---
reference_id: "PMID:35570949"
title: "Arsenic in Drinking Water and Incidences of Leukemia and Lymphoma: Implication for Its Dual Effects in Carcinogenicity."
authors:
- Lin MH
- Li CY
- Cheng YY
- Guo HR
journal: Front Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.863882
keywords:
- "Arsenic/adverse effects, analysis"
- Carcinogenesis
- Drinking Water/adverse effects
- Female
- "Hematologic Neoplasms/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Leukemia/epidemiology
- "Lymphoma/epidemiology, etiology"
- Male
- Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic in Drinking Water and Incidences of Leukemia and Lymphoma: Implication for Its Dual Effects in Carcinogenicity.
**Authors:** Lin MH, Li CY, Cheng YY, Guo HR
**Journal:** Front Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fpubh.2022.863882](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.863882)

## Content

1. Front Public Health. 2022 Apr 29;10:863882. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.863882.
eCollection 2022.

Arsenic in Drinking Water and Incidences of Leukemia and Lymphoma: Implication
for Its Dual Effects in Carcinogenicity.

Lin MH(1)(2), Li CY(3), Cheng YY(4), Guo HR(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, An Nan
Hospital, China Medical University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, College of Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Public Health, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Environmental Health, T.H. Chan School of Public Health,
Harvard University, Boston, MA, United States.
(5)Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Front Public Health. 2022 Dec 16;10:965779. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.965779.

Arsenic in drinking water has been recognized as carcinogenic to humans and can
cause solid cancers of lung, urinary bladder, and skin. Positive associations
have also been reported between arsenic ingestion and cancers of kidney, liver
and prostate. Nevertheless, arsenic trioxide has been used successfully in the
treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Therefore, arsenic might play
different roles in the carcinogenesis of solid cancers and hematologic
malignancies. The relationship between arsenic in drinking water and the
incidences of hematologic malignancies has not been fully investigated. We
established a cohort of Taiwanese population and assorted 319 townships of
Taiwan into two exposure categories using 0.05 mg/L as the cutoff. Then, we
linked these data to the Taiwan Cancer Registry and computed standardized
incidence ratios (SIRs) of lymphoma and leukemia by sex, exposure category and
time period. The trend of changes in the SIRs over time was assessed, from
1981-1990 to 1991-2000 and then to 2001-2010. We found that in both lymphoma and
leukemia, the higher exposure category was associated with lower SIRs in both
men and women. In terms of time trends, the SIRs in both lymphoma and leukemia
showed increasing trends in both sexes, while exposure to arsenic in drinking
water decreased over time. The arsenic level in drinking water was negatively
associated with the incidences of lymphoma and leukemia in both men and women.
This study supports the dual effects of arsenic on carcinogenesis, with a
potential protective effect against hematologic malignancies.

Copyright © 2022 Lin, Li, Cheng and Guo.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.863882
PMCID: PMC9099091
PMID: 35570949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
