---
reference_id: "PMID:28277858"
title: Pathophysiology of dyspnea in COPD.
authors:
- Anzueto A
- Miravitlles M
journal: Postgrad Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/00325481.2017.1301190
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of dyspnea in COPD.
**Authors:** Anzueto A, Miravitlles M
**Journal:** Postgrad Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00325481.2017.1301190](https://doi.org/10.1080/00325481.2017.1301190)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med. 2017 Apr;129(3):366-374. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2017.1301190.
Epub  2017 Mar 17.

Pathophysiology of dyspnea in COPD.

Anzueto A(1)(2), Miravitlles M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)a Pulmonology Section , University of Texas Health Science Center , San 
Antonio , TX , USA.
(2)b South Texas Veterans Health Care System , Department of Medicine, Pulmonary 
Section , San Antonio , TX , USA.
(3)c Pneumonology Department , Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron , Barcelona , 
Spain.
(4)d CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES) , Barcelona , Spain.

Dyspnea refers to the sensation of breathlessness, shortness of breath, or 
difficulty breathing that is commonly observed in patients with respiratory and 
cardiac disease. In the United States alone, dyspnea is reported in up to 4 
million all-cause emergency room visits annually. Dyspnea can be a symptom of 
several different underlying physical conditions, typically involving the lung 
and heart. Indeed, it is an important symptom in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), where it is associated with limited physical activity, increased 
anxiety and depression, decreased health-related quality of life (HRQoL), and 
reduced survival. Currently there is no single physiological correlate that will 
accurately predict dyspnea, particularly because the mechanisms that contribute 
to respiratory discomfort can vary between diseases and between individuals 
experiencing breathlessness who have been diagnosed with the same disease. 
Therefore, various subjective clinical and psychophysical scales and 
questionnaires are typically used to measure or predict dyspnea. It is the goal 
of this review to discuss the pathophysiological mechanisms leading to dyspnea, 
particularly those associated with COPD, the physical and psychological impact 
on patients, assessment approaches, and modalities currently used to treat it.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2017.1301190
PMID: 28277858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]