---
reference_id: "PMID:30409217"
title: The monocyte-macrophage-mast cell axis in dengue pathogenesis.
authors:
- Wan SW
- Wu-Hsieh BA
- Lin YS
- Chen WY
- Huang Y
- Anderson R
journal: J Biomed Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12929-018-0482-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The monocyte-macrophage-mast cell axis in dengue pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Wan SW, Wu-Hsieh BA, Lin YS, Chen WY, Huang Y, Anderson R
**Journal:** J Biomed Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12929-018-0482-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12929-018-0482-9)

## Content

1. J Biomed Sci. 2018 Nov 8;25(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s12929-018-0482-9.

The monocyte-macrophage-mast cell axis in dengue pathogenesis.

Wan SW(1), Wu-Hsieh BA(2), Lin YS(3)(4), Chen WY(2), Huang Y(5), Anderson 
R(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Immunology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National 
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, 
B3H 4R2, Canada.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National 
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. robert.anderson@dal.ca.
(7)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, 
B3H 4R2, Canada. robert.anderson@dal.ca.
(8)Canadian Center for Vaccinology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada. 
robert.anderson@dal.ca.

Dengue virus, the causative agent of dengue disease which may have hemorrhagic 
complications, poses a global health threat. Among the numerous target cells for 
dengue virus in humans are monocytes, macrophages and mast cells which are 
important regulators of vascular integrity and which undergo dramatic cellular 
responses after infection by dengue virus. The strategic locations of these 
three cell types, inside blood vessels (monocytes) or outside blood vessels 
(macrophages and mast cells) allow them to respond to dengue virus infection 
with the production of both intracellular and secretory factors which affect 
virus replication, vascular permeability and/or leukocyte extravasation. 
Moreover, the expression of Fc receptors on the surface of monocytes, 
macrophages and mast cells makes them important target cells for 
antibody-enhanced dengue virus infection which is a major risk factor for severe 
dengue disease, involving hemorrhage. Collectively, these features of monocytes, 
macrophages and mast cells contribute to both beneficial and harmful responses 
of importance to understanding and controlling dengue infection and disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12929-018-0482-9
PMCID: PMC6225659
PMID: 30409217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.