---
reference_id: "PMID:40448120"
title: CCDC22 mutations that impair COMMD binding cause attenuated 3C/Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome.
authors:
- Singla A
- Rogers C
- Touma MJ
- El-Najjar Y
- Colley A
- Boesch DJ
- Billadeau DD
- Gecz J
- Chen B
- Burstein E
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-025-02168-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Protein Binding
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Mutation
- Male
- Female
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism, genetics"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CCDC22 mutations that impair COMMD binding cause attenuated 3C/Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome.
**Authors:** Singla A, Rogers C, Touma MJ, El-Najjar Y, Colley A, Boesch DJ, Billadeau DD, Gecz J, Chen B, Burstein E
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-025-02168-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-025-02168-7)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2025 May 30;18(1):98. doi: 10.1186/s12920-025-02168-7.

CCDC22 mutations that impair COMMD binding cause attenuated 3C/Ritscher-Schinzel 
syndrome.

Singla A(1), Rogers C(2), Touma MJ(1), El-Najjar Y(1), Colley A(2), Boesch 
DJ(3), Billadeau DD(4), Gecz J(5), Chen B(3), Burstein E(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Genetics of Learning Disability Service, Hunter Genetics, Waratah, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)Roy J. Carver Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics & Molecular Biology, 
Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.
(4)Division of Oncology Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
MN, USA.
(5)Neurogenetics Research Program, School of Pediatrics and Reproductive Health, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. 
ezra.burstein@utsouthwestern.edu.
(7)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA. ezra.burstein@utsouthwestern.edu.

The CCC complex, composed of CCDC22, CCDC93, and ten proteins of the COMMD 
family, coordinates several critical steps required to recycle internalized 
plasma membrane proteins from endosomes to the cell surface. CCC interacts with 
Retriever, a trimeric cargo recognition complex comprising VPS35L, VPS26C, and 
VPS29, and works closely with the WASH complex, a crucial regulator of branched 
actin polymerization at endosomal membranes. Mutations in genes encoding 
subunits of these three complexes, CCDC22, VPS35L, and WASHC5, have been linked 
with a developmental syndrome known as 3 C (cranio-cerebello-cardiac) or 
Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome. Here, we report a new CCDC22 missense mutation, 
p.E208K, that results in attenuated 3 C syndrome, without cardiac or 
neuroanatomical abnormalities. We show that this mutation impairs CCC complex 
assembly by disrupting a conserved interaction surface required for 
CCDC22-COMMD4 binding. We also review previously described cases and identify 
that CCDC22 p.P172R has a similar attenuated phenotype and impairs complex 
assembly in a similar fashion as p.E208K. The characterization of these 
mutations adds to our understanding of the clinical and molecular spectrum of 
these disorders.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-025-02168-7
PMCID: PMC12125813
PMID: 40448120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Ethical approval for this research was obtained from the HREC 
(Human Research Ethics Committee) of the Women’s and Children’s Health Network 
(WCHN), with approval number REC786/07/2023. The study was conducted in 
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent to 
participate was obtained and signed by the parents/guardians of all the 
participants in this study. Consent for publication: The authors affirm that all 
the participants provided written informed consent for inclusion and publication 
of their clinical details, laboratory results, and photographs contained in this 
report. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.