---
reference_id: "PMID:37205940"
title: CTLA-4 Haploinsufficiency Presenting as Extensive Enteropathy in a Patient With Very Early Onset Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
authors:
- Tran NN
- Setty M
- Cham E
- Chan AY
- Ali S
journal: JPGN Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000099
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CTLA-4 Haploinsufficiency Presenting as Extensive Enteropathy in a Patient With Very Early Onset Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
**Authors:** Tran NN, Setty M, Cham E, Chan AY, Ali S
**Journal:** JPGN Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PG9.0000000000000099](https://doi.org/10.1097/PG9.0000000000000099)

## Content

1. JPGN Rep. 2021 Jul 12;2(3):e099. doi: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000099.
eCollection  2021 Aug.

CTLA-4 Haploinsufficiency Presenting as Extensive Enteropathy in a Patient With
Very Early Onset Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Tran NN(1), Setty M(1)(2), Cham E(3), Chan AY(4)(5), Ali S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatrics, UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland,
Oakland, CA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UCSF Benioff Children's
Hospital Oakland, Oakland, CA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital, San Francisco, CA.
(5)Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and Bone Marrow Transplant.

Patients with very early onset inflammatory bowel disease (VEO-IBD) have a
higher incidence of monogenic disease compared to older age groups. Age, alone,
is a strong predictor for monogenic disease. We discuss a case of VEO-IBD in
which the patient presented with severe and refractory enteropathy, leading to
diagnosis of CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency. Genetic workup showed de novo
heterozygous deletions of the CTLA-4 and ICOS genes. This case was unique, as
the patient did not have the other manifestations commonly present with the
disease. We advocate for early and routine genetic workup of VEO-IBD, as
patients with monogenic IBD have high morbidity and mortality, if inadequately
treated. Our patient did not respond to conventional treatment modalities and
required targeted treatment with Abatacept, a CTLA-4 agonist.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer on behalf of
European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition and
North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and
Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000099
PMCID: PMC10191597
PMID: 37205940

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.
