---
reference_id: "PMID:40853447"
title: Cardiac disease in patients with vasculitis.
authors:
- Binzenhöfer L
- Strauß K
- Seifert L
- Saleh I
- Scherzer M
- Höpler J
- Gailis D
- Gebhard C
- Lichtnekert J
- Ullrich F
- Singh D
- Sonneck T
- Thaler M
- Zimmer S
- Massberg S
- Thiele H
- Schäfer VS
- Nickenig G
- Czihal M
- Schulze-Koops H
- Lüsebrink E
journal: Clin Res Cardiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00392-025-02728-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Incidence
- "Heart Diseases/epidemiology, etiology, diagnosis"
- "Vasculitis/complications, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Retrospective Studies
- Echocardiography
- "Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Cine"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac disease in patients with vasculitis.
**Authors:** Binzenhöfer L, Strauß K, Seifert L, Saleh I, Scherzer M, Höpler J, Gailis D, Gebhard C, Lichtnekert J, Ullrich F, Singh D, Sonneck T, Thaler M, Zimmer S, Massberg S, Thiele H, Schäfer VS, Nickenig G, Czihal M, Schulze-Koops H, Lüsebrink E
**Journal:** Clin Res Cardiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00392-025-02728-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00392-025-02728-y)

## Content

1. Clin Res Cardiol. 2025 Sep;114(9):1216-1231. doi: 10.1007/s00392-025-02728-y.
Epub 2025 Aug 25.

Cardiac disease in patients with vasculitis.

Binzenhöfer L(#)(1), Strauß K(#)(1), Seifert L(1), Saleh I(1), Scherzer M(2),
Höpler J(2), Gailis D(3), Gebhard C(3), Lichtnekert J(3), Ullrich F(3), Singh
D(3), Sonneck T(3), Thaler M(3), Zimmer S(4), Massberg S(1), Thiele H(5),
Schäfer VS(6), Nickenig G(4), Czihal M(7), Schulze-Koops H(#)(8), Lüsebrink
E(#)(9).

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik Und Poliklinik I, Munich, Germany and DZHK (German Center
for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Munich Heart Alliance, Klinikum Der
Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Information Processing, Biometry and Epidemiology and
Department of Statistics, Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München, Munich,
Germany.
(3)Sektion Rheumatologie Und Klinische Immunologie, Medizinische Klinik Und
Poliklinik IV, Klinikum Der Universität München, Pettenkoferstr. 8a, 80336,
Munich, Germany.
(4)Medizinische Klinik Und Poliklinik II, Universitätsklinikum Bonn,
Venusberg-Campus 1, 53127, Bonn, Germany.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine/Cardiology and Leipzig Heart Science, Heart
Center Leipzig at Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany.
(6)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology Clinic of Internal
Medicine III, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(7)Medizinische Klinik Und Poliklinik IV, Sektion Angiologie, Klinikum Der
Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(8)Sektion Rheumatologie Und Klinische Immunologie, Medizinische Klinik Und
Poliklinik IV, Klinikum Der Universität München, Pettenkoferstr. 8a, 80336,
Munich, Germany. hendrik.schulze-koops@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(9)Medizinische Klinik Und Poliklinik II, Universitätsklinikum Bonn,
Venusberg-Campus 1, 53127, Bonn, Germany. enzo.luesebrink@gmx.de.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Cardiac involvement has been described in many forms of vasculitides
and is associated with worse outcomes. However, data on the incidence of
structural and arrhythmic heart disease is limited.
METHODS: For this single-center study, we recruited 191 patients with giant-cell
arteritis (GCA, n = 109), Takayasu arteritis (TAK, n = 26), polyarteritis nodosa
(PAN, n = 3), granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA, n = 38), or eosinophilic
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA, n = 15) between August 2023 and January
2025. The primary study endpoint was the incidence of structural or arrhythmic
heart disease after the diagnosis of vasculitis.
RESULTS: The demographic characteristics of patients diagnosed with vasculitis
differed significantly between those with GCA, TAK, PAN, GPA, and EGPA. Arterial
hypertension and dyslipidemia at baseline were more prevalent among patients
with GCA, while chest pain and signs of congestion were more frequently reported
by patients with EGPA. No significant difference between the five main subgroups
were found regarding the incidence of documented arrhythmic diseases. Cardiac
imaging was performed using echocardiography in 70% of the overall cohort and
cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) in 11%. CMR detected left ventricular systolic
dysfunction and myocardial fibrosis in 33% and 40% of EGPA patients,
respectively. All four cases of acute myocardial infarction occurred in patients
with GCA. Among 19 GCA patients who underwent coronary angiography, 21.1%
underwent percutaneous coronary intervention. In the EGPA group, coronary
angiography was performed in 46.7% of patients, but none required percutaneous
intervention. A substantial proportion of patients was treated with
acetylsalicylic acid (50.3%), beta-blockers (41.9%), or
ACE-inhibitors/AT1-receptor antagonists (60.2%).
CONCLUSION: Severe cardiac complications occurred rarely, although
cardiovascular risk factors, structural abnormalities, and arrhythmias affected
a substantial proportion of patients with vasculitis, highlighting the potential
benefit of systematic screening and multidisciplinary management.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00392-025-02728-y
PMCID: PMC12408678
PMID: 40853447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical standards: All ethical
standards were met in writing and submitting this correspondence. Conflicts of
interest: None. Data sharing agreement: The data are not publicly available due
to ethical restrictions and legal constraints. Readers may contact the
corresponding authors for reasonable requests for the data. De-identified data
may be provided after approval from the ethical review board.
