---
reference_id: "PMID:34469553"
title: The Burden of Invasive Bacterial Disease and the Impact of 10-Valent Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine in Children <5 years hospitalized for Meningitis in Lusaka, Zambia, 2010-2019.
authors:
- Yamba K
- Mpabalwani E
- Nakazwe R
- Mulendele E
- Weldegebriel G
- Mwenda JM
- Katsande R
- de Gouveia L
- Chizema-Kawesha E
- Chanda R
- Matapo B
- Mwansa JCL
- Lukwesa-Musyani C
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiab193
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Burden of Invasive Bacterial Disease and the Impact of 10-Valent Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine in Children <5 years hospitalized for Meningitis in Lusaka, Zambia, 2010-2019.
**Authors:** Yamba K, Mpabalwani E, Nakazwe R, Mulendele E, Weldegebriel G, Mwenda JM, Katsande R, de Gouveia L, Chizema-Kawesha E, Chanda R, Matapo B, Mwansa JCL, Lukwesa-Musyani C
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiab193](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiab193)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2021 Sep 1;224(12 Suppl 2):S275-S284. doi:
10.1093/infdis/jiab193.

The Burden of Invasive Bacterial Disease and the Impact of 10-Valent 
Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine in Children <5 years hospitalized for Meningitis 
in Lusaka, Zambia, 2010-2019.

Yamba K(1), Mpabalwani E(2)(3), Nakazwe R(1), Mulendele E(3), Weldegebriel G(4), 
Mwenda JM(4), Katsande R(4), de Gouveia L(5), Chizema-Kawesha E(6), Chanda R(1), 
Matapo B(4), Mwansa JCL(7), Lukwesa-Musyani C(1).

Author information:
(1)University Teaching Hospitals, Pathology & Microbiology Laboratory, Lusaka, 
Zambia.
(2)University of Zambia, School of Medicine, Department of Paediatrics & Child 
Health, Lusaka, Zambia.
(3)University Teaching Hospitals, Children's Hospital, Lusaka, Zambia.
(4)World Health Organisation, Regional Office for Africa, Brazzaville, Republic 
of Congo.
(5)Centre for Respiratory Diseases and Meningitis, National Institute for 
Communicable Diseases, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(6)Ministry of Health, Directorate of Public Health, Disease Surveillance and 
Research, Zambia.
(7)Lusaka Apex Medical University, Lusaka, Zambia.

BACKGROUND: Despite the availability of vaccines, invasive bacterial diseases 
remain a public health concern and cause childhood morbidity and mortality. We 
investigated the characteristics of etiological agents causing bacterial 
meningitis in children <5 years in the years pre- (2010-2012) and post- 
(2014-2019) 10-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV10) introduction in 
Zambia.
METHODS: Streptococcus pneumoniae (Spn), Haemophilus influenzae (Hi), and 
Neisseria meningitidis (Nm) from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were identified by 
microbiological culture and/or real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: During the surveillance period, a total of 3811 children were admitted 
with suspected meningitis, 16% (598 of 3811) of which were probable cases. 
Bacterial meningitis was confirmed in 37% (221 of 598) of the probable cases. 
Spn pneumoniae, Hi, and Nm accounted for 67% (148 of 221), 14% (31 of 221), and 
19% (42 of 221) of confirmed cases, respectively. Thirty-six percent of 
pneumococcal meningitis was caused by 10-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine 
(PCV10) serotypes, 16% 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and 39% by 
nonvaccine serotype (NVS). There was an association between the introduction of 
PCV10 vaccination and a decrease in both Spn meningitis and the proportion of 
PVC10 serotypes in the postvaccination period. Antimicrobial susceptibility of 
47 Spn isolates revealed 34% (16 of 47) penicillin resistance. The 31 serotyped 
Hi accounted for 74% type b (Hib) and 10% type a (Hia). All 42 serogrouped Nm 
belonged to serogroup W.
CONCLUSIONS: There was a decline in pneumococcal meningitis and proportion of 
PCV10 serotypes in the postvaccination period. However, the serotype replacement 
with non-PCV10 serotypes and penicillin resistance warrant continued 
surveillance to inform policy.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiab193
PMCID: PMC8409534
PMID: 34469553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]