---
reference_id: "PMID:36114039"
title: "[Idiopathic intracranial hypertension: From physiopathological mechanisms to therapeutic decision]."
authors:
- Robelin F
- Lenfant M
- Ricolfi F
- Béjot Y
- Comby PO
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2022.08.012
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Pseudotumor Cerebri/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Quality of Life
- Transverse Sinuses
- "Constriction, Pathologic"
- Stents
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Idiopathic intracranial hypertension: From physiopathological mechanisms to therapeutic decision].
**Authors:** Robelin F, Lenfant M, Ricolfi F, Béjot Y, Comby PO
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2022.08.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2022.08.012)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2022 Nov;43(11):661-668. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2022.08.012. 
Epub 2022 Sep 13.

[Idiopathic intracranial hypertension: From physiopathological mechanisms to 
therapeutic decision].

[Article in French]

Robelin F(1), Lenfant M(2), Ricolfi F(3), Béjot Y(4), Comby PO(3).

Author information:
(1)Service de neuroradiologie, CHU François Mitterrand Dijon, 14, rue Paul 
Gaffarel, 21000 Dijon, France. Electronic address: fabien.robelin@chu-dijon.fr.
(2)Service de neuroradiologie, CHU François Mitterrand Dijon, 14, rue Paul 
Gaffarel, 21000 Dijon, France.
(3)Service de neuroradiologie, CHU François Mitterrand Dijon, 14, rue Paul 
Gaffarel, 21000 Dijon, France; Université de Bourgogne, BP 27877-21078, Dijon 
Cedex, France.
(4)Service de neurologie, CHU François Mitterrand Dijon, 14, rue Paul Gaffarel, 
21000 Dijon, France; Université de Bourgogne, BP 27877-21078, Dijon Cedex, 
France.

Clinical features include visual disturbances, headaches, and pulsatile tinnitus 
that can be associated with reduced quality of life, and a risk of irreversible 
visual impairment in some cases. Obese women of childbearing age represent the 
main at-risk population, and the incidence of the disease is increasing because 
of rising prevalence of obesity worldwide. In addition, an imbalance in sex 
hormones is reported as a contributing risk factor. The pathophysiology of 
idiopathic intracranial hypertension involves a disturbance of the evacuation 
pathway of intracranial fluids caused by the increase in intracranial venous 
pressure. Brain imaging is useful for diagnosis with several signs including 
bilateral stenosis of the transverse sinuses that plays a major role in the 
pathogenesis of the disease by creating a positive feedback loop that increases 
intracranial venous hypertension and contributes to clinical manifestations. 
Treatment aims to relieve symptoms and prevent permanent visual impairment. Drug 
therapies including acetazolamide and topiramate have moderate effectiveness. 
Among invasive treatments, transverse sinus stenting seems to be the most 
interesting option to consider in drug-resistant patients. Weight loss remains 
essential to achieve a sustainable improvement by reducing central venous 
pressure. Future randomized trials are expected to reach a consensus on this 
treatment.

Copyright © 2022 Société Nationale Française de Médecine Interne (SNFMI). 
Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2022.08.012
PMID: 36114039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]