---
reference_id: "PMID:30981404"
title: "Estimates of the 2015 global and regional disease burden from four foodborne metals - arsenic, cadmium, lead and methylmercury."
authors:
- Gibb HJ
- Barchowsky A
- Bellinger D
- Bolger PM
- Carrington C
- Havelaar AH
- Oberoi S
- Zang Y
- "O'Leary K"
- Devleesschauwer B
journal: Environ Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2018.12.062
keywords:
- Arsenic
- Cadmium
- "Environmental Exposure/statistics & numerical data"
- "Food Contamination/statistics & numerical data"
- Global Health
- Lead
- Metals/analysis
- Methylmercury Compounds
- Quality-Adjusted Life Years
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimates of the 2015 global and regional disease burden from four foodborne metals - arsenic, cadmium, lead and methylmercury.
**Authors:** Gibb HJ, Barchowsky A, Bellinger D, Bolger PM, Carrington C, Havelaar AH, Oberoi S, Zang Y, O'Leary K, Devleesschauwer B
**Journal:** Environ Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envres.2018.12.062](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2018.12.062)

## Content

1. Environ Res. 2019 Jul;174:188-194. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2018.12.062. Epub
2018  Dec 25.

Estimates of the 2015 global and regional disease burden from four foodborne
metals - arsenic, cadmium, lead and methylmercury.

Gibb HJ(1), Barchowsky A(2), Bellinger D(3), Bolger PM(4), Carrington C(5),
Havelaar AH(6), Oberoi S(2), Zang Y(7), O'Leary K(8), Devleesschauwer B(9).

Author information:
(1)Gibb Epidemiology Consulting, Arlington, VA 22201, USA; George Washington
University Milken Institute School of Public Health, Washington, DC 20052, USA.
(2)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Graduate School of
Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
(3)Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School; Department
of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health; Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Exponent, Washington, DC 20036, USA.
(5)Spoiled Hike LLC, Gaithersburg, MD 20882, USA.
(6)Institute for Sustainable Food Systems, Emerging Pathogens Institute and
Department of Animal Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611,
USA.
(7)Food and Drug Administration, College Park, MD 20740, USA.
(8)Gibb Epidemiology Consulting, Arlington, VA 22201, USA.
(9)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium;
Department of Veterinary Public Health and Food Safety, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium. Electronic address:
brecht.devleesschauwer@sciensano.be.

The impact of foodborne metals on the burden of disease has been largely
overlooked, in comparison to the attention on acute diseases associated with
infectious foodborne agents. Four articles in this special section describe in
detail the burden of disease from foodborne lead, methylmercury, arsenic, and
cadmium. Ingested lead and methylmercury are causally associated with lifelong
intellectual disability. Long term ingestion of arsenic is causally associated
with an increased risk of cancer. Long term ingestion of cadmium is causally
associated with an increased risk of late stage chronic kidney disease. This
article presents an overview of the burden of disease from these four foodborne
metals and discusses them in the context of the World Health Organization's
initiative to estimate the global burden of foodborne disease. The results
indicate that in 2015, ingestion of arsenic, methylmercury, lead, and cadmium
resulted in more than 1 million illnesses, over 56,000 deaths, and more than 9
million disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) worldwide. The greatest impact on
DALYs was in the Western Pacific B subregion. All of the metals were found to
have high DALYs per case in comparison with other foodborne disease agents,
including infectious and parasitic agents. In addition, lead, arsenic, and
methylmercury were found to have high DALYs per 100,000 population in comparison
to other foodborne disease agents.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2018.12.062
PMID: 30981404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
