---
reference_id: "PMID:29905515"
title: Diagnosis of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia. An Official American Thoracic Society Clinical Practice Guideline.
authors:
- Shapiro AJ
- Davis SD
- Polineni D
- Manion M
- Rosenfeld M
- Dell SD
- Chilvers MA
- Ferkol TW
- Zariwala MA
- Sagel SD
- Josephson M
- Morgan L
- Yilmaz O
- Olivier KN
- Milla C
- Pittman JE
- Daniels MLA
- Jones MH
- Janahi IA
- Ware SM
- Daniel SJ
- Cooper ML
- Nogee LM
- Anton B
- Eastvold T
- Ehrne L
- Guadagno E
- Knowles MR
- Leigh MW
- Lavergne V
- American Thoracic Society Assembly on Pediatrics
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201805-0819ST
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia. An Official American Thoracic Society Clinical Practice Guideline.
**Authors:** Shapiro AJ, Davis SD, Polineni D, Manion M, Rosenfeld M, Dell SD, Chilvers MA, Ferkol TW, Zariwala MA, Sagel SD, Josephson M, Morgan L, Yilmaz O, Olivier KN, Milla C, Pittman JE, Daniels MLA, Jones MH, Janahi IA, Ware SM, Daniel SJ, Cooper ML, Nogee LM, Anton B, Eastvold T, Ehrne L, Guadagno E, Knowles MR, Leigh MW, Lavergne V, American Thoracic Society Assembly on Pediatrics
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.201805-0819ST](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201805-0819ST)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Jun 15;197(12):e24-e39. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201805-0819ST.

Diagnosis of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia. An Official American Thoracic Society 
Clinical Practice Guideline.

Shapiro AJ, Davis SD, Polineni D, Manion M, Rosenfeld M, Dell SD, Chilvers MA, 
Ferkol TW, Zariwala MA, Sagel SD, Josephson M, Morgan L, Yilmaz O, Olivier KN, 
Milla C, Pittman JE, Daniels MLA, Jones MH, Janahi IA, Ware SM, Daniel SJ, 
Cooper ML, Nogee LM, Anton B, Eastvold T, Ehrne L, Guadagno E, Knowles MR, Leigh 
MW, Lavergne V; American Thoracic Society Assembly on Pediatrics.

Comment in
    Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 Feb;16(2):171-174. doi: 
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201810-693CME.

BACKGROUND: This document presents the American Thoracic Society clinical 
practice guidelines for the diagnosis of primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD).
TARGET AUDIENCE: Clinicians investigating adult and pediatric patients for 
possible PCD.
METHODS: Systematic reviews and, when appropriate, meta-analyses were conducted 
to summarize all available evidence pertinent to our clinical questions. 
Evidence was assessed using the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation) approach for diagnosis and discussed by a 
multidisciplinary panel with expertise in PCD. Predetermined 
conflict-of-interest management strategies were applied, and recommendations 
were formulated, written, and graded exclusively by the nonconflicted panelists. 
Three conflicted individuals were also prohibited from writing, editing, or 
providing feedback on the relevant sections of the manuscript.
RESULTS: After considering diagnostic test accuracy, confidence in the estimates 
for each diagnostic test, relative importance of test results studied, desirable 
and undesirable direct consequences of each diagnostic test, downstream 
consequences of each diagnostic test result, patient values and preferences, 
costs, feasibility, acceptability, and implications for health equity, the panel 
made recommendations for or against the use of specific diagnostic tests as 
compared with using the current reference standard (transmission electron 
microscopy and/or genetic testing) for the diagnosis of PCD.
CONCLUSIONS: The panel formulated and provided a rationale for the direction as 
well as for the strength of each recommendation to establish the diagnosis of 
PCD.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201805-0819ST
PMCID: PMC6006411
PMID: 29905515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]