---
reference_id: "PMID:31467489"
title: Dabrafenib and Trametinib prolong coagulation through the inhibition of tissue factor in BRAF(v600e) mutated melanoma cells in vitro.
authors:
- Scatena C
- Franceschi S
- Franzini M
- Sanguinetti C
- Romiti N
- Caponi L
- Mandalà M
- Mazzanti CM
- Naccarato AG
journal: Cancer Cell Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12935-019-0938-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dabrafenib and Trametinib prolong coagulation through the inhibition of tissue factor in BRAF(v600e) mutated melanoma cells in vitro.
**Authors:** Scatena C, Franceschi S, Franzini M, Sanguinetti C, Romiti N, Caponi L, Mandalà M, Mazzanti CM, Naccarato AG
**Journal:** Cancer Cell Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12935-019-0938-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12935-019-0938-3)

## Content

1. Cancer Cell Int. 2019 Aug 28;19:223. doi: 10.1186/s12935-019-0938-3.
eCollection  2019.

Dabrafenib and Trametinib prolong coagulation through the inhibition of tissue 
factor in BRAF(v600e) mutated melanoma cells in vitro.

Scatena C(#)(1), Franceschi S(#)(2), Franzini M(3), Sanguinetti C(3), Romiti 
N(3), Caponi L(3), Mandalà M(4), Mazzanti CM(#)(2), Naccarato AG(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)1Division of Surgical Pathology, Department of Translational Research and New 
Technologies in Medicine and Surgery, University of Pisa, Via Roma 57, 56126 
Pisa, Italy.
(2)Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza, Pisa, Italy.
(3)3Division of Clinical Pathology, Department of Translational Research and New 
Technologies in Medicine and Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Unit of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology and Haematology, Papa 
Giovanni XXIII Cancer Center Hospital, Bergamo, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Neoplastic cells promote a hypercoagulable state by the expression 
of cell surface proteins, such as tissue factor. In BRAFv600 mutated melanoma 
patients upon BRAF inhibitors, a hypercoagulable state correlates with 
prognosis, while a down-regulation of the hemostatic parameters is observed in 
patients responders as compared to non responders. The present study was 
intended to better clarify the strict relationship between coagulation mediators 
and target therapy in melanoma.
METHODS: The expression of tissue factor was investigated after the treatment 
with the BRAF inhibitor Dabrafenib and the MEK inhibitor Trametinib in the 
BRAFv600e mutated melanoma cell lines A-375 and SK-MEL-28, together with its 
ability to activate the coagulation cascade.
RESULTS: Dabrafenib and Trametinib caused the down-regulation of TF in both cell 
lines A-375 and SK-MEL-28. For the cell line A-375 the effect was evident both 
at RNA and procoagulant activity; for the cell line SK-MEL-28 only at RNA level 
without any variation of the protein. Interestingly, when in contact with plasma 
deficient of factor VII, both cell lines were not able to activate the 
coagulation cascade.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides the first in vitro observation that 
tissue factor expressed in melanoma cells may contribute to the modulation of 
the coagulation state of patients in the treatment with BRAF inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1186/s12935-019-0938-3
PMCID: PMC6712666
PMID: 31467489

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.