---
reference_id: "PMID:20301391"
title: Berardinelli-Seip Congenital Lipodystrophy.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Van Maldergem L
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Berardinelli-Seip Congenital Lipodystrophy.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Van Maldergem L

## Content

1. Berardinelli-Seip Congenital Lipodystrophy.

Van Maldergem L(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2003 Sep 8 [updated 2016 Dec 8].

Author information:
(1)Centre de Génétique Humaine, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy (BSCL) is
usually diagnosed at birth or soon thereafter. Because of the absence of
functional adipocytes, lipid is stored in other tissues, including muscle and
liver. Affected individuals develop insulin resistance and approximately 25%-35%
develop diabetes mellitus between ages 15 and 20 years. Hepatomegaly secondary
to hepatic steatosis and skeletal muscle hypertrophy occur in all affected
individuals. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is reported in 20%-25% of affected
individuals and is a significant cause of morbidity from cardiac failure and
early mortality.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of BSCL is established in a proband with three
major criteria or two major criteria plus two or more minor criteria and/or by
the identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in AGPAT2 or BSCL2.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Restriction of total fat intake between
20% and 30% of total dietary energy maintains normal triglyceride serum
concentration. Leptin therapy for treatment of hypertriglyceridemia and diabetes
may be considered. Diabetes mellitus is managed as in childhood-onset diabetes
mellitus. Surveillance: Regular screening for glycosuria as a manifestation of
diabetes mellitus, which usually starts in the teens (average age 12 years) but
has also been described in infancy; monitoring for potential retinal, peripheral
nerve, and renal complications of diabetes mellitus; yearly echocardiogram;
yearly or biennial liver ultrasound examination to detect fatty infiltration.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Excessive dietary fat intake.
GENETIC COUNSELING: BSCL is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and
prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the
pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301391
