---
reference_id: "PMID:11711527"
title: Biochemical assessment of myocardial fibrosis in hypertensive heart disease.
authors:
- López B
- González A
- Varo N
- Laviades C
- Querejeta R
- Díez J
journal: Hypertension
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1161/hy1101.098549
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biochemical assessment of myocardial fibrosis in hypertensive heart disease.
**Authors:** López B, González A, Varo N, Laviades C, Querejeta R, Díez J
**Journal:** Hypertension (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1161/hy1101.098549](https://doi.org/10.1161/hy1101.098549)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 2001 Nov;38(5):1222-6. doi: 10.1161/hy1101.098549.

Biochemical assessment of myocardial fibrosis in hypertensive heart disease.

López B(1), González A, Varo N, Laviades C, Querejeta R, Díez J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Pathophysiology, School of Medicine, Department of 
Clinical Chemistry, University Clinic, University Clinic, University of Navarra, 
Pamplona, Spain.

Fibrous tissue accumulation is an integral feature of the adverse structural 
remodeling of cardiac tissue seen with hypertensive heart disease. Given the 
importance of fibrous tissue in leading to myocardial dysfunction and failure, 
noninvasive monitoring of myocardial fibrosis by use of serological markers of 
collagen turnover could prove a clinically useful tool, particularly given the 
potential for cardioprotective and cardioreparative pharmacological strategies. 
An emerging experimental and clinical experience holds promise for the use of 
radioimmunoassays of various serological markers of fibrillar collagen type I 
and type III turnover in arterial hypertension. More specifically, the 
measurement of serum concentrations of procollagen type I C-terminal propeptide 
(a peptide that is cleaved from procollagen type I during the synthesis of 
fibril-forming collagen type I) may provide indirect diagnostic information on 
both the extent of myocardial fibrosis and the ability of antihypertensive 
treatment to diminish collagen type I synthesis and reduce myocardial fibrosis. 
This approach represents an exciting and innovative strategy, and available data 
set the stage for larger trials, in which noninvasive measures of fibrosis in 
hypertensive heart disease could prove useful.

DOI: 10.1161/hy1101.098549
PMID: 11711527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]