---
reference_id: "PMID:28097356"
title: "Effect of Etelcalcetide vs Cinacalcet on Serum Parathyroid Hormone in Patients Receiving Hemodialysis With Secondary Hyperparathyroidism: A Randomized Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Block GA
- Bushinsky DA
- Cheng S
- Cunningham J
- Dehmel B
- Drueke TB
- Ketteler M
- Kewalramani R
- Martin KJ
- Moe SM
- Patel UD
- Silver J
- Sun Y
- Wang H
- Chertow GM
journal: JAMA
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.19468
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Calcimimetic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology"
- "Calcium/administration & dosage, blood"
- "Cinacalcet/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/blood
- Humans
- "Hyperparathyroidism, Secondary/blood, drug therapy, etiology"
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/complications, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nausea/chemically induced
- Parathyroid Hormone/blood
- "Peptides/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology"
- Renal Dialysis
- Time Factors
- Vomiting/chemically induced
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Etelcalcetide vs Cinacalcet on Serum Parathyroid Hormone in Patients Receiving Hemodialysis With Secondary Hyperparathyroidism: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Block GA, Bushinsky DA, Cheng S, Cunningham J, Dehmel B, Drueke TB, Ketteler M, Kewalramani R, Martin KJ, Moe SM, Patel UD, Silver J, Sun Y, Wang H, Chertow GM
**Journal:** JAMA (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2016.19468](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.19468)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2017 Jan 10;317(2):156-164. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.19468.

Effect of Etelcalcetide vs Cinacalcet on Serum Parathyroid Hormone in Patients
Receiving Hemodialysis With Secondary Hyperparathyroidism: A Randomized Clinical
Trial.

Block GA(1), Bushinsky DA(2), Cheng S(3), Cunningham J(4), Dehmel B(3), Drueke
TB(5), Ketteler M(6), Kewalramani R(3), Martin KJ(7), Moe SM(8), Patel UD(9),
Silver J(10), Sun Y(3), Wang H(3), Chertow GM(11).

Author information:
(1)Denver Nephrology, Denver, Colorado.
(2)University of Rochester, Rochester, New York.
(3)Amgen Inc, Thousand Oaks, California.
(4)University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Inserm, Université de Picardie, Amiens, France.
(6)Klinikum Coburg-GmbH, Coburg, Germany.
(7)St Louis University, St Louis, Missouri.
(8)Indiana University, Indianapolis.
(9)Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
(10)Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(11)Stanford University, Stanford, California.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2017 Jan 10;317(2):139-141. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.18631.
    JAMA. 2017 May 23;317(20):2132. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.4743.

IMPORTANCE: Secondary hyperparathyroidism contributes to extraskeletal
calcification and is associated with all-cause and cardiovascular mortality.
Control is suboptimal in the majority of patients receiving hemodialysis. An
intravenously (IV) administered calcimimetic could improve adherence and reduce
adverse gastrointestinal effects.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relative efficacy and safety of the IV calcimimetic
etelcalcetide and the oral calcimimetic cinacalcet.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A randomized, double-blind, double-dummy
active clinical trial was conducted comparing IV etelcalcetide vs oral placebo
and oral cinacalcet vs IV placebo in 683 patients receiving hemodialysis with
serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentrations higher than 500 pg/mL on active
therapy at 164 sites in the United States, Canada, Europe, Russia, and New
Zealand. Patients were enrolled from August 2013 to May 2014, with end of
follow-up in January 2015.
INTERVENTIONS: Etelcalcetide intravenously and oral placebo (n = 340) or oral
cinacalcet and IV placebo (n = 343) for 26 weeks. The IV study drug was
administered 3 times weekly with hemodialysis; the oral study drug was
administered daily.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary efficacy end point was noninferiority of
etelcalcetide at achieving more than a 30% reduction from baseline in mean
predialysis PTH concentrations during weeks 20-27 (noninferiority margin,
12.0%). Secondary end points included superiority in achieving biochemical end
points (>50% and >30% reduction in PTH) and self-reported nausea or vomiting.
RESULTS: The mean (SD) age of the trial participants was 54.7 (14.1) years and
56.2% were men. Etelcalcetide was noninferior to cinacalcet on the primary end
point. The estimated difference in proportions of patients achieving reduction
in PTH concentrations of more than 30% between the 198 of 343 patients (57.7%)
randomized to receive cinacalcet and the 232 of 340 patients (68.2%) randomized
to receive etelcalcetide was -10.5% (95% CI, -17.5% to -3.5%, P for
noninferiority, <.001; P for superiority, .004). One hundred seventy-eight
patients (52.4%) randomized to etelcalcetide achieved more than 50% reduction in
PTH concentrations compared with 138 patients (40.2%) randomized to cinacalcet
(P = .001; difference in proportions, 12.2%; 95% CI, 4.7% to 19.5%). The most
common adverse effect was decreased blood calcium (68.9% vs 59.8%).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients receiving hemodialysis with moderate
to severe secondary hyperparathyroidism, the use of etelcalcetide was not
inferior to cinacalcet in reducing serum PTH concentrations over 26 weeks; it
also met superiority criteria. Further studies are needed to assess clinical
outcomes as well as longer-term efficacy and safety.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT1896232.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2016.19468
PMID: 28097356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
