---
reference_id: "PMID:33409956"
title: "Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus: Novel Mutations."
authors:
- Nayak S
- Sarangi AN
- Sahoo SK
- Mangla P
- Tripathy M
- Rao S
- Gupta S
- Paliwal VK
- Sudhanshu S
- Ravi C
- Joshi K
- Bhatia V
- Bhatia E
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12098-020-03567-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus: Novel Mutations.
**Authors:** Nayak S, Sarangi AN, Sahoo SK, Mangla P, Tripathy M, Rao S, Gupta S, Paliwal VK, Sudhanshu S, Ravi C, Joshi K, Bhatia V, Bhatia E
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12098-020-03567-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-020-03567-7)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2021 Aug;88(8):785-792. doi: 10.1007/s12098-020-03567-7.
Epub  2021 Jan 7.

Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus: Novel Mutations.

Nayak S(1), Sarangi AN(2), Sahoo SK(1), Mangla P(1), Tripathy M(1), Rao S(3), 
Gupta S(1), Paliwal VK(4), Sudhanshu S(1), Ravi C(1), Joshi K(1), Bhatia V(5), 
Bhatia E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, 226014, India.
(2)Biomedical Informatics Center, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, B. J. Wadia Hospital for Children, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.
(4)Department of Neurology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, 226014, India. bhatiaviji@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    Indian J Pediatr. 2021 Aug;88(8):847. doi: 10.1007/s12098-021-03769-7.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the spectrum of neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM), 
document new mutations, and review published Indian literature on the etiology 
of NDM.
METHODS: Retrospective analysis of the clinical and genetic profile of 12 NDM 
patients.
RESULTS: Eight patients presented with NDM before the age of 6 mo. Three other 
patients, including 2 siblings presented in later part of infancy. An additional 
patient was diagnosed at age 5 y with the same etiology as her infant sibling. 
Four patients had transient diabetes [TNDM:1 each with a mutation in KCNJ11 and 
INS gene, 2 with ABCC8 mutation], 7 had permanent diabetes [PNDM: 2 siblings 
with complete glucokinase deficiency, 2 siblings with thiamine responsive 
megaloblastic anemia (TRMA), 1 with Immune dysregulation, Polyendocrinopathy, 
Enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX) syndrome and 2 with Wolcott Rallison syndrome, 
(WRS)]. Four patients had 5 novel mutations. Genetic etiology could not be 
established in 1 patient with features of insulin resistance. Poorly controlled 
blood glucose in the TRMA patient led to hyperglycemia-induced 
hemichorea-hemiballismus, a rare manifestation in children.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors describe 5 novel mutations, in the EIF2AK3, ABCC8, and 
GCK genes, a homozygous mutation at the ABCC8 locus presenting as TNDM, an 
obscure phenotype of the GCK gene mutation, and hyperglycemia-induced 
hemichorea-hemiballismus in a patient with TRMA. In India, PNDM is most commonly 
due to WRS similar to Middle Eastern countries with high consanguinity rates.

© 2021. Dr. K C Chaudhuri Foundation.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-020-03567-7
PMID: 33409956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]