---
reference_id: "PMID:10856714"
title: Progress towards understanding the role of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein in apolipoprotein-B lipoprotein assembly.
authors:
- Gordon DA
- Jamil H
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00049-4
keywords:
- Abetalipoproteinemia/genetics
- Animals
- "Apolipoproteins B/analysis, chemistry, metabolism"
- "Carrier Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- Cholesterol Ester Transfer Proteins
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Glycoproteins
- Humans
- Indoles/pharmacology
- Lipoproteins/chemistry
- "Lipoproteins, VLDL/chemistry, metabolism"
- Liver/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Microsomes/metabolism
- "Nervous System/embryology, metabolism"
- Piperidines/pharmacology
- Protein Binding
- Protein Folding
- Yolk Sac/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progress towards understanding the role of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein in apolipoprotein-B lipoprotein assembly.
**Authors:** Gordon DA, Jamil H
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00049-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00049-4)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jun 26;1486(1):72-83. doi:
10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00049-4.

Progress towards understanding the role of microsomal triglyceride transfer
protein in apolipoprotein-B lipoprotein assembly.

Gordon DA(1), Jamil H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Drug Discovery, Bristol-Myers Squibb
Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Princeton, NJ 08543, USA. gordond@bms.com

The microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) is necessary for the proper
assembly of the apolipoprotein B containing lipoproteins, very low density
lipoprotein and chylomicrons. Recent research has significantly advanced our
understanding of the role of MTP in these pathways at the molecular and cellular
level. Biochemical studies suggest that initiation of lipidation of the nascent
apolipoprotein B polypeptide may occur through a direct association with MTP.
This early lipidation may be required to allow the nascent polypeptide to fold
properly and therefore avoid ubiquitination and degradation. Concerning the
addition of core neutral lipids in the later stages of lipoprotein assembly,
cell culture studies show that MTP lipid transfer activity is not required for
this to occur for apolipoprotein B-100 containing lipoproteins. Likewise, MTP
does not appear to directly mediate addition of core neutral lipid to nascent
apoB-48 particles. However, new data indicate that MTP is required to produce
triglyceride rich droplets in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum which may supply
the core lipids for conversion of nascent, dense apoB-48 particles to mature
VLDL. In addition, assembly of dense apolipoprotein B-48 containing lipoproteins
has been observed in mouse liver in the absence of MTP. As a result of these new
data, an updated model for the role of MTP in lipoprotein assembly is proposed.

DOI: 10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00049-4
PMID: 10856714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
