---
reference_id: "PMID:22561632"
title: Alleviation of metabolic abnormalities induced by excessive fructose administration in Wistar rats by Spirulina maxima.
authors:
- Jarouliya U
- Zacharia JA
- Kumar P
- Bisen PS
- Prasad GB
journal: Indian J Med Res
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alleviation of metabolic abnormalities induced by excessive fructose administration in Wistar rats by Spirulina maxima.
**Authors:** Jarouliya U, Zacharia JA, Kumar P, Bisen PS, Prasad GB
**Journal:** Indian J Med Res (2012)

## Content

1. Indian J Med Res. 2012 Mar;135(3):422-8.

Alleviation of metabolic abnormalities induced by excessive fructose 
administration in Wistar rats by Spirulina maxima.

Jarouliya U(1), Zacharia JA, Kumar P, Bisen PS, Prasad GB.

Author information:
(1)School of Studies in Biochemistry & Biotechnology, Jiwaji University, 
Gwalior, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder characterized 
by hyperglycaemia. Several natural products have been isolated and identified to 
restore the complications of diabetes. Spirulina maxima is naturally occurring 
fresh water cyanobacterium, enriched with proteins and essential nutrients. The 
aim of the study was to determine whether S. maxima could serve as a therapeutic 
agent to correct metabolic abnormalities induced by excessive fructose 
administration in Wistar rats.
METHODS: Oral administration of 10 per cent fructose solution to Wistar rats (n 
= 5 in each group) for 30 days resulted in hyperglycaemia and hyperlipidaemia. 
Aqueous suspension of S. maxima (5 or 10%) was also administered orally once 
daily for 30 days. The therapeutic potential of the preparation with reference 
to metformin (500 mg/kg) was assessed by monitoring various biochemical 
parameters at 10 day intervals during the course of therapy and at the end of 30 
days S. maxima administration.
RESULTS: Significant (P<0.001) reductions in blood glucose, lipid profile 
(triglycerides, cholesterol and LDL, VLDL) and liver function markers (SGPT and 
SGOT) were recorded along with elevated level of HDL-C at the end of 30 days 
therapy of 5 or 10 per cent S. maxima aquous extract. Co-administration of S. 
maxima extract (5 or 10% aqueous) with 10 per cent fructose solution offered a 
significant protection against fructose induced metabolic abnormalities in 
Wistar rats.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: The present findings showed that S. maxima 
exhibited anti-hyperglycaemic, anti-hyperlipidaemic and hepatoprotective 
activity in rats fed with fructose. Further studies are needed to understand the 
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3361882
PMID: 22561632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]