---
reference_id: "PMID:41514563"
title: A Review of the Pathological and Molecular Diagnosis of Primary Myelofibrosis.
authors:
- Shao R
- Ryder C
- Wang L
- Zhang H
- Moscinski L
- Martin M
- Shebes M
- Li JY
- Song J
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/cancers18010050
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Review of the Pathological and Molecular Diagnosis of Primary Myelofibrosis.
**Authors:** Shao R, Ryder C, Wang L, Zhang H, Moscinski L, Martin M, Shebes M, Li JY, Song J
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers18010050](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers18010050)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2025 Dec 24;18(1):50. doi: 10.3390/cancers18010050.

A Review of the Pathological and Molecular Diagnosis of Primary Myelofibrosis.

Shao R(1), Ryder C(2), Wang L(3), Zhang H(2), Moscinski L(2), Martin M(4), 
Shebes M(4), Li JY(2), Song J(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, University of Central Florida, 6850 Lake Nona Blvd, 
Orlando, FL 32827, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
(3)Reading Hospital McGlinn Cancer Institute, Phoenixville Hospital Campus, West 
Reading, PA 19460, USA.
(4)College of Medicine, University of South Florida Morsani, Tampa, FL 33612, 
USA.

Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-negative 
myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) that features clonal proliferation of atypical 
megakaryocytes and myeloid cells, fibrosis of the bone marrow, extramedullary 
hematopoiesis, and increased risk of leukemic transformation to acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML). With the widespread application of molecular studies, especially 
next generation sequencing (NGS), significant advances have reshaped our 
understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of PMF and the prognostic relevance 
of specific gene mutations. In this review, we summarize its clinicopathologic 
features, genetic and molecular findings, updated diagnostic criteria, and 
differential diagnosis. These updates have been incorporated into the 5th 
edition of the World Health Organization classification of Hematolymphoid Tumors 
(WHO-5th) and the 2022 International Consensus Classification (ICC), thereby 
improving diagnostic accuracy and risk stratification, both of which are 
essential for tailoring treatment strategies and enhancing patient outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers18010050
PMCID: PMC12784778
PMID: 41514563

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.