---
reference_id: "PMID:38831911"
title: "A 37-Year-Old Man With Intellectual Disability Discovered to Have Aspartylglucosaminuria: Implications for the Diagnosis of Genetic Causes."
authors:
- Kouhashi M
- Yukawa K
- Yano N
- Hagemeijer MC
- Hirata S
- Kambe D
- Yokoyama A
- Yoshida A
- Kora K
- de Ronde CJ
- Vrieswijk S
- van der Meijden E
- Yoshida T
- Yamashita H
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200161
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A 37-Year-Old Man With Intellectual Disability Discovered to Have Aspartylglucosaminuria: Implications for the Diagnosis of Genetic Causes.
**Authors:** Kouhashi M, Yukawa K, Yano N, Hagemeijer MC, Hirata S, Kambe D, Yokoyama A, Yoshida A, Kora K, de Ronde CJ, Vrieswijk S, van der Meijden E, Yoshida T, Yamashita H
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200161](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200161)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2024 May 29;10(3):e200161. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200161. 
eCollection 2024 Jun.

A 37-Year-Old Man With Intellectual Disability Discovered to Have 
Aspartylglucosaminuria: Implications for the Diagnosis of Genetic Causes.

Kouhashi M(1), Yukawa K(1), Yano N(1), Hagemeijer MC(1), Hirata S(1), Kambe 
D(1), Yokoyama A(1), Yoshida A(1), Kora K(1), de Ronde CJ(1), Vrieswijk S(1), 
van der Meijden E(1), Yoshida T(1), Yamashita H(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (M.K., K.Y., S.H., D.K., H.Y.), Japanese Red 
Cross Wakayama Medical Center; Department of Neurology (M.K., S.H.); Department 
of Pediatrics (N.Y., A. Yokoyama, K.K., T.Y.), Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Japan; Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases (M.C.H., 
C.J.R., S.V., E.M.), Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Neurology (D.K.), Kyoto 
Kizugawa Hospital; and Department of Pediatrics (A. Yokoyama, A. Yoshida), 
Japanese Red Cross Wakayama Medical Center, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: The causes of intellectual disability (ID) are varied, with as many 
as 1,400 causative genes. We attempted to identify the causative gene in a 
patient with long-standing undiagnosed ID.
METHODS: Although this was an isolated case with no family history, we searched 
for the causative gene using trio-based whole-exome sequencing (trio-WES), 
because severe ID is often caused by genetic variations, and inherited metabolic 
disorders (IMDs) are assumed to be the cause when regression and epilepsy occur.
RESULTS: We identified homozygous donor splice-site variants in the AGA gene 
(aspartylglucosaminidase; NM_000027.4) Chr4(GRCh38):g. 177436275C>A, c.698+1G>T. 
This gene is implicated in aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU; OMIM #208400) and 
originated from both of the patient's parents. We confirmed the pathogenicity of 
the variant by detecting the splicing defect in cDNA from the patient's blood 
and accumulation of aberrant metabolites in the patient's urine.
DISCUSSION: We discuss how to more readily achieve an accurate diagnosis for 
patients with undiagnosed intellectual disabilities. Medical practitioners' 
awareness of the characteristics of the disease leading to clinical suspicion in 
patients with matching presentations, and the performance of newborn screening 
when possible, is important for the diagnosis of ID. In addition, the 
characteristic symptoms and course of the disease give rise to suspicion of 
IMDs. Given our results, we consider trio-WES to be a powerful method for 
identifying the causative genes in cases of ID with genetic causes.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200161
PMCID: PMC11145746
PMID: 38831911

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/NG for full disclosures.