---
reference_id: "PMID:24769838"
title: "Insight of the cytotoxicity of the aggregates of peptides or aberrant proteins: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhou R
- Xu B
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095759
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- "Amyloidosis/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Peptide Fragments/metabolism
- Protein Aggregates
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insight of the cytotoxicity of the aggregates of peptides or aberrant proteins: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhou R, Xu B
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0095759](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0095759)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 25;9(4):e95759. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095759. 
eCollection 2014.

Insight of the cytotoxicity of the aggregates of peptides or aberrant proteins: 
a meta-analysis.

Zhou R(1), Xu B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.

Aberrant proteins or peptide aggregates form soluble oligomers or nanofibrils 
that can cause a wide range of amyloidosis diseases, including Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). The mechanisms of their cytotoxicity, however, remain 
controversial and poorly understood, greatly hindering the development of AD 
drugs. Here we report a comprehensive evaluation of the cytotoxicity of the 
aggregates by meta-analysis. The analysis indicates that the cytotoxicity of the 
aggregates converges in a narrower range in the mass concentrations than in the 
molar concentrations, suggesting that it is the weight of the aggregates rather 
than the number of the molecules that dictates the cytotoxicity. This new 
perspective implies that these aggregates are likely to have non-specific 
interactions with cells to cause cell death. The comparison of several existing 
theories regarding cellular volumes supports that the aggregates may result in 
crowding effect and increase the free energy, thus resulting in instability of 
the cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095759
PMCID: PMC4000214
PMID: 24769838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Co-author Bing Xu is a PLOS 
ONE Editorial Board member. This does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS 
ONE Editorial policies and criteria.