---
reference_id: "PMID:21740555"
title: "Dose-response relationship between arsenic exposure and the serum enzymes for liver function tests in the individuals exposed to arsenic: a cross sectional study in Bangladesh."
authors:
- Islam K
- Haque A
- Karim R
- Fajol A
- Hossain E
- Salam KA
- Ali N
- Saud ZA
- Rahman M
- Rahman M
- Karim R
- Sultana P
- Hossain M
- Akhand AA
- Mandal A
- Miyataka H
- Himeno S
- Hossain K
journal: Environ Health
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-10-64
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dose-response relationship between arsenic exposure and the serum enzymes for liver function tests in the individuals exposed to arsenic: a cross sectional study in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Islam K, Haque A, Karim R, Fajol A, Hossain E, Salam KA, Ali N, Saud ZA, Rahman M, Rahman M, Karim R, Sultana P, Hossain M, Akhand AA, Mandal A, Miyataka H, Himeno S, Hossain K
**Journal:** Environ Health (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1476-069X-10-64](https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-10-64)

## Content

1. Environ Health. 2011 Jul 8;10:64. doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-10-64.

Dose-response relationship between arsenic exposure and the serum enzymes for 
liver function tests in the individuals exposed to arsenic: a cross sectional 
study in Bangladesh.

Islam K(1), Haque A, Karim R, Fajol A, Hossain E, Salam KA, Ali N, Saud ZA, 
Rahman M, Rahman M, Karim R, Sultana P, Hossain M, Akhand AA, Mandal A, Miyataka 
H, Himeno S, Hossain K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rajshahi University, 
Rajshahi-6205, Bangladesh.

BACKGROUND: Chronic arsenic exposure has been shown to cause liver damage. 
However, serum hepatic enzyme activity as recognized on liver function tests 
(LFTs) showing a dose-response relationship with arsenic exposure has not yet 
been clearly documented. The aim of our study was to investigate the 
dose-response relationship between arsenic exposure and major serum enzyme 
marker activity associated with LFTs in the population living in arsenic-endemic 
areas in Bangladesh.
METHODS: A total of 200 residents living in arsenic-endemic areas in Bangladesh 
were selected as study subjects. Arsenic concentrations in the drinking water, 
hair and nails were measured by Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectroscopy 
(ICP-MS). The study subjects were stratified into quartile groups as follows, 
based on concentrations of arsenic in the drinking water, as well as in 
subjects' hair and nails: lowest, low, medium and high. The serum hepatic enzyme 
activities of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), aspartate transaminase (AST) and 
alanine transaminase (ALT) were then assayed.
RESULTS: Arsenic concentrations in the subjects' hair and nails were positively 
correlated with arsenic levels in the drinking water. As regards the 
exposure-response relationship with arsenic in the drinking water, the 
respective activities of ALP, AST and ALT were found to be significantly 
increased in the high-exposure groups compared to the lowest-exposure groups 
before and after adjustments were made for different covariates. With internal 
exposure markers (arsenic in hair and nails), the ALP, AST and ALT activity 
profiles assumed a similar shape of dose-response relationship, with very few 
differences seen in the higher groups compared to the lowest group, most likely 
due to the temporalities of exposure metrics.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated that arsenic concentrations in the 
drinking water were strongly correlated with arsenic concentrations in the 
subjects' hair and nails. Further, this study revealed a novel exposure- and 
dose- response relationship between arsenic exposure metrics and serum hepatic 
enzyme activity. Elevated serum hepatic enzyme activities in the higher exposure 
gradients provided new insights into arsenic-induced liver toxicity that might 
be helpful for the early prognosis of arsenic-induced liver diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-069X-10-64
PMCID: PMC3146918
PMID: 21740555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]