---
reference_id: "PMID:27854233"
title: Cysteine Supplementation May be Beneficial in a Subgroup of Mitochondrial Translation Deficiencies.
authors:
- Bartsakoulia M
- Mϋller JS
- Gomez-Duran A
- Yu-Wai-Man P
- Boczonadi V
- Horvath R
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3233/JND-160178
keywords:
- Acetylcysteine/pharmacology
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Cyclooxygenase 2/genetics
- Cysteine/pharmacology
- Dietary Supplements
- "Fibroblasts/drug effects, metabolism"
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- MELAS Syndrome/metabolism
- MERRF Syndrome/metabolism
- "Mitochondria/drug effects, metabolism"
- Mitochondrial Diseases/metabolism
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Oxygen Consumption/drug effects
- Protein Biosynthesis/drug effects
- RNA-Binding Proteins
- tRNA Methyltransferases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cysteine Supplementation May be Beneficial in a Subgroup of Mitochondrial Translation Deficiencies.
**Authors:** Bartsakoulia M, Mϋller JS, Gomez-Duran A, Yu-Wai-Man P, Boczonadi V, Horvath R
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-160178](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-160178)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2016 Aug 30;3(3):363-379. doi: 10.3233/JND-160178.

Cysteine Supplementation May be Beneficial in a Subgroup of Mitochondrial 
Translation Deficiencies.

Bartsakoulia M(1), Mϋller JS(1), Gomez-Duran A(1)(2), Yu-Wai-Man P(1)(3)(4), 
Boczonadi V(1), Horvath R(1).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Mitochondrial Research Centre and the John Walton Muscular 
Dystrophy Research Centre, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, 
Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(2)Present address: Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Cambridge and MRC 
Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Newcastle Eye Centre, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(4)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Moorfields Eye Hospital and UCL Institute 
of Ophthalmology, London, UK.

Erratum in
    J Neuromuscul Dis. 2017;4(1):97. doi: 10.3233/JND-179001.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies are severe, relentlessly 
progressive conditions and there are very few effective therapies available to 
date. We have previously suggested that in two rare forms of reversible 
mitochondrial disease (reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency and 
reversible infantile hepatopathy) supplementation with L-cysteine can improve 
mitochondrial protein synthesis, since cysteine is required for the 
2-thiomodification of mitochondrial tRNAs.
OBJECTIVES: We studied whether supplementation with L-cysteine or 
N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) results in any improvement of the mitochondrial function 
in vitro in fibroblasts of patients with different genetic forms of abnormal 
mitochondrial translation.
METHODS: We studied in vitro in fibroblasts of patients carrying the common 
m.3243A>G and m.8344A>G mutations or autosomal recessive mutations in genes 
affecting mitochondrial translation, whether L-cysteine or N-acetyl-cysteine 
supplementation have an effect on mitochondrial respiratory chain function.
RESULTS: Here we show that supplementation with L-cysteine, but not with 
N-acetyl-cysteine partially rescues the mitochondrial translation defect in 
vitro in fibroblasts of patients carrying the m.3243A>G and m.8344A>G mutations. 
In contrast, N-acetyl-cysteine had a beneficial effect on mitochondrial 
translation in TRMU and MTO1 deficient fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that L-cysteine or N-acetyl-cysteine 
supplementation may be a potential treatment for selected subgroups of patients 
with mitochondrial translation deficiencies. Further studies are needed to 
explore the full potential of cysteine supplementation as a treatment for 
patients with mitochondrial disease.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-160178
PMID: 27854233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]