---
reference_id: "PMID:40639867"
title: "3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency in a child with developmental regression and delay: call for early diagnosis and multidisciplinary approach."
authors:
- Gulzar MM
- Sarani ZA
- Tariq M
- Knerr I
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2024-262865
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
- Infant
- "Developmental Disabilities/etiology, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/diagnosis, genetics, therapy, complications, diet therapy"
- Early Diagnosis
- Carnitine/therapeutic use
- Biotin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency in a child with developmental regression and delay: call for early diagnosis and multidisciplinary approach.
**Authors:** Gulzar MM, Sarani ZA, Tariq M, Knerr I
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2024-262865](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2024-262865)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2025 Jul 10;18(7):e262865. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2024-262865.

3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency in a child with developmental
regression and delay: call for early diagnosis and multidisciplinary approach.

Gulzar MM(1), Sarani ZA(1), Tariq M(1)(2), Knerr I(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Paediatrics, Midland Regional Hospital Portlaoise, Portlaoise, Laois,
Ireland.
(2)Women's & Children's Health, University College Dublin College of Health
Sciences, Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Children's Health Ireland,
Dublin, Ireland ina.knerr@cuh.ie.

3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (3-MCC) deficiency (3-MCC-D) is an autosomal
recessive disorder with a variable phenotype. Reduced 3-MCC enzyme activity
results in impaired leucine metabolism causing, for example, metabolic acidosis,
ketotic hypoglycaemia and carnitine deficiency. The spectrum of clinical
presentation is wide, ranging from severe early-onset presentations to
incidental findings in asymptomatic individuals. This report describes the case
of a young girl who underwent dramatic developmental regression at 11 months of
age, following a respiratory tract infection. Metabolic investigations revealed
high excretions of urinary 3-methylcrotonylglycine and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid,
consistent with 3-MCC-D. Treatment was commenced immediately, including
carnitine, biotin and moderate dietetic modifications. Molecular genetic
investigations confirmed compound heterozygosity for two pathogenic variants in
the MCCC1 gene, Trp358Cysfs*13 and duplication of exons 2 and 3. Now in middle
childhood, the girl is meeting all her developmental milestones and has had no
metabolic decompensation in 6 years of follow-up.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2025. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2024-262865
PMCID: PMC12258014
PMID: 40639867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
