---
reference_id: "PMID:22100379"
title: "[Antiphospholipid antibodies and haemostasis]."
authors:
- Masliah-Planchon J
- Darnige L
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2011.10.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Antiphospholipid antibodies and haemostasis].
**Authors:** Masliah-Planchon J, Darnige L
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2011.10.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2011.10.008)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2012 Apr;33(4):181-8. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2011.10.008. Epub
 2011 Nov 17.

[Antiphospholipid antibodies and haemostasis].

[Article in French]

Masliah-Planchon J(1), Darnige L.

Author information:
(1)Service d'hématologie biologique, hôpital européen Georges-Pompidou, AP-HP, 
20, rue Leblanc, 75908 Paris cedex 15, France.

The antiphospholipid syndrome is characterized by recurrent thrombosis and 
pregnancy morbidity in association with the persistent presence of 
autoantibodies called antiphospholipid antibodies. Antiphospholipids are a 
heterogeneous group of circulating autoantibodies associated with a risk of 
thrombosis and can paradoxically prolong in vitro the clotting times. In the 
past few years, significant improvement has been made in understanding the 
pathophysiologic mechanisms of the disease, thus raising the possibility of 
future predictive test for the risk of thrombosis. The aim of this review is to 
make an overview on how the antiphospholipids increase the risk of thrombosis 
and to provide an update of the laboratory diagnosis and the possible future 
therapies.

Copyright © 2011 Société nationale Française de médecine interne (SNFMI). 
Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2011.10.008
PMID: 22100379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]