---
reference_id: "PMID:29020838"
title: Safety and Efficacy of AAV5 Vectors Expressing Human or Canine CNGB3 in CNGB3-Mutant Dogs.
authors:
- Ye GJ
- Komáromy AM
- Zeiss C
- Calcedo R
- Harman CD
- Koehl KL
- Stewart GA
- Iwabe S
- Chiodo VA
- Hauswirth WW
- Aguirre GD
- Chulay JD
journal: Hum Gene Ther Clin Dev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1089/humc.2017.125
keywords:
- Animals
- "Chorioretinitis/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Color Vision Defects/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Cation Channels/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Dependovirus
- "Dog Diseases/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Dogs
- Genetic Therapy
- Genetic Vectors/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Immunity, Cellular/genetics"
- Opsins/genetics
- Parvovirinae/genetics
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- "Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and Efficacy of AAV5 Vectors Expressing Human or Canine CNGB3 in CNGB3-Mutant Dogs.
**Authors:** Ye GJ, Komáromy AM, Zeiss C, Calcedo R, Harman CD, Koehl KL, Stewart GA, Iwabe S, Chiodo VA, Hauswirth WW, Aguirre GD, Chulay JD
**Journal:** Hum Gene Ther Clin Dev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1089/humc.2017.125](https://doi.org/10.1089/humc.2017.125)

## Content

1. Hum Gene Ther Clin Dev. 2017 Dec;28(4):197-207. doi: 10.1089/humc.2017.125.
Epub  2017 Oct 11.

Safety and Efficacy of AAV5 Vectors Expressing Human or Canine CNGB3 in 
CNGB3-Mutant Dogs.

Ye GJ(1), Komáromy AM(2)(3), Zeiss C(4), Calcedo R(3), Harman CD(2), Koehl 
KL(2), Stewart GA(2), Iwabe S(3), Chiodo VA(5), Hauswirth WW(5), Aguirre GD(3), 
Chulay JD(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Applied Genetic Technologies Corporation (AGTC) , Alachua, Florida.
(2)2 College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State University , East Lansing, 
Michigan.
(3)4 School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(4)3 Yale University Medical School , New Haven, Connecticut.
(5)5 University of Florida , Gainesville, Florida.

Achromatopsia is an inherited retinal disorder of cone photoreceptors 
characterized by markedly reduced visual acuity, extreme light sensitivity, and 
absence of color discrimination. Approximately 50% of cases are caused by 
mutations in the cone photoreceptor-specific cyclic nucleotide gated channel 
beta subunit (CNGB3) gene. Studies in CNGB3-mutant dogs showed that subretinal 
injection of an AAV vector expressing human CNGB3, which has 76% amino acid 
identity with canine CNGB3, driven by a 2.1 kb human red cone opsin promoter 
(PR2.1) and packaged in AAV5 capsids (AAV5-PR2.1-hCNGB3) rescued cone 
photoreceptor function, but at high doses was associated with an inflammatory 
response (focal chorioretinitis) consistent with immune-mediated toxicity. AAV 
vectors containing the PR2.1 promoter packaged in AAV5 capsids and expressing 
either the native canine CNGB3 (AAV5-PR2.1-cCNGB3) or the human CNGB3 
(AAV5-PR2.1-hCNGB3) were evaluated at different dose levels in CNGB3-mutant 
dogs. The vector expressing canine CNGB3 achieved somewhat better rescue of cone 
function but unexpectedly was associated with a greater degree of retinal 
toxicity than the vector expressing human CNGB3. Very low-level T-cell immune 
responses to some AAV or CNGB3 peptides were observed in animals that received 
the higher vector dose. There was a more than twofold increase in serum 
neutralizing antibodies to AAV in one of three animals in the low-dose group and 
in two of three animals in the high-dose group. No serum anti-hCNGB3 antibodies 
were detected in any animal. The results of this study do not support the 
hypothesis that the focal chorioretinitis seen with high doses of 
AAV5-PR2.1-hCNGB3 in the initial studies was due to an immune response to human 
CNGB3.

DOI: 10.1089/humc.2017.125
PMCID: PMC5733651
PMID: 29020838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: G.Y. and J.D.C. are employees and shareholders 
of AGTC and have a conflict of interest to the extent that this work potentially 
increases their financial interests. W.W.H. and the University of Florida have a 
financial interest in the use of AAV therapies. W.W.H. owns equity in and is a 
consultant for AGTC and has a conflict of interest to the extent that this work 
potentially increases his financial interests. No competing financial interests 
exist for the remaining authors.