---
reference_id: "PMID:9144008"
title: Nationwide survey of neurologic manifestations of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in Japan.
authors:
- Nakagawa M
- Maruyama Y
- Sugita H
- Osame M
journal: Intern Med
year: '1997'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.36.175
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nationwide survey of neurologic manifestations of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in Japan.
**Authors:** Nakagawa M, Maruyama Y, Sugita H, Osame M
**Journal:** Intern Med (1997)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.36.175](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.36.175)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 1997 Mar;36(3):175-8. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.36.175.

Nationwide survey of neurologic manifestations of acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome in Japan.

Nakagawa M(1), Maruyama Y, Sugita H, Osame M.

Author information:
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Kagoshima University School of 
Medicine.

Comment in
    Intern Med. 1997 Mar;36(3):160-1.

To study the epidemiology of the neurologic manifestations of human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infection in Japan, we conducted two nationwide 
surveys. Of 1854 HIV-1 carriers, 578 had acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS) and 166 (28.7% of AIDS patients) had neurologic manifestations including 
HIV dementia (11.8%), myelopathy (3.6%) and peripheral neuropathy (2.6%). The 
incidence of neurologic manifestations in patients with HIV-1 infection through 
blood products was about 60% of that in patients with HIV-1 infection through 
sex or unknown routes. This nationwide survey showed that the incidence of 
neurologic manifestations in AIDS patients in Japan was consistent with that in 
other countries.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.36.175
PMID: 9144008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]