---
reference_id: "PMID:12108829"
title: Tay-Sachs disease screening and counseling families at risk for metabolic disease.
authors:
- Sutton VR
journal: Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0889-8545(01)00002-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tay-Sachs disease screening and counseling families at risk for metabolic disease.
**Authors:** Sutton VR
**Journal:** Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0889-8545(01)00002-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0889-8545(01)00002-x)

## Content

1. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2002 Jun;29(2):287-96. doi: 
10.1016/s0889-8545(01)00002-x.

Tay-Sachs disease screening and counseling families at risk for metabolic 
disease.

Sutton VR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. vsutton@bcm.tmc.edu

Carrier testing for Tay-Sachs disease should be offered to couples when at least 
one individual is of Ashkenazi Jewish (carrier frequency 1/30), Pennsylvania 
Dutch, Southern Louisiana Cajun, or Eastern Quebec French Canadian descent. 
Ideally, testing is done prior to conception. For Ashkenazi Jews, in whom DNA 
testing identifies 99.9% of carriers, DNA testing is the preferred method to 
ascertain carriers [14]. For non-Jewish individuals seeking carrier testing, 
enzyme assay should be done initially and positive or indeterminate results 
should be confirmed by DNA mutation analysis. If only one partner is descended 
from a high-risk group, that person should be tested first; only if he/ she is a 
carrier should the other partner be tested. If the couple is pregnant at the 
time carrier testing is requested, both partners should have enzyme testing 
(leukocyte assay for the pregnant woman and serum assay for the father) and DNA 
testing sent concomitantly to expedite counseling and action. Carriers are 
individuals with a disease causing DNA mutation or carrier range enzyme analysis 
results on both serum and leukocytes with no detectable mutation and no 
pseudodeficiency alleles. Noncarriers are individuals with normal enzyme results 
or carrier range enzyme results and a pseudodeficiency allele on DNA mutation 
analysis. If both partners are found to be carriers they should be counseled of 
a 25% risk of having an affected child with each pregnancy. Options to modify 
this risk include prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis or chorionic villus 
sampling, egg or sperm donation, preimplantation diagnosis or adoption.

DOI: 10.1016/s0889-8545(01)00002-x
PMID: 12108829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]