---
reference_id: "PMID:37282666"
title: Efficacy and safety of pralsetinib in patients with advanced RET fusion-positive non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Zhou Q
- Zhao J
- Chang J
- Wang H
- Fan Y
- Wang K
- Wu G
- Nian W
- Sun Y
- Sun M
- Wang X
- Shi H
- Zheng X
- Yao S
- Qin M
- Shen Z
- Yang J
- Wu YL
journal: Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.34897
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Pyridines/therapeutic use
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of pralsetinib in patients with advanced RET fusion-positive non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Zhou Q, Zhao J, Chang J, Wang H, Fan Y, Wang K, Wu G, Nian W, Sun Y, Sun M, Wang X, Shi H, Zheng X, Yao S, Qin M, Shen Z, Yang J, Wu YL
**Journal:** Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.34897](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.34897)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2023 Oct 15;129(20):3239-3251. doi: 10.1002/cncr.34897. Epub 2023 Jun
6.

Efficacy and safety of pralsetinib in patients with advanced RET fusion-positive
non-small cell lung cancer.

Zhou Q(1), Zhao J(2), Chang J(3), Wang H(3), Fan Y(4), Wang K(5), Wu G(6), Nian
W(7), Sun Y(8), Sun M(8), Wang X(9), Shi H(9), Zheng X(10), Yao S(11), Qin
M(11), Shen Z(11), Yang J(11), Wu YL(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital,
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Beijing Cancer Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, China.
(4)Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, China.
(5)West China Hospital Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(6)Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China.
(7)Chongqing Cancer Hospital, Chongqing, China.
(8)Jinan Central Hospital, Jinan, China.
(9)First Affiliated Hospital of Gannan Medical University, Ganzhou, China.
(10)Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute & Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(11)CStone Pharmaceuticals (Su Zhou) Co., Ltd., Suzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Pralsetinib is a potent, selective RET inhibitor targeting oncogenic
RET alterations. As part of the global, phase 1/2 ARROW trial (NCT03037385), the
efficacy and safety of pralsetinib in Chinese patients with advanced RET
fusion-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) were evaluated.
METHODS: Adult patients with advanced, RET fusion-positive NSCLC with or without
prior platinum-based chemotherapy were enrolled into two cohorts receiving
400-mg once-daily oral pralsetinib. Primary end points were objective response
rates assessed by blinded independent central review and safety.
RESULTS: Of 68 patients enrolled, 37 had received prior platinum-based
chemotherapy (48.6% with ≥3 prior systemic regimens) and 31 were
treatment-naïve. As of March 4, 2022 (data cutoff), of the patients with
measurable lesions at baseline, a confirmed objective response was observed in
22 (66.7%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 48.2-82.0) of 33 pretreated patients,
including 1 (3.0%) complete response and 21 (63.6%) partial responses; and in 25
(83.3%; 95% CI, 65.3-94.4) of 30 treatment-naïve patients, including two (6.7%)
complete responses and 23 (76.7%) partial responses. Median progression-free
survival was 11.7 months (95% CI, 8.7-not estimable) in pretreated patients and
12.7 months (95% CI, 8.9-not estimable) in treatment-naïve patients. The most
common grade 3/4 treatment-related adverse events in 68 patients were anemia
(35.3%) and decreased neutrophil count (33.8%). Eight (11.8%) patients
discontinued pralsetinib because of treatment-related adverse events.
CONCLUSION: Pralsetinib showed robust and durable clinical activity with a
well-tolerated safety profile in Chinese patients with RET fusion-positive
NSCLC.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT03037385.

© 2023 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.34897
PMID: 37282666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
