---
reference_id: "PMID:39491571"
title: Long-term prognosis of patients with an SCN5A loss-of-function variant and progressive cardiac conduction disorder or Brugada syndrome.
authors:
- Tuijnenburg F
- Proost VM
- Thollet A
- Barc J
- Groffen AJA
- Veerman CC
- van der Crabben SN
- van der Pas VR
- Kyndt F
- Jurgens SJ
- Tanck MWT
- Postema PG
- Peter van Tintelen J
- Bezzina CR
- Probst V
- Wilde AAM
- Gourraud JB
- Amin AS
journal: Heart Rhythm
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.10.057
keywords:
- Humans
- "NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Female
- "Brugada Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology, diagnosis"
- Retrospective Studies
- Prognosis
- Electrocardiography
- Follow-Up Studies
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Loss of Function Mutation
- "Cardiac Conduction System Disease/genetics, physiopathology"
- Heart Conduction System/physiopathology
- Time Factors
- Disease Progression
- DNA/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term prognosis of patients with an SCN5A loss-of-function variant and progressive cardiac conduction disorder or Brugada syndrome.
**Authors:** Tuijnenburg F, Proost VM, Thollet A, Barc J, Groffen AJA, Veerman CC, van der Crabben SN, van der Pas VR, Kyndt F, Jurgens SJ, Tanck MWT, Postema PG, Peter van Tintelen J, Bezzina CR, Probst V, Wilde AAM, Gourraud JB, Amin AS
**Journal:** Heart Rhythm (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.10.057](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.10.057)

## Content

1. Heart Rhythm. 2025 May;22(5):1321-1329. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.10.057. Epub
 2024 Nov 2.

Long-term prognosis of patients with an SCN5A loss-of-function variant and 
progressive cardiac conduction disorder or Brugada syndrome.

Tuijnenburg F(1), Proost VM(2), Thollet A(3), Barc J(3), Groffen AJA(4), Veerman 
CC(2), van der Crabben SN(4), van der Pas VR(5), Kyndt F(3), Jurgens SJ(1), 
Tanck MWT(6), Postema PG(7), Peter van Tintelen J(8), Bezzina CR(9), Probst 
V(3), Wilde AAM(7), Gourraud JB(3), Amin AS(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Cardiology, Heart Center, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Cardiology, Heart Center, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Nantes Université, CHU Nantes, CNRS, INSERM, l'Institut du Thorax, Nantes, 
France; European Reference Network for rare, low prevalence, and complex 
diseases of the heart (ERN GUARD-Heart), Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)European Reference Network for rare, low prevalence, and complex diseases of 
the heart (ERN GUARD-Heart), Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Human 
Genetics, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)European Reference Network for rare, low prevalence, and complex diseases of 
the heart (ERN GUARD-Heart), Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of 
Cardiology, Medical Spectrum Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Data Science, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Clinical Cardiology, Heart Center, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; European Reference 
Network for rare, low prevalence, and complex diseases of the heart (ERN 
GUARD-Heart), Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)European Reference Network for rare, low prevalence, and complex diseases of 
the heart (ERN GUARD-Heart), Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Genetics, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Experimental Cardiology, Heart Center, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; European 
Reference Network for rare, low prevalence, and complex diseases of the heart 
(ERN GUARD-Heart), Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Clinical Cardiology, Heart Center, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; European 
Reference Network for rare, low prevalence, and complex diseases of the heart 
(ERN GUARD-Heart), Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
a.s.amin@amsterdamumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: The long-term prognosis of patients with a loss-of-function variant 
in the cardiac sodium channel gene SCN5A is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the long-term arrhythmic risk in 
patients with an SCN5A loss-of-function variant to identify predictors of 
arrhythmic events.
METHODS: Probands and family members with (likely) pathogenic SCN5A 
loss-of-function variants were retrospectively included. Clinical and 
electrocardiographic data at baseline and last follow-up were collected. 
Patients with a history of cardiac arrest, sustained ventricular tachycardia, 
symptomatic or documented atrial tachy- or bradyarrhythmia, or arrhythmogenic 
syncope were categorized as symptomatic. Arrhythmic events at follow-up were 
defined as sudden death, aborted cardiac arrest, documented ventricular 
fibrillation, and/or sustained ventricular tachycardia.
RESULTS: We included 615 patients (349 men, 242 probands, 157 with a spontaneous 
type 1 Brugada electrocardiogram, and 111 symptomatic at baseline). During a 
median follow-up of 9.5 (Q1,Q3 5.0-14.3) years, arrhythmic events occurred in 41 
patients (6.7%), equating an overall event rate of 0.7%/y: 2.0%/y in symptomatic 
and 0.3%/y in asymptomatic patients. In the overall study population, symptoms 
at baseline, male sex, and QRS prolongation were identified as independent 
predictors of arrhythmic events. In asymptomatic patients, male sex and QRS 
prolongation were also identified as predictors. Asymptomatic women with QRS 
interval < 100 ms did not experience arrhythmic events at follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Key predictors of arrhythmic risk in patients with an SCN5A 
loss-of-function variant, regardless of a Brugada syndrome diagnosis, are 
symptoms at baseline, male sex, and prolonged QRS interval. Our findings may 
enable more tailored management strategies in patients with an SCN5A 
loss-of-function variant based on their individual risk profiles.

Copyright © 2024 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.10.057
PMID: 39491571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to disclose.