---
reference_id: "PMID:40171848"
title: "Targeting ROS1 rearrangements in non-small cell lung cancer: Current insights and future directions."
authors:
- Desilets A
- Repetto M
- Yang SR
- Drilon A
journal: Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.35784
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Gene Rearrangement
- Molecular Targeted Therapy/methods
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Mutation
- Aminopyridines
- Lactams
- Pyrazoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting ROS1 rearrangements in non-small cell lung cancer: Current insights and future directions.
**Authors:** Desilets A, Repetto M, Yang SR, Drilon A
**Journal:** Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.35784](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.35784)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2025 Mar 15;131 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):e35784. doi: 10.1002/cncr.35784.

Targeting ROS1 rearrangements in non-small cell lung cancer: Current insights
and future directions.

Desilets A(1), Repetto M(1)(2), Yang SR(3), Drilon A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Early Drug Development Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.
(3)Diagnostic Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine and New York Presbyterian
Hospital, New York, New York, USA.

ROS1 rearrangements define a molecular subset of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) by accounting for 1%-2% of cases. Targeted therapy with ROS1 tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has significantly improved the outcomes for these
patients. First-generation inhibitors, such as crizotinib and entrectinib, have
demonstrated impressive efficacy, with objective response rates exceeding
60%-70%. However, the emergence of resistance mechanisms, including
solvent-front mutations such as ROS1 G2032R, and limited blood-brain barrier
penetration have limited the long-term efficacy of early-generation agents.
Next-generation TKIs, including lorlatinib, taletrectinib, and repotrectinib,
have been developed to overcome these challenges. These agents show enhanced
central nervous system (CNS) penetration and activity against on-target ROS1
resistance mutations. Repotrectinib, a potent, CNS-penetrant ROS1 inhibitor, has
demonstrated superior activity in both TKI-naive and -resistant tumors,
including those harboring the G2032R mutation. Zidesamtinib, a highly selective
next-generation ROS1 inhibitor, further addresses TRK-mediated off-target
neurological toxicities seen with prior agents, and is poised to offer improved
tolerability. Ongoing research is focused on optimizing sequencing strategies
for ROS1 inhibitors and exploring combination approaches to prevent or overcome
resistance. In addition, the development of novel diagnostic tools, including
RNA-based next-generation sequencing, has enhanced the detection of functional
ROS1 fusions by ensuring that patients with actionable mutations receive
appropriate targeted therapies. These advances highlight the evolving landscape
of treatment for ROS1-positive NSCLC, with the aim of maximizing long-term
survival and quality of life.

© 2025 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.35784
PMCID: PMC12551656
PMID: 40171848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: Antoine Desilets has
received travel reimbursement by Astra Zeneca, Regeneron and Exelixis. Matteo
Repetto has received travel reimbursement by Sanofi. Soo-Ryum Yang has received
speaker honoraria with Medscape, Medical Learning Institute, PRIME Education and
participated in advisory boards with AstraZeneca, AbbVie, Merus, Roche, Amgen,
Sanofi. Alexander Drilon has received honoraria and participated in advisory
boards for 14ner/Elevation Oncology, Amgen, Abbvie, ArcherDX, AstraZeneca,
Beigene, BergenBio, Blueprint Medicines, Chugai Pharmaceutical, EcoR1, EMD
Serono, Entos, Exelixis, Helsinn, Hengrui Therapeutics, Ignyta/Genentech/Roche,
Janssen, Loxo/Bayer/Lilly, Merus, Monopteros, MonteRosa, Novartis, Nuvalent,
Pfizer, Prelude, Repare RX, Takeda/Ariad/Millenium, Treeline Bio, TP
Therapeutics, Tyra Biosciences, and Verastem; has declared associated research
paid to institution by Pfizer, Exelixis, GlaxoSmithKlein, Teva, Taiho, and
PharmaMar; has received royalties by Wolters Kluwer; has declared food/beverage
from Merck, Puma, Merus, and Boehringer Ingelheim; and has received CME
honoraria by Answers in CME, Applied Pharmaceutical Science, Inc., AXIS,
Clinical Care Options, EPG Health, Harborside Nexus, I3 Health, Imedex, Liberum,
Medendi, Medscape, Med Learning, MJH Life Sciences, MORE Health, Ology, OncLive,
Paradigm, Peerview Institute, PeerVoice, Physicians Education Resources,
Remedica Ltd., Research to Practice, RV More, Targeted Oncology, TouchIME, and
WebMD.
