---
reference_id: "PMID:22016347"
title: "A rare cause of hypertestosteronemia in a 68-year-old patient: a Leydig cell tumor due to a somatic GNAS (guanine nucleotide-binding protein, alpha-stimulating activity polypeptide 1)-activating mutation."
authors:
- Libé R
- Fratticci A
- Lahlou N
- Jornayvaz FR
- Tissier F
- Louiset E
- Guibourdenche J
- Vieillefond A
- Zerbib M
- Bertherat J
journal: J Androl
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2164/jandrol.111.013441
keywords:
- Aged
- Chromogranins
- Estradiol/blood
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/blood, genetics"
- Humans
- Inhibins/blood
- "Leydig Cell Tumor/genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Orchiectomy
- "Testicular Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Testosterone/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare cause of hypertestosteronemia in a 68-year-old patient: a Leydig cell tumor due to a somatic GNAS (guanine nucleotide-binding protein, alpha-stimulating activity polypeptide 1)-activating mutation.
**Authors:** Libé R, Fratticci A, Lahlou N, Jornayvaz FR, Tissier F, Louiset E, Guibourdenche J, Vieillefond A, Zerbib M, Bertherat J
**Journal:** J Androl (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2164/jandrol.111.013441](https://doi.org/10.2164/jandrol.111.013441)

## Content

1. J Androl. 2012 Jul-Aug;33(4):578-84. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.111.013441. Epub
2011  Oct 20.

A rare cause of hypertestosteronemia in a 68-year-old patient: a Leydig cell 
tumor due to a somatic GNAS (guanine nucleotide-binding protein, 
alpha-stimulating activity polypeptide 1)-activating mutation.

Libé R(1), Fratticci A, Lahlou N, Jornayvaz FR, Tissier F, Louiset E, 
Guibourdenche J, Vieillefond A, Zerbib M, Bertherat J.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) Unité 
1016, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 
8104, Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Cancer, Institut Cochin, 
Paris, France.

Leydig cell tumors of the testis are the most common type of non-germ cell 
testicular tumors. In adult patients, gynecomastia, oligozoospermia, erectile 
dysfunction, and other signs of feminization can be present, whereas 
testosterone levels are frequently in the normal range or slightly reduced. We 
describe a patient with a history of impaired sexual function, as well as 
progressive enlargement of the left testis, without gynecomastia. Hormonal 
evaluation demonstrated very high testosterone, estrogen, and pan-alpha-inhibin 
levels. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed the presence of left testicular 
hypertrophy without evidence of testicular mass. After left orchiectomy, 
histologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of Leydig cell tumor, and steroid 
hormone levels normalized. A heterozygous missense somatic gsp mutation (R201C) 
was found in tumoral tissue, whereas no mutation was found in the surrounding 
normal tissue or in leukocyte DNA. This case provides evidence that somatic 
activating gsp mutation in Leydig cells may result in tumor development, leading 
to overexpression of the inhibin alpha subunit and hyperactivity of the 
testosterone biosynthetic pathway.

DOI: 10.2164/jandrol.111.013441
PMID: 22016347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]