---
reference_id: "PMID:25649157"
title: "Ocular features in Alport syndrome: pathogenesis and clinical significance."
authors:
- Savige J
- Sheth S
- Leys A
- Nicholson A
- Mack HG
- Colville D
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.10581014
keywords:
- Animals
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- "Diagnostic Techniques, Ophthalmological"
- "Eye Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, therapy"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/complications, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Phenotype
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular features in Alport syndrome: pathogenesis and clinical significance.
**Authors:** Savige J, Sheth S, Leys A, Nicholson A, Mack HG, Colville D
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.10581014](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.10581014)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Apr 7;10(4):703-9. doi: 10.2215/CJN.10581014. Epub
 2015 Feb 3.

Ocular features in Alport syndrome: pathogenesis and clinical significance.

Savige J(1), Sheth S(2), Leys A(3), Nicholson A(4), Mack HG(5), Colville D(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Royal Melbourne 
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; The University of Melbourne Department 
of Medicine, Northern Health, Epping, Victoria, Australia; Department of 
Nephrology, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 
jasavige@unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia; Department of Ophthalmology, Bai Yamunabai Laxman Nair Charitable 
Hospital, Mumbai, India;
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Universitaire Ziekenhuizen, Leuven, Belgium; 
and.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Bai Yamunabai Laxman Nair Charitable Hospital, 
Mumbai, India;
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Melbourne, East Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(6)Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Royal Melbourne 
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Department of Ophthalmology, Royal 
Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia;

Alport syndrome is an inherited disease characterized by progressive renal 
failure, hearing loss, and ocular abnormalities. Mutations in the COL4A5 
(X-linked), or COL4A3 and COL4A4 (autosomal recessive) genes result in absence 
of the collagen IV α3α4α5 network from the basement membranes of the cornea, 
lens capsule, and retina and are associated with corneal opacities, anterior 
lenticonus, fleck retinopathy, and temporal retinal thinning. Typically, these 
features do not affect vision or, in the case of lenticonus, are correctable. In 
contrast, the rarer ophthalmic complications of posterior polymorphous corneal 
dystrophy, giant macular hole, and maculopathy all produce visual loss. Many of 
the ocular features of Alport syndrome are common, easily recognizable, and 
thus, helpful diagnostically, and in identifying the likelihood of early-onset 
renal failure. Lenticonus and central fleck retinopathy strongly suggest the 
diagnosis of Alport syndrome and are associated with renal failure before the 
age of 30 years, in males with X-linked disease. Sometimes, ophthalmic features 
suggest the mode of inheritance. A peripheral retinopathy in the mother of a 
male with hematuria suggests X-linked inheritance, and central retinopathy or 
lenticonus in a female means that recessive disease is likely. Ocular 
examination, retinal photography, and optical coherence tomography are widely 
available, safe, fast, inexpensive, and acceptable to patients. Ocular 
examination is particularly helpful in the diagnosis of Alport syndrome when 
genetic testing is not readily available or the results are inconclusive. It 
also detects complications, such as macular hole, for which new treatments are 
emerging.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.10581014
PMCID: PMC4386265
PMID: 25649157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]