---
reference_id: "PMID:12210345"
title: "Omodysplasia: an affected mother and son."
authors:
- Venditti CP
- Farmer J
- Russell KL
- Friedrich CA
- Alter C
- Canning D
- Whitaker L
- Mennuti MT
- Driscoll DA
- Zackai EH
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10555
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Adult
- "Dwarfism/genetics, pathology"
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- "Femur/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Growth Disorders/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Humerus/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mothers
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Pregnancy
- Radiography
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Omodysplasia: an affected mother and son.
**Authors:** Venditti CP, Farmer J, Russell KL, Friedrich CA, Alter C, Canning D, Whitaker L, Mennuti MT, Driscoll DA, Zackai EH
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.10555](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.10555)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Aug 1;111(2):169-77. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10555.

Omodysplasia: an affected mother and son.

Venditti CP(1), Farmer J, Russell KL, Friedrich CA, Alter C, Canning D, Whitaker 
L, Mennuti MT, Driscoll DA, Zackai EH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

We describe a second family with mother to son transmission of omodysplasia, a 
rare skeletal dysplasia characterized by shortened humeri, shortened first 
metacarpals and craniofacial dysmorphism. The mother in this family had been 
diagnosed previously with Robinow syndrome; subsequently, her diagnosis was 
reclassified. Her pregnancy was closely monitored antenatally with serial 
ultrasound examinations. Delayed ossification of the humerus was noted 
prenatally. Her son had ambiguous genitalia and similar skeletal manifestations 
as his mother. A comparison to other known and suspected cases of dominant 
omodysplasia is presented. Our observations confirm the existence of a dominant 
variant of omodysplasia, document genital hypoplasia as an important feature of 
this syndrome in males and highlight the need to differentiate this entity from 
Robinow syndrome.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.10555
PMID: 12210345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]