---
reference_id: "PMID:31600777"
title: Nr2f1 heterozygous knockout mice recapitulate neurological phenotypes of Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome and show impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity.
authors:
- Chen CA
- Wang W
- Pedersen SE
- Raman A
- Seymour ML
- Ruiz FR
- Xia A
- van der Heijden ME
- Wang L
- Yin J
- Lopez J
- Rech ME
- Lewis RA
- Wu SM
- Liu Z
- Pereira FA
- Pautler RG
- Zoghbi HY
- Schaaf CP
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz233
keywords:
- Animals
- "Behavior, Animal"
- COUP Transcription Factor I/physiology
- "Depression/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Hippocampus/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- "Memory Disorders/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Neuronal Plasticity
- "Optic Atrophies, Hereditary/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nr2f1 heterozygous knockout mice recapitulate neurological phenotypes of Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome and show impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity.
**Authors:** Chen CA, Wang W, Pedersen SE, Raman A, Seymour ML, Ruiz FR, Xia A, van der Heijden ME, Wang L, Yin J, Lopez J, Rech ME, Lewis RA, Wu SM, Liu Z, Pereira FA, Pautler RG, Zoghbi HY, Schaaf CP
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddz233](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddz233)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 Mar 27;29(5):705-715. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz233.

Nr2f1 heterozygous knockout mice recapitulate neurological phenotypes of 
Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome and show impaired hippocampal 
synaptic plasticity.

Chen CA(1)(2), Wang W(1)(2), Pedersen SE(3)(4)(5), Raman A(2)(6), Seymour ML(7), 
Ruiz FR(7), Xia A(7), van der Heijden ME(2)(8), Wang L(1)(2), Yin J(1)(2), Lopez 
J(1)(2), Rech ME(2), Lewis RA(1)(9), Wu SM(8)(9), Liu Z(2)(10), Pereira FA(7), 
Pautler RG(3)(4), Zoghbi HY(1)(2)(10)(11)(12), Schaaf CP(1)(2)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics-Cardiovascular Sciences 
Track, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Ross University School of 
Medicine, Portsmouth, Commonwealth of Dominica.
(6)Graduate Program in Quantitative and Computational Biosciences, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(7)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(8)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(11)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA.
(12)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.

Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome (BBSOAS) has been identified as an 
autosomal-dominant disorder characterized by a complex neurological phenotype, 
with high prevalence of intellectual disability and optic nerve 
atrophy/hypoplasia. The syndrome is caused by loss-of-function mutations in 
NR2F1, which encodes a highly conserved nuclear receptor that serves as a 
transcriptional regulator. Previous investigations to understand the protein's 
role in neurodevelopment have mostly used mouse models with constitutive and 
tissue-specific homozygous knockout of Nr2f1. In order to represent the human 
disease more accurately, which is caused by heterozygous NR2F1 mutations, we 
investigated a heterozygous knockout mouse model and found that this model 
recapitulates some of the neurological phenotypes of BBSOAS, including altered 
learning/memory, hearing defects, neonatal hypotonia and decreased hippocampal 
volume. The mice showed altered fear memory, and further electrophysiological 
investigation in hippocampal slices revealed significantly reduced long-term 
potentiation and long-term depression. These results suggest that a deficit or 
alteration in hippocampal synaptic plasticity may contribute to the intellectual 
disability frequently seen in BBSOAS. RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) analysis revealed 
significant differential gene expression in the adult Nr2f1+/- hippocampus, 
including the up-regulation of multiple matrix metalloproteases, which are known 
to be critical for the development and the plasticity of the nervous system. 
Taken together, our studies highlight the important role of Nr2f1 in 
neurodevelopment. The discovery of impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity in 
the heterozygous mouse model sheds light on the pathophysiology of altered 
memory and cognitive function in BBSOAS.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz233
PMCID: PMC7104670
PMID: 31600777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]