---
reference_id: "PMID:39100494"
title: Genome-wide expression analysis in a Fabry disease human podocyte cell line.
authors:
- Snanoudj S
- Derambure C
- Zhang C
- Hai Yen NT
- Lesueur C
- Coutant S
- Abily-Donval L
- Marret S
- Yang H
- Mardinoglu A
- Bekri S
- Tebani A
journal: Heliyon
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e34357
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide expression analysis in a Fabry disease human podocyte cell line.
**Authors:** Snanoudj S, Derambure C, Zhang C, Hai Yen NT, Lesueur C, Coutant S, Abily-Donval L, Marret S, Yang H, Mardinoglu A, Bekri S, Tebani A
**Journal:** Heliyon (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e34357](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e34357)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2024 Jul 9;10(14):e34357. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e34357. 
eCollection 2024 Jul 30.

Genome-wide expression analysis in a Fabry disease human podocyte cell line.

Snanoudj S(1), Derambure C(2), Zhang C(3), Hai Yen NT(1), Lesueur C(1), Coutant 
S(2), Abily-Donval L(4), Marret S(4), Yang H(3), Mardinoglu A(3)(5), Bekri S(1), 
Tebani A(1).

Author information:
(1)Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, INSERM, U1245, CHU Rouen, Department of Metabolic 
Biochemistry, Referral Center for Lysosomal Diseases, Filière G2M, 76000, Rouen, 
France.
(2)Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, INSERM U1245 and CHU Rouen, Department of Genetics 
and Reference Center for Developmental Disorders, FHU-G4 Génomique, F-76000, 
Rouen, France.
(3)Science for Life Laboratory, KTH - Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, INSERM, U1245, CHU Rouen, Department of Neonatal 
Pediatrics, Intensive Care, and Neuropediatrics, 76000, Rouen, France.
(5)Centre for Host-Microbiome Interactions, Faculty of Dentistry, Oral & 
Craniofacial Sciences, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked lysosomal disease caused by an enzyme 
deficiency of alpha-galactosidase A (α-gal A). This deficiency leads to the 
accumulation of glycosphingolipids in lysosomes, resulting in a range of 
clinical symptoms. The complex pathogenesis of FD involves lysosomal 
dysfunction, altered autophagy, and mitochondrial abnormalities. Omics sciences, 
particularly transcriptomic analysis, comprehensively understand molecular 
mechanisms underlying diseases. This study focuses on genome-wide expression 
analysis in an FD human podocyte model to gain insights into the underlying 
mechanisms of podocyte dysfunction. Human control and GLA-edited podocytes were 
used. Gene expression data was generated using RNA-seq analysis, and 
differentially expressed genes were identified using DESeq2. Principal component 
analysis and Spearman correlation have explored gene expression trends. 
Functional enrichment and Reporter metabolite analyses were conducted to 
identify significantly affected metabolites and metabolic pathways. Differential 
expression analysis revealed 247 genes with altered expression levels in 
GLA-edited podocytes compared to control podocytes. Among these genes, 136 were 
underexpressed, and 111 were overexpressed in GLA-edited cells. Functional 
analysis of differentially expressed genes showed their involvement in various 
pathways related to oxidative stress, inflammation, fatty acid metabolism, 
collagen and extracellular matrix homeostasis, kidney injury, apoptosis, 
autophagy, and cellular stress response. The study provides insights into 
molecular mechanisms underlying Fabry podocyte dysfunction. Integrating 
transcriptomics data with genome-scale metabolic modeling further unveiled 
metabolic alterations in GLA-edited podocytes. This comprehensive approach 
contributes to a better understanding of Fabry disease and may lead to 
identifying new biomarkers and therapeutic targets for this rare lysosomal 
disorder.

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e34357
PMCID: PMC11295972
PMID: 39100494

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.