---
reference_id: "PMID:22919874"
title: Reibergram and oligoclonal bands in diagnosis of multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Karamehic J
- Delic-Sarac M
- Subasic D
- Jukic T
- Coric J
- Panjeta M
- Drace Z
- Zecevic L
- Mutevelic S
- Dzananovic N
- Grcic N
- Kesmer A
journal: Med Arch
year: '2012'
doi: 10.5455/medarh.2012.66.222-225
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reibergram and oligoclonal bands in diagnosis of multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Karamehic J, Delic-Sarac M, Subasic D, Jukic T, Coric J, Panjeta M, Drace Z, Zecevic L, Mutevelic S, Dzananovic N, Grcic N, Kesmer A
**Journal:** Med Arch (2012)
**DOI:** [10.5455/medarh.2012.66.222-225](https://doi.org/10.5455/medarh.2012.66.222-225)

## Content

1. Med Arch. 2012;66(4):222-5. doi: 10.5455/medarh.2012.66.222-225.

Reibergram and oligoclonal bands in diagnosis of multiple sclerosis.

Karamehic J(1), Delic-Sarac M, Subasic D, Jukic T, Coric J, Panjeta M, Drace Z, 
Zecevic L, Mutevelic S, Dzananovic N, Grcic N, Kesmer A.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Immunology Clinical Center of University of Sarajevo. 
karamehic.jasenko@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: In this study authors have analyzed the correlation between the 
IgG immunoglobulins in cerebrospinal fluid and the findings of oligoclonal bands 
on gel. Immunoglobulin IgG in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can be detected in 
neurological diseasses (infections and inflammatory neurological diseases and in 
demyelinating diseases, like multiple sclerosis (MS)). Quantitative IgG in CSF 
can be expressed by different formulae Reiber (Reiber and Felgenhauer 1987), 
Tourtellotte (Tourtellotte 1970), Schuller (Schuller and Sagar 1983) and IgG 
Index (Link and Tibbling 1977). In this study we used Reibergram. Qualitative 
CSF IgG can be measured by electrophoresis and isoelectric focusing (IEF). We 
used IEF for analysig CSF and seum because of its higher sensitivity.
AIMS OF THE STUDY: To determine the correlation of immunoglobulins IgG 
positivity in CSF with the finding of oligoclonal bands on the gel.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The retrospective study based on data processed in OJ 
Clinical Immunology KCUS. Patients were suspicious of multiple sclerosis 
according to clinical findings and magnetic resonance imaging. All CSF and serum 
samples were processed by nephelometry, isoelectric focusing on the gel. 
Statistical analysis of intrathecal synthesis was also performed according to 
Reibergram.
RESULTS: Analyses were performed on 76 samples of cerebrospinal fluid and serum 
of patients from neurological clinic, suspected of multiple sclerosis. We 
received following results: 42 samples tested had type 1.25 samples tested 
showed type 2.3 samples had type 3.5 samples had type 4.1 sample had a fifth 
type. When we compare these results with values obtained by intrathecal 
synthesis of which is determined by Reibergram we obtained the following values: 
16 samples had intrathecal synthesis of 20%-60%, 9 samples had a negative value 
of intrathecal synthesis of 10% or less.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: For most patients with established MS we found 
intrathecal humoral response, type two, and the number and arrangement of IgG 
bands generally does not change during the disease, because they reflect 
long-term non-specific immune stimulation rather than a specific immune response 
that during infectious disease changes (quantitatively and qualitatively).

DOI: 10.5455/medarh.2012.66.222-225
PMID: 22919874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]