---
reference_id: "PMID:19637355"
title: "Vascular endothelial growth factor in the management of hepatocellular carcinoma: a review of literature."
authors:
- Kaseb AO
- Hanbali A
- Cotant M
- Hassan MM
- Wollner I
- Philip PA
journal: Cancer
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.24537
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vascular endothelial growth factor in the management of hepatocellular carcinoma: a review of literature.
**Authors:** Kaseb AO, Hanbali A, Cotant M, Hassan MM, Wollner I, Philip PA
**Journal:** Cancer (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.24537](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.24537)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2009 Nov 1;115(21):4895-906. doi: 10.1002/cncr.24537.

Vascular endothelial growth factor in the management of hepatocellular 
carcinoma: a review of literature.

Kaseb AO(1), Hanbali A, Cotant M, Hassan MM, Wollner I, Philip PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. 
D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

The importance of tumor angiogenesis in tumor biology is now widely accepted. 
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly vascular tumor, and angiogenesis is 
believed to play a considerable role in its development and progression. The 
authors reviewed the role of circulating vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) in screening for HCC and in risk stratification and treatment monitoring. 
They searched the world medical literature by accessing MEDLINE and PubMed for 
articles on: 1) the utility of circulating VEGF for HCC screening in patients 
with cirrhosis; 2) the role of circulating VEGF as a predictor of the invasive 
potential of HCC; and 3) monitoring anti-HCC treatment effects by serial 
measurements of circulating VEGF. They found evidence to support a potential 
role for VEGF in screening and surveillance of HCC. They also found support for 
developing the use of VEGF in the monitoring of treatment outcomes. Several 
studies suggested that the circulating VEGF level may be an independent 
prognostic marker in HCC. Further studies are needed to determine the utility of 
circulating VEGF in screening of patients with cirrhosis and to determine its 
potential role as a prognostic and predictive biomarker in patients with HCC. 
Cancer 2009. (c) 2009 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24537
PMID: 19637355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]