---
reference_id: "PMID:26255971"
title: Host genetic variants influencing the clinical course of hepatitis B virus infection.
authors:
- Matsuura K
- Isogawa M
- Tanaka Y
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.24350
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Host genetic variants influencing the clinical course of hepatitis B virus infection.
**Authors:** Matsuura K, Isogawa M, Tanaka Y
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.24350](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.24350)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2016 Mar;88(3):371-9. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24350. Epub 2015 Aug 14.

Host genetic variants influencing the clinical course of hepatitis B virus 
infection.

Matsuura K(1)(2)(3), Isogawa M(1), Tanaka Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology and Liver Unit, Nagoya City University Graduate School 
of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Nagoya City University 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Infectious Disease and Immunogenetics Section, Department of Transfusion 
Medicine, Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

The clinical course of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection greatly differs in 
individuals. Various viral, host, and environmental factors influence the 
natural history of HBV infection. Recent genome-wide association studies 
identified several host genetic factors influencing the clinical course of HBV 
infection. Genetic variations in HLA class II loci were significantly associated 
with susceptibility to persistent HBV infection. Other polymorphisms in or near 
the genes EHMT2, TCF19, and HLA-C, located near HLA class II loci, and UBE2L3 
were also associated with persistent HBV infection. Meanwhile, polymorphisms in 
KIF1B, GRIK1, and STAT4 were associated with HBV-related hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC). Interestingly, HLA class II genetic variations were strongly 
associated with not only persistent HBV infection, but also disease progression 
and HBV-related HCC in chronic hepatitis B. Understanding the various genetic 
factors associated with the clinical course of HBV infection is essential for 
personalized treatment and surveillance of disease progression and HCC.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24350
PMID: 26255971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]