---
reference_id: "PMID:30459321"
title: "BAFopathies' DNA methylation epi-signatures demonstrate diagnostic utility and functional continuum of Coffin-Siris and Nicolaides-Baraitser syndromes."
authors:
- Aref-Eshghi E
- Bend EG
- Hood RL
- Schenkel LC
- Carere DA
- Chakrabarti R
- Nagamani SCS
- Cheung SW
- Campeau PM
- Prasad C
- Siu VM
- Brady L
- Tarnopolsky MA
- Callen DJ
- Innes AM
- White SM
- Meschino WS
- Shuen AY
- Paré G
- Bulman DE
- Ainsworth PJ
- Lin H
- Rodenhiser DI
- Hennekam RC
- Boycott KM
- Schwartz CE
- Sadikovic B
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07193-y
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Epigenomics
- Face/abnormalities
- Facies
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Micrognathism/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Neck/abnormalities
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- SMARCB1 Protein/genetics
- Syndrome
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BAFopathies' DNA methylation epi-signatures demonstrate diagnostic utility and functional continuum of Coffin-Siris and Nicolaides-Baraitser syndromes.
**Authors:** Aref-Eshghi E, Bend EG, Hood RL, Schenkel LC, Carere DA, Chakrabarti R, Nagamani SCS, Cheung SW, Campeau PM, Prasad C, Siu VM, Brady L, Tarnopolsky MA, Callen DJ, Innes AM, White SM, Meschino WS, Shuen AY, Paré G, Bulman DE, Ainsworth PJ, Lin H, Rodenhiser DI, Hennekam RC, Boycott KM, Schwartz CE, Sadikovic B
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-018-07193-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07193-y)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2018 Nov 20;9(1):4885. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07193-y.

BAFopathies' DNA methylation epi-signatures demonstrate diagnostic utility and 
functional continuum of Coffin-Siris and Nicolaides-Baraitser syndromes.

Aref-Eshghi E(1)(2), Bend EG(3), Hood RL(4), Schenkel LC(1)(2), Carere DA(2), 
Chakrabarti R(5), Nagamani SCS(6), Cheung SW(6), Campeau PM(7), Prasad C(5), Siu 
VM(5), Brady L(8), Tarnopolsky MA(8), Callen DJ(8), Innes AM(9), White SM(10), 
Meschino WS(11), Shuen AY(5), Paré G(12), Bulman DE(4), Ainsworth PJ(1)(2), Lin 
H(1)(2), Rodenhiser DI(5)(13), Hennekam RC(14), Boycott KM(4), Schwartz CE(15), 
Sadikovic B(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London, 
N6A 5W9, ON, Canada.
(2)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Molecular Diagnostics Division, London Health 
Sciences Centre, London, N6A 5W9, ON, Canada.
(3)Prevention Genetics, Marshfield, 54449, WI, USA.
(4)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, K1H 8L1, ON, Canada.
(5)Children's Health Research Institute, London, N6A 5W9, ON, Canada.
(6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, 77030, TX, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Montreal, Montreal, H3C 3J7, QC, 
Canada.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, L8P 1A2, ON, Canada.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Alberta Children's Hospital Research 
Institute for Child and Maternal Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, T3B 
6A8, AB, Canada.
(10)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 3052, VIC, 
Australia.
(11)Genetics Program, North York General Hospital, Toronto, M2K 1E1, ON, Canada.
(12)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, L8P 1A2, ON, Canada.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Biochemistry and Oncology, Western University, 
London, N6A 5W9, ON, Canada.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, 1012 WX, The Netherlands.
(15)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, 29646, SC, USA.
(16)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London, 
N6A 5W9, ON, Canada. Bekim.Sadikovic@lhsc.on.ca.
(17)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Molecular Diagnostics Division, London Health 
Sciences Centre, London, N6A 5W9, ON, Canada. Bekim.Sadikovic@lhsc.on.ca.

Coffin-Siris and Nicolaides-Baraitser syndromes (CSS and NCBRS) are Mendelian 
disorders caused by mutations in subunits of the BAF chromatin remodeling 
complex. We report overlapping peripheral blood DNA methylation epi-signatures 
in individuals with various subtypes of CSS (ARID1B, SMARCB1, and SMARCA4) and 
NCBRS (SMARCA2). We demonstrate that the degree of similarity in the 
epi-signatures of some CSS subtypes and NCBRS can be greater than that within 
CSS, indicating a link in the functional basis of the two syndromes. We show 
that chromosome 6q25 microdeletion syndrome, harboring ARID1B deletions, 
exhibits a similar CSS/NCBRS methylation profile. Specificity of this 
epi-signature was confirmed across a wide range of neurodevelopmental conditions 
including other chromatin remodeling and epigenetic machinery disorders. We 
demonstrate that a machine-learning model trained on this DNA methylation 
profile can resolve ambiguous clinical cases, reclassify those with variants of 
unknown significance, and identify previously undiagnosed subjects through 
targeted population screening.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07193-y
PMCID: PMC6244416
PMID: 30459321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.