---
reference_id: "PMID:29704874"
title: "The convergence theory for vitiligo: A reappraisal."
authors:
- Kundu RV
- Mhlaba JM
- Rangel SM
- Le Poole IC
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/exd.13677
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The convergence theory for vitiligo: A reappraisal.
**Authors:** Kundu RV, Mhlaba JM, Rangel SM, Le Poole IC
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/exd.13677](https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.13677)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2019 Jun;28(6):647-655. doi: 10.1111/exd.13677. Epub 2018 Jun
28.

The convergence theory for vitiligo: A reappraisal.

Kundu RV(1), Mhlaba JM(1), Rangel SM(1), Le Poole IC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago, 
IL, USA.

Vitiligo is characterized by progressive loss of skin pigmentation. The search 
for aetiologic factors has led to the biochemical, the neurologic and the 
autoimmune theory. The convergence theory was then proposed several years ago to 
incorporate existing theories of vitiligo development into a single overview of 
vitiligo aetiology. The viewpoint that vitiligo is not caused only by 
predisposing mutations, or only by melanocytes responding to chemical/radiation 
exposure, or only by hyperreactive T cells, but rather results from a 
combination of aetiologic factors that impact melanocyte viability, has 
certainly stood the test of time. New findings have since informed the 
description of progressive depigmentation. Understanding the relative importance 
of such aetiologic factors combined with a careful selection of the most 
targetable pathways will continue to drive the next phase in vitiligo research: 
the development of effective therapeutics. In that arena, it is likewise 
important to acknowledge that pathways affected in some patients may not be 
altered in others. Taken together, the convergence theory continues to provide a 
comprehensive viewpoint of vitiligo aetiology. The theory serves to intertwine 
aetiologic pathways and will help to define pathways amenable to disease 
intervention in individual patients.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.13677
PMCID: PMC6204319
PMID: 29704874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors have declared 
no conflicting interests.