---
reference_id: "PMID:33859490"
title: "GM1 Gangliosidosis: Mechanisms and Management."
authors:
- Rha AK
- Maguire AS
- Martin DR
journal: Appl Clin Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2147/TACG.S206076
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GM1 Gangliosidosis: Mechanisms and Management.
**Authors:** Rha AK, Maguire AS, Martin DR
**Journal:** Appl Clin Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2147/TACG.S206076](https://doi.org/10.2147/TACG.S206076)

## Content

1. Appl Clin Genet. 2021 Apr 9;14:209-233. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S206076. eCollection
 2021.

GM1 Gangliosidosis: Mechanisms and Management.

Rha AK(1), Maguire AS(1)(2), Martin DR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Scott-Ritchey Research Center, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Physiology, and Pharmacology, Auburn University 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.

The lysosomal storage disorder, GM1 gangliosidosis (GM1), is a neurodegenerative 
condition resulting from deficiency of the enzyme β-galactosidase (β-gal). 
Mutation of the GLB1 gene, which codes for β-gal, prevents cleavage of the 
terminal β-1,4-linked galactose residue from GM1 ganglioside. Subsequent 
accumulation of GM1 ganglioside and other substrates in the lysosome impairs 
cell physiology and precipitates dysfunction of the nervous system. Beyond 
palliative and supportive care, no FDA-approved treatments exist for GM1 
patients. Researchers are critically evaluating the efficacy of substrate 
reduction therapy, pharmacological chaperones, enzyme replacement therapy, stem 
cell transplantation, and gene therapy for GM1. A Phase I/II clinical trial for 
GM1 children is ongoing to evaluate the safety and efficacy of adeno-associated 
virus-mediated GLB1 delivery by intravenous injection, providing patients and 
families with hope for the future.

© 2021 Rha et al.

DOI: 10.2147/TACG.S206076
PMCID: PMC8044076
PMID: 33859490

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Douglas R Martin reports grants from National 
Institutes of Health, during the conduct of the study; stock options from 
Lysogene, and personal fees from Axovant, outside the submitted work. The 
authors report no other potential conflicts of interest for this work.