---
reference_id: "PMID:38806112"
title: Defining the cardiovascular phenotype of adults with Alström syndrome.
authors:
- Roy A
- Patel L
- Yuan M
- "O'Shea C"
- Alvior AMB
- Charalambides M
- Moxon D
- Baig S
- Bunting KV
- Gehmlich K
- Geberhiwot T
- Steeds RP
journal: Int J Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2024.132212
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Phenotype
- "Alstrom Syndrome/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- Electrocardiography
- Echocardiography
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining the cardiovascular phenotype of adults with Alström syndrome.
**Authors:** Roy A, Patel L, Yuan M, O'Shea C, Alvior AMB, Charalambides M, Moxon D, Baig S, Bunting KV, Gehmlich K, Geberhiwot T, Steeds RP
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcard.2024.132212](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2024.132212)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol. 2024 Aug 15;409:132212. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2024.132212. Epub
 2024 May 26.

Defining the cardiovascular phenotype of adults with Alström syndrome.

Roy A(1), Patel L(2), Yuan M(3), O'Shea C(2), Alvior AMB(3), Charalambides M(4),
Moxon D(4), Baig S(5), Bunting KV(6), Gehmlich K(7), Geberhiwot T(8), Steeds
RP(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK; Department of Cardiology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
Electronic address: ashwinroy@nhs.net.
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(4)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK;
Department of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Queen Elizabeth Hospital
Birmingham, UK.
(6)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK; Department of Cardiology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(7)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK; Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine and
British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence Oxford, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(8)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK; Department of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Queen Elizabeth
Hospital Birmingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: >40% of infants with Alström Syndrome (AS) present with a transient,
severe cardiomyopathy in the first months of life, with apparent recovery in
survivors. One in five individuals then develop a later-onset cardiomyopathy but
wide clinical variability is observed, even within the same family. The
rationale for this study is to provide a comprehensive evaluation of the
cardiovascular phenotype in adults with AS.
METHODS: Adults attending the National Centre for AS in England were studied.
All patients underwent biochemical, 12- lead electrocardiography,
echocardiography, and cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging.
RESULTS: 47 adults with AS (64% male; mean age 33 years; 66% white British) were
studied. Seven (15%) survived infantile cardiomyopathy and 23 (49%) developed
adult-onset cardiomyopathy. Conventional risk factors for cardiovascular disease
were present in 39 (83%). Abnormalities were present on biomarkers in 16 (34%),
ECG 30 (64%), echocardiography 19 (40%) and CMR 31 (66%). Coronary artery
imaging was performed in six (13%), with abnormalities in two. Cardiac, renal,
and liver markers were more often impaired in older patients, with impaired left
ventricular ejection fraction, reduced global longitudinal strain and late
enhancement. 6 (13%) had severe pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary artery
pressure 46 mmHg) due to left heart disease on invasive testing.
CONCLUSION: Cardiomyopathy is common in adults with AS, complicated in a
significant proportion by atherosclerotic coronary artery disease and
restrictive cardiomyopathy, confirmed on CMR and invasive testing. With
advancing age, cardiovascular complications are compounded by contemporaneous
renal and liver disease.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2024.132212
PMID: 38806112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.
