---
reference_id: "PMID:28696225"
title: Glypican-6 promotes the growth of developing long bones by stimulating Hedgehog signaling.
authors:
- Capurro M
- Izumikawa T
- Suarez P
- Shi W
- Cydzik M
- Kaneiwa T
- Gariepy J
- Bonafe L
- Filmus J
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1083/jcb.201605119
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Proliferation
- Cilia/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Femur/embryology, metabolism"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Glycosaminoglycans/metabolism
- "Glypicans/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Growth Disorders/embryology, genetics, metabolism"
- HEK293 Cells
- "Hedgehog Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/congenital, embryology, genetics, metabolism"
- Osteogenesis
- Patched-1 Receptor/metabolism
- Phenotype
- Protein Binding
- Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs
- Signal Transduction
- "Tibia/embryology, metabolism"
- Time Factors
- Transfection
- Zinc Finger Protein GLI1/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glypican-6 promotes the growth of developing long bones by stimulating Hedgehog signaling.
**Authors:** Capurro M, Izumikawa T, Suarez P, Shi W, Cydzik M, Kaneiwa T, Gariepy J, Bonafe L, Filmus J
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.201605119](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201605119)

## Content

1. J Cell Biol. 2017 Sep 4;216(9):2911-2926. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201605119. Epub
2017  Jul 10.

Glypican-6 promotes the growth of developing long bones by stimulating Hedgehog 
signaling.

Capurro M(1)(2), Izumikawa T(1)(2), Suarez P(3), Shi W(1)(2), Cydzik M(1)(2), 
Kaneiwa T(1)(2), Gariepy J(1)(2), Bonafe L(3), Filmus J(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sunnybrook Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Center for Molecular Diseases, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(4)Sunnybrook Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada jorge.filmus@sri.utoronto.ca.

Autosomal-recessive omodysplasia (OMOD1) is a genetic condition characterized by 
short stature, shortened limbs, and facial dysmorphism. OMOD1 is caused by 
loss-of-function mutations of glypican 6 (GPC6). In this study, we show that 
GPC6-null embryos display most of the abnormalities found in OMOD1 patients and 
that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is significantly reduced in the long bones of these 
embryos. The Hh-stimulatory activity of GPC6 was also observed in cultured 
cells, where this GPC increased the binding of Hh to Patched 1 (Ptc1). 
Consistent with this, GPC6 interacts with Hh through its core protein and with 
Ptc1 through its glycosaminoglycan chains. Hh signaling is triggered at the 
primary cilium. In the absence of Hh, we observed that GPC6 is localized outside 
of the cilium but moves into the cilium upon the addition of Hh. We conclude 
that GPC6 stimulates Hh signaling by binding to Hh and Ptc1 at the cilium and 
increasing the interaction of the receptor and ligand.

© 2017 Capurro et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201605119
PMCID: PMC5584141
PMID: 28696225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]