---
reference_id: "PMID:30507702"
title: Endocrine aspects of Klinefelter syndrome.
authors:
- Lizarazo AH
- McLoughlin M
- Vogiatzi MG
journal: Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000454
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrine aspects of Klinefelter syndrome.
**Authors:** Lizarazo AH, McLoughlin M, Vogiatzi MG
**Journal:** Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MED.0000000000000454](https://doi.org/10.1097/MED.0000000000000454)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2019 Feb;26(1):60-65. doi: 
10.1097/MED.0000000000000454.

Endocrine aspects of Klinefelter syndrome.

Lizarazo AH(1), McLoughlin M, Vogiatzi MG.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetes, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Klinefelter syndrome is the most common sex chromosome 
abnormality in men. Hypogonadism and testicular degeneration are almost 
universal. Truncal adiposity, metabolic syndrome and low bone mass occur 
frequently. This review summarizes the most recent advances in the pathogenesis 
and management of the endocrine abnormalities in Klinefelter syndrome. It is 
expected that optimal endocrine management will improve outcomes and quality of 
life in Klinefelter syndrome.
RECENT FINDINGS: In Klinefelter syndrome, testosterone replacement is routinely 
prescribed despite lack of evidence on the optimal dose and time for initiation 
of therapy. Cross-sectional studies have linked hypogonadism to the development 
of metabolic abnormalities and low bone mass. Testosterone therapy, however, is 
not consistently associated with improved metabolic and bone outcomes. Increased 
truncal adiposity and high rates of metabolic syndrome are present in 
prepubertal children. A randomized trial of oxandrolone in prepubertal boys 
showed improvement in visual-motor function, socialization and cardiometabolic 
health. Testicular sperm extraction (TESE) has success rates similar to other 
causes of nonobstructive azoospermia when performed between 16 and 35 years of 
age.
SUMMARY: Endocrine care in Klinefelter syndrome should start in childhood and 
include evaluation of metabolic risk factors and bone health. Further research 
to guide evidence-based endocrine care is very much needed.

DOI: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000454
PMID: 30507702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]