---
reference_id: "PMID:38795594"
title: Relationship between sensation and balance and gait in multiple sclerosis patients with mild disability.
authors:
- Ozkul C
- Eldemir K
- Yildirim MS
- Cobanoglu G
- Eldemir S
- Guzel NA
- Irkec C
- Guclu-Gunduz A
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2024.105690
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between sensation and balance and gait in multiple sclerosis patients with mild disability.
**Authors:** Ozkul C, Eldemir K, Yildirim MS, Cobanoglu G, Eldemir S, Guzel NA, Irkec C, Guclu-Gunduz A
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2024.105690](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2024.105690)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2024 Jul;87:105690. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2024.105690.
 Epub 2024 May 18.

Relationship between sensation and balance and gait in multiple sclerosis 
patients with mild disability.

Ozkul C(1), Eldemir K(2), Yildirim MS(3), Cobanoglu G(4), Eldemir S(5), Guzel 
NA(4), Irkec C(6), Guclu-Gunduz A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Gazi University, Ankara, Türkiye. Electronic address: caglaozkul@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Ordu University, Ordu, Türkiye.
(3)Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Trakya University, Edirne, Türkiye.
(4)Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Gazi University, Ankara, Türkiye.
(5)Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Sivas Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Türkiye.
(6)Department of Neurology, Lokman Hekim University, Ankara, Türkiye.

BACKGROUND: Patients with Multiple Sclerosis (PwMS) often experience sensory, 
balance, and gait problems. Impairment in any sensation may increase imbalance 
and gait disorder in PwMS. This study aimed to (1) compare foot plantar 
sensations, knee position sense, balance, and gait in PwMS compared to Healthy 
Individuals (HI) and (2) examine the relationship between plantar sensations, 
knee position sense, balance, and gait in PwMS.
METHODS: Thirty PwMS with mild disability and 10 HI participated in this study. 
Light touch threshold, two-point discrimination, vibration duration, and knee 
position sense were examined on the Dominant Side (DS) and Non-Dominant Side 
(NDS). Balance and spatio-temporal gait analysis were evaluated in all 
participants.
RESULTS: PwMS had higher postural sway with eyes closed on the foam surface, 
longer swing phase of DS, longer single support phase of NDS, and shorter double 
support phase of DS compared to HI (p < 0.05). The results of regression 
analysis showed that the light touch thresholds of the 1st and 5th toes of the 
DS were associated with postural sway in different sensory conditions (p < 
0.05). In contrast, the light touch thresholds of the 1st and 5th toes, 
two-point discrimination of the heel, vibration duration of the 1st metatarsal 
head and knee position sense of the NDS, and light touch threshold in the medial 
arch of both sides were associated with the gait parameters (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: PwMS, even with mild disabilities needs neurorehabilitation to 
improve plantar sensation and knee position sense.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2024.105690
PMID: 38795594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.