---
reference_id: "PMID:511427"
title: Transient neonatal pustular melanosis.
authors:
- Barr RJ
- Globerman LM
- Werber FA
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '1979'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4362.1979.tb04681.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transient neonatal pustular melanosis.
**Authors:** Barr RJ, Globerman LM, Werber FA
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (1979)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-4362.1979.tb04681.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-4362.1979.tb04681.x)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 1979 Oct;18(8):636-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4362.1979.tb04681.x.

Transient neonatal pustular melanosis.

Barr RJ, Globerman LM, Werber FA.

A Mexican-American boy presented at birth with an extensive eruption consisting 
of 0.5 to 1.0 cm hyperpigmented macules with a distinct peripheral scale 
involving primarily the forearms, abdomen and lower back (Fig. 1). Rare intact 
vesicopustules were also identified. There was an unremarkable prenatal history, 
and the infant was a product of a normal vaginal delivery. With the exception of 
the skin lesions and moderate hepatosplenomegaly, the physical examination was 
normal. Gram stains of the pustules showed numerous neutrophils but no bacteria. 
Bacterial cultures, of the skin and blood, TORCH screen (toxoplasmosis, rubella, 
cytomegalic virus, and herpes virus) and a VDRL were negative. On the second day 
of life, the patient developed several pustules with surrounding erythema 
consistent with erythema toxicum neonatorum. Wright-stained smears of these 
lesions showed abundant eosinophils. Hepatosplenomegaly resolved by the third 
day of life and at the time of discharge only hyperpigmented macules persisted. 
Follow-up visit six weeks later showed no evidence of skin lesions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-4362.1979.tb04681.x
PMID: 511427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]