---
reference_id: "PMID:29569832"
title: Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Protect Islet Grafts Against Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-Induced Apoptosis During the Early Stage After Transplantation.
authors:
- He Y
- Zhang D
- Zeng Y
- Ma J
- Wang J
- Guo H
- Zhang J
- Wang M
- Zhang W
- Gong N
journal: Stem Cells
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/stem.2823
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Protect Islet Grafts Against Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-Induced Apoptosis During the Early Stage After Transplantation.
**Authors:** He Y, Zhang D, Zeng Y, Ma J, Wang J, Guo H, Zhang J, Wang M, Zhang W, Gong N
**Journal:** Stem Cells (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/stem.2823](https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.2823)

## Content

1. Stem Cells. 2018 Jul;36(7):1045-1061. doi: 10.1002/stem.2823. Epub 2018 Apr
17.

Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Protect Islet Grafts Against 
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-Induced Apoptosis During the Early Stage After 
Transplantation.

He Y(1), Zhang D(2), Zeng Y(2), Ma J(1), Wang J(1), Guo H(1), Zhang J(1), Wang 
M(1), Zhang W(1), Gong N(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Organ Transplantation, Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Health 
and the Ministry of Education, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan, China.

Early loss of grafted islets is the main obstacle to achieve favorable outcomes 
of islet transplantation. Mesenchymal stem cells are known to have a protective 
effect; however, its mechanism remains unclear. We hypothesized that bone 
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) can protect grafted islets against 
endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS)-induced apoptosis. In syngeneic 
streptozocin-induced diabetic BALB/c mice, islet grafts decreased blood glucose 
levels; however, the effect was not fully functional from the immediate 
post-transplant phase. β-Cell apoptosis was proven on days 1 and 3 after 
transplantation. Ultra-structural evidence of ERS was observed along with 
increased expressions of marker protein BIP and apoptosis-related protein CHOP. 
In contrast, BMSC co-transplantation maintained glucose hemostasis, inhibited 
apoptosis and alleviated ERS. In ex vivo culture, BMSCs improved viability of 
islets and decreased apoptosis. Increased ERS were observed in cultured islets 
exposed to hypoxia, but not in the islets cocultured with BMSCs. Furthermore, 
cocultured BMSCs protected islets against ERS-induced apoptosis as well as 
improved their insulin secretion, and BMSCs alleviated ERS by improving Myc 
expression through both stromal cell-derived factor 1 signal and contact effect. 
In conclusion, BMSCs protected the grafted islets against ERS-induced apoptosis 
during the early stage after transplantation. This study opens a new arena for 
ERS-targeted therapy to improve outcomes of islet transplantation. Stem Cells 
2018;36:1045-1061.

© 2018 The Authors Stem Cells published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of 
AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.2823
PMID: 29569832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]