---
reference_id: "PMID:37434352"
title: "Parvovirus B19 Infection: A Vasculitis Masquerade in an Elderly Patient."
authors:
- Suzuki M
- Watari T
journal: Am J Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.12659/AJCR.939696
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parvovirus B19 Infection: A Vasculitis Masquerade in an Elderly Patient.
**Authors:** Suzuki M, Watari T
**Journal:** Am J Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.12659/AJCR.939696](https://doi.org/10.12659/AJCR.939696)

## Content

1. Am J Case Rep. 2023 Jul 12;24:e939696. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.939696.

Parvovirus B19 Infection: A Vasculitis Masquerade in an Elderly Patient.

Suzuki M(1), Watari T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine, National Hospital Organization 
Sendai Medical Center, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(2)General Medicine Center, Shimane University Hospital, Izumo, Shimane, Japan.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA.

BACKGROUND The profound ability of viral infections to convincingly mimic 
vasculitis, thereby pathologically influencing vessels of any caliber, is 
undeniably significant. Notably, adult patients with B19V infection frequently 
experience joint pain and cutaneous eruptions, which are ostensibly immune 
responses to the infection and necessitate careful differentiation from 
autoimmunity. Conversely, vasculitis syndromes represent an amalgamation of 
diseases characterized by vascular inflammation, predominantly classified based 
on the impacted vessels' size and location. Although the expedited diagnosis and 
therapeutic management of vasculitis are paramount, many conditions, including 
infectious diseases, can potentially masquerade as vasculitis, necessitating 
rigorous differential diagnosis. CASE REPORT A 78-year-old male patient 
presented with fever, bilateral leg edema, skin rash, and foot numbness to the 
outpatient department. Blood investigations showed elevated inflammatory 
parameters, and urinalysis showed proteinuria and occult blood presence. We 
considered SVV, particularly microscopic polyangiitis, which causes acute renal 
injury, as the provisional diagnosis. Blood investigations, including 
auto-antibodies and a skin biopsy, were performed. However, his clinical 
symptoms resolved spontaneously before these investigation results were 
reported. Subsequently, the patient was diagnosed with B19V infection based on 
B19V immunoglobulin M antibody positivity. CONCLUSIONS B19V infection mimics 
vasculitis. Even in geriatric patients, particularly during B19V infection 
outbreaks, clinicians should conduct thorough interviews and examinations while 
contemplating the likelihood of B19V infection as a potential vasculitis mimic.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.939696
PMCID: PMC10351207
PMID: 37434352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared