---
reference_id: "PMID:33085149"
title: "Systematic review of low-dose isotretinoin for treatment of acne vulgaris: Focus on indication, dosage, regimen, efficacy, safety, satisfaction, and follow up, based on clinical studies."
authors:
- Sadeghzadeh-Bazargan A
- Ghassemi M
- Goodarzi A
- Roohaninasab M
- Najar Nobari N
- Behrangi E
journal: Dermatol Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/dth.14438
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic review of low-dose isotretinoin for treatment of acne vulgaris: Focus on indication, dosage, regimen, efficacy, safety, satisfaction, and follow up, based on clinical studies.
**Authors:** Sadeghzadeh-Bazargan A, Ghassemi M, Goodarzi A, Roohaninasab M, Najar Nobari N, Behrangi E
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dth.14438](https://doi.org/10.1111/dth.14438)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther. 2021 Jan;34(1):e14438. doi: 10.1111/dth.14438. Epub 2020 Dec 6.

Systematic review of low-dose isotretinoin for treatment of acne vulgaris: Focus 
on indication, dosage, regimen, efficacy, safety, satisfaction, and follow up, 
based on clinical studies.

Sadeghzadeh-Bazargan A(1), Ghassemi M(1), Goodarzi A(1), Roohaninasab M(1), 
Najar Nobari N(1), Behrangi E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Rasoul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences (IUMS), Tehran, Iran.

Oral isotretinoin is the most effective treatment for moderate to severe acne 
and its side effects are mostly dose-dependent. Low dose isotretinoin (0.5 
mg/kg/day for 1 week every 4 weeks for 6-months) could be effective and even in 
its end result, comparable with high or optimal doses. In this systematic 
review, we aimed to sum up the results of clinical trials regarding indications, 
dosage, prescription protocol, effectiveness, side effects, patient 
satisfaction, recurrence rate, and follow-up period of low dose isotretinoin in 
treatment of acne. Cochrane, Google Scholar, Science Direct, PubMed, and Medline 
were searched. A total of 460 articles were searched electronically and 382 
articles were excluded. About 4 were non-English and 2, before 1980. The full 
text of 72 articles was reviewed. Finally 15 documents met the inclusion 
criteria for entering this systematic review. The standard dose of isotretinoin 
is 0.5-1 mg/kg/day for 4 months with a total dose of 120-140 mg/kg/day. Daily 
doses between 0.1 and 0.3 mg/kg can be recommended for more than 6 months due to 
the occurrence of fewer side effects and more economical concerns. For greater 
effectiveness, it could be combined with other medications.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/dth.14438
PMID: 33085149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]