---
reference_id: "PMID:19462352"
title: End stage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Ambrosino N
- Gherardi M
- Carpenè N
journal: Pneumonol Alergol Pol
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# End stage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Ambrosino N, Gherardi M, Carpenè N
**Journal:** Pneumonol Alergol Pol (2009)

## Content

1. Pneumonol Alergol Pol. 2009;77(2):173-9.

End stage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ambrosino N(1), Gherardi M, Carpenè N.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Intensive Care and Pulmonary Diseases Unit, Cardio-Thoracic 
Department, University Hospital Pisa, Cisanello 56127 Pisa, Italy. 
n.ambrosino@ao-pisa.toscana.it

Many patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) die each year as 
those with lung cancer but current guidelines make few recommendations on the 
care for the most severe patients i.e. those with Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) stages III and IV with chronic respiratory 
failure. Only smoking cessation and long term oxygen therapy (LTOT) improve 
survival in COPD. Although non invasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) may 
have an adjunctive role in the management of chronic respiratory insufficiency 
there is little evidence for its use in the routine management of stable 
hypercapnic COPD patients. At difference, several prospective, randomised, 
controlled studies, systematic reviews and meta-analyses show good level of 
evidence for clinical efficacy of NPPV in the treatment of acute on chronic 
respiratory failure due to acute exacerbations of COPD. NPPV is also alternative 
to invasive ventilation for symptom relief in end stage COPD. Surgical 
interventions for end stage COPD like bullectomy, different modalities of lung 
volume reduction surgery and lung transplantation are likely to be of value to 
only a small percentage of patients. Nevertheless, there are specific 
indications, which, when added to pulmonary rehabilitation will further advance 
exercise capacity and quality of life. As in other chronic diseases when 
severity of disease increases along the natural history, therapy aimed to 
prolong life becomes less and less important in comparison to palliative therapy 
aimed to relieve symptoms. The most effective treatments for dyspnoea are 
bronchodilators, although also opiates may improve dyspnoea. Supplemental oxygen 
reduce exertional breathlessness and improve exercise tolerance in hypoxaemic 
COPD patients. There are difficulties in treating with antidepressant the frail 
and elderly COPD patients. Good clinical care can prevent or alleviate suffering 
by assessing symptoms and providing psychological and social support to the 
patients and their families.

PMID: 19462352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]