---
reference_id: "PMID:29427981"
title: Environmental Causes of Asthma.
authors:
- Cockcroft DW
journal: Semin Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1606219
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental Causes of Asthma.
**Authors:** Cockcroft DW
**Journal:** Semin Respir Crit Care Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0037-1606219](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0037-1606219)

## Content

1. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Feb;39(1):12-18. doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1606219.
 Epub 2018 Feb 10.

Environmental Causes of Asthma.

Cockcroft DW(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

Environmental factors which cause asthma are those that induce airway 
inflammation with eosinophils (more common) or neutrophils along with airway 
hyperresponsiveness (AHR). The most common of these (indeed the most common 
cause of asthma) are IgE-mediated inhalant allergen exposures. Allergen-induced 
AHR and inflammation are both associated with the allergen-induced late 
asthmatic response (LAR). Although allergens were previously recognized only as 
causes of symptoms and bronchoconstriction in asthmatics, we now appreciate them 
as causes of the fundamental pathophysiologic features of asthma. 
Low-molecular-weight chemical sensitizers, causes of occupational asthma, also 
cause asthma in a manner analogous to allergen. Acute irritant-induced asthma 
(reactive airways dysfunction syndrome) following a very heavy irritant exposure 
and chronic irritant-induced asthma following repeated high exposures can also 
induce persistent or permanent changes (inflammation and AHR) consistent with 
asthma. Textile dust exposure produces a different form of airway disease 
(byssinosis) which is less frequently observed currently. Environmental exposure 
to tobacco smoke facilitates the development of asthma in children. Personal 
smoking and environmental air pollution have an inconsistent and likely 
generally small effect in causing asthma.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0037-1606219
PMID: 29427981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.