---
reference_id: "PMID:31285087"
title: Environmental reservoirs of Vibrio cholerae.
authors:
- Islam MS
- Zaman MH
- Islam MS
- Ahmed N
- Clemens JD
journal: Vaccine
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.06.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental reservoirs of Vibrio cholerae.
**Authors:** Islam MS, Zaman MH, Islam MS, Ahmed N, Clemens JD
**Journal:** Vaccine (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.06.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.06.033)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2020 Feb 29;38 Suppl 1:A52-A62. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.06.033. 
Epub 2019 Jul 5.

Environmental reservoirs of Vibrio cholerae.

Islam MS(1), Zaman MH(2), Islam MS(2), Ahmed N(2), Clemens JD(2).

Author information:
(1)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b), 
68 Shaheed Tajuddin Ahmed Sarani, Mohakhali, Dhaka 1212, Bangladesh. Electronic 
address: sislam@icddrb.org.
(2)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b), 
68 Shaheed Tajuddin Ahmed Sarani, Mohakhali, Dhaka 1212, Bangladesh.

The environmental reservoir of Vibrio cholerae, the causative agent of cholera, 
has been a topic of scientific investigation ever since the discovery of the 
bacterium itself. While the bacteria can be isolated from both clinical and 
environmental sources during epidemics, it evades isolation by conventional 
culture techniques during the period between successive epidemics. The problem 
is identifying the location and mode of survival and multiplication of V. 
cholerae during this inter-epidemic period. This information is crucial not only 
for epidemiological reasons, but also because the seasonality of cholera 
epidemics is plausibly mediated by the climate-regulated activity of the 
reservoir. This article focuses on the epidemiological importance of the 
environmental reservoir of V. cholerae, considering several investigations made 
on different types of aquatic fauna (zooplanktons, crustaceans, etc.) and flora 
(macrophytes and microphytes). After evaluating different lines of evidence, we 
make the case that certain species of cyanobacteria (Anabaena variabilis, 
Microcystis aeruginosa) can act as inter-epidemic reservoirs of V. cholerae. 
Physiological and functional aspects of this association are also discussed. We 
then present a hypothesis, expanding upon a previously published conceptual 
model, of how the climate-regulated seasonality of cholera epidemics is mediated 
by the effect of climatic factors on algal bloom and other local abiotic 
variables in the water, using Bangladesh as a model. Finally, another aspect of 
the climate-dependence of disease patterns is briefly explored: large-scale 
environmental signatures associated with cholera, and recent modelling efforts 
to predict cholera outbreaks based on coastal phytoplankton. The review, 
therefore, serves not only as a study of the identity of the inter-epidemic 
reservoir of V. cholerae, but also explores different ways in which the 
reservoir and the pathogen behaviour is affected by the climate, and the 
possible consequences it may have on disease pattern.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.06.033
PMID: 31285087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.