---
reference_id: "PMID:23077018"
title: PRRT2 phenotypic spectrum includes sporadic and fever-related infantile seizures.
authors:
- Scheffer IE
- Grinton BE
- Heron SE
- Kivity S
- Afawi Z
- Iona X
- Goldberg-Stern H
- Kinali M
- Andrews I
- Guerrini R
- Marini C
- Sadleir LG
- Berkovic SF
- Dibbens LM
journal: Neurology
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182752c6c
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chorea/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Epilepsy, Benign Neonatal/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Seizures, Febrile/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PRRT2 phenotypic spectrum includes sporadic and fever-related infantile seizures.
**Authors:** Scheffer IE, Grinton BE, Heron SE, Kivity S, Afawi Z, Iona X, Goldberg-Stern H, Kinali M, Andrews I, Guerrini R, Marini C, Sadleir LG, Berkovic SF, Dibbens LM
**Journal:** Neurology (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182752c6c](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182752c6c)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2012 Nov 20;79(21):2104-8. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182752c6c. Epub 
2012 Oct 17.

PRRT2 phenotypic spectrum includes sporadic and fever-related infantile 
seizures.

Scheffer IE(1), Grinton BE, Heron SE, Kivity S, Afawi Z, Iona X, Goldberg-Stern 
H, Kinali M, Andrews I, Guerrini R, Marini C, Sadleir LG, Berkovic SF, Dibbens 
LM.

Author information:
(1)Florey Neuroscience Institutes, Melbourne, Australia.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2012 Nov 20;79(21):2086-8. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182752edd.
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 Dec;8(12):657. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.240.

OBJECTIVE: Benign familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE) is an autosomal dominant 
epilepsy syndrome characterized by afebrile seizures beginning at about 6 months 
of age. Mutations in PRRT2, encoding the proline-rich transmembrane protein 2 
gene, have recently been identified in the majority of families with BFIE and 
the associated syndrome of infantile convulsions and choreoathetosis (ICCA). We 
asked whether the phenotypic spectrum of PRRT2 was broader than initially 
recognized by studying patients with sporadic benign infantile seizures and 
non-BFIE familial infantile seizures for PRRT2 mutations.
METHODS: Forty-four probands with infantile-onset seizures, infantile 
convulsions with mild gastroenteritis, and benign neonatal seizures underwent 
detailed phenotyping and PRRT2 sequencing. The familial segregation of mutations 
identified in probands was studied.
RESULTS: The PRRT2 mutation c.649-650insC (p.R217fsX224) was identified in 11 
probands. Nine probands had a family history of BFIE or ICCA. Two probands had 
no family history of infantile seizures or paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia and 
had de novo PRRT2 mutations. Febrile seizures with or without afebrile seizures 
were observed in 2 families with PRRT2 mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: PRRT2 mutations are present in >80% of BFIE and >90% ICCA families, 
but are not a common cause of other forms of infantile epilepsy. De novo 
mutations of PRRT2 can cause sporadic benign infantile seizures. Seizures with 
fever may occur in BFIE such that it may be difficult to distinguish BFIE from 
febrile seizures and febrile seizures plus in small families.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182752c6c
PMCID: PMC3511925
PMID: 23077018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]