---
reference_id: "PMID:31774565"
title: Galactose 1-phosphate accumulates to high levels in galactose-treated cells due to low GALT activity and absence of product inhibition of GALK.
authors:
- Oh SL
- Cheng LY
- J Zhou JF
- Henke W
- Hagen T
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12198
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Galactose 1-phosphate accumulates to high levels in galactose-treated cells due to low GALT activity and absence of product inhibition of GALK.
**Authors:** Oh SL, Cheng LY, J Zhou JF, Henke W, Hagen T
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12198](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12198)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2020 May;43(3):529-539. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12198. Epub
2019  Dec 17.

Galactose 1-phosphate accumulates to high levels in galactose-treated cells due 
to low GALT activity and absence of product inhibition of GALK.

Oh SL(1), Cheng LY(1), J Zhou JF(1), Henke W(1), Hagen T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore.

Classic Galactosaemia is a genetic disorder, characterised by galactose 
intolerance in newborns. It occurs due to recessive mutations in the 
galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase (GALT) gene. One of the main 
alterations caused by GALT deficiency is the accumulation of galactose 
1-phosphate (Gal-1P) in cells. Studies have suggested that Gal-1P exerts 
cellular toxicity, possibly by inhibiting cellular metabolism. However, the 
exact significance of Gal-1P in disease pathogenesis remains unclear. In this 
study, we tested the hypothesis that Gal-1P inhibits cellular glucose 
utilisation by competing with substrates in the glycolytic pathway. We also 
investigated the metabolism of both galactose and glucose in GALT-expressing 
HEK293T and 143B cells to identify critical reactions steps contributing to the 
metabolic toxicity of galactose. Notably, we found that galactose-treated 
HEK293T and 143B cells, which express endogenous GALT, accumulate markedly high 
intracellular Gal-1P concentrations. Despite very high intracellular Gal-1P 
concentrations, no inhibition of cellular glucose uptake and no significant 
changes in the intracellular concentrations of glycolytic metabolites were 
observed. This indicates that Gal-1P does not exert an inhibitory effect on 
glycolysis in cells and rules out one potential hypothesis for cellular Gal-1P 
toxicity. We also investigated the mechanism responsible for the observed Gal-1P 
accumulation. Our results suggest that Gal-1P accumulation is a result of both 
low GALT activity and the absence of product inhibition by Gal-1P on 
galactokinase (GALK1), the enzyme responsible for phosphorylating galactose to 
Gal-1P. These findings provide a better understanding of the disease mechanisms 
underlying Classic Galactoaemia.

© 2019 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12198
PMID: 31774565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]