---
reference_id: "PMID:32826895"
title: "Frataxin gene editing rescues Friedreich's ataxia pathology in dorsal root ganglia organoid-derived sensory neurons."
authors:
- Mazzara PG
- Muggeo S
- Luoni M
- Massimino L
- Zaghi M
- Valverde PT
- Brusco S
- Marzi MJ
- Palma C
- Colasante G
- Iannielli A
- Paulis M
- Cordiglieri C
- Giannelli SG
- Podini P
- Gellera C
- Taroni F
- Nicassio F
- Rasponi M
- Broccoli V
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-17954-3
keywords:
- Antioxidants/pharmacology
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Cell Differentiation
- Chromatin/metabolism
- "Friedreich Ataxia/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Ganglia, Spinal/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Editing/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Introns
- Iron-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Organoids/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Sensory Receptor Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Transcriptome
- Frataxin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frataxin gene editing rescues Friedreich's ataxia pathology in dorsal root ganglia organoid-derived sensory neurons.
**Authors:** Mazzara PG, Muggeo S, Luoni M, Massimino L, Zaghi M, Valverde PT, Brusco S, Marzi MJ, Palma C, Colasante G, Iannielli A, Paulis M, Cordiglieri C, Giannelli SG, Podini P, Gellera C, Taroni F, Nicassio F, Rasponi M, Broccoli V
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-020-17954-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17954-3)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2020 Aug 21;11(1):4178. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-17954-3.

Frataxin gene editing rescues Friedreich's ataxia pathology in dorsal root
ganglia organoid-derived sensory neurons.

Mazzara PG(#)(1)(2), Muggeo S(#)(1), Luoni M(1), Massimino L(1), Zaghi M(1),
Valverde PT(1), Brusco S(1), Marzi MJ(3), Palma C(4), Colasante G(1), Iannielli
A(1)(5), Paulis M(6), Cordiglieri C(7), Giannelli SG(1), Podini P(1), Gellera
C(8), Taroni F(8), Nicassio F(3), Rasponi M(4), Broccoli V(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132, Milan,
Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute, 92037, La Jolla,
CA, USA.
(3)Center for Genomic Science of IIT@SEMM, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
(IIT), 20139, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Electronics, Information & Bioengineering, Politecnico di
Milano, 20133, Milan, Italy.
(5)National Research Council (CNR), Institute of Neuroscience, 20129, Milan,
Italy.
(6)Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, 20089, Rozzano, Milano, Italy.
(7)National Institute of Molecular Genetics "Romeo e Enrica Invernizzi" - INGM,
20122, Milan, Italy.
(8)Unit of Medical Genetics and Neurogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico Carlo Besta, 20133, Milan, Italy.
(9)Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132, Milan,
Italy. broccoli.vania@hsr.it.
(10)National Research Council (CNR), Institute of Neuroscience, 20129, Milan,
Italy. broccoli.vania@hsr.it.
(#)Contributed equally

Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is an autosomal-recessive neurodegenerative and
cardiac disorder which occurs when transcription of the FXN gene is silenced due
to an excessive expansion of GAA repeats into its first intron. Herein, we
generate dorsal root ganglia organoids (DRG organoids) by in vitro
differentiation of human iPSCs. Bulk and single-cell RNA sequencing show that
DRG organoids present a transcriptional signature similar to native DRGs and
display the main peripheral sensory neuronal and glial cell subtypes.
Furthermore, when co-cultured with human intrafusal muscle fibers, DRG organoid
sensory neurons contact their peripheral targets and reconstitute the muscle
spindle proprioceptive receptors. FRDA DRG organoids model some molecular and
cellular deficits of the disease that are rescued when the entire FXN intron 1
is removed, and not with the excision of the expanded GAA tract. These results
strongly suggest that removal of the repressed chromatin flanking the GAA tract
might contribute to rescue FXN total expression and fully revert the
pathological hallmarks of FRDA DRG neurons.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-17954-3
PMCID: PMC7442818
PMID: 32826895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
