---
reference_id: "PMID:36012178"
title: "Ectodysplasin A (EDA) Signaling: From Skin Appendage to Multiple Diseases."
authors:
- Yang R
- Mei Y
- Jiang Y
- Li H
- Zhao R
- Sima J
- Yao Y
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23168911
keywords:
- Animals
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/metabolism"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic"
- "Ectodysplasins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mammals/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Skin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ectodysplasin A (EDA) Signaling: From Skin Appendage to Multiple Diseases.
**Authors:** Yang R, Mei Y, Jiang Y, Li H, Zhao R, Sima J, Yao Y
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23168911](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23168911)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Aug 10;23(16):8911. doi: 10.3390/ijms23168911.

Ectodysplasin A (EDA) Signaling: From Skin Appendage to Multiple Diseases.

Yang R(1), Mei Y(1), Jiang Y(1), Li H(1), Zhao R(1), Sima J(1), Yao Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Aging Neuroscience and Neuropharmacology, School of Basic 
Medicine and Clinical Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, 
China.

Ectodysplasin A (EDA) signaling is initially identified as morphogenic signaling 
regulating the formation of skin appendages including teeth, hair follicles, 
exocrine glands in mammals, feathers in birds and scales in fish. Gene mutation 
in EDA signaling causes hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED), a congenital 
hereditary disease with malformation of skin appendages. Interestingly, emerging 
evidence suggests that EDA and its receptors can modulate the proliferation, 
apoptosis, differentiation and migration of cancer cells, and thus may regulate 
tumorigenesis and cancer progression. More recently, as a newly discovered 
hepatocyte factor, EDA pathway has been demonstrated to be involved in the 
pathogenesis of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and type II diabetes by 
regulating glucose and lipid metabolism. In this review, we summarize the 
function of EDA signaling from skin appendage development to multiple other 
diseases, and discuss the clinical application of recombinant EDA protein as 
well as other potential targets for disease intervention.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23168911
PMCID: PMC9408960
PMID: 36012178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.