---
reference_id: "PMID:11113841"
title: Risk factors for premature ovarian failure in females with galactosemia.
authors:
- Guerrero NV
- Singh RH
- Manatunga A
- Berry GT
- Steiner RD
- Elsas LJ 2nd
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1067/mpd.2000.109148
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Follicle Stimulating Hormone/blood
- "Galactosemias/complications, diet therapy, genetics"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- Point Mutation/genetics
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "UTP-Hexose-1-Phosphate Uridylyltransferase/blood, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk factors for premature ovarian failure in females with galactosemia.
**Authors:** Guerrero NV, Singh RH, Manatunga A, Berry GT, Steiner RD, Elsas LJ 2nd
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1067/mpd.2000.109148](https://doi.org/10.1067/mpd.2000.109148)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2000 Dec;137(6):833-41. doi: 10.1067/mpd.2000.109148.

Risk factors for premature ovarian failure in females with galactosemia.

Guerrero NV(1), Singh RH, Manatunga A, Berry GT, Steiner RD, Elsas LJ 2nd.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.

The risk for premature ovarian failure (POF) in females with galactosemia can be 
predicted by analyzing 3 areas of risk pathology: the patient's molecular 
genotype for galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT), alternate pathways 
for galactose metabolism, and the patient's environment at diagnosis and during 
treatment.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cross-sectional information was collected on 53 
females with classic galactosemia, and their ovarian function was analyzed by 
determination of serum follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone 
levels and by clinical observation. The associations were analyzed between POF 
and the mutations in GALT, the highest erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate 
(Gal-1-P) level at diagnosis, the age at which dietary treatment was initiated, 
mean erythrocyte Gal-1-P level during treatment, and whole-body carbon 
13-labeled galactose oxidation to (13)CO(2).
RESULTS: The most prevalent mutation, Q188R, had a significant effect of 
genotype category (Q188R/Q188R, Q188R/Other, Other/Other) on POF (P =.04, Fisher 
exact test and an odds ratio of 8.3). Mean erythrocyte Gal-1-P level during 
treatment was a significant risk factor for POF (P =.04). Also, all patients 
studied with less than 5% total body oxidation of galactose to (13)CO(2) had 
POF, whereas those with more than 5% did not have POF (P =.008, Fisher exact 
test).
CONCLUSION: The development of POF in females with galactosemia is more likely 
if the patient's genotype is Q188R/Q188R, if the mean erythrocyte Gal-1-P is 
>3.5 mg/dL during therapy, and if the recovery of (13)CO(2) from whole-body 
(13)C-galactose oxidation is reduced below 5% of administered (13)C-galactose.

DOI: 10.1067/mpd.2000.109148
PMID: 11113841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]