---
reference_id: "PMID:29732974"
title: Mini Review - Asthma and Food Allergy.
authors:
- Foong RX
- du Toit G
- Fox AT
journal: Curr Pediatr Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2174/1573396314666180507121136
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mini Review - Asthma and Food Allergy.
**Authors:** Foong RX, du Toit G, Fox AT
**Journal:** Curr Pediatr Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573396314666180507121136](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573396314666180507121136)

## Content

1. Curr Pediatr Rev. 2018;14(3):164-170. doi: 10.2174/1573396314666180507121136.

Mini Review - Asthma and Food Allergy.

Foong RX(1)(2), du Toit G(1), Fox AT(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Asthma, Allergy and Lung Biology, Department of Paediatric 
Allergy, King's College London and Guy's and St. Thomas' Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Child Health, University College of London, London, United 
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: It is well known that there is a common interplay between atopic 
conditions and that having one atopic condition can predispose to the 
development of others. The link between asthma and food allergy has been well 
researched over the years; although the exact interplay between the two atopic 
conditions is yet to be fully described. Research suggests that children who 
have both asthma and food allergy are at greater risk of more severe asthmatic 
episodes.
CONCLUSION: They are also at risk of food allergen triggered asthmatic episodes 
as well as foodallergen induced anaphylaxis. Therefore, it is important for 
clinicians to understand and recognise the association between these two atopic 
conditions to provide children and their families with the correct treatment and 
management to avoid potentially life-threatening events related to their 
disease.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1573396314666180507121136
PMID: 29732974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]