---
reference_id: "PMID:35308163"
title: "Clinical, Biochemical, Molecular, and Outcome Features of Mitochondrial 3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-CoA Synthase Deficiency in 10 Chinese Patients."
authors:
- Wu S
- Shen L
- Chen Q
- Gong C
- Yang Y
- Wei H
- Cao B
- Chen Y
journal: Front Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.816779
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, Biochemical, Molecular, and Outcome Features of Mitochondrial 3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-CoA Synthase Deficiency in 10 Chinese Patients.
**Authors:** Wu S, Shen L, Chen Q, Gong C, Yang Y, Wei H, Cao B, Chen Y
**Journal:** Front Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2021.816779](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2021.816779)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Mar 4;12:816779. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.816779. eCollection
 2021.

Clinical, Biochemical, Molecular, and Outcome Features of Mitochondrial
3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-CoA Synthase Deficiency in 10 Chinese Patients.

Wu S(1), Shen L(1), Chen Q(1), Gong C(2), Yang Y(3), Wei H(1), Cao B(2), Chen
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Henan Key Laboratory of
Children's Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Children's Hospital Affiliated to
Zhengzhou University, Henan Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou Children's Hospital,
Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Genetics and Metabolism, Beijing Children's
Hospital, Capital Medical University, National Center for Children's Health,
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.

Background: Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase deficiency
(HMGCS2D) is a rare autosomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by mutations
of the HMGCS2 gene. To date, no more than 60 patients have been reported
throughout the world. Purpose: To analyze the clinical, biochemical, molecular,
and outcome features of HMGCS2D in a case series of 10 new Chinese patients.
Methods: This retrospective study includes 10 Chinese patients diagnosed with
HMGCS2D. We collected and analyzed clinical data for all patients. We also
reviewed clinical data for 39 cases that had been reported previously. Results:
All of our patients had experienced their first metabolic crisis before
12 months old. The most common clinical manifestations were anorexia, dyspnea,
and disturbance of consciousness (10/10), followed by vomiting (8/10), fever
(7/10), cough (4/10), diarrhea, and seizures (3/10). Each patient (10/10) had a
different degree of hepatomegaly and increased aminotransferase, severe
metabolic acidosis, and hypofibrinogenemia. 9 patients presented with severe
hypoglycemia and weak positives on qualitative tests of urinary ketone body.
Patient 3 was the only one without hypoglycemia. Five patients had hypocalcemia,
five patients had hyperammonemia, four patients had hyperuricemia, and three had
hypertriglyceridemia. During the metabolic acidosis episode, we observed high
dicarboxylic acid values in urine, and the elevated ratio of blood
acetylcarnitine to free carnitine may have been an additional biochemical
signature. However, all returned to normal during the interictal interval.
Molecular analysis identified 15 variants in the HMGCS2 gene, of which 10 were
novel (c.220G>A/p.E74K, c.407A>G/p.D136G, c.422T>A/p.V141D, c.719A>C/p.D240A,
c.821G>A/p.R274H, c.39dupA/p.L14Tfs*59, c.1394delA/p.N465Tfs*10,
c.788delT/p.L263Cfs*36, c.717T>G/p.Y239*, and c.1017-2A>G). Combining these with
previous cases, the known mutation c.1201G>T/p.E401* has been found in 6/40
(15.0%) of mutated alleles in 21 Chinese patients from 20 families, while none
have been found in other populations. We found that patients with biallelic
truncation mutation appeared to show a more severe clinical condition through a
literature review. Conclusion: This study analyzed the phenotypic and genetic
features of HMGCS2D in a Chinese case series. We also expanded the HMGCS2
mutational spectrum with 10 novel variants. The c.1201G>T/p.E401* mutation was
the most frequent, representing 15.0% of the mutated alleles in reported
unrelated Chinese patients, and thus, it may be a hot spot mutation.

Copyright © 2022 Wu, Shen, Chen, Gong, Yang, Wei, Cao and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.816779
PMCID: PMC8931749
PMID: 35308163

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
