---
reference_id: "PMID:40644618"
title: Landscape and clinicopathologic features of RAS pathway mutations in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Montalban-Bravo G
- Loghavi S
- Li Z
- Chien K
- Kanagal-Shamanna R
- Bataller A
- Natu A
- Gurney M
- Bazinet A
- Hammond D
- Sasaki K
- Borthakur G
- Swaminathan M
- DiNardo C
- Kadia T
- Ravandi F
- Daver N
- Short N
- Pemmaraju N
- Issa G
- Lasho TL
- Finke CM
- Al-Kali A
- Csizmar C
- Alkhateeb H
- Gangat N
- Mangaonkar AA
- Bueso-Ramos C
- Tefferi A
- Kantarjian H
- Garcia-Manero G
- Patnaik MM
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2025016529
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Chronic/genetics, pathology, metabolism, mortality"
- Mutation
- Male
- Female
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "ras Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Landscape and clinicopathologic features of RAS pathway mutations in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Montalban-Bravo G, Loghavi S, Li Z, Chien K, Kanagal-Shamanna R, Bataller A, Natu A, Gurney M, Bazinet A, Hammond D, Sasaki K, Borthakur G, Swaminathan M, DiNardo C, Kadia T, Ravandi F, Daver N, Short N, Pemmaraju N, Issa G, Lasho TL, Finke CM, Al-Kali A, Csizmar C, Alkhateeb H, Gangat N, Mangaonkar AA, Bueso-Ramos C, Tefferi A, Kantarjian H, Garcia-Manero G, Patnaik MM
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2025016529](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2025016529)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2025 Oct 14;9(19):5105-5117. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2025016529.

Landscape and clinicopathologic features of RAS pathway mutations in chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia.

Montalban-Bravo G(1), Loghavi S(2), Li Z(3), Chien K(1), Kanagal-Shamanna R(2),
Bataller A(1), Natu A(4), Gurney M(4), Bazinet A(1), Hammond D(1), Sasaki K(1),
Borthakur G(1), Swaminathan M(1), DiNardo C(1), Kadia T(1), Ravandi F(1), Daver
N(1), Short N(1), Pemmaraju N(1), Issa G(1), Lasho TL(4), Finke CM(4), Al-Kali
A(4), Csizmar C(4), Alkhateeb H(4), Gangat N(4), Mangaonkar AA(4), Bueso-Ramos
C(2), Tefferi A(4), Kantarjian H(1), Garcia-Manero G(1), Patnaik MM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX.
(2)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX.
(4)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

Comment in
    Blood Adv. 2025 Oct 14;9(19):5118-5120. doi:
10.1182/bloodadvances.2025017435.

RAS pathway (RASp) mutations induce proliferative features, and promote
transformation in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). However, the unique
clonal landscape and hierarchy of distinct RASp mutations remain unexplored. To
characterize the landscape, architecture, and implications of unique RASp
mutations in CMML, we evaluated a cohort of 814 patients with CMML. We
identified 461 RASp mutations among 342 patients (42%). N/KRAS and CBL mutations
were the most common, frequently involved the P-loop or RING domains,
respectively, and frequently appeared as dominant events (63% and 65%,
respectively). BRAF, NF1, and PTPN11 mutations spanned throughout the gene
structure, and frequently appeared as subclonal events (75%, 64%, and 59%,
respectively). CBL mutations frequently occurred in codominance with SRSF2 and
multihit TET2, and were enriched for KIT mutations. PTPN11 mutations more
frequently co-occurred with SETBP1 and DNMT3A mutations, and were infrequently
codominant with TET2 or ASXL1. RASp mutations predicted for shorter overall
survival (hazard ratio [HR], 1.55; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.15-2.07; P =
.0075) and leukemia-free survival (LFS; HR, 1.67; 95% CI, 1.26-2.20; P = .0011),
influenced outcomes of myelodysplastic and TET2 mutant CMML, and cooperated with
IDH2 and RUNX1 mutations to induce shorter LFS. These data set the bases for
refined genomic classifications of CMML, and underscore the need to develop
RAS-directed therapies for patients with CMML.

© 2025 American Society of Hematology. Published by Elsevier Inc. Licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC
BY-NC-ND 4.0), permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with
attribution. All other rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2025016529
PMCID: PMC12848361
PMID: 40644618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: K.S. reports
honoraria from Otsuka Pharma; and consultancy fees from Pfizer Japan. H.K.
reports research support from AbbVie, Agios, Amgen, Ariad, Astex, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Cyclacel, Daiichi-Sankyo, Immunogen, Jazz Pharma, Novartis, and Pfizer;
honoraria from AbbVie, Actinium, Agios, Amgen, Immunogen, Orsinex, Pfizer, and
Takeda; and an advisory role with Actinium. G.G.-M. reports support from and an
advisory role with Celgene Corporation, Astex, and Amphivena; and grant/research
support from Helsinn, Novartis, AbbVie, Onconova, H3 Biomedicine, and Merck. The
remaining authors declare no competing financial interests.
