---
reference_id: "PMID:28224613"
title: "GLI3-related polydactyly: a review."
authors:
- Al-Qattan MM
- Shamseldin HE
- Salih MA
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12952
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GLI3-related polydactyly: a review.
**Authors:** Al-Qattan MM, Shamseldin HE, Salih MA, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12952](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12952)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2017 Nov;92(5):457-466. doi: 10.1111/cge.12952. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

GLI3-related polydactyly: a review.

Al-Qattan MM(1), Shamseldin HE(2), Salih MA(3), Alkuraya FS(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

GLI3 mutations are known to be associated with nine syndromes/conditions in 
which polydactyly is a feature. In this review, the embryology, pathogenesis, 
and animal models of GLI3-related polydactyly are discussed first. This is 
followed by a detailed review of the genotype-phenotype correlations. Based on 
our review of the literature and our clinical experiences, we recommend viewing 
GLI3-related syndromes/conditions as four separate entities; each characterized 
by a specific pattern of polydactyly. These four entities are: the preaxial 
polydactyly type IV-Greig-acrocallosal spectrum, postaxial polydactyly types 
A/B, Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), and oral-facial-digital overlap syndrome. We 
also provide illustrative clinical examples from our practice including a family 
with a novel GLI3 mutation causing PHS. The review also introduces the term 
'Forme Fruste' preaxial polydactyly and gives several 
conclusions/recommendations including the recommendation to revise the current 
criteria for the clinical diagnosis of PHS.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12952
PMID: 28224613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]