---
reference_id: "PMID:33420503"
title: Anti-tumour necrosis factor treatment for the prevention of ischaemic events in patients with deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2).
authors:
- Cooray S
- Omyinmi E
- Hong Y
- Papadopoulou C
- Harper L
- Al-Abadi E
- Goel R
- Dubey S
- Wood M
- Jolles S
- Berg S
- Ekelund M
- Armon K
- Eleftheriou D
- Brogan PA
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keaa837
keywords:
- Adenosine Deaminase/genetics
- Adolescent
- "Agammaglobulinemia/complications, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- "Ischemia/etiology, prevention & control"
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Retrospective Studies
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/complications, genetics"
- Tumor Necrosis Factor Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-tumour necrosis factor treatment for the prevention of ischaemic events in patients with deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2).
**Authors:** Cooray S, Omyinmi E, Hong Y, Papadopoulou C, Harper L, Al-Abadi E, Goel R, Dubey S, Wood M, Jolles S, Berg S, Ekelund M, Armon K, Eleftheriou D, Brogan PA
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keaa837](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keaa837)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2021 Sep 1;60(9):4373-4378. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keaa837.

Anti-tumour necrosis factor treatment for the prevention of ischaemic events in 
patients with deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2).

Cooray S(1), Omyinmi E(1), Hong Y(1), Papadopoulou C(1), Harper L(2), Al-Abadi 
E(3), Goel R(2), Dubey S(4), Wood M(5), Jolles S(6), Berg S(7), Ekelund M(8), 
Armon K(9), Eleftheriou D(1), Brogan PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Infection, Inflammation and Rheumatology Section, University College London 
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London.
(2)Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham.
(3)Rheumatology Department, Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation 
Trust, Birmingham.
(4)Rheumatology Department, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Oxford.
(5)Paediatric Rheumatology Department, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Leeds.
(6)Department of Immunology, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, UK.
(7)Paediatric Rheumatology, The Queen Silvia Children's Hospital and University 
of Gothenburg, Gothenburg.
(8)Ryhov County Hospital, Jönköping, Sweden.
(9)Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Rheumatology (Oxford). 2021 Jun 18;60(6):e218-e219. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keab081.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the impact of anti-Tumour Necrosis Factor-α (anti-TNF) 
treatment on the occurrence of vasculitic ischaemic events in patients with 
deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2).
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of DADA2 patients referred from six centres to 
Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children was conducted. Ischaemic events, 
vasculitic disease activity, biochemical, immunological, and radiological 
features were compared, before and after anti-TNF treatment.
RESULTS: A total of 31 patients with genetically confirmed DADA2 were included 
in the study. The median duration of active disease activity prior to anti-TNF 
treatment was 73 months (inter-quartile range [IQR] 27.5-133.5 months). Twenty 
seven/31 patients received anti-TNF treatment for a median of 32 months (IQR 
12.0-71.5 months). The median event rate of central nervous system (CNS) and 
non-CNS ischemic events before anti-TNF treatment was 2.37 per 100 
patient-months (IQR 1.25-3.63); compared with 0.00 per 100 patient-months (IQR 
0.0-0.0) post-treatment (p< 0.0001). Paediatric vasculitis activity score (PVAS) 
was also significantly reduced: median score of 20/63 (IQR 13.0-25.8/63) 
pre-treatment vs. 2/63 (IQR 0.0-3.8/63) following anti-TNF treatment (p< 
0.0001), with mild livedoid rash being the main persisting feature. Anti-TNF 
treatment was not effective for severe immunodeficiency or bone marrow failure, 
which required haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).
CONCLUSION: Anti-TNF treatment significantly reduced the incidence of ischaemic 
events and other vasculitic manifestations of DADA2, but was not effective for 
immunodeficiency or bone marrow failure.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keaa837
PMID: 33420503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]