---
reference_id: "PMID:38268056"
title: "Reevaluating the relevance of (18)F-FDG PET findings for diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis: a case series."
authors:
- Chen J
- Metzger G
- Furth C
- Bohner G
- Siffrin V
journal: Neurol Res Pract
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s42466-023-00299-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reevaluating the relevance of (18)F-FDG PET findings for diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis: a case series.
**Authors:** Chen J, Metzger G, Furth C, Bohner G, Siffrin V
**Journal:** Neurol Res Pract (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s42466-023-00299-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s42466-023-00299-9)

## Content

1. Neurol Res Pract. 2024 Jan 25;6(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s42466-023-00299-9.

Reevaluating the relevance of (18)F-FDG PET findings for diagnosis of
neurosarcoidosis: a case series.

Chen J(1)(2)(3), Metzger G(4), Furth C(4), Bohner G(5), Siffrin V(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Experimental Neurology, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany.
jessy.chen@charite.de.
(2)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin
and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
jessy.chen@charite.de.
(3)Berlin Institute of Health at Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Biomedical Innovation Academy, BIH Charité Clinician Scientist Program, Berlin,
Germany. jessy.chen@charite.de.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate
member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, and
Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Institute of Neuroradiology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology and Experimental Neurology, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin
and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis (NS) remains challenging due to the
difficulty to obtain central nervous system (CNS) biopsies. Various diagnostic
parameters are considered for the definition of possible, probable and definite
NS. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the imaging gold standard and considered
in diagnostic criteria. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission (18F-FDG PET) is
sometimes performed additionally to identify possible systemic biopsy targets.
However, at present, its findings are not incorporated into the diagnostic
criteria for neurosarcoidosis (NS).
METHODS: We conducted a single center retrospective search for the period
2020-2022, for patients with neurological symptoms in a diagnostic context of
suspected NS who underwent MRI and additional 18F-FDG PET scans to identify
potential hypermetabolism in the CNS and biopsy targets.
RESULTS: We identified three cases of NS, where Gadolinium-enhanced MRI scans
did not show abnormalities while 18F-FDG PET revealed hypermetabolic lesions in
areas of the CNS. Additional MRI scans were still inconclusive for structural
changes. We diagnosed a "probable" NS in all cases with histopathological
confirmation of systemic sarcoidosis which led to an intensified therapy regime.
DISCUSSION: 18F-FDG PET is an early indicator for metabolic changes. It appears
to be a useful add-on to improve accuracy of diagnostic criteria in suspected NS
without MRI findings.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s42466-023-00299-9
PMCID: PMC10809582
PMID: 38268056

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
