---
reference_id: "PMID:12768225"
title: Fomivirsen.
authors:
- Grillone LR
- Lanz R
journal: Drugs Today (Barc)
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1358/dot.2001.37.4.620590
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fomivirsen.
**Authors:** Grillone LR, Lanz R
**Journal:** Drugs Today (Barc) (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1358/dot.2001.37.4.620590](https://doi.org/10.1358/dot.2001.37.4.620590)

## Content

1. Drugs Today (Barc). 2001 Apr;37(4):245-255. doi: 10.1358/dot.2001.37.4.620590.

Fomivirsen.

Grillone LR(1), Lanz R.

Author information:
(1)ISTA Pharmaceuticals (previously Isis Pharmaceuticals, Inc.), Irvine, 
California, USA.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis can rapidly lead to blindness in patients with 
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Fomivirsen is a novel antisense drug 
with a 21-nucleotide sequence complementary to the immediate early region 2 of 
CMV messenger ribonucleic acid. In clinical trials, fomivirsen was shown to 
provide effective treatment for newly diagnosed, peripheral CMV retinitis in 
patients with AIDS and in those with relapsed CMV retinitis that is unresponsive 
to conventional therapy. These trials also demonstrated that local treatment 
with fomivirsen does not result in measurable systemic absorption of fomivirsen 
or its metabolites. Thus, there is minimal risk of systemic exposure to 
fomivirsen or its metabolites with intravitreal dosing at either 165 mcg or 330 
mcg. The only clinically relevant adverse events are mild to moderate local 
ocular effects that are transient and manageable with topical medications. (c) 
2001 Prous Science. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2001.37.4.620590
PMID: 12768225