---
reference_id: "PMID:30480810"
title: "The possible role of bacteria, viruses, and parasites in initiation and exacerbation of irritable bowel syndrome."
authors:
- Shariati A
- Fallah F
- Pormohammad A
- Taghipour A
- Safari H
- Chirani AS
- Sabour S
- Alizadeh-Sani M
- Azimi T
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/jcp.27828
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The possible role of bacteria, viruses, and parasites in initiation and exacerbation of irritable bowel syndrome.
**Authors:** Shariati A, Fallah F, Pormohammad A, Taghipour A, Safari H, Chirani AS, Sabour S, Alizadeh-Sani M, Azimi T
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.27828](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.27828)

## Content

1. J Cell Physiol. 2019 Jun;234(6):8550-8569. doi: 10.1002/jcp.27828. Epub 2018
Nov  27.

The possible role of bacteria, viruses, and parasites in initiation and 
exacerbation of irritable bowel syndrome.

Shariati A(1), Fallah F(2), Pormohammad A(2), Taghipour A(3), Safari H(4), 
Chirani AS(2), Sabour S(5), Alizadeh-Sani M(6), Azimi T(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Medicine, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Health Promotion Research Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Ardebil University of Medical 
Science, Ardebil, Iran.
(6)Student Research Committee, Department of Food Sciences and Technology, 
Faculty of Nutrition and Food Sciences, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz, Iran.
(7)Department of Pathobiology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a prolonged and disabling functional 
gastrointestinal disorder with the incidence rate of 18% in the world. IBS could 
seriously affect lifetime of patients and cause high economic burden on the 
community. The pathophysiology of the IBS is hardly understood, whereas several 
possible mechanisms, such as visceral hypersensitivity, irregular gut motility, 
abnormal brain-gut relations, and the role of infectious agents, are implicated 
in initiation and development of this syndrome. Different studies demonstrated 
an alteration in B-lymphocytes, mast cells (MC), T-lymphocytes, and cytokine 
concentrations in intestinal mucosa or systemic circulation that are likely to 
contribute to the formation of the IBS. Therefore, IBS could be developed in 
those with genetic predisposition. Infections' role in initiation and 
exacerbation of IBS has been investigated by quite several clinical studies; 
moreover, the possible role of some pathogens in development and exacerbation of 
this disease has been described. It appears that the main obligatory pathogens 
correspond with the IBS disease, Clostridium difficile, Escherichia coli, 
Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis, Campylobacter concisus, 
Campylobacter jejuni, Chlamydia trachomatis, Helicobacter pylori, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Salmonella spp, Shigella spp, and viruses, particularly noroviruses. 
A number of pathogenic parasites (Blastocystis, Dientamoeba fragilis, and 
Giardia lamblia) may also be involved in the progression and exacerbation of the 
disease. Based on the current knowledge, the current study concludes that the 
most common bacterial, viral, and parasitic pathogens may be involved in the 
development and progression of IBS.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.27828
PMID: 30480810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]