---
reference_id: "PMID:27579697"
title: ESPGHAN-NASPGHAN Guidelines for the Evaluation and Treatment of Gastrointestinal and Nutritional Complications in Children With Esophageal Atresia-Tracheoesophageal Fistula.
authors:
- Krishnan U
- Mousa H
- "Dall'Oglio L"
- Homaira N
- Rosen R
- Faure C
- Gottrand F
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000001401
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Disease Management
- "Esophageal Atresia/complications, therapy"
- Humans
- Quality of Life
- "Tracheoesophageal Fistula/complications, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ESPGHAN-NASPGHAN Guidelines for the Evaluation and Treatment of Gastrointestinal and Nutritional Complications in Children With Esophageal Atresia-Tracheoesophageal Fistula.
**Authors:** Krishnan U, Mousa H, Dall'Oglio L, Homaira N, Rosen R, Faure C, Gottrand F
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPG.0000000000001401](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.0000000000001401)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2016 Nov;63(5):550-570. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0000000000001401.

ESPGHAN-NASPGHAN Guidelines for the Evaluation and Treatment of Gastrointestinal
and Nutritional Complications in Children With Esophageal
Atresia-Tracheoesophageal Fistula.

Krishnan U(1), Mousa H, Dall'Oglio L, Homaira N, Rosen R, Faure C, Gottrand F.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Sydney Children's Hospital
†Discipline of Pediatrics, School of Women's and Children's Health, University
of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia ‡Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Rady Children's Hospital §San Diego School of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego ||Digestive Endoscopy and Surgery Unit, Bambino Gesu
Children's Hospital-IRCCS, Rome, Italy ¶Centre for Big Data Research in Health,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia #Aerodigestive Centre, Division
of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston **Harvard
Medical School, Harvard, MA ††Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Sainte-Justine Hospital ‡‡Department of Pediatrics, Université de Montréal,
Montreal, Canada §§CHU Lille, University Lille, National Reference Center for
Congenital Malformation of the Esophagus, Department of Pediatric
Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition, Lille, France.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2018 Jan;66(1):e26. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0000000000001760.
    J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2018 Jan;66(1):e26-e27. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0000000000001794.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal atresia (EA) is one of the most common congenital
digestive anomalies. With improvements in surgical techniques and intensive care
treatments, the focus of care of these patients has shifted from mortality to
morbidity and quality-of-life issues. These children face gastrointestinal (GI)
problems not only in early childhood but also through adolescence and adulthood.
There is, however, currently a lack of a systematic approach to the care of
these patients. The GI working group of International Network on Esophageal
Atresia comprises members from ESPGHAN/NASPGHAN and was charged with the task of
developing uniform evidence-based guidelines for the management of GI
complications in children with EA.
METHODS: Thirty-six clinical questions addressing the diagnosis, treatment, and
prognosis of the common GI complications in patients with EA were formulated.
Questions on the diagnosis, and treatment of gastroesophageal reflux, management
of "cyanotic spells," etiology, investigation and management of dysphagia,
feeding difficulties, anastomotic strictures, congenital esophageal stenosis in
EA patients were addressed. The importance of excluding eosinophilic esophagitis
and associated GI anomalies in symptomatic patients with EA is discussed as is
the quality of life of these patients and the importance of a systematic
transition of care to adulthood. A systematic literature search was performed
from inception to March 2014 using Embase, MEDLINE, the Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Clinical Trials, and
PsychInfo databases. The approach of the Grading of Recommendations Assessment,
Development and Evaluation was applied to evaluate outcomes. During 2 consensus
meetings, all recommendations were discussed and finalized. The group members
voted on each recommendation, using the nominal voting technique. Expert opinion
was used where no randomized controlled trials were available to support the
recommendation.

DOI: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000001401
PMID: 27579697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
