---
reference_id: "PMID:37866138"
title: Electroencephalographic Patterns in Pediatric Patients With Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 Coinfection.
authors:
- Martinez-Valderrama A
- Myers KA
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.09.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Electroencephalographic Patterns in Pediatric Patients With Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 Coinfection.
**Authors:** Martinez-Valderrama A, Myers KA
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.09.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.09.014)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2023 Dec;149:114-119. doi:
10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.09.014.  Epub 2023 Sep 25.

Electroencephalographic Patterns in Pediatric Patients With Multisystem 
Inflammatory Syndrome in Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 Coinfection.

Martinez-Valderrama A(1), Myers KA(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, 
Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 
Department of Neurology & Neurosurgery, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: 
kenneth.myers@mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: Children with recent or acute coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
infections are susceptible to a number of neurological complications, including 
encephalopathy and seizures. Within the phenomenon of multisystem inflammatory 
syndrome in children (MIS-C), patients may be encephalopathic or have other 
nervous system sequelae. The electroencephalographic (EEG) patterns accompanying 
neurological complications of COVID-19 infection have been reported but 
primarily in case reports or small case series.
METHODS: In this study, we reviewed all reports of EEG patterns seen in 
pediatric patients with presentations attributed to COVID-19 infection.
RESULTS: Fifty patient reports were identified, drawn from 27 articles. We 
separately analyzed patients whose primary neurological concern was (1) 
encephalopathy, (2) seizures, or (3) other neurological abnormalities. Patients 
with acute encephalopathy tend to have EEG showing diffusely slow background, 
often in the delta range; however, the pattern of slowing is sometimes anterior 
or posterior predominant and may evolve over the course of illness.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with COVID-19 infection presenting with seizures may have 
focal or bilateral semiologies, but postictal EEG rarely shows interictal 
epileptiform discharges and is more likely to also show diffuse slowing. 
However, subclinical seizures and nonconvulsive status epilepticus have been 
reported, so prolonged EEG monitoring may still be indicated.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.09.014
PMID: 37866138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Dr. Myers 
holds or has held research funding from Savoy Foundation, Dravet Canada, 
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Citizens United for 
Research in Epilepsy (439534), Epilepsy Canada, Koolen-de Vries Foundation, Liam 
Foundation, and Fonds de Recherches du Québec – Santé; he is also a site 
principal investigator for studies by LivaNova and Ultragenyx. The other authors 
report no conflicts of interest.