---
reference_id: "PMID:30537755"
title: Efficacy and Safety of Amrubicin in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Patients Beyond Third-Line Therapy.
authors:
- Saigusa M
- Asada K
- Akamatsu T
- Tanaka Y
- Endo Y
- Yamamoto A
- Morita S
- Shirai T
journal: Oncol Res Treat
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1159/000493199
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Amrubicin in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Patients Beyond Third-Line Therapy.
**Authors:** Saigusa M, Asada K, Akamatsu T, Tanaka Y, Endo Y, Yamamoto A, Morita S, Shirai T
**Journal:** Oncol Res Treat (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000493199](https://doi.org/10.1159/000493199)

## Content

1. Oncol Res Treat. 2019;42(1-2):52-56. doi: 10.1159/000493199. Epub 2018 Dec 12.

Efficacy and Safety of Amrubicin in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Patients Beyond 
Third-Line Therapy.

Saigusa M, Asada K, Akamatsu T, Tanaka Y, Endo Y, Yamamoto A, Morita S, Shirai 
T.

BACKGROUND: There are no standard cytotoxic treatments for non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) patients beyond third-line therapy. The purpose of this study was 
to evaluate the efficacy and safety of amrubicin in pretreated NSCLC patients.
METHODS: The records of NSCLC patients who received amrubicin monotherapy as a 
third or later line of chemotherapy at Shizuoka General Hospital between April 
2007 and March 2015 were retrospectively reviewed. Tumor response was evaluated 
according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1. 
Toxicities were evaluated according to the Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events version 3.0.
RESULTS: Overall, 69 patients were enrolled in this study; 16 patients were 
female and the median age was 67 years. The median number of treatment cycles 
was 3. The response rate was 7.2%, and the disease control rate was 63.8%. The 
median progression-free survival was 2.8 months. The median overall survival was 
7.7 months. Hematological toxicities of ≥ grade 3 included leukopenia (59.4%) 
and neutropenia (62.3%). Non-hematological toxicities of ≥ grade 2 included 
anorexia (27.5%) and fatigue (24.6%).
CONCLUSION: Although hematological toxicities were severe, these results 
suggested that amrubicin in NSCLC patients beyond third-line therapy shows 
sufficient clinical benefit.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000493199
PMID: 30537755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]