---
reference_id: "PMID:33762937"
title: "Cinical, Metabolic, and Genetic Analysis and Follow-Up of Eight Patients With HIBCH Mutations Presenting With Leigh/Leigh-Like Syndrome."
authors:
- Wang J
- Liu Z
- Xu M
- Han X
- Ren C
- Yang X
- Zhang C
- Fang F
journal: Front Pharmacol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.605803
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cinical, Metabolic, and Genetic Analysis and Follow-Up of Eight Patients With HIBCH Mutations Presenting With Leigh/Leigh-Like Syndrome.
**Authors:** Wang J, Liu Z, Xu M, Han X, Ren C, Yang X, Zhang C, Fang F
**Journal:** Front Pharmacol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphar.2021.605803](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2021.605803)

## Content

1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Mar 8;12:605803. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.605803. 
eCollection 2021.

Cinical, Metabolic, and Genetic Analysis and Follow-Up of Eight Patients With 
HIBCH Mutations Presenting With Leigh/Leigh-Like Syndrome.

Wang J(1), Liu Z(1), Xu M(1), Han X(1), Ren C(1), Yang X(1), Zhang C(2), Fang 
F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Research, Development of MILS International, Ishikawa, Japan.

Erratum in
    Front Pharmacol. 2021 Jun 10;12:686933. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.686933.

3-Hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase (HIBCH, NM_014362.3) gene mutation can cause 
HIBCH deficiency, leading to Leigh/Leigh-like disease. To date, few case series 
have investigated the relationship between metabolites and clinical phenotypes 
or the effects of treatment, although 34 patients with HIBCH mutations from 27 
families have been reported. The purpose of this study was to analyze the 
phenotypic spectrum, follow-up results, metabolites, and genotypes of patients 
with HIBCH deficiency presenting with Leigh/Leigh-like syndrome and explore 
specific metabolites related to disease diagnosis and prognosis through 
retrospective and longitudinal studies. Applying next-generation sequencing, we 
identified eight patients with HIBCH mutations from our cohort of 181 cases of 
genetically diagnosed Leigh/Leigh-like syndrome. Six novel HIBCH mutations were 
identified: c.977T>G [p.Leu326Arg], c.1036G>T [p.Val346Phe], c.750+1G>A, 
c.810-2A>C, c.469C>T [p.Arg157*], and c.236delC [p.Pro79Leufs*5]. The Newcastle 
Pediatric Mitochondrial Disease Scale (NPMDS) was employed to assess disease 
progression and clinical outcomes. The non-invasive approach of metabolite 
analysis showed that levels of some were associated with clinical phenotype 
severity. Five (5/7) patients presented with elevated C4-OH in dried blood 
spots, and the level was probably correlated with the NPMDS scores during the 
peak disease phase. 2,3-Dihydroxy-2-methylbutyrate in urine was elevated in six 
(6/7) patients and elevated S-(2-caboxypropyl)cysteamine in urine was found in 
three patients (3/3). The median age at initial presentation was 13 months 
(8-18 months), and the median follow-up was 2.3 years (range 1.3-7.2 years). We 
summarized and compared with all reported patients with HIBCH mutations. The 
most prominent clinical manifestations were developmental regression/delay, 
hypotonia, encephalopathy, and feeding difficulties. We administered drug and 
dietary treatment. During follow-up, five patients responded positively to 
treatment with a significant decrease in NPMDS scores. Our research is the 
largest case series of patients with HIBCH mutations.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Liu, Xu, Han, Ren, Yang, Zhang and Fang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.605803
PMCID: PMC7982470
PMID: 33762937

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.