---
reference_id: "PMID:15703195"
title: Linkage of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) type-4 to chromosome 6q24 and identification of mutations in syntaxin 11.
authors:
- zur Stadt U
- Schmidt S
- Kasper B
- Beutel K
- Diler AS
- Henter JI
- Kabisch H
- Schneppenheim R
- Nürnberg P
- Janka G
- Hennies HC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi076
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Genetic Linkage
- "Histiocytosis, Non-Langerhans-Cell/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Qa-SNARE Proteins
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Linkage of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) type-4 to chromosome 6q24 and identification of mutations in syntaxin 11.
**Authors:** zur Stadt U, Schmidt S, Kasper B, Beutel K, Diler AS, Henter JI, Kabisch H, Schneppenheim R, Nürnberg P, Janka G, Hennies HC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddi076](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddi076)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Mar 15;14(6):827-34. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi076. Epub 2005
Feb  9.

Linkage of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) type-4 to 
chromosome 6q24 and identification of mutations in syntaxin 11.

zur Stadt U(1), Schmidt S, Kasper B, Beutel K, Diler AS, Henter JI, Kabisch H, 
Schneppenheim R, Nürnberg P, Janka G, Hennies HC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital, 
University of Hamburg, Germany.

Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) is a rare autosomal recessive 
disorder characterized by hyperactive phagocytes and defects in natural killer 
cell function. It has been shown previously that mutations in the perforin 1 
gene (PRF1) and in UNC13D are associated with FHL2 and FHL3, respectively, 
indicating genetic heterogeneity. We performed genome-wide homozygosity mapping 
in a large consanguineous Kurdish kindred with five children affected with FHL. 
Linkage to a 10 cM region on chromosome 6q24 between D6S1569 and D6S960 defined 
a novel FHL locus. By screening positional candidate genes, we identified a 
homozygous deletion of 5 bp in the syntaxin 11 gene (STX11) in this family. We 
could demonstrate that syntaxin 11 protein was absent in the mononuclear cell 
fraction of patients with the homozygous 5 bp deletion. In addition to this 
family, we found homozygous mutations in STX11 in five consanguineous 
Turkish/Kurdish FHL kindreds including two families with the 5 bp deletion, one 
family with a large 19.2 kb genomic deletion spanning the entire coding region 
of STX11 (exon 2) and two families with a nonsense mutation that leads to a 
premature stop codon in the C-terminal end of the protein. As both STX11 and 
UNC13D are involved in vesicle trafficking and membrane fusion, we conclude 
that, besides mutations in perforin 1, defects in the endocytotic or the 
exocytotic pathway may be a common mechanism in FHL.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi076
PMID: 15703195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]