---
reference_id: "PMID:38842388"
title: "A novel homozygous pathogenic missense variant in COX6B1: Further delineation of the phenotype."
authors:
- Jennions E
- Olsson-Engman M
- Visuttijai K
- Wiksell Å
- Fluriach Dominguez N
- Kollberg G
- Oldfors A
- Hedberg-Oldfors C
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63783
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics, pathology"
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- Homozygote
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel homozygous pathogenic missense variant in COX6B1: Further delineation of the phenotype.
**Authors:** Jennions E, Olsson-Engman M, Visuttijai K, Wiksell Å, Fluriach Dominguez N, Kollberg G, Oldfors A, Hedberg-Oldfors C
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63783](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63783)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2024 Oct;194(10):e63783. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63783. Epub
2024  Jun 6.

A novel homozygous pathogenic missense variant in COX6B1: Further delineation of 
the phenotype.

Jennions E(1), Olsson-Engman M(2), Visuttijai K(3), Wiksell Å(4), Fluriach 
Dominguez N(5), Kollberg G(3), Oldfors A(3), Hedberg-Oldfors C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Blekinge Hospital, Karlskrona, Sweden.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Queen Silvias Children's Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Department of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Queen Silvias Children's Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.

Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency is a phenotypically diverse group of 
diseases caused by variants in over 30 genes. Biallelic pathogenic variants in 
COX6B1 have been described in four patients to date with varying disease 
manifestations. We describe the clinical features and follow-up of a patient 
with a novel homozygous pathogenic variant in COX6B1 who presented acutely with 
severe encephalomyopathy associated with an infection. New findings include 
ophthalmological evaluation and follow-up of neuroradiological investigations. 
The novel p.Trp31Arg variant was predicted to be pathogenic in silico, and 
further functional analyses with biochemical analysis of mitochondrial function 
showed isolated COX deficiency. Muscle biopsy showed a specific lack of COX6B1 
protein together with complex IV deficiency on western blot, enzyme 
histochemistry, and immuno-histochemistry.

© 2024 The Author(s). American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63783
PMID: 38842388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]