---
reference_id: "PMID:40830795"
title: Clinical and molecular spectrum of patients with methylmalonic acidemia and homocysteinemia complicated by cardiovascular manifestations.
authors:
- Zhao W
- Zhang Y
- Pi Y
- Li Y
- Zhang H
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03907-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, complications, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- "Hyperhomocysteinemia/genetics, complications, pathology"
- Infant
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Retrospective Studies
- Cardiovascular Diseases/genetics
- Homocystinuria/genetics
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular spectrum of patients with methylmalonic acidemia and homocysteinemia complicated by cardiovascular manifestations.
**Authors:** Zhao W, Zhang Y, Pi Y, Li Y, Zhang H
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03907-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03907-w)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Aug 19;20(1):443. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03907-w.

Clinical and molecular spectrum of patients with methylmalonic acidemia and
homocysteinemia complicated by cardiovascular manifestations.

Zhao W(1), Zhang Y(2), Pi Y(1), Li Y(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, 050000, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, 050000, China. 28402129@hebmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: To investigate the clinical characteristics, treatment response, and
prognosis of patients with methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) and homocysteinemia
complicated by cardiovascular manifestations and to raise awareness regarding
MMA and homocysteinemia.
METHODS: A total of 16 children diagnosed with MMA and homocysteinemia with
cardiovascular manifestations who were admitted to the Department of Pediatrics
of the Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University from June 2018 to October
2024 were retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: All 16 patients had varying degrees of neurological manifestations, and
all had cardiovascular manifestations, 3 patients were diagnosed with MMA and
homocysteinemia by newborn screening and received conventional treatment, the
remaining 13 patients had nausea, vomiting, anemia, recurrent pneumonitis,
respiratory distress, and lethargy as their first symptoms. Cardiovascular
complications were found between the ages of 2 months and 12 years, with 9
patients having pulmonary hypertension, 7 having hypertension, and 5 having
non-compaction of ventricular myocardium. Fourteen of these cases were confirmed
to have CblC-type methylmalonic acidemia caused by mutations in the MMACHC gene
by genetic testing. The most common mutations were c.80A > G (p.Q27R) (8 cases)
and c.609G > A (p.W203X) (8 cases).
CONCLUSION: Cardiovascular manifestation is uncommon in patients with MMA and
homocysteinemia, but it is usually critical cause of death. When unexplained
pulmonary hypertension or hypertension occurs, MMA and homocysteinemia should be
suspected, especially when accompanied by manifestations of other systems.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03907-w
PMCID: PMC12362896
PMID: 40830795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Second
Hospital of Hebei Medical University. Competing interests: The authors declare
that they have no competing interests.
