---
reference_id: "PMID:30488801"
title: "Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: Symptoms and Signs at Initial Presentations."
authors:
- Metry AM
- Al Salmi I
- Al Balushi F
- Yousef MA
- Al Ismaili F
- Hola A
- Hannawi S
journal: Antiinflamm Antiallergy Agents Med Chem
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2174/1871523018666181128161828
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: Symptoms and Signs at Initial Presentations.
**Authors:** Metry AM, Al Salmi I, Al Balushi F, Yousef MA, Al Ismaili F, Hola A, Hannawi S
**Journal:** Antiinflamm Antiallergy Agents Med Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1871523018666181128161828](https://doi.org/10.2174/1871523018666181128161828)

## Content

1. Antiinflamm Antiallergy Agents Med Chem. 2019;18(2):142-150. doi: 
10.2174/1871523018666181128161828.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: Symptoms and Signs at Initial Presentations.

Metry AM(1), Al Salmi I(1), Al Balushi F(2), Yousef MA(1), Al Ismaili F(1), Hola 
A(1), Hannawi S(3).

Author information:
(1)The Renal Medicine Department, The Royal Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(2)Rheumatology Department, The Royal Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(3)Rheumatology Department, Ministry of Health and Prevention, Dubai 65522, 
United Arab Emirates.

BACKGROUND: Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune multisystem 
inflammatory condition that causes microvascular inflammation with the 
production of various auto-antibodies that play a major role in its 
pathogenesis. SLE can affect both sexes, all ages, and all ethnic groups with 
widespread geographical and socioeconomic backgrounds. Asia encompasses people 
of many sociocultural backgrounds with diverse ethnic.
OBJECTIVE: Due to a lack of national epidemiological research, the incidence and 
prevalence of SLE in Middle Eastern and Arab countries, have only recently been 
studied. This article aims to explore the status of SLE in Oman and to record 
symptoms and signs of SLE at first presentation.
METHODOLOGY: Medical records of all patients diagnosed with SLE at the Royal 
Hospital from 2006 to 2014 were reviewed for information recorded at first 
visit. SLE diagnosis was based on the American College of Rheumatology 
classification criteria; ACR97 (which includes the clinical manifestation and 
laboratory evidence). Patients with SLE disease manifestations extrapolated and 
analyzed. There were 966 patients diagnosed with SLE during the period from 2006 
to 2014. Mean (SD) age at presentations was 35.5 (11.5) years. Majority of 
patients were female which constitutes 88.7% of the total SLE patients with mean 
age 27.6 (1.4) years.
RESULTS: Constitutional symptoms were found in 48.68 of SLE population including 
fatigue in 35.22%, and weight changes in 13.43%. The cutaneous manifestations 
that were present included malar rash 37.69%, photosensitivity 35.10%, discoid 
lupus 17.63%, and hair loss 39.29%. Musculoskeletal manifestations were commonly 
seen among the studied population including arthralgia in 68.75%, myalgia in 
55.65%, arthritis in 48.31%, whilst myositis, tendon abnormalities and avascular 
necrosis were found in only 2.47%, 0.31% and 1.98%. respectively.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study of the symptoms and signs at initial 
clinical presentation of SLE patients compared to other studies done regionally 
where most have focused on clinical manifestations during the progression course 
of SLE. SLE manifestations may be related to the differences in the genetic 
make-up of the patients who come from various ethnic groups despite similar 
geography or sociocultural background, or to referral bias, as some studies were 
performed in the nephrology units and others in the rheumatology units. There is 
a pressing need to establish a nationwide and regional collaboration to 
establish LUPUS and to put forward a strategic planning with each MOH to provide 
an easy and efficient report of SLE cases and provide various effective 
management for such a debilitating syndrome.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1871523018666181128161828
PMID: 30488801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]