---
reference_id: "PMID:36914665"
title: Systematic review of NTRK 1/2/3 fusion prevalence pan-cancer and across solid tumours.
authors:
- "O'Haire S"
- Franchini F
- Kang YJ
- Steinberg J
- Canfell K
- Desai J
- Fox S
- IJzerman M
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-31055-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic review of NTRK 1/2/3 fusion prevalence pan-cancer and across solid tumours.
**Authors:** O'Haire S, Franchini F, Kang YJ, Steinberg J, Canfell K, Desai J, Fox S, IJzerman M
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-31055-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-31055-3)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Mar 13;13(1):4116. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-31055-3.

Systematic review of NTRK 1/2/3 fusion prevalence pan-cancer and across solid 
tumours.

O'Haire S(1)(2), Franchini F(3)(4), Kang YJ(5), Steinberg J(5), Canfell K(5), 
Desai J(4)(6), Fox S(4)(7), IJzerman M(3)(4)(8).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Health Services Research, Centre for Health Policy, Melbourne School 
of Population and Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health 
Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. 
sophie.ohaire@petermac.org.
(2)Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry 
and Health Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. 
sophie.ohaire@petermac.org.
(3)Cancer Health Services Research, Centre for Health Policy, Melbourne School 
of Population and Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health 
Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry 
and Health Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(5)The Daffodil Centre, The University of Sydney, a Joint Venture with Cancer 
Council New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(7)Department of Pathology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia.
(8)Erasmus School of Health Policy and Management, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

NTRK gene fusions are rare somatic mutations found across cancer types with 
promising targeted therapies emerging. Healthcare systems face significant 
challenges in integrating these treatments, with uncertainty in prevalence and 
optimal testing methods to identify eligible patients. We performed a systematic 
review of NTRK fusion prevalence to inform efficient diagnostic screening and 
scale of therapeutic uptake. We searched Medline, Embase and Cochrane databases 
on 31/03/2021. Inclusion criteria were studies reporting fusion rates in solid 
tumours, English language, post-2010 publication and minimum sample size. 
Critical appraisal was performed using a custom 11-item checklist. Rates were 
collated by cancer type and pooled if additional synthesis criteria were met. 
160 studies were included, with estimates for 15 pan-cancer and 429 specific 
cancer types (63 paediatric). Adult pan-cancer estimates ranged 0.03-0.70%, with 
higher rates found in RNA-based assays. In common cancers, rates were 
consistently below 0.5%. Rare morphological subtypes, colorectal microsatellite 
instability, and driver mutation exclusion cancers had higher rates. Only 35.6% 
of extracted estimates used appropriate methods and sample size to identify NTRK 
fusions. NTRK fusion-positive cancers are rare and widely distributed across 
solid tumours. Small-scale, heterogeneous data confound prevalence prediction. 
Further large-scale, standardised genomic data are needed to characterise NTRK 
fusion epidemiology.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-31055-3
PMCID: PMC10011574
PMID: 36914665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.