---
reference_id: "PMID:34882836"
title: Musculoskeletal Comorbidities and Quality of Life in ENPP1-Deficient Adults and the Response of Enthesopathy to Enzyme Replacement Therapy in Murine Models.
authors:
- Ferreira CR
- Ansh AJ
- Nester C
- "O'Brien C"
- Stabach PR
- Murtada SI
- Lester ER
- Khursigara G
- Molloy L
- Carpenter TO
- Braddock DT
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4487
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Enthesopathy/drug therapy, genetics"
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factors
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Pain
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- Quality of Life
- Vascular Calcification/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Musculoskeletal Comorbidities and Quality of Life in ENPP1-Deficient Adults and the Response of Enthesopathy to Enzyme Replacement Therapy in Murine Models.
**Authors:** Ferreira CR, Ansh AJ, Nester C, O'Brien C, Stabach PR, Murtada SI, Lester ER, Khursigara G, Molloy L, Carpenter TO, Braddock DT
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4487](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4487)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2022 Mar;37(3):494-504. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4487. Epub 2021
Dec  26.

Musculoskeletal Comorbidities and Quality of Life in ENPP1-Deficient Adults and
the Response of Enthesopathy to Enzyme Replacement Therapy in Murine Models.

Ferreira CR(1), Ansh AJ(2), Nester C(3), O'Brien C(4), Stabach PR(2), Murtada
SI(5), Lester ER(2), Khursigara G(3), Molloy L(4), Carpenter TO(6), Braddock
DT(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genomics and Metabolic Genetics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA.
(3)Inozyme Pharma, Inc., Boston, MA, USA.
(4)GACI Global, Argyle, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics (Endocrinology), Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT, USA.

Ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1) deficiency leads to
cardiovascular calcification in infancy, fibroblast growth factor 23
(FGF23)-mediated hypophosphatemic rickets in childhood, and osteomalacia in
adulthood. Excessive enthesis mineralization and cervical spine fusion have been
previously reported in patients with biallelic ENPP1 deficiency, but their
effect on quality of life is unknown. We describe additional musculoskeletal
complications in patients with ENPP1 deficiency, namely osteoarthritis and
interosseous membrane ossification, and for the first time evaluate
health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in patients with this disease, both
subjectively via narrative report, and objectively via the Brief Pain
Inventory-Short Form, and a Patient Reported Outcome Measurement Information
System Physical Function (PROMIS PF) short form. Residual pain, similar in
magnitude to that identified in adult patients with X-linked hypophosphatemia,
was experienced by the majority of patients despite use of analgesic
medications. Impairment in physical function varied from mild to severe. To
assess murine ENPP1 deficiency for the presence of enthesopathy, and for the
potential response to enzyme replacement therapy, we maintained Enpp1asj/asj
mice on regular chow for 23 weeks and treated cohorts with either vehicle or a
long-acting form of recombinant ENPP1. Enpp1asj/asj mice treated with vehicle
exhibited robust calcification throughout their Achilles tendons, whereas
two-thirds of those treated with ENPP1 enzyme replacement exhibited complete or
partial suppression of the Achilles tendon calcification. Our combined results
document that musculoskeletal complications are a significant source of
morbidity in biallelic ENPP1 deficiency, a phenotype which is closely
recapitulated in Enpp1asj/asj mice. Finally, we show that a long-acting form of
recombinant ENPP1 prevents the development of enthesis calcification at the
relatively modest dose of 0.3 mg/kg per week, suggesting that suppression of
enthesopathy may be attainable upon dose escalation. © 2021 American Society for
Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR). This article has been contributed to by US
Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

© 2021 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR). This article has
been contributed to by US Government employees and their work is in the public
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4487
PMCID: PMC9667476
PMID: 34882836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests C.R.F. reports a
collaboration with Inozyme Pharma, Inc. as part of a Cooperative Research and
Development Agreement. P.R.S. and D.T.B. are inventors of patents owned by Yale
University for therapeutics treating ENPP1 deficiency. D.T.B is an equity holder
and receives research and consulting support from Inozyme Pharma, Inc. G.K. and
C.N. are full-time employees of Inozyme Pharma, Inc. G.K., C.N. and T.O.C own
stock in Inozyme Pharma, Inc. T.O.C. has received consulting fees from
Ultragenyx, Alexion, Inozyme, Regeneron and Clementia, and honoraria from Kyowa
Kirin. A.J. A, C.O., S.M., E.R.L., and L.M. report no conflict of interest.
