---
reference_id: "PMID:24531329"
title: A SWI/SNF-related autism syndrome caused by de novo mutations in ADNP.
authors:
- Helsmoortel C
- Vulto-van Silfhout AT
- Coe BP
- Vandeweyer G
- Rooms L
- van den Ende J
- Schuurs-Hoeijmakers JH
- Marcelis CL
- Willemsen MH
- Vissers LE
- Yntema HG
- Bakshi M
- Wilson M
- Witherspoon KT
- Malmgren H
- Nordgren A
- Annerén G
- Fichera M
- Bosco P
- Romano C
- de Vries BB
- Kleefstra T
- Kooy RF
- Eichler EE
- Van der Aa N
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2899
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Base Sequence
- "Child Development Disorders, Pervasive/genetics"
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- Exome/genetics
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- Gene Components
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A SWI/SNF-related autism syndrome caused by de novo mutations in ADNP.
**Authors:** Helsmoortel C, Vulto-van Silfhout AT, Coe BP, Vandeweyer G, Rooms L, van den Ende J, Schuurs-Hoeijmakers JH, Marcelis CL, Willemsen MH, Vissers LE, Yntema HG, Bakshi M, Wilson M, Witherspoon KT, Malmgren H, Nordgren A, Annerén G, Fichera M, Bosco P, Romano C, de Vries BB, Kleefstra T, Kooy RF, Eichler EE, Van der Aa N
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2899](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2899)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2014 Apr;46(4):380-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.2899. Epub 2014 Feb 16.

A SWI/SNF-related autism syndrome caused by de novo mutations in ADNP.

Helsmoortel C(1), Vulto-van Silfhout AT(2), Coe BP(3), Vandeweyer G(4), Rooms 
L(1), van den Ende J(5), Schuurs-Hoeijmakers JH(6), Marcelis CL(6), Willemsen 
MH(6), Vissers LE(6), Yntema HG(6), Bakshi M(7), Wilson M(8), Witherspoon KT(9), 
Malmgren H(10), Nordgren A(10), Annerén G(11), Fichera M(12), Bosco P(13), 
Romano C(14), de Vries BB(15), Kleefstra T(15), Kooy RF(1), Eichler EE(9), Van 
der Aa N(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)1] Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. [2].
(3)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. [3].
(4)1] Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. 
[2] Biomedical informatics research center Antwerpen (Biomina), Department of 
Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium.
(5)University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Genetic Medicine, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, 
Australia.
(9)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(10)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(11)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(12)1] Unit of Neurology, I.R.C.C.S. Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, 
Italy. [2] Medical Genetics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(13)Laboratory of Cytogenetics, I.R.C.C.S. Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, 
Troina, Italy.
(14)Unit of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, I.R.C.C.S. Associazione Oasi Maria 
Santissima, Troina, Italy.
(15)1] Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life 
Sciences, Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. [2] Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(16)1] Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. 
[2] University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

Despite the high heritability of autism spectrum disorders (ASD), characterized 
by persistent deficits in social communication and interaction and restricted, 
repetitive patterns of behavior, interests or activities, a genetic diagnosis 
can be established in only a minority of patients. Known genetic causes include 
chromosomal aberrations, such as the duplication of the 15q11-13 region, and 
monogenic causes, as in Rett and fragile-X syndromes. The genetic heterogeneity 
within ASD is striking, with even the most frequent causes responsible for only 
1% of cases at the most. Even with the recent developments in next-generation 
sequencing, for the large majority of cases no molecular diagnosis can be 
established. Here, we report ten patients with ASD and other shared clinical 
characteristics, including intellectual disability and facial dysmorphisms 
caused by a mutation in ADNP, a transcription factor involved in the SWI/SNF 
remodeling complex. We estimate this gene to be mutated in at least 0.17% of ASD 
cases, making it one of the most frequent ASD-associated genes known to date.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2899
PMCID: PMC3990853
PMID: 24531329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests EEE is on the 
scientific advisory boards for Pacific Biosciences, Inc., SynapDx Corp., and 
DNAnexus, Inc.