---
reference_id: "PMID:39330046"
title: "Estimating the Proportion of Overdiagnosis among Prostate, Breast, and Thyroid Cancers in China: Findings from the Global Burden of Disease 2019."
authors:
- Wang S
- Ji Y
- Ren M
- Li J
- Yang Z
journal: Curr Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/curroncol31090418
keywords:
- Global Burden of Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Aged
- "Breast Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Overdiagnosis/statistics & numerical data"
- Incidence
- China/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimating the Proportion of Overdiagnosis among Prostate, Breast, and Thyroid Cancers in China: Findings from the Global Burden of Disease 2019.
**Authors:** Wang S, Ji Y, Ren M, Li J, Yang Z
**Journal:** Curr Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/curroncol31090418](https://doi.org/10.3390/curroncol31090418)

## Content

1. Curr Oncol. 2024 Sep 20;31(9):5643-5651. doi: 10.3390/curroncol31090418.

Estimating the Proportion of Overdiagnosis among Prostate, Breast, and Thyroid
Cancers in China: Findings from the Global Burden of Disease 2019.

Wang S(1), Ji Y(1)(2), Ren M(1)(3), Li J(1)(4), Yang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)JC School of Public Health and Primary Care, Faculty of Medicine, Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Innovent Biologics, Shanghai 200050, China.
(3)Immunoprophylaxis Department, Anhui Provincial Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Hefei 230601, China.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Programming, Sanofi, Chengdu 610000, China.

The incidence of prostate, breast, and thyroid cancers has increased in China
over the past few decades. Whether and how much these increases can be
attributed to overdiagnosis are less understood. This study aimed to estimate
the proportion of overdiagnosis among these three cancers in China during
2004-2019. The age-specific cancer incidence, cancer mortality, and all-cause
mortality in China were extracted from the Global Burden of Diseases 2019. The
lifetime risk of developing and that of dying from each cancer were calculated
using the life table method. The proportion of overdiagnosis of a cancer was
estimated as the difference between the lifetime risk of developing the cancer
and that of suffering from the cancer (including death, metastasis, and symptoms
caused by the cancer), further divided by the lifetime risk of developing the
cancer. The highest possible values of these parameters were adopted in the
estimation so as to obtain the lower bounds of the proportions of overdiagnosis.
Sensitivity analyses assuming different lag periods between the diagnosis of a
cancer and death from the cancer were performed. The results showed that the
lifetime risk of developing prostate, breast, and thyroid cancer increased
dramatically from 2004 to 2019 in China, while the increase in the lifetime risk
of dying from these cancers was less pronounced. The proportions of
overdiagnosis among prostate, breast, and thyroid cancers were estimated to be
7.88%, 18.99%, and 24.92%, respectively, in 2004, and increased to 18.20%,
26.25%, and 29.24%, respectively, in 2019. The increasing trends were
statistically significant for all three cancers (all p < 0.001). In sensitivity
analyses, the proportions of overdiagnosis decreased, but upward trends over
time remained for all three cancers. In conclusion, the overdiagnosis of
prostate, breast, and thyroid cancers in China increased from 2004 to 2019, with
the highest proportion seen in thyroid cancer and the most rapid increase seen
in prostate cancer. Multifaceted efforts by policy makers, guideline developers,
and clinicians are needed to tackle this problem.

DOI: 10.3390/curroncol31090418
PMCID: PMC11431510
PMID: 39330046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Ji, Y. was employed by the company
Innovent Biologics, Shanghai, China. Author Li, J. was employed by the company
Sanofi, Chengdu, China. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
