---
reference_id: "PMID:30036598"
title: Clinical and genetic differences between pustular psoriasis subtypes.
authors:
- Twelves S
- Mostafa A
- Dand N
- Burri E
- Farkas K
- Wilson R
- Cooper HL
- Irvine AD
- Oon HH
- Kingo K
- Köks S
- Mrowietz U
- Puig L
- Reynolds N
- Tan ES
- Tanew A
- Torz K
- Trattner H
- Valentine M
- Wahie S
- Warren RB
- Wright A
- Bata-Csörgő Z
- Szell M
- Griffiths CEM
- Burden AD
- Choon SE
- Smith CH
- Barker JN
- Navarini AA
- Capon F
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.06.038
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Interleukins/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Psoriasis/genetics
- Smoking/genetics
- Vesicular Transport Proteins/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic differences between pustular psoriasis subtypes.
**Authors:** Twelves S, Mostafa A, Dand N, Burri E, Farkas K, Wilson R, Cooper HL, Irvine AD, Oon HH, Kingo K, Köks S, Mrowietz U, Puig L, Reynolds N, Tan ES, Tanew A, Torz K, Trattner H, Valentine M, Wahie S, Warren RB, Wright A, Bata-Csörgő Z, Szell M, Griffiths CEM, Burden AD, Choon SE, Smith CH, Barker JN, Navarini AA, Capon F
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2018.06.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2018.06.038)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019 Mar;143(3):1021-1026. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2018.06.038. Epub 2018 Jul 21.

Clinical and genetic differences between pustular psoriasis subtypes.

Twelves S(1), Mostafa A(2), Dand N(1), Burri E(3), Farkas K(4), Wilson R(5),
Cooper HL(6), Irvine AD(7), Oon HH(8), Kingo K(9), Köks S(10), Mrowietz U(11),
Puig L(12), Reynolds N(13), Tan ES(8), Tanew A(14), Torz K(11), Trattner H(14),
Valentine M(15), Wahie S(16), Warren RB(17), Wright A(18), Bata-Csörgő Z(19),
Szell M(20), Griffiths CEM(17), Burden AD(21), Choon SE(22), Smith CH(5), Barker
JN(23), Navarini AA(3), Capon F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, School of Basic and Medical
Biosciences, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland;
Department of Dermatology, Beni Suef University, Beni Suef, Egypt.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(5)St John's Institute of Dermatology, School of Basic and Medical Biosciences,
King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Portsmouth Dermatology Unit, Portsmouth Hospitals Trust, Portsmouth, United
Kingdom.
(7)Paediatric Dermatology, Our Lady's Children's Hospital Crumlin, and Clinical
Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(8)Department of Dermatology, National Skin Centre, Singapore.
(9)Department of Dermatology, University of Tartu, and the Clinic of
Dermatology, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
(10)Department of Pathophysiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(11)Psoriasis Center at the Department of Dermatology, University Medical
Center, Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(12)Department of Dermatology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona,
Spain.
(13)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Medical School, Newcastle University and the
Department of Dermatology, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(14)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(15)Division of Dermatology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Wash.
(16)University Hospital of North Durham and Darlington Memorial Hospital,
Darlington, United Kingdom.
(17)Dermatology Centre, Salford Royal Hospital, University of Manchester and the
Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(18)St Lukes Hospital, Bradford, and the Centre for Skin Science, University of
Bradford, Bradford, United Kingdom.
(19)MTA-SZTE Dermatological Research Group, Szeged, and the Department of
Dermatology and Allergology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(20)MTA-SZTE Dermatological Research Group, Szeged, and the Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(21)Institute of Infection, Inflammation and Immunity, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(22)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Sultanah Aminah, Jeffrey Cheah School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University Malaysia, Johor Bahru, Selangor,
Malaysia.
(23)St John's Institute of Dermatology, School of Basic and Medical Biosciences,
King's College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
jonathan.barker@kcl.ac.uk.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019 Feb;143(2):810-811. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2018.11.010.
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019 Feb;143(2):809-810. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2018.11.009.

BACKGROUND: The term pustular psoriasis indicates a group of severe skin
disorders characterized by eruptions of neutrophil-filled pustules. The disease,
which often manifests with concurrent psoriasis vulgaris, can have an acute
systemic (generalized pustular psoriasis [GPP]) or chronic localized
(palmoplantar pustulosis [PPP] and acrodermatitis continua of Hallopeau [ACH])
presentation. Although mutations have been uncovered in IL36RN and AP1S3, the
rarity of the disease has hindered the study of genotype-phenotype correlations.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to characterize the clinical and genetic features of
pustular psoriasis through the analysis of an extended patient cohort.
METHODS: We ascertained a data set of unprecedented size, including 863
unrelated patients (251 with GPP, 560 with PPP, 28 with ACH, and 24 with
multiple diagnoses). We undertook mutation screening in 473 cases.
RESULTS: Psoriasis vulgaris concurrence was lowest in PPP (15.8% vs 54.4% in GPP
and 46.2% in ACH, P < .0005 for both), whereas the mean age of onset was
earliest in GPP (31.0 vs 43.7 years in PPP and 51.8 years in ACH, P < .0001 for
both). The percentage of female patients was greater in PPP (77.0%) than in GPP
(62.5%; P = 5.8 × 10-5). The same applied to the prevalence of smokers (79.8% vs
28.3%, P < 10-15). Although AP1S3 alleles had similar frequency (0.03-0.05)
across disease subtypes, IL36RN mutations were less common in patients with PPP
(0.03) than in those with GPP (0.19) and ACH (0.16; P = 1.9 × 10-14 and .002,
respectively). Importantly, IL36RN disease alleles had a dose-dependent effect
on age of onset in all forms of pustular psoriasis (P = .003).
CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of an unparalleled resource revealed key clinical and
genetic differences between patients with PPP and those with GPP.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.06.038
PMCID: PMC6403101
PMID: 30036598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
