---
reference_id: "PMID:20301758"
title: GBE1 Adult Polyglucosan Body Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Akman HO
- Lossos A
- Kakhlon O
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GBE1 Adult Polyglucosan Body Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Akman HO, Lossos A, Kakhlon O

## Content

1. GBE1 Adult Polyglucosan Body Disease.

Akman HO(1), Lossos A(2), Kakhlon O(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2009 Apr 2 [updated 2020 Sep 17].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York
(2)Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Most individuals with classic GBE1 adult polyglucosan
body disease (GBE1-APBD) present after age 40 years with unexplained progressive
neurogenic bladder, gait difficulties (i.e., spasticity and weakness) from mixed
upper and lower motor neuron involvement, sensory loss predominantly in the
distal lower extremities, autonomic dysfunction (associated with orthostatic
hypotension and constipation), and mild cognitive difficulties (often executive
dysfunction). Some affected individuals without classic GBE1-APBD have atypical
phenotypes including Alzheimer disease-like dementia and axonal neuropathy,
stroke-like episodes, and diaphragmatic failure; others may have a history of
infantile liver disease.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of GBE1-APBD is established in a proband with
suggestive findings and biallelic GBE1 pathogenic variants identified by
molecular genetic testing. Note: GBE enzyme assay (in any tissue) is not a
first-line diagnostic test for GBE1-APBD.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Optimally, symptomatic care is provided
by a multidisciplinary team that includes specialists in physical medicine
rehabilitation, urology, and behavioral neurology or psychology. An
individualized physical therapy program can improve flexibility, reduce
spasticity, maintain or improve joint mobility, and facilitate activities of
daily living; antispasmodic drugs may decrease cramps and facilitate walking.
Spastic bladder may be managed with anticholinergic drugs and clean intermittent
catheterization or an indwelling bladder catheter to prevent urosepsis;
treatment of recurrent urinary infections is essential. Treatment of cognitive
decline and psychiatric manifestations is per standard practice. Surveillance:
Routine: neurologic assessments to monitor progression of upper motor neuron and
lower motor neuron signs and to assess for new manifestations; urologic
evaluations for complications of spastic bladder; occupational and physical
therapy assessments regarding activities of daily living; and mental health
assessments.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GBE1-APBD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If
both parents are known to be heterozygous for a GBE1 pathogenic variant, each
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected,
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic heterozygote (carrier), and a 25% chance
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the GBE1 pathogenic variants have
been identified in the family, carrier testing for at-risk relatives and
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for GBE1-APBD are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301758
