---
reference_id: "PMID:808872"
title: Anterior chamber cleavage syndrome. A stepladder classification.
authors:
- Waring GO 3rd
- Rodrigues MM
- Laibson PR
journal: Surv Ophthalmol
year: '1975'
doi: 10.1016/0039-6257(75)90034-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anterior chamber cleavage syndrome. A stepladder classification.
**Authors:** Waring GO 3rd, Rodrigues MM, Laibson PR
**Journal:** Surv Ophthalmol (1975)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0039-6257(75)90034-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/0039-6257(75)90034-x)

## Content

1. Surv Ophthalmol. 1975 Jul-Aug;20(1):3-27. doi: 10.1016/0039-6257(75)90034-x.

Anterior chamber cleavage syndrome. A stepladder classification.

Waring GO 3rd, Rodrigues MM, Laibson PR.

This paper classifies the abnormalities of the anterior chamber cleavage 
syndrome (mesodermal dysgenesis of the iris and cornea). The anatomic findings 
are arranged in a tabular stepladder fashion which builds from simple to more 
complex combinations, most of which have been previously known by eponyms. There 
are three groups of anomalies: 1) peripheral, 2) central, and 3) combinations of 
the two. 1) The peripheral anomalies consist of a prominent Schwalbe's ring, 
iris strands to Schwalbe's ring, and hypoplasia of the anterior iris stroma. 
Developmental glaucoma is commonly present. 2) The essential feature of the 
central anomalies is a defect in the corneal endothelium and Descemet's membrane 
with an overlying corneal opacity. Additional components include central 
iridocorneal adhesions, keratolenticular approximation with cataract, and 
scleralizaiton of the cornea. Chorioretinal anomalies, developmental glaucoma, 
and systemic malformations may be present. 3) Central and peripheral 
combinations may exist in the same eye, in both eyes of the same patient, or 
within the same family.

DOI: 10.1016/0039-6257(75)90034-x
PMID: 808872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]