---
reference_id: "PMID:32234379"
title: "Aortitis and periaortitis: The puzzling spectrum of inflammatory aortic diseases."
authors:
- Marvisi C
- Accorsi Buttini E
- Vaglio A
journal: Presse Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2020.104018
keywords:
- Aorta/pathology
- "Aortitis/classification, diagnosis, etiology, pathology"
- Diagnostic Imaging/methods
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/diagnosis, etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G4-Related Disease/complications
- "Retroperitoneal Fibrosis/complications, pathology"
- "Takayasu Arteritis/diagnosis, etiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aortitis and periaortitis: The puzzling spectrum of inflammatory aortic diseases.
**Authors:** Marvisi C, Accorsi Buttini E, Vaglio A
**Journal:** Presse Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lpm.2020.104018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lpm.2020.104018)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 2020 Apr;49(1):104018. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2020.104018. Epub 2020
Mar  28.

Aortitis and periaortitis: The puzzling spectrum of inflammatory aortic
diseases.

Marvisi C(1), Accorsi Buttini E(2), Vaglio A(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy.
(2)Department of Haematology, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical, Experimental and Clinical Sciences "Mario Serio"
and Meyer Children's Hospital, University of Firenze, Firenze, Italy. Electronic
address: augusto.vaglio@unifi.it.

Aortitis and periaortitis are inflammatory diseases of the aorta and its main
branches; they differ in the extension of inflammation, which is confined to the
aortic wall in aortitis, and spreads to the periaortic space in periaortitis.
Aortitis is classified as non-infectious or infectious. Non-infectious aortitis
represents a common feature of large-vessel vasculitides but can also be
isolated or associated with other rheumatologic conditions. Periaortitis can be
idiopathic or secondary to a wide array of etiologies such as drugs, infections,
malignancies, and other proliferative diseases. Notably, both aortitis and
periaortitis may arise in the context of IgG4-related disease, a recently
characterised fibro-inflammatory systemic disease. Prompt recognition, correct
diagnosis and appropriate treatment are essential in order to avoid
life-threatening complications.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2020.104018
PMID: 32234379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
