---
reference_id: "PMID:36688581"
title: Disease severity and genotype-phenotype correlation in adult patients with familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Tuncer Kuru F
- Gokcen N
- Yazici A
- Cefle A
journal: Mod Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/mr/road007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease severity and genotype-phenotype correlation in adult patients with familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Tuncer Kuru F, Gokcen N, Yazici A, Cefle A
**Journal:** Mod Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/mr/road007](https://doi.org/10.1093/mr/road007)

## Content

1. Mod Rheumatol. 2023 Dec 22;34(1):214-219. doi: 10.1093/mr/road007.

Disease severity and genotype-phenotype correlation in adult patients with 
familial Mediterranean fever.

Tuncer Kuru F(1), Gokcen N(1), Yazici A(1), Cefle A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the relationships of disease severity with genotype and 
phenotype in adult familial Mediterranean fever patients.
METHODS: Two-hundred seventy-five patients included in the study were divided 
into four groups according to their mutations: Group 1, M694V homozygous; Group 
2, M694V-other; Group 3, other-other; and Group 4, no meaningful gene variants. 
Disease severity was evaluated using the Pras disease severity score. The 
association between Pras scores and other possible predictors was assessed by 
the multiple linear regression analysis.
RESULTS: In this study, 12.4% of all patients were in Group 1, 55.3% were in 
Group 2, 26.5% were in Group 3, and 5.8% were in Group 4. Pras scores were 
higher in Group 1 than in Groups 2, 3, and 4 (post hoc pairwise comparisons; 
P = .001, P < .001, and P = .001, respectively). Age at disease onset and age at 
diagnosis were found moderately and strongly correlated with Pras scores. 
Patients with moderate and severe disease were intensely involved in Group 1.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher Pras scores, earlier age of symptoms and diagnosis, more 
frequent arthritis and erysipelas-like erythema, and higher colchicine dose are 
closely associated with M694V homozygous familial Mediterranean fever patients. 
These patients also have mostly moderate and severe disease severity.

© Japan College of Rheumatology 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/mr/road007
PMID: 36688581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]