---
reference_id: "PMID:21502743"
title: Ultrasound diagnosis, management and prognosis in a consecutive series of 27 cases of fetal hydrops following maternal parvovirus B19 infection.
authors:
- Chauvet A
- Dewilde A
- Thomas D
- Joriot S
- Vaast P
- Houfflin-Debarge V
- Subtil D
journal: Fetal Diagn Ther
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1159/000323821
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ultrasound diagnosis, management and prognosis in a consecutive series of 27 cases of fetal hydrops following maternal parvovirus B19 infection.
**Authors:** Chauvet A, Dewilde A, Thomas D, Joriot S, Vaast P, Houfflin-Debarge V, Subtil D
**Journal:** Fetal Diagn Ther (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000323821](https://doi.org/10.1159/000323821)

## Content

1. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2011;30(1):41-7. doi: 10.1159/000323821. Epub 2011 Apr 18.

Ultrasound diagnosis, management and prognosis in a consecutive series of 27 
cases of fetal hydrops following maternal parvovirus B19 infection.

Chauvet A(1), Dewilde A, Thomas D, Joriot S, Vaast P, Houfflin-Debarge V, Subtil 
D.

Author information:
(1)Pôle d'Obstétrique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Université Lille II, Lille, 
France. chauvetagathe@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Fetal hydrops caused by anemia from parvovirus B19 infection 
(FH-B19) is rare. Doppler measurement of the middle cerebral artery peak 
systolic velocity (PSV-MCA) improves its prenatal diagnosis, but its frequency 
and prognosis are still poorly known. Despite improved survival due to in utero 
transfusions, the possibility of late neurological sequelae makes prognosis 
uncertain.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the frequency, management and prognosis of a consecutive 
series of FH-B19 observed over a 15-year period.
METHODS: Retrospective study of 27 cases of FH-B19, that is, 3/100,000 births, 
24 of them discovered during routine second-trimester ultrasound. All but 1 case 
(96.2%) had at least four of the six ultrasound signs that Saltzman et al. 
[Obstet Gynecol 1989;74:106-111] suggested as indicators of anemia. Of the 
fetuses tested, 80% had a PSV-MCA >1.5 MoM, also indicative of anemia. Of the 19 
fetuses treated by exchange transfusions, 11 were liveborn compared with 2 of 
the 6 not so treated (57.8 vs. 33.3%, NS). The survival rate was higher during 
the second half of the study period (23.1 vs. 71.4%, p < 0.02) for less severe 
anemia (p < 0.03) and for repeated transfusions (p = 0.03). In our series, 1 
case of prenatal cerebral atrophy was identified on screening. All 13 liveborn 
children appeared healthy at the age of 1 year.
CONCLUSION: In cases of fetal hydrops, Saltzman et al.'s ultrasound criteria and 
PSV-MCA measurement made it possible to determine the likelihood that anemia is 
the cause of the hydrops and to measure its intensity. Use of these techniques 
allowed us to choose the most appropriate treatment (transfusion or not, 
depending on the degree of anemia), and survival improved notably in our series.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000323821
PMID: 21502743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]