---
reference_id: "PMID:23765682"
title: Successful treatment of an overlapping choriocapillaritis between multifocal choroiditis and acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) with adalimumab (Humira™).
authors:
- Neri P
- Ricci F
- Giovannini A
- Arapi I
- De Felici C
- Cusumano A
- Mariotti C
journal: Int Ophthalmol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s10792-013-9801-z
keywords:
- Adalimumab
- Adult
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Choroid/blood supply
- Choroiditis/drug therapy
- Humans
- Male
- Retinal Diseases/drug therapy
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful treatment of an overlapping choriocapillaritis between multifocal choroiditis and acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) with adalimumab (Humira™).
**Authors:** Neri P, Ricci F, Giovannini A, Arapi I, De Felici C, Cusumano A, Mariotti C
**Journal:** Int Ophthalmol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10792-013-9801-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10792-013-9801-z)

## Content

1. Int Ophthalmol. 2014 Apr;34(2):359-64. doi: 10.1007/s10792-013-9801-z. Epub
2013  Jun 14.

Successful treatment of an overlapping choriocapillaritis between multifocal
choroiditis and acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) with adalimumab
(Humira™).

Neri P(1), Ricci F, Giovannini A, Arapi I, De Felici C, Cusumano A, Mariotti C.

Author information:
(1)Ocular Immunology Service, The Eye Clinic, Polytechnic University of Marche,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria-Ospedali Riuniti di Ancona, Via Conca 71,
60020, Ancona, Torrette, Italy, p.neri@univpm.it.

To report a case of overlapping choriocapillaritis that initially presented as
multifocal choroiditis (MFC) but later showed features compatible with acute
zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) resistant to standard immunosuppression
that responded only to adalimumad therapy. A 41-year-old patient presented with
multiple small, discrete yellow-whitish spots in both eyes, compatible with MFC.
A few weeks later, despite treatment with sub-Tenon and systemic
corticosteroids, a choroidal neovascularization occurred in the right eye. The
patient was treated with intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor.
After 2 months, reduced visual acuity, photopsia and visual field defect in the
left eye occurred. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography revealed
photoreceptor outer segment defects common to all choriocapillaritis. The
additional finding of an annular scotoma and a 360° ring on indocyanine green
angiography led us to make the diagnosis of presumed AZOOR. Despite the
combination of several immunosuppressive agents leading to temporary control of
the disease, the patient experienced a further worsening. At that point,
adalimumab was introduced, which led to an obvious improvement. This case
supports the hypothesis that two different entities of the so-called AZOOR
complex can be possible in the same eye, even asynchronously. In our case,
anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha monoclonal antibody therapy represented a valid
treatment option in a patient unresponsive to traditional immunosuppressive
treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/s10792-013-9801-z
PMID: 23765682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
