---
reference_id: "PMID:32878278"
title: "Established and Emerging Mechanisms in the Pathogenesis of Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy: A Multifaceted Disease."
authors:
- Gao S
- Puthenvedu D
- Lombardi R
- Chen SN
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/ijms21176320
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cardiomyopathies/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Established and Emerging Mechanisms in the Pathogenesis of Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy: A Multifaceted Disease.
**Authors:** Gao S, Puthenvedu D, Lombardi R, Chen SN
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms21176320](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21176320)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Aug 31;21(17):6320. doi: 10.3390/ijms21176320.

Established and Emerging Mechanisms in the Pathogenesis of Arrhythmogenic
Cardiomyopathy: A Multifaceted Disease.

Gao S(1), Puthenvedu D(1), Lombardi R(1)(2), Chen SN(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, Federico II University of Naples,
80131 Naples, Italy.

Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) is a heritable myocardial disease that
manifests with cardiac arrhythmias, syncope, sudden cardiac death, and heart
failure in the advanced stages. The pathological hallmark of ACM is a gradual
replacement of the myocardium by fibroadiposis, which typically starts from the
epicardium. Molecular genetic studies have identified causal mutations
predominantly in genes encoding for desmosomal proteins; however, non-desmosomal
causal mutations have also been described, including genes coding for nuclear
proteins, cytoskeleton componentsand proteins involved in excitation-contraction
coupling. Despite the poor prognosis, currently available treatments can only
partially control symptoms and to date there is no effective therapy for ACM.
Inhibition of the canonical Wnt/β-catenin pathway and activation of the Hippo
and the TGF-β pathways have been implicated in the pathogenesis of ACM. Yet, our
understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in the development of the
disease and the cell source of fibroadiposis remains incomplete. Elucidation of
the pathogenesis of the disease could facilitate targeted approaches for
treatment. In this manuscript we will provide a comprehensive review of the
proposed molecular and cellular mechanisms of the pathogenesis of ACM, including
the emerging evidence on abnormal calcium homeostasis and
inflammatory/autoimmune response. Moreover, we will propose novel hypothesis
about the role of epicardial cells and paracrine factors in the development of
the phenotype. Finally, we will discuss potential innovative therapeutic
approaches based on the growing knowledge in the field.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21176320
PMCID: PMC7503882
PMID: 32878278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
