---
reference_id: "PMID:15159330"
title: Mutation in the KCNQ1 gene leading to the short QT-interval syndrome.
authors:
- Bellocq C
- van Ginneken AC
- Bezzina CR
- Alders M
- Escande D
- Mannens MM
- Baró I
- Wilde AA
journal: Circulation
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000130409.72142.FE
keywords:
- Aged
- Animals
- COS Cells
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Electric Conductivity
- Electrocardiography
- Humans
- KCNQ Potassium Channels
- KCNQ1 Potassium Channel
- Male
- Mutation
- "Potassium Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- "Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated"
- Syndrome
- "Ventricular Fibrillation/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation in the KCNQ1 gene leading to the short QT-interval syndrome.
**Authors:** Bellocq C, van Ginneken AC, Bezzina CR, Alders M, Escande D, Mannens MM, Baró I, Wilde AA
**Journal:** Circulation (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.CIR.0000130409.72142.FE](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000130409.72142.FE)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2004 May 25;109(20):2394-7. doi:
10.1161/01.CIR.0000130409.72142.FE.

Mutation in the KCNQ1 gene leading to the short QT-interval syndrome.

Bellocq C(1), van Ginneken AC, Bezzina CR, Alders M, Escande D, Mannens MM, Baró
I, Wilde AA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Physiopathologie et de Pharmacologie Cellulaires et
Moléculaires, INSERM U533, Hôtel-Dieu, Nantes, France.

BACKGROUND: The electrocardiographic short QT-interval syndrome forms a distinct
clinical entity presenting with a high rate of sudden death and exceptionally
short QT intervals. The disorder has recently been linked to gain-of-function
mutation in KCNH2. The present study demonstrates that this disorder is
genetically heterogeneous and can also be caused by mutation in the KCNQ1 gene.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A 70-year man presented with idiopathic ventricular
fibrillation. Both immediately after the episode and much later, his QT interval
was abnormally short without any other physical or electrophysiological
anomalies. Analysis of candidate genes identified a g919c substitution in KCNQ1
encoding the K+ channel KvLQT1. Functional studies of the KvLQT1 V307L mutant
(alone or coexpressed with the wild-type channel, in the presence of IsK)
revealed a pronounced shift of the half-activation potential and an acceleration
of the activation kinetics leading to a gain of function in I(Ks). When
introduced in a human action potential computer model, the modified biophysical
parameters predicted repolarization shortening.
CONCLUSIONS: We present an alternative molecular mechanism for the short
QT-interval syndrome. Functional and computational studies of the KCNQ1 V307L
mutation identified in a patient with this disorder favor the association of
short QT with mutation in KCNQ1.

DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000130409.72142.FE
PMID: 15159330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
