---
reference_id: "PMID:41406155"
title: "The clinical phenotype of carriers of intermediate alleles in the huntingtin gene: A scoping review."
authors:
- van Hofslot A
- Oosterloo M
- de Jong JJA
- Andriessen RL
- de Bot ST
- Linden DEJ
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1177/18796397251397683
keywords:
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein/genetics
- Alleles
- Phenotype
- Heterozygote
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- Huntington Disease/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical phenotype of carriers of intermediate alleles in the huntingtin gene: A scoping review.
**Authors:** van Hofslot A, Oosterloo M, de Jong JJA, Andriessen RL, de Bot ST, Linden DEJ
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1177/18796397251397683](https://doi.org/10.1177/18796397251397683)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2026 Feb;15(1):3-19. doi: 10.1177/18796397251397683. Epub 
2025 Dec 17.

The clinical phenotype of carriers of intermediate alleles in the huntingtin 
gene: A scoping review.

van Hofslot A(1)(2)(3), Oosterloo M(1)(2), de Jong JJA(1)(4), Andriessen 
RL(1)(2), de Bot ST(3), Linden DEJ(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Mental Health and Neuroscience Research Institute (MHeNS), Faculty of Health, 
Medicine, and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Radiology & Nuclear Medicine, Maastricht University Medical 
Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, 
The Netherlands.

BackgroundHuntington's Disease (HD) is a hereditary neurodegenerative disorder 
caused by a cytosine-adenine-guanine (CAG) repeat expansion (CAG > 35) in the 
Huntingtin (HTT) gene. Intermediate alleles (IAs, CAG = 27-35) are generally not 
associated with HD. However, IA carriers with symptoms have been reported in 
literature.ObjectiveTo review the existing literature on IAs, in order to 
provide an overview of the clinical phenotype of IA 
carriers.MethodsPeer-reviewed articles published between 1993 and July 2024 from 
three databases (Embase, PubMed, and Web of Science) were included.ResultsIn 
case reports, a high percentage (90%) of IA carriers was reported to have 
symptoms (HD-related and -unrelated), or abnormalities in neuroimaging. Cohort 
studies also reported evidence of symptoms in IA carriers, although most cohorts 
did not obtain significant differences compared to controls.ConclusionBased on 
this review, we argue that there is not enough evidence to draw a clear 
conclusion on the clinical phenotype of individuals carrying an intermediate 
allele of the HTT gene. Literature reports symptomatic IA carriers, but reported 
symptoms are non-specific and common in the general population. Additionally, 
the quality of the data is suboptimal, due to lack of detailed symptom 
descriptions, the absence of differential diagnoses, a selection bias, and a 
considerable publication bias towards IA carriers with symptoms. More research 
is needed to provide a better insight into the clinical phenotype of IA 
carriers.

DOI: 10.1177/18796397251397683
PMCID: PMC12847463
PMID: 41406155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsDuring the 
past year, Mayke Oosterloo has received research grant funding from NWA-ORC 
(NWA.1389.20.244), Ministry of Education, Culture and Science: Biotech Booster 
(BIOB24071), Alzheimer Nederland, Dutch Huntington’s Disease Association, and a 
pending patent (EP23197746.3). Mayke Oosterloo is member of the scientific 
bioethics advisory committee (SBAC) of the European Huntington Disease Network, 
and takes part in clinical trials sponsored by PRILENIA and WAVE. None of these 
sponsors were involved in the design, execution, interpretation, or writing of 
this study. Susanne T. de Bot: Leiden University Medical Center receives funding 
from the European Huntington’s Disease Network (EHDN) and Cure HD Initiative 
(CHDI), is involved in the EU Horizon 2020 project: Innovative Medicines 
Initiative (IMI) 2 (IDEA_FAST), has received research grant funding from NWA-ORC 
(NWA.1389.20.244), and takes part in clinical trials sponsored by PRILENIA, PTC 
Therapeutics, WAVE, and VICO Therapeutics. Susanne T. de Bot is member of the HD 
Expert Advisory Panel for the PTC518 phase 3 program (PTC Therapeutics). None of 
these sponsors were involved in the design, execution, interpretation, or 
writing of this study. The remaining authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.