---
reference_id: "PMID:31920975"
title: Genotype-Phenotype Relationships and Endocrine Findings in Prader-Willi Syndrome.
authors:
- Costa RA
- Ferreira IR
- Cintra HA
- Gomes LHF
- Guida LDC
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00864
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-Phenotype Relationships and Endocrine Findings in Prader-Willi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Costa RA, Ferreira IR, Cintra HA, Gomes LHF, Guida LDC
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2019.00864](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2019.00864)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2019 Dec 13;10:864. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2019.00864.  eCollection 2019.

Genotype-Phenotype Relationships and Endocrine Findings in Prader-Willi 
Syndrome.

Costa RA(1), Ferreira IR(1), Cintra HA(1), Gomes LHF(1), Guida LDC(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Alta Complexidade, Instituto Nacional da Saúde da Mulher, da 
Criança e Do Adolescente Fernandes Figueira, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a complex imprinting disorder related to genomic 
errors that inactivate paternally-inherited genes on chromosome 15q11-q13 with 
severe implications on endocrine, cognitive and neurologic systems, metabolism, 
and behavior. The absence of expression of one or more genes at the PWS critical 
region contributes to different phenotypes. There are three molecular mechanisms 
of occurrence: paternal deletion of the 15q11-q13 region; maternal uniparental 
disomy 15; or imprinting defects. Although there is a clinical diagnostic 
consensus criteria, DNA methylation status must be confirmed through genetic 
testing. The endocrine system can be the most affected in PWS, and growth 
hormone replacement therapy provides improvement in growth, body composition, 
and behavioral and physical attributes. A key feature of the syndrome is the 
hypothalamic dysfunction that may be the basis of several endocrine symptoms. 
Clinical and molecular complexity in PWS enhances the importance of genetic 
diagnosis in therapeutic definition and genetic counseling. So far, no single 
gene mutation has been described to contribute to this genetic disorder or 
related to any exclusive symptoms. Here we proposed to review individually 
disrupted genes within the PWS critical region and their reported clinical 
phenotypes related to the syndrome. While genes such as MKRN3, MAGEL2, NDN, or 
SNORD115 do not address the full spectrum of PWS symptoms and are less likely to 
have causal implications in PWS major clinical signs, SNORD116 has emerged as a 
critical, and possibly, a determinant candidate in PWS, in the recent years. 
Besides that, the understanding of the biology of the PWS SNORD genes is fairly 
low at the present. These non-coding RNAs exhibit all the hallmarks of RNA 
methylation guides and can be incorporated into ribonucleoprotein complexes with 
possible hypothalamic and endocrine functions. Also, DNA conservation between 
SNORD sequences across placental mammals strongly suggests that they have a 
functional role as RNA entities on an evolutionary basis. The broad clinical 
spectrum observed in PWS and the absence of a clear genotype-phenotype specific 
correlation imply that the numerous genes involved in the syndrome have an 
additive deleterious effect on different phenotypes when deficiently expressed.

Copyright © 2019 Costa, Ferreira, Cintra, Gomes and Guida.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00864
PMCID: PMC6923197
PMID: 31920975