---
reference_id: "PMID:987768"
title: Lowering brain phenylalanine levels by giving other large neutral amino acids. A new experimental therapeutic approach to phenylketonuria.
authors:
- Andersen AE
- Avins L
journal: Arch Neurol
year: '1976'
doi: 10.1001/archneur.1976.00500100018008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lowering brain phenylalanine levels by giving other large neutral amino acids. A new experimental therapeutic approach to phenylketonuria.
**Authors:** Andersen AE, Avins L
**Journal:** Arch Neurol (1976)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archneur.1976.00500100018008](https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.1976.00500100018008)

## Content

1. Arch Neurol. 1976 Oct;33(10):684-6. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1976.00500100018008.

Lowering brain phenylalanine levels by giving other large neutral amino acids. A 
new experimental therapeutic approach to phenylketonuria.

Andersen AE, Avins L.

Hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase activity was inhibitied in F344 rat pups by 
injection with parachlorophenylalanine on days 7, 8, and 9 after birth. On day 
10, animals were divided into control and experimental groups. Controls received 
an injection of phenylalanine, with the characteristic phenylketonuria (PKU) 
changes of elevated phenylalanine but normal tyrosine levels. The experimental 
group received a similar injection of phenylalanine but in addition received 
either a single amino acid or a combination of amino acids from the large 
neutral amino acids (LNAA) group. The LNAA group of amino acids--phenylalanine, 
tyrosine, tryptophan, leucine, isoleucine, and valine--compete with each other 
for entry into brain by a common transport mechanism. Compared with controls, 
the experimental group had lower phenylalanine levels in brain, but no change in 
serum levels, giving a lower brain-serum phenylalanine ratio. Increasing the 
serum concentrations of amino acids competitive with phenylalanine for transport 
across the blood brain barrier might form an alternative approach to effective 
dietary treatment of PKU.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1976.00500100018008
PMID: 987768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]