---
reference_id: "PMID:20442355"
title: Role of tetrabenazine for Huntington's disease-associated chorea.
authors:
- Poon LH
- Kang GA
- Lee AJ
journal: Ann Pharmacother
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1345/aph.1M582
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of tetrabenazine for Huntington's disease-associated chorea.
**Authors:** Poon LH, Kang GA, Lee AJ
**Journal:** Ann Pharmacother (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1345/aph.1M582](https://doi.org/10.1345/aph.1M582)

## Content

1. Ann Pharmacother. 2010 Jun;44(6):1080-9. doi: 10.1345/aph.1M582. Epub 2010 May
 4.

Role of tetrabenazine for Huntington's disease-associated chorea.

Poon LH(1), Kang GA, Lee AJ.

Author information:
(1)University of California at San Francisco, CA, USA. Linda.poon@va.gov

OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and safety of 
tetrabenazine for the treatment of Huntington's disease (HD)-associated chorea.
DATA SOURCES: Primary literature and review articles were obtained through a 
PubMed search (1959-November 2009) using the terms tetrabenazine, HD, chorea, 
and hyperkinetic movement disorders. A bibliographic search was performed on 
selected articles.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All English-language articles identified 
from the data sources were reviewed. Studies including greater than 10 patients 
and a direct comparative study with primarily HD-associated chorea were included 
in the review.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Tetrabenazine is the first drug approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for the management of HD-associated chorea. Tetrabenazine 
binds reversibly to the type 2 vesicular monoamine transporters and has been 
shown to inhibit monoamine uptake in presynaptic vesicles, resulting in 
monoamine depletion. The duration of the antichorea effect of tetrabenazine has 
been reported to be approximately 5.5 hours. Tetrabenazine is extensively 
metabolized hepatically by the CYP2D6 enzyme to its primary active metabolite, 
alpha-dihydrotetrabenazine. The half-life of alpha-dihydrotetrabenazine is 4-8 
hours. Clinical trials demonstrated that tetrabenazine reduces chorea, on 
average, by 5 units based upon the chorea score from the Unified Huntington's 
Disease Rating Scale. The most common adverse effects reported include sedation, 
drowsiness, parkinsonism, and depression. Rarely, corrected QT interval 
prolongation, orthostatic hypotension, and hyperprolactinemia have been 
reported. Tetrabenazine also has a black box warning for increasing the risk of 
depression and suicidality.
CONCLUSIONS: Tetrabenazine can provide significant benefit in the treatment of 
chorea associated with HD. Given the potential adverse effects of tetrabenazine, 
health-care providers need to screen patients carefully prior to initiating 
treatment with this medication. In the future, additional long-term and 
comparative studies would be useful for further clarification of the role of 
tetrabenazine in the treatment of HD-associated chorea.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1M582
PMID: 20442355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]