---
reference_id: "PMID:30452289"
title: Novel Splice-Site Mutation of KRT1 Underlies Diffuse Palmoplantar Keratoderma in a Large Chinese Pedigree.
authors:
- Tang ZL
- Wang T
- Xiao T
- Wang YQ
- Ma CW
- Niu XW
- Xiao SX
- Wang XP
journal: Genet Test Mol Biomarkers
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2018.0154
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Splice-Site Mutation of KRT1 Underlies Diffuse Palmoplantar Keratoderma in a Large Chinese Pedigree.
**Authors:** Tang ZL, Wang T, Xiao T, Wang YQ, Ma CW, Niu XW, Xiao SX, Wang XP
**Journal:** Genet Test Mol Biomarkers (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1089/gtmb.2018.0154](https://doi.org/10.1089/gtmb.2018.0154)

## Content

1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2018 Nov 21. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2018.0154. Online
ahead of print.

Novel Splice-Site Mutation of KRT1 Underlies Diffuse Palmoplantar Keratoderma in
a Large Chinese Pedigree.

Tang ZL(1), Wang T(1), Xiao T(1), Wang YQ(1), Ma CW(2), Niu XW(1), Xiao SX(1),
Wang XP(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Dermatology and The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University , Xi'an, People's Republic of China .
(2)2 Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University , Xi'an, People's Republic of China .

AIMS: To identify potential causative gene mutations in a large Han Chinese
pedigree with diffuse nonepidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma (NEPPK).
METHODS: We enrolled 11 patients and 8 healthy individuals from a pedigree with
NEPPK and 100 randomly selected healthy controls. Biopsy samples were obtained
from the proband. Genomic DNA was extracted from a peripheral blood sample from
each participant. Mutation detection via polymerase chain reaction and Sanger
sequencing of relevant potential causative genes, including KRT1, KRT6C, KRT10,
KRT16, AQP5, and SERPINB7, was performed. Comparisons were made between
sequencing outcomes and currently available reference genome databases,
including HGMD Pro, Pubmed, 1000 Genomics, and dbSNP.
RESULTS: Histological findings, clinical features, and medical history were in
accordance with the diagnosis of diffuse NEPPK. We identified a novel
splice-site mutation c.1255-1G > C in intron 6 of KRT1 in all individuals with
NEPPK in the pedigree.
CONCLUSIONS: Diffuse NEPPK is a relatively rare subtype of palmoplantar
keratoderma. The results of this study expand the spectrum of KRT1 mutations in
diffuse NEPPK and provide insights into the understanding of its underlying
pathological mechanisms and phenotype-genotype correlations.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2018.0154
PMID: 30452289
