---
reference_id: "PMID:26616476"
title: "Anti-TNF-α therapies for the treatment of Crohn's disease: the past, present and future."
authors:
- Berns M
- Hommes DW
journal: Expert Opin Investig Drugs
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1517/13543784.2016.1126247
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-TNF-α therapies for the treatment of Crohn's disease: the past, present and future.
**Authors:** Berns M, Hommes DW
**Journal:** Expert Opin Investig Drugs (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1517/13543784.2016.1126247](https://doi.org/10.1517/13543784.2016.1126247)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2016;25(2):129-43. doi: 
10.1517/13543784.2016.1126247. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Anti-TNF-α therapies for the treatment of Crohn's disease: the past, present and 
future.

Berns M(1), Hommes DW(1).

Author information:
(1)a Center for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, Melvin and Bren Simon Digestive 
Diseases, David Geffen School of Medicine , University of California , Los 
Angeles , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Anti-TNF-α therapy is a novel approach that has transformed the 
way moderate-to-severe Crohn's disease (CD) is treated and has significantly 
improved clinical outcomes of patients with enhanced remission induction and 
maintenance efficacies. As a result, anti-TNF-α agents have become the primary 
cost driver in the treatment of CD, as the frequency of hospitalizations and 
surgical interventions have been drastically reduced.
AREAS COVERED: In the review, the authors cover current anti-TNF-α treatments 
for CD including efficacy, mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetics and safety. In 
addition, the authors discuss future anti-TNF-α agents currently in the 
development pipeline including biosimilars, golimumab, oral AVX-470, 
TNF-α-kinoid vaccine, and non-biologic HMPL-004.
EXPERT OPINION: While new therapeutics are in the pipeline like anti-integrin 
and anti-interleukin therapeutics, anti-TNF-α therapy remains at the forefront 
of CD treatment due to its long-term efficacy and safety profiles. The next 
horizon for new anti-TNF-α agents is biosimilars, which offer comparable safety 
and effectiveness to the originator molecules. Biosimilars promise to expand 
accessibility to anti-TNF-α therapy while significantly reducing the cost burden 
to patients and healthcare systems.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.2016.1126247
PMID: 26616476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]