---
reference_id: "PMID:29199884"
title: "Congenital cavitary optic disc anomaly and Axenfeld's anomaly in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: A case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Ali MH
- Azar NF
- Aakalu V
- Chau FY
- Abbasian J
- Setabutr P
- Maumenee IH
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2017.1408850
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital cavitary optic disc anomaly and Axenfeld's anomaly in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: A case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Ali MH, Azar NF, Aakalu V, Chau FY, Abbasian J, Setabutr P, Maumenee IH
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2017.1408850](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2017.1408850)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2018 Apr;39(2):271-274. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2017.1408850. 
Epub 2017 Dec 4.

Congenital cavitary optic disc anomaly and Axenfeld's anomaly in Wolf-Hirschhorn 
syndrome: A case report and review of the literature.

Ali MH(1), Azar NF(1), Aakalu V(1), Chau FY(1), Abbasian J(1), Setabutr P(1), 
Maumenee IH(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences , University of Illinois at 
Chicago, Illinois Eye and Ear Infirmary , Chicago , IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome is a rare genetic syndrome caused by a 
heterozygous deletion on chromosome 4p16.3 and is characterized by a "Greek 
warrior helmet" facies, hypotonia, developmental delay, seizures, structural 
central nervous system defects, intrauterine growth restriction, sketelal 
anomalies, cardiac defects, abnormal tooth development, and hearing loss. A 
variety of ocular manifestations may occur in up to 40% of patients.
MATERIALS/METHODS: We report the genetic testing results, systemic findings, and 
complete ophthalmologic examination findings in a patient with Wolf-Hirschhorn 
syndrome, including external photography, RetCam3 (Clarity Medical Systems, 
Pleasonton, CA) goniography, and fundus photography. In addition, we review the 
literature on ocular manifestations of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed an unbalanced translocation between 
4p16.3-15.3 and Xp22.33-p22.2. Systemic findings included "Greek warrior helmet" 
facies, hypotonia, cleft palate, neonatal tooth eruption, talipes equinovarus, 
bilateral clinodactyly, clitoromegaly, partial agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
bilateral renal hypoplasia, and two atrial septal defects. Ocular findings 
included normal intraocular pressures and corneal diameters, large-angle 
exotropia, downward slanting of the palpebral fissures, absent eyelid creases, 
upper and lower eyelid retraction with shortage of the anterior eyelid lamellae, 
euryblepharon, lagophthalmos with poor Bell's reflex and exposure keratopathy, 
hypertelorism, Axenfeld's anomaly, megalopapillae, and cavitary optic disc 
anomaly.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe the ocular phenotype of a patient with Wolf-Hirschhorn 
syndrome, including the rare descriptions and photographs of Axenfeld's anomaly, 
megalopapilla, and cavitary optic disc anomaly in this condition.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2017.1408850
PMCID: PMC5823738
PMID: 29199884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest The authors report no 
conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and 
writing of this article.