---
reference_id: "PMID:31521978"
title: The clinical responses of TNIP2-ALK fusion variants to crizotinib in ALK-rearranged lung adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Feng T
- Chen Z
- Gu J
- Wang Y
- Zhang J
- Min L
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2019.08.032
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- "Adenocarcinoma of Lung/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- Crizotinib/therapeutic use
- Female
- Gene Rearrangement
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Prognosis
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical responses of TNIP2-ALK fusion variants to crizotinib in ALK-rearranged lung adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Feng T, Chen Z, Gu J, Wang Y, Zhang J, Min L
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2019.08.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2019.08.032)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2019 Nov;137:19-22. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2019.08.032. Epub 2019
 Aug 31.

The clinical responses of TNIP2-ALK fusion variants to crizotinib in
ALK-rearranged lung adenocarcinoma.

Feng T(1), Chen Z(1), Gu J(2), Wang Y(1), Zhang J(2), Min L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Northern Jiangsu
People's Hospital, The First Clinical College of Dalian Medical University,
Yangzhou 225001, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Northern Jiangsu
People's Hospital, Clinical Medical College of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou
225001, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Northern Jiangsu
People's Hospital, The First Clinical College of Dalian Medical University,
Yangzhou 225001, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: minlingfeng@126.com.

OBJECTIVES: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) has been proven to be another
driver oncogene that accounts for 3%-7% of non-small-cell lung cancer, and it is
more common in young patients and nonsmokers. ALK rearrangements have been
previously identified in about 5.1% of lung adenocarcinoma, including EML4-ALK
fusion variants, KIF5B-ALK and TFG-ALK. However, a TNIP2-ALK fusion has not been
reported in lung adenocarcinoma. Herein, we described a rare case of
ALK-rearranged lung adenocarcinoma responding to crizotinib.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay and comprehensive
next-generation sequencing (NGS) were performed on the aspirated biopsied tumor
tissue.
RESULTS: The IHC analysis revealed an ALK-positive tumor, while NGS detected a
TNIP2-ALK fusion. The patient achieved continuous remission after treatment with
crizotinib (250 mg, twice a day).
CONCLUSION: This case provides valuable information on the response to
crizotinib of patients with TNIP2-ALK fusion and better understanding of ALK-TKI
applications in the future. NGS is a new method that can offer effective
detection of gene fusion and gene mutations.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2019.08.032
PMID: 31521978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
