---
reference_id: "PMID:36428031"
title: Rare case of dengue encephalitis with extensive brain lesions from Pakistan.
authors:
- Hussain T
- Rashid Z
- Kumar J
- Kumar D
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-250271
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare case of dengue encephalitis with extensive brain lesions from Pakistan.
**Authors:** Hussain T, Rashid Z, Kumar J, Kumar D
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2022-250271](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2022-250271)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2022 Nov 25;15(11):e250271. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-250271.

Rare case of dengue encephalitis with extensive brain lesions from Pakistan.

Hussain T(1)(2), Rashid Z(3), Kumar J(4), Kumar D(3).

Author information:
(1)Neurology, Bolan Medical College, Quetta, Baluchistan, Pakistan 
taimoor_naran@yahoo.com.
(2)Neurology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(3)Internal Medicine, Hayatabad Medical Complex, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(4)Internal medicine, Khyber Medical College, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, 
Pakistan.

Dengue infection is common in 129 countries including Pakistan, with an 
estimated 390 million dengue virus infections per year. Asia accounts for 70% of 
the actual burden. Clinical signs and symptoms of dengue include a high fever 
(40°C/104 °F) accompanied by two of the following symptoms during the febrile 
phase: severe headache, pain behind the eyes, muscle and joint pains, nausea, 
vomiting, swollen glands and rash. Severe dengue is a potentially fatal 
complication, due to plasma leaking, fluid accumulation, respiratory distress, 
severe bleeding or organ impairment. Dengue virus does not usually cause 
neurological manifestations, unlike other arboviral infections. Encephalopathy 
is the most common neurological complication. Encephalitis is rare 
manifestation. We report a rare case of dengue encephalitis from Pakistan, with 
extensive brain lesions involving the thalamus, cerebellar vermis and 
frontoparietal periventricular regions. Therefore, we suggest dengue 
encephalitis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of fever with 
altered sensorium, especially in Asian countries such as Pakistan where dengue 
is rampant as dengue encephalitis can be fatal at times.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2022. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2022-250271
PMCID: PMC9703312
PMID: 36428031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.