---
reference_id: "PMID:32819890"
title: Homozygous variants of EDAR underlying hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in three consanguineous families.
authors:
- Khan SA
- Rukan A
- Ullah A
- Bibi N
- Humayun M
- Ullah W
- Raza R
- Muhammad N
- Ahmad W
- Khan S
- E-Kalsoom U
journal: Eur J Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1684/ejd.2020.3844
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Consanguinity
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, pathology"
- Edar Receptor/genetics
- Edar-Associated Death Domain Protein/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pakistan
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous variants of EDAR underlying hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in three consanguineous families.
**Authors:** Khan SA, Rukan A, Ullah A, Bibi N, Humayun M, Ullah W, Raza R, Muhammad N, Ahmad W, Khan S, E-Kalsoom U
**Journal:** Eur J Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1684/ejd.2020.3844](https://doi.org/10.1684/ejd.2020.3844)

## Content

1. Eur J Dermatol. 2020 Aug 1;30(4):408-416. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2020.3844.

Homozygous variants of EDAR underlying hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in 
three consanguineous families.

Khan SA(1), Rukan A(2), Ullah A(3), Bibi N(4), Humayun M(1), Ullah W(1), Raza 
R(5), Muhammad N(1), Ahmad W(5), Khan S(1), E-Kalsoom U(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology & Genetic Engineering, Kohat University of 
Science & Technology, Kohat, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Hazara University, Mansehra, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, 
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Medical 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Bioinformatics, Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University, 
Peshawar, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a congenital anomaly 
characterized by hypohydrosis, hypotrichosis and hypodontia. Mutations in at 
least four genes (EDAR, EDARADD, WNT10A, TRAF6) have been reported to cause both 
autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant forms of HED. Mutations in two other 
genes (EDA and IKBKG) have been reported to cause X-linked HED.
OBJECTIVES: To clinically characterize three consanguineous families (A-C) 
segregating with autosomal recessive HED and identify possible disease-causing 
variants of EDAR and EDARADD genes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The genes, EDAR and EDARADD, were sequenced in Family A 
and C, and exome sequencing was performed in Family B. Additionally, in Family A 
and C, the effect of the identified variants was examined by analysis of EDAR 
mRNA, extracted from hair follicles from both affected and unaffected members.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis revealed three possible disease-causing EDAR variants 
including a novel splice acceptor site variant (IVS3-1G > A) in Family A and two 
previously reported mutations (p.[Ala26Val], p.[Arg25*]) in the two other 
families. Previously, the nonsense variant p.(Arg25*) was reported only in the 
heterozygous state. Analysis of the RNA, extracted from hair follicles, revealed 
skipping of a downstream exon in EDAR and complete degradation of EDAR mRNA in 
affected members in family A and C, respectively. Computational modelling 
validated the pathogenic effect of the two variants identified in Family B and 
C.
CONCLUSION: The three variants reported here expand the spectrum of EDAR 
mutations associated with HED which may further facilitate genetic counselling 
of families segregating with similar disorders in the Pakistani population.

DOI: 10.1684/ejd.2020.3844
PMID: 32819890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]