---
reference_id: "PMID:11733556"
title: A mutation in the human MPDU1 gene causes congenital disorder of glycosylation type If (CDG-If).
authors:
- Kranz C
- Denecke J
- Lehrman MA
- Ray S
- Kienz P
- Kreissel G
- Sagi D
- Peter-Katalinic J
- Freeze HH
- Schmid T
- Jackowski-Dohrmann S
- Harms E
- Marquardt T
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1172/JCI13635
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Blood Protein Electrophoresis
- CHO Cells
- Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics
- Cricetinae
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Oligosaccharides/analysis
- "Repressor Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in the human MPDU1 gene causes congenital disorder of glycosylation type If (CDG-If).
**Authors:** Kranz C, Denecke J, Lehrman MA, Ray S, Kienz P, Kreissel G, Sagi D, Peter-Katalinic J, Freeze HH, Schmid T, Jackowski-Dohrmann S, Harms E, Marquardt T
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI13635](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI13635)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2001 Dec;108(11):1613-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI13635.

A mutation in the human MPDU1 gene causes congenital disorder of glycosylation 
type If (CDG-If).

Kranz C(1), Denecke J, Lehrman MA, Ray S, Kienz P, Kreissel G, Sagi D, 
Peter-Katalinic J, Freeze HH, Schmid T, Jackowski-Dohrmann S, Harms E, Marquardt 
T.

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinderheilkunde, Münster, Germany.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2001 Dec;108(11):1579-82. doi: 10.1172/JCI14498.

We describe a new congenital disorder of glycosylation, CDG-If. The patient has 
severe psychomotor retardation, seizures, failure to thrive, dry skin and 
scaling with erythroderma, and impaired vision. CDG-If is caused by a defect in 
the gene MPDU1, the human homologue of hamster Lec35, and is the first disorder 
to affect the use, rather than the biosynthesis, of donor substrates for 
lipid-linked oligosaccharides. This leads to the synthesis of incomplete and 
poorly transferred precursor oligosaccharides lacking both mannose and glucose 
residues. The patient has a homozygous point mutation (221T-->C, L74S) in a 
semiconserved amino acid of MPDU1. Chinese hamster ovary Lec35 cells lack a 
functional Lec35 gene and synthesize truncated lipid-linked oligosaccharides 
similar to the patient's. They lack glucose and mannose residues donated by 
Glc-P-Dol and Man-P-Dol. Transfection with the normal human MPDU1 allele nearly 
completely restores normal glycosylation, whereas transfection with the 
patient's MPDU1 allele only weakly restores normal glycosylation. This work 
provides a new clinical picture for another CDG that may involve synthesis of 
multiple types of glycoconjugates.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI13635
PMCID: PMC200991
PMID: 11733556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]