---
reference_id: "PMID:28011147"
title: Interleukin-15 Is Associated with Severity and Mortality in Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.
authors:
- Su SC
- Mockenhaupt M
- Wolkenstein P
- Dunant A
- Le Gouvello S
- Chen CB
- Chosidow O
- Valeyrie-Allanore L
- Bellon T
- Sekula P
- Wang CW
- Schumacher M
- Kardaun SH
- Hung SI
- Roujeau JC
- Chung WH
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2016.11.034
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Chemokines/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cytokines/blood
- Female
- Humans
- Interleukin-15/blood
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Registries
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/blood, mortality, physiopathology"
- Taiwan
- Up-Regulation
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interleukin-15 Is Associated with Severity and Mortality in Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.
**Authors:** Su SC, Mockenhaupt M, Wolkenstein P, Dunant A, Le Gouvello S, Chen CB, Chosidow O, Valeyrie-Allanore L, Bellon T, Sekula P, Wang CW, Schumacher M, Kardaun SH, Hung SI, Roujeau JC, Chung WH
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jid.2016.11.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2016.11.034)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2017 May;137(5):1065-1073. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2016.11.034. 
Epub 2016 Dec 21.

Interleukin-15 Is Associated with Severity and Mortality in Stevens-Johnson 
Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.

Su SC(1), Mockenhaupt M(2), Wolkenstein P(3), Dunant A(4), Le Gouvello S(5), 
Chen CB(6), Chosidow O(3), Valeyrie-Allanore L(3), Bellon T(7), Sekula P(8), 
Wang CW(9), Schumacher M(8), Kardaun SH(10), Hung SI(11), Roujeau JC(12), Chung 
WH(13).

Author information:
(1)Whole-Genome Research Core Laboratory of Human Diseases, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan; Department of Dermatology, Drug Hypersensitivity 
Clinical and Research Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Linkou and 
Keelung, Taiwan.
(2)Dokumentationszentrum schwerer Hautreaktionen, Department of Dermatology, 
Faculty of Medicine and Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.
(4)Biostatistics and Epidemiology Unit, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(5)University Medical Center Henri Mondor, ImmunoBiology Department and Inserm 
U955, France.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Drug Hypersensitivity Clinical and Research 
Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Linkou and Keelung, Taiwan; 
Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Chang Gung Immunology Consortium, Chang Gung 
Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(7)Research Unit, Hospital La Paz Health Research Institute (IdiPAZ), Madrid, 
Spain.
(8)Institute for Medical Biometry and Statistics, Faculty of Medicine and 
Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Drug Hypersensitivity Clinical and Research 
Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Linkou and Keelung, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Reference Center for Cutaneous Adverse Reactions, 
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.
(11)Institute of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Infection and Immunity 
Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France. 
Electronic address: jean-claude.roujeau@wanadoo.fr.
(13)Whole-Genome Research Core Laboratory of Human Diseases, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan; Department of Dermatology, Drug Hypersensitivity 
Clinical and Research Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Linkou and 
Keelung, Taiwan; Chang Gung Immunology Consortium, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital 
and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of Dermatology, Xiamen Chang Gung 
Hospital, Xiamen, China. Electronic address: chung1@cgmh.org.tw.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2017 May;137(5):1004-1008. doi: 
10.1016/j.jid.2017.01.003.

Early diagnosis and prognosis monitoring for Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic 
epidermal necrolysis (TEN) still remain a challenge. This study aims to explore 
any cytokine/chemokine with prognostic potential in Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome/TEN. Through screening a panel of 28 serological factors, IL-6, IL-8, 
IL-15, tumor necrosis factor-α, and granulysin were upregulated in patients with 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome/TEN and selected for the further validation in total 
155 patients with Stevens-Johnson syndrome/TEN, including 77 from Taiwan and 78 
from the Registry of Severe Cutaneous Adverse Reactions. Among these factors 
evaluated, the levels of IL-15 (r = 0.401; P < 0.001) and granulysin (r = 0.223; 
P = 0.026) were significantly correlated with the disease severity in 112 
samples after excluding patients with insufficient data to calculate the score 
of TEN. In addition, IL-15 was also associated with mortality (P = 0.002; odds 
ratio, 1.09; 95% confidence interval, 1.03-1.14; P = 0.001; adjusted odds ratio, 
1.10; 95% confidence interval, 1.04-1.16). Consistent results were obtained 
after the exclusion of Taiwanese patients with sepsis to rule out possible 
confounders. Moreover, IL-15 was shown to enhance cytotoxicity of cultured 
natural killer cells and blister cells from patients with TEN. Our findings 
highlight a usefulness of IL-15 in prognosis monitoring and therapeutic 
intervention of this devastating condition.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2016.11.034
PMID: 28011147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]