---
reference_id: "PMID:36675121"
title: "Leigh Syndrome: Spectrum of Molecular Defects and Clinical Features in Russia."
authors:
- Kistol D
- Tsygankova P
- Krylova T
- Bychkov I
- Itkis Y
- Nikolaeva E
- Mikhailova S
- Sumina M
- Pechatnikova N
- Kurbatov S
- Bostanova F
- Migiaev O
- Zakharova E
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24021597
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leigh Disease/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Russia
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Aspartate-tRNA Ligase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leigh Syndrome: Spectrum of Molecular Defects and Clinical Features in Russia.
**Authors:** Kistol D, Tsygankova P, Krylova T, Bychkov I, Itkis Y, Nikolaeva E, Mikhailova S, Sumina M, Pechatnikova N, Kurbatov S, Bostanova F, Migiaev O, Zakharova E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24021597](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24021597)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 13;24(2):1597. doi: 10.3390/ijms24021597.

Leigh Syndrome: Spectrum of Molecular Defects and Clinical Features in Russia.

Kistol D(1), Tsygankova P(1), Krylova T(1), Bychkov I(1), Itkis Y(1), Nikolaeva 
E(2), Mikhailova S(3), Sumina M(4), Pechatnikova N(5), Kurbatov S(6)(7), 
Bostanova F(1), Migiaev O(8), Zakharova E(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Medical Genetics, 115522 Moscow, Russia.
(2)Research and Clinical Institute of Pediatrics Named After Yuri Veltischev of 
the Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University of the Ministry of 
Health of the Russian Federation, 125412 Moscow, Russia.
(3)Russian Children's Clinical Hospital, 119571 Moscow, Russia.
(4)State Healthcare Institution of Sverdlovsk Region "Clinical and Diagnostic 
Center "Mother's and Child Health Protection", 620067 Ekaterinburg, Russia.
(5)Morozov Children's City Clinical Hospital, 119049 Moscow, Russia.
(6)Research Institute of Experimental Biology and Medicine, Voronezh State 
Medical University Named after N. N. Burdenko, 394036 Voronezh, Russia.
(7)Medical Center "Zdorovii Rebenok", 394077 Voronezh, Russia.
(8)Gemotest Laboratory LLC., 123112 Moscow, Russia.

Leigh syndrome (LS), also known as infantile subacute necrotizing 
encephalopathy, is the most frequent mitochondrial disorder in children. 
Recently, more than 80 genes have been associated with LS, which greatly 
complicates the diagnosis. In this article, we present clinical and molecular 
findings of 219 patients with LS and give the detailed description of three 
cases with rare findings in nuclear genes MORC2, NARS2 and VPS13D, demonstrating 
wide genetic heterogeneity of this mitochondrial disease. The most common cause 
of LS in Russian patients are pathogenic variants in the SURF1 gene (44.3% of 
patients). The most frequent pathogenic variant is c.845_846delCT (66.0% of 
mutant alleles; 128/192), which is also widespread in Eastern Europe. Five main 
LS genes, SURF1, SCO2, MT-ATP6, MT-ND5 and PDHA1, account for 70% of all LS 
cases in the Russian Federation. Using next generation sequencing (NGS) 
technique, we were able to detect pathogenic variants in other nuclear genes: 
NDUFV1, NDUFS2, NDUFS8, NDUFAF5, NDUFAF6, NDUFA10, SUCLG1, GFM2, COX10, PMPCB, 
NARS2, PDHB and SLC19A3, including two genes previously associated with 
Leigh-like phenotypes-MORC2 and VPS13D. We found 49 previously undescribed 
nucleotide variants, including two deep intronic variants which affect splicing.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24021597
PMCID: PMC9865855
PMID: 36675121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.