---
reference_id: "PMID:12094333"
title: Present and future treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Crinò L
- Cappuzzo F
journal: Semin Oncol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1053/sonc.2002.34266
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Present and future treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Crinò L, Cappuzzo F
**Journal:** Semin Oncol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1053/sonc.2002.34266](https://doi.org/10.1053/sonc.2002.34266)

## Content

1. Semin Oncol. 2002 Jun;29(3 Suppl 9):9-16. doi: 10.1053/sonc.2002.34266.

Present and future treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Crinò L(1), Cappuzzo F.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, Bellaria Hospital, 
Bologna, Italy.

Platinum-based chemotherapy is considered the standard treatment for advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Several phase II trials using cisplatin in 
combination with new chemotherapeutic agents, such as gemcitabine, the taxanes, 
vinorelbine, and irinotecan, showed impressive response rates and suggested an 
improvement in overall survival. Large phase III trials comparing these 
second-generation cisplatin regimens indicated a substantial equivalence of new 
combinations, marginally improving the outcome of patients over the 
first-generation platinum-based regimens. Phase III trials have not yet shown 
dramatic advantages for either multiple-drug regimens, with nonoverlapping 
mechanisms of action and toxicity, or nonplatinum doublets, with efficacy and/or 
toxicity profiles superior to those of platinum-based chemotherapy. Chemotherapy 
in advanced non-small cell lung cancer has reached a plateau, and it is clear 
that new approaches are required. These should include prevention, screening, 
and early detection, and the use of novel treatments based on our understanding 
of the biology and molecular biology of this disease.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/sonc.2002.34266
PMID: 12094333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]