---
reference_id: "PMID:31158068"
title: Relationship Between Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Nature Killer Cells.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Chen Q
- Feng H
journal: Viral Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1089/vim.2018.0131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship Between Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Nature Killer Cells.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Chen Q, Feng H
**Journal:** Viral Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1089/vim.2018.0131](https://doi.org/10.1089/vim.2018.0131)

## Content

1. Viral Immunol. 2019 Jul/Aug;32(6):263-268. doi: 10.1089/vim.2018.0131. Epub
2019  Jun 3.

Relationship Between Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Nature Killer 
Cells.

Zhang J(1), Chen Q(2), Feng H(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)1Gastroenterology, Nanjing Jiangbei People's Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(2)2Infectious Diseases Section, Nanjing Jiangbei People's Hospital, Nanjing, 
China.
(3)3Infectious Diseases Section, Jiangsu Provincial People's Hospital Pukou 
Branch, Pukou District Central Hospital, Nanjing, China.

As the main effector cells of innate immunity, nature killer (NK) cells play 
important roles in preventing hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. This study aims 
to investigate the correlation between NK cells and different clinical stages of 
chronic HBV infection and interferon-α (IFN-α) therapy. Two hundred ninety-five 
patients diagnosed with chronic hepatitis B (CHB) infection and selected 50 
healthy adults were enrolled in this study, the frequency of CD3-CD56+ cells in 
peripheral blood were measured and analyzed. The level of NK cells was decreased 
in hepatitis B-associated liver cirrhosis significantly and had no changes in 
CHB or hepatocellular carcinoma, while the frequency of NK cells gradually 
decreased from the baseline to week 24 and then increased since week 24-48 in 
CHB with IFN-α treatment. NK cells played an important role in the process of 
HBV progression and IFN-α therapy.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2018.0131
PMID: 31158068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]