---
reference_id: "PMID:34609369"
title: "TRANSTHYRETIN AMYLOIDOSIS THERAPIES: GUIDING THE FUTURE."
authors:
- González-Duarte A
journal: Rev Invest Clin
year: '2021'
doi: 10.24875/RIC.21000323
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRANSTHYRETIN AMYLOIDOSIS THERAPIES: GUIDING THE FUTURE.
**Authors:** González-Duarte A
**Journal:** Rev Invest Clin (2021)
**DOI:** [10.24875/RIC.21000323](https://doi.org/10.24875/RIC.21000323)

## Content

1. Rev Invest Clin. 2021;73(5):310-315. doi: 10.24875/RIC.21000323.

TRANSTHYRETIN AMYLOIDOSIS THERAPIES: GUIDING THE FUTURE.

González-Duarte A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición 
Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.

Transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis (ATTR) is a progressive condition characterized 
by multiorgan accumulation of amyloid deposits composed of transthyretin (TTR) 
fibrils. Over the past decades, despite being a rare disease, ATTR amyloidosis 
has enabled top-tier therapeutics. In the 90s, organ transplantation was the 
mainstream therapeutic option and fostered distinct approaches, such as combined 
liver-heart transplant and domino (sequential) liver transplantation. Likewise, 
several TTR molecule stabilizers were developed successfully. Over the past 
decade, oriented genetic therapies emerged to prevent, control, and, 
surprisingly, reverse amyloid deposition. Silencing the TTR gene using different 
strategies is flourishing, and ongoing trials continue to evaluate diverse 
approaches to optimize their application. The following perspective describes 
the currently available treatments for ATTR amyloidosis and the prospects on the 
potential application of these strategies in other medical fields.

Copyright: © 2021 Permanyer.

DOI: 10.24875/RIC.21000323
PMID: 34609369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]