---
reference_id: "PMID:28662344"
title: "Oral and Craniofacial Anomalies of Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: Dental Management in the Context of a Rare Disease."
authors:
- Panny A
- Glurich I
- Haws RM
- Acharya A
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1177/0022034517716913
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral and Craniofacial Anomalies of Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: Dental Management in the Context of a Rare Disease.
**Authors:** Panny A, Glurich I, Haws RM, Acharya A
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0022034517716913](https://doi.org/10.1177/0022034517716913)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2017 Nov;96(12):1361-1369. doi: 10.1177/0022034517716913. Epub
2017  Jun 29.

Oral and Craniofacial Anomalies of Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: Dental Management in 
the Context of a Rare Disease.

Panny A(1), Glurich I(1), Haws RM(2), Acharya A(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Institute for Oral and Systemic Health, Marshfield Clinic Research 
Foundation, Marshfield, WI, USA.
(2)2 Center for Clinical Research, Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation, 
Marshfield, WI, USA.

Standardized guidelines for the oral health management of patients with rare 
diseases exhibiting morphologic anomalies are currently lacking. This review 
considers Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), a monogenic autosomal recessive nonmotile 
ciliopathy, as an archetypal condition. Dental anomalies are present in a 
majority of individuals affected by BBS due to abnormal embryonic orofacial and 
tooth development. Genetically encoded intrinsic oral structural anomalies and 
heterogeneous BBS clinical phenotypes and consequent oral comorbidities confound 
oral health management. Since the comorbid spectrum of BBS phenotypes spans 
diabetes, renal disease, obesity, sleep apnea, cardiovascular disease, and 
cognitive disorders, a broad spectrum of collateral oral disease may be 
encountered. The genetic impact of BBS on the anatomic development of oral 
components and oral pathology encountered in the context of various BBS 
phenotypes and their associated comorbidities are reviewed herein. Challenges 
encountered in managing patients with BBS are highlighted, emphasizing the 
spectrum of oral pathology associated with heterogeneous clinical phenotypic 
expression. Guidelines for provision of care across the spectrum of BBS clinical 
phenotypes are considered. Establishment of integrated medical-dental delivery 
models of oral care in the context of rare diseases is emphasized, including 
involvement of caregivers in the context of managing these patients with special 
needs.

DOI: 10.1177/0022034517716913
PMCID: PMC5652854
PMID: 28662344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the authorship and/or publication of this article.