---
reference_id: "PMID:18954859"
title: "[News for adrenal insufficiency]."
authors:
- Nunes ML
- Tabarin A
journal: Ann Endocrinol (Paris)
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/S0003-4266(08)73968-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [News for adrenal insufficiency].
**Authors:** Nunes ML, Tabarin A
**Journal:** Ann Endocrinol (Paris) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0003-4266(08)73968-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0003-4266(08)73968-4)

## Content

1. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2008 Sep;69 Suppl 1:S44-52. doi: 
10.1016/S0003-4266(08)73968-4.

[News for adrenal insufficiency].

[Article in French]

Nunes ML(1), Tabarin A.

Author information:
(1)Service d'endocrinologie, CHU de Bordeaux, Hôpital Haut Lévêque, avenue de 
Magellan, 33604 Pessac, France. marie-laure.nunes@chu-bordeaux.fr

The congress of the Endocrine Society 2008 approached the diagnostic, etiologic, 
prognostic and therapeutic novelties of adrenal insufficiency (AI). Diagnosis of 
AI often requires serum cortisol measurement during dynamic tests. Salivary 
cortisol measurement was reported to have an equivalent diagnostic performance 
to serum cortisol and that is even better when CBG levels are altered. 
Iatrogenic AI is much more frequent than Addison's disease. Two studies have 
shown that patients with inhaled corticosteroid and opioid treatments should be 
tested for AI. A Norwegian study reported an increased mortality in the subgroup 
of young men that presented Addison's disease before the age of 40. Plasma 
cortisol concentration in patients with current glucocorticoid replacement 
therapy differs notably from those observed in physiological condition. This 
imperfect replacement may be responsible for adverse physical condition and 
impaired quality of life. Two formulations of delayed hydrocortisone tablets 
with different pharmacokinetics from usual hydrocortisone (DuoCort and 
Chronocort) are in development. The first study is promising and shows that 
these formulations better mimick the body's natural cortisol release. Its use in 
the treatment of AI in patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia has also 
been tested.

DOI: 10.1016/S0003-4266(08)73968-4
PMID: 18954859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]