---
reference_id: "PMID:37014531"
title: Variable Bone Phenotypes in Patients with Pseudohypoparathyroidism.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Lu C
- Chen X
journal: Curr Osteoporos Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11914-023-00787-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable Bone Phenotypes in Patients with Pseudohypoparathyroidism.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Lu C, Chen X
**Journal:** Curr Osteoporos Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11914-023-00787-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11914-023-00787-6)

## Content

1. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2023 Jun;21(3):311-321. doi: 10.1007/s11914-023-00787-6. 
Epub 2023 Apr 4.

Variable Bone Phenotypes in Patients with Pseudohypoparathyroidism.

Wang Y(1)(2), Lu C(1), Chen X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Laboratory of Endocrinology and Metabolism, West 
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(2)Department of Geriatric Medicine, the People's Hospital of Deyang City, 
Deyang, 618000, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Laboratory of Endocrinology and Metabolism, West 
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, China. onlycx@163.com.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is a disorder caused by 
mutations and/or epigenetic changes at the complex GNAS locus. It is 
characterized by hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and an elevated parathyroid 
hormone concentration secondary to the resistance of target tissues to the 
biological actions of parathyroid hormone. PHP is divided into several subtypes 
with different yet overlapping phenotypes. Research on the bone status in 
patients with PHP is sparse and has yielded inconsistent results. This review 
was performed to summarize the current knowledge on the bone phenotypes and 
possible mechanisms of PHP.
RECENT FINDINGS: Patients with PHP exhibit highly variable bone phenotypes and 
increased concentrations of bone turnover markers. Long-standing elevation of 
the parathyroid hormone concentration may lead to hyperparathyroid bone 
diseases, including rickets and osteitis fibrosa. Compared with normal controls, 
patients with PHP may exhibit similar, increased, or decreased bone mineral 
density. Higher bone mineral density has been found in patients with PHP type 1A 
than in normal controls, whereas decreased bone mass, osteosclerosis, and 
osteitis fibrosa cystica have been reported in patients with PHP type 1B, 
indicating more variable bone phenotypes in PHP type 1B. Bone tissues show 
partial sensitivity to parathyroid hormone in patients with PHP, leading to 
heterogeneous reactions to parathyroid hormone in different individuals and even 
in different regions of bone tissues in the same individual. Regions rich in 
cancellous bone are more sensitive and show more obvious improvement after 
therapy. Active vitamin D and calcium can significantly improve abnormal bone 
metabolism in patients with PHP.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11914-023-00787-6
PMID: 37014531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]