---
reference_id: "PMID:34503107"
title: Genomic and Transcriptomic Characteristics of Esophageal Adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Hoppe S
- Jonas C
- Wenzel MC
- Velazquez Camacho O
- Arolt C
- Zhao Y
- Büttner R
- Quaas A
- Plum PS
- Hillmer AM
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cancers13174300
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic and Transcriptomic Characteristics of Esophageal Adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Hoppe S, Jonas C, Wenzel MC, Velazquez Camacho O, Arolt C, Zhao Y, Büttner R, Quaas A, Plum PS, Hillmer AM
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers13174300](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13174300)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Aug 26;13(17):4300. doi: 10.3390/cancers13174300.

Genomic and Transcriptomic Characteristics of Esophageal Adenocarcinoma.

Hoppe S(1), Jonas C(1), Wenzel MC(1), Velazquez Camacho O(1), Arolt C(1), Zhao
Y(2), Büttner R(1), Quaas A(1), Plum PS(1)(2), Hillmer AM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne,
University of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of General, Visceral, Cancer and Transplantation Surgery, Faculty
of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 50937
Cologne, Germany.
(3)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne,
Germany.

Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a deadly disease with limited options for
targeted therapy. With the help of next-generation sequencing studies over the
last decade, we gained an understanding of the genomic architecture of EAC. The
tumor suppressor gene TP53 is mutated in 70 to 80% of tumors followed by genomic
alterations in CDKN2A, KRAS, ERBB2, ARID1A, SMAD4 and a long tail of less
frequently mutated genes. EAC is characterized by a high burden of point
mutations and genomic rearrangements, resulting in amplifications and deletions
of genomic regions. The genomic complexity is likely hampering the efficacy of
targeted therapies. Barrett's esophagus (BE), a metaplastic response of the
esophagus to gastro-esophageal reflux disease, is the main risk factor for the
development of EAC. Almost all EACs are derived from BE. The sequence from BE to
EAC provides an opportunity to study the genomic evolution towards EAC. While
the overlap of point mutations between BE and EAC within the same patient is, at
times, surprisingly low, there is a correlation between the complexity of the
genomic copy number profile and the development of EAC. Transcriptomic analyses
separated EAC into a basal and a classical subtype, with the basal subtype
showing a higher level of resistance to chemotherapy. In this review, we provide
an overview of the current knowledge of the genomic and transcriptomic
characteristics of EAC and their relevance for the development of the disease
and patient care.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13174300
PMCID: PMC8428370
PMID: 34503107

Conflict of interest statement: A.M.H. receives research funding from Dracen
Pharmaceuticals Inc. Other authors declare no conflict of interest.
