---
reference_id: "PMID:25432637"
title: GABA receptor subunit distribution and FMRP-mGluR5 signaling abnormalities in the cerebellum of subjects with schizophrenia, mood disorders, and autism.
authors:
- Fatemi SH
- Folsom TD
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2014.10.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GABA receptor subunit distribution and FMRP-mGluR5 signaling abnormalities in the cerebellum of subjects with schizophrenia, mood disorders, and autism.
**Authors:** Fatemi SH, Folsom TD
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2014.10.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2014.10.010)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2015 Sep;167(1-3):42-56. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2014.10.010.
Epub  2014 Nov 26.

GABA receptor subunit distribution and FMRP-mGluR5 signaling abnormalities in 
the cerebellum of subjects with schizophrenia, mood disorders, and autism.

Fatemi SH(1), Folsom TD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Division of Neuroscience Research, University of 
Minnesota Medical School, 420 Delaware St SE, MMC 392, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 
USA; Department of Neuroscience, University of Minnesota Medical School, 321 
Church St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. Electronic address: fatem002@umn.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Division of Neuroscience Research, University of 
Minnesota Medical School, 420 Delaware St SE, MMC 392, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 
USA. Electronic address: folso013@umn.edu.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the 
brain. GABAergic receptor abnormalities have been documented in several major 
psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, mood disorders, and autism. 
Abnormal expression of mRNA and protein for multiple GABA receptors has also 
been observed in multiple brain regions leading to alterations in the balance 
between excitatory/inhibitory signaling in the brain with potential profound 
consequences for normal cognition and maintenance of mood and perception. 
Altered expression of GABAA receptor subunits has been documented in fragile X 
mental retardation 1 (FMR1) knockout mice, suggesting that loss of its protein 
product, fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), impacts GABAA subunit 
expression. Recent postmortem studies from our laboratory have shown reduced 
expression of FMRP in the brains of subjects with schizophrenia, bipolar 
disorder, major depression, and autism. FMRP acts as a translational repressor 
and, under normal conditions, inhibits metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 
(mGluR5)-mediated signaling. In fragile X syndrome (FXS), the absence of FMRP is 
hypothesized to lead to unregulated mGluR5 signaling, ultimately resulting in 
the behavioral and intellectual impairments associated with this disorder. Our 
laboratory has identified changes in mGluR5 expression in autism, schizophrenia, 
and mood disorders. In the current review article, we discuss our postmortem 
data on GABA receptors, FMRP, and mGluR5 levels and compare our results with 
other laboratories. Finally, we discuss the interactions between these molecules 
and the potential for new therapeutic interventions that target these 
interconnected signaling systems.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2014.10.010
PMCID: PMC5301472
PMID: 25432637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.