---
reference_id: "PMID:15054848"
title: "Recurrence of achondrogenesis type II within the same family: evidence for germline mosaicism."
authors:
- Faivre L
- Le Merrer M
- Douvier S
- Laurent N
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Rousseau T
- Vereecke I
- Sagot P
- Delezoide AL
- Coucke P
- Mortier G
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20597
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrence of achondrogenesis type II within the same family: evidence for germline mosaicism.
**Authors:** Faivre L, Le Merrer M, Douvier S, Laurent N, Thauvin-Robinet C, Rousseau T, Vereecke I, Sagot P, Delezoide AL, Coucke P, Mortier G
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.20597](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.20597)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Apr 30;126A(3):308-12. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20597.

Recurrence of achondrogenesis type II within the same family: evidence for 
germline mosaicism.

Faivre L(1), Le Merrer M, Douvier S, Laurent N, Thauvin-Robinet C, Rousseau T, 
Vereecke I, Sagot P, Delezoide AL, Coucke P, Mortier G.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d'Enfants, Dijon, France. 
laurence.faivre@chu-dijon.fr

Achondrogenesis type II is a lethal skeletal dysplasia caused by new dominant 
mutations within the type II collagen gene (COL2A1). Here we report on two 
pregnancies of a healthy, nonconsanguineous young couple. In the first 
pregnancy, severe micromelia and generalized edema were noted on ultrasound at 
21 weeks' gestation. Clinical, radiological, and histological evaluation of the 
fetus after termination of the pregnancy showed typical findings of 
achondrogenesis type II. In the second pregnancy, fetal hygroma was noted at 11 
weeks' gestation. Similar clinical, radiographic, and histologic findings were 
observed in the second fetus, suggesting the recurrence of achondrogenesis II 
within this family. Molecular analysis of genomic DNA extracted from amniotic 
cells of the second fetus revealed heterozygosity for a 1340G > A missense 
mutation (G316D) in the COL2A1 gene. This mutation was not found in the parents. 
Although, we could not evaluate the presence of this mutation in the first 
fetus, we strongly believe that our data are in favor of germline mosaicism as 
the most likely explanation for the recurrence of type II achondrogenesis in 
both sibs.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20597
PMID: 15054848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]