---
reference_id: "PMID:31078196"
title: Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder.
authors:
- Lanza di Scalea T
- Pearlstein T
journal: Med Clin North Am
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2019.02.007
keywords:
- "Contraceptives, Oral/therapeutic use"
- "Contraceptives, Oral, Hormonal/therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- "Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Premenstrual Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Women's Health"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder.
**Authors:** Lanza di Scalea T, Pearlstein T
**Journal:** Med Clin North Am (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcna.2019.02.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcna.2019.02.007)

## Content

1. Med Clin North Am. 2019 Jul;103(4):613-628. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2019.02.007.

Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder.

Lanza di Scalea T(1), Pearlstein T(2).

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and Women's Health, Dell Medical School, 
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. Electronic address: 
teresa.lanza@austin.utexas.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Women's Behavioral Medicine, Women's Medicine Collaborative, Miriam 
Hospital, 146 West River Street, Providence, RI 02904, USA.

Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) comprises emotional and physical symptoms 
and functional impairment that lie on the severe end of the continuum of 
premenstrual symptoms. Women with PMDD have a differential response to normal 
hormonal fluctuations. This susceptibility may involve the serotonin system, 
altered sensitivity of the GABAA receptor to the neurosteroid allopregnanalone, 
and altered brain circuitry involving emotional and cognitive functions. 
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors are considered the first-line treatment. 
Second-line treatments include oral contraceptives containing drospirenone, 
other ovulation suppression methods, calcium, chasteberry, and 
cognitive-behavioral therapy.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcna.2019.02.007
PMID: 31078196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]