---
reference_id: "PMID:32918369"
title: "Using an aquatic model, Xenopus laevis, to uncover the role of chromodomain 1 in craniofacial disorders."
authors:
- Wyatt BH
- Raymond TO
- Lansdon LA
- Darbro BW
- Murray JC
- Manak JR
- Dickinson AJG
journal: Genesis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/dvg.23394
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- "Cartilage/embryology, metabolism"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- "DNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- Jaw/embryology
- "Neural Crest/embryology, metabolism"
- "Xenopus Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Xenopus laevis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Using an aquatic model, Xenopus laevis, to uncover the role of chromodomain 1 in craniofacial disorders.
**Authors:** Wyatt BH, Raymond TO, Lansdon LA, Darbro BW, Murray JC, Manak JR, Dickinson AJG
**Journal:** Genesis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dvg.23394](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvg.23394)

## Content

1. Genesis. 2021 Feb;59(1-2):e23394. doi: 10.1002/dvg.23394. Epub 2020 Sep 11.

Using an aquatic model, Xenopus laevis, to uncover the role of chromodomain 1 in
craniofacial disorders.

Wyatt BH(1), Raymond TO(1), Lansdon LA(2)(3), Darbro BW(4), Murray JC(4), Manak
JR(2)(4), Dickinson AJG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia,
USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Mercy Hospital,
Kansas City, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

The chromodomain family member chromodomain 1 (CHD1) has been shown to have
numerous critical molecular functions including transcriptional regulation,
splicing, and DNA repair. Complete loss of function of this gene is not
compatible with life. On the other hand, missense and copy number variants of
CHD1 can result in intellectual disabilities and craniofacial malformations in
human patients including cleft palate and Pilarowski-Bjornsson Syndrome. We have
used the aquatic developmental model organism Xenopus laevis, to determine a
specific role for Chd1 in such cranioafcial disorders. Protein and gene
knockdown techniques in Xenopus, including antisense oligos and mosaic
Crispr/Cas9-mediated mutagenesis, recapitulated the craniofacial defects
observed in humans. Further analysis indicated that embryos deficient in Chd1
had defects in cranial neural crest development and jaw cartilage morphology.
Additionally, flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry revealed that decreased
Chd1 resulted in increased in apoptosis in the developing head. Together, these
experiments demonstrate that Chd1 is critical for fundamental processes and cell
survival in craniofacial development. We also presented evidence that Chd1 is
regulated by retinoic acid signaling during craniofacial development. Expression
levels of chd1 mRNA, specifically in the head, were increased by RAR agonist
exposure and decreased upon antagonist treatment. Subphenotypic levels of an RAR
antagonist and Chd1 morpholinos synergized to result in orofacial defects.
Further, RAR DNA binding sequences (RAREs) were detected in chd1 regulatory
regions by bioinformatic analysis. In summary, by combining human genetics and
experiments in an aquatic model we now have a better understanding of the role
of CHD1 in craniofacial disorders.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/dvg.23394
PMCID: PMC10701884
PMID: 32918369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST No competing interests
declared.
