---
reference_id: PMID:32049433
title: 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and congenital heart disease.
authors:
- Goldmuntz E
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31774
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and congenital heart disease.
**Authors:** Goldmuntz E
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31774](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31774)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2020 Mar;184(1):64-72. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31774. Epub 2020 Feb 12.

22q11.2 deletion syndrome and congenital heart disease.

Goldmuntz E(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of 
Pediatrics, The Perelman School of Medicine, The University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome has an estimated prevalence of 1 in 4-6,000 
livebirths. The phenotype varies widely; the most common features include: 
facial dysmorphia, hypocalcemia, palate and speech disorders, feeding and 
gastrointestinal disorders, immunodeficiency, recurrent infections, 
neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders, and congenital heart disease. 
Approximately 60-80% of patients have a cardiac malformation most commonly 
including a subset of conotruncal defects (tetralogy of Fallot, truncus 
arteriosus, interrupted aortic arch type B), conoventricular and/or atrial 
septal defects, and aortic arch anomalies. Cardiac patients with a 22q11.2 
deletion do not generally experience higher mortality upon surgical intervention 
but suffer more peri-operative complications than their non-syndromic 
counterparts. New guidelines suggest screening for a 22q11.2 deletion in the 
patient with tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus, interrupted aortic arch 
type B, conoventricular septal defects as well as those with an isolated aortic 
arch anomaly. Early identification of a 22q11.2 deletion in the neonate or 
infant when other syndromic features may not be apparent allows for timely 
parental screening for reproductive counseling and anticipatory evaluation of 
cardiac and noncardiac features. Screening the at-risk child or adult allows for 
important age-specific clinical, neurodevelopmental, psychiatric, and 
reproductive issues to be addressed.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31774
PMID: 32049433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]