---
reference_id: "PMID:37703867"
title: "Immunotherapy for Gestational Trophoblastic Neoplasia: A New Paradigm."
authors:
- Baas IO
- Westermann AM
- You B
- Bolze PA
- Seckl M
- Ghorani E
journal: Gynecol Obstet Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000533972
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Gestational Trophoblastic Disease/drug therapy
- Pregnancy
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunotherapy for Gestational Trophoblastic Neoplasia: A New Paradigm.
**Authors:** Baas IO, Westermann AM, You B, Bolze PA, Seckl M, Ghorani E
**Journal:** Gynecol Obstet Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000533972](https://doi.org/10.1159/000533972)

## Content

1. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2024;89(3):230-238. doi: 10.1159/000533972. Epub 2023
Sep  13.

Immunotherapy for Gestational Trophoblastic Neoplasia: A New Paradigm.

Baas IO(1), Westermann AM(2), You B(3), Bolze PA(3), Seckl M(4), Ghorani E(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands, i.o.baas-3@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Amsterdam University Medical Centres, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Université Lyon 1, Hospices Civils De Lyon, Centre Français De Référence Des 
Maladies Trophoblastiques, Hôpital Lyon Sud, CITOHL, EA 3738 CICLY, Univ Lyon 1, 
Lyon, France.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Gestational Trophoblastic Disease Centre, 
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, Charing Cross Hospital, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Immune checkpoint immunotherapy (CPI) targeting programmed cell 
death 1 (PD-1)/ligand (PD-L1) has been shown to be an effective treatment for 
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN). This includes those with multidrug 
resistance, ultra-high-risk disease, and epithelioid trophoblastic 
tumour/placental site trophoblastic tumour subtypes that are inherently 
chemotherapy resistant, but there is also emerging evidence in low-risk disease.
OBJECTIVES: We set out to generate an overview of the current data supporting 
the use of CPI for GTN in both high-risk and low-risk disease and to consider 
future research goals and directions in order to implement CPI in current 
treatment guidelines.
METHODS: We identified and reviewed the published data on the use of CPI agents 
in GTN.
OUTCOME: 133 patients were identified who had been treated with CPI for GTN with 
pembrolizumab (23), avelumab (22), camrelizumab (57), toripalimab (15), or other 
anti-PD-1 agents (16), of whom 118 had high-risk diseases, relapse or multi-drug 
resistant disease, and 15 low-risk diseases. Overall 85 patients achieved 
complete remission, 77 (of 118) with high-risk disease, and 8 (of 15) with 
low-risk disease. 1 patient with complete remission in the high-risk group 
developed a relapse 22 months after anti-PD-1 treatment had been stopped. 
Treatment was generally well tolerated across studies.
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK: The majority of high-risk patients (77/118) treated 
with CPI are cured and this is particularly relevant amongst those with 
chemotherapy resistant disease who otherwise have very limited treatment 
options. Priorities for future research include determining whether these agents 
have a role earlier in the disease course, the utility of combination with 
chemotherapy, and effects on future fertility. Treatment availability remains a 
concern due to the high price of these agents.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000533972
PMCID: PMC11152029
PMID: 37703867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.