---
reference_id: "PMID:24790662"
title: Iron overload in Beta thalassaemia major and intermedia patients.
authors:
- Mishra AK
- Tiwari A
journal: Maedica (Bucur)
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Iron overload in Beta thalassaemia major and intermedia patients.
**Authors:** Mishra AK, Tiwari A
**Journal:** Maedica (Bucur) (2013)

## Content

1. Maedica (Bucur). 2013 Sep;8(4):328-32.

Iron overload in Beta thalassaemia major and intermedia patients.

Mishra AK(1), Tiwari A(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biotechnology, UTD, Rajiv Gandhi Proudyogiki Vishwavidyalaya,
Airport Road, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: In beta thalassaemia major multiple blood transfusions, ineffective
erythropoiesis and increased gastrointestinal iron absorption lead to iron
overload in the body. Iron overload impairs the immune system, placing patients
at greater risk of infection and illness. Iron overload can be determined by
serum ferritin measurement.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study is to assess the serum ferritin levels
in multi-transfused Thalassaemia major and Thalassaemia intermedia patients. The
study was also done to estimate the present situation of awareness of iron
overload in them.
METHODS: Seventy two blood samples from clinically diagnosed thalassaemia major
and intermedia patients were collected from different tertiary care hospitals in
Bhopal, India for their serum ferritin estimation. Serum ferritin measurement
was performed using indirect enzyme linked immune sorbent based serum ferritin
assay kit. Data were analyzed to determine association between variables. The
association between age, sex, and serum ferritin level were established.
RESULTS: 87.4% of the beta thalassaemia major patients showed very high ferritin
levels. The mean serum ferritin level was found to be 2767.52 ng/ml. 44.4%
patients had serum ferritin between 1000 to 2500 ng/ml, while 43.05% patients
had values above 2500 ng/ml. These levels reflect inadequate chelation and
vulnerability to develop iron overload related complications.
CONCLUSION: There is an urgent need to rationalize the chelation therapy and to
create awareness about the consequences of iron overload in the patients. The
study showed high levels of serum ferritin beta thalassaemia major patients
which give an overall bleak view.

PMCID: PMC3968466
PMID: 24790662
