---
reference_id: "PMID:38589924"
title: "The behavioral phenotype of children and adolescents with attenuated non-ketotic hyperglycinemia, intermediate to good subtype."
authors:
- Van Hirtum LDFM
- Van Damme T
- Van Hove JLK
- Steyaert JG
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03172-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The behavioral phenotype of children and adolescents with attenuated non-ketotic hyperglycinemia, intermediate to good subtype.
**Authors:** Van Hirtum LDFM, Van Damme T, Van Hove JLK, Steyaert JG
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03172-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03172-3)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Apr 8;19(1):150. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03172-3.

The behavioral phenotype of children and adolescents with attenuated non-ketotic 
hyperglycinemia, intermediate to good subtype.

Van Hirtum LDFM(1)(2), Van Damme T(3)(4), Van Hove JLK(#)(5), Steyaert 
JG(#)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child- and Adolescent Psychiatry, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
Liesbet.vanhirtum@student.kuleuven.be.
(2)Ankerpunt vzw, Leuven, Belgium. Liesbet.vanhirtum@student.kuleuven.be.
(3)Department of Child Psychiatry, UPC Z.Org, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(6)Department of Child- and Adolescent Psychiatry, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Leuven Autism Research Consortium, Leuven, Belgium.
(#)Contributed equally

AIM: We aim to describe the behavioral phenotype of children and adolescents 
with the good to intermediate attenuated form of non-ketotic hyperglycinemia 
(NKH) and to explore associations between the behavioral phenotype and age, sex, 
plasma glycine levels and drug treatment.
METHOD: Parents of children with attenuated NKH completed questionnaires 
assessing maladaptive behavior, adaptive behavior, social communication, 
speech/language development and motor development in addition to demographic and 
medical questions.
RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION: Twelve children, age 6 to 21y, functioned at mild to 
severe intellectual disability levels. Their speech/language development was in 
line with their developmental quotient. Relative to their intellectual 
functioning, their motor development and communication were weaker in comparison 
to their general development. Their adaptive behavior, however, appeared a 
relative strength. There was no evidence for autism spectrum disorder occurring 
more frequently than expected, rather social skills, except for communication, 
were rated as a relative strength. Maladaptive behaviors with ADHD-like 
characteristics were present in more than two thirds of children. Maladaptive 
behaviors were significantly related to female sex and to taking 
dextromethorphan, but no significant relation between plasma glycine levels and 
behavior was found. Future studies will need to evaluate causality in the 
observed relation between dextromethorphan use and maladaptive behaviors. 
Clinicians should reconsider the benefit of dextromethorphan when presented with 
disruptive behaviors in children with attenuated NKH.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03172-3
PMCID: PMC11003182
PMID: 38589924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have stated that they had no 
interests which might be perceived as posing a conflict or bias.