---
reference_id: "PMID:15811946"
title: Identification of the control region for tissue-specific imprinting of the stimulatory G protein alpha-subunit.
authors:
- Liu J
- Chen M
- Deng C
- "Bourc'his D"
- Nealon JG
- Erlichman B
- Bestor TH
- Weinstein LS
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0408262102
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "DNA (Cytosine-5-)-Methyltransferases/deficiency, genetics"
- DNA Methylation
- Fathers
- Female
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics"
- Genomic Imprinting/genetics
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mothers
- Organ Specificity
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- Pseudohypoparathyroidism/genetics
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of the control region for tissue-specific imprinting of the stimulatory G protein alpha-subunit.
**Authors:** Liu J, Chen M, Deng C, Bourc'his D, Nealon JG, Erlichman B, Bestor TH, Weinstein LS
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0408262102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0408262102)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Apr 12;102(15):5513-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0408262102. Epub 2005 Apr 5.

Identification of the control region for tissue-specific imprinting of the
stimulatory G protein alpha-subunit.

Liu J(1), Chen M, Deng C, Bourc'his D, Nealon JG, Erlichman B, Bestor TH,
Weinstein LS.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Branch and Genetics of Development and Disease Branch,
National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive, and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Gnas is a complex gene with multiple imprinted promoters. The upstream Nesp and
Nespas/Gnasxl promoters are paternally and maternally methylated, respectively.
The downstream promoter for the stimulatory G protein alpha-subunit (G(s)alpha)
is unmethylated, although in some tissues (e.g., renal proximal tubules),
G(s)alpha is poorly expressed from the paternal allele. Just upstream of the
G(s)alpha promoter is a primary imprint mark (1A region) where maternal-specific
methylation is established during oogenesis. Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1B, a
disorder of renal parathyroid hormone resistance, is associated with loss of 1A
methylation. Analysis of embryos of Dnmt3L(-/-) mothers (which cannot methylate
maternal imprint marks) showed that Nesp, Nespas/Gnasxl, and 1A imprinting
depend on one or more maternal primary imprint marks. We generated mice with
deletion of the 1A differentially methylated region. These mice had normal
Nesp-Nespas/Gnasxl imprinting, indicating that the Gnas locus contains two
independent imprinting domains (Nespas-Nespas/Gnasxl and 1A-G(s)alpha)
controlled by distinct maternal primary imprint marks. Paternal, but not
maternal, 1A deletion resulted in G(s)alpha overexpression in proximal tubules
and evidence for increased parathyroid hormone sensitivity but had no effect on
G(s)alpha expression in other tissues where G(s)alpha is normally not imprinted.
The 1A region is a maternal imprint mark that contains one or more
methylation-sensitive cis-acting elements that suppress G(s)alpha expression
from the paternal allele in a tissue-specific manner.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0408262102
PMCID: PMC556240
PMID: 15811946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
