---
reference_id: "PMID:30335335"
title: Vohwinkel Syndrome.
authors:
- Saleh D
- Saleh HM
- Tanner LS
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vohwinkel Syndrome.
**Authors:** Saleh D, Saleh HM, Tanner LS

## Content

1. Vohwinkel Syndrome.

Saleh D(1), Saleh HM(2), Tanner LS.

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2023 Nov 13.

Author information:
(1)Sampson Regional Medical Center
(2)Department of Dermatology, Ain Shams University

Vohwinkel syndrome, also known as keratoderma hereditarian mutilans, is 
classified as a type of hereditary palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK). PPKs exist on 
a spectrum from inherited to acquired and can range in their presentation. A PPK 
may be an isolated finding or part of a syndrome with extracutaneous 
involvement. Rarely a PPK can be drug-induced or part of a paraneoplastic 
process. The classic Vohwinkel syndrome is a hereditary PPK associated with 
"starfish" keratoses on the knuckles, a PPK in a "honeycomb" pattern, hearing 
impairment, and mutilating digital constriction bands (pseudoainhum) that often 
lead to autoamputation of the affected digit(s). A variant of Vohwinkel 
syndrome, loricrin keratoderma, presents as a honeycomb PPK with pseudoainhum 
with the addition of ichthyosis; deafness is not a feature of this ichthyosiform 
variant.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30335335

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Dahlia Saleh declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Haitham Saleh 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Laura Tanner declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.