---
reference_id: "PMID:33938473"
title: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection and critically ill children.
authors:
- Damania R
- Moore W
- Viamonte HC
- Kamat P
- Basu RK
journal: Curr Opin Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000001019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection and critically ill children.
**Authors:** Damania R, Moore W, Viamonte HC, Kamat P, Basu RK
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOP.0000000000001019](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000001019)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2021 Jun 1;33(3):286-291. doi:
10.1097/MOP.0000000000001019.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection and critically ill 
children.

Damania R(1), Moore W, Viamonte HC, Kamat P, Basu RK.

Author information:
(1)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Emory 
University, Department of Pediatrics, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Amidst an ongoing pandemic, the delineation of the pediatric 
consequence of infection from the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2) virus is emerging. This review summarizes available 
pediatric data and covers the aspects of epidemiology, critical illness with 
acute infection [coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)], the discovered 
multi-inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), and management options.
RECENT FINDINGS: The available data from the source of the initial viral 
transmission and then through Europe, Africa, and the Western Hemisphere 
identifies important aspects of the SARS-CoV2 pandemic: 1) Pediatric infection 
occurs commonly, is likely underestimated, and transmission patterns remain 
incompletely described, 2) Pediatric patients suffer multiple end-organ injuries 
but COVID-19 is not the same prevalence in terms of severity as in adults, 3) 
MIS-C is a novel and life-threatening manifestation of exposure to the virus, 4) 
Management using a combination of supportive care, standard practice intensive 
care management, and anti-inflammatory agents is associated with recovery, 5) 
Long-term sequelae of viral exposure is unknown at this time.
SUMMARY: Emerging evidence suggests pediatric patients are at risk for severe 
and life-threatening effects of exposure to SARS-CoV2. As the pandemic 
continues, further research is warranted - particularly as a vaccine is not yet 
available for use in children.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000001019
PMID: 33938473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]