---
reference_id: "PMID:31032790"
title: "Pityriasis Lichenoid-like Mycosis Fungoides in a 9-year-old Boy: A Case Report."
authors:
- Lin TL
- Chen YJ
- Weng YC
- Yang CS
- Juan IK
journal: Acta Dermatovenerol Croat
year: '2019'
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Male
- "Mycosis Fungoides/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis Lichenoid-like Mycosis Fungoides in a 9-year-old Boy: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Lin TL, Chen YJ, Weng YC, Yang CS, Juan IK
**Journal:** Acta Dermatovenerol Croat (2019)

## Content

1. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat. 2019 Mar;27(1):37-39.

Pityriasis Lichenoid-like Mycosis Fungoides in a 9-year-old Boy: A Case Report.

Lin TL, Chen YJ, Weng YC, Yang CS, Juan IK(1).

Author information:
(1)Chao-Kuei Juan, MD, Department of Dermatology, Taichung Veterans General
Hospital, Taichung , Taiwan, No. 1650, Section 4, Taiwan Boulevard Taichung
40705 , Taiwan; zon2zon2zon2zon2@yahoo.com.tw.

Dear Editors, Pityriasis lichenoides (PL)-like mycosis fungoides (MF) is a rare
variant of MF, presenting clinical findings of PL but histological features of
MF. It was first reported by Ko et al. (1) and only a few cases have been
reported since (2-5). Herein we report the case of a boy with PL-like MF and
review the related literature. A 9-year-old boy presented with a 1-year history
of multiple pruritic crusted erythematous papules and scaly pink maculopatches
on the face, trunk, and extremities (Figure 1, a and b). Histologic examination
of a papule revealed lymphocytic epidermotropism and lymphocytes tagging the
dermoepidermal junction. The nuclei of the lymphocytes were hyperchromatic and
irregular (Figure 1, c and d). Immunohistochemically, the infiltrating
lymphocytes revealed positivity for CD2, CD3, CD5, CD7, and CD8, but were
negative for CD4, CD20, CD30, CD68, and CD163 (Figure 1, e-g). T-cell receptor
gene rearrangement analysis (TCR-GRA) demonstrated the rearrangement of the
gamma chain (Figure 1, h). PL-like MF was diagnosed. The patient was started on
narrowband ultraviolet B (NBUVB) phototherapy. The skin lesions markedly
improved after 6 months of treatment. There was no recurrence during the 2 years
of follow-up. There has long been a controversy regarding whether PL is just an
inflammatory dermatosis or a genuine T-cell lymphoproliferative disease. Wang et
al. (2) proposed three categories for the relationship between PL and MF: (A) PL
with a dominant T-cell clone, (B) PL subsequently progressing into MF, and (C)
PL-like MF. In the first category, PL is a monoclonal T-cell-mediated
inflammatory disorder, in which T-cell clones were found in about 50% of
patients (6,7). The second category involves progression from long-term PL to MF
(8,9). The average time-to-progression is about 8 years. It has been speculated
that the PL-related immunologic microenvironment is favorable for developing a
tumoral clone. Our patient presented with PL-like lesions clinically, while
biopsy findings, results of immunohistochemistry, and TCR-GRA all suggested that
this case was MF. Due to the short duration (only one year) of his lesions, we
established the diagnosis of PL-like MF de novo, rather than evolution from PL
to MF. The features of previously reported cases of PL-like MF and those of our
patient are summarized in Table 1 (1-5). Men were predominant (18:7) among the
total of 25 patients. Most patients were children or young adults (mean age of
23.4 years).The interval between presence of lesions and diagnosis varied from 1
month to 10 years. The cutaneous eruptions were all PL in appearance and almost
all involved both the trunk and extremities. Pruritus was reported by
approximately half of the patients. Histologically, the scaly papules were
usually indistinguishable from classical MF, showing epidermotropism, haloed
lymphocytes, lymphocytes aligning along the dermoepidermal junction, and
Pautrier's microabscesses. Immunohistochemically, all tested cases demonstrated
positivity for CD3 but were negative for CD20 and CD30. Cases with predominantly
CD8-positive cells were twice as prevalent as cases with predominantly
CD4-positive cells. TCR-GRA was performed in 20 cases, 15 of which revealed
monoclonality. Most patients received psoralen combined with ultraviolet A or
NBUVB phototherapy, and demonstrated either a complete or partial response.
Recurrence was reported in only 2 cases (5). In summary, PL-like MF is a rare
variant of MF. It has some features distinct from classic MF, such as a higher
incidence in young men and predominantly CD8-positive T-cells infiltration.
Phototherapy can be used as the first line of treatment. A good response and a
favorable prognosis can be expected.

PMID: 31032790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
