---
reference_id: "PMID:29179815"
title: CHARGE syndrome modeling using patient-iPSCs reveals defective migration of neural crest cells harboring CHD7 mutations.
authors:
- Okuno H
- Renault Mihara F
- Ohta S
- Fukuda K
- Kurosawa K
- Akamatsu W
- Sanosaka T
- Kohyama J
- Hayashi K
- Nakajima K
- Takahashi T
- Wysocka J
- Kosaki K
- Okano H
journal: Elife
year: '2017'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.21114
keywords:
- Animals
- "CHARGE Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Movement
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chick Embryo
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/physiology
- Mutant Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Neural Crest/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHARGE syndrome modeling using patient-iPSCs reveals defective migration of neural crest cells harboring CHD7 mutations.
**Authors:** Okuno H, Renault Mihara F, Ohta S, Fukuda K, Kurosawa K, Akamatsu W, Sanosaka T, Kohyama J, Hayashi K, Nakajima K, Takahashi T, Wysocka J, Kosaki K, Okano H
**Journal:** Elife (2017)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.21114](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.21114)

## Content

1. Elife. 2017 Nov 28;6:e21114. doi: 10.7554/eLife.21114.

CHARGE syndrome modeling using patient-iPSCs reveals defective migration of 
neural crest cells harboring CHD7 mutations.

Okuno H(1), Renault Mihara F(1), Ohta S(1), Fukuda K(2), Kurosawa K(3), Akamatsu 
W(1)(4), Sanosaka T(1), Kohyama J(1), Hayashi K(5), Nakajima K(5), Takahashi 
T(6), Wysocka J(7)(8)(9)(10), Kosaki K(11), Okano H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Biological Science, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, 
Japan.
(4)Center for Genomic and Regenerative Medicine, Juntendo University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Anatomy, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, United States.
(8)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, United States.
(9)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, United States.
(10)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, United States.
(11)Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

CHARGE syndrome is caused by heterozygous mutations in the chromatin remodeler, 
CHD7, and is characterized by a set of malformations that, on clinical grounds, 
were historically postulated to arise from defects in neural crest formation 
during embryogenesis. To better delineate neural crest defects in CHARGE 
syndrome, we generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from two patients 
with typical syndrome manifestations, and characterized neural crest cells 
differentiated in vitro from these iPSCs (iPSC-NCCs). We found that expression 
of genes associated with cell migration was altered in CHARGE iPSC-NCCs compared 
to control iPSC-NCCs. Consistently, CHARGE iPSC-NCCs showed defective 
delamination, migration and motility in vitro, and their transplantation in ovo 
revealed overall defective migratory activity in the chick embryo. These results 
support the historical inference that CHARGE syndrome patients exhibit defects 
in neural crest migration, and provide the first successful application of 
patient-derived iPSCs in modeling craniofacial disorders.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.21114
PMCID: PMC5705211
PMID: 29179815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests declared. H Okano is a 
scientific consultant for San Bio, Co. Ltd., Esai, Co. Ltd., and Dainichi 
Sankyo, Co. Ltd.