---
reference_id: "PMID:42168223"
title: Genetic associations between post-traumatic stress disorder and REM-sleep behavior disorder.
authors:
- Ghamgosar Shahkhali M
- Liu L
- Ghamgosar Shahkhali MH
- Yu E
- Asayesh F
- Ahmad J
- Teferra M
- Arnulf I
- Dodet P
- Ju YE
- Hu MTM
- Montplaisir JY
- Gagnon JF
- Desautels A
- Ibrahim A
- Stefani A
- Högl B
- Aktan-Süzgün M
- Iranzo A
- Serradell M
- Montini A
- Maya G
- Gaig C
- Gigli GL
- Valente M
- Janes F
- Bernardini A
- Dauvilliers Y
- Sonka K
- Kemlink D
- Dusek P
- Sommerauer M
- Tamgüney G
- Figorilli M
- Puligheddu M
- Cochen De Cock V
- Oertel W
- Janzen A
- Antelmi E
- Mollenhauer B
- Sixel-Doring F
- Terzaghi M
- Fiamingo G
- Skorvanek M
- Kulcsarova K
- Abril B
- Ferini-Strambi L
- Bušková J
- Orso B
- Mattioli P
- Arnaldi D
- Dijkstra F
- Viaene M
- Boeve BF
- Ross OA
- Rouleau GA
- Neilson LE
- Elliott JE
- Lim MM
- Postuma RB
- Gan-Or Z
journal: NPJ Parkinsons Dis
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1038/s41531-026-01397-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic associations between post-traumatic stress disorder and REM-sleep behavior disorder.
**Authors:** Ghamgosar Shahkhali M, Liu L, Ghamgosar Shahkhali MH, Yu E, Asayesh F, Ahmad J, Teferra M, Arnulf I, Dodet P, Ju YE, Hu MTM, Montplaisir JY, Gagnon JF, Desautels A, Ibrahim A, Stefani A, Högl B, Aktan-Süzgün M, Iranzo A, Serradell M, Montini A, Maya G, Gaig C, Gigli GL, Valente M, Janes F, Bernardini A, Dauvilliers Y, Sonka K, Kemlink D, Dusek P, Sommerauer M, Tamgüney G, Figorilli M, Puligheddu M, Cochen De Cock V, Oertel W, Janzen A, Antelmi E, Mollenhauer B, Sixel-Doring F, Terzaghi M, Fiamingo G, Skorvanek M, Kulcsarova K, Abril B, Ferini-Strambi L, Bušková J, Orso B, Mattioli P, Arnaldi D, Dijkstra F, Viaene M, Boeve BF, Ross OA, Rouleau GA, Neilson LE, Elliott JE, Lim MM, Postuma RB, Gan-Or Z
**Journal:** NPJ Parkinsons Dis (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41531-026-01397-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41531-026-01397-6)

## Content

1. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 2026 May 21. doi: 10.1038/s41531-026-01397-6. Online ahead
 of print.

Genetic associations between post-traumatic stress disorder and REM-sleep 
behavior disorder.

Ghamgosar Shahkhali M(1)(2), Liu L(1)(2)(3), Ghamgosar Shahkhali MH(4), Yu 
E(1)(2), Asayesh F(1)(3), Ahmad J(1)(3), Teferra M(1)(3), Arnulf I(5), Dodet 
P(5), Ju YE(6), Hu MTM(7), Montplaisir JY(8)(9), Gagnon JF(8)(10), Desautels 
A(8)(11), Ibrahim A(12), Stefani A(12), Högl B(12), Aktan-Süzgün M(12), Iranzo 
A(13), Serradell M(13), Montini A(13), Maya G(13), Gaig C(13), Gigli GL(14)(15), 
Valente M(14)(15), Janes F(14)(15), Bernardini A(14)(15), Dauvilliers Y(16), 
Sonka K(17), Kemlink D(17), Dusek P(17), Sommerauer M(18)(19)(20), Tamgüney 
G(21)(22), Figorilli M(23), Puligheddu M(23), Cochen De Cock V(24)(25), Oertel 
W(26), Janzen A(26), Antelmi E(27)(28), Mollenhauer B(29)(30), Sixel-Doring 
F(26)(29), Terzaghi M(31), Fiamingo G(8)(31), Skorvanek M(32)(33)(34), 
Kulcsarova K(32)(33)(34), Abril B(35), Ferini-Strambi L(36), Bušková J(37)(38), 
Orso B(39), Mattioli P(39)(40), Arnaldi D(39)(40), Dijkstra F(41)(42)(43), 
Viaene M(41)(42), Boeve BF(44), Ross OA(45), Rouleau GA(1)(2)(3), Neilson 
LE(46)(47), Elliott JE(46)(47), Lim MM(46)(47), Postuma RB(1)(3)(8), Gan-Or 
Z(48)(49)(50).

Author information:
(1)The Neuro (Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital), McGill University, 
Montréal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, QC, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Computer Engineering, Ahrar Institute of Technology and Higher 
Education, Rasht, Iran.
(5)Sleep Clinic, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, APHP-Sorbonne University and Paris 
Brain institute, Paris, France.
(6)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.
(7)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(8)Centre d'Études Avancées en Médecine du Sommeil, Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de 
Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(10)Department of Psychology, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, QC, 
Canada.
(11)Department of Neurosciences, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(12)Department of Neurology, Sleep Disorders Clinic, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(13)Neurology Service, Sleep Centre, Hospital Clínic Barcelona, Universitat de 
Barcelona, IDIBAPS, CIBERNED: CB06/05/0018-ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain.
(14)Department of Head, Neck and Neurosciences, Clinical Neurology Unit, 
University Hospital of Udine, Udine, Italy.
(15)Department of Medicine (DMED), University of Udine, Udine, Italy.
(16)National Reference Centre for Orphan Diseases, Narcolepsy-Rare Hypersomnias, 
Sleep Unit, Department of Neurology, CHU Montpellier, Institute for 
Neurosciences of Montpellier INM, Univ Montpellier, INSERM, Montpellier, France.
(17)Department of Neurology and Centre of Clinical Neuroscience, Charles 
University, First Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(18)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(19)Cognitive Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-3), 
Research Centre Jülich, Jülich, Germany.
(20)Center for Neurology, Department of Parkinson, Sleep, and Movement 
Disorders, University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(21)Institute of Biological Information Processing-Structural Biochemistry 
(IBI-7), Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, Germany.
(22)Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftliche 
Fakultät, Institut für Physikalische Biologie, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(23)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, Sleep Disorder Research 
Center, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(24)Sleep and Neurology Unit, Beau Soleil Clinic, Montpellier, France.
(25)EuroMov Digital Health in Motion, Univ Montpellier, IMT Mines Ales, 
Montpellier, France.
(26)Department of Neurology, Philipps-University, Marburg, Germany.
(27)AOVR, Verona, Italy.
(28)DIMI Department of Engineering and Medicine of Innovation, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(29)Department of Neurology, University Medical Centre Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(30)Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik, Kassel, Germany.
(31)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(32)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, P. J. Safarik University, 
Kosice, Slovakia.
(33)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of L. Pasteur, Kosice, 
Slovakia.
(34)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine, P. J. Safarik 
University, Kosice, Slovakia.
(35)Sleep Disorder Unit, Carémeau Hospital, University Hospital of Nîmes, Nîmes, 
France.
(36)Department of Neurological Sciences, Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, 
Milan, Italy.
(37)Department of Sleep Medicine, National Institute of Mental Health, Klecany, 
Czech Republic.
(38)Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(39)Department of Neuroscience (DINOGMI), University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(40)IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
(41)Laboratory for Sleep Disorders, St. Dimpna Regional Hospital, Geel, Belgium.
(42)Department of Neurology, St. Dimpna Regional Hospital, Geel, Belgium.
(43)Department of Neurology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
(44)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(45)Departments of Neuroscience and Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, 
Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(46)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, 
USA.
(47)Department of Veteran Affairs, VA Portland Health Care System and VISN20 
Northwest Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Portland, OR, 
USA.
(48)The Neuro (Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital), McGill University, 
Montréal, QC, Canada. ziv.gan-or@mcgill.ca.
(49)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada. 
ziv.gan-or@mcgill.ca.
(50)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, QC, 
Canada. ziv.gan-or@mcgill.ca.

Isolated/idiopathic rapid-eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (iRBD) is, 
in most cases, an early form of α -synuclein-related neurodegenerative diseases, 
including Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Clinical reports 
suggest that iRBD is more common in individuals with Post-Traumatic Stress 
Disorder (PTSD) compared to those without PTSD. We conducted polygenic risk 
score (PRS), genetic correlation, and Mendelian randomization analyses to 
explore potential genetic and/or causal associations between PTSD and iRBD. 
Dopamine transporter imaging binding status was also examined in iRBD patients 
with (N = 6) and without PTSD (N = 32). While not supporting a causal 
relationship, genetic analyses revealed a significant association between PTSD 
and iRBD, consistent with the exploratory imaging substudy. These findings 
suggest that individuals genetically at risk for PTSD may also be at higher risk 
for iRBD. Further investigation of iRBD in individuals with PTSD may help inform 
potential neurodegenerative risk.

© 2026. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41531-026-01397-6
PMID: 42168223

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Z.G-O. received consultancy 
fees from Lysosomal Therapeutics Inc. (LTI), Idorsia, Prevail Therapeutics, Ono 
Therapeutics, Denali, Handl Therapeutics, Neuron23, Bial Biotech, Bial, UCB, 
Capsida, Vanqua Bio, Congruence Therapeutics, Takeda, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, 
EG427, Guidepoint, Lighthouse and Deerfield. Z.G-O. is affiliated with npj 
Parkinson’s Disease as Associate Editor. Z.G-O. was not involved in the 
journal’s review of, or decisions related to, this manuscript. B.M. has received 
honoraria for consultancy and/or educational presentations from GE, Bial, Roche, 
Biogen, AbbVie, Desitin and Amprion, is a member of the executive steering 
committee of the Parkinson Progression Marker Initiative of the Michael J. Fox 
Foundation for Parkinson’s Research and has received research funding from 
Aligning Science Across Parkinson’s disease (ASAP, CRN). A.D. received research 
grants from Eisai and Takeda, honoraria from serving on the scientific advisory 
board of Eisai, Takeda, Paladin Labs, as well as honoraria from speaking 
engagements from AstraZeneca, Eisai, Jazz Pharma and Paladin Labs. None of the 
financial disclosures is relevant to the submitted work.