---
reference_id: "PMID:36450981"
title: Genomic signature of Fanconi anaemia DNA repair pathway deficiency in cancer.
authors:
- Webster ALH
- Sanders MA
- Patel K
- Dietrich R
- Noonan RJ
- Lach FP
- White RR
- Goldfarb A
- Hadi K
- Edwards MM
- Donovan FX
- Hoogenboezem RM
- Jung M
- Sridhar S
- Wiley TF
- Fedrigo O
- Tian H
- Rosiene J
- Heineman T
- Kennedy JA
- Bean L
- Rosti RO
- Tryon R
- Gonzalez AM
- Rosenberg A
- Luo JD
- Carroll TS
- Shroff S
- Beaumont M
- Velleuer E
- Rastatter JC
- Wells SI
- Surrallés J
- Bagby G
- MacMillan ML
- Wagner JE
- Cancio M
- Boulad F
- Scognamiglio T
- Vaughan R
- Beaumont KG
- Koren A
- Imielinski M
- Chandrasekharappa SC
- Auerbach AD
- Singh B
- Kutler DI
- Campbell PJ
- Smogorzewska A
journal: Nature
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05253-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic signature of Fanconi anaemia DNA repair pathway deficiency in cancer.
**Authors:** Webster ALH, Sanders MA, Patel K, Dietrich R, Noonan RJ, Lach FP, White RR, Goldfarb A, Hadi K, Edwards MM, Donovan FX, Hoogenboezem RM, Jung M, Sridhar S, Wiley TF, Fedrigo O, Tian H, Rosiene J, Heineman T, Kennedy JA, Bean L, Rosti RO, Tryon R, Gonzalez AM, Rosenberg A, Luo JD, Carroll TS, Shroff S, Beaumont M, Velleuer E, Rastatter JC, Wells SI, Surrallés J, Bagby G, MacMillan ML, Wagner JE, Cancio M, Boulad F, Scognamiglio T, Vaughan R, Beaumont KG, Koren A, Imielinski M, Chandrasekharappa SC, Auerbach AD, Singh B, Kutler DI, Campbell PJ, Smogorzewska A
**Journal:** Nature (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-022-05253-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05253-4)

## Content

1. Nature. 2022 Dec;612(7940):495-502. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05253-4. Epub 2022
 Nov 30.

Genomic signature of Fanconi anaemia DNA repair pathway deficiency in cancer.

Webster ALH(#)(1), Sanders MA(#)(2)(3), Patel K(1), Dietrich R(4), Noonan RJ(1), 
Lach FP(1), White RR(1), Goldfarb A(1), Hadi K(5), Edwards MM(6), Donovan FX(7), 
Hoogenboezem RM(3), Jung M(1), Sridhar S(1), Wiley TF(1), Fedrigo O(8), Tian 
H(5), Rosiene J(5), Heineman T(1), Kennedy JA(1)(9), Bean L(1), Rosti RO(1), 
Tryon R(10), Gonzalez AM(1), Rosenberg A(1), Luo JD(11), Carroll TS(11), Shroff 
S(12), Beaumont M(12), Velleuer E(13)(14), Rastatter JC(15)(16), Wells 
SI(17)(18), Surrallés J(19), Bagby G(20), MacMillan ML(10), Wagner JE(10), 
Cancio M(21), Boulad F(21), Scognamiglio T(22), Vaughan R(23), Beaumont KG(12), 
Koren A(6), Imielinski M(5), Chandrasekharappa SC(7), Auerbach AD(24), Singh 
B(25), Kutler DI(26), Campbell PJ(2), Smogorzewska A(27).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genome Maintenance, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Cancer, Ageing and Somatic Mutation (CASM), Wellcome Sanger Institute, 
Hinxton, UK.
(3)Department of Hematology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Deutsche Fanconi-Anämie-Hilfe e.V, Unna-Siddinghausen, Germany.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine and 
New York Genome Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 
USA.
(7)Cancer Genetics and Comparative Genomics Branch, National Human Genome 
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)Vertebrate Genomes Laboratory, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(11)Bioinformatics Resource Center, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(12)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences. Icahn School of Medicine, Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(13)Institute for Pathology, Department for Cytopathology, University Hospital 
of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(14)Pediatric Cancer Center, Helios Hospital Krefeld, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(15)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Ann and Robert 
H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(16)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(17)Division of Oncology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(19)Genomic Instability and DNA Repair Syndromes Group and Joint Research Unit 
on Genomic Medicine UAB-Sant Pau Biomedical Research Institute (IIB Sant Pau), 
Institut de Recerca Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau-IIB Sant Pau, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(20)Departments of Medicine and Molecular and Medical Genetics, Division of 
Hematology and Medical Oncology, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and 
Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(22)Department of Pathology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(23)Department of Biostatistics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(24)Human Genetics and Hematology Program, The Rockefeller University, New York, 
NY, USA.
(25)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA.
(26)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical 
College, New York, NY, USA.
(27)Laboratory of Genome Maintenance, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. 
asmogorzewska@rockefeller.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Fanconi anaemia (FA), a model syndrome of genome instability, is caused by a 
deficiency in DNA interstrand crosslink repair resulting in chromosome 
breakage1-3. The FA repair pathway protects against endogenous and exogenous 
carcinogenic aldehydes4-7. Individuals with FA are hundreds to thousands fold 
more likely to develop head and neck (HNSCC), oesophageal and anogenital 
squamous cell carcinomas8 (SCCs). Molecular studies of SCCs from individuals 
with FA (FA SCCs) are limited, and it is unclear how FA SCCs relate to sporadic 
HNSCCs primarily driven by tobacco and alcohol exposure or infection with human 
papillomavirus9 (HPV). Here, by sequencing genomes and exomes of FA SCCs, we 
demonstrate that the primary genomic signature of FA repair deficiency is the 
presence of high numbers of structural variants. Structural variants are 
enriched for small deletions, unbalanced translocations and fold-back 
inversions, and are often connected, thereby forming complex rearrangements. 
They arise in the context of TP53 loss, but not in the context of HPV infection, 
and lead to somatic copy-number alterations of HNSCC driver genes. We further 
show that FA pathway deficiency may lead to epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
and enhanced keratinocyte-intrinsic inflammatory signalling, which would 
contribute to the aggressive nature of FA SCCs. We propose that the genomic 
instability in sporadic HPV-negative HNSCC may arise as a result of the FA 
repair pathway being overwhelmed by DNA interstrand crosslink damage caused by 
alcohol and tobacco-derived aldehydes, making FA SCC a powerful model to study 
tumorigenesis resulting from DNA-crosslinking damage.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-05253-4
PMCID: PMC10202100
PMID: 36450981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Rocket Pharmaceuticals 
provided research funding and partial salary support to A.S. for an unrelated 
project. P.J.C. is a founder, director and consultant for Mu Genomics Ltd. B.S. 
is a co-inventor of intellectual property related to DCN1 small molecule 
inhibitors licensed by MSK to Cinsanso. He has rights to receive royalty income 
as a result of this arrangement. MSK has financial interests related to this 
intellectual property and Cinsanso as a result of this arrangement. Other 
authors declare no competing interests.