---
reference_id: "PMID:28314522"
title: Increased photosensitivity following short sleep in sleep deprived patients.
authors:
- Elmalı AD
- Kurucu H
- Ertürk Çetin Ö
- Çokar Ö
- Matur Z
- Dervent A
- Benbir Şenel G
- Gürses C
- Demirbilek V
journal: Neurophysiol Clin
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.neucli.2017.01.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased photosensitivity following short sleep in sleep deprived patients.
**Authors:** Elmalı AD, Kurucu H, Ertürk Çetin Ö, Çokar Ö, Matur Z, Dervent A, Benbir Şenel G, Gürses C, Demirbilek V
**Journal:** Neurophysiol Clin (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neucli.2017.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucli.2017.01.011)

## Content

1. Neurophysiol Clin. 2017 Jun;47(3):239-245. doi: 10.1016/j.neucli.2017.01.011. 
Epub 2017 Mar 15.

Increased photosensitivity following short sleep in sleep deprived patients.

Elmalı AD(1), Kurucu H(2), Ertürk Çetin Ö(2), Çokar Ö(3), Matur Z(4), Dervent 
A(2), Benbir Şenel G(2), Gürses C(5), Demirbilek V(2).

Author information:
(1)Istanbul university, Cerrahpasa faculty of medicine, department of neurology, 
Kocamustafapasa St. No. 53, 34098 Istanbul, Turkey. Electronic address: 
denizelmali@yahoo.com.
(2)Istanbul university, Cerrahpasa faculty of medicine, department of neurology, 
Kocamustafapasa St. No. 53, 34098 Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Haseki training and research hospital, department of neurology, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(4)Istanbul Bilim university, department of neurology, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Istanbul university, Istanbul faculty of medicine, department of neurology, 
Istanbul, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: We aimed to determine the effect of short day-time sleep on 
photoparoxysmal epileptic activity in sleep-deprived patients.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed video-EEG recordings performed between 2003 
and 2015. All recordings following at least four hours of sleep deprivation, 
including intermittent photic stimulation (IPS) both before and after sleep with 
any form of epileptiform activity were included. The study group was divided 
into four subgroups: (1) no photoparoxysmal response (PPR) group, with 
epileptiform activities other than PPRs; (2) increment group, with PPR duration 
increased by ≥200% after vs. before sleep; (3) no significant change group, with 
PPR duration increased between 50% and 200% after vs. before sleep; (4) 
decrement group, with PPR duration increased ≤50% after vs. before sleep.
RESULTS: A total number of 5805 EEG recordings from 459 patients was analyzed. 
Photosensitivity was present in 98 patients (21.4%). The PPRs after sleep were 
increased in 70% of the photosensitive patients, did not change in 23%, and were 
decreased in 7%. The increase in duration of PPRs was statistically significant 
(P<0.001). In our cohort, photosensitivity would have been detected in 
67 patients if IPS was applied only before sleep and in 91 patients if IPS was 
applied only after awakening (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that photosensitivity is enhanced after 
awakening from a short sleep following sleep deprivation. Thus, we recommend 
performing IPS after awakening to increase sensitivity to detect photoparoxysmal 
epileptiform discharges.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neucli.2017.01.011
PMID: 28314522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]