---
reference_id: "PMID:28976804"
title: Comparative Study of Three Bile Duct Closure Methods Following Laparoscopic Common Bile Duct Exploration for Choledocholithiasis.
authors:
- Parra-Membrives P
- Martínez-Baena D
- Lorente-Herce J
- Jiménez-Riera G
journal: J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1089/lap.2017.0433
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative Study of Three Bile Duct Closure Methods Following Laparoscopic Common Bile Duct Exploration for Choledocholithiasis.
**Authors:** Parra-Membrives P, Martínez-Baena D, Lorente-Herce J, Jiménez-Riera G
**Journal:** J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1089/lap.2017.0433](https://doi.org/10.1089/lap.2017.0433)

## Content

1. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2018 Feb;28(2):145-151. doi: 
10.1089/lap.2017.0433. Epub 2017 Oct 4.

Comparative Study of Three Bile Duct Closure Methods Following Laparoscopic 
Common Bile Duct Exploration for Choledocholithiasis.

Parra-Membrives P(1)(2), Martínez-Baena D(2), Lorente-Herce J(2), Jiménez-Riera 
G(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Surgery, University of Seville , Sevilla, Spain .
(2)2 Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery Unit, General and Digestive Surgery 
Department, Valme University Hospital , Sevilla, Spain .

BACKGROUND: There are three choledochotomy closure methods available following 
laparoscopic common bile duct exploration: T-tube insertion, antegrade stenting, 
and primary choledochorrhaphy. We reviewed the experience of 12 years at our 
center searching for the optimal closure technique.
METHODS: We analyzed retrospectively 146 patients that underwent one of the 
three closure methods from February 2004 to March 2016. Hospital stay, need for 
readmission, incidence of early and long-term complications, and biliary leakage 
development and their clinical impact were determined for each technique.
RESULTS: Hospital stay was more prolonged, and need for readmission was higher 
in the T-tube group. Nine patients of the T-tube group (17.3%), 5 patients 
(8.6%) of the antegrade stenting group, and 1 patient of the primary suture 
group (2.8%) developed Dindo-Clavien ≥3 complications (P = .076). The incidence 
of biliary leakage was 3.8%, 8.6%, and 16.7% for the T-tube group, antegrade 
stenting group, and primary suture group, respectively. There was no grade C 
biliary fistula in the primary suture group, and all grade B leaks in these 
patients were only due to prolonged duration. The T-tube removal caused adverse 
events in 21.1% of the patients, and complications directly related with stents 
occurred in 9.6%.
CONCLUSION: Antegrade stents or T-tube insertion do not provide any added value 
for choledochotomy closure but are charged with specific morbidity. On the 
contrary, despite biliary leaks being more frequent after primary suture, they 
are of little clinical consequence and may be managed on an outpatient basis.

DOI: 10.1089/lap.2017.0433
PMID: 28976804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]