---
reference_id: "PMID:35227908"
title: Thymic Carcinomas-A Concise Multidisciplinary Update on Recent Developments From the Thymic Carcinoma Working Group of the International Thymic Malignancy Interest Group.
authors:
- Roden AC
- Ahmad U
- Cardillo G
- Girard N
- Jain D
- Marom EM
- Marx A
- Moreira AL
- Nicholson AG
- Rajan A
- Shepherd AF
- Simone CB 2nd
- Strange CD
- Szolkowska M
- Truong MT
- Rimner A
journal: J Thorac Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2022.01.021
keywords:
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Neoplasms, Glandular and Epithelial/pathology"
- Public Opinion
- Thymoma/pathology
- "Thymus Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thymic Carcinomas-A Concise Multidisciplinary Update on Recent Developments From the Thymic Carcinoma Working Group of the International Thymic Malignancy Interest Group.
**Authors:** Roden AC, Ahmad U, Cardillo G, Girard N, Jain D, Marom EM, Marx A, Moreira AL, Nicholson AG, Rajan A, Shepherd AF, Simone CB 2nd, Strange CD, Szolkowska M, Truong MT, Rimner A
**Journal:** J Thorac Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtho.2022.01.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtho.2022.01.021)

## Content

1. J Thorac Oncol. 2022 May;17(5):637-650. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2022.01.021. Epub 
2022 Feb 25.

Thymic Carcinomas-A Concise Multidisciplinary Update on Recent Developments From 
the Thymic Carcinoma Working Group of the International Thymic Malignancy 
Interest Group.

Roden AC(1), Ahmad U(2), Cardillo G(3), Girard N(4), Jain D(5), Marom EM(6), 
Marx A(7), Moreira AL(8), Nicholson AG(9), Rajan A(10), Shepherd AF(11), Simone 
CB 2nd(12), Strange CD(13), Szolkowska M(14), Truong MT(13), Rimner A(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota. Electronic address: roden.anja@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Carlo Forlanini Hospital, Azienda Ospedaliera 
San Camillo Forlanini, Rome, Italy.
(4)Institut Curie, Institut du thorax Curie Montsouris, Paris, France; 
Université de Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines (UVSQ), Paris Saclay Campus, 
Versailles, France.
(5)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.
(6)Radiology Department, The Chaim Sheba Medical Center Affiliated With Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(7)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, Heidelberg 
University, Mannheim, Germany.
(8)Department of Pathology, New York University Langone Health, New York, New 
York.
(9)Department of Histopathology, Royal Brompton and Harefield Hospitals, London, 
United Kingdom; National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, 
United Kingdom.
(10)Thoracic and Gastrointestinal Malignancies Branch, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(11)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, New York.
(12)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and 
New York Proton Center, New York, New York.
(13)Division of Diagnostic Imaging, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(14)Department of Pathology, National Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases Research 
Institute, Warsaw, Poland.

Thymic carcinomas are rare malignancies that in general arise in the prevascular 
(anterior) mediastinum. These tumors are usually invasive, often present at 
advanced stages, and typically behave aggressively. Studies are hampered by the 
paucity of these tumors, the large variety of carcinoma subtypes, and the lack 
of unique morphologic and immunophenotypic features. Despite these challenges, 
advances in diagnostic imaging, surgical approaches, systemic therapies, and 
radiation therapy techniques have been made. The WHO classification of thymic 
epithelial tumors has been updated in 2021, and the eighth tumor nodal 
metastasis staging by the American Joint Committee on Cancer/Union for 
International Cancer Control included thymic carcinomas in 2017. Molecular 
alterations that provide more insight into the pathogenesis of these tumors and 
that potentially permit use of novel targeted therapies are increasingly being 
identified. New approaches to radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and immunotherapy 
are under evaluation. International societies, including the International 
Thymic Malignancy Interest Group, European Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Japanese, Chinese, and Korean thymic associations, have been critical in 
organizing and conducting multi-institutional clinical studies. Herein, we 
review contemporary multidisciplinary perspectives in diagnosis and management 
of thymic carcinoma.

Copyright © 2022 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2022.01.021
PMCID: PMC11080660
PMID: 35227908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]