---
reference_id: "PMID:37266762"
title: The Role of Tau Proteoforms in Health and Disease.
authors:
- Waheed Z
- Choudhary J
- Jatala FH
- Fatimah
- Noor A
- Zerr I
- Zafar S
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03387-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Tau Proteoforms in Health and Disease.
**Authors:** Waheed Z, Choudhary J, Jatala FH, Fatimah, Noor A, Zerr I, Zafar S
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-023-03387-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-023-03387-8)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2023 Sep;60(9):5155-5166. doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03387-8. Epub
 2023 Jun 2.

The Role of Tau Proteoforms in Health and Disease.

Waheed Z(#)(1), Choudhary J(#)(1), Jatala FH(#)(1), Fatimah(#)(1), Noor A(2), 
Zerr I(3), Zafar S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering (SMME), National 
University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), Bolan Road, Sector H-12, 
Islamabad, 46000, Pakistan.
(2)School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering (SMME), National 
University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), Bolan Road, Sector H-12, 
Islamabad, 46000, Pakistan. aneeqa_n@yahoo.com.
(3)Clinical Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Göttingen and the 
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Robert-Koch-Straße 40, 
37075, Göttingen, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Tau is a microtubule-associated binding protein in the nervous system that is 
known for its role in stabilizing microtubules throughout the nerve cell. It 
accumulates as β-sheet-rich aggregates and neurofibrillary tangles, leading to 
an array of different pathologies. Six splice variants of this protein, 
generated from the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) gene, are expressed 
in the brain. Amongst these variants, 0N3R, is prominent during fetal 
development, while the rest, 0N4R, 1N3R, 1N4R, 2N3R, and 2N4R, are expressed in 
postnatal stages. Tau isoforms play their role separately or in combination with 
others to contribute to one or multiple neurodegenerative disorders and clinical 
syndromes. For instance, in Alzheimer's disease and a subset of frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration (FTLD)-MAPT (i.e., R406W and V337M), both 3R and 4R isoforms 
are involved; therefore, they are called 3R/4R mix tauopathies. On the other 
hand, 4R isoforms are aggregated in progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 
corticobasal degeneration (CBD), and a majority of FTLD-MAPT and these diseases 
are called 4R tauopathies. Similarly, Pick's disease has an association with 3R 
tau isoforms and is thereby referred to as 3R tauopathy. Unlike 3R isoforms, the 
4R variants have a faster rate of aggregation that accelerates the associated 
neurodegenerative mechanisms. Moreover, post-translational modifications of each 
isoform occur at a different rate and dictate their physiological and 
pathological attributes. The smallest tau isoform (0N3R) is highly 
phosphorylated in the fetal brain but does not lead to the generation of 
aggregates. On the other hand, proteoforms in the adult human brain undergo 
aggregation upon their phosphorylation and glycation. Expanding on this 
knowledge, this article aims to review the physiological and pathological roles 
of tau isoforms and their underlying mechanisms that result in neurological 
deficits. Physiological and pathological relevance of microtubule-associated 
protein tau (MAPT): Tau exists as six splice variants in the brain, each 
differing with respect to expression, post-translational modifications (PTMs), 
and aggregation kinetics. Physiologically, they are involved in the 
stabilization of microtubules that form the molecular highways for axonal 
transport. However, an imbalance in their expression and the associated PTMs 
leads to a disruption in their physiological function through the formation of 
neurofibrillary tangles that accumulate in various regions of the brain and 
contribute to several types of tauopathies.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-023-03387-8
PMID: 37266762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]