---
reference_id: "PMID:29300049"
title: Hirschsprung disease - integrating basic science and clinical medicine to improve outcomes.
authors:
- Heuckeroth RO
journal: Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/nrgastro.2017.149
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschsprung disease - integrating basic science and clinical medicine to improve outcomes.
**Authors:** Heuckeroth RO
**Journal:** Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrgastro.2017.149](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrgastro.2017.149)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018 Mar;15(3):152-167. doi: 
10.1038/nrgastro.2017.149. Epub 2018 Jan 4.

Hirschsprung disease - integrating basic science and clinical medicine to 
improve outcomes.

Heuckeroth RO(1).

Author information:
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia - Research Institute, 3615 Civic 
Center Boulevard, Abramson Pediatric Research Center, Suite #1116i, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-1209, USA.

Hirschsprung disease is defined by the absence of enteric neurons at the end of 
the bowel. The enteric nervous system (ENS) is the intrinsic nervous system of 
the bowel and regulates most aspects of bowel function. When the ENS is missing, 
there are no neurally mediated propulsive motility patterns, and the bowel 
remains contracted, causing functional obstruction. Symptoms of Hirschsprung 
disease include constipation, vomiting, abdominal distension and growth failure. 
Untreated disease usually causes death in childhood because bloodstream 
bacterial infections occur in the context of bowel inflammation (enterocolitis) 
or bowel perforation. Current treatment is surgical resection of the bowel to 
remove or bypass regions where the ENS is missing, but many children have 
problems after surgery. Although the anatomy of Hirschsprung disease is simple, 
many clinical features remain enigmatic, and diagnosis and management remain 
challenging. For example, the age of presentation and the type of symptoms that 
occur vary dramatically among patients, even though every affected child has 
missing neurons in the distal bowel at birth. In this Review, basic science 
discoveries are linked to clinical manifestations of Hirschsprung disease, 
including partial penetrance, enterocolitis and genetics. Insights into disease 
mechanisms that might lead to new prevention, diagnostic and treatment 
strategies are described.

DOI: 10.1038/nrgastro.2017.149
PMID: 29300049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]