---
reference_id: "PMID:38832425"
title: "Naked antibodies and antibody-drug conjugates: targeted therapy for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia."
authors:
- Brivio E
- Bautista F
- Zwaan CM
journal: Haematologica
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2023.283815
keywords:
- Humans
- "Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/drug therapy, immunology"
- Child
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Immunoconjugates/therapeutic use
- "Antibodies, Bispecific/therapeutic use"
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Immunological/therapeutic use"
- Treatment Outcome
- Inotuzumab Ozogamicin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Naked antibodies and antibody-drug conjugates: targeted therapy for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
**Authors:** Brivio E, Bautista F, Zwaan CM
**Journal:** Haematologica (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2023.283815](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2023.283815)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2024 Jun 1;109(6):1700-1712. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2023.283815.

Naked antibodies and antibody-drug conjugates: targeted therapy for childhood 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Brivio E(1), Bautista F(1), Zwaan CM(2).

Author information:
(1)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht.
(2)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht; Pediatric Oncology, 
Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

The treatment of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) has reached 
overall survival rates exceeding 90%. The present and future challenges are to 
cure the remainder of patients still dying from disease, and to reduce morbidity 
and mortality in those who can be cured with standard-of-care chemotherapy by 
replacing toxic chemotherapy elements while retaining cure rates. With the novel 
therapeutic options introduced in the last years, including immunotherapies and 
targeted antibodies, the treatment of ALL is undergoing major changes. For 
B-cell precursor ALL, blinatumomab, an anti-CD19 bispecific antibody, has 
established its role in the consolidation treatment for both high- and 
standard-risk first relapse of ALL, in the presence of bone marrow involvement, 
and may also have an impact on the outcome of high-risk subsets such as infant 
ALL and Philadelphia chromosome-positive ALL. Inotuzumab ozogamicin, an 
anti-CD22 drug conjugated antibody, has demonstrated high efficacy in inducing 
complete remission in relapsed ALL, even in the presence of high tumor burden, 
but randomized phase III trials are still ongoing. For T-ALL the role of 
CD38-directed treatment, such as daratumumab, is gaining interest, but 
randomized data are needed to assess its specific benefit. These antibodies are 
currently being tested in patients with newly diagnosed ALL and may lead to 
major changes in the present paradigm of treatment of pediatric ALL. Unlike the 
past, lessons may be learned from innovations in adult ALL, in which more 
drastic changes are piloted that may need to be translated to pediatrics.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2023.283815
PMCID: PMC11141655
PMID: 38832425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]