---
reference_id: "PMID:40629209"
title: "Arsenic in drinking water and breast cancer: a case-control study from a high exposure area in Northern Chile."
authors:
- Blanco E
- Acevedo J
- Pérez L
- Herrera M
- Durán V
- Barlaro T
- Meza R
- Roa JC
- Parra R
- Benitez H
- Schwalb ME
- Steinmaus C
- Ferreccio C
journal: Breast Cancer Res Treat
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10549-025-07765-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Breast Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, chemically induced"
- Chile/epidemiology
- "Arsenic/adverse effects, analysis, toxicity"
- "Drinking Water/chemistry, adverse effects, analysis"
- Case-Control Studies
- Middle Aged
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Aged
- Adult
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/adverse effects"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic in drinking water and breast cancer: a case-control study from a high exposure area in Northern Chile.
**Authors:** Blanco E, Acevedo J, Pérez L, Herrera M, Durán V, Barlaro T, Meza R, Roa JC, Parra R, Benitez H, Schwalb ME, Steinmaus C, Ferreccio C
**Journal:** Breast Cancer Res Treat (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10549-025-07765-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-025-07765-9)

## Content

1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2025 Aug;213(1):127-135. doi:
10.1007/s10549-025-07765-9. Epub 2025 Jul 8.

Arsenic in drinking water and breast cancer: a case-control study from a high
exposure area in Northern Chile.

Blanco E(1)(2), Acevedo J(3)(4), Pérez L(2), Herrera M(2), Durán V(5), Barlaro
T(6), Meza R(7), Roa JC(8), Parra R(9), Benitez H(9), Schwalb ME(10), Steinmaus
C(11), Ferreccio C(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)College UC, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Escuela de Salud Pública, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago,
Chile.
(3)Centro de Epidemiología y Políticas de Salud, Facultad de Medicina Clínica
Alemana, Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Centro Para La Prevención y Control del Cáncer (CECAN), Santiago, Chile.
(5)Department of Pathology, Hospital Juan Noé, Arica, Chile.
(6)Department of Pathology, Hospital Ernesto Torres Galdames de Iquique,
Iquique, Chile.
(7)Department of Pathology, Hospital Carlos Cisternas de Calama, Calama, Chile.
(8)Department of Pathology, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(9)Department of Pathology, Hospital Leonardo Guzmán de Antofagasta,
Antofagasta, Chile.
(10)Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, California Environmental
Protection Agency, Oakland, CA, USA.
(11)Arsenic Research Group, School of Public Health, University of California,
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(12)Escuela de Salud Pública, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Santiago, Chile. cferreccio@ispch.cl.
(13)Instituto de Salud Pública de Chile, Marathón 1000, Ñuñoa Santiago, Chile.
cferreccio@ispch.cl.

PURPOSE: Exposure to arsenic in drinking water is a cause of lung, bladder, and
skin cancer, however the relation between arsenic and breast cancer is unclear.
Northern Chile had high levels of arsenic in drinking water (up to 900 µg/l)
between 1950 and 1970, facilitating the study of outcomes with long latency. We
conducted a breast cancer case-control study in Northern Chile (2014-2018) and
analyzed 505 incident breast cancer cases and 409 population-based female
controls with data collected on lifetime exposure to arsenic and potential
confounders.
METHODS: We identified cases in collaboration with cancer committees, hospitals,
and medical facilities in the study area. Controls were recruited from the Chile
Voter Registry. Logistic regression was used to assess the relationship between
arsenic exposure and breast cancer adjusting for education and age. We evaluated
cumulative, lifetime average and highest single year exposure with tertiles and
quartiles and population weighted controls based on age and region of residence.
RESULTS: Exposure levels were high in both cases and controls, with median
(interquartile range) values of: 52 (15-84) and 42 (10-106) μg/L for average
lifetime concentration, respectively. Adjusted odds ratios (OR) for tertile of
cumulative exposure to arsenic concentrations in water (< 1.17, 1.17-5.16,
and ≥ 5.17 mg) were 1.00, 0.85 [95% confidence interval (CI), 0.60-1.18], and
1.10 (0.79-1.55). Results were similar for lifetime average and single-highest
year exposure metrics.
CONCLUSION: We did not find evidence of increased odds of higher arsenic
exposure among incident breast cancer cases compared to female population
controls.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-025-07765-9
PMID: 40629209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors
have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose. Ethical
approval: The study was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board
of the Pontificia Universidad Católica of Chile (ID: 15-037) and the Northern
Region Ethical Committee of the Public Health System. Patient consent: All
participants (cases, controls and next of kin proxies) provided signed informed
consent before answering questionnaires.
