---
reference_id: "PMID:33075814"
title: "Overcoming T-cell exhaustion in LCH: PD-1 blockade and targeted MAPK inhibition are synergistic in a mouse model of LCH."
authors:
- Sengal A
- Velazquez J
- Hahne M
- Burke TM
- Abhyankar H
- Reyes R
- Olea W
- Scull B
- Eckstein OS
- Bigenwald C
- Bollard CM
- Yu W
- Merad M
- McClain KL
- Allen CE
- Chakraborty R
journal: Blood
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2020005867
keywords:
- Animals
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/drug effects, pathology"
- "CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/drug effects, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Drug Synergism
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/drug therapy, pathology"
- Humans
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overcoming T-cell exhaustion in LCH: PD-1 blockade and targeted MAPK inhibition are synergistic in a mouse model of LCH.
**Authors:** Sengal A, Velazquez J, Hahne M, Burke TM, Abhyankar H, Reyes R, Olea W, Scull B, Eckstein OS, Bigenwald C, Bollard CM, Yu W, Merad M, McClain KL, Allen CE, Chakraborty R
**Journal:** Blood (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2020005867](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020005867)

## Content

1. Blood. 2021 Apr 1;137(13):1777-1791. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020005867.

Overcoming T-cell exhaustion in LCH: PD-1 blockade and targeted MAPK inhibition 
are synergistic in a mouse model of LCH.

Sengal A(1)(2), Velazquez J(1)(2), Hahne M(1), Burke TM(1)(2)(3), Abhyankar 
H(1), Reyes R(1), Olea W(1), Scull B(1), Eckstein OS(1), Bigenwald C(4)(5), 
Bollard CM(6)(7)(8), Yu W(9), Merad M(4)(5), McClain KL(1)(2), Allen 
CE(1)(2)(3), Chakraborty R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX.
(2)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and.
(3)Program in Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX.
(4)Department of Oncological Sciences, Tisch Cancer Institute, and.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Icahn School of Medicine, New York, NY.
(6)Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children's National Medical 
Center, Washington, DC.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical Medicine, The George 
Washington University, Washington, DC; and.
(9)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.

Comment in
    Blood. 2021 Apr 1;137(13):1705-1706. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020009251.

Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is an inflammatory myeloid neoplasia 
characterized by granulomatous lesions containing pathological CD207+ dendritic 
cells (DCs) with persistent MAPK pathway activation. Standard-of-care 
chemotherapies are inadequate for most patients with multisystem disease, and 
optimal strategies for relapsed and refractory disease are not defined. The 
mechanisms underlying development of inflammation in LCH lesions, the role of 
inflammation in pathogenesis, and the potential for immunotherapy are unknown. 
Analysis of the immune infiltrate in LCH lesions identified the most prominent 
immune cells as T lymphocytes. Both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells exhibited "exhausted" 
phenotypes with high expression of the immune checkpoint receptors. LCH DCs 
showed robust expression of ligands to checkpoint receptors. Intralesional CD8+ 
T cells showed blunted expression of Tc1/Tc2 cytokines and impaired effector 
function. In contrast, intralesional regulatory T cells demonstrated intact 
suppressive activity. Treatment of BRAFV600ECD11c LCH mice with anti-PD-1 or 
MAPK inhibitor reduced lesion size, but with distinct responses. Whereas MAPK 
inhibitor treatment resulted in reduction of the myeloid compartment, anti-PD-1 
treatment was associated with reduction in the lymphoid compartment. Notably, 
combined treatment with MAPK inhibitor and anti-PD-1 significantly decreased 
both CD8+ T cells and myeloid LCH cells in a synergistic fashion. These results 
are consistent with a model that MAPK hyperactivation in myeloid LCH cells 
drives recruitment of functionally exhausted T cells within the LCH 
microenvironment, and they highlight combined MAPK and checkpoint inhibition as 
a potential therapeutic strategy.

© 2021 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020005867
PMCID: PMC8020265
PMID: 33075814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.