---
reference_id: PMID:35474304
title: Clinical and transcriptomic features of persistent exacerbation-prone severe asthma in U-BIOPRED cohort.
authors:
- Hoda U
- Pavlidis S
- Bansal AT
- Takahashi K
- Hu S
- Ng Kee Kwong F
- Rossios C
- Sun K
- Bhavsar P
- Loza M
- Baribaud F
- Chanez P
- Fowler SJ
- Horvath I
- Montuschi P
- Singer F
- Musial J
- Dahlen B
- Krug N
- Sandstrom T
- Shaw DE
- Lutter R
- Fleming LJ
- Howarth PH
- Caruso M
- Sousa AR
- Corfield J
- Auffray C
- De Meulder B
- Lefaudeux D
- Dahlen SE
- Djukanovic R
- Sterk PJ
- Guo Y
- Adcock IM
- Chung KF
- U-BIOPRED study group
journal: Clin Transl Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ctm2.816
keywords:
- "Asthma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Bronchi/pathology
- Cohort Studies
- Humans
- Sputum/metabolism
- Transcriptome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and transcriptomic features of persistent exacerbation-prone severe asthma in U-BIOPRED cohort.
**Authors:** Hoda U, Pavlidis S, Bansal AT, Takahashi K, Hu S, Ng Kee Kwong F, Rossios C, Sun K, Bhavsar P, Loza M, Baribaud F, Chanez P, Fowler SJ, Horvath I, Montuschi P, Singer F, Musial J, Dahlen B, Krug N, Sandstrom T, Shaw DE, Lutter R, Fleming LJ, Howarth PH, Caruso M, Sousa AR, Corfield J, Auffray C, De Meulder B, Lefaudeux D, Dahlen SE, Djukanovic R, Sterk PJ, Guo Y, Adcock IM, Chung KF, U-BIOPRED study group
**Journal:** Clin Transl Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ctm2.816](https://doi.org/10.1002/ctm2.816)

## Content

1. Clin Transl Med. 2022 Apr;12(4):e816. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.816.

Clinical and transcriptomic features of persistent exacerbation-prone severe 
asthma in U-BIOPRED cohort.

Hoda U(1), Pavlidis S(2), Bansal AT(3), Takahashi K(1)(4), Hu S(3), Ng Kee Kwong 
F(1), Rossios C(1), Sun K(3), Bhavsar P(1), Loza M(5), Baribaud F(5), Chanez 
P(6), Fowler SJ(7), Horvath I(8), Montuschi P(9), Singer F(10), Musial J(11), 
Dahlen B(12), Krug N(13), Sandstrom T(14), Shaw DE(15), Lutter R(16), Fleming 
LJ(1), Howarth PH(17), Caruso M(18), Sousa AR(19), Corfield J(20), Auffray 
C(21), De Meulder B(21), Lefaudeux D(21), Dahlen SE(12), Djukanovic R(17), Sterk 
PJ(16), Guo Y(3), Adcock IM(1), Chung KF(1); U-BIOPRED study group.

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, and Biomedical 
Research Unit, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust, London, UK.
(2)Department of Computing & Data Science Institute, Imperial College London.
(3)Acclarogen, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Research Centre for Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Asahi General Hospital, 
Asahi, Japan.
(5)Janssen Research and Development, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, UK.
(6)Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Marseille, Clinique des Bronches, 
Allergies et Sommeil, Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
(7)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Biology, 
School of Biological Sciences, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, 
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, and NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, 
Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(8)Department of Pulmonology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(9)Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(10)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Children's Hospital Zurich 
and Childhood Research Center, Zurich, and Department of Paediatrics, 
Inselspital, University of Bern, Switzerland.
(11)Department of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, 
Poland.
(12)Centre for Allergy Research, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(13)Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Hannover, 
Germany.
(14)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, 
Sweden.
(15)Respiratory Research Unit, University of Nottingham, UK.
(16)Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(17)NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research Centre, Clinical and Experimental 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, UK.
(18)Department of Biochemical and Biotechnological Medicine, University of 
Catania, Catania, Italy.
(19)Respiratory Therapeutic Unit, GSK, Stockley Park, UK.
(20)AstraZeneca R&D, Molndal, Sweden, and Areteva R&D, Nottingham, UK.
(21)European Institute for Systems Biology and Medicine, CNRS-ENS-UCBL-INSERM, 
Lyon, France.

Comment in
    Clin Transl Med. 2022 May;12(5):e860. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.860.
    Clin Transl Med. 2022 Sep;12(9):e878. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.878.

BACKGROUND: Exacerbation-prone asthma is a feature of severe disease. However, 
the basis for its persistency remains unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the clinical and transcriptomic features of frequent 
exacerbators (FEs) and persistent FEs (PFEs) in the U-BIOPRED cohort.
METHODS: We compared features of FE (≥2 exacerbations in past year) to 
infrequent exacerbators (IE, <2 exacerbations) and of PFE with repeat ≥2 
exacerbations during the following year to persistent IE (PIE). Transcriptomic 
data in blood, bronchial and nasal epithelial brushings, bronchial biopsies and 
sputum cells were analysed by gene set variation analysis for 103 gene 
signatures.
RESULTS: Of 317 patients, 62.4% had FE, of whom 63.6% had PFE, while 37.6% had 
IE, of whom 61.3% had PIE. Using multivariate analysis, FE was associated with 
short-acting beta-agonist use, sinusitis and daily oral corticosteroid use, 
while PFE was associated with eczema, short-acting beta-agonist use and asthma 
control index. CEA cell adhesion molecule 5 (CEACAM5) was the only 
differentially expressed transcript in bronchial biopsies between PE and IE. 
There were no differentially expressed genes in the other four compartments. 
There were higher expression scores for type 2, T-helper type-17 and type 1 
pathway signatures together with those associated with viral infections in 
bronchial biopsies from FE compared to IE, while there were higher expression 
scores of type 2, type 1 and steroid insensitivity pathway signatures in 
bronchial biopsies of PFE compared to PIE.
CONCLUSION: The FE group and its PFE subgroup are associated with poor asthma 
control while expressing higher type 1 and type 2 activation pathways compared 
to IE and PIE, respectively.

© 2022 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Medicine published by John Wiley 
& Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Shanghai Institute of Clinical 
Bioinformatics.

DOI: 10.1002/ctm2.816
PMCID: PMC9043117
PMID: 35474304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Singer reports honoraria for lectures and 
presentations from Novartis Pharma Switzerland and Vertex Pharmaceuticals 
Switzerland, outside the submitted work. Dr Shaw has received speaker fees from 
Chiesi and Astra Zeneca and advisory board fees from Adherium, Nuvoair, Astra 
Zeneca and Chiesi. Dr Loza is employed by and own stock in Johnson & Johnson. 
Dr. SE Dahlén reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, Cayman Chemicals, GSK, 
Novartis, Regeneron, Sanofi and Teva for consultancies outside the submitted 
work. Drs Auffray, Demulder and Lefaudeux report grants from the IMI (U‐BIOPRED 
n°115010 and eTRIKS n°115446). Dr Fowler has received grants from Boehringer 
Ingelheim and fees from Chiesi, outside of the current work. Dr Djukanovic 
reports receiving fees for lectures at symposia organised by Novartis, 
AstraZeneca and TEVA, consultation for TEVA and Novartis as members of advisory 
boards, and participation in a scientific discussion about asthma organised by 
GlaxoSmithKline. He is a co‐founder and current consultant and has shares in 
Synairgen, a University of Southampton spin out company. Dr Sterk reports grants 
from public–private funding by the Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI), 
outside the submitted work. Dr Chung has received honoraria for participating in 
Advisory Board meetings of GSK, AZ, Roche, Novartis, Merck, BI, TEVA and 
Shionogi regarding treatments for asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
and chronic cough and has also been remunerated for speaking engagements. The 
other authors have no disclosures in relation to this work. U‐BIOPRED was 
supported by an Innovative Medicines Initiative Joint Undertaking (No. 115010), 
resources from the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007‐2013) 
and EFPIA companies’ in‐kind contribution (www.imi.europa.eu). KFC and IMA are 
funded by UK Research and Innovation (UKRI). KFC is an Emeritus Senior 
Investigator of the UK National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). CEW is 
funded by the Swedish Heart Lung Foundation (HLF 20180290, HLF 20200693). We 
acknowledge the contribution of the whole U‐BIOPRED team as listed in the 
Supporting Information repository file.