---
reference_id: "PMID:31466347"
title: "Molecular and Clinical Opposite Findings in 11p15.5 Associated Imprinting Disorders: Characterization of Basic Mechanisms to Improve Clinical Management."
authors:
- Wesseler K
- Kraft F
- Eggermann T
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/ijms20174219
keywords:
- "Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11/genetics"
- Disease Management
- Genetic Services/standards
- Genomic Imprinting
- Humans
- "Silver-Russell Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and Clinical Opposite Findings in 11p15.5 Associated Imprinting Disorders: Characterization of Basic Mechanisms to Improve Clinical Management.
**Authors:** Wesseler K, Kraft F, Eggermann T
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms20174219](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20174219)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Aug 28;20(17):4219. doi: 10.3390/ijms20174219.

Molecular and Clinical Opposite Findings in 11p15.5 Associated Imprinting 
Disorders: Characterization of Basic Mechanisms to Improve Clinical Management.

Wesseler K(1), Kraft F(1), Eggermann T(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Technical University Aachen 
(RWTH), 52074 Aachen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Technical University Aachen 
(RWTH), 52074 Aachen, Germany. teggermann@ukaachen.de.

Silver-Russell and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndromes (SRS, BWS) are rare congenital 
human disorders characterized by opposite growth disturbances. With the 
increasing knowledge on the molecular basis of SRS and BWS, it has become 
obvious that the disorders mirror opposite alterations at the same genomic loci 
in 11p15.5. In fact, these changes directly or indirectly affect the expression 
of IGF2 and CDKN1C and their associated pathways, and thereby, cause growth 
disturbances as key features of both diseases. The increase of knowledge has 
become possible with the development and implementation of new and comprehensive 
assays. Whereas, in the beginning molecular testing was restricted to single 
chromosomal loci, many tests now address numerous loci in the same run, and the 
diagnostic implementation of (epi)genome wide assays is only a question of time. 
These high-throughput approaches will be complemented by the analysis of other 
omic datasets (e.g., transcriptome, metabolome, proteome), and it can be 
expected that the integration of these data will massively improve the 
understanding of the pathobiology of imprinting disorders and their diagnostics. 
Especially long-read sequencing methods, e.g., nanopore sequencing, allowing 
direct detection of native DNA modification, will strongly contribute to a 
better understanding of genomic imprinting in the near future. Thereby, new 
genomic loci and types of pathogenic variants will be identified, resulting in 
more precise discrimination into different molecular subgroups. These subgroups 
serve as the basis for (epi)genotype-phenotype correlations, allowing a more 
directed prognosis, counseling, and therapy. By deciphering the 
pathophysiological consequences of SRS and BWS and their molecular disturbances, 
future therapies will be available targeting the basic cause of the disease and 
respective pathomechanisms and will complement conventional therapeutic 
strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20174219
PMCID: PMC6747273
PMID: 31466347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.