---
reference_id: "PMID:20301302"
title: "Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia, Autosomal Dominant."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Briggs MD
- Wright MJ
- Mortier GR
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia, Autosomal Dominant.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Briggs MD, Wright MJ, Mortier GR

## Content

1. Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia, Autosomal Dominant.

Briggs MD(1), Wright MJ(2), Mortier GR(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Jan 8 [updated 2024 Jul 4].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Skeletal Genetics, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle 
University, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
(2)Consultant Clinical Geneticist, Northern Genetics Service, Institute of Human 
Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
(3)Chairman, Department of Clinical Genetics, Department of Human Genetics, KU 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Autosomal dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) 
presents in early childhood, usually with pain in the hips and/or knees after 
exercise. Affected children report fatigue with long-distance walking. Waddling 
gait may be present. Adult height is either in the lower range of normal or 
mildly shortened. The limbs are relatively short in comparison to the trunk. 
Pain and joint deformity progress, resulting in early-onset osteoarthritis, 
particularly of the large weight-bearing joints.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of autosomal dominant MED is established in a 
proband with typical clinical and radiographic findings and/or a heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in COL9A1, COL9A2, COL9A3, COMP, or MATN3 identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: For pain control, a combination of 
analgesics and physiotherapy including hydrotherapy; referral to a 
rheumatologist or pain specialist as needed; consideration of realignment 
osteotomy and/or acetabular osteotomy to limit joint destruction and development 
of osteoarthritis. Consider total joint arthroplasty if the degenerative hip 
changes cause uncontrollable pain/dysfunction. Offer psychosocial support 
addressing issues of short stature, chronic pain, disability, and employment. 
Surveillance: Evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon for chronic pain and/or limb 
deformities (genu varum, genu valgum). Agents/circumstances to avoid: Obesity; 
exercise causing repetitive strain on affected joints.
GENETIC COUNSELING: By definition, autosomal dominant MED is inherited in an 
autosomal dominant manner. Many individuals with autosomal dominant MED have an 
affected parent. The proportion of individuals with autosomal dominant MED who 
have the disorder as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant is unknown. Each 
child of an individual with autosomal dominant MED has a 50% chance of 
inheriting the pathogenic variant. Once the autosomal dominant MED-related 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal 
and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301302