---
reference_id: "PMID:34573351"
title: "ATM's Role in the Repair of DNA Double-Strand Breaks."
authors:
- Shibata A
- Jeggo PA
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12091370
keywords:
- Apoptosis/genetics
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Cycle Checkpoints/genetics
- "Chromatin/genetics, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "DNA Breaks, Double-Stranded"
- DNA Repair
- Humans
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ATM's Role in the Repair of DNA Double-Strand Breaks.
**Authors:** Shibata A, Jeggo PA
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12091370](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12091370)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Aug 31;12(9):1370. doi: 10.3390/genes12091370.

ATM's Role in the Repair of DNA Double-Strand Breaks.

Shibata A(1), Jeggo PA(2).

Author information:
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Gunma University Initiative for Advanced
Research (GIAR), Gunma University, Gunma 371-8511, Japan.
(2)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, School of Life Sciences, University of
Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RQ, UK.

Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is a central kinase that activates an
extensive network of responses to cellular stress via a signaling role. ATM is
activated by DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) and by oxidative stress,
subsequently phosphorylating a plethora of target proteins. In the last several
decades, newly developed molecular biological techniques have uncovered multiple
roles of ATM in response to DNA damage-e.g., DSB repair, cell cycle checkpoint
arrest, apoptosis, and transcription arrest. Combinational dysfunction of these
stress responses impairs the accuracy of repair, consequently leading to
dramatic sensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR) in ataxia telangiectasia (A-T)
cells. In this review, we summarize the roles of ATM that focus on DSB repair.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12091370
PMCID: PMC8466060
PMID: 34573351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the
collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the
manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.
