---
reference_id: "PMID:20301736"
title: FLNB-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Robertson S
- Meira J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FLNB-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Robertson S, Meira J

## Content

1. FLNB-Related Disorders.

Robertson S(1), Meira J(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2008 Oct 9 [updated 2025 Sep 11].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Paediatric Genetics, Department of Paediatrics and Child Health,
Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
(2)Professor, State University of Bahia (UNEB), Salvador, Bahia, Brazil

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The FLNB-related disorders can be divided into two
groups of conditions caused by loss of function or gain of function of
filamin-B. Biallelic loss-of-function pathogenic variants in FLNB cause
spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome (FLNB-SCT). Monoallelic gain-of-function
pathogenic variants in FLNB cause a spectrum of phenotypic severity ranging from
apparently isolated clubfoot to Larsen syndrome (FLNB-LS), atelosteogenesis type
3 (FLNB-AO3), and atelosteogenesis type 1 (FLNB-AO1), which is perinatal lethal.
For the purposes of this GeneReview, the previously described entities Piepkorn
dysplasia and boomerang dysplasia are subsumed under the FLNB-AO1 spectrum.
FLNB-SCT is characterized by postnatal disproportionate short stature; scoliosis
and lordosis due to vertebral fusions; carpal and tarsal synostosis; and,
variably, clubfeet, hearing loss, and dental enamel hypoplasia. FLNB-LS is
characterized by combinations of congenital dislocations of the hip, knee, and
elbow; clubfeet (equinovarus or equinovalgus foot deformities); scoliosis and
cervical kyphosis (which can be associated with a cervical myelopathy); short,
broad, spatulate distal phalanges; distinctive craniofacial features (prominent
forehead, depressed nasal bridge, malar flattening, and widely spaced eyes);
vertebral anomalies; and supernumerary carpal and tarsal ossification centers.
Individuals with FLNB-LS may also present with midline cleft palate and hearing
loss. FLNB-AO1 and FLNB-AO3 are characterized by severe short-limbed dwarfism;
dislocated hips, knees, and elbows; and clubfeet. FLNB-AO1 is lethal in the
perinatal period. At its most severe, the spectrum of phenotypes assigned
FLNB-AO1 can present with perinatal-lethal micromelic dwarfism characterized by
flipper-like limbs (polysyndactyly with complete syndactyly of all fingers and
toes, hypoplastic or absent first digits, and duplicated intermediate and distal
phalanges); macrobrachycephaly; prominent forehead; hypertelorism; and
proptosis. Occasional features include cleft palate, omphalocele, and cardiac
and genitourinary anomalies. In individuals with FLNB-AO3, survival beyond the
neonatal period is possible with intensive and invasive respiratory support.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of FLNB-SCT is established in a proband by
identification of biallelic loss-of-function pathogenic variants in FLNB by
molecular genetic testing. The diagnosis of other FLNB-related disorders (LS,
AO1, AO3) is established in a proband by identification of a heterozygous
gain-of-function pathogenic variant in FLNB by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Cervical spine instability in
asymptomatic infants can be successfully managed with posterior arthrodesis.
Function can be stabilized (if not improved) in infants with myelopathic signs
by a combination of anterior decompression and circumferential arthrodesis. Hip
dislocation in individuals with FLNB-LS usually requires operative reduction.
Scoliosis and clubfeet are managed in a routine manner. Anesthetic agents that
allow more rapid induction and recovery are preferred in those with
laryngotracheomalacia. When possible, cleft palate and hearing loss are best
managed by multidisciplinary teams. Surveillance: Annual orthopedic evaluation
for progressive scoliosis; feeding and growth assessment for those with cleft
palate by a multidisciplinary team; annual audiologic and dental evaluations.
Pregnancy management: Delivery of an affected infant has the potential to be
complicated by extended breech presentation due to dislocation of the hips and
knees.
GENETIC COUNSELING: FLNB-SCT is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If
both parents are known to be heterozygous for an FLNB pathogenic variant, each
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of inheriting
biallelic pathogenic variants and being affected, a 50% chance of inheriting one
pathogenic variant and being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting
neither of the familial FLNB pathogenic variants. Heterozygous sibs of a proband
with FLNB-SCT can exhibit mild reductions in stature but no other medically
significant phenotypic manifestations. Once the FLNB pathogenic variant(s) have
been identified in an affected family member, heterozygote testing for at-risk
relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible. FLNB-LS,
FLNB-AO1, FLNB-AO3, and FLNB-related apparently isolated clubfoot are inherited
in an autosomal dominant manner. Comparatively mild (e.g., FLNB-LS) and severe
(e.g., FLNB-AO3) forms of the autosomal dominant FLNB-related disorders can
occur in the same family. Some individuals diagnosed with an autosomal dominant
FLNB-related disorder have the disorder as the result of a pathogenic variant
inherited from a heterozygous or mosaic parent. Some individuals have the
disorder as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant (the vast majority of
lethal FLNB conditions are the result of de novo pathogenic variants). Each
child of a proband who is heterozygous for an FLNB pathogenic variant has a 50%
chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Each child of a proband with
somatic mosaicism for an FLNB pathogenic variant has up to a 50% chance of
inheriting the pathogenic variant. Offspring who inherit an FLNB pathogenic
variant from a proband with somatic mosaicism may be more severely affected than
the proband. Once the FLNB pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected
family member, prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301736
