---
reference_id: "PMID:27858751"
title: "A Large Deletion Affecting TPM3, Causing Severe Nemaline Myopathy."
authors:
- Kiiski K
- Lehtokari VL
- Manzur AY
- Sewry C
- Zaharieva I
- Muntoni F
- Pelin K
- Wallgren-Pettersson C
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3233/JND-150107
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Large Deletion Affecting TPM3, Causing Severe Nemaline Myopathy.
**Authors:** Kiiski K, Lehtokari VL, Manzur AY, Sewry C, Zaharieva I, Muntoni F, Pelin K, Wallgren-Pettersson C
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-150107](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-150107)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2015 Sep 21;2(4):433-438. doi: 10.3233/JND-150107.

A Large Deletion Affecting TPM3, Causing Severe Nemaline Myopathy.

Kiiski K(1), Lehtokari VL(1), Manzur AY(2), Sewry C(2)(3), Zaharieva I(3), 
Muntoni F(2)(3), Pelin K(1)(4), Wallgren-Pettersson C(1).

Author information:
(1)The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and the Department of Medical and 
Clinical Genetics, Medicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(4)Department of Biosciences, Division of Genetics, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Nemaline myopathy may be caused by pathogenic 
variants in the TPM3 gene and is then called NEM1. All previously identified 
disease-causing variants are point mutations including missense, nonsense and 
splice-site variants. The aim of the study was to identify the disease-causing 
gene in this patient and verify the NM diagnosis.
METHODS: Mutation analysis methods include our self-designed nemaline myopathy 
array, The Nemaline Myopathy Comparative Genomic Hybridisation Array (NM-CGH 
array), whole-genome array-CGH, dHPLC, Sanger sequencing and whole-exome 
sequencing. The diagnostic muscle biopsy was investigated further by routine 
histopathological methods.
RESULTS: We present here the first large (17-21 kb) aberration in the 
α-tropomyosinslow gene (TPM3), identified using the NM-CGH array. This 
homozygous deletion removes the exons 1a and 2b as well as the promoter of the 
TPM3 isoform encoding Tpm3.12st. The severe phenotype included paucity of 
movement, proximal and axial weakness and feeding difficulties requiring 
nasogastric tube feeding. The infant died at the age of 17.5 months. Muscle 
biopsy showed variation in fibre size and rods in a population of hypotrophic 
muscle fibres expressing slow myosin, often with internal nuclei, and abnormal 
immunolabelling revealing many hybrid fibres.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the only copy number variation we have identified in any NM 
gene other than nebulin (NEB), suggesting that large deletions or duplications 
in these genes are very rare, yet possible, causes of NM.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-150107
PMCID: PMC5240603
PMID: 27858751