---
reference_id: "PMID:39881294"
title: "Identification of unmet information needs among families of critically ill patients and their association with post-intensive care syndrome-family: protocol for a single-center cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Ito Y
- Hamaguchi T
- Suzuki M
- Otaka Y
- Asai M
- Sakaguchi Y
- Shirai Y
- Yoshikawa E
- Tateno A
- Yokobori S
journal: BMC Palliat Care
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12904-024-01599-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of unmet information needs among families of critically ill patients and their association with post-intensive care syndrome-family: protocol for a single-center cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Ito Y, Hamaguchi T, Suzuki M, Otaka Y, Asai M, Sakaguchi Y, Shirai Y, Yoshikawa E, Tateno A, Yokobori S
**Journal:** BMC Palliat Care (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12904-024-01599-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12904-024-01599-w)

## Content

1. BMC Palliat Care. 2025 Jan 29;24(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s12904-024-01599-w.

Identification of unmet information needs among families of critically ill 
patients and their association with post-intensive care syndrome-family: 
protocol for a single-center cross-sectional study.

Ito Y(1)(2)(3), Hamaguchi T(4), Suzuki M(4), Otaka Y(5), Asai M(6)(7), Sakaguchi 
Y(8), Shirai Y(9), Yoshikawa E(6), Tateno A(5), Yokobori S(10)(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan. y-ito@tsuruga-nu.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Nursing, Graduate School of Health Sciences, Kobe University, 
Kobe, Japan. y-ito@tsuruga-nu.ac.jp.
(3)Faculty of Nursing Science, Tsuruga Nursing University, Tsuruga, Japan. 
y-ito@tsuruga-nu.ac.jp.
(4)Departments of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Nippon Medical School, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Medical Psychology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Faculty of Pharma-Sciences, Teikyo University, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)School of Human Welfare Studies, Kwansei Gakuin University, Nishinomiya, 
Japan.
(9)Department of Human Health Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(10)Departments of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Families of critically ill patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) 
need a variety of information about the patient. Meeting these information needs 
improves the quality of communication between the family and ICU staff, as well 
as reduces the risk of post-intensive care syndrome-family (PICS-F). However, 
information needs continue to be unmet, and information regarding which specific 
information needs are met or unmet is insufficient. Additionally, the unmet 
needs that affect PICS-F are unknown. Therefore, this study aims to identify the 
unmet information needs of families of patients admitted to the ICU in terms of 
communication with ICU staff and determine their association with PICS-F.
METHODS: This study will be a single-center cross-sectional study using a 
questionnaire survey. The participants will include family members of patients 
admitted to the emergency ICU of the Department of Emergency and Critical Care 
Medicine, Nippon Medical School Hospital in Japan. Eligibility for participation 
will be assessed from medical records, and family members of patients who meet 
the eligibility criteria will be identified and sent a questionnaire. PICS-F and 
unmet information needs will be assessed 1 to 12 months after patients leave the 
ICU. PICS-F assessment will include the evaluation of anxiety, depression, 
post-traumatic stress disorder, and prolonged grief disorder. Univariate and 
multiple logistic regression analyses will be used to examine the association 
between PICS-F and unmet information needs.
DISCUSSION: This study will fill a research gap in communication between ICU 
staff and families of ICU patients by examining the information that tends not 
to be provided or understood by families, thereby providing an understanding of 
the information that is likely to be an unmet information need. Additionally, 
this study can contribute to the development of future communication strategies 
by investigating which unmet information needs are associated with PICS-F risk, 
thus emphasizing the information needs that should be given priority when 
developing effective communication strategies.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: University Hospital Medical Information Network Center 
Clinical Trials Registry UMIN 000053813.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12904-024-01599-w
PMCID: PMC11776254
PMID: 39881294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study was approved by the Central Ethics Committee of the 
Nippon Medical School Foundation (approval no. M-2023-152; approval date: 
February 19, 2024). Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests.