---
reference_id: "PMID:25214840"
title: "Update on anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: morphological, molecular, and genetic features of the most aggressive thyroid cancer."
authors:
- Ragazzi M
- Ciarrocchi A
- Sancisi V
- Gandolfi G
- Bisagni A
- Piana S
journal: Int J Endocrinol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1155/2014/790834
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: morphological, molecular, and genetic features of the most aggressive thyroid cancer.
**Authors:** Ragazzi M, Ciarrocchi A, Sancisi V, Gandolfi G, Bisagni A, Piana S
**Journal:** Int J Endocrinol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2014/790834](https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/790834)

## Content

1. Int J Endocrinol. 2014;2014:790834. doi: 10.1155/2014/790834. Epub 2014 Aug
21.

Update on anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: morphological, molecular, and genetic 
features of the most aggressive thyroid cancer.

Ragazzi M(1), Ciarrocchi A(2), Sancisi V(2), Gandolfi G(2), Bisagni A(1), Piana 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathology Unit, IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Viale Risorgimento 80, 
42123 Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Translational Research, Research and Statistic Infrastructure, 
Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova-IRCCS, 42123 Reggio Emilia, Italy.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is the most aggressive form of thyroid 
cancer. It shows a wide spectrum of morphological presentations and the 
diagnosis could be challenging due to its high degree of dedifferentiation. 
Molecular and genetic features of ATC are widely heterogeneous as well and many 
efforts have been made to find a common profile in order to clarify its 
cancerogenetic process. A comprehensive review of the current literature is here 
performed, focusing on histopathological and genetic features.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/790834
PMCID: PMC4158294
PMID: 25214840