---
reference_id: "PMID:37726791"
title: "Prevalence and quality of temporomandibular disorders, chronic pain and psychological distress in patients with classical and hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: an exploratory study."
authors:
- Willich L
- Bohner L
- Köppe J
- Jackowski J
- Hanisch M
- Oelerich O
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02877-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and quality of temporomandibular disorders, chronic pain and psychological distress in patients with classical and hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: an exploratory study.
**Authors:** Willich L, Bohner L, Köppe J, Jackowski J, Hanisch M, Oelerich O
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02877-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02877-1)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Sep 19;18(1):294. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02877-1.

Prevalence and quality of temporomandibular disorders, chronic pain and 
psychological distress in patients with classical and hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome: an exploratory study.

Willich L(1), Bohner L(2), Köppe J(3), Jackowski J(4), Hanisch M(5)(6), Oelerich 
O(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, University Hospital Münster, 
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, Building W30, Münster, D-48149, Germany.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Münster, 
Münster, 48149, Germany.
(3)Institute of Biostatistics and Clinical Research, University of Münster, 
Schmeddingstraße 56, Münster, D- 48149, Germany.
(4)Department of Oral Surgery and Policlinical Ambulance, Faculty of Health, 
Witten/Herdecke University, Alfred-Herrhausen-Str. 45, Witten, 58448, Germany.
(5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Münster, 
Münster, 48149, Germany. marcel.hanisch@ukmuenster.de.
(6)Department of Oral Surgery and Policlinical Ambulance, Faculty of Health, 
Witten/Herdecke University, Alfred-Herrhausen-Str. 45, Witten, 58448, Germany. 
marcel.hanisch@ukmuenster.de.
(7)Department of Prosthodontics, University Hospital Münster, 
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, Building W30, Münster, D-48149, Germany. 
ole.oelerich@ukmuenster.de.

BACKGROUND: The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes are a group of clinically and 
genetically heterogeneous hereditary diseases affecting the connective tissue. 
They are characterized by hypermobility of the joints, hyperextensible skin and 
friable tissue. According to current classification, 13 subtypes can be 
distinguished, of which the hypermobile and the classical subtype are the most 
prevalent. This study aimed to evaluate patients with classical (cEDS) and 
hypermobile (hEDS) Ehlers-Danlos syndrome regarding temporomandibular disorder 
(TMD), chronic pain, and psychological distress.
METHODS: Support groups from Germany, Austria, and Switzerland were contacted, 
and social media were used to recruit participants. Free text questions, the 
German version of the Depression Anxiety and Stress Scale (DASS), and the German 
version of the Graded Chronic Pain Status (GCPS) were used.
RESULTS: 259 participants were included (230 hEDS/29 cEDS). At least 49.2% of 
the participants had painful or restricted jaw movements, and at least 84.9% had 
pain in the masticatory muscles, with 46.3% already having a diagnosed TMD. 
Multivariate analysis showed a significant correlation between TMJ involvement 
and chronic pain with a 2.5-fold higher risk of chronic pain with a diagnosed 
TMD. 22.8% of participants had a critical score for depression, 53.3% had a 
critical score for anxiety, and 34.0% had a critical score for stress.
CONCLUSION: There is a high prevalence of TMD problems and chronic pain in 
patients with cEDS and hEDS. The lack of knowledge about these problems can 
create psychological distress. More research is needed to provide adequate 
treatment for patients with EDS.

© 2023. Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02877-1
PMCID: PMC10510186
PMID: 37726791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.