---
reference_id: "PMID:36387164"
title: Whole exome sequencing identified a novel POT1 variant as a candidate pathogenic allele underlying a Li-Fraumeni-like family.
authors:
- Li Y
- Xie Y
- Wang D
- Xu H
- Ye J
- Yin JC
- Chen J
- Yan J
- Ye B
- Chen C
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.963364
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole exome sequencing identified a novel POT1 variant as a candidate pathogenic allele underlying a Li-Fraumeni-like family.
**Authors:** Li Y, Xie Y, Wang D, Xu H, Ye J, Yin JC, Chen J, Yan J, Ye B, Chen C
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2022.963364](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2022.963364)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2022 Nov 1;12:963364. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.963364. eCollection
2022.

Whole exome sequencing identified a novel POT1 variant as a candidate pathogenic
allele underlying a Li-Fraumeni-like family.

Li Y(1)(2), Xie Y(2), Wang D(3), Xu H(1)(2), Ye J(1)(2), Yin JC(3), Chen
J(1)(2), Yan J(3), Ye B(3), Chen C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Interventional Pulmonology of Zhejiang Province, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Medical Department, Nanjing Geneseeq Technology Inc., Nanjing, Jiangsu,
China.

BACKGROUND: Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) and Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndrome are
rare hereditary diseases characterized by predisposition to a diverse spectrum
of cancer types, primarily sarcoma. The pathogenic variants underlying the
majority of LFL cases remain to be explored.
METHODS: We performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) on 13 core members of a large
LFL family with highly aggregated incidences of cancers, including cases with
sarcoma, non-small cell lung cancer and cardiac angiosarcoma, and conducted a
comprehensive literature review of candidate gene associations in LFS/LFL
syndromes or sarcoma to identify potential pathogenic germline variants.
RESULTS: No germline variants in the best-known LFL/LFS-associated gene TP53
were detected. Of all the genes associated with LFS/LFL or sarcoma that we have
surveyed, we identified a novel p.P35L germline variant in POT1 (protection of
telomeres 1). Germline and somatic alterations in POT1 have been implicated in a
series of familial cancers, including angiosarcoma, glioma, melanoma and
colorectal cancer. This particular variant is located in the telomere-binding
OB1 domain, which is important in maintaining the proper telomere length, and
showed high conservation across different POT1 orthologues. No record of the
variant was found in any of the 1000 genomes, ExAC, gnomAD, dpSNP and COSMIC
databases. Prediction algorithms and in silico structural analysis suggested
completely disrupted protein structure and function of POT1 in the presence of
this mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Leveraging WES, we identified a novel germline risk allele, p.P35L
in POT1, that likely predisposes to LFL syndrome. Our results support the
routine testing of POT1 and other LFL/LFS-associated genes in the risk
populations to enable early cancer diagnosis, prevention and intervention.

Copyright © 2022 Li, Xie, Wang, Xu, Ye, Yin, Chen, Yan, Ye and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.963364
PMCID: PMC9664187
PMID: 36387164

Conflict of interest statement: DW, JCY, JRY and BY are employees of Nanjing
Geneseeq Technology Inc. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be constructed as a potential conflict of interest.
