---
reference_id: "PMID:31375190"
title: "Palliative Care Approach to Chronic Diseases: End Stages of Heart Failure, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, Liver Failure, and Renal Failure."
authors:
- Mechler K
- Liantonio J
journal: Prim Care
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.pop.2019.05.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Palliative Care Approach to Chronic Diseases: End Stages of Heart Failure, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, Liver Failure, and Renal Failure.
**Authors:** Mechler K, Liantonio J
**Journal:** Prim Care (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pop.2019.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pop.2019.05.008)

## Content

1. Prim Care. 2019 Sep;46(3):415-432. doi: 10.1016/j.pop.2019.05.008. Epub 2019
Jun  12.

Palliative Care Approach to Chronic Diseases: End Stages of Heart Failure, 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, Liver Failure, and Renal Failure.

Mechler K(1), Liantonio J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Division of Geriatric Medicine 
and Palliative Care, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, 1015 Walnut Street 
Suite 401, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. Electronic address: 
kathleen.mechler@jefferson.edu.
(2)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Division of Geriatric Medicine 
and Palliative Care, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, 1015 Walnut Street 
Suite 401, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Management of chronic diseases is often palliative by definition. Empowering 
primary care providers to manage symptoms and effectively prognosticate is 
necessary for this challenging population. In this article, the authors focus 
specifically on end-stage congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, end-stage kidney disease, and end-stage liver disease and how 
palliative principles can guide decision making and symptom management in these 
disease states. Special considerations in advance care planning, initiation and 
cessation of advanced therapies, and discussions on when to initiate hospice are 
included in this article.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pop.2019.05.008
PMID: 31375190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]