---
reference_id: "PMID:21793881"
title: "Physiological skin manifestations in twins: association with maternal and neonatal factors."
authors:
- Gupta P
- Faridi MM
- Batra M
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1470.2011.01434.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Physiological skin manifestations in twins: association with maternal and neonatal factors.
**Authors:** Gupta P, Faridi MM, Batra M
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1525-1470.2011.01434.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1525-1470.2011.01434.x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2011 Jul-Aug;28(4):387-92. doi: 
10.1111/j.1525-1470.2011.01434.x.

Physiological skin manifestations in twins: association with maternal and 
neonatal factors.

Gupta P(1), Faridi MM, Batra M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, University College of 
Medical Sciences, Delhi, India.

There is paucity of literature on the incidence and clinical associations of 
transient benign dermatological conditions in twin neonates. This prospective 
study evaluated 253 live-born twin babies (≥23 wks) at a tertiary care hospital 
in Delhi, India. All study subjects were observed for the first 7 days of life, 
and regular dermatological examination was performed. The primary focus was on 
palatine Epstein pearls (PEP), milia, erythema toxicum neonatorum (ETN), and 
physiological skin desquamation (PDS). Zygosity was determined with the help of 
sex combination of the pairs, chorionicity of the placentae, and seven blood 
group phenotypes. Chi-square test, Cohen's kappa test, and logistic regression 
analysis were done. PEP, milia, ETN, and PDS were seen in 88.1%, 83.4%, 2.4%, 
and 4.3% twin babies, respectively. Preputial Epstein pearls were not seen. 
Birth order, maternal anemia, route of delivery, meconium staining of amniotic 
fluid, gestational maturity, birth weight, and presence of intrauterine growth 
restriction were found to be associated with one or more of the studied skin 
conditions (p < 0.05), but maternal age, pregnancy-induced hypertension, and sex 
of the baby did not affect incidence of any (p > 0.05). The intrapair 
concordance was highly significant (p < 0.001) in mono- and dizygotic twins. PEP 
and milia were equally common in the evaluated twins as compared to reports in 
singletons, while ETN and PDS were less common in this twin cohort. 
Environmental and genetic factors may regulate physiological skin manifestations 
in newborns.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1525-1470.2011.01434.x
PMID: 21793881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]