---
reference_id: "PMID:19727383"
title: The treatment of secondary hemochromatosis.
authors:
- Gattermann N
journal: Dtsch Arztebl Int
year: '2009'
doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2009.0499
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The treatment of secondary hemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Gattermann N
**Journal:** Dtsch Arztebl Int (2009)
**DOI:** [10.3238/arztebl.2009.0499](https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2009.0499)

## Content

1. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2009 Jul;106(30):499-504, I. doi:
10.3238/arztebl.2009.0499.  Epub 2009 Jul 24.

The treatment of secondary hemochromatosis.

Gattermann N(1).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Hämatologie, Onkologie und klinische Immunologie, 
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany. 
Gattermann@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

Comment in
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2009 Nov;106(46):764; author reply 764. doi: 
10.3238/arztebl.2009.0764a.

BACKGROUND: Because secondary hemochromatosis is due to hereditary or acquired 
anemia, phlebotomy is not a suitable means of removing excess iron in this 
situation. Rather, the treatment is based on the targeted elimination of iron by 
means of iron chelators.
METHODS: Selective review of the literature.
RESULTS: Disorders causing secondary hemochromatosis (e.g., thalassemia) are 
characterized by ineffective erythropoiesis leading to increased duodenal uptake 
of iron. Most patients are also chronically transfusion-dependent and receive 
200-250 mg of iron with each transfused unit of packed red blood cells. As the 
excess iron cannot be actively excreted, iron overload ensues, which can cause 
organ damage. Most patients with this condition in Germany are elderly persons 
with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). The standard treatment to date, 
parenterally administered deferoxamine, is often hampered by poor compliance. In 
September 2006, a new oral iron chelator, deferasirox, was approved for use in 
Germany. According to current findings, this medication is safe, except for a 
low risk of renal or hepatic failure.
CONCLUSIONS: Iron chelation is a treatment option not only for thalassemia 
patients, but also for those with lower-risk MDS who can be expected to need 
several years of transfusion therapy.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2009.0499
PMCID: PMC2735704
PMID: 19727383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]