---
reference_id: "PMID:37475055"
title: How common is remission in rheumatoid factor-positive juvenile idiopathic arthritis patients? The multicenter Pediatric Rheumatology Academy (PeRA) research group experience.
authors:
- Ozdel S
- Sönmez HE
- Çağlayan Ş
- Akgün Ö
- Aydın T
- Baba Ö
- Bağrul İ
- Yener GO
- Öztürk K
- Demir F
- Yıldırım DG
- Karadağ ŞG
- Bağlan E
- Çakan M
- Kalyoncu M
- Makay BB
- Ünsal ŞE
- Bakkaloğlu S
- Bülbül M
- Sözeri B
- Ayaz NA
journal: Pediatr Rheumatol Online J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12969-023-00860-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How common is remission in rheumatoid factor-positive juvenile idiopathic arthritis patients? The multicenter Pediatric Rheumatology Academy (PeRA) research group experience.
**Authors:** Ozdel S, Sönmez HE, Çağlayan Ş, Akgün Ö, Aydın T, Baba Ö, Bağrul İ, Yener GO, Öztürk K, Demir F, Yıldırım DG, Karadağ ŞG, Bağlan E, Çakan M, Kalyoncu M, Makay BB, Ünsal ŞE, Bakkaloğlu S, Bülbül M, Sözeri B, Ayaz NA
**Journal:** Pediatr Rheumatol Online J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12969-023-00860-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12969-023-00860-5)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2023 Jul 20;21(1):72. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-023-00860-5.

How common is remission in rheumatoid factor-positive juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis patients? The multicenter Pediatric Rheumatology Academy (PeRA) 
research group experience.

Ozdel S(1)(2), Sönmez HE(3), Çağlayan Ş(4), Akgün Ö(5), Aydın T(6), Baba Ö(7), 
Bağrul İ(8), Yener GO(9), Öztürk K(10), Demir F(11), Yıldırım DG(12), Karadağ 
ŞG(5), Bağlan E(8), Çakan M(4), Kalyoncu M(7), Makay BB(6), Ünsal ŞE(6), 
Bakkaloğlu S(12), Bülbül M(8), Sözeri B(4), Ayaz NA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Dr Sami Ulus Maternity and Child Health 
and Diseases Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. 
semanurozdel@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Etlik City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. 
semanurozdel@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli 
University, Kocaeli, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, University of Health Sciences, Umraniye 
Research and Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül 
University, Izmir, Turkey.
(7)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz 
Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey.
(8)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Dr Sami Ulus Maternity and Child Health 
and Diseases Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(9)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Medicalpark Hospital, Gaziantep, 
Turkey.
(10)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Istanbul Medeniyet University, Göztepe 
Prof. Dr. Süleyman Yalçın City Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(11)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Acıbadem Healthcare Group, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(12)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, 
Ankara, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid factor (RF)-positive polyarthritis is the least common 
type of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). Functional disability in 
RF-positive polyarthritis patients is much more severe than in patients with 
other subtypes; but data on this subtype alone is limited. This study aimed to 
analyze clinical features, long-term follow-up, treatment response, and 
remission status in a large multicenter cohort of RF-positive polyarthritis 
patients.
METHODS: This retrospective study included RF-positive polyarthritis patients 
that were followed up for ≥ 6 months between 2017 and 2022 by the Pediatric 
Rheumatology Academy (PeRA)-Research Group (RG). Data on patient demographics, 
clinical and laboratory characteristics were obtained from medical charts. JIA 
treatments and duration of treatment were also recorded. The patients were 
divided into 2 groups based on methotrexate (MTX) response, as follows: group 1: 
MTX responsive, group 2: MTX unresponsive. Clinical and laboratory findings were 
compared between the 2 groups.
RESULTS: The study included 56 (45 female and 11 male) patients. The median age 
at onset of RF-positive polyarthritis was 13.2 years [(interquartile range) 
(IQR): 9.0-15.0 years] and the median duration of follow-up was 41.5 months 
(IQR: 19.5-75.7 months). Symmetrical arthritis affecting the metacarpophalangeal 
and proximal interphalangeal joints of the hands was commonly observed. 
Subcutaneous MTX was the preferred initial treatment; however, it was 
ineffective in 39 (69.6%) of the patients. Of 25 patients followed for 
24 months, 56% still had active disease at 24 months.
CONCLUSION: During 2 years of treatment, 44% of RF-positive polyarthritis 
patients have inactive disease, and they should be considered as a distinct and 
important clinical entity requiring aggressive and early treatment.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-023-00860-5
PMCID: PMC10360344
PMID: 37475055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of intrest.