---
reference_id: "PMID:29858280"
title: Blocking Properdin Prevents Complement-Mediated Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome and Systemic Thrombophilia.
authors:
- Ueda Y
- Miwa T
- Gullipalli D
- Sato S
- Ito D
- Kim H
- Palmer M
- Song WC
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2017121244
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics, prevention & control"
- Complement C3/metabolism
- Complement C9/metabolism
- Complement Factor H/genetics
- "Complement Pathway, Alternative"
- Female
- Fibrin/metabolism
- Hemoglobins/metabolism
- "Kidney/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Platelet Count
- "Properdin/deficiency, genetics, immunology"
- "Thrombophilia/genetics, prevention & control"
- "Thrombosis/prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blocking Properdin Prevents Complement-Mediated Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome and Systemic Thrombophilia.
**Authors:** Ueda Y, Miwa T, Gullipalli D, Sato S, Ito D, Kim H, Palmer M, Song WC
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2017121244](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2017121244)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018 Jul;29(7):1928-1937. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2017121244. Epub
2018 Jun 1.

Blocking Properdin Prevents Complement-Mediated Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome and
Systemic Thrombophilia.

Ueda Y(1), Miwa T(1), Gullipalli D(1), Sato S(1), Ito D(1), Kim H(1), Palmer
M(2), Song WC(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics and.
(2)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Comment in
    Ann Transl Med. 2018 Nov;6(Suppl 1):S62. doi: 10.21037/atm.2018.10.35.

Background Properdin (P) is a positive regulator of the alternative pathway of
complement activation. Although P inhibition is expected and has been shown to
ameliorate the alternative pathway of complement-mediated tissue injury in
several disease models, it unexpectedly exacerbated renal injury in a murine
model of C3 glomerulopathy. The role of P in atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome
(aHUS) is uncertain.Methods We blocked P function by genetic deletion or
mAb-mediated inhibition in mice carrying a factor H (FH) point mutation, W1206R
(FHR/R), that causes aHUS and systemic thrombophilia with high mortality.Results
P deficiency completely rescued FHR/R mice from premature death and prevented
thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, and renal disease. It also eliminated
macrovessel thrombi that were prevalent in FHR/R mice. All mice that received a
function-blocking anti-P mAb for 8 weeks survived the experimental period and
appeared grossly healthy. Platelet counts and hemoglobin levels were
significantly improved in FHR/R mice after 4 weeks of anti-P mAb treatment. One
half of the FHR/R mice treated with an isotype control mAb but none of the
anti-P mAb-treated mice developed stroke-related neurologic disease. Anti-P
mAb-treated FHR/R mice showed largely normal renal histology, and residual liver
thrombi were detected in only three of 15 treated mice.Conclusions These results
contrast with the detrimental effect of P inhibition observed in a murine model
of C3 glomerulopathy and suggest that P contributes critically to aHUS
pathogenesis. Inhibition of P in aHUS may be of therapeutic benefit.

Copyright © 2018 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2017121244
PMCID: PMC6050941
PMID: 29858280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
