---
reference_id: "PMID:25604237"
title: "Neuropathogenesis of HIV: from initial neuroinvasion to HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND)."
authors:
- Zayyad Z
- Spudich S
journal: Curr HIV/AIDS Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s11904-014-0255-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathogenesis of HIV: from initial neuroinvasion to HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND).
**Authors:** Zayyad Z, Spudich S
**Journal:** Curr HIV/AIDS Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11904-014-0255-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11904-014-0255-3)

## Content

1. Curr HIV/AIDS Rep. 2015 Mar;12(1):16-24. doi: 10.1007/s11904-014-0255-3.

Neuropathogenesis of HIV: from initial neuroinvasion to HIV-associated 
neurocognitive disorder (HAND).

Zayyad Z(1), Spudich S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Yale University School of Medicine, 300 George 
Street, Room 8300c, New Haven, CT, 06520, USA, zaina.zayyad@yale.edu.

Early in the HIV epidemic, the central nervous system (CNS) was recognized as a 
target of infection and injury in the advanced stages of disease. Though the 
most severe forms of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND) related to 
severe immunosuppression are rare in the current era of widespread combination 
antiretroviral therapy (cART), evidence now supports pathological involvement of 
the CNS throughout the course of infection. Recent work suggests that the stage 
for HIV neuropathogenesis may be set with initial viral entry into the CNS, 
followed by initiation of pathogenetic processes including neuroinflammation and 
neurotoxicity, and establishment of local, compartmentalized HIV replication 
that may reflect a tissue reservoir for HIV. Key questions still exist as to 
when HIV establishes local infection in the CNS, which CNS cells are the primary 
targets of HIV, and what mechanistic processes underlie the injury to neurons 
that produce clinical symptoms of HAND. Advances in these areas will provide 
opportunities for improved treatment of patients with established HAND, 
prevention of neurological disease in those with early stage infection, and 
understanding of HIV tissue reservoirs that will aid efforts at HIV eradication.

DOI: 10.1007/s11904-014-0255-3
PMCID: PMC4741099
PMID: 25604237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]