---
reference_id: "PMID:19668210"
title: Cabin1 restrains p53 activity on chromatin.
authors:
- Jang H
- Choi SY
- Cho EJ
- Youn HD
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1657
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cabin1 restrains p53 activity on chromatin.
**Authors:** Jang H, Choi SY, Cho EJ, Youn HD
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.1657](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.1657)

## Content

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2009 Sep;16(9):910-5. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1657. Epub 2009
Aug  9.

Cabin1 restrains p53 activity on chromatin.

Jang H(1), Choi SY, Cho EJ, Youn HD.

Author information:
(1)National Research Laboratory for Metabolic Checkpoint, Department of 
Biomedical Sciences & Biochemistry, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2009 Sep;16(9):900-1. doi: 10.1038/nsmb0909-900.

The tumor suppressor p53 has been proposed to bind target promoters upon 
genotoxic stress. However, recent evidence shows that p53 occupies some target 
promoters without such stress, suggesting that a negative regulator might render 
p53 transcriptionally inactive on these promoters. Here we show that calcineurin 
binding protein 1 (Cabin1) is a negative regulator of p53. Downregulation of 
Cabin1 induces activation of a subset of p53 target genes. Cabin1 physically 
interacts with p53 on these target promoters and represses p53 transcriptional 
activity in the absence of genotoxic stress, by regulating histone modification 
and p53 acetylation marks. Knockdown of Cabin1 retards cell growth and promotes 
cell death after DNA damage in a p53-dependent manner. Thus, Cabin1 inhibits p53 
function on chromatin in the quiescent state; the presence of inactive p53 on 
some promoters might allow a prompt response upon DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.1657
PMID: 19668210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]