---
reference_id: "PMID:32309433"
title: "The Roles of Uterine Natural Killer (NK) Cells and KIR/HLA-C Combination in the Development of Preeclampsia: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Yang X
- Yang Y
- Yuan Y
- Liu L
- Meng T
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1155/2020/4808072
keywords:
- Animals
- Female
- Fetus
- Genotype
- "HLA-C Antigens/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- "Killer Cells, Natural/immunology"
- "Pre-Eclampsia/immunology, physiopathology"
- Pregnancy/immunology
- "Receptors, KIR/genetics, immunology"
- Trophoblasts
- Uterine Artery/physiopathology
- Uterus/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Roles of Uterine Natural Killer (NK) Cells and KIR/HLA-C Combination in the Development of Preeclampsia: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Yang X, Yang Y, Yuan Y, Liu L, Meng T
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2020/4808072](https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/4808072)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2020 Mar 28;2020:4808072. doi: 10.1155/2020/4808072.
eCollection  2020.

The Roles of Uterine Natural Killer (NK) Cells and KIR/HLA-C Combination in the
Development of Preeclampsia: A Systematic Review.

Yang X(1), Yang Y(2), Yuan Y(2), Liu L(2), Meng T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, The First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(2)China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.

Preeclampsia (PE) is termed as a systemic disease that involves multiple organs;
however, the exact etiology is still quite unclear. It is believed that the poor
remodeling of uterine spiral arteries triggers PE, thereby causing failed
placentation and producing inflammatory factors. The decline of blood flow
results in lowering the nutrients and oxygen received by the fetus and
augmenting the placental pressure in PE. Decidual immune cells, especially
uterine natural killer (uNK) cells, are involved in the process of placentation.
Decidual NK (dNK) cells significantly contribute to the vascular remodeling
through the secretion of cytokines and angiogenic mediators in normal placental
development. The abnormal activation of NK cells in both the peripheral blood
and the decidua was counted among the causes leading to PE. The correlation
existing between maternal killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) and
HLA-C in trophoblast cells constitutes a robust evidence for the genetic
etiology of PE. The combinations of the two kinds of gene systems, together with
the KIR genotype in the mother and the HLA-C group in her fetus, are likely to
exactly decide the pregnancy outcome. The women, who have the inappropriate
match of KIR/HLA-C, are likely to be prone to the augmented risk of PE. However,
the combinations of KIR/HLA-C in PE undergo ethnic changes. The extensive
prospective research works in Europe, Asia, and Africa are required for
providing more findings in PE patients.

Copyright © 2020 Xiuhua Yang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/4808072
PMCID: PMC7149372
PMID: 32309433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.
