---
reference_id: "PMID:38910144"
title: "Effectiveness and safety of pharmacological prophylaxis for chronic migraine: a systematic review and network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhao C
- Li C
- Yu X
- Dai X
- Zou W
journal: J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12512-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness and safety of pharmacological prophylaxis for chronic migraine: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhao C, Li C, Yu X, Dai X, Zou W
**Journal:** J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-024-12512-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-024-12512-z)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2024 Sep;271(9):5762-5777. doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12512-z. Epub
2024  Jun 23.

Effectiveness and safety of pharmacological prophylaxis for chronic migraine: a 
systematic review and network meta-analysis.

Zhao C(1), Li C(2), Yu X(3), Dai X(3), Zou W(4).

Author information:
(1)First School of Clinical Medicine, Heilongjiang University of Chinese 
Medicine, Harbin, 150040, Heilongjiang, China.
(2)The Second Department of Rehabilitation, Heilongjiang Provincial Hospital of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Harbin, 150030, Heilongjiang, China.
(3)The Third Department of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Heilongjiang University of Chinese Medicine, 26 Heping Road, 
Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150040, Heilongjiang, China.
(4)The Third Department of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Heilongjiang University of Chinese Medicine, 26 Heping Road, 
Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150040, Heilongjiang, China. kuangzou1965@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Chronic migraine (CM) significantly impacts both the physical and 
mental health of patients. Current studies on the safety and effectiveness of 
different pharmacological prophylaxis interventions for CM are limited. To 
address this gap, we conducted a network meta-analysis (NMA) to compare and rank 
the efficacy and safety of various drugs in preventing CM.
METHODS: Two independent researchers systematically searched four databases from 
their inception to August 1, 2023, to identify eligible randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs). Subsequently, they performed data extraction and assessed the 
risk of bias. A NMA was then performed. Continuous outcomes and binary outcomes 
were displayed as weighted mean difference (WMD) and risk ratio (RR), 
respectively, and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) were reported. The 
surface under the cumulative ranking curve (SUCRA) was used to rank each 
intervention separately.
RESULTS: 24 RCTs involving 8789 patients were included. Compared to placebo, 
Botulinum toxin A demonstrated the most significant effect in reducing the 
monthly migraine days for CM patients (MD = 3.88, 95% CI 0.48, 7.28); in terms 
of improving the response rate by a 50% reduction in monthly migraine days, 
Topiramate (RR = 50.06, 95% CI 3.18, 787.30) was the most effective; there was 
no statistically significant difference between all preventive drugs and placebo 
in improving the migraine disability assessment (MIDAS) score; in terms of the 
incidence of adverse events, Eptinezumab (RR = 1.09, 95% CI 0.8, 1.54) exhibited 
the highest safety profile.
CONCLUSION: Among all the drugs for the preventive drugs for CM, Botulinum toxin 
A has the best efficacy and safety profile, closely followed by calcitonin 
gene-related peptide (CGRP) monoclonal antibodies (mAbs).

© 2024. Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-024-12512-z
PMID: 38910144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]