---
reference_id: "PMID:27544719"
title: "Pilot study of newborn screening of inborn error of metabolism using tandem mass spectrometry in Malaysia: outcome and challenges."
authors:
- Yunus ZM
- Rahman SA
- Choy YS
- Keng WT
- Ngu LH
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2016-0028
keywords:
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Malaysia/epidemiology
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- Pilot Projects
- Prognosis
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pilot study of newborn screening of inborn error of metabolism using tandem mass spectrometry in Malaysia: outcome and challenges.
**Authors:** Yunus ZM, Rahman SA, Choy YS, Keng WT, Ngu LH
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2016-0028](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2016-0028)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Sep 1;29(9):1031-9. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2016-0028.

Pilot study of newborn screening of inborn error of metabolism using tandem mass
spectrometry in Malaysia: outcome and challenges.

Yunus ZM, Rahman SA, Choy YS, Keng WT, Ngu LH.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to determine the feasibility of performing
newborn screening (NBS) of inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) using tandem mass
spectrometry (TMS) and the impact on its detection rate in Malaysia.
METHODS: During the study period between June 2006 and December 2008, 30,247
newborns from 11 major public hospitals in Malaysia were screened for 27 inborn
errors of amino acid, organic acid and fatty acid metabolism by TMS. Dried blood
spot (DBS) samples were collected between 24 h and 7 days with parental consent.
Samples with abnormal results were repeated and the babies were recalled to
confirm the diagnosis with follow-up testing.
RESULTS: Cut-off values for amino acids and acylcarnitines were established.
Eight newborns were confirmed to have IEM: two newborns with Maple syrup urine
disease (MSUD), two with methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) one with ethylmalonic
aciduria, two with argininosuccinic aciduria and one with isovaleric aciduria.
Diagnosis was missed in two newborns. The detection rate of IEMs in this study
was one in 2916 newborns. The sensitivity and specificity of TMS were 80% and
99%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: IEMs are common in Malaysia. NBS of IEMs by TMS is a valuable
preventive strategy by enabling the diagnosis and early treatment of IEM before
the onset of symptoms aiming at prevention of mental retardation and physical
handicap. A number of shortcomings warrant further solution so that in near
future NBS for IEMs will become a standard of care for all babies in Malaysia in
tandem with the developed world.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2016-0028
PMID: 27544719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
