---
reference_id: "PMID:37732822"
title: "POEMS syndrome: Update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management."
authors:
- Dispenzieri A
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.27081
keywords:
- Humans
- "POEMS Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy, pathology"
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/metabolism
- Risk Factors
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Polyradiculoneuropathy/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# POEMS syndrome: Update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management.
**Authors:** Dispenzieri A
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.27081](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.27081)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 2023 Dec;98(12):1934-1950. doi: 10.1002/ajh.27081. Epub 2023 Sep
 21.

POEMS syndrome: Update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management.

Dispenzieri A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

DISEASE OVERVIEW: POEMS syndrome is a life-threatening condition due to an 
underlying plasma cell neoplasm. The major criteria for the syndrome are 
polyradiculoneuropathy, clonal plasma cell disorder, sclerotic bone lesions, 
elevated vascular endothelial growth factor, and the presence of Castleman 
disease. Minor features include organomegaly, endocrinopathy, characteristic 
skin changes, papilledema, extravascular volume overload, and thrombocytosis.
DIAGNOSIS: The diagnosis of POEMS syndrome is made with three of the major 
criteria, two of which must include polyradiculoneuropathy and clonal plasma 
cell disorder, and at least one of the minor criteria.
RISK STRATIFICATION: Because the pathogenesis of the syndrome is not well 
understood, risk stratification is limited to clinical phenotype rather than 
specific molecular markers. Risk factors include low serum albumin, age, pleural 
effusion, pulmonary hypertension, and reduced estimated glomerular filtration 
rate.
RISK-ADAPTED THERAPY: For those patients with a dominant plasmacytoma, 
first-line therapy is irradiation. Patients with diffuse sclerotic lesions or 
disseminated bone marrow involvement should receive systemic therapy. 
Corticosteroids are temporizing, but alkylators and lenalidomide are the 
mainstays of treatment, the former either in the form of low-dose conventional 
therapy or as high-dose conditioning for stem cell transplantation. Thalidomide 
and bortezomib also have activity, but their benefit needs to be weighed against 
their risk of exacerbating the peripheral neuropathy. Daratumumab combinations 
also appear promising based on case series. Prompt recognition and institution 
of both supportive care measures and therapy directed against the plasma cell 
result in the best outcomes.

© 2023 The Authors. American Journal of Hematology published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.27081
PMID: 37732822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]