---
reference_id: "PMID:22193225"
title: "Behcet's disease presenting with sudden-onset paraplegia due to anterior spinal artery involvement: 1-year follow-up of rehabilitation in conjunction with medication."
authors:
- Duman I
- Guzelkucuk U
- Tezel K
- Aydemir K
- Yılmaz B
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-011-2298-8
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Behcet Syndrome/complications
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Paraplegia/drug therapy, rehabilitation"
- Spinal Cord/blood supply
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Behcet's disease presenting with sudden-onset paraplegia due to anterior spinal artery involvement: 1-year follow-up of rehabilitation in conjunction with medication.
**Authors:** Duman I, Guzelkucuk U, Tezel K, Aydemir K, Yılmaz B
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-011-2298-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-011-2298-8)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2013 Jun;33(6):1605-8. doi: 10.1007/s00296-011-2298-8. Epub
2011  Dec 23.

Behcet's disease presenting with sudden-onset paraplegia due to anterior spinal
artery involvement: 1-year follow-up of rehabilitation in conjunction with
medication.

Duman I(1), Guzelkucuk U, Tezel K, Aydemir K, Yılmaz B.

Author information:
(1)Gülhane Military Medical Academy, Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Turkish Armed Forces Rehabilitation Center, 06533 Bilkent,
Ankara, Turkey. iltekinduman@yahoo.com

A 26-year-old male patient with sudden-onset paraplegia was presented. Clinical
and imaging evaluation revealed isolated spinal cord lesions at thoracal levels
and anterior spinal arterial involvement. Diagnosis of Behcet's disease was
established with associating clinical findings with medical history. Vigorous
medication and rehabilitation program were performed. Through the 1-year
rehabilitation period in conjunction with medication, strength and functions
improved gradually. A satisfactory functional gain as a rehabilitative goal in
independence in activities of daily living and long-distance ambulation achieved
around 4 months. The patient reached full independence after 1-year. As
conclusion, Behcet's disease can present with sudden-onset paraplegia. In case
of no evident etiology for paraplegia in young male, neuro-Behcet's disease also
should be kept in mind. Contrary to assumption, early aggressive treatment and
continuous rehabilitation in conjunction with medication might provide good
prognosis with excellent clinical outcome in spinal cord involvement.
Satisfactory functional recovery should be expected only after 3-4 months, and
complete independence can be achieved after 1 year.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-011-2298-8
PMID: 22193225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
