---
reference_id: "PMID:39125589"
title: "Navigating Lipodystrophy: Insights from Laminopathies and Beyond."
authors:
- Krüger P
- Hartinger R
- Djabali K
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25158020
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lamin Type A/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lipodystrophy/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Animals
- "Laminopathies/genetics, metabolism"
- "Progeria/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Lipodystrophy, Familial Partial/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Lipid Metabolism/genetics
- "Adipose Tissue/metabolism, pathology"
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- Gene Editing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Navigating Lipodystrophy: Insights from Laminopathies and Beyond.
**Authors:** Krüger P, Hartinger R, Djabali K
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25158020](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25158020)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 23;25(15):8020. doi: 10.3390/ijms25158020.

Navigating Lipodystrophy: Insights from Laminopathies and Beyond.

Krüger P(1), Hartinger R(1), Djabali K(1).

Author information:
(1)Epigenetics of Aging, Department of Dermatology and Allergy, TUM School of 
Medicine, Munich Institute of Biomedical Engineering (MIBE), Technical 
University of Munich (TUM), 85748 Garching, Germany.

Recent research into laminopathic lipodystrophies-rare genetic disorders caused 
by mutations in the LMNA gene-has greatly expanded our knowledge of their 
complex pathology and metabolic implications. These disorders, including 
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS), Mandibuloacral Dysplasia (MAD), and 
Familial Partial Lipodystrophy (FPLD), serve as crucial models for studying 
accelerated aging and metabolic dysfunction, enhancing our understanding of the 
cellular and molecular mechanisms involved. Research on laminopathies has 
highlighted how LMNA mutations disrupt adipose tissue function and metabolic 
regulation, leading to altered fat distribution and metabolic pathway 
dysfunctions. Such insights improve our understanding of the pathophysiological 
interactions between genetic anomalies and metabolic processes. This review 
merges current knowledge on the phenotypic classifications of these diseases and 
their associated metabolic complications, such as insulin resistance, 
hypertriglyceridemia, hepatic steatosis, and metabolic syndrome, all of which 
elevate the risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke, and diabetes. Additionally, 
a range of published therapeutic strategies, including gene editing, antisense 
oligonucleotides, and novel pharmacological interventions aimed at addressing 
defective adipocyte differentiation and lipid metabolism, will be explored. 
These therapies target the core dysfunctional lamin A protein, aiming to 
mitigate symptoms and provide a foundation for addressing similar metabolic and 
genetic disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25158020
PMCID: PMC11311807
PMID: 39125589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.