---
reference_id: "PMID:22891485"
title: "[Type 1 diabetes: from genetic predisposition to hypothetical environmental triggers]."
authors:
- Phlips JC
- Radermecker RP
journal: Rev Med Liege
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Type 1 diabetes: from genetic predisposition to hypothetical environmental triggers].
**Authors:** Phlips JC, Radermecker RP
**Journal:** Rev Med Liege (2012)

## Content

1. Rev Med Liege. 2012 May-Jun;67(5-6):319-25.

[Type 1 diabetes: from genetic predisposition to hypothetical environmental 
triggers].

[Article in French]

Phlips JC(1), Radermecker RP.

Author information:
(1)Service de Diabétologie, Nutrition et Maladies métaboliques, CHU de Liège, 
Belgique. jcphilips@chu.ulg.ac.be

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease that results in a progressive (complete 
in most cases) destruction of insulin-secreting beta cells from Langerhans 
islets. Even if the autoimmune process becomes to be well known, no one is yet 
sure what specifically prompts the autoimmune response that destroys the body's 
ability to produce insulin. Etiology of this complex disease combines a genetic 
predisposition and still (almost) unknown environmental factors that trigger 
autoimmuninty specifically targeting beta cells. Genetic HLA predispositions are 
clearly identified. However, only few people with apparent genetic 
predisposition to type 1 diabetes actually end up getting the disease. Moreover, 
the remarkable increase of type 1 diabetes prevalence observed in numerous 
countries can not be explained by genetics. Because genetic factors can't 
predict alone the development of type 1 diabetes, environmental factors must be 
involved such as viral infections, toxins from food, cow milk during childhood 
(instead of breast feeding) or vitamin D deficiency. This paper aims at 
describing the role of the genetic predisposition and the environmental 
hypothesis which can be involved in the development of type 1 diabetes. We will 
conclude by briefly describing clinical trials targeting either the immune 
response or the potentially toxic environment.

PMID: 22891485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]