---
reference_id: "PMID:34183231"
title: The ciliary impact of nonciliary gene mutations.
authors:
- Lovera M
- Lüders J
journal: Trends Cell Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2021.06.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ciliary impact of nonciliary gene mutations.
**Authors:** Lovera M, Lüders J
**Journal:** Trends Cell Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tcb.2021.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2021.06.001)

## Content

1. Trends Cell Biol. 2021 Nov;31(11):876-887. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2021.06.001.
Epub  2021 Jun 25.

The ciliary impact of nonciliary gene mutations.

Lovera M(1), Lüders J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona 
Institute of Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona 
Institute of Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. 
Electronic address: jens.luders@irbbarcelona.org.

Mutations in genes encoding centriolar or ciliary proteins cause diseases 
collectively known as 'ciliopathies'. Interestingly, the Human Phenotype 
Ontology database lists numerous disorders that display clinical features 
reminiscent of ciliopathies but do not involve defects in the centriole-cilium 
proteome. Instead, defects in different cellular compartments may impair cilia 
indirectly and cause additional, nonciliopathy phenotypes. This phenotypic 
heterogeneity, perhaps combined with the field's centriole-cilium-centric view, 
may have hindered the recognition of ciliary contributions. Identifying these 
diseases and dissecting how the underlying gene mutations impair cilia not only 
will add to our understanding of cilium assembly and function but also may open 
up new therapeutic avenues.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcb.2021.06.001
PMID: 34183231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.