---
reference_id: "PMID:40986435"
title: The molecular basis of KCNH1-related epileptic encephalopathy and the challenge of developing targeted therapeutics.
authors:
- Sundman AK
- Jin S
- Vadlamudi L
- King GF
journal: Brain
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awaf353
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The molecular basis of KCNH1-related epileptic encephalopathy and the challenge of developing targeted therapeutics.
**Authors:** Sundman AK, Jin S, Vadlamudi L, King GF
**Journal:** Brain (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awaf353](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awaf353)

## Content

1. Brain. 2026 Jan 8;149(1):37-47. doi: 10.1093/brain/awaf353.

The molecular basis of KCNH1-related epileptic encephalopathy and the challenge 
of developing targeted therapeutics.

Sundman AK(1)(2), Jin S(1)(2), Vadlamudi L(3)(4), King GF(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, 
QLD 4072, Australia.
(2)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide 
and Protein Science, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, 
Australia.
(3)Centre for Clinical Research, The University of Queensland, Herston, QLD 
4006, Australia.
(4)Department of Neurology, Royal Brisbane & Women's Hospital, Herston, QLD 
4006, Australia.

Epilepsy is a common but heterogeneous neurological disorder characterized by 
recurrent seizures resulting from aberrant hypersynchronous electrical 
discharges in all or part of the brain. While there are numerous potential 
causes, such as traumatic brain injury, stroke and infection, many epilepsies 
have a genetic basis. Here we review the molecular basis, clinical phenotype and 
treatment options for KCNH1 epilepsy, which is caused by gain-of-function 
mutations in the gene KCNH1, encoding the voltage-gated potassium channel 
Kv10.1. Although first discovered in patients with Temple-Baraitser syndrome and 
Zimmermann-Laband syndrome, these genetic disorders are now recognized as 
belonging to a broad spectrum of KCNH1-related encephalopathies characterized by 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, facial dysmorphism and 
infantile-onset seizures. A major challenge in developing disease-specific 
anti-seizure medications for KCNH1 epilepsy is selectivity over Kv11.1 (hERG), a 
closely related channel that plays a fundamental role in repolarization of the 
cardiac action potential and which is uniquely susceptible to inhibition by a 
diverse range of drugs. We argue that allosteric modulators of Kv10.1 that 
induce a depolarizing shift in the channel's activation threshold are more 
likely to provide seizure control in KCNH1 epilepsy patients than pore blockers 
that annihilate channel function.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awaf353
PMCID: PMC12782163
PMID: 40986435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.