---
reference_id: "PMID:30429277"
title: "CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy: A major player in primary microgliopathies."
authors:
- Konno T
- Kasanuki K
- Ikeuchi T
- Dickson DW
- Wszolek ZK
journal: Neurology
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006642
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/pathology
- Humans
- "Leukoencephalopathies/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Microglia/pathology, physiology"
- Mutation
- "Receptors, Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/genetics"
- "Receptor, Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy: A major player in primary microgliopathies.
**Authors:** Konno T, Kasanuki K, Ikeuchi T, Dickson DW, Wszolek ZK
**Journal:** Neurology (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000006642](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000006642)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2018 Dec 11;91(24):1092-1104. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006642.
Epub  2018 Nov 14.

CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy: A major player in primary microgliopathies.

Konno T(1), Kasanuki K(2), Ikeuchi T(2), Dickson DW(2), Wszolek ZK(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neurology (T.K., Z.K.W.) and Neuroscience (K.K., 
D.W.D.), Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL; and Department of Molecular Genetics 
(T.I.), Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, Niigata, Japan. Dr. Konno 
is currently with the Department of Neurology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata 
University, Niigata, Japan. Wszolek.Zbigniew@mayo.edu 
konno_t@bri.niigata-u.ac.jp.
(2)From the Departments of Neurology (T.K., Z.K.W.) and Neuroscience (K.K., 
D.W.D.), Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL; and Department of Molecular Genetics 
(T.I.), Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, Niigata, Japan. Dr. Konno 
is currently with the Department of Neurology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata 
University, Niigata, Japan.

Since the discovery of CSF1R gene mutations in families with hereditary diffuse 
leukoencephalopathy with spheroids in 2012, more than 70 different mutations 
have been identified around the world. Through the analyses of mutation 
carriers, CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy has been distinctly characterized 
clinically, radiologically, and pathologically. Typically, patients present with 
frontotemporal dementia-like phenotype in their 40s-50s, accompanied by motor 
symptoms, including pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs. Women tend to develop 
the clinical symptoms at a younger age than men. On brain imaging, in addition 
to white matter abnormalities, thinning of the corpus callosum, 
diffusion-restricted lesions in the white matter, and brain calcifications are 
hallmarks. Primary axonopathy followed by demyelination was suggested by 
pathology. Haploinsufficiency of colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF1R) is 
evident in a patient with a frameshift mutation, facilitating the establishment 
of Csf1r haploinsufficient mouse model. These mice develop clinical, radiologic, 
and pathologic phenotypes consistent with those of human patients with CSF1R 
mutations. In vitro, perturbation of CSF1R signaling is shown in cultured cells 
expressing mutant CSF1R. However, the underlying mechanisms by which CSF1R 
mutations selectively lead to white matter degeneration remains to be 
elucidated. Given that CSF1R mainly expresses in microglia, CSF1R-related 
leukoencephalopathy is representative of primary microgliopathies, of which 
microglia have a pivotal and primary role in pathogenesis. In this review, we 
address the current knowledge of CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy and discuss 
the putative pathophysiology, with a focus on microglia, as well as future 
research directions.

© 2018 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006642
PMCID: PMC6329328
PMID: 30429277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]