---
reference_id: "PMID:38861626"
title: Vertical Transplacental Infections.
authors:
- McCluskey JM
- Sato AI
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vertical Transplacental Infections.
**Authors:** McCluskey JM, Sato AI

## Content

1. Vertical Transplacental Infections.

McCluskey JM(1), Sato AI(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2024 Aug 16.

Author information:
(1)University of Nebraska Medical Center
(2)UNMC

As opposed to horizontal transmission between individuals in a population, 
vertical transmission of an infectious agent is generally defined as 
transmission from a pregnant individual to their fetus. Horizontal transmission 
during pregnancy is frequently examined based on timing (antenatal, perinatal, 
or postnatal); more specific considerations involve viral transplacental 
infections. Vertical antenatal and in-utero infections refer to the same general 
mechanism of infection, although the particular pathophysiologic mechanisms will 
vary with the infectious agent. Viral transplacental infections represent a 
critical category of maternal-fetal health concerns, with the capacity to 
traverse the placental barrier and adversely affect the developing 
fetus, leading to a range of outcomes, from mild disease to severe congenital 
anomalies or fetal death. Infectious agents that can cross the placenta include 
those historically described by "ToRCHes" (toxoplasmosis, other [hepatitis B 
virus and syphilis], rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus). 
However, Listeria, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), parvovirus B19, 
varicella-zoster virus, hepatitis C virus, and Zika virus are also known to 
cause transplacental infections. Each infection can have profound implications 
for fetal development, with risks varying based on the timing of infection 
during pregnancy and the specific pathogen involved. See StatPearls' companion 
references, " Antepartum infections," "HIV in Pregnancy," and "Pregnancy and 
Viral Hepatitis," for more information on vertically transmitted infections and 
associated intrapartum issues. Please note that the terms "maternal" and 
"mother" in this activity refer to the birthing parent and are not meant to 
exclude other birthing parents.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 38861626

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: James McCluskey declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Alice Sato 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.