---
reference_id: "PMID:28325357"
title: "Chronic myeloid leukemia with a rare fusion transcript, e19a2 BCR-ABL1: A report of three cases from India."
authors:
- Sazawal S
- Chikkara S
- Singh K
- Chaubey R
- Chandra D
- Mishra P
- Mahapatra M
- Seth T
- Saxena R
journal: Ann Diagn Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2016.12.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic myeloid leukemia with a rare fusion transcript, e19a2 BCR-ABL1: A report of three cases from India.
**Authors:** Sazawal S, Chikkara S, Singh K, Chaubey R, Chandra D, Mishra P, Mahapatra M, Seth T, Saxena R
**Journal:** Ann Diagn Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2016.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2016.12.001)

## Content

1. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2017 Apr;27:24-27. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2016.12.001. 
Epub 2016 Dec 15.

Chronic myeloid leukemia with a rare fusion transcript, e19a2 BCR-ABL1: A report 
of three cases from India.

Sazawal S(1), Chikkara S(1), Singh K(1), Chaubey R(1), Chandra D(1), Mishra 
P(1), Mahapatra M(1), Seth T(1), Saxena R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 
110029, India.
(2)Department of Hematology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 
110029, India. Electronic address: renusaxena@outlook.com.

The μ-bcr breakpoint connects exon 19 of BCR with ABL giving rise to the e19a2 
transcript corresponding to the p230 fusion protein (micro-BCR breakpoint) which 
is rarely seen in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients. Here we report three 
patients with p230 fusion protein presenting with different clinical 
presentations and diagnosed as CML-CP. These patients received Imatinib 
(tyrosine kinase inhibitor-TKI) and are still in remission.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2016.12.001
PMID: 28325357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]