---
reference_id: "PMID:10677296"
title: Autosomal recessive disorder otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia is associated with loss-of-function mutations in the COL11A2 gene.
authors:
- Melkoniemi M
- Brunner HG
- Manouvrier S
- Hennekam R
- Superti-Furga A
- Kääriäinen H
- Pauli RM
- van Essen T
- Warman ML
- Bonaventure J
- Miny P
- Ala-Kokko L
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1086/302750
keywords:
- Adult
- Alternative Splicing/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Codon, Terminator/genetics"
- "Collagen/deficiency, genetics"
- Consanguinity
- "Deafness/genetics, physiopathology"
- Diseases in Twins/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Pedigree
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis, genetics"
- Radiography
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal recessive disorder otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia is associated with loss-of-function mutations in the COL11A2 gene.
**Authors:** Melkoniemi M, Brunner HG, Manouvrier S, Hennekam R, Superti-Furga A, Kääriäinen H, Pauli RM, van Essen T, Warman ML, Bonaventure J, Miny P, Ala-Kokko L
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302750](https://doi.org/10.1086/302750)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Feb;66(2):368-77. doi: 10.1086/302750.

Autosomal recessive disorder otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia is associated
with loss-of-function mutations in the COL11A2 gene.

Melkoniemi M(1), Brunner HG, Manouvrier S, Hennekam R, Superti-Furga A,
Kääriäinen H, Pauli RM, van Essen T, Warman ML, Bonaventure J, Miny P, Ala-Kokko
L.

Author information:
(1)Collagen Research Unit, Biocenter, Department of Medical Biochemistry,
University of Oulu, Kajaanintie 52A, FIN-90220 Oulu, Finland.

Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED) is an autosomal recessive skeletal
dysplasia accompanied by severe hearing loss. The phenotype overlaps that of the
autosomal dominant disorders-Stickler and Marshall syndromes-but can be
distinguished by disproportionately short limbs, severe hearing loss, and lack
of ocular involvement. In one family with OSMED, a homozygous Gly-->Arg
substitution has been described in COL11A2, which codes for the alpha2 chain of
type XI collagen. We report seven further families with OSMED. All affected
individuals had a remarkably similar phenotype: profound sensorineural hearing
loss, skeletal dysplasia with limb shortening and large epiphyses, cleft palate,
an extremely flat face, hypoplasia of the mandible, a short nose with anteverted
nares, and a flat nasal bridge. We screened affected individuals for mutations
in COL11A2 and found different mutations in each family. Individuals from four
families, including three with consanguineous parents, were homozygous for
mutations. Individuals from three other families, in whom parents were
nonconsanguineous, were compound heterozygous. Of the 10 identified mutations, 9
are predicted to cause premature termination of translation, and 1 is predicted
to cause an in-frame deletion. We conclude that the OSMED phenotype is highly
homogenous and results from homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for COL11A2
mutations, most of which are predicted to cause complete absence of alpha2(XI)
chains.

DOI: 10.1086/302750
PMCID: PMC1288089
PMID: 10677296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
