---
reference_id: "PMID:35717381"
title: "Clinical and genetic profile of patients enrolled in the Transthyretin Amyloidosis Outcomes Survey (THAOS): 14-year update."
authors:
- Dispenzieri A
- Coelho T
- Conceição I
- Waddington-Cruz M
- Wixner J
- Kristen AV
- Rapezzi C
- Planté-Bordeneuve V
- Gonzalez-Moreno J
- Maurer MS
- Grogan M
- Chapman D
- Amass L
- THAOS investigators
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02359-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic profile of patients enrolled in the Transthyretin Amyloidosis Outcomes Survey (THAOS): 14-year update.
**Authors:** Dispenzieri A, Coelho T, Conceição I, Waddington-Cruz M, Wixner J, Kristen AV, Rapezzi C, Planté-Bordeneuve V, Gonzalez-Moreno J, Maurer MS, Grogan M, Chapman D, Amass L, THAOS investigators
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02359-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02359-w)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Jun 18;17(1):236. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02359-w.

Clinical and genetic profile of patients enrolled in the Transthyretin 
Amyloidosis Outcomes Survey (THAOS): 14-year update.

Dispenzieri A(1), Coelho T(2), Conceição I(3), Waddington-Cruz M(4), Wixner 
J(5), Kristen AV(6), Rapezzi C(7)(8), Planté-Bordeneuve V(9), Gonzalez-Moreno 
J(10), Maurer MS(11), Grogan M(12), Chapman D(13), Amass L(13); THAOS 
investigators.

Collaborators: Pavia PG, Tarnev I, Costello JG, Briseno MAGD, Schmidt H, 
Drachman B, Barroso FA, Yamashita T, Lairez O, Sekijima Y, Vita G, Jeon ES, 
Hanna M, Slosky D, Luigetti M, LoRusso S, Beamud FM, Adams D, Moelgaard H, Press 
R, Cirami CL, Nienhuis H, Plana JMC, Inamo J, Jacoby D, Emdin M, Quan D, Hummel 
S, Witteles R, Dori A, Shah S, Lenihan D, Azevedo O, Murali S, Zivkovic S, Low 
SC, Nativi-Nicolau J, Fine N, Tallaj J, Tschoepe C, Torrón RF, Polydefkis M, 
Merlini G, Badelita S, Gottlieb S, Tauras J, Correia EB, Ventura H, Gess B, 
Darstein F, Oh J, Marburger T, Van Cleemput J, Salutto VL, Parman Y, Chao CC, 
Sarswat N, Mueller C, Steidley D, Ralph J, Warner A, Cotts W, Hoffman J, Rugiero 
M, Misawa S, Blanco JLM, Davila LG, Sadeh M, Luo J, Kyriakides T, Wang A, 
Kaufmann H, Zivkovic S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
dispenzieri.angela@mayo.edu.
(2)Unidade Corino Andrade, Hospital Santo António, Centro Hospitalar 
Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, CHULN, Hospital de Santa Maria, Universidade de 
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)University Hospital, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, National 
Amyloidosis Referral Center, CEPARM, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, 
Sweden.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Angiology, Respiratory Medicine, Medical University 
of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Cardiological Centre, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(8)Maria Cecilia Hospital, GVM Care & Research, Cotignola, Ravenna, Italy.
(9)Hôpital Henri Mondor - AP-HP, East Paris University, Créteil, France.
(10)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Universitario Son Llatzer, Instituto 
de Investigación Sanitaria Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(11)Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA.
(12)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(13)Pfizer Inc, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR amyloidosis) is a rare, 
life-threatening disease caused by the accumulation of variant or wild-type 
(ATTRwt amyloidosis) transthyretin amyloid fibrils in the heart, peripheral 
nerves, and other tissues and organs.
METHODS: Established in 2007, the Transthyretin Amyloidosis Outcomes Survey 
(THAOS) is the largest ongoing, global, longitudinal observational study of 
patients with ATTR amyloidosis, including both inherited and wild-type disease, 
and asymptomatic carriers of pathogenic TTR mutations. This descriptive analysis 
examines baseline characteristics of symptomatic patients and asymptomatic gene 
carriers enrolled in THAOS since its inception in 2007 (data cutoff: August 1, 
2021).
RESULTS: This analysis included 3779 symptomatic patients and 1830 asymptomatic 
gene carriers. Symptomatic patients were predominantly male (71.4%) and had a 
mean (standard deviation [SD]) age of symptom onset of 56.3 (17.8) years. 
Val30Met was the most common genotype in symptomatic patients in South America 
(80.9%), Europe (55.4%), and Asia (50.5%), and more patients had early- versus 
late-onset disease in these regions. The majority of symptomatic patients in 
North America (58.8%) had ATTRwt amyloidosis. The overall distribution of 
phenotypes in symptomatic patients was predominantly cardiac (40.7%), 
predominantly neurologic (40.1%), mixed (16.6%), and no phenotype (2.5%). In 
asymptomatic gene carriers, mean (SD) age at enrollment was 42.4 (15.7) years, 
42.4% were male, and 73.2% carried the Val30Met mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: This 14-year global overview of THAOS in over 5000 patients 
represents the largest analysis of ATTR amyloidosis to date and highlights the 
genotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity of the disease.
CLINICALTRIALS: gov Identifier: NCT00628745.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02359-w
PMCID: PMC9206752
PMID: 35717381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AD reports research grants from Celgene, 
Millennium, Pfizer, Janssen, and Alnylam; and has received funding from Pfizer 
for meeting expenses (travel) and attended advisory boards for Akcea and 
Intellia. TC reports serving as a medical advisor for Pfizer and receiving 
funding for scientific meeting expenses (travel, accommodation, and 
registration) from Pfizer. IC reports consulting fees and funding for scientific 
meeting expenses (travel, accommodation, and registration) from Pfizer. MW-C 
reports research funding, consulting fees, and travel support for advisory 
boards and meetings from FoldRx Pharmaceuticals and Pfizer. JW reports 
consulting fees and travel support for lectures and advisory boards from Pfizer 
and Alnylam, and consulting fees from Akcea. AVK reports reimbursement for study 
visits from Pfizer during the conduct of the study. CR reports research grants 
from Pfizer and consultancy fees from Pfizer, Alnylam, and Prothena. VP-B 
reports serving as a medical advisor for Pfizer, Alnylam, Eidos, and Ionis. JG-M 
reports speaker fees from Pfizer, Alnylam, and Akcea. MSM reports grants from 
Pfizer during the conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from Pfizer, 
Eidos, Prothena, and Ionis; grants from Alnylam; and personal fees from GSK and 
Akcea outside the submitted work. MG reports grants and advisory board and 
consultancy fees paid to her institution from Alnylam, Eidos, Prothena, and 
Pfizer. DC and LA are full-time employees of Pfizer and hold stock and/or stock 
options with Pfizer.