---
reference_id: "PMID:29063142"
title: Molecular therapeutic strategies for FGFR3 gene-related skeletal dysplasia.
authors:
- Chen J
- Liu J
- Zhou Y
- Liu S
- Liu G
- Zuo Y
- Wu Z
- Wu N
- Qiu G
journal: J Mol Med (Berl)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00109-017-1602-9
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bone Diseases/genetics, therapy"
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Drug Repositioning
- Humans
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Proteolysis
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular therapeutic strategies for FGFR3 gene-related skeletal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Chen J, Liu J, Zhou Y, Liu S, Liu G, Zuo Y, Wu Z, Wu N, Qiu G
**Journal:** J Mol Med (Berl) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00109-017-1602-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-017-1602-9)

## Content

1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2017 Dec;95(12):1303-1313. doi: 10.1007/s00109-017-1602-9. 
Epub 2017 Oct 23.

Molecular therapeutic strategies for FGFR3 gene-related skeletal dysplasia.

Chen J(1)(2), Liu J(1)(2)(3), Zhou Y(2)(4), Liu S(1)(2)(5), Liu G(1)(2)(5), Zuo 
Y(1)(2)(5), Wu Z(2)(5)(6), Wu N(7)(8)(9), Qiu G(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, No. 1 
Shuaifuyuan, Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory for Genetic Research of Skeletal Deformity, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Department of Breast Surgical Oncology, National Cancer Center/Cancer 
Hospital, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(5)Medical Research Center of Orthopaedics, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Central Laboratory, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(7)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, No. 1 
Shuaifuyuan, Beijing, 100730, China. dr.wunan@pumch.cn.
(8)Beijing Key Laboratory for Genetic Research of Skeletal Deformity, Beijing, 
China. dr.wunan@pumch.cn.
(9)Medical Research Center of Orthopaedics, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China. dr.wunan@pumch.cn.
(10)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, No. 1 
Shuaifuyuan, Beijing, 100730, China. qiuguixingpumch@126.com.
(11)Beijing Key Laboratory for Genetic Research of Skeletal Deformity, Beijing, 
China. qiuguixingpumch@126.com.
(12)Medical Research Center of Orthopaedics, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing, China. qiuguixingpumch@126.com.

The FGFR3 gene encodes fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 protein, a negative 
regulator of chondrogenesis. Gain-of-function mutations result in constitutively 
activated FGFR3, leading to aberrant signal transduction, and accounting for 
inhibition of chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation. Generally, these 
pathogenic mutations maintain FGFR3 in an active state and cause diverse 
phenotypes in patients with skeletal dysplasia. For decades, studies have 
revealed the molecular mechanisms of constitutively activated FGFR3 and relevant 
therapeutic strategies. By modulating the FGFR3-induced signalling pathway with 
methods such as blocking binding between ligands and receptors, blocking 
tyrosine kinase activities, or antagonising the FGFR3 downstream signalling 
pathway, these strategies offer the possibility to ameliorate FGFR3 gene-related 
skeletal dysplasia phenotypes. In this review, we describe the mechanisms of 
potential therapeutic targets and underlying regulators and then systematically 
review molecular therapeutic strategies for FGFR3 gene-related skeletal 
dysplasia based on current knowledge.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-017-1602-9
PMID: 29063142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]