---
reference_id: "PMID:38791102"
title: A Humanized and Viable Animal Model for Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia-CYP21A2-R484Q Mutant Mouse.
authors:
- Thirumalasetty SR
- Schubert T
- Naumann R
- Reichardt I
- Rohm ML
- Landgraf D
- Gembardt F
- Peitzsch M
- Hartmann MF
- Sarov M
- Wudy SA
- Reisch N
- Huebner A
- Koehler K
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25105062
keywords:
- Animals
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Steroid 21-Hydroxylase/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Female
- Male
- Humans
- "Corticosterone/metabolism, blood"
- Aldosterone/metabolism
- "Adrenal Glands/metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- Progesterone/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Humanized and Viable Animal Model for Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia-CYP21A2-R484Q Mutant Mouse.
**Authors:** Thirumalasetty SR, Schubert T, Naumann R, Reichardt I, Rohm ML, Landgraf D, Gembardt F, Peitzsch M, Hartmann MF, Sarov M, Wudy SA, Reisch N, Huebner A, Koehler K
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25105062](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25105062)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 7;25(10):5062. doi: 10.3390/ijms25105062.

A Humanized and Viable Animal Model for Congenital Adrenal 
Hyperplasia-CYP21A2-R484Q Mutant Mouse.

Thirumalasetty SR(1), Schubert T(1), Naumann R(2), Reichardt I(3), Rohm ML(1), 
Landgraf D(1), Gembardt F(4), Peitzsch M(5), Hartmann MF(6), Sarov M(3), Wudy 
SA(6), Reisch N(7), Huebner A(1), Koehler K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Paediatrics, 
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische 
Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(2)Transgenic Core Facility, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and 
Genetics, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(3)Genome Engineering Facility, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology 
and Genetics, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Medizinische Klinik III, Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 
Dresden, Germany.
(5)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine 
and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 
Dresden, Germany.
(6)Steroid Research & Mass Spectrometry Unit, Paediatric Endocrinology and 
Diabetology, Center of Child and Adolescent Medicine, Justus Liebig Universität, 
35392 Giessen, Germany.
(7)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, LMU Klinikum München, 80336 Munich, 
Germany.

Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) is an autosomal recessive disorder 
impairing cortisol synthesis due to reduced enzymatic activity. This leads to 
persistent adrenocortical overstimulation and the accumulation of precursors 
before the blocked enzymatic step. The predominant form of CAH arises from 
mutations in CYP21A2, causing 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21-OHD). Despite 
emerging treatment options for CAH, it is not always possible to physiologically 
replace cortisol levels and counteract hyperandrogenism. Moreover, there is a 
notable absence of an effective in vivo model for pre-clinical testing. In this 
work, we developed an animal model for CAH with the clinically relevant point 
mutation p.R484Q in the previously humanized CYP21A2 mouse strain. Mutant mice 
showed hyperplastic adrenals and exhibited reduced levels of corticosterone and 
11-deoxycorticosterone and an increase in progesterone. Female mutants presented 
with higher aldosterone concentrations, but blood pressure remained similar 
between wildtype and mutant mice in both sexes. Male mutant mice have normal 
fertility with a typical testicular appearance, whereas female mutants are 
infertile, exhibit an abnormal ovarian structure, and remain in a consistent 
diestrus phase. Conclusively, we show that the animal model has the potential to 
contribute to testing new treatment options and to prevent comorbidities that 
result from hormone-related derangements and treatment-related side effects in 
CAH patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25105062
PMCID: PMC11120801
PMID: 38791102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.