---
reference_id: "PMID:23985001"
title: "Diagnosis and treatment of hereditary hemochromatosis: an update."
authors:
- Kanwar P
- Kowdley KV
journal: Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1586/17474124.2013.816114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and treatment of hereditary hemochromatosis: an update.
**Authors:** Kanwar P, Kowdley KV
**Journal:** Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1586/17474124.2013.816114](https://doi.org/10.1586/17474124.2013.816114)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Aug;7(6):517-30. doi: 
10.1586/17474124.2013.816114.

Diagnosis and treatment of hereditary hemochromatosis: an update.

Kanwar P(1), Kowdley KV.

Author information:
(1)Liver Center for Excellence, Digestive Disease Institute, Virginia Mason 
Medical Center, Seattle, WA, USA.

Erratum in
    Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Nov;7(8):767.

Hereditary hemochromatosis is an inherited iron overload disorder caused by 
inappropriately low hepcidin secretion leading to increased duodenal absorption 
of dietary iron, most commonly in C282Y homozygous individuals. This can result 
in elevated serum ferritin, iron deposition in various organs and ultimately 
end-organ damage, although there is incomplete biochemical and clinical 
penetrance and variable phenotypic expression of the HFE mutation in hereditary 
hemochromatosis. An elevated SF >1000 mg/l [corrected] is associated with an 
increased risk of cirrhosis and mortality in C282Y homozygotes.Conversely, a SF 
<1000 µg/l is associated with a very low likelihood of cirrhosis, making liver 
biopsy unnecessary among C282Y homozygotes in the absence of concomitant risk 
factors for liver disease. Phlebotomy remains the mainstay of treatment and new 
treatments being studied include erythrocytapheresis and 'mini-hepcidins'. Iron 
overload is being recognized to play a carcinogenic role in hepatocellular 
carcinoma and other cancers, possibly supporting iron depletion in these 
patients.

DOI: 10.1586/17474124.2013.816114
PMID: 23985001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]