---
reference_id: "PMID:34467644"
title: "A novel homozygous mutation in the human ALG12 gene results in an aberrant profile of oligomannose N-glycans in patient's serum."
authors:
- Ziburová J
- Nemčovič M
- Šesták S
- Bellová J
- Pakanová Z
- Siváková B
- Šalingová A
- Šebová C
- Ostrožlíková M
- Lekka DE
- Brucknerová J
- Brucknerová I
- Skokňová M
- Mc Cullough A
- Hrčková G
- Hlavatá A
- Bzdúch V
- Mucha J
- Baráth P
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62474
keywords:
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing
- Glycosylation
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mannosyltransferases/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Polysaccharides/genetics, metabolism"
- Slovakia/epidemiology
- Transferrin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel homozygous mutation in the human ALG12 gene results in an aberrant profile of oligomannose N-glycans in patient's serum.
**Authors:** Ziburová J, Nemčovič M, Šesták S, Bellová J, Pakanová Z, Siváková B, Šalingová A, Šebová C, Ostrožlíková M, Lekka DE, Brucknerová J, Brucknerová I, Skokňová M, Mc Cullough A, Hrčková G, Hlavatá A, Bzdúch V, Mucha J, Baráth P
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62474](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62474)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Nov;185(11):3494-3501. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62474. Epub 
2021 Sep 1.

A novel homozygous mutation in the human ALG12 gene results in an aberrant 
profile of oligomannose N-glycans in patient's serum.

Ziburová J(1)(2), Nemčovič M(1), Šesták S(1), Bellová J(1), Pakanová Z(1), 
Siváková B(1), Šalingová A(3), Šebová C(3), Ostrožlíková M(3), Lekka DE(4)(5), 
Brucknerová J(4)(5), Brucknerová I(4), Skokňová M(4), Mc Cullough A(4), Hrčková 
G(6), Hlavatá A(6), Bzdúch V(6), Mucha J(1), Baráth P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Glycobiology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Institute of 
Chemistry, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, 
Slovakia.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Institute of Children's Diseases, 
Bratislava, Slovakia.
(4)Department of Neonatology and Intensive Medicine, National Institute of 
Children's Diseases, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Paediatrics, National Institute of 
Children's Diseases, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia.

Congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ig (ALG12-CDG) is a rare inherited 
metabolic disease caused by a defect in alpha-mannosyltransferase 8, encoded by 
the ALG12 gene (22q13.33). To date, only 15 patients have been diagnosed with 
ALG12-CDG globally. Due to a newborn Slovak patient's clinical and biochemical 
abnormalities, the isoelectric focusing of transferrin was performed with 
observed significant hypoglycosylation typical of CDG I. Furthermore, analysis 
of neutral serum N-glycans by mass spectrometry revealed the accumulation of 
GlcNAc2Man5-7 and decreased levels of GlcNAc2Man8-9, which indicated impaired 
ALG12 enzymatic activity. Genetic analysis of the coding regions of the ALG12 
gene of the patient revealed a novel homozygous substitution mutation c.1439T>C 
p.(Leu480Pro) within Exon 10. Furthermore, both of the patient's parents and his 
twin sister were asymptomatic heterozygous carriers of the variant. This 
comprehensive genomic and glycomic approach led to the confirmation of the ALG12 
pathogenic variant responsible for the clinical manifestation of the disorder in 
the patient described.

© 2021 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62474
PMCID: PMC9291070
PMID: 34467644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflict of 
interest.