---
reference_id: "PMID:22084479"
title: Frequent and widespread vascular abnormalities in human signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 deficiency.
authors:
- Chandesris MO
- Azarine A
- Ong KT
- Taleb S
- Boutouyrie P
- Mousseaux E
- Romain M
- Bozec E
- Laurent S
- Boddaert N
- Thumerelle C
- Tillie-Leblond I
- Hoarau C
- Lebranchu Y
- Aladjidi N
- Tron F
- Barlogis V
- Body G
- Munzer M
- Jaussaud R
- Suarez F
- Clément O
- Hermine O
- Tedgui A
- Lortholary O
- Picard C
- Mallat Z
- Fischer A
journal: Circ Cardiovasc Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.961235
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- Aortic Aneurysm/pathology
- Biomarkers/blood
- Carotid Arteries/diagnostic imaging
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Interleukin-17/metabolism
- "Job Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mice
- Mutation
- Prospective Studies
- "STAT3 Transcription Factor/antagonists & inhibitors, deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Ultrasonography
- Whole Body Imaging
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequent and widespread vascular abnormalities in human signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 deficiency.
**Authors:** Chandesris MO, Azarine A, Ong KT, Taleb S, Boutouyrie P, Mousseaux E, Romain M, Bozec E, Laurent S, Boddaert N, Thumerelle C, Tillie-Leblond I, Hoarau C, Lebranchu Y, Aladjidi N, Tron F, Barlogis V, Body G, Munzer M, Jaussaud R, Suarez F, Clément O, Hermine O, Tedgui A, Lortholary O, Picard C, Mallat Z, Fischer A
**Journal:** Circ Cardiovasc Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.961235](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.961235)

## Content

1. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Feb 1;5(1):25-34. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.961235. Epub 2011 Nov 14.

Frequent and widespread vascular abnormalities in human signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 3 deficiency.

Chandesris MO(1), Azarine A, Ong KT, Taleb S, Boutouyrie P, Mousseaux E, Romain 
M, Bozec E, Laurent S, Boddaert N, Thumerelle C, Tillie-Leblond I, Hoarau C, 
Lebranchu Y, Aladjidi N, Tron F, Barlogis V, Body G, Munzer M, Jaussaud R, 
Suarez F, Clément O, Hermine O, Tedgui A, Lortholary O, Picard C, Mallat Z, 
Fischer A.

Author information:
(1)Hematology Department, Necker Children's Hospital, Assistance Publique 
Hôpitaux de Paris, 149 rue de Sèvres, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Aug 1;5(4):e37.

BACKGROUND: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) 
deficiency is responsible for autosomal dominant hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome, 
characterized by recurrent bacterial and fungal infections, connective tissue 
abnormalities, hyperimmunoglobulin E, and Th17 lymphopenia. Although vascular 
abnormalities have been reported in some patients, the prevalence, 
characteristics, and etiology of these features have yet to be described.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We prospectively screened 21 adult STAT3-deficient patients 
[corrected] (median age, 26 years; range, 17-44 years) [corrected] for vascular 
abnormalities. We explored the entire arterial vasculature with whole-body 
magnetic resonance imaging angiography, coronary multislice computed tomography, 
and echo-tracking-based imaging specifically for the [corrected] carotid 
arteries. We also assayed for serum biomarkers of inflammation and endothelial 
dysfunction. Finally, we studied murine models of aortic aneurysm in the 
presence and absence of inhibitors of STAT3-dependent signaling. Ninety-five 
percent of patients showed brain abnormalities (white matter hyperintensities, 
lacunar lesions suggestive of ischemic infarcts, and atrophy). We reported 
peripheral and brain artery abnormalities in 84% of the patients and detected 
coronary artery abnormalities in 50% of the patients. The most frequent vascular 
abnormalities were ectasia and aneurysm. The carotid intima-media thickness was 
markedly decreased, with a substantial increase in circumferential wall stress, 
indicating the occurrence of hypotrophic arterial remodeling in this 
STAT3-deficient population. Systemic inflammatory biomarker levels correlated 
poorly with the vascular phenotype. In vivo inhibition of STAT3 signaling or 
blockade of IL-17A resulted in a marked increase in aneurysm severity and fatal 
rupture in mouse models.
CONCLUSIONS: Vascular abnormalities are highly prevalent in patients with STAT3 
deficiency. This feature is consistent with the greater susceptibility to 
vascular aneurysm observed after inhibition of STAT3-dependent signaling in 
mouse models.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.961235
PMID: 22084479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]