---
reference_id: "PMID:31930430"
title: "The Many Faces of Meckel's Diverticulum: Update on Management in Incidental and Symptomatic Patients."
authors:
- Lindeman RJ
- Søreide K
journal: Curr Gastroenterol Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s11894-019-0742-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Many Faces of Meckel's Diverticulum: Update on Management in Incidental and Symptomatic Patients.
**Authors:** Lindeman RJ, Søreide K
**Journal:** Curr Gastroenterol Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11894-019-0742-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11894-019-0742-1)

## Content

1. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2020 Jan 13;22(1):3. doi: 10.1007/s11894-019-0742-1.

The Many Faces of Meckel's Diverticulum: Update on Management in Incidental and 
Symptomatic Patients.

Lindeman RJ(1)(2), Søreide K(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Stavanger University Hospital, 
Stavanger, Norway.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Stavanger University Hospital, 
Stavanger, Norway. ksoreide@mac.com.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. 
ksoreide@mac.com.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Meckel's diverticulum may be detected incidentally or present 
with symptoms from infancy and to old age. The presentation may be acute, with 
several complications associated with the condition. We aim to review the many 
faces with which a Meckel's diverticulum may present, either symptomatically or 
as an incidental finding.
RECENT FINDINGS: Due to its rarity, recent studies mainly include small 
retrospective series or case reports. Emphasis in the recent literature is on 
clinical presentation, the pathology of symptomatic cases, management options 
and risks of neoplasia. Symptoms are mainly caused by obstruction, bleeding or 
diverticulitis. Cross-sectional imaging is unspecific, although capsule 
endoscopy is reported of use in case series. Meckel's diverticulum presents with 
clinical features that are age-specific. Complicated Meckel's diverticulum is 
treated by resection. Optimal treatment of incidental cases remains debated. 
Meckel's diverticulum usually stays asymptomatic, and decision-making for 
management should be based on patient-specific factors. Use of minimal invasive 
techniques mandates refinement of the optimal treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s11894-019-0742-1
PMID: 31930430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]