---
reference_id: "PMID:39484073"
title: Outcomes of cases with elevated 3-hydroxyisovaleryl carnitine report from the newborn screening program.
authors:
- Al Mutairi F
- Alkhalaf R
- Khan AR
- Al Othaim A
- Alfadhel M
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101153
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of cases with elevated 3-hydroxyisovaleryl carnitine report from the newborn screening program.
**Authors:** Al Mutairi F, Alkhalaf R, Khan AR, Al Othaim A, Alfadhel M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101153](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101153)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2024 Oct 13;41:101153. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101153.
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Outcomes of cases with elevated 3-hydroxyisovaleryl carnitine report from the
newborn screening program.

Al Mutairi F(1)(2), Alkhalaf R(1), Khan AR(3), Al Othaim A(3)(2), Alfadhel
M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetic and Precision Medicine Department, King Abdullah Specialized Children
Hospital, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs
(MNGHA), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)King Abdullah International Medical Research Center (KAIMRC), King Saud bin
Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Ministry of National Guard Health
Affairs, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, King Abdulaziz Medical City,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Elevated plasma levels of 3-hydroxyisovaleryl-carnitine (C5OH) and
impaired leucine catabolism are frequently observed in newborn screening
reports, necessitating consideration of various diseases in the differential
diagnosis. This study aimed to analyze different forms of C5OH and explore their
potential predictive value for diagnosis and outcomes.
METHODS: A retrospective review of newborn screening positive cases for
C5OH-related diseases from May 2011 to December 2023 was conducted. Clinical,
biochemical, and molecular phenotypes of all confirmed positive cases during
this period were examined.
RESULTS: A total of 15 true positive cases were diagnosed. No significant
correlation was found between the C5OH levels in newborn screening and the
diagnosis of specific C5OH-related disorders or the presence of metabolic,
neonatal, or developmental abnormalities. Outcomes varied based on the spectrum
of diseases.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that relying solely on C5OH levels from
newborn screening is insufficient for making accurate diagnoses or predictions
regarding C5OH-related disorders. Further comprehensive evaluation and
consideration of additional factors are essential for accurate diagnosis,
management and outcome.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101153
PMCID: PMC11525625
PMID: 39484073

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial
interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing
interests: Fuad AL Mutairi reports administrative support, equipment, drugs, or
supplies, and writing assistance were provided by King Abdullah International
Medical Research Center. If there are other authors, they declare that they have
no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
