---
reference_id: "PMID:28803251"
title: Epidemiological Study of Huntington's Disease in the Province of Ferrara, Italy.
authors:
- Carrassi E
- Pugliatti M
- Govoni V
- Sensi M
- Casetta I
- Granieri E
journal: Neuroepidemiology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1159/000479697
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiological Study of Huntington's Disease in the Province of Ferrara, Italy.
**Authors:** Carrassi E, Pugliatti M, Govoni V, Sensi M, Casetta I, Granieri E
**Journal:** Neuroepidemiology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000479697](https://doi.org/10.1159/000479697)

## Content

1. Neuroepidemiology. 2017;49(1-2):18-23. doi: 10.1159/000479697. Epub 2017 Aug
12.

Epidemiological Study of Huntington's Disease in the Province of Ferrara, Italy.

Carrassi E(1), Pugliatti M, Govoni V, Sensi M, Casetta I, Granieri E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Specialty Surgery, Section of Neurology, 
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative 
disorder caused by the abnormal expansion of CAG triplet repeat. We aimed to 
reappraise HD epidemiology in a northern Italian population, in relation to 
introduction of genetic testing.
METHODS: Through ICD-9M code 333.4 and medical fare exemption code RF0080, HD 
cases were identified from administrative health data and medical records from 
the Units of Neurology and Genetics, Ferrara University Hospital, and from other 
provincial neurological structures.
RESULTS: HD mean annual incidence rate in 1990-2009 was 0.3 per 100,000 (95% CI 
0.2-0.5). All incident cases were found to have symptoms of the disease's 
classic form, and neither juvenile nor the rigid Westphal variant was detected. 
The mean (SD) age at onset was 50.2 (12.7 years; range 32-82 years), 54.9 (14.6) 
for men and 45.8 (9.4) for women. On prevalence day, December 31, 2014, HD 
prevalence was 4.2 per 100,000 (95% CI 2.4-7.0), with a male:female ratio of 
1:2.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence and incidence of HD in our population were lower 
than the prevalence and incidence reported for other European and Italian 
populations, but higher compared to those of Asia, Africa, and Eastern Europe. 
Compared to previous studies, HD incidence and prevalence did not change 
significantly.

© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000479697
PMID: 28803251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]