---
reference_id: "PMID:39257888"
title: "Granulomatosis with polyangiitis: clinical characteristics and updates in diagnosis."
authors:
- Potentas-Policewicz M
- Fijolek J
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1369233
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Granulomatosis with polyangiitis: clinical characteristics and updates in diagnosis.
**Authors:** Potentas-Policewicz M, Fijolek J
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2024.1369233](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2024.1369233)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2024 Aug 27;11:1369233. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1369233. 
eCollection 2024.

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis: clinical characteristics and updates in 
diagnosis.

Potentas-Policewicz M(1), Fijolek J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Dr Anna Gostynska Wolski Hospital, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)The Third Department of Pneumonology and Oncology, National Tuberculosis and 
Lung Diseases Research Institute, Warsaw, Poland.

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) is a rare systemic disease characterized 
by granulomatous inflammation of the respiratory tract and necrotizing 
vasculitis of small and medium vessels often associated with the production of 
anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) directed mainly against leukocyte 
proteinase 3 (PR3). Usually, it involves upper airways, lungs, and kidneys, 
however any organ may be affected. The diagnosis is based on clinical, 
radiological, and serological findings. Biopsies, although strongly recommended, 
are not always feasible and often provides non-specific features. ANCA plays a 
crucial role in the diagnosis of GPA; nevertheless, ANCA detection is not a 
substitute for biopsy, which plays an important role in suspected cases, 
particularly when histological confirmation cannot be obtained. Significant 
advances have been made in classification criteria and phenotyping of the 
disease, particularly in determining the nuances between PR3-ANCA and 
myeloperoxidase (MPO)-ANCA vasculitis. This has led to better characterization 
of patients and the development of targeted treatment in the future. In 
addition, better identification of cytokine and immunological profiles may 
result in immuno-phenotyping becoming a new approach to identify patients with 
ANCA-associated vasculitis (AAV). Due to the chronic relapsing-remitting nature, 
strict follow-up of GPA is necessary to provide appropriate management. The 
search for the accurate marker of disease activity and to predict relapse is 
still ongoing and no predictor has been found to reliably guide therapeutic 
decision-making.

Copyright © 2024 Potentas-Policewicz and Fijolek.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1369233
PMCID: PMC11385631
PMID: 39257888

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.