---
reference_id: "PMID:19727242"
title: Cytogenetic and molecular characterization of complex three-way translocations in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Freeman CE
- Mercer DD
- Ye Y
- Van Brunt J 3rd
- Li MM
journal: Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban
year: '2009'
keywords:
- Aged
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 8"
- Female
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytogenetic and molecular characterization of complex three-way translocations in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Freeman CE, Mercer DD, Ye Y, Van Brunt J 3rd, Li MM
**Journal:** Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban (2009)

## Content

1. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2009 Aug 18;41(4):477-9.

Cytogenetic and molecular characterization of complex three-way translocations
in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Freeman CE(1), Mercer DD, Ye Y, Van Brunt J 3rd, Li MM.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Program, Hayward Genetics Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.

The most frequent chromosomal rearrangement reported in acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) is t(15; 17) (q22; q21). The t(15; 17) generates the PML/RARA
fusion gene that blocks the transcription of genes involved in myeloid cell
differentiation. A small number of simple and complex variants of the classical
t(15; 17) have been reported. We report two complex three-way translocation
variants, t(3; 17; 15) (q27; q21; q22) and t(8; 17; 15) (q24.3; q12; q22) in
which the PML/RARA fusion gene has been created on the derivative 15
chromosomes. Many of these variant translocations are suspected by conventional
cytogenetics but need to be confirmed with additional molecular testing. We
discuss the importance of supplementing conventional cytogenetic testing with
FISH and RT-PCR to accurately diagnose APL variant patients.

PMID: 19727242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
