---
reference_id: "PMID:18303418"
title: "Smoking: relationship to chronic bronchitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and mortality."
authors:
- Pelkonen M
journal: Curr Opin Pulm Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e3282f379e9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smoking: relationship to chronic bronchitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and mortality.
**Authors:** Pelkonen M
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pulm Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCP.0b013e3282f379e9](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCP.0b013e3282f379e9)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2008 Mar;14(2):105-9. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e3282f379e9.

Smoking: relationship to chronic bronchitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease and mortality.

Pelkonen M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, 
Finland. Pelkonen@kuh.fi

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To describe the recent findings concerning the relationship 
between smoking, chronic bronchitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 
mortality.
RECENT FINDINGS: During their lifetime, over 40% of smokers develop chronic 
bronchitis. Chronic bronchitis is associated with an accelerated decline in lung 
function - a risk of developing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 
mortality. Approximately one-quarter of smokers can be affected by clinically 
significant chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The incidence of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease is also substantial in young adults. Smokers may 
reduce their risk of developing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by 
physical activity and increase their survival by smoking reduction. In adults 
and the elderly population, severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is 
associated with the most rapid decline in lung function, which is, in turn, 
associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease-related hospitalization 
and mortality. Using a fixed forced expiratory volume in 1 s/force vital 
capacity ratio (0.7) to define obstruction in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease at old age is acceptable. In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
patients, the disease is still underreported on death certificates. Chronic 
mucus production and being a female are associated with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease mentioned on death certificates.
SUMMARY: Chronic bronchitis is a marker identifying high-risk individuals. With 
respect to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and mortality, interventions to 
promote smoking cessation are important to reduce these risks.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e3282f379e9
PMID: 18303418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]