---
reference_id: "PMID:38341323"
title: "Efficacy and safety of bempedoic acid in patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia: analysis of pooled patient-level data from phase 3 clinical trials."
authors:
- Duell PB
- Banach M
- Catapano AL
- Laufs U
- Mancini GBJ
- Ray KK
- Broestl C
- Zhang Y
- Lei L
- Goldberg AC
journal: J Clin Lipidol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2023.12.005
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dicarboxylic Acids/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II/drug therapy
- Male
- "Cholesterol, LDL/blood"
- "Fatty Acids/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Middle Aged
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- "Clinical Trials, Phase III as Topic"
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of bempedoic acid in patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia: analysis of pooled patient-level data from phase 3 clinical trials.
**Authors:** Duell PB, Banach M, Catapano AL, Laufs U, Mancini GBJ, Ray KK, Broestl C, Zhang Y, Lei L, Goldberg AC
**Journal:** J Clin Lipidol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacl.2023.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacl.2023.12.005)

## Content

1. J Clin Lipidol. 2024 Mar-Apr;18(2):e153-e165. doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2023.12.005.
 Epub 2024 Jan 11.

Efficacy and safety of bempedoic acid in patients with heterozygous familial 
hypercholesterolemia: analysis of pooled patient-level data from phase 3 
clinical trials.

Duell PB(1), Banach M(2), Catapano AL(3), Laufs U(4), Mancini GBJ(5), Ray KK(6), 
Broestl C(7), Zhang Y(7), Lei L(7), Goldberg AC(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for Preventive Cardiology, Knight Cardiovascular Institute and 
Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Clinical Nutrition, School of Medicine, 
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA (Dr Duell). Electronic 
address: duellb@ohsu.edu.
(2)Department of Preventive Cardiology and Lipidology, Medical University of 
Łódź (MUL), Łódź, Poland (Dr Banach).
(3)University of Milan and IRCCS Multimedica, Milan, Italy (Dr Catapano).
(4)Klinik und Poliklinik für Kardiologie, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany (Dr Laufs).
(5)Center for Cardiovascular Innovation, Division of Cardiology, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada (Dr Mancini).
(6)Department of Primary Care and Public Health, Imperial College London, 
London, UK (Dr Ray).
(7)Esperion Therapeutics, Inc., Ann Arbor, MI, USA (Drs Broestl, Zhang, Lei).
(8)Department of Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA (Dr 
Goldberg).

BACKGROUND: Patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HeFH) 
often cannot reach guideline-recommended low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(LDL-C) goals despite multidrug therapy.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of bempedoic acid as an add-on 
therapy for lowering LDL-C in patients with HeFH.
METHODS: Pooled data from two 52-week phase 3 clinical trials of patients with 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and/or HeFH receiving maximally tolerated 
statin therapy (randomized 2:1 to bempedoic acid or placebo) were analyzed by 
HeFH status. Endpoints included changes from baseline to week 12 (and up to week 
52) in LDL-C and other lipid parameters, achievement of LDL-C goals, and safety.
RESULTS: A total of 217 (bempedoic acid, 146; placebo, 71) patients with HeFH 
and 2,792 (bempedoic acid, 1,864; placebo, 928) without HeFH were included (mean 
baseline LDL-C, 172.8 mg/dL and 102.6 mg/dL, respectively). Bempedoic acid 
significantly lowered LDL-C at week 12 vs. placebo regardless of HeFH status 
(with HeFH, -21.2%; without HeFH, -18.2% [both P<0.0001]). Bempedoic acid 
significantly reduced other lipid parameters and high-sensitivity C-reactive 
protein vs. placebo regardless of HeFH status (all P≤0.01). Among patients with 
HeFH treated with bempedoic acid, 32% and 27% achieved LDL-C <100 mg/dL at weeks 
12 and 52, respectively. Overall treatment-emergent adverse event incidence was 
comparable across all four groups (74.7-77.5%).
CONCLUSION: Bempedoic acid significantly lowered LDL-C levels vs. placebo and 
was generally well tolerated in all patients, with no new safety findings in 
patients with HeFH, despite more intensive lipid-lowering therapy in patients 
with vs. without HeFH.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacl.2023.12.005
PMID: 38341323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest PBD has 
received institutional research grant(s)/support from Regeneron, Regenxbio, and 
Retrophin/Travere Therapeutics, and has served as a consultant for Akcea/Ionis, 
Esperion Therapeutics, Inc., Kaneka, Novo Nordisk, and Regeneron. MB has 
received research grant(s)/support from Amgen, Daiichi Sankyo, Sanofi, Mylan, 
and Valeant, and has served as a consultant for Abbott/Mylan, Abbott Vascular, 
Amgen, Daiichi Sankyo, Esperion Therapeutics, Inc., Freia Pharmaceuticals, KRKA, 
Lilly, MSD, NewAmsterdam Pharma, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Polfarmex, Polpharma, 
Regeneron, Sanofi-Aventis, Servier, Teva, and Zentiva. ALC has received research 
grant(s)/support from Amgen, Menarini, Mylan, Sanofi, and Sanofi Regeneron, and 
has served as a consultant for or received honoraria from Akcea, Amgen, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Esperion Therapeutics, Inc., Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Kowa, Medco, 
Menarini, Merck, Mylan, Novartis, Recordati, Regeneron, Sanofi, The Corpus, and 
Viatris. UL has received research grants or funding from Amgen, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Novartis, and Sanofi. GBJM received research grant(s)/support from Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, HLS Therapeutics, Merck, Novo Nordisk, 
and Sanofi, and has served as a consultant for these companies as well as 
Esperion Therapeutics, Inc., Novartis, and Servier. KKR has received 
institutional research grant(s)/support from Amgen, MSD, Pfizer, Regeneron, and 
Sanofi, and served as a consultant for or received honoraria from AbbVie, Akcea, 
Algorithm, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cerenis, Cipla, Dr Reddy's 
Laboratories, Lilly, Esperion Therapeutics, Inc., Kowa, Medco, MSD, Novo 
Nordisk, Pfizer, Regeneron, Resverlogix, Sanofi, Takeda, and Zuellig Pharma. CB 
is an employee of Esperion Therapeutics, Inc., and may own Esperion stock and/or 
stock options. YZ was an employee of Esperion Therapeutics, Inc. when the 
analysis was carried out and may hold stock and/or stock options. LL is a 
consultant contracted by Esperion Therapeutics, Inc. and may own Esperion stock 
or stock options. ACG has received research grant(s)/support from Amarin, Amgen, 
Akcea/IONIS, Arrowhead, Esperion Therapeutics, Inc., Merck, NewAmsterdam Pharma, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Regeneron, and Sanofi; has served as a consultant for 23andMe, 
Akcea, Esperion, IONIS, Merck, NewAmsterdam Pharma, Novartis, OptumRX, 
Regeneron, and Sanofi; and has provided editorial work for Merck.