---
reference_id: "PMID:21373256"
title: Molecular Study of Three Lebanese and Syrian Patients with Waardenburg Syndrome and Report of Novel Mutations in the EDNRB and MITF Genes.
authors:
- Haddad NM
- Ente D
- Chouery E
- Jalkh N
- Mehawej C
- Khoueir Z
- Pingault V
- Mégarbané A
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1159/000322891
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Study of Three Lebanese and Syrian Patients with Waardenburg Syndrome and Report of Novel Mutations in the EDNRB and MITF Genes.
**Authors:** Haddad NM, Ente D, Chouery E, Jalkh N, Mehawej C, Khoueir Z, Pingault V, Mégarbané A
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000322891](https://doi.org/10.1159/000322891)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2011 Jan;1(4):169-175. doi: 10.1159/000322891. Epub 2011 Jan
10.

Molecular Study of Three Lebanese and Syrian Patients with Waardenburg Syndrome
and Report of Novel Mutations in the EDNRB and MITF Genes.

Haddad NM(1), Ente D, Chouery E, Jalkh N, Mehawej C, Khoueir Z, Pingault V,
Mégarbané A.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Génétique Médicale et Laboratoire Associé INSERM UMR-S910, Faculté
de Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a genetic disorder characterized primarily by
depigmentation of the skin and hair, heterochromia of the irides, sensorineural
deafness, and sometimes by dystopia canthorum, and Hirschsprung disease. WS
presents a large clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Four different types have
been individualized and linked to 5 different genes. We report 2 cases of WS
type II and 1 case of WS type IV from Lebanon and Syria. The genetic studies
revealed 2 novel mutations in the MITF gene of the WS type II cases and 1 novel
homozygous mutation in the EDNRB gene of the WS type IV case. This is the first
molecular study of patients from the Arab world. Additional cases will enable a
more detailed description of the clinical spectrum of Waardenburg syndrome in
this region.

DOI: 10.1159/000322891
PMCID: PMC3042120
PMID: 21373256
