---
reference_id: "PMID:39110717"
title: Varicella Zoster Virus disrupts MAIT cell polyfunctional effector responses.
authors:
- Purohit SK
- Stern L
- Corbett AJ
- Mak JYW
- Fairlie DP
- Slobedman B
- Abendroth A
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012372
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella Zoster Virus disrupts MAIT cell polyfunctional effector responses.
**Authors:** Purohit SK, Stern L, Corbett AJ, Mak JYW, Fairlie DP, Slobedman B, Abendroth A
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1012372](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1012372)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2024 Aug 7;20(8):e1012372. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012372. 
eCollection 2024 Aug.

Varicella Zoster Virus disrupts MAIT cell polyfunctional effector responses.

Purohit SK(1), Stern L(1), Corbett AJ(2), Mak JYW(3), Fairlie DP(3), Slobedman 
B(1), Abendroth A(1).

Author information:
(1)Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health, Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, at 
the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(3)ARC Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide and Protein Science, 
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.

Mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are unconventional T cells that 
respond to riboflavin biosynthesis and cytokines through TCR-dependent and 
-independent pathways, respectively. MAIT cell activation plays an 
immunoprotective role against several pathogens, however the functional capacity 
of MAIT cells following direct infection or exposure to infectious agents 
remains poorly defined. We investigated the impact of Varicella Zoster Virus 
(VZV) on blood-derived MAIT cells and report virus-mediated impairment of 
activation, cytokine production, and altered transcription factor expression by 
VZV infected (antigen+) and VZV exposed (antigen-) MAIT cells in response to 
TCR-dependent and -independent stimulation. Furthermore, we reveal that 
suppression of VZV exposed (antigen-) MAIT cells is not mediated by a soluble 
factor from neighbouring VZV infected (antigen+) MAIT cells. Finally, we 
demonstrate that VZV impairs the cytolytic potential of MAIT cells in response 
to riboflavin synthesising bacteria. In summary, we report a virus-mediated 
immune-evasion strategy that disarms MAIT cell responses.

Copyright: © 2024 Purohit et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012372
PMCID: PMC11305569
PMID: 39110717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.Y.W.M., A.J.C., and D.P.F. are inventors on 
patents describing MAIT cell antigens and tetramers. The authors declare no 
other potential conflict of interest.