---
reference_id: "PMID:20724309"
title: "EULAR recommendations for the management of systemic lupus erythematosus with neuropsychiatric manifestations: report of a task force of the EULAR standing committee for clinical affairs."
authors:
- Bertsias GK
- Ioannidis JP
- Aringer M
- Bollen E
- Bombardieri S
- Bruce IN
- Cervera R
- Dalakas M
- Doria A
- Hanly JG
- Huizinga TW
- Isenberg D
- Kallenberg C
- Piette JC
- Schneider M
- Scolding N
- Smolen J
- Stara A
- Tassiulas I
- Tektonidou M
- Tincani A
- van Buchem MA
- van Vollenhoven R
- Ward M
- Gordon C
- Boumpas DT
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.130476
keywords:
- Cranial Nerve Diseases/etiology
- "Diagnostic Techniques, Neurological"
- Evidence-Based Medicine/methods
- Humans
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnosis, etiology, psychology, therapy"
- Mental Disorders/etiology
- Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/etiology
- Risk Factors
- Spinal Cord Diseases/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EULAR recommendations for the management of systemic lupus erythematosus with neuropsychiatric manifestations: report of a task force of the EULAR standing committee for clinical affairs.
**Authors:** Bertsias GK, Ioannidis JP, Aringer M, Bollen E, Bombardieri S, Bruce IN, Cervera R, Dalakas M, Doria A, Hanly JG, Huizinga TW, Isenberg D, Kallenberg C, Piette JC, Schneider M, Scolding N, Smolen J, Stara A, Tassiulas I, Tektonidou M, Tincani A, van Buchem MA, van Vollenhoven R, Ward M, Gordon C, Boumpas DT
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard.2010.130476](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard.2010.130476)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Dec;69(12):2074-82. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.130476. Epub
2010  Aug 19.

EULAR recommendations for the management of systemic lupus erythematosus with
neuropsychiatric manifestations: report of a task force of the EULAR standing
committee for clinical affairs.

Bertsias GK(1), Ioannidis JP, Aringer M, Bollen E, Bombardieri S, Bruce IN,
Cervera R, Dalakas M, Doria A, Hanly JG, Huizinga TW, Isenberg D, Kallenberg C,
Piette JC, Schneider M, Scolding N, Smolen J, Stara A, Tassiulas I, Tektonidou
M, Tincani A, van Buchem MA, van Vollenhoven R, Ward M, Gordon C, Boumpas DT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Rheumatology, University of Crete School
of Medicine, Heraklion, Greece. boumpasd@med.uoc.gr

OBJECTIVES: To develop recommendations for the diagnosis, prevention and
treatment of neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE)
manifestations.
METHODS: The authors compiled questions on prevalence and risk factors,
diagnosis and monitoring, therapy and prognosis of NPSLE. A systematic
literature search was performed and evidence was categorised based on sample
size and study design.
RESULTS: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients are at increased risk of
several neuropsychiatric manifestations. Common (cumulative incidence > 5%)
manifestations include cerebrovascular disease (CVD) and seizures; relatively
uncommon (1-5%) are severe cognitive dysfunction, major depression, acute
confusional state (ACS), peripheral nervous disorders psychosis. Strong risk
factors (at least fivefold increased risk) are previous or concurrent severe
NPSLE (for cognitive dysfunction, seizures) and antiphospholipid antibodies (for
CVD, seizures, chorea). The diagnostic work-up of suspected NPSLE is comparable
to that in patients without SLE who present with the same manifestations, and
aims to exclude causes unrelated to SLE. Investigations include cerebrospinal
fluid analysis (to exclude central nervous system infection), EEG (to diagnose
seizure disorder), neuropsychological tests (to assess cognitive dysfunction),
nerve conduction studies (for peripheral neuropathy) and MRI (T1/T2,
fluid-attenuating inversion recovery, diffusion-weighted imaging, enhanced T1
sequence). Glucocorticoids and immunosuppressive therapy are indicated when
NPSLE is thought to reflect an inflammatory process (optic neuritis, transverse
myelitis, peripheral neuropathy, refractory seizures, psychosis, ACS) and in the
presence of generalised lupus activity. Antiplatelet/anticoagulation therapy is
indicated when manifestations are related to antiphospholipid antibodies,
particularly thrombotic CVD.
CONCLUSIONS: Neuropsychiatric manifestations in SLE patients should be first
evaluated and treated as in patients without SLE, and secondarily attributed to
SLE and treated accordingly.

DOI: 10.1136/ard.2010.130476
PMID: 20724309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
