---
reference_id: "PMID:21057504"
title: Exome sequencing identifies ACAD9 mutations as a cause of complex I deficiency.
authors:
- Haack TB
- Danhauser K
- Haberberger B
- Hoser J
- Strecker V
- Boehm D
- Uziel G
- Lamantea E
- Invernizzi F
- Poulton J
- Rolinski B
- Iuso A
- Biskup S
- Schmidt T
- Mewes HW
- Wittig I
- Meitinger T
- Zeviani M
- Prokisch H
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/ng.706
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenases/chemistry, genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cell Line
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Electron Transport Complex I/deficiency, metabolism"
- "Electrophoresis, Gel, Two-Dimensional"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/drug effects, metabolism"
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Riboflavin/pharmacology
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Transduction, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Exome sequencing identifies ACAD9 mutations as a cause of complex I deficiency.
**Authors:** Haack TB, Danhauser K, Haberberger B, Hoser J, Strecker V, Boehm D, Uziel G, Lamantea E, Invernizzi F, Poulton J, Rolinski B, Iuso A, Biskup S, Schmidt T, Mewes HW, Wittig I, Meitinger T, Zeviani M, Prokisch H
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.706](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.706)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2010 Dec;42(12):1131-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.706. Epub 2010 Nov 7.

Exome sequencing identifies ACAD9 mutations as a cause of complex I deficiency.

Haack TB(1), Danhauser K, Haberberger B, Hoser J, Strecker V, Boehm D, Uziel G, 
Lamantea E, Invernizzi F, Poulton J, Rolinski B, Iuso A, Biskup S, Schmidt T, 
Mewes HW, Wittig I, Meitinger T, Zeviani M, Prokisch H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research 
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2011 Aug;80(2):133-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01645.x.

An isolated defect of respiratory chain complex I activity is a frequent 
biochemical abnormality in mitochondrial disorders. Despite intensive 
investigation in recent years, in most instances, the molecular basis 
underpinning complex I defects remains unknown. We report whole-exome sequencing 
of a single individual with severe, isolated complex I deficiency. This 
analysis, followed by filtering with a prioritization of mitochondrial proteins, 
led us to identify compound heterozygous mutations in ACAD9, which encodes a 
poorly understood member of the mitochondrial acyl-CoA dehydrogenase protein 
family. We demonstrated the pathogenic role of the ACAD9 variants by the 
correction of the complex I defect on expression of the wildtype ACAD9 protein 
in fibroblasts derived from affected individuals. ACAD9 screening of 120 
additional complex I-defective index cases led us to identify two additional 
unrelated cases and a total of five pathogenic ACAD9 alleles.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.706
PMID: 21057504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]