---
reference_id: "PMID:11756577"
title: High-dose intravenous immune globulin for stiff-person syndrome.
authors:
- Dalakas MC
- Fujii M
- Li M
- Lutfi B
- Kyhos J
- McElroy B
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa01167
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High-dose intravenous immune globulin for stiff-person syndrome.
**Authors:** Dalakas MC, Fujii M, Li M, Lutfi B, Kyhos J, McElroy B
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa01167](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa01167)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2001 Dec 27;345(26):1870-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa01167.

High-dose intravenous immune globulin for stiff-person syndrome.

Dalakas MC(1), Fujii M, Li M, Lutfi B, Kyhos J, McElroy B.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Diseases Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1382, USA. 
dalakasm@ninds.nih.gov

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2002 May 30;346(22):1747-8; author reply 1747-8. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200205303462214.
    N Engl J Med. 2002 May 30;346(22):1747-8; author reply 1747-8.

BACKGROUND: Stiff-person syndrome is a disabling central nervous system disorder 
with no satisfactory treatment that is characterized by muscle rigidity, 
episodic muscle spasms, high titers of antibodies against glutamic acid 
decarboxylase (GAD65), and a frequent association with autoimmune disorders. 
Because stiff-person syndrome is most likely immune-mediated, we evaluated the 
efficacy of intravenous immune globulin.
METHODS: We assigned 16 patients who had stiff-person syndrome and anti-GAD65 
antibodies, in random order, to receive intravenous immune globulin or placebo 
for three months, followed by a one-month washout period and then by three 
months of therapy with the alternative agent. Efficacy was judged by 
improvements in scores on the distribution-of-stiffness index and 
heightened-sensitivity scale from base line (month 1) to the second and third 
month of each treatment phase. Direct and carryover effects of treatment were 
compared in the two groups.
RESULTS: Among patients who received immune globulin first, stiffness scores 
decreased significantly (P=0.02) and heightened-sensitivity scores decreased 
substantially during immune globulin therapy but rebounded during placebo 
administration. In contrast, the scores in the group that received placebo first 
remained constant during placebo administration but dropped significantly during 
immune globulin therapy (P=0.01). When the data were analyzed for a direct and a 
first-order carryover effect, there was a significant difference in stiffness 
scores (P=0.01 and P<0.001, respectively) between the immune globulin and 
placebo groups, and immune globulin therapy had a significant direct treatment 
effect on sensitivity scores (P=0.03). Eleven patients who received immune 
globulin became able to walk more easily or without assistance, their frequency 
of falls decreased, and they were able to perform work-related or household 
tasks. The duration of the beneficial effects of immune globulin varied from six 
weeks to one year. Anti-GAD65 antibody titers declined after immune globulin 
therapy but not after placebo administration.
CONCLUSIONS: Intravenous immune globulin is a well-tolerated and effective, 
albeit costly, therapy for patients with stiff-person syndrome and anti-GAD65 
antibodies.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa01167
PMID: 11756577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]