---
reference_id: "PMID:39370779"
title: "The intricate pathogenicity of Group A Streptococcus: A comprehensive update."
authors:
- Bergsten H
- Nizet V
journal: Virulence
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/21505594.2024.2412745
keywords:
- Humans
- "Streptococcus pyogenes/pathogenicity, immunology, genetics"
- "Streptococcal Infections/microbiology, immunology"
- Virulence Factors/metabolism
- Animals
- Immune Evasion
- Virulence
- Extracellular Traps/immunology
- Inflammation
- Host-Pathogen Interactions/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The intricate pathogenicity of Group A Streptococcus: A comprehensive update.
**Authors:** Bergsten H, Nizet V
**Journal:** Virulence (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21505594.2024.2412745](https://doi.org/10.1080/21505594.2024.2412745)

## Content

1. Virulence. 2024 Dec;15(1):2412745. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2024.2412745. Epub
2024  Nov 5.

The intricate pathogenicity of Group A Streptococcus: A comprehensive update.

Bergsten H(1)(2), Nizet V(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Host-Microbe Systems and Therapeutics, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 
Biomedicum, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Group A Streptococcus (GAS) is a versatile pathogen that targets human lymphoid, 
decidual, skin, and soft tissues. Recent advancements have shed light on its 
airborne transmission, lymphatic spread, and interactions with neuronal systems. 
GAS promotes severe inflammation through mechanisms involving inflammasomes, 
IL-1β, and T-cell hyperactivation. Additionally, it secretes factors that 
directly induce skin necrosis via Gasdermin activation and sustains survival and 
replication in human blood through sophisticated immune evasion strategies. 
These include lysis of erythrocytes, using red cell membranes for camouflage, 
resisting antimicrobial peptides, evading phagocytosis, escaping from neutrophil 
extracellular traps (NETs), inactivating chemokines, and cleaving targeted 
antibodies. GAS also employs molecular mimicry to traverse connective tissues 
undetected and exploits the host's fibrinolytic system, which contributes to its 
stealth and potential for causing autoimmune conditions after repeated 
infections. Secreted toxins disrupt host cell membranes, enhancing intracellular 
survival and directly activating nociceptor neurons to induce pain. Remarkably, 
GAS possesses mechanisms for precise genome editing to defend against phages, 
and its fibrinolytic capabilities have found applications in medicine. Immune 
responses to GAS are paradoxical: robust responses to its virulence factors 
correlate with more severe disease, whereas recurrent infections often show 
diminished immune reactions. This review focuses on the multifaceted virulence 
of GAS and introduces novel concepts in understanding its pathogenicity.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2024.2412745
PMCID: PMC11542602
PMID: 39370779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).