---
reference_id: "PMID:24202964"
title: Genetics of eating disorders.
authors:
- Hinney A
- Volckmar AL
journal: Curr Psychiatry Rep
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s11920-013-0423-y
keywords:
- Anorexia/genetics
- Bulimia Nervosa/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Twin Studies as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of eating disorders.
**Authors:** Hinney A, Volckmar AL
**Journal:** Curr Psychiatry Rep (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11920-013-0423-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-013-0423-y)

## Content

1. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2013 Dec;15(12):423. doi: 10.1007/s11920-013-0423-y.

Genetics of eating disorders.

Hinney A(1), Volckmar AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University
of Duisburg-Essen, Virchowstrasse 171, 45147, Essen, Germany,
anke.hinney@uni-due.de.

Disordered eating behavior is the core symptom of the complex disorders anorexia
nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Twin and family studies derive high heritability
estimates. Hence, substantial genetic influences on the etiology can be assumed
for both. Initially, candidate gene studies pertaining to the monoaminergic
neurotransmitter systems and to body weight regulation comprised the core of the
genetic analyses. Unfortunately, confirmed, solid findings substantiated in
meta-analyses are rare, so that eventually none of these associations is
unequivocal. Thus, systematic, genome-wide approaches emerged to identify genes
with no a priori evidence for their involvement in eating disorders. Genome-wide
association studies have hinted to formerly unknown genetic regions. However,
significant genome-wide findings have not yet been reported.

DOI: 10.1007/s11920-013-0423-y
PMID: 24202964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
