---
reference_id: "PMID:34459947"
title: Congenital Coronary Artery Anomalies and Sudden Cardiac Death.
authors:
- Schiavone M
- Gobbi C
- Gasperetti A
- Zuffi A
- Forleo GB
journal: Pediatr Cardiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00246-021-02713-y
keywords:
- "Coronary Vessel Anomalies/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Humans
- Prospective Studies
- Sinus of Valsalva
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Coronary Artery Anomalies and Sudden Cardiac Death.
**Authors:** Schiavone M, Gobbi C, Gasperetti A, Zuffi A, Forleo GB
**Journal:** Pediatr Cardiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00246-021-02713-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00246-021-02713-y)

## Content

1. Pediatr Cardiol. 2021 Dec;42(8):1676-1687. doi: 10.1007/s00246-021-02713-y.
Epub  2021 Aug 30.

Congenital Coronary Artery Anomalies and Sudden Cardiac Death.

Schiavone M(#)(1), Gobbi C(#)(2), Gasperetti A(3)(4), Zuffi A(2), Forleo GB(3).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology Unit, ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco - Luigi Sacco University 
Hospital, University of Milan, Via G.B. Grassi, 74, 20157, Milan, Italy. 
marco.schiavone11@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Saint Martin Private Hospital Center, Caen, France.
(3)Cardiology Unit, ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco - Luigi Sacco University 
Hospital, University of Milan, Via G.B. Grassi, 74, 20157, Milan, Italy.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Coronary artery anomalies (CAAs) are a heterogeneous group of rare congenital 
diseases whose features and pathophysiological mechanisms are extremely 
variable, ranging from silent anomalies to sudden cardiac death (SCD) in the 
most severe cases. Although rare, congenital CAAs confer a high risk of 
myocardial ischemia and SCD, especially in young, previously "healthy" athletes 
during or immediately after vigorous exertion. Although some high-risk features 
that may lead to SCD have been identified, specific pathophysiological 
mechanisms related to SCD still remain poorly understood. When a CAA is 
incidentally diagnosed, optimal SCD risk stratification remains challenging, 
particularly in cases of anomalous aortic origin of a coronary artery arising 
from the opposite aortic sinus of Valsalva (ACAOS). In recent times, invasive 
imaging with intravascular ultrasound has gained a role in further identifying 
high-risk anatomic features; it has been integrated with traditional, 
non-invasive anatomic imaging evaluations, typically high-quality 
echocardiography, and cardiac magnetic resonance. Multidisciplinary programs and 
specific SCD risk scores should be developed in an endeavor to choose the right 
therapeutic approach, either clinical or interventional/surgical. Intravascular 
ultrasound is an extremely useful tool to evaluate vessel stenosis, even if 
prospective studies are still required to further validate this diagnostic 
strategy. In the present review, we aimed to analyze the pathophysiology and the 
clinical impact of ACAOS. We also summarized the predominant mechanisms for 
interference with normal coronary artery function, which might contribute to the 
onset of life-threatening arrhythmias and SCD.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00246-021-02713-y
PMID: 34459947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]