---
reference_id: "PMID:29802583"
title: "Contrast medium induced acute kidney injury: a narrative review."
authors:
- Pistolesi V
- Regolisti G
- Morabito S
- Gandolfini I
- Corrado S
- Piotti G
- Fiaccadori E
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-018-0498-y
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/chemically induced, diagnosis, epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Animals
- Contrast Media/adverse effects
- Humans
- "Kidney/drug effects, pathology, physiopathology"
- Prognosis
- "Protective Agents/administration & dosage"
- Protective Factors
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contrast medium induced acute kidney injury: a narrative review.
**Authors:** Pistolesi V, Regolisti G, Morabito S, Gandolfini I, Corrado S, Piotti G, Fiaccadori E
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-018-0498-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-018-0498-y)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2018 Dec;31(6):797-812. doi: 10.1007/s40620-018-0498-y. Epub 2018
May  25.

Contrast medium induced acute kidney injury: a narrative review.

Pistolesi V(1), Regolisti G(2), Morabito S(3), Gandolfini I(2), Corrado S(2), 
Piotti G(2), Fiaccadori E(2).

Author information:
(1)Hemodialysis Unit, Policlinico Umberto I, "Sapienza" University, Viale del 
Policlinico, 155, 00161, Rome, Italy. valentina.pistolesi@uniroma1.it.
(2)Acute and Chronic Renal Failure Unit, Parma University Medical School, Parma, 
Italy.
(3)Hemodialysis Unit, Policlinico Umberto I, "Sapienza" University, Viale del 
Policlinico, 155, 00161, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI) is the third 
leading cause of hospital-acquired acute kidney injury. It is more commonly 
observed following intra-arterial administration of iodinated contrast media 
(CM) for cardiac procedures in patients with pre-existing chronic kidney disease 
(CKD), and is associated with increased short- and long-term morbidity and 
mortality. This review investigates the key current evidence on CI-AKI 
definition, epidemiology and pathogenesis, as a basis for recommending 
preventive measures that can be implemented in clinical practice.
METHODS: An extensive literature search was performed to identify the relevant 
studies describing the epidemiology, pathogenesis, outcome and prevention of 
CI-AKI.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Pre-existing CKD, intra-arterial administration and CM 
volume are the most important risk factors for CI-AKI. Since risk factors for 
CI-AKI are well defined, and the timing of renal insult is known, patients 
should be carefully stratified before the administration of CM, in order to 
reduce the negative impact of modifiable risk factors on renal function. The 
intravenous administration of moderate amounts of isotonic saline solution or 
bicarbonate solution still represents the principal intervention with documented 
and acceptable effectiveness for CI-AKI prevention. More data are needed on 
aggressive volume expansion strategies along with diuretics, targeting forced 
diuresis with high urinary output. The role of antioxidant agents remains 
controversial, and only moderate evidence exists in favour of N-acetylcysteine. 
Statins could contribute to reducing the incidence of CI-AKI, although their 
mechanism of action is not fully ascertained. No robust data demonstrate a 
reduction of CI-AKI incidence by peri-procedural hemodialysis/hemofiltration; 
renal replacement therapies may carry instead unnecessary risks. Remote ischemic 
preconditioning might represent a simple, non-invasive and cost effective 
preventive measure for CI-AKI prevention, but few data are currently available 
about its clinical application in patients at high risk of CI-AKI.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-018-0498-y
PMID: 29802583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]