---
reference_id: "PMID:25383842"
title: Bilateral rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia-Strudwick type.
authors:
- Szigiato AA
- Hillier RJ
- Muni RH
journal: Retin Cases Brief Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000079
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Humans
- Laser Therapy/methods
- Male
- "Myopia, Degenerative/etiology"
- Osteochondrodysplasias/complications
- Retinal Detachment/etiology
- Retinal Perforations/etiology
- Vitrectomy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bilateral rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia-Strudwick type.
**Authors:** Szigiato AA, Hillier RJ, Muni RH
**Journal:** Retin Cases Brief Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICB.0000000000000079](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICB.0000000000000079)

## Content

1. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2015 Winter;9(1):51-4. doi:
10.1097/ICB.0000000000000079.

Bilateral rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in spondyloepimetaphyseal 
dysplasia-Strudwick type.

Szigiato AA(1), Hillier RJ, Muni RH.

Author information:
(1)*Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
†Department of Ophthalmology, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
United Kingdom; and ‡Department of Ophthalmology, St Michael's Hospital, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PURPOSE: To document the diagnosis and repair of bilateral retinal detachments 
in a child with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia-Strudwick type, a rare 
autosomal dominant genetic disorder involving abnormal production of Type II 
collagen.
METHODS: Case report.
RESULTS: A 13-year-old patient diagnosed with spondyloepimetaphyseal 
dysplasia-Strudwick type presented with a localized superior temporal retinal 
detachment in the right eye and a 180° giant retinal tear with an associated 
macula-off retinal detachment in the left eye. He was highly myopic and had a 
visual acuity of 20/80 in the right eye and counting fingers in the left eye. He 
underwent a pars plana vitrectomy in the left eye and laser retinoplexy in the 
right eye, achieving complete reattachment and/or stabilization of both retinae, 
with a visual acuity of 20/60 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye at 3 
months postoperatively.
CONCLUSION: Patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia-Strudwick type may be 
at a higher risk of developing myopia, vitreoretinal degeneration, and a 
subsequent retinal detachment, although the scientific literature provides a 
loose association between these conditions. Critically, we propose a temporal 
association between retinal detachment and the onset of puberty in these 
patients and suggest that a dilated retinal screening examination should be 
scheduled at around the time of puberty for patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal 
dysplasia-Strudwick type to detect any asymptomatic retinal pathology.

DOI: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000079
PMID: 25383842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]