---
reference_id: "PMID:32983705"
title: "Adult Onset Still's Disease: A Retrospective, Single-Center Study."
authors:
- Hassan SA
- Choudhry AS
- Jamal S
- Sheikh FN
- Farooque U
journal: Cureus
year: '2020'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.10008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult Onset Still's Disease: A Retrospective, Single-Center Study.
**Authors:** Hassan SA, Choudhry AS, Jamal S, Sheikh FN, Farooque U
**Journal:** Cureus (2020)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.10008](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.10008)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2020 Aug 25;12(8):e10008. doi: 10.7759/cureus.10008.

Adult Onset Still's Disease: A Retrospective, Single-Center Study.

Hassan SA(1), Choudhry AS(2), Jamal S(3), Sheikh FN(4), Farooque U(5).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, PAK.
(2)Internal Medicine, Lahore Medical and Dental College, Lahore, PAK.
(3)Internal Medicine, Abbasi Shaheed Hospital, Karachi, PAK.
(4)Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA.
(5)Neurology, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, PAK.

Background Adult-onset Still's disease (AOSD) is characterized by a classical 
triad of spiking fever, arthritis, and evanescent rash. It is one of the main 
causes of hospital admissions for fever of unknown origin and has an extended 
mean time to diagnosis. Therefore, it remains underdiagnosed relative to its 
aforementioned time frame. In this study, we attempt to highlight clinical and 
lab findings associated with AOSD. We then compare our diagnostic results with 
similar previous studies. Our results should help physicians not to miss this 
rare entity and make the diagnosis in a reduced time frame. Materials and 
methods This a retrospective, single-center study conducted at Dow University 
Hospital in Karachi, Pakistan. Thirty patients were enrolled in this study for 
six months (July 2019-December 2019). All patients were identified and recruited 
in the medical outpatient department using Yamaguchi's criteria. Written consent 
was obtained from all patients to access all their clinical charts. Demographics 
and prior results of laboratory investigations were retrieved from the chart 
files. Results In our study, the mean age of patients was 26.6 years. More 
specifically, males accounted for 53.3% (n=16) of cases, and females accounted 
for 46.6% (n=14) of total cases. The most common presenting clinical features 
included arthralgia (100%, n=30), fever (100%, n=30), myalgia (96.6%, n=29), 
large joint arthritis (66.6%, n=20), sore throat (50%, n=15), hepatomegaly (40%, 
n=12), splenomegaly (23.3%, n=7), skin rash (36.6%, n=11) and pericarditis (20%, 
n=6). Furthermore, none of our patients had cervical lymphadenopathy. The most 
commonly reported laboratory findings include leukocytosis (100%, n=30), 
hyperferritinemia (90%, n=27), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (100%, 
n=30) and abnormal liver function tests (76.6%, n=23). Chest x-rays performed in 
all patients revealed no abnormalities in 83% of patients (n=25). All patients 
in our study sample (n=30) tested negative for antinuclear antibodies and 
rheumatoid factor. It was also noted that the mean duration of diagnosis in our 
patients was 5.98 weeks. The mean hospitalization period in our patients was 
12.5 days. Furthermore, 16.7% of patients (n=5) suffered from disease relapse.  
Conclusion Our study ascertains that the presence of certain clinical and 
laboratory findings strongly indicate a diagnosis of adult-onset Still's 
disease.

Copyright © 2020, Hassan et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.10008
PMCID: PMC7515547
PMID: 32983705

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.