---
reference_id: "PMID:40537162"
title: "Genetics Review: Joubert Syndrome."
authors:
- Tran AM
- Jnah AJ
- De Castro Pretelt MJ
journal: Neonatal Netw
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1891/NN-2024-0052
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics Review: Joubert Syndrome.
**Authors:** Tran AM, Jnah AJ, De Castro Pretelt MJ
**Journal:** Neonatal Netw (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1891/NN-2024-0052](https://doi.org/10.1891/NN-2024-0052)

## Content

1. Neonatal Netw. 2025 Jun 1;44(3):159-166. doi: 10.1891/NN-2024-0052.

Genetics Review: Joubert Syndrome.

Tran AM(1), Jnah AJ(2), De Castro Pretelt MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Nursing, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA 
tranau23@students.ecu.edu.
(2)College of Nursing, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a rare neurodevelopmental and multisystem ciliopathy 
that affects 1 in 80,000-10,0000 infants globally per year. Classic defects 
include hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, thickened cerebellar peduncles, and 
deepened interpeduncular fossa, which is regarded as a "molar tooth" sign. More 
than 30 genes have been associated with JS. Gene mutations disrupt normal 
ciliary development and function during early embryogenesis and cause a vast 
array of symptoms and pathologies. The purpose of this article is to investigate 
this rare and complex medical condition. We present up-to-date information on 
the genetics, pathophysiology, clinical manifestations, diagnostics, and 
management of JS. We also include a valuable perspective from a pediatric 
geneticist who specializes in JS to enhance our understanding of challenges 
associated with making a molecular diagnosis and emphasize the importance of 
early recognition and diagnostics as a means to optimize the quality of care.

© 2025 Springer Publishing Company.

DOI: 10.1891/NN-2024-0052
PMID: 40537162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]