---
reference_id: "PMID:38396973"
title: "Autoimmune Autonomic Neuropathy: From Pathogenesis to Diagnosis."
authors:
- Nakane S
- Koike H
- Hayashi T
- Nakatsuji Y
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25042296
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ganglia, Autonomic"
- Post-Acute COVID-19 Syndrome
- Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System
- Autonomic Nervous System
- "Autonomic Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Autoimmune Diseases/diagnosis, pathology"
- Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/pathology
- Autoantibodies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Autonomic Neuropathy: From Pathogenesis to Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Nakane S, Koike H, Hayashi T, Nakatsuji Y
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25042296](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25042296)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Feb 15;25(4):2296. doi: 10.3390/ijms25042296.

Autoimmune Autonomic Neuropathy: From Pathogenesis to Diagnosis.

Nakane S(1), Koike H(2), Hayashi T(1), Nakatsuji Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toyama, 2630 
Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.
(2)Division of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Saga University, Saga 849-8501, Japan.

Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG) is a disease of autonomic failure 
caused by ganglionic acetylcholine receptor (gAChR) autoantibodies. Although the 
detection of autoantibodies is important for distinguishing the disease from 
other neuropathies that present with autonomic dysfunction, other factors are 
important for accurate diagnosis. Here, we provide a comprehensive review of the 
clinical features of AAG, highlighting differences in clinical course, clinical 
presentation, and laboratory findings from other neuropathies presenting with 
autonomic symptoms. The first step in diagnosing AAG is careful history taking, 
which should reveal whether the mode of onset is acute or chronic, followed by 
an examination of the time course of disease progression, including the 
presentation of autonomic and extra-autonomic symptoms. AAG is a neuropathy that 
should be differentiated from other neuropathies when the patient presents with 
autonomic dysfunction. Immune-mediated neuropathies, such as acute autonomic 
sensory neuropathy, are sometimes difficult to differentiate, and therefore, 
differences in clinical and laboratory findings should be well understood. Other 
non-neuropathic conditions, such as postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, 
chronic fatigue syndrome, and long COVID, also present with symptoms similar to 
those of AAG. Although often challenging, efforts should be made to 
differentiate among the disease candidates.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25042296
PMCID: PMC10889307
PMID: 38396973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.