---
reference_id: "PMID:36879079"
title: "Understanding COVID-19 in children: immune determinants and post-infection conditions."
authors:
- Rotulo GA
- Palma P
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41390-023-02549-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding COVID-19 in children: immune determinants and post-infection conditions.
**Authors:** Rotulo GA, Palma P
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41390-023-02549-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41390-023-02549-7)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2023 Aug;94(2):434-442. doi: 10.1038/s41390-023-02549-7. Epub
2023  Mar 6.

Understanding COVID-19 in children: immune determinants and post-infection 
conditions.

Rotulo GA(1)(2), Palma P(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit of Clinical Immunology and Vaccinology, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, 00165, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health (DINOGMI), University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Research Unit of Clinical Immunology and Vaccinology, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, 00165, Rome, Italy. paolo.palma@opbg.net.
(4)Chair of Pediatrics, Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome "Tor 
Vergata", 00185, Rome, Italy. paolo.palma@opbg.net.

Coronavirus disease 2019 in children presents with milder clinical 
manifestations than in adults. On the other hand, the presence of a wide range 
of inflammatory manifestations, including multisystem inflammatory syndrome in 
children (MIS-C), in the period after infection suggests a particular 
susceptibility of some children toward severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Both protective factors that prevent evolution to 
severe forms and risk factors for post-infectious conditions are likely to be 
found in age-related differences in the immune system. The prompt innate 
response with type I IFN production and the generation of neutralizing 
antibodies play a crucial role in containing the infection. The greater number 
of naive and regulatory cells in children helps to avoid the cytokine storm 
while the causes of the intense inflammatory response in MIS-C need to be 
elucidated. This review aims to analyze the main results of the recent 
literature assessing immune response to SARS-CoV-2 over the pediatric age group. 
We summarized such observations by dividing them into innate and acquired 
immunity, then reporting how altered immune responses can determine 
post-infectious conditions. IMPACT: The main immune markers of acute SARS-CoV-2 
infection in children are summarized in this review. This paper reports a broad 
overview of age-related differences in the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 and 
emerging post-infection conditions. A summary of currently available therapies 
for the pediatric age group is provided.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the International Pediatric 
Research Foundation, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41390-023-02549-7
PMCID: PMC9987407
PMID: 36879079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.