---
reference_id: "PMID:31098643"
title: Update on the Prenatal Diagnosis and Outcomes of Fetal Bilateral Renal Agenesis.
authors:
- Huber C
- Shazly SA
- Blumenfeld YJ
- Jelin E
- Ruano R
journal: Obstet Gynecol Surv
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/OGX.0000000000000670
keywords:
- "Congenital Abnormalities/diagnostic imaging, mortality"
- Female
- Humans
- "Kidney/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Kidney Diseases/congenital, diagnostic imaging, mortality"
- Oligohydramnios/diagnostic imaging
- Pregnancy
- "Ultrasonography, Doppler, Color/methods"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on the Prenatal Diagnosis and Outcomes of Fetal Bilateral Renal Agenesis.
**Authors:** Huber C, Shazly SA, Blumenfeld YJ, Jelin E, Ruano R
**Journal:** Obstet Gynecol Surv (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/OGX.0000000000000670](https://doi.org/10.1097/OGX.0000000000000670)

## Content

1. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 2019 May;74(5):298-302. doi:
10.1097/OGX.0000000000000670.

Update on the Prenatal Diagnosis and Outcomes of Fetal Bilateral Renal Agenesis.

Huber C(1), Shazly SA(2), Blumenfeld YJ(3), Jelin E(4), Ruano R(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Student, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria; Research Trainee.
(2)Resident in Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(3)Associate Professor and Director of Fetal Therapy, Division of Maternal-Fetal 
Medicine and Obstetrics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA.
(4)Assistant Professor and Director of Johns Hopkins Children's Center Fetal 
Program, Division of Pediatric Surgery, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, 
MD.
(5)Professor of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Pediatrics and Physiology & Biomedical 
Engineering, Chair of the Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, and Director of 
Mayo Clinic Fetal Section, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN.

IMPORTANCE: Bilateral renal agenesis is a rare congenital anomaly associated 
with poor prognosis.
OBJECTIVE: The aims of this article are to review and summarize evidence on 
prenatal diagnosis and outcomes of bilateral renal agenesis.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: A search was undertaken using PubMed and 
ClinicalTrials.gov databases from January 1, 1998, to September 1, 2018. Search 
terms include "prenatal diagnosis" OR "outcomes" AND "bilateral renal agenesis." 
Search was limited to English language.
RESULTS: Fetal ultrasonography is the primary imaging modality for prenatal 
diagnosis of fetal urogenital tract abnormalities. However, ultrasonography is 
limited by several factors; it is operator dependent and associated with small 
field of view, has limited soft-tissue acoustic contrast, and is also influenced 
by patient habitus and fetal position. Color Doppler ultrasonography can be used 
as an adjunct to exclude bilateral renal agenesis by visualizing renal arteries. 
In the literature, prenatal magnetic resonance imaging has been reported to be 
equal to or superior to prenatal ultrasonography. Bilateral renal agenesis with 
oligohydramnios/anhydramnios is associated with a poor prognosis; perinatal 
death occurs secondary to pulmonary hypoplasia in the majority of cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Ultrasonography in combination with color Doppler ultrasonography 
permits the fetal urinary tract to be assessed in the first and early second 
trimester of gestation. The magnetic resonance imaging can be used as a 
complementary adjunctive modality in equivocal or inconclusive ultrasonographic 
findings.

DOI: 10.1097/OGX.0000000000000670
PMID: 31098643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]