---
reference_id: "PMID:28118661"
title: "Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion in the Transcription Factor 4 (TCF4) Gene Leads to Widespread mRNA Splicing Changes in Fuchs' Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy."
authors:
- Wieben ED
- Aleff RA
- Tang X
- Butz ML
- Kalari KR
- Highsmith EW
- Jen J
- Vasmatzis G
- Patel SV
- Maguire LJ
- Baratz KH
- Fautsch MP
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.16-20900
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Alleles
- "Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Leucine Zipper Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Blotting, Southern"
- "Endothelium, Corneal/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Fuchs' Endothelial Dystrophy/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- RNA Splicing/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Transcription Factor 4
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion in the Transcription Factor 4 (TCF4) Gene Leads to Widespread mRNA Splicing Changes in Fuchs' Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy.
**Authors:** Wieben ED, Aleff RA, Tang X, Butz ML, Kalari KR, Highsmith EW, Jen J, Vasmatzis G, Patel SV, Maguire LJ, Baratz KH, Fautsch MP
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.16-20900](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.16-20900)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2017 Jan 1;58(1):343-352. doi:
10.1167/iovs.16-20900.

Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion in the Transcription Factor 4 (TCF4) Gene Leads
to Widespread mRNA Splicing Changes in Fuchs' Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy.

Wieben ED(1), Aleff RA(1), Tang X(2), Butz ML(3), Kalari KR(2), Highsmith EW(3),
Jen J(4), Vasmatzis G(5), Patel SV(6), Maguire LJ(6), Baratz KH(6), Fautsch
MP(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States.
(2)Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics and Department of Health
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States.
(4)Department of Experimental Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, United States.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United
States.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United
States.

PURPOSE: To identify RNA missplicing events in human corneal endothelial tissue
isolated from Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD).
METHODS: Total RNA was isolated and sequenced from corneal endothelial tissue
obtained during keratoplasty from 12 patients with FECD and 4 patients
undergoing keratoplasty or enucleation for other indications. The length of the
trinucleotide repeat (TNR) CTG in the transcription factor 4 (TCF4) gene was
determined using leukocyte-derived DNA analyzed by a combination of Southern
blotting and Genescan analysis. Commercial statistical software was used to
quantify expression of alternatively spliced genes. Validation of selected
alternative splicing events was performed by using RT-PCR. Gene sets identified
were analyzed for overrepresentation using Web-based analysis system.
RESULTS: Corneal endothelial tissue from FECD patients containing a CTG TNR
expansion sequence in the TCF4 gene revealed widespread changes in mRNA
splicing, including a novel splicing event involving FGFR2. Differential
splicing of NUMA1, PPFIBP1, MBNL1, and MBNL2 transcripts were identified in all
FECD samples containing a TNR expansion. The differentially spliced genes were
enriched for products that localize to the cell cortex and bind cytoskeletal and
cell adhesion proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Corneal endothelium from FECD patients harbors a unique signature
of mis-splicing events due to CTG TNR expansion in the TCF4 gene, consistent
with the hypothesis that RNA toxicity contributes to the pathogenesis of FECD.
Changes to the endothelial barrier function, a known event in the development of
FECD, was identified as a key biological process influenced by the missplicing
events.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.16-20900
PMCID: PMC5270622
PMID: 28118661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
