---
reference_id: "PMID:28221363"
title: Premature primary tooth eruption in cognitive/motor-delayed ADNP-mutated children.
authors:
- Gozes I
- Van Dijck A
- Hacohen-Kleiman G
- Grigg I
- Karmon G
- Giladi E
- Eger M
- Gabet Y
- Pasmanik-Chor M
- Cappuyns E
- Elpeleg O
- Kooy RF
- Bedrosian-Sermone S
journal: Transl Psychiatry
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/tp.2017.27
keywords:
- Animals
- Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/genetics"
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mandible/diagnostic imaging
- Mice
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Tooth/diagnostic imaging
- Tooth Eruption/genetics
- "Tooth, Deciduous"
- X-Ray Microtomography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Premature primary tooth eruption in cognitive/motor-delayed ADNP-mutated children.
**Authors:** Gozes I, Van Dijck A, Hacohen-Kleiman G, Grigg I, Karmon G, Giladi E, Eger M, Gabet Y, Pasmanik-Chor M, Cappuyns E, Elpeleg O, Kooy RF, Bedrosian-Sermone S
**Journal:** Transl Psychiatry (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/tp.2017.27](https://doi.org/10.1038/tp.2017.27)

## Content

1. Transl Psychiatry. 2017 Feb 21;7(2):e1043. doi: 10.1038/tp.2017.27.

Premature primary tooth eruption in cognitive/motor-delayed ADNP-mutated 
children.

Gozes I(1)(2), Van Dijck A(3), Hacohen-Kleiman G(1)(2), Grigg I(1)(2), Karmon 
G(1)(2), Giladi E(1)(2), Eger M(2)(4), Gabet Y(2)(4), Pasmanik-Chor M(2)(5), 
Cappuyns E(3), Elpeleg O(6), Kooy RF(3), Bedrosian-Sermone S(7).

Author information:
(1)The Lily and Avraham Gildor Chair for the Investigation of Growth Factors, 
The Elton Laboratory for Neuroendocrinology, Department of Human Molecular 
Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Sagol School of Neuroscience and Adams Super Center for Brain Studies, Tel 
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University and University Hospital of 
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Anthropology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Sagol 
School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)The Bioinformatics Unit, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic, Hadassah Hebrew University 
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(7)ADNP Kids Research Foundation, Brush Prairie, WA, USA.

Erratum in
    Transl Psychiatry. 2017 Jul 4;7(7):e1166. doi: 10.1038/tp.2017.128.

A major flaw in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) management is late diagnosis. 
Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) is a most frequent de novo 
mutated ASD-related gene. Functionally, ADNP protects nerve cells against 
electrical blockade. In mice, complete Adnp deficiency results in dysregulation 
of over 400 genes and failure to form a brain. Adnp haploinsufficiency results 
in cognitive and social deficiencies coupled to sex- and age-dependent deficits 
in the key microtubule and ion channel pathways. Here, collaborating with 
parents/caregivers globally, we discovered premature tooth eruption as a 
potential early diagnostic biomarker for ADNP mutation. The parents of 44/54 
ADNP-mutated children reported an almost full erupted dentition by 1 year of 
age, including molars and only 10 of the children had teeth within the normal 
developmental time range. Looking at Adnp-deficient mice, by computed 
tomography, showed significantly smaller dental sacs and tooth buds at 5 days of 
age in the deficient mice compared to littermate controls. There was only 
trending at 2 days, implicating age-dependent dysregulation of teething in 
Adnp-deficient mice. Allen Atlas analysis showed Adnp expression in the jaw 
area. RNA sequencing (RNAseq) and gene array analysis of human ADNP-mutated 
lymphoblastoids, whole-mouse embryos and mouse brains identified dysregulation 
of bone/nervous system-controlling genes resulting from ADNP mutation/deficiency 
(for example, BMP1 and BMP4). AKAP6, discovered here as a major gene regulated 
by ADNP, also links cognition and bone maintenance. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first time that early primary (deciduous) teething is 
related to the ADNP syndrome, providing for early/simple diagnosis and paving 
the path to early intervention/specialized treatment plan.

DOI: 10.1038/tp.2017.27
PMCID: PMC5438031
PMID: 28221363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ADNP is under patent protection for diagnostics 
and for clinical use and, in part, is under term sheet agreement to Coronis 
Partners from Ramot at Tel Aviv University (Professor Gozes, Chief Scientific 
Officer). The remaining authors declare no conflict of interest.