---
reference_id: "PMID:30503887"
title: A neonatal mouse model of Enterovirus D68 infection induces both interstitial pneumonia and acute flaccid myelitis.
authors:
- Sun S
- Bian L
- Gao F
- Du R
- Hu Y
- Fu Y
- Su Y
- Wu X
- Mao Q
- Liang Z
journal: Antiviral Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.11.013
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Antibodies, Viral/therapeutic use"
- Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/virology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Enterovirus D, Human/pathogenicity"
- "Enterovirus Infections/complications, immunology"
- Female
- "Immunization, Passive"
- Lethal Dose 50
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/virology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Myelitis/virology
- Neuromuscular Diseases/virology
- Viral Load
- Viral Tropism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A neonatal mouse model of Enterovirus D68 infection induces both interstitial pneumonia and acute flaccid myelitis.
**Authors:** Sun S, Bian L, Gao F, Du R, Hu Y, Fu Y, Su Y, Wu X, Mao Q, Liang Z
**Journal:** Antiviral Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.11.013)

## Content

1. Antiviral Res. 2019 Jan;161:108-115. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.11.013.
Epub  2018 Nov 29.

A neonatal mouse model of Enterovirus D68 infection induces both interstitial
pneumonia and acute flaccid myelitis.

Sun S(1), Bian L(2), Gao F(3), Du R(4), Hu Y(5), Fu Y(6), Su Y(7), Wu X(8), Mao
Q(9), Liang Z(10).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Peking Union Medical College (PUMC), Beijing, China; National Institute for Food
and Drug Control, Beijing, China. Electronic address: sunbaoshiyang@163.com.
(2)National Institute for Food and Drug Control, Beijing, China. Electronic
address: bianlian2015@126.com.
(3)National Institute for Food and Drug Control, Beijing, China. Electronic
address: gaofan0914@qq.com.
(4)National Institute for Food and Drug Control, Beijing, China. Electronic
address: 18600674038@163.com.
(5)Hualan Biological Engineering Inc, Xinxiang, China. Electronic address:
903818633@qq.com.
(6)National Institute for Food and Drug Control, Beijing, China. Electronic
address: 863614216@qq.com.
(7)National Institute for Food and Drug Control, Beijing, China. Electronic
address: justsuyao@163.com.
(8)National Institute for Food and Drug Control, Beijing, China. Electronic
address: eastarwx@163.com.
(9)National Institute for Food and Drug Control, Beijing, China. Electronic
address: maoqunying@126.com.
(10)National Institute for Food and Drug Control, Beijing, China. Electronic
address: lzhenglun@126.com.

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) is a causative agent of recent outbreaks of severe
respiratory illness, pneumonia and acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) worldwide. The
study of the pathogenesis, vaccines and anti-viral drugs for EV-D68 infection
has been reported. Given the previously described mouse model of EV-D68, we
sought to establish a neonatal mice model inducing both pneumonia and AFM. The
neonatal BALB/c mice were inoculated intraperitoneally with the EV-D68 strain
(named15296-virus) which was produced by the reverse genetics method. The
infected mice displayed limb paralysis, tachypnea and even death, which were
similar to the clinical symptoms of human infections. Moreover, the results of
histopathologic examination and immunohistochemical staining showed acidophilic
necrosis in the muscle, the spinal cord and alveolar wall thickening in the
lung, indicating that EV-D68 exhibited strong tropism to the muscles, spinal
cord and lung. Furthermore, the results of real-time PCR also suggested that the
viral loads in the blood, spinal cord, muscles and lung were higher than those
in other tissues at different time points post-infection. Additionally, the
neonatal mouse model was used for evaluating the EV-D68 infection. The results
of the anti-serum passive and maternal antibody protection indicated that the
neonatal mice could be protected against the EV-D68 challenge, and displayed
that both the serum of 15296-virus and prototype-virus (Fermon) were performing
a certain cross-protective activity against the 15296-virus challenge. In
summary, the above results proved that our neonatal mouse model possessed not
only the interstitial pneumonia and AFM simultaneously but also a potentiality
to evaluate the protective effects of EV-D68 vaccines and anti-viral drugs in
the future.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.11.013
PMID: 30503887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
