---
reference_id: PMID:16709660
title: "Clinical presentation, diagnosis and long-term outcome of Wilson's disease: a cohort study."
authors:
- Merle U
- Schaefer M
- Ferenci P
- Stremmel W
journal: Gut
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/gut.2005.087262
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical presentation, diagnosis and long-term outcome of Wilson's disease: a cohort study.
**Authors:** Merle U, Schaefer M, Ferenci P, Stremmel W
**Journal:** Gut (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gut.2005.087262](https://doi.org/10.1136/gut.2005.087262)

## Content

1. Gut. 2007 Jan;56(1):115-20. doi: 10.1136/gut.2005.087262. Epub 2006 May 18.

Clinical presentation, diagnosis and long-term outcome of Wilson's disease: a 
cohort study.

Merle U(1), Schaefer M, Ferenci P, Stremmel W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Neuenheimer 
Feld 410, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. uta_merle@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Comment in
    Gut. 2007 Jan;56(1):154.

BACKGROUND: Wilson's disease is a rare inborn disease related to copper storage, 
leading to liver cirrhosis and neuropsychological deterioration. Clinical data 
on larger cohorts are limited owing to low disease frequency.
OBJECTIVE AND METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of 163 patients 
with Wilson's disease, examined at the University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany, to determine clinical presentation, diagnostic course and long-term 
outcome.
RESULTS: Diagnostic criteria for non-caeruloplasmin-bound serum copper, serum 
caeruloplasmin, 24-h urinary copper excretion, liver copper content, presence of 
Kayser-Fleischer rings and histological signs of chronic liver damage were 
reached in 86.6%, 88.2%, 87.1%, 92.7%, 66.3% and 73% of patients, respectively. 
By analysis of the coding region of ATP7B (except exons 2, 3 and 21), 
disease-causing mutations were detected in 57% and 29% of patients with Wilson's 
disease on both chromosomes and on one chromosome, respectively. No mutations 
were detected in 15% of patients with Wilson's disease. No significant 
differences were found in clinical parameters or initial presentation between 
patients grouped according to their mutations. The patients with neurological 
symptoms were significantly older at the onset of symptoms than patients with 
hepatitic symptoms (20.2 v 15.5 years of age, p<0.05), and the neurological 
symptoms were associated with a significantly longer time from onset to 
diagnosis than hepatic symptoms (44.4 v 14.4 months, p<0.05). After initiating 
treatment, 76.1% of the patients had a stable or improved course of the disease. 
Disease progression under treatment was more likely for neuropsychiatric than 
for hepatic symptoms. Side effects of treatment occurred in 74.4% of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with Wilson's disease having predominantly 
neuropsychiatric symptoms manifest symptoms later, have a longer time delay from 
onset of symptoms until definitive diagnosis and have a poorer outcome than 
patients with hepatic symptoms.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2005.087262
PMCID: PMC1856673
PMID: 16709660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.