---
reference_id: "PMID:33741442"
title: "Sacituzumab govitecan, a Trop-2-directed antibody-drug conjugate, for patients with epithelial cancer: final safety and efficacy results from the phase I/II IMMU-132-01 basket trial."
authors:
- Bardia A
- Messersmith WA
- Kio EA
- Berlin JD
- Vahdat L
- Masters GA
- Moroose R
- Santin AD
- Kalinsky K
- Picozzi V
- "O'Shaughnessy J"
- Gray JE
- Komiya T
- Lang JM
- Chang JC
- Starodub A
- Goldenberg DM
- Sharkey RM
- Maliakal P
- Hong Q
- Wegener WA
- Goswami T
- Ocean AJ
journal: Ann Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2021.03.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sacituzumab govitecan, a Trop-2-directed antibody-drug conjugate, for patients with epithelial cancer: final safety and efficacy results from the phase I/II IMMU-132-01 basket trial.
**Authors:** Bardia A, Messersmith WA, Kio EA, Berlin JD, Vahdat L, Masters GA, Moroose R, Santin AD, Kalinsky K, Picozzi V, O'Shaughnessy J, Gray JE, Komiya T, Lang JM, Chang JC, Starodub A, Goldenberg DM, Sharkey RM, Maliakal P, Hong Q, Wegener WA, Goswami T, Ocean AJ
**Journal:** Ann Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.annonc.2021.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.03.005)

## Content

1. Ann Oncol. 2021 Jun;32(6):746-756. doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2021.03.005. Epub
2021  Mar 16.

Sacituzumab govitecan, a Trop-2-directed antibody-drug conjugate, for patients 
with epithelial cancer: final safety and efficacy results from the phase I/II 
IMMU-132-01 basket trial.

Bardia A(1), Messersmith WA(2), Kio EA(3), Berlin JD(4), Vahdat L(5), Masters 
GA(6), Moroose R(7), Santin AD(8), Kalinsky K(9), Picozzi V(10), O'Shaughnessy 
J(11), Gray JE(12), Komiya T(13), Lang JM(14), Chang JC(15), Starodub A(16), 
Goldenberg DM(17), Sharkey RM(17), Maliakal P(17), Hong Q(17), Wegener WA(17), 
Goswami T(17), Ocean AJ(18).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
USA.
(2)University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, USA.
(3)Goshen Center for Cancer Care, Goshen, USA.
(4)Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, USA.
(5)Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, USA.
(6)Helen F Graham Cancer Center and Research Institute, Newark, USA.
(7)Orlando Health UF Health Cancer Center, Orlando, USA.
(8)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, USA.
(9)Columbia University Irving Medical Center-Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, New York, USA.
(10)Virginia Mason Cancer Center, Seattle, USA.
(11)Texas Oncology, Baylor University Medical Center, US Oncology, Dallas, USA.
(12)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, USA.
(13)Parkview Cancer Institute, Fort Wayne, USA.
(14)University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, USA.
(15)Houston Methodist Cancer Center, Houston, USA.
(16)Riverside Peninsula Cancer Institute, Newport News, USA.
(17)Immunomedics, Inc., a Subsidiary of Gilead Sciences, Inc., Morris Plains, 
USA.
(18)Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, USA. Electronic address: 
ajo9001@med.cornell.edu.

BACKGROUND: Sacituzumab govitecan (SG), a trophoblast cell surface antigen-2 
(Trop-2)-directed antibody-drug conjugate, has demonstrated antitumor efficacy 
and acceptable tolerability in a phase I/II multicenter trial (NCT01631552) in 
patients with advanced epithelial cancers. This report summarizes the safety 
data from the overall safety population (OSP) and efficacy data, including 
additional disease cohorts not published previously.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with refractory metastatic epithelial cancers 
received intravenous SG (8, 10, 12, or 18 mg/kg) on days 1 and 8 of 21-day 
cycles until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. Endpoints for the OSP 
included safety and pharmacokinetic parameters with investigator-evaluated 
objective response rate (ORR per RECIST 1.1), duration of response, clinical 
benefit rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival evaluated for 
cohorts (n > 10 patients) of small-cell lung, colorectal, esophageal, 
endometrial, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, and castrate-resistant prostate 
cancer.
RESULTS: In the OSP (n = 495, median age 61 years, 68% female; UGT1A1∗28 
homozygous, n = 46; 9.3%), 41 (8.3%) permanently discontinued treatment due to 
adverse events (AEs). Most common treatment-related AEs were nausea (62.6%), 
diarrhea (56.2%), fatigue (48.3%), alopecia (40.4%), and neutropenia (57.8%). 
Most common treatment-related serious AEs (n = 75; 15.2%) were febrile 
neutropenia (4.0%) and diarrhea (2.8%). Grade ≥3 neutropenia and febrile 
neutropenia occurred in 42.4% and 5.3% of patients, respectively. Neutropenia 
(all grades) was numerically more frequent in UGT1A1∗28 homozygotes (28/46; 
60.9%) than heterozygotes (69/180; 38.3%) or UGT1A1∗1 wild type (59/177; 33.3%). 
There was one treatment-related death due to an AE of aspiration pneumonia. 
Partial responses were seen in endometrial cancer (4/18, 22.2% ORR) and 
small-cell lung cancer (11/62, 17.7% ORR), and one castrate-resistant prostate 
cancer patient had a complete response (n = 1/11; 9.1% ORR).
CONCLUSIONS: SG demonstrated a toxicity profile consistent with previous 
published reports. Efficacy was seen in several cancer cohorts, which validates 
Trop-2 as a broad target in solid tumors.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annonc.2021.03.005
PMID: 33741442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure AB has received research support 
(paid to institution) from Genentech, Novartis, Pfizer, Merck, Sanofi, Radius 
Health, Immunomedics, Inc., Mersana, Innocrin, and Biotheranostics Inc.; has 
served as a consultant to Biotheranostics Inc., Pfizer, Novartis, Genentech, 
Merck, Radius Health, Immunomedics, Inc., Spectrum Pharma, Taiho, Sanofi, 
Daiichi Pharma/AstraZeneca, Puma, Philipps, and Eli Lilly; and has received 
travel support from Biotheranostics Inc., Pfizer, Novartis, Genentech, Merck, 
Radius Health, Immunomedics, Inc., Spectrum Pharma, Taiho, Sanofi, and Philipps. 
WM has received research support (paid to institution) from Immunomedics, Inc. 
EAK is a stockholder of Immunomedics, Inc. JDB has received research support 
(paid to institution) from AbbVie/Pharmacyclics, Beigene, EMD Serono, 
Immunomedics, Inc., Symphogen, Pfizer, Taiho, Novartis, Genentech/Roche, Bayer, 
Lilly/Loxo, Incyte, Boston Biomedical, Macrogenics, and I-Mab Biopharma; has 
served as a consultant to Ipsen, Clovis, and QED Therapeutics, EMD Serono, 
Seattle Genetics, Bayer, Celgene, LSK Biopharma, Eisai, AstraZeneca, Five Prime, 
Armo, AbbVie, Symphogen, Erytech, and Gritstone; participates in a Data Safety 
Monitoring Board for the Pancreatic Cancer Action Network; and receives 
compensation from the National Cancer Institute for study sections and work on 
an Investigational Drug Steering Committee. LV has received research support 
from Weill Cornell Medicine, serves on advisory boards for Immunomedics, Inc., 
Berg Pharma, and Seattle Genetics, and has served as a consultant to Osmol 
Therapeutics. RM has received research support from the Orlando Health UF Health 
Cancer Center and has received honorarium from Eli Lilly, Pfizer, Genentech, 
Immunomedics, Inc., Seattle Genetics, and Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS). ADS has 
served as a consultant to Puma and Merck, and has received research support from 
Gilead, Puma, Immunomedics, Inc., Synthon, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Genentech, and 
Tesaro. KK has received research support from Immunomedics, Inc., Novartis, 
Incyte, Genentech/Roche, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, Calithera Biosciences, Acetylon, 
Seattle Genetics, Amgen, Zentalis Pharmaceuticals, and CytomX Therapeutics; has 
served as a consultant to Immunomedics, Inc., Merck, Seattle Genetics, Pfizer, 
Novartis, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Amgen, and AstraZeneca. His spouse is currently 
employed by Grail and was previously employed at Array and Pfizer. JO has served 
as a consultant to AbbVie, Agendia, AstraZeneca, BMS, Celgene, Eisai, Genentech, 
Immunomedics, Inc., Jounce Therapeutics, Lilly, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Puma, 
Roche, and Seattle Genetics. JEG has received research support from BMS, Merck, 
AstraZeneca, Array, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Genentech, and has served as a 
consultant to BMS, Merck, Inivata, EMD Serono/Merck KGaA, AstraZeneca, Celgene, 
and Novartis. TK has received travel support from Merck and has received 
honoraria from Boehringer Ingelheim. JML holds equity interest in Salus 
Discovery, LLC. He has served as a consultant to Janssen, Sanofi, Astellas, 
Pfizer, and Immunomedics, Inc. AS has served as a consultant to Sandoz and Bayer 
and has received speaking honoraria from BMS. DMG reports previous employment by 
Immunomedics, Inc. and status as company founder; serving as Chairman of the 
Board and Chief Scientific Officer of Immunomedics, Inc.; and was a stockholder. 
He is an inventor and co-inventor of patents pertaining to sacituzumab 
govitecan, with potential royalties from product sales. RMS was previously 
employed by Immunomedics, Inc., at the time this study was conducted; has served 
as a consultant to Immunomedics, Inc.; and was a stockholder of Immunomedics, 
Inc. PM reports previous employment by Immunomedics, Inc., while study was 
performed and being a stockholder in Immunomedics, Inc. QH was an employee and 
stock shareholder of Immunomedics, Inc., a subsidiary of Gilead Sciences, Inc. 
and has received travel support from Advaxis; spouse is an employee and stock 
shareholder of Merck. WW reports previous employment by Immunomedics, Inc., 
while study was performed; served as a consultant to Immunomedics, Inc., and was 
a stockholder in Immunomedics, Inc. TG was an employee and stockholder of 
Immunomedics, Inc. a subsidiary of Gilead Sciences, Inc. AJO has served in a 
consulting or advisory role for Immunomedics, Inc., Celgene, Tyme Therapeutics, 
Array, Merck, BMS, ProStrakan, Novartis, Pfizer, Eli Lilly, and Genentech; has 
served in Speaker's Bureau for Daiichi Sankyo; and has received travel, 
accommodations, expenses from Daiichi Sankyo. All other authors have declared no 
conflicts of interest.