---
reference_id: "PMID:2729337"
title: Natural history of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in women in Rhode Island.
authors:
- Carpenter CC
- Mayer KH
- Fisher A
- Desai MB
- Durand L
journal: Am J Med
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1016/0002-9343(89)90471-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in women in Rhode Island.
**Authors:** Carpenter CC, Mayer KH, Fisher A, Desai MB, Durand L
**Journal:** Am J Med (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0002-9343(89)90471-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-9343(89)90471-3)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 1989 Jun;86(6 Pt 2):771-5. doi: 10.1016/0002-9343(89)90471-3.

Natural history of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in women in Rhode Island.

Carpenter CC(1), Mayer KH, Fisher A, Desai MB, Durand L.

Author information:
(1)Brown University AIDS Program, Providence, Rhode Island 02906.

PURPOSE: Current recommendations for treatment of human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) infection and for prophylaxis against associated opportunistic infections 
in North America are largely based on observations of HIV infection in males. In 
an effort to determine whether the natural history and clinical course may be 
different, with implications relevant to prophylaxis against opportunistic 
infections, we have documented the clinical courses of the first 24 known cases 
of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in women in Rhode Island, most of 
whom developed Centers for Disease Control-defined AIDS before the availability 
of an effective antiviral agent (i.e., zidovudine) or a well-defined approach to 
prophylaxis against opportunistic infections (e.g., oral trimethoprimsulfa).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The subjects in this study are 24 women with AIDS who were 
treated by members of the Brown University medical faculty from June 1982 
through June 1988. All patients had thorough clinical evaluations and 
appropriate laboratory studies as they became available. All were followed at 
intervals no greater than two months. All opportunistic infections were treated 
by appropriate, specific antimicrobial therapy. When zidovudine became 
available, it was administered to all remaining patients in the study. All 
subjects were counseled about HIV infection, its modes of transmission, and the 
early symptoms of opportunistic infections.
RESULTS: These observations yielded the following three major findings: (1) 
Candida esophagitis was the most common (38%) AIDS-defining event; (2) 
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia was less frequently the AIDS-defining event (13%) 
and occurred less commonly during the illness (29%) than in North American males 
with AIDS; (3) Of 14 women in whom the diagnosis of AIDS was established before 
January 1, 1987, the mean survival time after diagnosis was greater than 20 
months.
CONCLUSION: More information on the natural history of HIV infection in North 
American women is urgently needed. If more extensive data from other geographic 
regions confirm the observations in this study, the optimal approach to 
prophylaxis against opportunistic infections in women with AIDS may be 
substantially different from that which is most appropriate for males.

DOI: 10.1016/0002-9343(89)90471-3
PMID: 2729337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]