---
reference_id: "PMID:39933731"
title: "Phrenic Nerve Reconstruction in Pediatric Diaphragm Paralysis: Outcomes and Techniques."
authors:
- Kaufman MR
- Lu C
- Staab V
- Bauer T
journal: Eur J Pediatr Surg
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1055/a-2536-4405
keywords:
- Humans
- "Respiratory Paralysis/surgery, etiology, physiopathology"
- Phrenic Nerve/surgery
- Retrospective Studies
- Child
- Female
- Male
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Treatment Outcome
- Plastic Surgery Procedures/methods
- Infant
- Respiratory Function Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phrenic Nerve Reconstruction in Pediatric Diaphragm Paralysis: Outcomes and Techniques.
**Authors:** Kaufman MR, Lu C, Staab V, Bauer T
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr Surg (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2536-4405](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2536-4405)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2025 Aug;35(4):302-308. doi: 10.1055/a-2536-4405. Epub
2025  Feb 11.

Phrenic Nerve Reconstruction in Pediatric Diaphragm Paralysis: Outcomes and
Techniques.

Kaufman MR(1), Lu C(2), Staab V(3), Bauer T(4).

Author information:
(1)The Institute for Advanced Reconstruction, Shrewsbury, New Jersey, United
States.
(2)Department of Surgery, Hackensack Meridian Jersey Shore University Medical
Center, Neptune, New Jersey, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hackensack Meridian Jersey Shore University
Medical Center, Neptune, New Jersey, United States.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Hackensack Meridian Jersey Shore University
Medical Center, Neptune, New Jersey, United States.

Symptomatic diaphragm paralysis in the pediatric patient is an uncommon
condition. This study aims to evaluate the outcomes and technique of phrenic
nerve reconstruction and its application to pediatric patients with unilateral
and bilateral diaphragm paralysis at a single institution. The objective of this
study is to demonstrate the application of a well-studied reconstructive
technique in a population of patients not previously studied.A retrospective
review of pediatric patients between 2012 and 2022 with symptomatic diaphragm
paralysis treated with phrenic nerve reconstruction. Nine patients with a median
age of 10 years were offered surgical treatment. The etiology of their paralysis
included: birth trauma, congenital cervical anomaly, mediastinal neoplastic
disease, cervical spinal cord injury, and acute flaccid myelitis. Measures of
postoperative improvement include: fluoroscopic sniff testing, pulmonary
function testing, electromyography/nerve conduction testing, ultrasound
evaluation, and ventilator requirements.One hundred percent of patients with
unilateral paralysis demonstrated improvement, defined as improvements in
dyspnea, orthopnea, fatigability, and decreased respiratory infections. This was
corroborated by sniff testing, pulmonary function testing, and electrodiagnostic
evaluation. In 80% of patients, there was recovery of diaphragm excursion on the
chest fluoroscopy, and a 10% or greater improvement in pulmonary spirometry
(forced expiratory volume in 1 second, FEV1, and forced vital capacity, FVC)
percent predicted values. In patients with bilateral diaphragm paralysis, 75%
demonstrated improvement in sniff testing, ultrasound findings, and ventilator
requirements. One of four patients with bilateral paralysis and chronic
ventilator dependency did not improve. There were no postoperative complications
defined as hematoma, wound infection, pleural effusion, pneumonia, sepsis, nerve
injury, or hardware malfunction seen during follow-up.Phrenic nerve
reconstruction in pediatric patients demonstrates potential as a safe and
effective surgical option for symptomatic diaphragm paralysis. In patients with
unilateral paralysis, this intervention consistently improved respiratory
function. In patients with bilateral paralysis, the results were variable but
showed promise in facilitating ventilator weaning when performed early. These
findings underscore the importance of early surgical intervention. Larger,
multicenter studies are needed to validate its long-term potential.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2536-4405
PMID: 39933731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.
