---
reference_id: "PMID:38515699"
title: Functional investigation of a novel ANKRD11 frameshift variant identified in a Chinese family with KBG syndrome.
authors:
- Wei S
- Li Y
- Yang W
- Chen S
- Liu F
- Zhang M
- Ban B
- He D
journal: Heliyon
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e28082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional investigation of a novel ANKRD11 frameshift variant identified in a Chinese family with KBG syndrome.
**Authors:** Wei S, Li Y, Yang W, Chen S, Liu F, Zhang M, Ban B, He D
**Journal:** Heliyon (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e28082](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e28082)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2024 Mar 13;10(6):e28082. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e28082. 
eCollection 2024 Mar 30.

Functional investigation of a novel ANKRD11 frameshift variant identified in a 
Chinese family with KBG syndrome.

Wei S(1)(2), Li Y(1)(3), Yang W(4), Chen S(1)(2), Liu F(1)(2), Zhang M(1)(3), 
Ban B(1)(2)(3), He D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Genetics and Metabolism, Affiliated Hospital of 
Jining Medical University, Jining, PR China.
(2)Medical Research Center, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, 
Jining, PR China.
(3)Chinese Research Center for Behavior Medicine in Growth and Development, 
Jining, PR China.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, PR China.

KBG syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant condition characterized by multisystem 
developmental disorder, primarily caused by loss-of-function variants in ankyrin 
repeat domain-containing protein 11 (ANKRD11). Approximately 80 % of ANKRD11 
variants associated with KBG syndrome, are frameshift and nonsense variants. 
Current insight into the pathogenesis of KBG syndrome resulting from ANKRD11 
truncating variants remains limited. Here, we presented two members from a 
non-consanguineous Chinese pedigree both exhibiting characteristics fitting the 
KBG syndrome-associated phenotypic spectrum. Whole-exome sequencing identified a 
novel heterozygous frameshift variant in ANKRD11 (NM_013275.6, c.2280_2281delGT, 
p.Y761Qfs*20) in the proband. Sanger sequencing confirmed that the variant was 
inherited from her mother and co-segregated with KBG syndrome phenotype. In 
vitro functional assays revealed that the frameshift variant escaped 
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, and resulting in a truncated protein with 
significantly increased expression levels compared to full-length ANKRD11. 
Immunofluorescence results demonstrated that truncated protein was predominantly 
expressed in the nucleus of HEK293 cells, while wild-type ANKRD11 was equally 
distributed in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. Moreover, the truncated protein 
significantly reduced CDKN1A/P21-promoter luciferase activity in comparison to 
wild-type ANKRD11 protein, as well as a remarkably decrease in the endogenous 
CDKN1A/P21 mRNA level in HEK293 cells. These findings suggest a loss of 
transcriptional activation function and potentially a dominant-negative 
mechanism. Overall, our study expands the mutational spectrum of ANKRD11 gene 
and provides new insights into the pathogenic mechanism of KBG syndrome caused 
by ANKRD11 truncating variants.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e28082
PMCID: PMC10956060
PMID: 38515699

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.