---
reference_id: "PMID:39377587"
title: "Metagenomic, metabolomic, and lipidomic shifts associated with fecal microbiota transplantation for recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection."
authors:
- McMillan AS
- Zhang G
- Dougherty MK
- McGill SK
- Gulati AS
- Baker ES
- Theriot CM
journal: mSphere
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/msphere.00706-24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metagenomic, metabolomic, and lipidomic shifts associated with fecal microbiota transplantation for recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection.
**Authors:** McMillan AS, Zhang G, Dougherty MK, McGill SK, Gulati AS, Baker ES, Theriot CM
**Journal:** mSphere (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/msphere.00706-24](https://doi.org/10.1128/msphere.00706-24)

## Content

1. mSphere. 2024 Oct 29;9(10):e0070624. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00706-24. Epub 2024 
Oct 8.

Metagenomic, metabolomic, and lipidomic shifts associated with fecal microbiota 
transplantation for recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection.

McMillan AS(#)(1)(2), Zhang G(#)(3), Dougherty MK(4)(5), McGill SK(4), Gulati 
AS(6)(7), Baker ES(3), Theriot CM(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Program, Department of Biological Sciences, College of Science, 
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Rex Digestive Healthcare, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Feb 09:2024.02.07.579219. doi: 10.1101/2024.02.07.579219.

Recurrent C. difficile infection (rCDI) is an urgent public health threat, for 
which the last resort and lifesaving treatment is a fecal microbiota transplant 
(FMT). However, the exact mechanisms that mediate a successful FMT are not 
well-understood. Here, we use longitudinal stool samples collected from patients 
undergoing FMT to evaluate intra-individual changes in the microbiome, 
metabolome, and lipidome after successful FMTs relative to their baselines 
pre-FMT. We show changes in the abundance of many lipids, specifically a 
decrease in acylcarnitines post-FMT, and a shift from conjugated bile acids 
pre-FMT to deconjugated secondary bile acids post-FMT. These changes correlate 
with a decrease in Enterobacteriaceae, which encode carnitine metabolism genes, 
and an increase in Lachnospiraceae, which encode bile acid altering genes such 
as bile salt hydrolases (BSHs) and the bile acid-inducible (bai) operon, 
post-FMT. We also show changes in gut microbe-encoded amino acid biosynthesis 
genes, of which Enterobacteriaceae was the primary contributor to amino acids C. 
difficile is auxotrophic for. Liquid chromatography, ion mobility spectrometry, 
and mass spectrometry (LC-IMS-MS) revealed a shift from microbial conjugation of 
primary bile acids pre-FMT to secondary bile acids post-FMT. Here, we define the 
structural and functional changes associated with a successful FMT and generate 
hypotheses that require further experimental validation. This information is 
meant to help guide the development of new microbiota-focused therapeutics to 
treat rCDI.IMPORTANCERecurrent C. difficile infection is an urgent public health 
threat, for which the last resort and lifesaving treatment is a fecal microbiota 
transplant. However, the exact mechanisms that mediate a successful FMT are not 
well-understood. Here, we show changes in the abundance of many lipids, 
specifically acylcarnitines and bile acids, in response to FMT. These changes 
correlate with Enterobacteriaceae pre-FMT, which encodes carnitine metabolism 
genes, and Lachnospiraceae post-FMT, which encodes bile salt hydrolases and baiA 
genes. There was also a shift from microbial conjugation of primary bile acids 
pre-FMT to secondary bile acids post-FMT. Here, we define the structural and 
functional changes associated with a successful FMT, which we hope will help aid 
in the development of new microbiota-focused therapeutics to treat rCDI.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00706-24
PMCID: PMC11520286
PMID: 39377587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.M.T. has consulted for Vedanta Biosciences, 
Inc., Summit Therapeutics, and Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and is on the 
Scientific Advisory Board for Ancilia Biosciences.