---
reference_id: "PMID:39143095"
title: Lamin A/C deficiency-mediated ROS elevation contributes to pathogenic phenotypes of dilated cardiomyopathy in iPSC model.
authors:
- Qiu H
- Sun Y
- Wang X
- Gong T
- Su J
- Shen J
- Zhou J
- Xia J
- Wang H
- Meng X
- Fu G
- Zhang D
- Jiang C
- Liang P
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-51318-5
keywords:
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- "Lamin Type A/metabolism, genetics"
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Humans
- "Sirtuin 1/metabolism, genetics"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism, pathology"
- Oxidative Stress
- Phenotype
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- "Calcium-Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase Type 2/metabolism, genetics"
- Frameshift Mutation
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/metabolism, genetics"
- Nuclear Envelope/metabolism
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Male
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lamin A/C deficiency-mediated ROS elevation contributes to pathogenic phenotypes of dilated cardiomyopathy in iPSC model.
**Authors:** Qiu H, Sun Y, Wang X, Gong T, Su J, Shen J, Zhou J, Xia J, Wang H, Meng X, Fu G, Zhang D, Jiang C, Liang P
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-51318-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51318-5)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Aug 14;15(1):7000. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-51318-5.

Lamin A/C deficiency-mediated ROS elevation contributes to pathogenic phenotypes
of dilated cardiomyopathy in iPSC model.

Qiu H(1)(2)(3), Sun Y(1)(2), Wang X(4)(5), Gong T(4)(5), Su J(4)(5), Shen
J(4)(5), Zhou J(4)(5), Xia J(6), Wang H(7), Meng X(8), Fu G(1)(2), Zhang D(8),
Jiang C(9)(10), Liang P(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Intervention and Regenerative Medicine of
Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Heart Center, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Zhejiang Provincial
People's Hospital (Affiliated People's Hospital), Hangzhou Medical College,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of combined Multi-organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public
Health, the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, China.
(5)Institute of Translational Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, the
First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
China.
(7)Prenatal Diagnosis Center, Hangzhou Women's Hospital, Hangzhou, China.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life
Science, Hubei University, Wuhan, China.
(9)Department of Cardiology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China. cyjiang@zju.edu.cn.
(10)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Intervention and Regenerative Medicine of
Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China. cyjiang@zju.edu.cn.
(11)Key Laboratory of combined Multi-organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public
Health, the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, China. pingliang@zju.edu.cn.
(12)Institute of Translational Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
pingliang@zju.edu.cn.

Mutations in the nuclear envelope (NE) protein lamin A/C (encoded by LMNA),
cause a severe form of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) with early-onset
life-threatening arrhythmias. However, molecular mechanisms underlying increased
arrhythmogenesis in LMNA-related DCM (LMNA-DCM) remain largely unknown. Here we
show that a frameshift mutation in LMNA causes abnormal Ca2+ handling,
arrhythmias and disformed NE in LMNA-DCM patient-specific iPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs). Mechanistically, lamin A interacts with sirtuin 1
(SIRT1) where mutant lamin A/C accelerates degradation of SIRT1, leading to
mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress. Elevated reactive oxygen species
(ROS) then activates the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II
(CaMKII)-ryanodine receptor 2 (RYR2) pathway and aggravates the accumulation of
SUN1 in mutant iPSC-CMs, contributing to arrhythmias and NE deformation,
respectively. Taken together, the lamin A/C deficiency-mediated ROS disorder is
revealed as central to LMNA-DCM development. Manipulation of impaired SIRT1
activity and excessive oxidative stress is a potential future therapeutic
strategy for LMNA-DCM.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-51318-5
PMCID: PMC11324749
PMID: 39143095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
