---
reference_id: "PMID:32593610"
title: "Not Just for Kids: A Rare Case of Congenital Laryngeal Cleft in an Adult."
authors:
- Xiao CC
- Schloegel LS
- Jiang N
journal: J Voice
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jvoice.2020.05.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Not Just for Kids: A Rare Case of Congenital Laryngeal Cleft in an Adult.
**Authors:** Xiao CC, Schloegel LS, Jiang N
**Journal:** J Voice (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jvoice.2020.05.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvoice.2020.05.017)

## Content

1. J Voice. 2022 Mar;36(2):293.e7-293.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.jvoice.2020.05.017. Epub
 2020 Jun 24.

Not Just for Kids: A Rare Case of Congenital Laryngeal Cleft in an Adult.

Xiao CC(1), Schloegel LS(2), Jiang N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Kaiser Permanente Medical Center at 
Oakland, Oakland, California. Electronic address: Christopher.Xiao@kp.org.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Kaiser Permanente Medical Center at 
Oakland, Oakland, California.

OBJECTIVE: This case report aims to increase awareness of the diagnosis of 
laryngeal cleft in adult patients and discuss treatment options.
METHODS: Case report and review of the literature.
RESULTS: We present a case of a 56-year-old male referred for hoarseness and 
chronic cough that was discovered to have a type 2 laryngeal cleft. He had 
chronic aspiration, recurrent pneumonia, and a hoarse voice for his entire life. 
In contrast to most described cases in adults, this patient was successfully 
treated with an endoscopic approach using absorbable suture.
CONCLUSION: Laryngeal clefts are uncommon and almost always detected in 
childhood, making adult laryngeal clefts extremely rare. Endoscopic repair is a 
feasible and successful treatment option in these cases.

Copyright © 2020 The Voice Foundation. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvoice.2020.05.017
PMID: 32593610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]