---
reference_id: "PMID:30988227"
title: "[Cockayne Syndrome]."
authors:
- Moriwaki S
journal: Brain Nerve
year: '2019'
doi: 10.11477/mf.1416201282
keywords:
- Cockayne Syndrome
- DNA Damage
- DNA Repair
- Humans
- Japan
- Mutation
- Skin Neoplasms
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Cockayne Syndrome].
**Authors:** Moriwaki S
**Journal:** Brain Nerve (2019)
**DOI:** [10.11477/mf.1416201282](https://doi.org/10.11477/mf.1416201282)

## Content

1. Brain Nerve. 2019 Apr;71(4):390-393. doi: 10.11477/mf.1416201282.

[Cockayne Syndrome].

Moriwaki S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Osaka Medical College.

Cockayne syndrome (CS) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by
severe photosensitive genodermatosis that is associated with premature aging
caused by defects in the UV-induced DNA damage repair system, particularly the
transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair. The clinical features of CS
include photosensitivity, a characteristic senile face, significant
developmental abnormalities, such as short stature, underweight, and
microcephaly, progressive cachexia, severe visual impairment, and sensorineural
deafness. CS is clinically classified into type I (classical type), type II
(congenital or severe type) and type III (late-onset or adult-onset type).
Additionally, there exists a rare form of xerodema pigmentosum-Cockayne syndrome
(XP/CS) complex. The incidence of CS is 2.7 in 1,000,000 individuals in Japan
and 90% of the cases are type I. Unlike XP, in CS, skin cancer is not known to
occur in areas of skin exposed to sunlight. However, we observed a case where
solar keratosis developed in adult-onset CS patients (CS type III) with a
pathological mutation in the CSB gene. In XP/CS, patients easily develop skin
cancer from early childhood in areas of the skin exposed to sunlight.

DOI: 10.11477/mf.1416201282
PMID: 30988227
