---
reference_id: "PMID:39600263"
title: "Pediatric Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Chernov ES
- Ghanem A
- Gonzales Parilla L
- Carroll WW
journal: Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/00034894241302143
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Female
- "Maxillary Sinus/diagnostic imaging, surgery, abnormalities"
- "Paranasal Sinus Diseases/surgery, diagnosis, diagnostic imaging"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Enophthalmos/etiology, diagnosis, surgery"
- Syndrome
- Endoscopy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Chernov ES, Ghanem A, Gonzales Parilla L, Carroll WW
**Journal:** Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00034894241302143](https://doi.org/10.1177/00034894241302143)

## Content

1. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2025 Apr;134(4):284-290. doi: 
10.1177/00034894241302143. Epub 2024 Nov 27.

Pediatric Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Case Report and Literature Review.

Chernov ES(1)(2), Ghanem A(1), Gonzales Parilla L(1), Carroll WW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(2)SUNY Upstate Medical University, School of Medicine, Syracuse, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Silent sinus syndrome (SSS) is a rare condition involving idiopathic 
maxillary sinus underdevelopment, orbital floor resorption, enophthalmos, and 
hypoglobus. SSS is more commonly described in adults, with only very limited 
literature in the pediatric population. Given the rarity of the condition, there 
is a lack of consensus regarding proper diagnostic criteria and treatment 
strategies. We present a case of pediatric SSS and a review of other cases in 
the literature.
METHODS: Case report and systematic review.
RESULTS: A 12-year-old female patient was referred for incidental MRI findings 
suggestive of SSS. Examination revealed minimal enophthalmos with some 
hypoglobus. A CT scan of the sinuses confirmed the diagnosis of SSS, and the 
patient underwent a right sided endoscopic modified medial 
maxillectomy/mega-antrostomy with image guidance given the significant maxillary 
hypoplasia. A literature review of CINAHL, PubMed, and Scopus identified 15 
studies that referenced pediatric SSS cases.
CONCLUSIONS: This article reports a case of pediatric SSS and compares the 
presenting symptoms, diagnostic criteria, and surgical intervention to other 
cases of pediatric SSS. As pediatric SSS is a very rare disease, this case 
offers a possible treatment strategy for a severely atelectatic maxillary sinus.

DOI: 10.1177/00034894241302143
PMID: 39600263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.