---
reference_id: "PMID:38321079"
title: Current and future state of pharmacological management of pediatric obesity.
authors:
- Fox CK
- Kelly AS
- Reilly JL
- Theis-Mahon N
- Raatz SJ
journal: Int J Obes (Lond)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41366-024-01465-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Pediatric Obesity/drug therapy
- Anti-Obesity Agents/therapeutic use
- Child
- Adolescent
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current and future state of pharmacological management of pediatric obesity.
**Authors:** Fox CK, Kelly AS, Reilly JL, Theis-Mahon N, Raatz SJ
**Journal:** Int J Obes (Lond) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41366-024-01465-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41366-024-01465-y)

## Content

1. Int J Obes (Lond). 2025 Mar;49(3):388-396. doi: 10.1038/s41366-024-01465-y.
Epub  2024 Feb 6.

Current and future state of pharmacological management of pediatric obesity.

Fox CK(1), Kelly AS(2), Reilly JL(3), Theis-Mahon N(4), Raatz SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Minnesota, Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric 
Obesity Medicine, Minneapolis, MN, USA. Lusc0001@umn.edu.
(2)University of Minnesota, Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric 
Obesity Medicine, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(3)Emory University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Atlanta, USA.
(4)University of Minnesota, Health Sciences Library, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Pediatric obesity is a highly prevalent chronic disease, which has traditionally 
been treated with lifestyle therapy alone. Yet for many youth, lifestyle 
intervention as a monotherapy is often insufficient for achieving clinically 
significant and durable BMI reduction. While metabolic/bariatric surgery 
achieves robust and long-lasting outcomes, it is neither widely accessible nor 
wanted by most pediatric patients and families. In the past 3 years, this 
treatment gap between lifestyle therapy and metabolic/bariatric surgery has been 
filled with a number of landmark clinical trials examining the safety and 
efficacy of anti-obesity medication (AOM) for use in children and adolescents. 
These trials include studies of liraglutide, phentermine/topiramate ER, 
semaglutide, and setmelanotide, all of which have led to FDA and/or EMA 
approval. Concurrent with this developing evidence base, in 2023, the American 
Academy of Pediatrics published their first Clinical Practice Guideline on the 
assessment and management of childhood obesity. The Guideline includes the 
recommendation that pediatric health care providers should offer AOM to youth 
ages ≥12 years with obesity. Recognizing that AOM use in the pediatric 
population will likely become the standard of care and to provide perspective on 
the recently generated data regarding new AOM, this narrative review summarizes 
the published randomized controlled trials (RCTs) from the past 10 years that 
examine AOM for the pediatric population. This report additionally includes RCTs 
examining AOM for special populations of pediatric obesity including monogenic 
obesity, Bardet Biedl syndrome, Prader Willi syndrome, and hypothalamic obesity. 
Finally, the clinical application of AOM for children and adolescents, as well 
as future directions and challenges are discussed.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41366-024-01465-y
PMID: 38321079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: CKF receives research 
support for serving as a site principal investigator from Novo Nordisk and Eli 
Lilly. Compensation is paid directly to her institution. ASK engages in unpaid 
consulting and educational activities for Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Novo 
Nordisk, and Vivus; receives donated drug/placebo from Novo Nordisk and Vivus 
for National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases-funded 
clinical trials. SJR receives research support for serving as a site 
co-investigator from Novo Nordisk and Eli Lilly. Compensations is paid directly 
to her institution. The other authors have no competing interests.