---
reference_id: "PMID:31472889"
title: Hypertension and Arrhythmias.
authors:
- Afzal MR
- Savona S
- Mohamed O
- Mohamed-Osman A
- Kalbfleisch SJ
journal: Heart Fail Clin
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension and Arrhythmias.
**Authors:** Afzal MR, Savona S, Mohamed O, Mohamed-Osman A, Kalbfleisch SJ
**Journal:** Heart Fail Clin (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.011)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Clin. 2019 Oct;15(4):543-550. doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.011.

Hypertension and Arrhythmias.

Afzal MR(1), Savona S(1), Mohamed O(1), Mohamed-Osman A(1), Kalbfleisch SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical 
Center, 473 West 12th Avenue, Suite 200, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical 
Center, 473 West 12th Avenue, Suite 200, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic 
address: steven.kalbfleisch@osumc.edu.

Hypertension is the most common cardiovascular risk factor and underlies heart 
failure, coronary artery disease, stroke, and chronic kidney disease. 
Hypertensive heart disease can manifest as cardiac arrhythmias. Supraventricular 
and ventricular arrhythmias may occur in the hypertensive patients. Atrial 
fibrillation and hypertension contribute to an increased risk of stroke. Some 
antihypertensive drugs predispose to electrolyte abnormalities, which may result 
in atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. A multipronged strategy involving 
appropriate screening, aggressive lifestyle modifications, and optimal 
pharmacotherapy can result in improved blood pressure control and prevent the 
onset or delay progression of heart failure, coronary artery disease, and 
cardiac arrhythmias.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.011
PMID: 31472889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]