---
reference_id: "PMID:28187057"
title: Improvements in Gait With Hearing Aids and Cochlear Implants.
authors:
- Shayman CS
- Earhart GM
- Hullar TE
journal: Otol Neurotol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001360
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Improvements in Gait With Hearing Aids and Cochlear Implants.
**Authors:** Shayman CS, Earhart GM, Hullar TE
**Journal:** Otol Neurotol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MAO.0000000000001360](https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0000000000001360)

## Content

1. Otol Neurotol. 2017 Apr;38(4):484-486. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001360.

Improvements in Gait With Hearing Aids and Cochlear Implants.

Shayman CS(1), Earhart GM, Hullar TE.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, Oregon †Program in Physical Therapy, Departments of 
Neurology and Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether wearing auditory assistive devices can improve 
gait and dynamic balance.
PATIENTS: Three adult users of bilateral hearing assistive devices: one with 
cytomegalovirus exposure wearing cochlear implants, one with Ménière's disease 
wearing hearing aids, and one with presbystasis wearing hearing aids.
INTERVENTION: Rehabilitative intervention involved participants performing gait 
and dynamic posture tasks with and without their hearing assistive devices.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Gait velocity and Mini-BESTest score.
RESULTS: The participant with Ménière's disease showed a clinically significant 
improvement in gait in the aided versus the unaided condition (20.5 cm/s higher 
velocity and five point better Mini-BESTest score). The other two participants 
also improved with augmented audition, but to a lesser degree.
CONCLUSIONS: Bilateral hearing augmentation may promote clinically significant 
improvements in gait, although the effects are not uniform among patients. 
Hearing aids or cochlear implants may be important interventions for improving 
stability during walking in some people with hearing loss.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001360
PMCID: PMC5743199
PMID: 28187057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]