---
reference_id: "PMID:26520442"
title: HNF1β drives glutathione (GSH) synthesis underlying intrinsic carboplatin resistance of ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC).
authors:
- Lopes-Coelho F
- Gouveia-Fernandes S
- Gonçalves LG
- Nunes C
- Faustino I
- Silva F
- Félix A
- Pereira SA
- Serpa J
journal: Tumour Biol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-4290-5
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Clear Cell/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Animals
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cisplatin/administration & dosage"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- "Glutamate-Cysteine Ligase/biosynthesis, blood, genetics"
- Glutathione/biosynthesis
- "Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1-beta/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HNF1β drives glutathione (GSH) synthesis underlying intrinsic carboplatin resistance of ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC).
**Authors:** Lopes-Coelho F, Gouveia-Fernandes S, Gonçalves LG, Nunes C, Faustino I, Silva F, Félix A, Pereira SA, Serpa J
**Journal:** Tumour Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13277-015-4290-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13277-015-4290-5)

## Content

1. Tumour Biol. 2016 Apr;37(4):4813-29. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-4290-5. Epub 2015
 Oct 31.

HNF1β drives glutathione (GSH) synthesis underlying intrinsic carboplatin
resistance of ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC).

Lopes-Coelho F(1)(2), Gouveia-Fernandes S(1)(2), Gonçalves LG(3), Nunes C(1)(2),
Faustino I(1), Silva F(1)(2), Félix A(1)(4), Pereira SA(1), Serpa J(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Estudos de Doenças Crónicas (CEDOC), NOVA Medical School/Faculdade
de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campo Mártires da Pátria 130,
1169-056, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Unidade de Investigação em Patobiologia Molecular do Instituto Português de
Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil (IPOLFG), Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica (ITQB), Oeiras, Portugal.
(4)Pathology Department, IPOLFG, Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Centro de Estudos de Doenças Crónicas (CEDOC), NOVA Medical School/Faculdade
de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campo Mártires da Pátria 130,
1169-056, Lisbon, Portugal. jacinta.serpa@fcm.unl.pt.
(6)Unidade de Investigação em Patobiologia Molecular do Instituto Português de
Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil (IPOLFG), Lisbon, Portugal.
jacinta.serpa@fcm.unl.pt.

Chemoresistance to platinum-based antineoplastic agents is a consistent feature
among ovarian carcinomas; however, whereas high-grade serous carcinoma (OSC)
acquires resistance during chemotherapy, ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) is
intrinsically resistant. The main objective of this study was to explore, in
vitro and in vivo, if hepatocyte nuclear factor 1β (HNF1β) and glutaminolysis
contribute for the resistance of OCCC to carboplatin through the intrinsically
increased GSH bioavailability. To disclose the role of HNF1β, experiments were
also performed in an OSC cell line, which does not express HNF1β. Metabolic
profiles, GSH quantification, HNF1β, and γ-glutamylcysteine ligase catalytic
subunit (GCLC) and modifier subunit (GCLM) expression, cell cycle, and death
were assessed in ES2 cell line (OCCC) and OVCAR3 cell line (OSC); HNF1β
knockdown was performed in ES2 and murine model of subcutaneous and peritoneal
OCCC tumors was established to test buthionine sulphoxamine (BSO), as a
sensitizer to carboplatin. Glutaminolysis is activated in ES2 and OVCAR3, though
ES2 exclusively synthesizes amino acids and GSH. ES2 cells are more resistant to
carboplatin than OVCAR3 and the abrogation of GSH production by BSO sensitizes
ES2 to carboplatin. HNF1β regulates the expression of GCLC, but not GCLM, and
consequently GSH production in ES2. In vivo, BSO prior to carboplatin reduces
dramatically subcutaneous tumor size and GSH levels, as well as peritoneal
dissemination. Our study discloses HNF1β as the mediator of intrinsic OCCC
chemoresistance and sheds a light to re-explore a cancer adjuvant therapeutic
approach using BSO to overcome the lack of efficient therapy in OCCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-4290-5
PMID: 26520442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
