---
reference_id: "PMID:22889867"
title: Clinical and prognostic significance of coagulation assays in melanoma.
authors:
- Tas F
- Ciftci R
- Kilic L
- Bilgin E
- Keskin S
- Sen F
- Yildiz I
- Yasasever V
journal: Melanoma Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/CMR.0b013e328357be7c
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and prognostic significance of coagulation assays in melanoma.
**Authors:** Tas F, Ciftci R, Kilic L, Bilgin E, Keskin S, Sen F, Yildiz I, Yasasever V
**Journal:** Melanoma Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CMR.0b013e328357be7c](https://doi.org/10.1097/CMR.0b013e328357be7c)

## Content

1. Melanoma Res. 2012 Oct;22(5):368-75. doi: 10.1097/CMR.0b013e328357be7c.

Clinical and prognostic significance of coagulation assays in melanoma.

Tas F(1), Ciftci R, Kilic L, Bilgin E, Keskin S, Sen F, Yildiz I, Yasasever V.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Oncology, University of Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey. 
faruktas2002@yahoo.com

The activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis is frequently found among cancer 
patients. Such tumors are considered to be associated with a higher risk of 
invasion, metastases, and eventually worse outcome. The aim of this study is to 
explore the clinical and prognostic value of blood coagulation tests for 
melanoma patients. Pretreatment blood coagulation tests including prothrombin 
time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), prothrombin activity 
(PTA), international normalized ratio (INR), D-dimer (DD), fibrinogen (F) 
levels, and platelet (PLT) counts were carried out. This prospective study 
included 61 melanoma patients [stage I-II (n=10), stage III (n=14), stage IV 
(n=37), M1c (n=26) disease], and 50 healthy controls. It included 34 (56%) men, 
median age 53 years, range 16-88 years. Over half of the patients (54%) were in 
the metastatic stage and most of them (70%) had M1c. The plasma level of 
pretreatment blood coagulation tests including DD, F, APTT, INR levels, and PLT 
counts showed a statistically significant difference between the patient and the 
control group (P<0.001 for all, but P=0.049 for INR). The levels of INR, DD, F, 
and PLT counts were higher and APTT was lower in the melanoma group, whereas the 
PT and PTA levels did not show any significant difference. There was a 
significant association between PT, PTA, INR, and PLT levels and the age of the 
patient. Patients with node metastasis in M0 disease had higher levels of PTA 
and PLT counts (P=0.002 and 0.048, respectively) and lower levels of PT and INR 
(P=0.056 and 0.046, respectively). The M1c patients tended to have higher plasma 
F levels (437 vs. 297 mg/dl, P=0.055) than M1a and M1b patients. The 1-year 
survival rate for all patients was 70%. In association with distant metastasis, 
advanced metastatic stage (M1c), elevated lactate dehydrogenase, and erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate, only elevated plasma F levels had a significantly adverse 
effect on survival among the coagulation parameters (P=0.031). The 1-year 
survival rates for patients with high and normal F levels were 58 and 88%, 
respectively. In conclusion, changes in the coagulation-fibrinolytic system are 
often present in melanoma and elevation in the plasma F level is associated with 
decreased survival.

DOI: 10.1097/CMR.0b013e328357be7c
PMID: 22889867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]