---
reference_id: "PMID:33559832"
title: Spectral domain optical coherence tomography findings of patients with pars planitis and risk factors affecting visual acuity.
authors:
- Yalçındağ FN
- Temel E
- Özgür EG
journal: Int Ophthalmol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10792-021-01734-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spectral domain optical coherence tomography findings of patients with pars planitis and risk factors affecting visual acuity.
**Authors:** Yalçındağ FN, Temel E, Özgür EG
**Journal:** Int Ophthalmol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10792-021-01734-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10792-021-01734-z)

## Content

1. Int Ophthalmol. 2021 May;41(5):1753-1761. doi: 10.1007/s10792-021-01734-z.
Epub  2021 Feb 9.

Spectral domain optical coherence tomography findings of patients with pars 
planitis and risk factors affecting visual acuity.

Yalçındağ FN(1), Temel E(2), Özgür EG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Opthalmology, Kırşehir Ahi Evran Training and Research 
Hospital, Kırşehir, Turkey. emine912@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, 
Turkey.

PURPOSE: To evaluate spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) 
findings of 42 eyes with pars planitis and to identify risk factors affecting 
visual acuity.
METHODS: Medical records and SD-OCT findings were retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: Mean best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.248 ± 0.3 on the logMAR 
scale at baseline. SD-OCT findings included epiretinal membrane (ERM) in 16 
(38.1%) eyes, loss of normal foveal contour appearance in 8 (19.0%), ellipsoid 
zone (EZ) damage in 5 (11.9%), external limiting membrane (ELM) damage in 3 
(7.1%), disruption of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) in 2 (4.8%), and macular 
atrophy in 1 (2.4%). There was macular edema in 10 (23.8%) eyes [cystoid macular 
edema (CME) in 8 (19.0%), diffuse macular edema (DME) in 6 (14.3%), and serous 
retinal detachment in 2 (4.8%)]. The mean central macular thickness (CMT) was 
272.1 ± 319.5 μm. Patients were followed up for a mean of 50.6 ± 36.7 months. 
Mean BCVA was 0.210 ± 0.3 at the final evaluation. SD-OCT findings included ERM 
in 28 (66.7%) eyes, EZ damage in 6 (14.3%), ELM damage in 3 (7.1%), disruption 
of RPE in 4 (9.5%), loss of normal foveal contour appearance in 12 (28.6%), and 
macular atrophy in 2 (4.8%). There was CME and/or DME in 6 (14.3%) eyes. The 
mean CMT was 238 ± 220.9 μm and was significantly lower than the baseline 
(p < 0.001). According to multivariate linear regression analysis, the presence 
of DME, and loss of normal foveal contour appearance at baseline were the 
independent factors associated with BCVA at the final examination (B = 0.726, 
p < 0.001; B = 0.766, p < 0.001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: DME and loss of normal foveal contour appearance were more likely 
to have adverse effects on visual acuity.

DOI: 10.1007/s10792-021-01734-z
PMID: 33559832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]