---
reference_id: "PMID:17847007"
title: "Mutation in WNT10A is associated with an autosomal recessive ectodermal dysplasia: the odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia."
authors:
- Adaimy L
- Chouery E
- Megarbane H
- Mroueh S
- Delague V
- Nicolas E
- Belguith H
- de Mazancourt P
- Megarbane A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/520064
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Consanguinity
- DNA/genetics
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Lebanon
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nails, Malformed/genetics"
- Odontodysplasia/genetics
- Pedigree
- Syndrome
- Tongue/abnormalities
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation in WNT10A is associated with an autosomal recessive ectodermal dysplasia: the odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Adaimy L, Chouery E, Megarbane H, Mroueh S, Delague V, Nicolas E, Belguith H, de Mazancourt P, Megarbane A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/520064](https://doi.org/10.1086/520064)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Oct;81(4):821-8. doi: 10.1086/520064. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

Mutation in WNT10A is associated with an autosomal recessive ectodermal 
dysplasia: the odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia.

Adaimy L(1), Chouery E, Megarbane H, Mroueh S, Delague V, Nicolas E, Belguith H, 
de Mazancourt P, Megarbane A.

Author information:
(1)Unite de Genetique Medicale, Faculte de Medecine, Universite Saint-Joseph de 
Beyrouth, Paris, France.

Odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome in which 
the presenting phenotype is dry hair, severe hypodontia, smooth tongue with 
marked reduction of fungiform and filiform papillae, onychodysplasia, 
keratoderma and hyperhidrosis of palms and soles, and hyperkeratosis of the 
skin. We studied three consanguineous Lebanese Muslim Shiite families that 
included six individuals affected with odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia. Using a 
homozygosity-mapping strategy, we assigned the disease locus to an ~9-cM region 
at chromosome 2q35-q36.2, located between markers rs16853834 and D2S353, with a 
maximum multipoint LOD score of 5.7. Screening of candidate genes in this region 
led us to identify the same c.697G-->T (p.Glu233X) homozygous nonsense mutation 
in exon 3 of the WNT10A gene in all patients. At the protein level, the mutation 
is predicted to result in a premature truncated protein of 232 aa instead of 417 
aa. This is the first report to our knowledge of a human phenotype resulting 
from a mutation in WNT10A, and it is the first demonstration of an ectodermal 
dysplasia caused by an altered WNT signaling pathway, expanding the list of 
WNT-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1086/520064
PMCID: PMC1973944
PMID: 17847007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]