---
reference_id: "PMID:38088571"
title: Uncovering the Hidden World of Aqueous Humor Proteins for Discovery of Biomarkers for Marfan Syndrome.
authors:
- Shi Y
- Chen J
- Cai L
- Zhang X
- Chen Z
- Yang J
- Jiang Y
- Lu Y
journal: Adv Sci (Weinh)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/advs.202303161
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uncovering the Hidden World of Aqueous Humor Proteins for Discovery of Biomarkers for Marfan Syndrome.
**Authors:** Shi Y, Chen J, Cai L, Zhang X, Chen Z, Yang J, Jiang Y, Lu Y
**Journal:** Adv Sci (Weinh) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/advs.202303161](https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202303161)

## Content

1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2024 Feb;11(6):e2303161. doi: 10.1002/advs.202303161. Epub
2023  Dec 13.

Uncovering the Hidden World of Aqueous Humor Proteins for Discovery of 
Biomarkers for Marfan Syndrome.

Shi Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen J(1)(2)(3)(4), Cai L(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhang X(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Chen Z(1)(2)(3)(4), Yang J(1)(2)(3)(4), Jiang Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Lu Y(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Eye Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, Eye and ENT Hospital, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, 200031, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Myopia, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200031, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Myopia, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanghai, 
200031, China.
(4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Visual Impairment and Restoration, Shanghai, 
200031, China.

Ectopia lentis is a hallmark of Marfan syndrome (MFS), a genetic connective 
tissue disorder affecting 1/5000 to 1/10 000 individuals worldwide. Early 
detection in ophthalmology clinics and timely intervention of cardiovascular 
complications can be lifesaving. In this study, a modified proteomics workflow 
with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based 
data-independent acquisition (DIA) and field asymmetric ion mobility 
spectrometry (FAIMS) to profile the proteomes of aqueous humor (AH) and lens 
tissue from MFS children with ectopia lentis is utilized. Over 2300 and 2938 
comparable proteins are identified in AH and the lens capsule, respectively. 
Functional enrichment analyses uncovered dysregulation of complement and 
coagulation-related pathways, collagen binding, and cell adhesion in MFS. 
Through weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) and machine learning, 
distinct modules associated with clinical traits are constructed and a unique 
biomarker panel (Q14376, Q99972, P02760, Q07507; gene names: GALE, MYOC, AMBP, 
DPT) is defined. These biomarkers are further validated using advanced parallel 
reaction monitoring (PRM) in an independent patient cohort. The results provide 
novel insights into the proteome characterization of ectopia lentis and offer a 
promising approach for developing a valuable biomarker panel to aid in the early 
diagnosis of Marfan syndrome via AH proteome.

© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202303161
PMCID: PMC10853735
PMID: 38088571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.