---
reference_id: PMID:26497905
title: Mutations in the MORC2 gene cause axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
authors:
- Sevilla T
- Lupo V
- Martínez-Rubio D
- Sancho P
- Sivera R
- Chumillas MJ
- García-Romero M
- Pascual-Pascual SI
- Muelas N
- Dopazo J
- Vílchez JJ
- Palau F
- Espinós C
journal: Brain
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awv311
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- Axons/pathology
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Gene Expression/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Sciatic Nerve/metabolism
- Sural Nerve/ultrastructure
- "Transcription Factors/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the MORC2 gene cause axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
**Authors:** Sevilla T, Lupo V, Martínez-Rubio D, Sancho P, Sivera R, Chumillas MJ, García-Romero M, Pascual-Pascual SI, Muelas N, Dopazo J, Vílchez JJ, Palau F, Espinós C
**Journal:** Brain (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awv311](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awv311)

## Content

1. Brain. 2016 Jan;139(Pt 1):62-72. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv311. Epub 2015 Oct 24.

Mutations in the MORC2 gene cause axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Sevilla T(1), Lupo V(2), Martínez-Rubio D(3), Sancho P(3), Sivera R(4), 
Chumillas MJ(5), García-Romero M(6), Pascual-Pascual SI(6), Muelas N(7), Dopazo 
J(8), Vílchez JJ(1), Palau F(9), Espinós C(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Avd. 
Fernando Abril Martorell no. 106, 46026 Valencia, Spain 2 Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), c/ Eduardo Primo 
Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain 3 Department of Medicine, University of 
Valencia, Avd. Blasco Ibáñez no. 15, 46010 Valencia, Spain.
(2)2 Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
c/ Eduardo Primo Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain 4 Program in Rare and 
Genetic Diseases and IBV/CSIC Associated Unit, Centro de Investigación Príncipe 
Felipe (CIPF), c/ Eduardo Primo Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain 
cespinos@cipf.es.
(3)2 Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
c/ Eduardo Primo Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain 4 Program in Rare and 
Genetic Diseases and IBV/CSIC Associated Unit, Centro de Investigación Príncipe 
Felipe (CIPF), c/ Eduardo Primo Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain.
(4)1 Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Avd. 
Fernando Abril Martorell no. 106, 46026 Valencia, Spain.
(5)2 Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
c/ Eduardo Primo Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain 5 Department of Clinical 
Neurophysiology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Avd. Fernando Abril 
Martorell no. 106, 46026 Valencia, Spain.
(6)6 Department of Neuropaediatrics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, P° de la 
Castellana no. 261, 08046 Madrid, Spain.
(7)1 Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Avd. 
Fernando Abril Martorell no. 106, 46026 Valencia, Spain 2 Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), c/ Eduardo Primo 
Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain.
(8)2 Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
c/ Eduardo Primo Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain 7 Program on Computational 
Genomics, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), c/ Eduardo Primo 
Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain.
(9)2 Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
c/ Eduardo Primo Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain 4 Program in Rare and 
Genetic Diseases and IBV/CSIC Associated Unit, Centro de Investigación Príncipe 
Felipe (CIPF), c/ Eduardo Primo Yúfera no. 13, 46012 Valencia, Spain 8 
Department of Genetic and Molecular Medicine, and Pediatric Institute for Rare 
Diseases (IPER), Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, P° Sant Joan de Déu no. 2, 08950 
Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Brain. 2016 Apr;139(Pt 4):e26. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv411.
    Brain. 2016 Jul;139(Pt 7):e40. doi: 10.1093/brain/aww082.
    Brain. 2016 Dec;139(Pt 12):e70. doi: 10.1093/brain/aww252.
    Brain. 2017 Apr 1;140(4):e21. doi: 10.1093/brain/awx019.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a complex disorder with wide genetic 
heterogeneity. Here we present a new axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease form, 
associated with the gene microrchidia family CW-type zinc finger 2 (MORC2). 
Whole-exome sequencing in a family with autosomal dominant segregation 
identified the novel MORC2 p.R190W change in four patients. Further mutational 
screening in our axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease clinical series detected two 
additional sporadic cases, one patient who also carried the same MORC2 p.R190W 
mutation and another patient that harboured a MORC2 p.S25L mutation. Genetic and 
in silico studies strongly supported the pathogenicity of these sequence 
variants. The phenotype was variable and included patients with congenital or 
infantile onset, as well as others whose symptoms started in the second decade. 
The patients with early onset developed a spinal muscular atrophy-like picture, 
whereas in the later onset cases, the initial symptoms were cramps, distal 
weakness and sensory impairment. Weakness and atrophy progressed in a random and 
asymmetric fashion and involved limb girdle muscles, leading to a severe 
incapacity in adulthood. Sensory loss was always prominent and proportional to 
disease severity. Electrophysiological studies were consistent with an 
asymmetric axonal motor and sensory neuropathy, while fasciculations and 
myokymia were recorded rather frequently by needle electromyography. Sural nerve 
biopsy revealed pronounced multifocal depletion of myelinated fibres with some 
regenerative clusters and occasional small onion bulbs. Morc2 is expressed in 
both axons and Schwann cells of mouse peripheral nerve. Different roles in 
biological processes have been described for MORC2. As the silencing of 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease genes have been associated with DNA damage response, 
it is tempting to speculate that a deregulation of this pathway may be linked to 
the axonal degeneration observed in MORC2 neuropathy, thus adding a new 
pathogenic mechanism to the long list of causes of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

© The Author (2015). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awv311
PMID: 26497905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]