---
reference_id: "PMID:20711281"
title: Chromoblastomycosis Caused by Phialophora richardsiae.
authors:
- Son YM
- Kang HK
- Na SY
- Lee HY
- Baek JO
- Lee JR
- Roh JY
- Seo YH
journal: Ann Dermatol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.5021/ad.2010.22.3.362
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chromoblastomycosis Caused by Phialophora richardsiae.
**Authors:** Son YM, Kang HK, Na SY, Lee HY, Baek JO, Lee JR, Roh JY, Seo YH
**Journal:** Ann Dermatol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.5021/ad.2010.22.3.362](https://doi.org/10.5021/ad.2010.22.3.362)

## Content

1. Ann Dermatol. 2010 Aug;22(3):362-6. doi: 10.5021/ad.2010.22.3.362. Epub 2010
Aug  5.

Chromoblastomycosis Caused by Phialophora richardsiae.

Son YM(1), Kang HK, Na SY, Lee HY, Baek JO, Lee JR, Roh JY, Seo YH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Gachon University of Medicine and Science, Gil 
Medical Center, Incheon, Korea.

Chromoblastomycosis is a chronic fungal disease of the skin and subcutaneous 
tissues caused by a group of dematiaceous (black) fungi. The most common 
etiologic agents are Fonsecaea pedrosoi and Cladophialophora carrionii, both of 
which can be isolated from plant debris. The infection usually follows traumatic 
inoculation by a penetrating thorn or splinter wound. Several months after the 
injury, painless papules or nodules appear on the affected area; these papules 
then progress to scaly and verrucose plaques. We report a case of 
chromoblastomycosis caused by Phialophora richardsiae, which has been rarely 
associated with chromoblastomycosis. The case involved a 43-year-old male, who 
for the past 2 months had noted an erythematous, pustulous plaque that was 
somewhat dark brown in color on his right shin; the plaque also had intermittent 
purulent discharge and crust formation. On histopathological examination, 
chronic granulomatous inflammation and sclerotic cells were seen. The tissue 
fungus culture grew out the typical black fungi of P. richardsiae, which was 
confirmed by polymerase chain reaction. The patient has been treated with a 
combination of terbinafine and itraconazole for 3 months with a good clinical 
response.

DOI: 10.5021/ad.2010.22.3.362
PMCID: PMC2917698
PMID: 20711281