---
reference_id: "PMID:11468689"
title: "MYO6, the human homologue of the gene responsible for deafness in Snell's waltzer mice, is mutated in autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss."
authors:
- Melchionda S
- Ahituv N
- Bisceglia L
- Sobe T
- Glaser F
- Rabionet R
- Arbones ML
- Notarangelo A
- Di Iorio E
- Carella M
- Zelante L
- Estivill X
- Avraham KB
- Gasparini P
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/323156
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6"
- Deafness/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Myosin Heavy Chains/chemistry, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Protein Conformation
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MYO6, the human homologue of the gene responsible for deafness in Snell's waltzer mice, is mutated in autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss.
**Authors:** Melchionda S, Ahituv N, Bisceglia L, Sobe T, Glaser F, Rabionet R, Arbones ML, Notarangelo A, Di Iorio E, Carella M, Zelante L, Estivill X, Avraham KB, Gasparini P
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/323156](https://doi.org/10.1086/323156)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Sep;69(3):635-40. doi: 10.1086/323156. Epub 2001 Jul 20.

MYO6, the human homologue of the gene responsible for deafness in Snell's
waltzer mice, is mutated in autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss.

Melchionda S(1), Ahituv N, Bisceglia L, Sobe T, Glaser F, Rabionet R, Arbones
ML, Notarangelo A, Di Iorio E, Carella M, Zelante L, Estivill X, Avraham KB,
Gasparini P.

Author information:
(1)Servizio Genetica Medica, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico-Ospedale "Casa Sollievo Sofferenza," I-71013 San Giovanni Rotondo,
Italy.

Mutations in the unconventional myosin VI gene, Myo6, are associated with
deafness and vestibular dysfunction in the Snell's waltzer (sv) mouse. The
corresponding human gene, MYO6, is located on chromosome 6q13. We describe the
mapping of a new deafness locus, DFNA22, on chromosome 6q13 in a family affected
by a nonsyndromic dominant form of deafness (NSAD), and the subsequent
identification of a missense mutation in the MYO6 gene in all members of the
family with hearing loss.

DOI: 10.1086/323156
PMCID: PMC1235492
PMID: 11468689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
