---
reference_id: "PMID:39014351"
title: "Novel GNAI3 mutation in a Chinese family with auriculocondylar syndrome and treatment of severe dentofacial deformities: a 5-year follow-up case report."
authors:
- Shi Y
- Rong L
- Liu S
- Liu Y
- Zong C
- Lu J
- Shang H
- Xue Y
- Tian L
journal: BMC Oral Health
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12903-024-04575-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Dentofacial Deformities/genetics, surgery"
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Ear Diseases/genetics, surgery"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gi-Go/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Ear/abnormalities
- "Osteogenesis, Distraction/methods"
- Mutation
- Orthognathic Surgical Procedures
- China
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel GNAI3 mutation in a Chinese family with auriculocondylar syndrome and treatment of severe dentofacial deformities: a 5-year follow-up case report.
**Authors:** Shi Y, Rong L, Liu S, Liu Y, Zong C, Lu J, Shang H, Xue Y, Tian L
**Journal:** BMC Oral Health (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12903-024-04575-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12903-024-04575-1)

## Content

1. BMC Oral Health. 2024 Jul 16;24(1):803. doi: 10.1186/s12903-024-04575-1.

Novel GNAI3 mutation in a Chinese family with auriculocondylar syndrome and 
treatment of severe dentofacial deformities: a 5-year follow-up case report.

Shi Y(#)(1), Rong L(#)(2), Liu S(3), Liu Y(1), Zong C(1), Lu J(1), Shang H(1), 
Xue Y(4), Tian L(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and Regeneration, 
National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shaanxi Clinical Research 
Center for Oral Diseases, Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School 
of Stomatology, The Fourth Military Medical University, 145 West Changle Road, 
Xi'an, 710032, PR China.
(2)Department of Stomatology, Air Force Medical Center, The Fourth Military 
Medical University, 30 Fucheng Road, Beijing, 100089, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and Regeneration, 
National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shaanxi Clinical Research 
Center for Oral Diseases, Department of Orthodontics, School of Stomatology, The 
Fourth Military Medical University, 145 West Changle Road, Xi'an, 710032, PR 
China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and Regeneration, 
National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shaanxi Clinical Research 
Center for Oral Diseases, Department of Oral Surgery, School of Stomatology, The 
Fourth Military Medical University, 145 West Changle Road, Xi'an, 710032, PR 
China. 530170019@qq.com.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and Regeneration, 
National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shaanxi Clinical Research 
Center for Oral Diseases, Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School 
of Stomatology, The Fourth Military Medical University, 145 West Changle Road, 
Xi'an, 710032, PR China. tianleison@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Auriculocondylar syndrome (ARCND) is an extremely rare autosomal 
dominant or recessive condition that typically manifests as question mark ears 
(QMEs), mandibular condyle hypoplasia, and micrognathia. Severe dental and 
maxillofacial malformations present considerable challenges in patients' lives 
and clinical treatment. Currently, only a few ARCND cases have been reported 
worldwide, but most of them are related to genetic mutations, clinical symptoms, 
and ear correction; there are few reports concerning the treatment of 
dentofacial deformities.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here, we report a rare case of ARCND in a Chinese family. A 
novel insertional mutation in the guanine nucleotide-binding protein 
alpha-inhibiting activity polypeptide 3 (GNAI3) was identified in the patient 
and their brother using whole-exome sequencing. After a multidisciplinary 
consultation and examination, sequential orthodontic treatment and craniofacial 
surgery, including distraction osteogenesis and orthognathic surgery, were 
performed using three-dimensional (3D) digital technology to treat the patient's 
dentofacial deformity. A good prognosis was achieved at the 5-year follow-up, 
and the patient returned to normal life.
CONCLUSIONS: ARCND is a monogenic and rare condition that can be diagnosed based 
on its clinical triad of core features. Molecular diagnosis plays a crucial role 
in the diagnosis of patients with inconspicuous clinical features. We present a 
novel insertion variation in GNAI3, which was identified in exon 2 of chromosome 
110116384 in a Chinese family. Sequential therapy with preoperative orthodontic 
treatment combined with distraction osteogenesis and orthognathic surgery guided 
by 3D digital technology may be a practical and effective method for treating 
ARCND.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-024-04575-1
PMCID: PMC11251236
PMID: 39014351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.