---
reference_id: "PMID:28540937"
title: Dental caries.
authors:
- Pitts NB
- Zero DT
- Marsh PD
- Ekstrand K
- Weintraub JA
- Ramos-Gomez F
- Tagami J
- Twetman S
- Tsakos G
- Ismail A
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.30
keywords:
- DMF Index
- "Dental Caries/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- "Dental Plaque/prevention & control"
- "Fluorides/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Tooth Remineralization
- Toothpastes/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dental caries.
**Authors:** Pitts NB, Zero DT, Marsh PD, Ekstrand K, Weintraub JA, Ramos-Gomez F, Tagami J, Twetman S, Tsakos G, Ismail A
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2017.30](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2017.30)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017 May 25;3:17030. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.30.

Dental caries.

Pitts NB(1), Zero DT(2), Marsh PD(3), Ekstrand K(4), Weintraub JA(5),
Ramos-Gomez F(6), Tagami J(7), Twetman S(4), Tsakos G(8), Ismail A(9).

Author information:
(1)Dental Innovation and Translation Centre, King's College London Dental
Institute, Floor 17 Tower Wing, Guy's Hospital, Great Maze Pond Road, London SE1
9RT, UK.
(2)Department of Cariology Operative Dentistry and Dental Public Health, Oral
Health Research Institute, Indiana University School of Dentistry, Indianapolis,
Indiana, USA.
(3)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, University of Leeds, Leeds,
UK.
(4)Department of Odontology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Dental Ecology, University of North Carolina School of
Dentistry, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(6)UCLA Center Children's Oral Health - UCCOH and Section of Pediatric
Dentistry, UCLA School of Dentistry, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California, USA.
(7)Cariology and Operative Dentistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, UCL, London, UK.
(9)Restorative Dentistry, Maurice H. Kornberg School of Dentistry, Temple
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Dental caries is a biofilm-mediated, sugar-driven, multifactorial, dynamic
disease that results in the phasic demineralization and remineralization of
dental hard tissues. Caries can occur throughout life, both in primary and
permanent dentitions, and can damage the tooth crown and, in later life, exposed
root surfaces. The balance between pathological and protective factors
influences the initiation and progression of caries. This interplay between
factors underpins the classification of individuals and groups into caries risk
categories, allowing an increasingly tailored approach to care. Dental caries is
an unevenly distributed, preventable disease with considerable economic and
quality-of-life burdens. The daily use of fluoride toothpaste is seen as the
main reason for the overall decline of caries worldwide over recent decades.
This Primer aims to provide a global overview of caries, acknowledging the
historical era dominated by restoration of tooth decay by surgical means, but
focuses on current, progressive and more holistic long-term, patient-centred,
tooth-preserving preventive care.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.30
PMID: 28540937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
