---
reference_id: "PMID:17113430"
title: Retinitis pigmentosa.
authors:
- Hartong DT
- Berson EL
- Dryja TP
journal: Lancet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69740-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Docosahexaenoic Acids/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Visual Acuity
- Vitamin A/therapeutic use
- Vitamin E/therapeutic use
- Vitamins/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinitis pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Hartong DT, Berson EL, Dryja TP
**Journal:** Lancet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69740-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69740-7)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2006 Nov 18;368(9549):1795-809. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69740-7.

Retinitis pigmentosa.

Hartong DT(1), Berson EL, Dryja TP.

Author information:
(1)Ocular Molecular Genetics Institute, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts 
Eye and Ear Infirmary, 243 Charles Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Hereditary degenerations of the human retina are genetically heterogeneous, with 
well over 100 genes implicated so far. This Seminar focuses on the subset of 
diseases called retinitis pigmentosa, in which patients typically lose night 
vision in adolescence, side vision in young adulthood, and central vision in 
later life because of progressive loss of rod and cone photoreceptor cells. 
Measures of retinal function, such as the electroretinogram, show that 
photoreceptor function is diminished generally many years before symptomic night 
blindness, visual-field scotomas, or decreased visual acuity arise. More than 45 
genes for retinitis pigmentosa have been identified. These genes account for 
only about 60% of all patients; the remainder have defects in as yet 
unidentified genes. Findings of controlled trials indicate that nutritional 
interventions, including vitamin A palmitate and omega-3-rich fish, slow 
progression of disease in many patients. Imminent treatments for retinitis 
pigmentosa are greatly anticipated, especially for genetically defined subsets 
of patients, because of newly identified genes, growing knowledge of affected 
biochemical pathways, and development of animal models.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69740-7
PMID: 17113430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]