---
reference_id: "PMID:24399650"
title: Quantitative assessment of the effect of glutathione S-transferase genes GSTM1 and GSTT1 on hepatocellular carcinoma risk.
authors:
- Shen YH
- Chen S
- Peng YF
- Shi YH
- Huang XW
- Yang GH
- Ding ZB
- Yi Y
- Zhou J
- Qiu SJ
- Fan J
- Ren N
journal: Tumour Biol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1524-2
keywords:
- Aflatoxin B1/metabolism
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/ethnology, etiology, genetics"
- "Epistasis, Genetic"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Glutathione Transferase/genetics
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/ethnology, etiology, genetics"
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Risk
- Serum Albumin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative assessment of the effect of glutathione S-transferase genes GSTM1 and GSTT1 on hepatocellular carcinoma risk.
**Authors:** Shen YH, Chen S, Peng YF, Shi YH, Huang XW, Yang GH, Ding ZB, Yi Y, Zhou J, Qiu SJ, Fan J, Ren N
**Journal:** Tumour Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13277-013-1524-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13277-013-1524-2)

## Content

1. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4007-15. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1524-2. Epub 2014
 Jan 8.

Quantitative assessment of the effect of glutathione S-transferase genes GSTM1
and GSTT1 on hepatocellular carcinoma risk.

Shen YH(1), Chen S, Peng YF, Shi YH, Huang XW, Yang GH, Ding ZB, Yi Y, Zhou J,
Qiu SJ, Fan J, Ren N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Liver Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Liver Cancer Institute,
Fudan University, 180 Feng-Lin Road, Shanghai, 200032, People's Republic of
China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most serious health problems
worldwide. As in many other diseases, environment and genetic factors are
believed to be involved in the pathogenesis of HCC. Numerous epidemiologic
investigations including case-control and cohort studies have suggested the
association of glutathione S-transferase (GST) genetic polymorphisms and HCC
risk. However, some studies have produced conflicting results. Therefore, we
performed an updated meta-analysis to clarify this inconsistency and to
establish a comprehensive picture of the association of the polymorphisms of
GSTM1 and GSTT1 with HCC susceptibility. We searched PubMed, Embase, ISI Web of
Science, and CNKI databases to identify eligible studies meeting the inclusion
criteria up to August 30, 2013. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals
(CIs) were used to assess the strength of association. Finally, there were a
total of 33 studies with 4,232 cases and 6,601 controls included in this
meta-analysis. In the pooled analysis, significantly increased HCC risks were
found for null genotype of GSTM1 (OR = 1.31, 95% CI = 1.07-1.61, P = 0.010, P
heterogeneity < 10(-5)) and GSTT1 (OR = 1.47, 95% CI = 1.25-1.74, P < 10(-5), P
heterogeneity < 10(-5)). Potential sources of heterogeneity were explored by
subgroup analysis based on ethnicity, sample size, and source of control.
Significant results were found among East Asians and Indians when stratified by
ethnicity, while no evidence of significant associations was observed among
Caucasian and African populations. In the gene-gene interaction analysis, a
statistically significant increased risk for HCC was detected for individuals
with combined deletion mutations in both genes compared to those with wild
genotypes (OR = 1.88, 95% CI = 1.41-2.50, P < 10(-4), P heterogeneity = 0.004).
The present meta-analysis demonstrated that the GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotype
may be associated with an increased risk of HCC and that individuals having the
combination of both defective GST genotypes may be more susceptible to
developing HCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-013-1524-2
PMID: 24399650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
