---
reference_id: "PMID:38391753"
title: An Overview of UBTF Neuroregression Syndrome.
authors:
- Braden AA
- Xiao J
- Hori R
- Brown C
- Khan MM
journal: Brain Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/brainsci14020179
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Overview of UBTF Neuroregression Syndrome.
**Authors:** Braden AA, Xiao J, Hori R, Brown C, Khan MM
**Journal:** Brain Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/brainsci14020179](https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci14020179)

## Content

1. Brain Sci. 2024 Feb 15;14(2):179. doi: 10.3390/brainsci14020179.

An Overview of UBTF Neuroregression Syndrome.

Braden AA(1)(2), Xiao J(1), Hori R(3), Brown C(4), Khan MM(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, TN 38104, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Institute, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(5)Division of Regenerative and Rehabilitation Sciences, Department of Physical 
Therapy, Center for Muscle, Metabolism and Neuropathology, College of Health 
Professions, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, 
USA.

Recently, a recurrent de novo dominant mutation in UBTF (c.628G>A, p.Glu210Lys; 
UBTF E210K) was identified as the cause of a neurological disorder which has 
been named UBTF Neuroregression Syndrome (UNS), or Childhood-Onset 
Neurodegeneration with Brain Atrophy (CONDBA). To date, only 17 cases have been 
reported worldwide. The molecular etiology is a pathogenic variant, E210K, 
within the HMG-box 2 of Upstream Binding Transcription Factor (UBTF). UBTF, a 
nucleolar protein, plays an important role in ribosomal RNA (rRNA) synthesis, 
nucleolar integrity, and cell survival. This variant causes unstable 
preinitiation complexes to form, resulting in altered rDNA chromatin structures, 
rRNA dysregulation, DNA damage, and ultimately, neurodegeneration. Defining 
clinical characteristics of the disorder include but are not limited to 
developmental regression beginning at approximately three years of age, 
progressive motor dysfunction, declining cognition, ambulatory loss, and 
behavioral problems. Histological and neuroimaging abnormalities include 
cortical atrophy, white matter deficits, and enlarged ventricles. Herein, we 
present a detailed overview of all published cases as well as the functional 
roles of UBTF to better understand the pathophysiology. Bringing undiagnosed 
cases to the attention of clinicians and researchers by making them aware of the 
clinical features will improve research and support the development of 
therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci14020179
PMCID: PMC10886456
PMID: 38391753

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.