---
reference_id: "PMID:20301412"
title: Canavan Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Nagy A
- Bley AE
- Eichler F
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Canavan Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Nagy A, Bley AE, Eichler F

## Content

1. Canavan Disease.

Nagy A(1), Bley AE(2), Eichler F(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
1999 Sep 16 [updated 2023 Dec 21].

Author information:
(1)Center for Rare Neurological Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Leukodystrophy Clinic, University Children's Hospital, University Medical
Center, Hamburg, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Canavan disease is a leukodystrophy characterized by
neurodevelopmental delays, macrocephaly, and tone abnormalities. The phenotypic
spectrum ranges from the more severe typical Canavan disease (85%-90% of
individuals) to the less severe atypical Canavan disease (10%-15%). Typical
Canavan disease is characterized by neurodevelopmental impairment evident by
ages three to five months, followed by neurodegeneration and developmental
regression. The clinical course of atypical Canavan disease is more variable,
with neurodevelopmental delay usually becoming evident in the first years of
life and frequently followed by developmental regression later in childhood or
adolescence. All individuals with Canavan disease have reduced life expectancy,
with the majority surviving to age ten years and the minority living to
adulthood.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Canavan disease is established in a proband
with suggestive findings either by biochemical testing or by molecular genetic
testing. The biochemical diagnosis is established in an individual with
suggestive clinical findings and elevated N-acetylaspartic acid (NAA) in urine
(using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry) or in the brain by proton magnetic
resonance spectroscopy. The molecular diagnosis is established in an individual
with suggestive clinical findings and biallelic ASPA pathogenic variants
identified by molecular genetic testing. Frequently, both types of testing are
performed; turnaround time, which varies among laboratories, should be
considered when determining the order of testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Multidisciplinary care by specialists
in neurology (to manage spasticity and seizures if present); orthopedics,
physical medicine and rehabilitation, physical therapy, and occupational therapy
(to minimize contractures, optimize abilities and seating posture); feeding
therapy (to assure adequate nutrition and weight gain, minimize risk of
aspiration); and education (to support appropriate learning goals).
Surveillance: Regularly scheduled evaluations of growth, nutrition, and safety
of oral intake; respiratory function; seizure control and neurologic findings;
developmental progress and educational needs; assessment of mobility and
self-help skills; and need for social services such as palliative/respite care.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Canavan disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an ASPA pathogenic
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the ASPA pathogenic variants have
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk
relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301412
