---
reference_id: "PMID:33112026"
title: "Successful treatment of erythematous-squamous disorders of the external auditory canal with tacrolimus and clotrimazole in otic oil: Our experience in 25 patients."
authors:
- Navarro-Triviño FJ
- Ruiz-Villaverde R
journal: Dermatol Ther
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/dth.14471
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful treatment of erythematous-squamous disorders of the external auditory canal with tacrolimus and clotrimazole in otic oil: Our experience in 25 patients.
**Authors:** Navarro-Triviño FJ, Ruiz-Villaverde R
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dth.14471](https://doi.org/10.1111/dth.14471)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther. 2020 Nov;33(6):e14471. doi: 10.1111/dth.14471. Epub 2020 Nov 4.

Successful treatment of erythematous-squamous disorders of the external auditory 
canal with tacrolimus and clotrimazole in otic oil: Our experience in 25 
patients.

Navarro-Triviño FJ(1), Ruiz-Villaverde R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Contact Eczema and Immunoallergic Diseases, Dermatology, 
Hospital Universitario San Cecilio, Granada, Spain.
(2)Department of Psoriasis, Dermatology, Hospital Universitario San Cecilio, 
Granada, Spain.

The external auditory canal (EAC) comprises a special area where 
erythematous-scaly diseases are located. Among the main dermatoses that can 
affect EAC seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis, irritant or allergic contact 
dermatitis, chronic external otitis (atrial eczematoid dermatitis) and cutaneous 
lupus should be considered. In this study, 25 consecutive patients were 
recruited on our dermatological outpatient clinic, 9 men and 16 women, with a 
clinical diagnosis of localized erythematous-squamous dermatoses in EAC. The 
mean age was 48.8 years (16-83). The mean time of evolution of the dermatoses 
was 11.44 months (2-36). Regarding the diagnosis, 14 patients were diagnosed 
with seborrheic dermatitis (56%), 9 patients with psoriasis (36%), 1 patient 
with subacute cutaneous lupus (4%), and 1 patient with allergic contact 
dermatitis to corticosteroids (4%). The indicated treatment was tacrolimus 0.1% 
and clotrimazole 1% in otic oil, twice a day, for 1 month. The EAC had to be 
cleaned initially with saline solution impregnated on a swab from the ears. The 
IGA score and pruritus showed a high results, with important improvement of 
almost all patients. The satisfaction of the patients obtained with the TSQM-9 
questionnaire was 95.2. Retreatment showed an equal efficacy observed during the 
first treatment period. The efficacy and the absence of side effects with the 
treatment make this magistral formula an adequate therapeutic option for these 
dermatoses.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/dth.14471
PMID: 33112026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]