---
reference_id: "PMID:9042279"
title: "\"Proximal-type\" epithelioid sarcoma, a distinctive aggressive neoplasm showing rhabdoid features. Clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study of a series."
authors:
- Guillou L
- Wadden C
- Coindre JM
- Krausz T
- Fletcher CD
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1097/00000478-199702000-00002
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- "Carcinoma/chemistry, pathology, therapy"
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/chemistry, pathology, therapy"
- "Sarcoma/chemistry, pathology, therapy"
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/chemistry, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# "Proximal-type" epithelioid sarcoma, a distinctive aggressive neoplasm showing rhabdoid features. Clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study of a series.
**Authors:** Guillou L, Wadden C, Coindre JM, Krausz T, Fletcher CD
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00000478-199702000-00002](https://doi.org/10.1097/00000478-199702000-00002)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 1997 Feb;21(2):130-46. doi:
10.1097/00000478-199702000-00002.

"Proximal-type" epithelioid sarcoma, a distinctive aggressive neoplasm showing 
rhabdoid features. Clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural 
study of a series.

Guillou L(1), Wadden C, Coindre JM, Krausz T, Fletcher CD.

Author information:
(1)Institut Universitaire de Pathologie, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Eighteen examples of an unusual malignant soft-tissue neoplasm, the morphology 
of which ranged from that of "atypical" epithelioid sarcoma to that of a 
rhabdoid tumor or undifferentiated carcinoma (with transitional forms) are 
described. Patients included 11 males and seven females; their median age was 
35.5 years with most patients aged 20 to 40 years. Development of a mass was the 
main presenting symptom. Six tumors developed in the pelvis and perineal region, 
four in the pubic region and vulva, three in the buttocks, one in the deep soft 
tissues of the left hip, one on the penis, one in left forearm, one in left 
axilla, and one on the occiput. Tumor size ranged from 1 to 20 cm (median, 4 
cm). On microscopic examination, the tumor cells invaded the subcutaneous or 
deep soft tissues, had prominent epithelioid or rhabdoid features, had marked 
cytologic atypia, and grew in a multinodular pattern in half of the cases. Areas 
of necrosis were often seen. A granuloma-like pattern reminiscent of that 
observed in classic epithelioid sarcoma was observed in only two cases. 
Immunohistochemically, positivity for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, 
and vimentin was seen in all but one of the cases. Of 16 cases, 10 and eight 
tumors reacted with desmin and CD34, respectively; five of 15 reacted at least 
focally with smooth-muscle actin, whereas three of 13 and one of 10 reacted for 
HMB-45 and carcinoembryonic antigen, respectively. S-100 protein and CD31 
yielded negative results. Seven tumors were investigated at the ultrastructural 
level, four of which showed prominent intracytoplasmic intermediate filament 
aggregates, often accumulating into paranuclear whorls, which is in keeping with 
the rhabdoid phenotype. Five tumors showed features of epithelial 
differentiation (i.e., tonofilament-like structures or desmosomes or both), 
whereas one tumor displayed features of myofibroblastic differentiation. 
Differential diagnoses include mainly conventional epithelioid sarcoma, 
extrarenal malignant rhabdoid tumor, epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve 
sheath tumor, melanoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and undifferentiated carcinoma. 
Follow-up information on 14 patients (range, 4 months to 8 years; median, 19 
months) revealed local recurrence in one case and metastatic dissemination in 
six patients, leading to death in five. In our opinion, the above-described 
neoplasms represent a usually "proximal-type" of epithelioid sarcoma. In 
contrast to the conventional, "distal-type" epithelioid sarcoma, the proximal 
variant is characterized by a predominantly large-cell, epithelioid 
cytomorphology, marked cytologic atypia, frequent occurrence of rhabdoid 
features, and lack of a granuloma-like pattern in most cases. It appears to be 
somewhat more aggressive (or at least metastasizes earlier) than usual 
epithelioid sarcoma.

DOI: 10.1097/00000478-199702000-00002
PMID: 9042279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]