---
reference_id: "PMID:19700011"
title: "Extracutaneous manifestations and complications of inherited epidermolysis bullosa: part II. Other organs."
authors:
- Fine JD
- Mellerio JE
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2009.03.053
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/complications"
- Dermatology
- "Education, Medical, Continuing"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/complications, pathology, therapy"
- Heart Diseases/etiology
- Humans
- Mouth Diseases/etiology
- Musculoskeletal Diseases/etiology
- Nervous System Diseases/etiology
- Skin Neoplasms/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extracutaneous manifestations and complications of inherited epidermolysis bullosa: part II. Other organs.
**Authors:** Fine JD, Mellerio JE
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2009.03.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2009.03.053)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009 Sep;61(3):387-402; quiz 403-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaad.2009.03.053.

Extracutaneous manifestations and complications of inherited epidermolysis 
bullosa: part II. Other organs.

Fine JD(1), Mellerio JE.

Author information:
(1)The National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry, and Department of Medicine 
(Dermatology), Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, 
USA. Jo-David.Fine@vanderbilt.edu

It is well known, primarily via case reports and limited case series, that 
nonepithelial tissues may become injured in patients with epidermolysis bullosa. 
Only recently, however, have there been data generated from large, well 
characterized cohorts. Our objective is to provide dermatologists with a 
comprehensive review of each of these major extracutaneous complications, with a 
summary of the pertinent literature and evidence-based recommendations for 
surveillance, evaluation, and management. Some epidermolysis bullosa subtypes 
are at risk for severe injury of the bone marrow, musculoskeletal system, heart, 
kidney, and teeth, and for the development of squamous cell carcinoma, basal 
cell carcinoma, or malignant melanoma. If untreated, significant morbidity or 
mortality may result.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2009.03.053
PMID: 19700011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]