---
reference_id: "PMID:39821955"
title: "Multicenter Retrospective Analysis of Pediatric Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma: Treatment Practices and Outcomes Prior to Pediatric American Thyroid Association Guidelines Implementation."
authors:
- Mahajan P
- May SB
- Shekar M
- Werny D
- Patterson BC
- Chan CM
- Aldrink JH
- Horvath KZ
- Hawkins DS
- Olson TA
- Venkatramani R
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.31545
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/therapy, pathology, mortality"
- Male
- Child
- Adolescent
- Retrospective Studies
- Practice Guidelines as Topic/standards
- Follow-Up Studies
- Thyroidectomy
- Young Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multicenter Retrospective Analysis of Pediatric Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma: Treatment Practices and Outcomes Prior to Pediatric American Thyroid Association Guidelines Implementation.
**Authors:** Mahajan P, May SB, Shekar M, Werny D, Patterson BC, Chan CM, Aldrink JH, Horvath KZ, Hawkins DS, Olson TA, Venkatramani R
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.31545](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.31545)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2025 Apr;72(4):e31545. doi: 10.1002/pbc.31545. Epub 2025
 Jan 16.

Multicenter Retrospective Analysis of Pediatric Differentiated Thyroid
Carcinoma: Treatment Practices and Outcomes Prior to Pediatric American Thyroid
Association Guidelines Implementation.

Mahajan P(1), May SB(2), Shekar M(3), Werny D(4), Patterson BC(5), Chan CM(6),
Aldrink JH(7), Horvath KZ(8), Hawkins DS(1), Olson TA(9), Venkatramani R(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Washington, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute/Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Washington, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(5)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School
of Medicine, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(6)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Nationwide Children's
Hospital, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(8)Center for Surgical Outcomes Research, Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Aflac Cancer
and Blood Disorders Center, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA.
(10)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Texas Children's Cancer Center, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston,
Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: Differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC) is the most common pediatric
thyroid malignancy, with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) representing 90% of
the cases. In 2015, the American Thyroid Association (ATA) developed management
guidelines for pediatric DTC.
PROCEDURE: Patients less than 21 years of age diagnosed with DTC between 2000
and 2015 at Texas Children's Hospital, Seattle Children's Hospital, Children's
Healthcare of Atlanta, Children's Hospital Colorado, and Nationwide Children's
Hospital were retrospectively analyzed to evaluate treatment practices before
the implementation of the ATA guidelines.
RESULTS: We included 216 pediatric patients with DTC. A majority were female
(76%) with a median age at diagnosis of 14.8 years. Neck swelling (56%) and
palpable nodules (49%) were common presenting symptoms. Diagnostic evaluations
typically included thyroid ultrasound, with common features being
microcalcifications (47.7%) and hypoechogenicity (39.0%). Fine-needle aspiration
cytology confirmed diagnosis in 50.5%. The majority of patients underwent total
thyroidectomy (78.7%) and lymph node dissection (75.5%). ATA risk stratification
was low, intermediate, and high risk in 111 (51.4%), 29 (13.4%), and 76 patients
(35.2%), respectively. Upfront radioactive iodine (RAI) was administered in 83%.
At 1-year follow-up, 46% were disease-free (66% low risk, 59% intermediate risk,
and 13% high risk). The 5-year progression-free survival for low, intermediate,
and high risk were 86%, 53%, and 43%, respectively. The disease-related overall
survival was 100%.
CONCLUSIONS: Prior to the introduction of the ATA guidelines, a majority of
patients underwent total thyroidectomy with lymph node dissection followed by
RAI. Selective use of RAI for low-risk disease as recommended in the current
guidelines may be appropriate.

© 2025 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.31545
PMID: 39821955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
