---
reference_id: "PMID:37811348"
title: "Cecal Dieulafoy lesion is a rare cause of lower gastrointestinal bleeding: A case report."
authors:
- Saha B
- Takkellapati D
- Beckman TJ
journal: SAGE Open Med Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/2050313X231203463
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cecal Dieulafoy lesion is a rare cause of lower gastrointestinal bleeding: A case report.
**Authors:** Saha B, Takkellapati D, Beckman TJ
**Journal:** SAGE Open Med Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/2050313X231203463](https://doi.org/10.1177/2050313X231203463)

## Content

1. SAGE Open Med Case Rep. 2023 Oct 5;11:2050313X231203463. doi: 
10.1177/2050313X231203463. eCollection 2023.

Cecal Dieulafoy lesion is a rare cause of lower gastrointestinal bleeding: A 
case report.

Saha B(1), Takkellapati D(2), Beckman TJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, USA.

Dieulafoy lesions are a rare but life-threatening cause of gastrointestinal 
bleeding. Colonic Dieulafoy lesions are exceptionally rare, comprising only 2% 
of these lesions. We present a case of cecal Dieulafoy lesion as an unusual 
cause of lower gastrointestinal bleeding-along with hemoptysis. An 81-year-old 
male with pulmonary hypertension presented with a one-day history of 
hematochezia. He subsequently developed new small-volume hemoptysis/hematemesis 
with increasing oxygen requirements. Bronchoscopy revealed old blood in the left 
lower lobe, with no active bleeding. The hemoptysis was attributed to severe 
pulmonary hypertension. Colonoscopy revealed a 2-mm cecal Dieulafoy lesion with 
spurting bleeding, which was clipped. We report a rare case of cecal Dieulafoy 
lesion with only 13 other published cases. Our case was complicated by 
hemoptysis creating an interesting diagnostic dilemma. In patients bleeding from 
both oral and anal orifices, a brisk upper gastrointestinal bleed-as well as 
independent causes involving the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts-should 
be considered.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/2050313X231203463
PMCID: PMC10557406
PMID: 37811348

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.