---
reference_id: "PMID:24663253"
title: "Serum vitamin D levels may not reflect tissue-level vitamin D in sarcoidosis."
authors:
- Berlin JL
- Shantha GP
- Yeager H
- Thomas-Hemak L
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: "2014"
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2014-203759
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum vitamin D levels may not reflect tissue-level vitamin D in sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Berlin JL, Shantha GP, Yeager H, Thomas-Hemak L
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2014-203759](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2014-203759)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2014 Mar 24;2014:bcr2014203759. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2014-203759.

Serum vitamin D levels may not reflect tissue-level vitamin D in sarcoidosis.

Berlin JL(1), Shantha GP, Yeager H, Thomas-Hemak L.

Hypercalcemia in sarcoidosis is due to three mechanistic reasons: (1) systemic
conversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D by the enzyme
1-alpha hydroxylase produced by activated monocyte/macrophage system, (2)
production of parathormone-related peptide (PTHrP) by the sarcoid granuloma,
(3) tissue-level conversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
by 1-alphahydroxylase produced by local monocyte/macrophage system in the
sarcoid granuloma. We report two cases of one proposed mechanism of
hypercalcaemia in sarcoidosis (mechanism 3). Both individuals presented with
sarcoidosis and 25-hydroxyvitamin D deficiency and developed symptomatic
hypercalcaemia with vitamin D replacement. Given their low serum parathormone
and parathormone-related peptide levels, low serum 25-hydroxy vitamin D and
normal serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, the systemic 25-hydroxy vitamin D
deficiency may not have reflected an increased activity of vitamin D at the
local granulomatous tissue level.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2014-203759
PMCID: PMC3975517
PMID: 24663253
