---
reference_id: "PMID:26903504"
title: Mutations in the murine homologue of TUBB5 cause microcephaly by perturbing cell cycle progression and inducing p53-associated apoptosis.
authors:
- Breuss M
- Fritz T
- Gstrein T
- Chan K
- Ushakova L
- Yu N
- Vonberg FW
- Werner B
- Elling U
- Keays DA
journal: Development
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1242/dev.131516
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/genetics
- "Brain/abnormalities, embryology"
- Cell Cycle/genetics
- Cell Differentiation
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/embryology"
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Microcephaly/genetics
- "Microtubules/genetics, metabolism"
- Neural Stem Cells/cytology
- SOXB1 Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Spindle Apparatus/genetics
- Stem Cells/cytology
- Tubulin/genetics
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/biosynthesis, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the murine homologue of TUBB5 cause microcephaly by perturbing cell cycle progression and inducing p53-associated apoptosis.
**Authors:** Breuss M, Fritz T, Gstrein T, Chan K, Ushakova L, Yu N, Vonberg FW, Werner B, Elling U, Keays DA
**Journal:** Development (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.131516](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.131516)

## Content

1. Development. 2016 Apr 1;143(7):1126-33. doi: 10.1242/dev.131516. Epub 2016 Feb
 22.

Mutations in the murine homologue of TUBB5 cause microcephaly by perturbing cell
cycle progression and inducing p53-associated apoptosis.

Breuss M(1), Fritz T(1), Gstrein T(1), Chan K(2), Ushakova L(1), Yu N(1),
Vonberg FW(3), Werner B(1), Elling U(4), Keays DA(5).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr.
Bohr-Gasse 7, Vienna 1030, Austria.
(2)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr.
Bohr-Gasse 7, Vienna 1030, Austria Medical Scientist Training Program, Stony
Brook University Medical Center, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.
(3)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr.
Bohr-Gasse 7, Vienna 1030, Austria Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
(4)Institute for Molecular Biotechnology (IMBA), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr.
Bohr-Gasse 3, Vienna 1030, Austria.
(5)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr.
Bohr-Gasse 7, Vienna 1030, Austria david.keays@imp.ac.at.

Microtubules play a crucial role in the generation, migration and
differentiation of nascent neurons in the developing vertebrate brain. Mutations
in the constituents of microtubules, the tubulins, are known to cause an array
of neurological disorders, including lissencephaly, polymicrogyria and
microcephaly. In this study we explore the genetic and cellular mechanisms that
cause TUBB5-associated microcephaly by exploiting two new mouse models: a
conditional E401K knock-in, and a conditional knockout animal. These mice
present with profound microcephaly due to a loss of upper-layer neurons that
correlates with massive apoptosis and upregulation of p53. This phenotype is
associated with a delay in cell cycle progression and ectopic DNA elements in
progenitors, which is dependent on the dosage of functional Tubb5. Strikingly,
we report ectopic Sox2-positive progenitors and defects in spindle orientation
in our knock-in mouse line, which are absent in knockout animals. This work
sheds light on the functional repertoire of Tubb5, reveals that the E401K
mutation acts by a complex mechanism, and demonstrates that the cellular
pathology driving TUBB5-associated microcephaly is cell death.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.131516
PMID: 26903504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
