---
reference_id: "PMID:29110062"
title: "Osteoporosis and bone mineral density in patients with Wilson's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Chenbhanich J
- Thongprayoon C
- Atsawarungruangkit A
- Phupitakphol T
- Cheungpasitporn W
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-017-4295-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoporosis and bone mineral density in patients with Wilson's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Chenbhanich J, Thongprayoon C, Atsawarungruangkit A, Phupitakphol T, Cheungpasitporn W
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-017-4295-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-017-4295-6)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2018 Feb;29(2):315-322. doi: 10.1007/s00198-017-4295-6. Epub 
2017 Nov 6.

Osteoporosis and bone mineral density in patients with Wilson's disease: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Chenbhanich J(1), Thongprayoon C(2), Atsawarungruangkit A(3), Phupitakphol T(3), 
Cheungpasitporn W(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Metrowest Medical Center, 115 Lincoln St, 
Framingham, MA, 01702, USA. jirat.chen@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Bassett Medical Center, Cooperstown, NY, 
USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Metrowest Medical Center, 115 Lincoln St, 
Framingham, MA, 01702, USA.
(4)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA.

This systematic review aims to assess the occurrence and risks of osteopenia and 
osteoporosis in patientswith Wilson's disease (WD). A literature search was 
conducted utilizing EMBASE and MEDLINE frominception through April 2017. Studies 
assessing the occurrence or risk of osteopenia and/or osteoporosis inWD patients 
were included. Effect estimates from the individual study were extracted and 
combined usingrandom-effect, generic inverse variance method of DerSimonian and 
Laird. Of 754 studies, four studies with283 WD patients met the eligibility 
criteria and were included in the data analysis. The pooled prevalencerates of 
osteopenia and osteoporosis in WD patients were 36.5% (95% confidence interval 
[CI]: 14.8%-65.7%) and 27.7% (95%CI: 8.6%-60.9%), respectively. When 
meta-analysis was limited only to adults, the estimated prevalence rates of 
osteopenia, osteoporosis, and vertebral fracture were 50.0% (95%CI: 
42.0%-58.0%), 17.6% (95%CI: 6.7%-38.6%) and 8.01% (95%CI: 4.05%-15.2%), 
respectively. Meta-regressionshowed significant impacts of age (negative 
correlation; P=0.002) and male status (positive correlation;P < 0.001) on the 
prevalence of osteoporosis. The data on risks of osteopenia and osteoporosis in 
WDpatients were limited. We suggests that there are potential associations of WD 
with osteopenia and/orosteoporosis. Also, young age and male status are 
correlated with the higher prevalence of osteoporosis inWD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-017-4295-6
PMID: 29110062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]