---
reference_id: "PMID:37799505"
title: "A Novel Variant in the Desmoplakin Gene in One Case of the Rare Carvajal Syndrome with Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Zhao XJ
- Bai CY
- Li XY
- Wang L
- Wang RP
- Xia Y
- Liu G
- Zhao HL
- Xu HZ
journal: Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2147/CCID.S429030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Variant in the Desmoplakin Gene in One Case of the Rare Carvajal Syndrome with Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Zhao XJ, Bai CY, Li XY, Wang L, Wang RP, Xia Y, Liu G, Zhao HL, Xu HZ
**Journal:** Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2147/CCID.S429030](https://doi.org/10.2147/CCID.S429030)

## Content

1. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2023 Sep 29;16:2737-2748. doi: 
10.2147/CCID.S429030. eCollection 2023.

A Novel Variant in the Desmoplakin Gene in One Case of the Rare Carvajal 
Syndrome with Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Case Report and Literature Review.

Zhao XJ(1), Bai CY(2), Li XY(1), Wang L(2), Wang RP(2), Xia Y(1)(2), Liu G(1), 
Zhao HL(#)(1), Xu HZ(#)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang, 050031, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Shijiazhuang Great Wall Cardiovascular Hospital, 
Shijiazhuang, 050035, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Carvajal syndrome is a rare hereditary cardiocutaneous syndrome caused by the 
variants of the desmoplakin (DSP) gene. In this study, we report a patient of 
Carvajal syndrome with a novel homozygous missense variant of DSP gene. We 
diagnosed a 7-year-old female patient with Carvajal syndrome characterized by 
dilated cardiomyopathy, palmoplantar keratoderma, woolly hair, and dental 
dysplasia, who disclosed a novel homozygous missense variant c.4597C > T 
(p.Q1533X) in exon 6 of the DSP gene found for the first time. Both her parents 
were heterozygous for the identified nonsense variant c.4597C > T (p.Q1533X) in 
DSP gene but neither showed evidence of Carvajal syndrome, indicating that this 
novel variant causes the disease in an autosomal recessive manner. Genotypes of 
Carvajal syndrome are even broader than so far anticipated. When patients with 
dilated cardiomyopathy, palmoplantar keratoderma, woolly hair, and dental 
dysplasia are found in clinical practice, Carvajal syndrome should be highly 
suspected, and family gene sequencing should be actively carried out.

© 2023 Zhao et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CCID.S429030
PMCID: PMC10547600
PMID: 37799505

Conflict of interest statement: All authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.