---
reference_id: "PMID:19249388"
title: Alcohol withdrawal seizures.
authors:
- Hughes JR
journal: Epilepsy Behav
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2009.02.037
keywords:
- "Alcohol Withdrawal Seizures/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mice
- Rats
- "Receptors, GABA/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/genetics, metabolism"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alcohol withdrawal seizures.
**Authors:** Hughes JR
**Journal:** Epilepsy Behav (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yebeh.2009.02.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2009.02.037)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Behav. 2009 Jun;15(2):92-7. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2009.02.037. Epub
2009  Feb 26.

Alcohol withdrawal seizures.

Hughes JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Illinois Medical Center, M/C 796, 912 
South Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. jhughes@uic.edu

The topic of alcohol withdrawal syndrome (AWS), including delirium tremens and 
especially seizures, is reviewed. From mice and rat studies, it is known that 
both N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors 
are involved in AWS. During alcohol intoxication chronic adaptations of NMDA and 
GABA receptors occur, and during alcohol withdrawal a hyperexcitable state 
develops. In studies on humans, during intoxication the NMDA receptors are 
activated and mediate tonic inhibition. In withdrawal, a rebound activation of 
these receptors occurs. Both GABA-A and GABA-B receptors, especially the alpha2 
subunit of GABA-A receptors, are also likely involved. Homocysteine increases 
with active drinking, and in withdrawal, excitotoxicity likely is induced by a 
further increase in homocysteine, viewed as a risk factor for AWS and also as a 
screening tool. The dopamine transporter gene is also associated with AWS. 
Characteristics involves changes in the ECG, especially an increase in QT 
interval, and EEG changes, including abnormal quantified EEG, at times periodic 
lateralized epileptiform discharges, and especially seizures, usually occurring 
6-48h after the cessation of drinking. Therapy has emphasized benzodiazepines, 
mainly diazepam and lorazepam, but more standard antiepileptic drugs, like 
carbamazepine and topiramate, are also effective and safe.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2009.02.037
PMID: 19249388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]