---
reference_id: "PMID:20961938"
title: "Posterior myocardial infarction: are we failing to diagnose this?"
authors:
- Khan JN
- Chauhan A
- Mozdiak E
- Khan JM
- Varma C
journal: Emerg Med J
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1136/emj.2010.099861
keywords:
- Clinical Competence/standards
- Electrocardiography
- Emergency Medical Technicians/standards
- England
- "Hospitals, Teaching"
- Humans
- "Medical Staff, Hospital/standards"
- Myocardial Infarction/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Posterior myocardial infarction: are we failing to diagnose this?
**Authors:** Khan JN, Chauhan A, Mozdiak E, Khan JM, Varma C
**Journal:** Emerg Med J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1136/emj.2010.099861](https://doi.org/10.1136/emj.2010.099861)

## Content

1. Emerg Med J. 2012 Jan;29(1):15-8. doi: 10.1136/emj.2010.099861. Epub 2010 Oct 
20.

Posterior myocardial infarction: are we failing to diagnose this?

Khan JN(1), Chauhan A, Mozdiak E, Khan JM, Varma C.

Author information:
(1)Sandwell & West Birmingham Hospitals NHS Trust, Birmingham, UK. 
mally777@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Isolated posterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) 
accounts for up to 7% of STEMIs. The diagnosis is suggested by indirect 
anterior-lead ECG changes. Confirmation requires presence of ST-elevation in 
posterior-leads (V7-V9). We investigated the ability of hospital doctors and 
paramedics to diagnose posterior STEMI (PMI).
METHODS: Doctors in the emergency department and acute medical unit at two 
teaching hospitals and West Midlands Ambulance Service Paramedics were asked to 
interpret a 12-lead ECG illustrating ST-depression and dominant R-wave in V1-V2 
in the context of cardiac chest pain, and identify PMI as a potential diagnosis. 
Their ability to identify PMI was compared with their ability to diagnose 
anterolateral STEMI on a 12-lead ECG. We assessed whether doctors knew that 
posterior-leads were required to confirm PMI and whether doctors and nurses 
could position posterior-leads.
RESULTS: 44 of the 117 doctors (38%) identified PMI as a potential diagnosis. 
PMI was identified by 73% of registrars, 30% of senior house-officers and 18% of 
house-officers. 50% of doctors who identified potential PMI knew that 
posterior-leads were required to confirm the diagnosis. 20% of doctors correctly 
positioned these and 19% knew the diagnostic criteria for PMI (ST-elevation ≥1 
mm in V7-V9). 13 of the 60 nurses (22%) in the emergency department and acute 
medical unit correctly positioned posterior-leads. Five of the 50 (10%) 
paramedics identified PMI as a potential diagnosis. Doctors and paramedics were 
significantly better at diagnosing anterolateral STEMI than PMI.
CONCLUSIONS: A significant proportion of doctors and paramedics were unable to 
diagnose PMI. Hence, the majority of PMIs may be being missed. Routine use of 
posterior-leads in the standard assessment of patients with chest pain may 
identify up to an additional 7% of STEMIs, allowing prompt reperfusion therapy, 
which would reduce morbidity and mortality.

DOI: 10.1136/emj.2010.099861
PMID: 20961938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]