---
reference_id: "PMID:39256843"
title: Clinical characteristics and molecular genetic analysis of ten cases of ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency in southeastern China.
authors:
- Yuan G
- Liu Z
- Chen Z
- Zhang X
- Zhang W
- Chen D
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-024-01740-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics and molecular genetic analysis of ten cases of ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency in southeastern China.
**Authors:** Yuan G, Liu Z, Chen Z, Zhang X, Zhang W, Chen D
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-024-01740-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-024-01740-8)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2024 Sep 11;50(1):171. doi: 10.1186/s13052-024-01740-8.

Clinical characteristics and molecular genetic analysis of ten cases of 
ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency in southeastern China.

Yuan G(1)(2), Liu Z(1)(3), Chen Z(4), Zhang X(2), Zhang W(1)(3), Chen D(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)The Graduate School of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's Hospital, 
Quanzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neonatology, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's Hospital, 
Quanzhou, China.
(4)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's 
Hospital, Quanzhou, China.
(5)The Graduate School of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China. 
chendm9090@163.com.
(6)Department of Neonatology, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's Hospital, 
Quanzhou, China. chendm9090@163.com.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to investigate the clinical and molecular genetic 
characteristics of ten children with ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency 
(OTCD) in southeastern China, as well as the correlation between the genotype 
and phenotype of OTCD.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was performed on the clinical manifestations, 
laboratory testing, and genetic test findings of ten children with OTCD admitted 
between August 2015 and October 2021 at Quanzhou Maternity and Children's 
Hospital of Fujian Province in China.
RESULTS: Five boys presented with early-onset symptoms, including poor appetite, 
drowsiness, groaning, seizures, and liver failure. In contrast, five patients 
(one boy and four girls) had late-onset gastrointestinal symptoms as the primary 
clinical manifestation, all presenting with hepatic impairment, and four with 
hepatic failure.Nine distinct variants of the OTC gene were identified, 
including two novel mutations: c.1033del(p.Y345Tfs*50) and c.167T > A(p.M56K). 
Of seven patients who died, five had early-onset disease despite active 
treatment. Three patients survived, and two of them underwent liver 
transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical manifestations of OTCD lack specificity. However, 
elevated blood ammonia levels serve as a crucial diagnostic clue for OTCD. 
Genetic testing aids in more accurate diagnosis and prognosis assessment by 
clinicians. In addition, we identified two novel pathogenic variants and expand 
the mutational spectrum of the gene OTC, which may contribute to a better 
understanding of the clinical and genetic characteristics of OTCD patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-024-01740-8
PMCID: PMC11389275
PMID: 39256843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.