---
reference_id: PMID:39224588
title: "Immunological and homeostatic pathways of alpha -1 antitrypsin: a new therapeutic potential."
authors:
- Mazzuca C
- Vitiello L
- Travaglini S
- Maurizi F
- Finamore P
- Santangelo S
- Rigon A
- Vadacca M
- Angeletti S
- Scarlata S
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1443297
keywords:
- Humans
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/immunology, therapeutic use, metabolism"
- Homeostasis
- Animals
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Adaptive Immunity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunological and homeostatic pathways of alpha -1 antitrypsin: a new therapeutic potential.
**Authors:** Mazzuca C, Vitiello L, Travaglini S, Maurizi F, Finamore P, Santangelo S, Rigon A, Vadacca M, Angeletti S, Scarlata S
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1443297](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1443297)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Aug 19;15:1443297. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1443297. 
eCollection 2024.

Immunological and homeostatic pathways of alpha -1 antitrypsin: a new 
therapeutic potential.

Mazzuca C(1)(2), Vitiello L(3), Travaglini S(1), Maurizi F(1), Finamore P(1), 
Santangelo S(1), Rigon A(4), Vadacca M(4), Angeletti S(5), Scarlata S(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Respiratory Pathophysiology and 
Thoracic Endoscopy, Fondazione Policlinico Campus Bio Medico University 
Hospital- Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Allergology Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Human Sciences and Promotion of the Quality of Life, San 
Raffaele University, Rome, Italy.
(4)Clinical and Research Section of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, 
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Campus Bio-Medico, Rome, Italy.
(5)Unit of Clinical Laboratory Science, University Campus Bio-Medico of Rome, 
Rome, Italy.

α -1 antitrypsin (A1AT) is a 52 kDa acute-phase glycoprotein belonging to the 
serine protease inhibitor superfamily (SERPIN). It is primarily synthesized by 
hepatocytes and to a lesser extent by monocytes, macrophages, intestinal 
epithelial cells, and bronchial epithelial cells. A1AT is encoded by SERPINA1 
locus, also known as PI locus, highly polymorphic with at least 100 allelic 
variants described and responsible for different A1AT serum levels and function. 
A1AT inhibits a variety of serine proteinases, but its main target is 
represented by Neutrophil Elastase (NE). However, recent attention has been 
directed towards its immune-regulatory and homeostatic activities. A1AT exerts 
immune-regulatory effects on different cell types involved in innate and 
adaptive immunity. Additionally, it plays a role in metal and lipid metabolism, 
contributing to homeostasis. An adequate comprehension of these mechanisms could 
support the use of A1AT augmentation therapy in many disorders characterized by 
a chronic immune response. The aim of this review is to provide an up-to-date 
understanding of the molecular mechanisms and regulatory pathways responsible 
for immune-regulatory and homeostatic activities of A1AT. This knowledge aims to 
support the use of A1AT in therapeutic applications. Furthermore, the review 
summarizes the current state of knowledge regarding the application of A1AT in 
clinical and laboratory settings human and animal models.

Copyright © 2024 Mazzuca, Vitiello, Travaglini, Maurizi, Finamore, Santangelo, 
Rigon, Vadacca, Angeletti and Scarlata.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1443297
PMCID: PMC11366583
PMID: 39224588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.