---
reference_id: "PMID:29713693"
title: Clot stability as a determinant of effective factor VIII replacement in hemophilia A.
authors:
- Leong L
- Chernysh IN
- Xu Y
- Sim D
- Nagaswami C
- de Lange Z
- Kosolapova S
- Cuker A
- Kauser K
- Weisel JW
journal: Res Pract Thromb Haemost
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/rth2.12034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clot stability as a determinant of effective factor VIII replacement in hemophilia A.
**Authors:** Leong L, Chernysh IN, Xu Y, Sim D, Nagaswami C, de Lange Z, Kosolapova S, Cuker A, Kauser K, Weisel JW
**Journal:** Res Pract Thromb Haemost (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/rth2.12034](https://doi.org/10.1002/rth2.12034)

## Content

1. Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2017 Oct;1(2):231-241. doi: 10.1002/rth2.12034. Epub
 2017 Aug 10.

Clot stability as a determinant of effective factor VIII replacement in
hemophilia A.

Leong L(1), Chernysh IN(2), Xu Y(1), Sim D(1), Nagaswami C(2), de Lange Z(2)(3),
Kosolapova S(2), Cuker A(2), Kauser K(1), Weisel JW(2).

Author information:
(1)Bayer, West Coast Innovation Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Centre of Excellence for Nutrition, North-West University, Potchefstroom
Campus, Potchefstroom, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Factor VIII (FVIII) replacement is standard of care for patients
with hemophilia A (HemA); however, patient response does not always correlate
with FVIII levels. We hypothesize this may be in part due to the physical
properties of clots and contributions of fibrin, platelets, and erythrocytes,
which may be important for hemostasis.
OBJECTIVE: To understand how FVIII contributes to effective hemostasis in terms
of clot structure and mechanical properties.
PATIENTS/METHODS: In vitro HemA clots in human plasma or whole blood were
analyzed using turbidity waveform analysis, confocal microscopy, and rheometry
with or without added FVIII. In vivo clots from saphenous vein puncture in
wild-type and HemA mice with varying FVIII levels were examined using scanning
electron microscopy.
RESULTS: FVIII profoundly affected HemA clot structure and physical properties;
added FVIII converted the open and porous fibrin meshwork and low stiffness of
HemA clots to a highly branched and dense meshwork with higher stiffness.
Platelets and erythrocytes incorporated into clots modulated clot properties.
The clots formed in the mouse saphenous vein model contained variable amounts of
compressed erythrocytes (polyhedrocytes), fibrin, and platelets depending on the
levels of FVIII, correlating with bleeding times. FVIII effects on clot
characteristics were dose-dependent and reached a maximum at ~25% FVIII, such
that HemA clots formed with this level of FVIII resembled clots from unaffected
controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Effective clot formation can be achieved in HemA by replacement
therapy, which alters the architecture of the fibrin network and associated
cells, thus increasing clot stiffness and decreasing clot permeability.

DOI: 10.1002/rth2.12034
PMCID: PMC5920517
PMID: 29713693

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: I. N. Chernysh,
C. Nagaswami, Z. de Lange, S. Kosolapova, and A. Cuker have no conflicts of
interest to disclose.
