---
reference_id: "PMID:34024115"
title: "Benefits and Risks of Dual Versus Single Antiplatelet Therapy for Secondary Stroke Prevention: A Systematic Review for the 2021 Guideline for the Prevention of Stroke in Patients With Stroke and Transient Ischemic Attack."
authors:
- Brown DL
- Levine DA
- Albright K
- Kapral MK
- Leung LY
- Reeves MJ
- Sico J
- Strong B
- Whiteley WN
- American Heart Association Stroke Council
journal: Stroke
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000377
keywords:
- "Dual Anti-Platelet Therapy/methods, standards"
- Humans
- "Ischemic Attack, Transient/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- "Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/administration & dosage"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic/standards
- "Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic/methods, standards"
- Risk Assessment
- "Secondary Prevention/methods, standards"
- "Stroke/epidemiology, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Benefits and Risks of Dual Versus Single Antiplatelet Therapy for Secondary Stroke Prevention: A Systematic Review for the 2021 Guideline for the Prevention of Stroke in Patients With Stroke and Transient Ischemic Attack.
**Authors:** Brown DL, Levine DA, Albright K, Kapral MK, Leung LY, Reeves MJ, Sico J, Strong B, Whiteley WN, American Heart Association Stroke Council
**Journal:** Stroke (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STR.0000000000000377](https://doi.org/10.1161/STR.0000000000000377)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2021 Jul;52(7):e468-e479. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000377. Epub 2021
 May 24.

Benefits and Risks of Dual Versus Single Antiplatelet Therapy for Secondary
Stroke Prevention: A Systematic Review for the 2021 Guideline for the Prevention
of Stroke in Patients With Stroke and Transient Ischemic Attack.

Brown DL, Levine DA, Albright K, Kapral MK, Leung LY, Reeves MJ, Sico J, Strong
B, Whiteley WN; American Heart Association Stroke Council.

BACKGROUND: Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) after ischemic stroke or transient
ischemic attack may reduce recurrent stroke but also increase severe bleeding
compared with single antiplatelet therapy (SAPT). The American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association convened an evidence review committee to
perform a systematic review and meta-analysis of the benefits and risks of DAPT
compared with SAPT for secondary ischemic stroke prevention.
METHODS: The Medline, Embase, and Cochrane databases were searched on December
5, 2019, to identify phase III or IV randomized controlled trials (n≥100) from
December 1999 to December 2019. We calculated unadjusted relative risks (RRs)
and performed meta-analyses of studies based on the duration of treatment (short
[≤90 days] versus long [>90 days]).
RESULTS: Three short-duration randomized controlled trials were identified that
enrolled mostly patients with minor stroke or high risk transient ischemic
attack. In these trials, DAPT, compared with SAPT, was associated with a lower
90-day risk of recurrent ischemic stroke (pooled RR, 0.68 [95% CI, 0.55-0.83],
I 2=37.1%). There was no significant increase in major bleeding with DAPT in
short-duration trials (pooled RR, 1.88 [95% CI, 0.93-3.83], I 2=8.9%). In 2
long-duration treatment randomized controlled trials (mean treatment duration,
18-40 months), DAPT was not associated with a significant reduction in recurrent
ischemic stroke (pooled RR, 0.89 [95% CI, 0.79-1.02], I 2=1.4%), but was
associated with a higher risk of major bleeding (pooled RR, 2.42 [95% CI,
1.37-4.30], I 2=75.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: DAPT was more effective than SAPT for prevention of secondary
ischemic stroke when initiated early after the onset of minor stroke/high-risk
transient ischemic attack and treatment duration was <90 days. However, when the
treatment duration was longer and initiated later after stroke or transient
ischemic attack onset, DAPT was not more effective than SAPT for ischemic stroke
prevention and it increased the risk of bleeding.

DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000377
PMID: 34024115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]