---
reference_id: "PMID:20101035"
title: Elevated CSF N-acetylaspartylglutamate in patients with free sialic acid storage diseases.
authors:
- Mochel F
- Engelke UF
- Barritault J
- Yang B
- McNeill NH
- Thompson JN
- Vanderver A
- Wolf NI
- Willemsen MA
- Verheijen FW
- Seguin F
- Wevers RA
- Schiffmann R
journal: Neurology
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181cbcdc4
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Demyelinating Diseases/cerebrospinal fluid, etiology, urine"
- Dipeptides/cerebrospinal fluid
- Female
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Male
- Mutation
- "N-Acetylneuraminic Acid/cerebrospinal fluid, urine"
- Organic Anion Transporters/genetics
- "Sialic Acid Storage Disease/cerebrospinal fluid, complications, diagnosis, genetics, urine"
- Symporters/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated CSF N-acetylaspartylglutamate in patients with free sialic acid storage diseases.
**Authors:** Mochel F, Engelke UF, Barritault J, Yang B, McNeill NH, Thompson JN, Vanderver A, Wolf NI, Willemsen MA, Verheijen FW, Seguin F, Wevers RA, Schiffmann R
**Journal:** Neurology (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181cbcdc4](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181cbcdc4)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2010 Jan 26;74(4):302-5. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181cbcdc4.

Elevated CSF N-acetylaspartylglutamate in patients with free sialic acid storage 
diseases.

Mochel F(1), Engelke UF, Barritault J, Yang B, McNeill NH, Thompson JN, 
Vanderver A, Wolf NI, Willemsen MA, Verheijen FW, Seguin F, Wevers RA, 
Schiffmann R.

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR S975, Hôpital de La Salpêtrière, Paris, France. 
fanny.mochel@upmc.fr

OBJECTIVE: To investigate body fluids of patients with undiagnosed 
leukodystrophies using in vitro (1)H-NMR spectroscopy (H-NMRS).
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study using high-resolution in vitro 
H-NMRS on CSF and urine samples.
RESULTS: We found a significant increase of free sialic acid in CSF or urine in 
6 of 41 patients presenting with hypomyelination of unknown etiology. Molecular 
genetic testing revealed pathogenic mutations in the SLC17A5 gene in all 6 
patients. H-NMRS revealed an increase of N-acetylaspartylglutamate in the CSF of 
all patients with SLC17A5 mutation (range 13-114 micromol/L, reference <12 
micromol/L).
CONCLUSION: In patients with undiagnosed leukodystrophies, increased free sialic 
acid in CSF or urine is a marker for free sialic acid storage disorder and 
facilitates the identification of the underlying genetic defect. Because 
increase of N-acetylaspartylglutamate in CSF has been observed in other 
hypomyelinating disorders, it can be viewed as a marker of a subgroup of 
hypomyelinating disorders.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181cbcdc4
PMCID: PMC3122303
PMID: 20101035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]