---
reference_id: "PMID:25961632"
title: "CT-Definable Subtypes of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Statement of the Fleischner Society."
authors:
- Lynch DA
- Austin JH
- Hogg JC
- Grenier PA
- Kauczor HU
- Bankier AA
- Barr RG
- Colby TV
- Galvin JR
- Gevenois PA
- Coxson HO
- Hoffman EA
- Newell JD Jr
- Pistolesi M
- Silverman EK
- Crapo JD
journal: Radiology
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1148/radiol.2015141579
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CT-Definable Subtypes of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Statement of the Fleischner Society.
**Authors:** Lynch DA, Austin JH, Hogg JC, Grenier PA, Kauczor HU, Bankier AA, Barr RG, Colby TV, Galvin JR, Gevenois PA, Coxson HO, Hoffman EA, Newell JD Jr, Pistolesi M, Silverman EK, Crapo JD
**Journal:** Radiology (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1148/radiol.2015141579](https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2015141579)

## Content

1. Radiology. 2015 Oct;277(1):192-205. doi: 10.1148/radiol.2015141579. Epub 2015 
May 11.

CT-Definable Subtypes of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: A Statement of 
the Fleischner Society.

Lynch DA(1), Austin JH(1), Hogg JC(1), Grenier PA(1), Kauczor HU(1), Bankier 
AA(1), Barr RG(1), Colby TV(1), Galvin JR(1), Gevenois PA(1), Coxson HO(1), 
Hoffman EA(1), Newell JD Jr(1), Pistolesi M(1), Silverman EK(1), Crapo JD(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Radiology (D.A.L.) and Medicine (J.D.C.), National 
Jewish Health, 1400 Jackson St, Denver, CO 80206; Department of Radiology, 
Columbia University, New York, NY (J.H.M.A.); Department of Pathology, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada (J.C.H.); Department of 
Radiology, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France (P.A.G.); Department of 
Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany (H.U.K.); Department of Radiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Boston, Mass (A.A.B.); Departments of Medicine and Epidemiology, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, NY (R.G.B.); Department of Pathology, Mayo 
Clinic Scottsdale, Scottsdale, Ariz (T.V.C.); Department of Chest Imaging, 
American Institute for Radiologic Pathology, Silver Spring, Md (J.R.G.); 
Department of Radiology, Hôpital Erasme, Brussels, Belgium (P.A.G.); Department 
of Radiology, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada (H.C.); 
Department of Radiology, Division of Physiological Imaging, Carver College of 
Medicine, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, Iowa (E.A.H., 
J.D.N.); Respiratory Unit, Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, 
University of Florence, Florence, Italy (M.P.); and Channing Laboratory, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston, Mass (E.K.S.).

The purpose of this statement is to describe and define the phenotypic 
abnormalities that can be identified on visual and quantitative evaluation of 
computed tomographic (CT) images in subjects with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), with the goal of contributing to a personalized approach to the 
treatment of patients with COPD. Quantitative CT is useful for identifying and 
sequentially evaluating the extent of emphysematous lung destruction, changes in 
airway walls, and expiratory air trapping. However, visual assessment of CT 
scans remains important to describe patterns of altered lung structure in COPD. 
The classification system proposed and illustrated in this article provides a 
structured approach to visual and quantitative assessment of COPD. Emphysema is 
classified as centrilobular (subclassified as trace, mild, moderate, confluent, 
and advanced destructive emphysema), panlobular, and paraseptal (subclassified 
as mild or substantial). Additional important visual features include airway 
wall thickening, inflammatory small airways disease, tracheal abnormalities, 
interstitial lung abnormalities, pulmonary arterial enlargement, and 
bronchiectasis.

(©) RSNA, 2015.

DOI: 10.1148/radiol.2015141579
PMCID: PMC4613878
PMID: 25961632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]