---
reference_id: "PMID:35741724"
title: "Multisystem Proteinopathy Due to VCP Mutations: A Review of Clinical Heterogeneity and Genetic Diagnosis."
authors:
- Pfeffer G
- Lee G
- Pontifex CS
- Fanganiello RD
- Peck A
- Weihl CC
- Kimonis V
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13060963
keywords:
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/genetics
- "Frontotemporal Dementia/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Osteitis Deformans/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Valosin Containing Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multisystem Proteinopathy Due to VCP Mutations: A Review of Clinical Heterogeneity and Genetic Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Pfeffer G, Lee G, Pontifex CS, Fanganiello RD, Peck A, Weihl CC, Kimonis V
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13060963](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13060963)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 May 27;13(6):963. doi: 10.3390/genes13060963.

Multisystem Proteinopathy Due to VCP Mutations: A Review of Clinical
Heterogeneity and Genetic Diagnosis.

Pfeffer G(1)(2), Lee G(3), Pontifex CS(1), Fanganiello RD(4), Peck A(5), Weihl
CC(6), Kimonis V(3).

Author information:
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Cumming
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, Canada.
(2)Alberta Child Health Research Institute, Department of Medical Genetics,
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, Canada.
(3)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California Irvine Medical Center, Orange, CA 92868, USA.
(4)Oral Ecology Research Group, Faculty of Dental Medicine, Université Laval,
Quebec City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada.
(5)Cure VCP Disease, Inc., Americus, GA 31709, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

In this work, we review clinical features and genetic diagnosis of diseases
caused by mutations in the gene encoding valosin-containing protein (VCP/p97),
the functionally diverse AAA-ATPase. VCP is crucial to a multitude of cellular
functions including protein quality control, stress granule formation and
clearance, and genomic integrity functions, among others. Pathogenic mutations
in VCP cause multisystem proteinopathy (VCP-MSP), an autosomal dominant,
adult-onset disorder causing dysfunction in several tissue types. It can result
in complex neurodegenerative conditions including inclusion body myopathy,
frontotemporal dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or combinations of
these. There is also an association with other neurodegenerative phenotypes such
as Alzheimer-type dementia and Parkinsonism. Non-neurological presentations
include Paget disease of bone and may also include cardiac dysfunction. We
provide a detailed discussion of genotype-phenotype correlations,
recommendations for genetic diagnosis, and genetic counselling implications of
VCP-MSP.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13060963
PMCID: PMC9222868
PMID: 35741724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests to report.
