---
reference_id: "PMID:3287565"
title: "Role of empiric parenteral antibiotics prior to lumbar puncture in suspected bacterial meningitis: state of the art."
authors:
- Talan DA
- Hoffman JR
- Yoshikawa TT
- Overturf GD
journal: Rev Infect Dis
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1093/clinids/10.2.365
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of empiric parenteral antibiotics prior to lumbar puncture in suspected bacterial meningitis: state of the art.
**Authors:** Talan DA, Hoffman JR, Yoshikawa TT, Overturf GD
**Journal:** Rev Infect Dis (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1093/clinids/10.2.365](https://doi.org/10.1093/clinids/10.2.365)

## Content

1. Rev Infect Dis. 1988 Mar-Apr;10(2):365-76. doi: 10.1093/clinids/10.2.365.

Role of empiric parenteral antibiotics prior to lumbar puncture in suspected 
bacterial meningitis: state of the art.

Talan DA(1), Hoffman JR, Yoshikawa TT, Overturf GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Olive View Medical Center, Sylmar, California 91342.

Comment in
    Rev Infect Dis. 1990 Mar-Apr;12(2):359, 361-4. doi: 
10.1093/clinids/12.2.359-a.

The performance of lumbar puncture (LP) in patients with suspected meningitis is 
often delayed if, for example, the clinical presentation suggests a need for 
prior computed tomographic (CT) scan or if patients are initially examined at 
settings with limited clinical facilities. The role of empiric parenteral 
antibiotic therapy prior to LP under these circumstances has not been critically 
analyzed. Review of the literature suggests that in cases of bacterial 
meningitis (1) the existing data are inadequate to assess the effect of a short 
delay of therapy on mortality and morbidity; (2) a short period of antibiotic 
therapy prior to LP does not change cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) white blood cell 
count, protein, or glucose; (3) the yield of CSF gram stain and culture may be 
somewhat reduced by a short period of antibiotic therapy, but these tests often 
remain positive; and (4) adjunctive tests, including blood cultures and CSF 
antigen tests, can often independently identify the bacterial meningopathogen. 
The available evidence suggests that if bacterial meningitis is suspected and LP 
must be delayed, intravenous antibiotics are warranted before CSF is obtained.

DOI: 10.1093/clinids/10.2.365
PMID: 3287565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]