---
reference_id: "PMID:25534823"
title: Akt- or MEK-mediated mTOR inhibition suppresses Nf1 optic glioma growth.
authors:
- Kaul A
- Toonen JA
- Cimino PJ
- Gianino SM
- Gutmann DH
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nou329
keywords:
- Animals
- Astrocytes/metabolism
- Brain Neoplasms/metabolism
- Cell Proliferation
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Kinase 1/metabolism
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Neurofibromatosis 1/metabolism
- "Neurofibromin 1/genetics, metabolism"
- Optic Nerve Glioma/metabolism
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/metabolism
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Akt- or MEK-mediated mTOR inhibition suppresses Nf1 optic glioma growth.
**Authors:** Kaul A, Toonen JA, Cimino PJ, Gianino SM, Gutmann DH
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/nou329](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/nou329)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2015 Jun;17(6):843-53. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nou329. Epub 2014 Dec
21.

Akt- or MEK-mediated mTOR inhibition suppresses Nf1 optic glioma growth.

Kaul A(1), Toonen JA(1), Cimino PJ(1), Gianino SM(1), Gutmann DH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri (A.K., J.A.T., S.M.G., D.H.G.); Department of Pathology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri (P.J.C.).

BACKGROUND: Children with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) develop optic pathway
gliomas, which result from impaired NF1 protein regulation of Ras activity. One
obstacle to the implementation of biologically targeted therapies is an
incomplete understanding of the individual contributions of the downstream Ras
effectors (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase [MEK], Akt) to optic glioma
maintenance. This study was designed to address the importance of MEK and Akt
signaling to Nf1 optic glioma growth.
METHODS: Primary neonatal mouse astrocyte cultures were employed to determine
the consequence of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt and MEK inhibition
on Nf1-deficient astrocyte growth. Nf1 optic glioma-bearing mice were used to
assess the effect of Akt and MEK inhibition on tumor volume, proliferation, and
retinal ganglion cell dysfunction.
RESULTS: Both MEK and Akt were hyperactivated in Nf1-deficient astrocytes in
vitro and in Nf1 murine optic gliomas in vivo. Pharmacologic PI3K or Akt
inhibition reduced Nf1-deficient astrocyte proliferation to wild-type levels,
while PI3K inhibition decreased Nf1 optic glioma volume and proliferation. Akt
inhibition of Nf1-deficient astrocyte and optic glioma growth reflected
Akt-dependent activation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). Sustained MEK
pharmacologic blockade also attenuated Nf1-deficient astrocytes as well as Nf1
optic glioma volume and proliferation. Importantly, these MEK inhibitory effects
resulted from p90RSK-mediated, Akt-independent mTOR activation. Finally, both
PI3K and MEK inhibition reduced optic glioma-associated retinal ganglion cell
loss and nerve fiber layer thinning.
CONCLUSION: These findings establish that the convergence of 2 distinct Ras
effector pathways on mTOR signaling maintains Nf1 mouse optic glioma growth,
supporting the evaluation of pharmacologic inhibitors that target mTOR function
in future human NF1-optic pathway glioma clinical trials.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/nou329
PMCID: PMC4483119
PMID: 25534823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
