---
reference_id: "PMID:24142635"
title: Effect of testosterone replacement therapy on bone mineral density in patients with Klinefelter syndrome.
authors:
- Jo DG
- Lee HS
- Joo YM
- Seo JT
journal: Yonsei Med J
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3349/ymj.2013.54.6.1331
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of testosterone replacement therapy on bone mineral density in patients with Klinefelter syndrome.
**Authors:** Jo DG, Lee HS, Joo YM, Seo JT
**Journal:** Yonsei Med J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3349/ymj.2013.54.6.1331](https://doi.org/10.3349/ymj.2013.54.6.1331)

## Content

1. Yonsei Med J. 2013 Nov;54(6):1331-5. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2013.54.6.1331.

Effect of testosterone replacement therapy on bone mineral density in patients 
with Klinefelter syndrome.

Jo DG(1), Lee HS, Joo YM, Seo JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Cheil General Hospital, Kwandong University College of 
Medicine, 17 Seoae-ro 1-gil, Jung-gu, Seoul 100-380, Korea. jtandro@cgh.co.kr.

PURPOSE: Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is related to testicular insufficiency, which 
causes low testosterone levels in serum. Generally, sex hormone levels and bone 
mineral density (BMD) are lower in patients with KS than normal. We investigated 
the effects of testosterone replacement on serum testosterone levels and BMD in 
KS patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From December 2005 to March 2008, 18 KS patients with a 
47, XXY karyotype were treated with initial intramuscular injections of 
long-acting testosterone undecanoate (Nebido®, 1000 mg/4 mL) at baseline and 
second injections after six weeks. An additional four injections were 
administered at intervals of 12 weeks after the second injection. BMD was 
measured at the lumbar spine (L2-4), the left femoral neck and Ward's triangle, 
using dual energy X-ray absorptiometry. Medical histories, physical examinations 
and prostate specific antigen, hematology and serum chemistry were conducted for 
each patient. In addition, total testosterone and sex hormone-binding globulin 
levels were measured.
RESULTS: Following testosterone replacement, mean serum total testosterone 
increased significantly from baseline (0.90 vs. 4.51 ng/mL, p<0.001), and total 
testosterone rose to normal levels after replacement in all patients. The mean 
BMD of the lumbar spine increased significantly (0.91 vs. 0.97 g/cm², p<0.001). 
Similar increases of BMD were also observed at the femoral neck, but this 
increase was not significant.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that testosterone replacement therapy may be 
effective in treating BMD deficiency in men with testosterone deficiency, 
especially those with Klinefelter syndrome.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2013.54.6.1331
PMCID: PMC3809853
PMID: 24142635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflicts of 
interest.