---
reference_id: "PMID:39801710"
title: "Genomic characterization of Huntington's disease genetic modifiers informs drug target tractability."
authors:
- Namuli KL
- Slike AN
- Hollebeke MA
- Wright GEB
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae418
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic characterization of Huntington's disease genetic modifiers informs drug target tractability.
**Authors:** Namuli KL, Slike AN, Hollebeke MA, Wright GEB
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcae418](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcae418)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2025 Jan 11;7(1):fcae418. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae418.
eCollection 2025.

Genomic characterization of Huntington's disease genetic modifiers informs drug
target tractability.

Namuli KL(1)(2), Slike AN(1)(2), Hollebeke MA(1)(2), Wright GEB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Max Rady College of Medicine,
Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, CanadaR3E
0T6.
(2)PrairieNeuro Research Centre, Kleysen Institute for Advanced Medicine, Health
Sciences Centre and Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, CanadaR3E 3J7.

Huntington's disease is caused by a CAG repeat in the HTT gene. Repeat length
correlates inversely with the age of onset but only explains part of the
observed clinical variability. Genome-wide association studies highlight DNA
repair genes in modifying disease onset, but further research is required to
identify causal genes and evaluate their tractability as drug targets. To
address these gaps and learn important preclinical information, we analysed
genome-wide association study data from a large Huntington's disease
age-of-onset study (n = 9064), prioritizing robust candidate Huntington's
disease modifier genes using bioinformatic approaches and analysing related
information for these genes from large-scale human genetic repositories. We
supplemented this information with other Huntington's disease-related screens,
including exome studies of Huntington's disease onset and high-throughput
assessments of mHTT toxicity. To confirm whether Huntington's disease modifiers
are shared across repeat expansion disorders, we also analysed age-of-onset
genome-wide association study data from X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism caused by
a (CCCTCT)n expansion. We also studied modifier-related associations with rare
diseases to inform potential off-target therapeutic effects and conducted
comprehensive phenome-wide studies to identify other traits linked to these
genes. Finally, we evaluated the aggregated human genetic evidence and
theoretical druggability of the prioritized Huntington's disease modifier genes,
including characteristics recently associated with clinical trial stoppage due
to safety concerns (i.e. human genetic constraint, number of interacting
partners and RNA tissue expression specificity). In total, we annotated and
assessed nine robust candidate Huntington's disease modifier genes. Notably, we
detected a high correlation (R 2 = 0.78) in top age-of-onset genome-wide
association study hits across repeat expansion disorders, emphasizing
cross-disorder relevance. Clinical genetic repositories analysis showed DNA
repair genes, such as MLH1, PMS2 and MSH3, are associated with cancer
phenotypes, suggesting potential limitations as drug targets. LIG1 and RRM2B
were both associated with neurofibrillary tangles, which may provide a link to a
potential role in mHTT aggregates, while MSH3 was associated with several
cortical morphology-related traits relevant to Huntington's disease. Finally,
human genetic evidence and theoretical druggability analyses prioritized and
ranked modifier genes, with PMS1 exhibiting the most favourable profile.
Notably, HTT itself ranked poorly as a theoretical drug target, emphasizing the
importance of exploring modifier-based alternative targets. In conclusion, our
study highlights the importance of human genomic information to prioritize
Huntington's disease modifier genes as drug targets, providing a basis for
future therapeutic development in Huntington's disease and other repeat
expansion disorders.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae418
PMCID: PMC11724427
PMID: 39801710

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.
