---
reference_id: "PMID:17584854"
title: Large spectrum of lissencephaly and pachygyria phenotypes resulting from de novo missense mutations in tubulin alpha 1A (TUBA1A).
authors:
- Poirier K
- Keays DA
- Francis F
- Saillour Y
- Bahi N
- Manouvrier S
- Fallet-Bianco C
- Pasquier L
- Toutain A
- Tuy FP
- Bienvenu T
- Joriot S
- Odent S
- Ville D
- Desguerre I
- Goldenberg A
- Moutard ML
- Fryns JP
- van Esch H
- Harvey RJ
- Siebold C
- Flint J
- Beldjord C
- Chelly J
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20572
keywords:
- "Brain/abnormalities, embryology"
- Brain Diseases/genetics
- DNA/genetics
- Doublecortin Protein
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Tubulin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large spectrum of lissencephaly and pachygyria phenotypes resulting from de novo missense mutations in tubulin alpha 1A (TUBA1A).
**Authors:** Poirier K, Keays DA, Francis F, Saillour Y, Bahi N, Manouvrier S, Fallet-Bianco C, Pasquier L, Toutain A, Tuy FP, Bienvenu T, Joriot S, Odent S, Ville D, Desguerre I, Goldenberg A, Moutard ML, Fryns JP, van Esch H, Harvey RJ, Siebold C, Flint J, Beldjord C, Chelly J
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20572](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20572)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2007 Nov;28(11):1055-64. doi: 10.1002/humu.20572.

Large spectrum of lissencephaly and pachygyria phenotypes resulting from de novo 
missense mutations in tubulin alpha 1A (TUBA1A).

Poirier K(1), Keays DA, Francis F, Saillour Y, Bahi N, Manouvrier S, 
Fallet-Bianco C, Pasquier L, Toutain A, Tuy FP, Bienvenu T, Joriot S, Odent S, 
Ville D, Desguerre I, Goldenberg A, Moutard ML, Fryns JP, van Esch H, Harvey RJ, 
Siebold C, Flint J, Beldjord C, Chelly J.

Author information:
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Centre national de la recherche 
scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 8104, Paris, France.

We have recently reported a missense mutation in exon 4 of the tubulin alpha 1A 
(Tuba1a) gene in a hyperactive N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) induced mouse mutant 
with abnormal lamination of the hippocampus. Neuroanatomical similarities 
between the Tuba1a mutant mouse and mice deficient for Doublecortin (Dcx) and 
Lis1 genes, and the well-established functional interaction between DCX and 
microtubules (MTs), led us to hypothesize that mutations in TUBA1A (TUBA3, 
previous symbol), the human homolog of Tuba1a, might give rise to cortical 
malformations. This hypothesis was subsequently confirmed by the identification 
of TUBA1A mutations in two patients with lissencephaly and pachygyria, 
respectively. Here we report additional TUBA1A mutations identified in six 
unrelated patients with a large spectrum of brain dysgeneses. The de novo 
occurrence was shown for all mutations, including one recurrent mutation 
(c.790C>T, p.R264C) detected in two patients, and two mutations that affect the 
same amino acid (c.1205G>A, p.R402H; c.1204C>T, p.R402C) detected in two other 
patients. Retrospective examination of MR images suggests that patients with 
TUBA1A mutations share not only cortical dysgenesis, but also cerebellar, 
hippocampal, corpus callosum, and brainstem abnormalities. Interestingly, the 
specific high level of Tuba1a expression throughout the period of central 
nervous system (CNS) development, shown by in situ hybridization using mouse 
embryos, is in accordance with the brain-restricted developmental phenotype 
caused by TUBA1A mutations. All together, these results, in combination with 
previously reported data, strengthen the relevance of the known interaction 
between MTs and DCX, and highlight the importance of the MTs/DCX complex in the 
neuronal migration process.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20572
PMID: 17584854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]