---
reference_id: "PMID:37432558"
title: "Beremagene Geperpavec: First Approval."
authors:
- Dhillon S
journal: Drugs
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40265-023-01921-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica/genetics, metabolism"
- Keratinocytes/metabolism
- "Collagen/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Genetic Therapy
- "Collagen Type VII/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beremagene Geperpavec: First Approval.
**Authors:** Dhillon S
**Journal:** Drugs (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40265-023-01921-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-023-01921-5)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2023 Aug;83(12):1131-1135. doi: 10.1007/s40265-023-01921-5.

Beremagene Geperpavec: First Approval.

Dhillon S(1).

Author information:
(1)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand. dru@adis.com.

Beremagene geperpavec-svdt (VYJUVEK™) is a topically applied, redosable, live, 
replication defective herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) vector -based gene therapy 
that is being developed by Krystal Biotech to deliver functional human collagen 
type VII alpha 1 chain (COL7A1) genes in patients with both, dominant and 
recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. Beremagene geperpavec can transduce 
both keratinocytes and fibroblasts and restore functional COL7 protein. In May 
2023, beremagene geperpavec received its first approval in the US for the 
treatment of wounds in patients ≥ 6 months of age with dystrophic epidermolysis 
bullosa with mutation(s) in the COL7A1 gene. A Marketing Authorization 
Application for beremagene geperpavec in Europe is planned for the second half 
of 2023. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of beremagene 
geperpavec leading to this first approval for dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-023-01921-5
PMID: 37432558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]