---
reference_id: "PMID:40552560"
title: Clinical and Genetic Findings in a Chinese Cohort of Dentatorubral-Pallidoluysian Atrophy Patients.
authors:
- Yuan RY
- Chen YF
- Lin W
- Li MC
- Zeng YH
- Cheng B
- Yu XT
- Zuo DD
- Sun HM
- Ye BN
- Ye YX
- Cui ML
- Cai NQ
- Lin Y
- Zhang QJ
- Qiu YS
- Zhang LW
- Song XW
- Wei JN
- Pan LY
- Yan YY
- Sun YM
- Yu JT
- Wu ZY
- Dong Y
- Cao CY
- Wu C
- Zu J
- Dai YY
- Shang XJ
- Zhou HT
- Wang MJ
- Ke Q
- Dong EL
- Xiao YF
- Ouyang ZY
- Chen XY
- Hu JP
- Lin MT
- Fu Y
- Chen WJ
- Wang N
- Gan SR
- OSCCAR Investigators
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ana.27293
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive/genetics, diagnostic imaging, blood, psychology"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Neurofilament Proteins/blood
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- East Asian People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Genetic Findings in a Chinese Cohort of Dentatorubral-Pallidoluysian Atrophy Patients.
**Authors:** Yuan RY, Chen YF, Lin W, Li MC, Zeng YH, Cheng B, Yu XT, Zuo DD, Sun HM, Ye BN, Ye YX, Cui ML, Cai NQ, Lin Y, Zhang QJ, Qiu YS, Zhang LW, Song XW, Wei JN, Pan LY, Yan YY, Sun YM, Yu JT, Wu ZY, Dong Y, Cao CY, Wu C, Zu J, Dai YY, Shang XJ, Zhou HT, Wang MJ, Ke Q, Dong EL, Xiao YF, Ouyang ZY, Chen XY, Hu JP, Lin MT, Fu Y, Chen WJ, Wang N, Gan SR, OSCCAR Investigators
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.27293](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.27293)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2025 Oct;98(4):750-761. doi: 10.1002/ana.27293. Epub 2025 Jun 24.

Clinical and Genetic Findings in a Chinese Cohort of
Dentatorubral-Pallidoluysian Atrophy Patients.

Yuan RY(#)(1), Chen YF(#)(1)(2), Lin W(#)(1), Li MC(3), Zeng YH(1), Cheng B(1),
Yu XT(1), Zuo DD(1), Sun HM(1), Ye BN(1), Ye YX(1), Cui ML(1), Cai NQ(1)(4), Lin
Y(1)(4), Zhang QJ(1)(4), Qiu YS(5), Zhang LW(6), Song XW(7)(8), Wei JN(7)(8),
Pan LY(9), Yan YY(10), Sun YM(11), Yu JT(12), Wu ZY(13), Dong Y(13), Cao CY(14),
Wu C(15), Zu J(16), Dai YY(17), Shang XJ(18), Zhou HT(19), Wang MJ(20), Ke
Q(21), Dong EL(22), Xiao YF(23), Ouyang ZY(24), Chen XY(25), Hu JP(3), Lin
MT(1)(4), Fu Y(1)(4), Chen WJ(1)(4), Wang N(1)(4), Gan SR(1)(4); OSCCAR
Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Institute of
Neuroscience, Fujian Key Laboratory of Molecular Neurology, Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, Quanzhou, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, National Regional Medical Center, Binhai Campus of
the First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China; Rare Disease Center, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, China Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neuroscience, Second Affiliated
Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Key Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Channelopathies of Guangdong Province and
the Ministry of Education of China, Guangzhou, China.
(9)Longyan First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical University, Longyan,
China.
(10)Department of Neurology, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, China.
(11)Department of Neurology and National Research Center for Aging and Medicine
& National Center for Neurological Disorders, State Key Laboratory of Medical
Neurobiology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(12)Department of Neurology and National Center for Neurological Disorders,
Huashan Hospital, State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers
Center for Brain Science, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.
(13)Department of Medical Genetics and Center for Rare Diseases, Second
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(14)Department of Neurology, Henan Provincial People's Hospital, People's
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(15)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment of
Major Neurological Diseases, National Key Clinical Department and Key Discipline
of Neurology, Guangzhou, China.
(16)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical
University, Xuzhou, China.
(17)Department of Paediatrics, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical
University, Xuzhou, China.
(18)The first affiliated hospital of Wannan Medical College (Yijishan Hospital),
Wuhu, China.
(19)Central Laboratory, Luoyang Central Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou
University; Neurology Department, Luoyang Central Hospital Affiliated to
Zhengzhou University, Luoyang, China.
(20)Department of Neurology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, China;
Department of Laboratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.
(21)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(22)Department of Neurology, Huangshi Central Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of
Hubei Polytechnic University, Huangshi, China.
(23)Department of Neurology, Zhangzhou Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, Zhangzhou, China.
(24)China Spinocerebellar Ataxia Association, Beijing, China.
(25)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine of First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) is a rare, inherited
neurodegenerative disorder caused by the expansion of cytosine-adenine-guanine
repeats in ATN1. Most studies on DRPLA to date are limited to case reports. We
aimed to provide a comprehensive summary of the clinical, genetic, biological,
and magnetic resonance imaging characteristics of DRPLA using cross-sectional
baseline data.
METHODS: This is a cross-sectional observational cohort study. We used an
extensive battery of assessments, included clinical phenotypes, genotypes,
cognitive performance, biological markers, and magnetic resonance imaging
characteristics.
RESULTS: We enrolled 116 DRPLA patients, including 96 manifest patients and 20
prodromal patients. We identified a previously unreported ATN1 haplotype
consisting of 8 single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Cognitive assessments revealed
that 51 manifest patients (96%) and 4 prodromal patients (29%) scored <26 on the
Montreal Cognitive Assessment. Manifest patients showed impairments across all
cognitive domains, whereas prodromal patients showed deficits only in phonemic
fluency. Biological analyses showed significantly elevated plasma neurofilament
light levels in manifest patients compared with prodromal patients (P < 0.001)
and healthy controls (P < 0.001). Magnetic resonance imaging findings revealed
widespread gray matter loss across the whole brain in manifest patients, whereas
prodromal patients showed gray matter loss localized to the bilateral cerebellar
hemispheres.
INTERPRETATION: This is the first DRPLA cohort study to comprehensively report
clinical, genetic, cognitive, imaging, and plasma neurofilament light data. This
study provides robust data to enhance our understanding of the overall features
of DRPLA. We also propose clear definitions for the preclinical stage of DRPLA,
and demonstrate the high diagnostic utility of plasma neurofilament light as a
biomarker. ANN NEUROL 2025;98:750-761.

© 2025 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.27293
PMID: 40552560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
