---
reference_id: "PMID:1356074"
title: Medication-induced systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Skaer TL
journal: Clin Ther
year: '1992'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medication-induced systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Skaer TL
**Journal:** Clin Ther (1992)

## Content

1. Clin Ther. 1992 Jul-Aug;14(4):496-506; discussion 495.

Medication-induced systemic lupus erythematosus.

Skaer TL(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Washington State University, Pullman.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multisystem autoimmune disease affecting 
a variety of tissues and organs. The diagnosis of SLE can be made only after 
several related illnesses are considered and ruled out. The etiology of SLE is 
unclear, but hormonal factors, environmental toxins, infectious viruses, genetic 
predisposition, and certain medications have all been considered risk factors. 
Idiopathic SLE is seen predominantly in young women, with a female:male ratio of 
approximately 10:1. Each patient is unique and may suffer from a variety of 
signs and symptoms. The disease is highly unpredictable, and most patients 
experience flare-ups or fluctuations. The epidemiologic characteristics of 
medication-induced SLE (MI-SLE) are different from those of idiopathic SLE. 
Musculoskeletal symptoms predominate the clinical presentation of MI-SLE, while 
renal and central nervous system involvement is rare or absent. Moreover, a 
greater percentage of caucasian patients with no female predominance is 
evidenced in MI-SLE. Several medications can produce positive results on an 
antinuclear antibody test with or without evidence of clinical lupus. 
Hydralazine and procainamide are the most commonly recognized medications for 
inducing SLE. The onset of procainamide- and hydralazine-induced SLE occurs 
after 50 years of age, which is directly related to the age of the population 
using these medications. Estrogen-containing oral contraceptives and ibuprofen 
can exacerbate the symptoms of idiopathic SLE. Clinical judgment dictates the 
importance of careful patient monitoring and selection of therapy.

PMID: 1356074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]