---
reference_id: "PMID:32106311"
title: Association of clinical severity with FANCB variant type in Fanconi anemia.
authors:
- Jung M
- Ramanagoudr-Bhojappa R
- van Twest S
- Rosti RO
- Murphy V
- Tan W
- Donovan FX
- Lach FP
- Kimble DC
- Jiang CS
- Vaughan R
- Mehta PA
- Pierri F
- Dufour C
- Auerbach AD
- Deans AJ
- Smogorzewska A
- Chandrasekharappa SC
journal: Blood
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2019003249
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of clinical severity with FANCB variant type in Fanconi anemia.
**Authors:** Jung M, Ramanagoudr-Bhojappa R, van Twest S, Rosti RO, Murphy V, Tan W, Donovan FX, Lach FP, Kimble DC, Jiang CS, Vaughan R, Mehta PA, Pierri F, Dufour C, Auerbach AD, Deans AJ, Smogorzewska A, Chandrasekharappa SC
**Journal:** Blood (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2019003249](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2019003249)

## Content

1. Blood. 2020 Apr 30;135(18):1588-1602. doi: 10.1182/blood.2019003249.

Association of clinical severity with FANCB variant type in Fanconi anemia.

Jung M(1), Ramanagoudr-Bhojappa R(2), van Twest S(3), Rosti RO(1), Murphy V(3), 
Tan W(3), Donovan FX(2), Lach FP(1), Kimble DC(2), Jiang CS(4), Vaughan R(4), 
Mehta PA(5)(6), Pierri F(7), Dufour C(7), Auerbach AD(8), Deans AJ(3), 
Smogorzewska A(1), Chandrasekharappa SC(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genome Maintenance, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY.
(2)Cancer Genomics Unit, Cancer Genetics and Comparative Genomics Branch, 
National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD.
(3)Genome Stability Unit, St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, The Rockefeller University Hospital, The 
Rockefeller University, New York, NY.
(5)Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune Deficiency, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, OH.
(7)Hematology Unit, IRCSS G. Gaslini, Genoa, Italy; and.
(8)Human Genetics and Hematology Program, The Rockefeller University, New York, 
NY.

Comment in
    Blood. 2020 Apr 30;135(18):1514-1515. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020005451.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is the most common genetic cause of bone marrow failure and 
is caused by inherited pathogenic variants in any of 22 genes. Of these, only 
FANCB is X-linked. We describe a cohort of 19 children with FANCB variants, from 
16 families of the International Fanconi Anemia Registry. Those with FANCB 
deletion or truncation demonstrate earlier-than-average onset of bone marrow 
failure and more severe congenital abnormalities compared with a large series of 
FA individuals in published reports. This reflects the indispensable role of 
FANCB protein in the enzymatic activation of FANCD2 monoubiquitination, an 
essential step in the repair of DNA interstrand crosslinks. For FANCB missense 
variants, more variable severity is associated with the extent of residual 
FANCD2 monoubiquitination activity. We used transcript analysis, genetic 
complementation, and biochemical reconstitution of FANCD2 monoubiquitination to 
determine the pathogenicity of each variant. Aberrant splicing and transcript 
destabilization were associated with 2 missense variants. Individuals carrying 
missense variants with drastically reduced FANCD2 monoubiquitination in 
biochemical and/or cell-based assays tended to show earlier onset of hematologic 
disease and shorter survival. Conversely, variants with near-normal FANCD2 
monoubiquitination were associated with more favorable outcome. Our study 
reveals a genotype-phenotype correlation within the FA-B complementation group 
of FA, where severity is associated with level of residual FANCD2 
monoubiquitination.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2019003249
PMCID: PMC7193183
PMID: 32106311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: A.S. receives 
research funding from Rocket Pharmaceuticals for an unrelated project. The 
remaining authors declare no competing financial interests.