---
reference_id: "PMID:31326502"
title: Molecular genetics of congenital myotonic dystrophy.
authors:
- Lanni S
- Pearson CE
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2019.104533
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular genetics of congenital myotonic dystrophy.
**Authors:** Lanni S, Pearson CE
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2019.104533](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2019.104533)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2019 Dec;132:104533. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2019.104533. Epub 2019 
Jul 19.

Molecular genetics of congenital myotonic dystrophy.

Lanni S(1), Pearson CE(2).

Author information:
(1)Program of Genetics & Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, The 
Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, 686 Bay Street, Toronto M5G 0A4, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Program of Genetics & Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, The 
Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, 686 Bay Street, Toronto M5G 0A4, 
Ontario, Canada; University of Toronto, Program of Molecular Genetics, Canada. 
Electronic address: cepearson.sickkids@gmail.com.

Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is a neuromuscular disease showing strong 
genetic anticipation, and is caused by the expansion of a CTG repeat tract in 
the 3'-UTR of the DMPK gene. Congenital Myotonic Dystrophy (CDM1) represents the 
most severe form of the disease, with prenatal onset, symptoms distinct from 
adult onset DM1, and a high rate of perinatal mortality. CDM1 is usually 
associated with very large CTG expansions, but this correlation is not absolute 
and cannot explain the distinct clinical features and the strong bias for 
maternal transmission. This review focuses upon the molecular and epigenetic 
factors that modulate disease severity and might be responsible for CDM1. 
Changes in the epigenetic status of the DM1 locus and in gene expression have 
recently been observed. Increasing evidence supports a role of a CTCF binding 
motif as a cis-element, upstream of the DMPK CTG tract, whereby CpG methylation 
of this site regulates the interaction of the insulator protein CTCF as a 
modulating trans-factor responsible for the inheritance and expression of CDM1.

Crown Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2019.104533
PMID: 31326502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]