---
reference_id: "PMID:36102118"
title: "Long-term vascular dysfunction in Kawasaki disease: systematic review and meta-analyses."
authors:
- Patra PK
- Banday AZ
- Das RR
- Manohari S
- Jindal AK
- Singh S
journal: Cardiol Young
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1017/S1047951122002906
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term vascular dysfunction in Kawasaki disease: systematic review and meta-analyses.
**Authors:** Patra PK, Banday AZ, Das RR, Manohari S, Jindal AK, Singh S
**Journal:** Cardiol Young (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1047951122002906](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1047951122002906)

## Content

1. Cardiol Young. 2023 Sep;33(9):1614-1626. doi: 10.1017/S1047951122002906. Epub 
2022 Sep 14.

Long-term vascular dysfunction in Kawasaki disease: systematic review and 
meta-analyses.

Patra PK(1), Banday AZ(2), Das RR(3), Manohari S(2), Jindal AK(2), Singh S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
Patna, Bihar, India.
(2)Allergy Immunology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Advanced Pediatrics 
Centre, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), 
Chandigarh, India.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, AIIMS, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.

BACKGROUND: Long-term physiological dysfunction in coronary/systemic vasculature 
may persist in individuals with Kawasaki disease even in the absence of coronary 
artery abnormalities. We perform a systematic review and meta-analyses of 
studies assessing long-term vascular function in Kawasaki disease.
METHODS: PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science databases were searched for relevant 
literature published till May 2021. Patients with Kawasaki disease were included 
as cases and healthy age/sex-matched individuals as controls. Newcastle Ottawa 
Scale was used to assess the study quality. Outcome measures were differences in 
markers of vascular function 1 year after diagnosis of Kawasaki disease. Data 
were analysed using Review Manager software. Comprehensive meta-analysis 
software was used for meta-regression. To assess the certainty of evidence, 
GRADE Profiler software was utilised.
RESULTS: Of 2280 citations, 49 case-control studies (comprising 2714 cases and 
2118 controls) were included for data synthesis. Decreased flow-mediated 
dilatation [3.83, 95%CI 0.94-6.72] and increased pulse-wave velocity [39.34 
cm/sec, 95%CI 20.86-57.83], arterial stiffness [0.35, 95%CI 0.11-0.59], and 
common carotid artery intima-media thickness were noted in patients with 
Kawasaki disease. No significant difference was observed for 
nitroglycerine-mediated dilatation and endothelial peripheral artery tonometry 
(endo-PAT). Significant inter-study heterogeneity was observed for flow-mediated 
dilatation, arterial stiffness, carotid artery intima-media thickness, and 
endo-PAT. The GRADE evidence was of 'very low quality' for all outcome measures 
except 'moderate quality' for pulse-wave velocity.
CONCLUSIONS: Evidence suggests the presence of long-term endothelial dysfunction 
in patients with Kawasaki disease even in the absence of coronary artery 
abnormalities. Avoidance of development of other cardiovascular risk factors 
seems prudent in patients with Kawasaki disease.

DOI: 10.1017/S1047951122002906
PMID: 36102118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]