---
reference_id: "PMID:23392101"
title: "Molecular IGF-1 and IGF-1 receptor defects: from genetics to clinical management."
authors:
- Walenkamp MJ
- Losekoot M
- Wit JM
journal: Endocr Dev
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1159/000342841
keywords:
- Animals
- Birth Weight/genetics
- Female
- Fetal Growth Retardation/genetics
- "Growth Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/genetics
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation/physiology
- Pregnancy
- "Receptor, IGF Type 1/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular IGF-1 and IGF-1 receptor defects: from genetics to clinical management.
**Authors:** Walenkamp MJ, Losekoot M, Wit JM
**Journal:** Endocr Dev (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000342841](https://doi.org/10.1159/000342841)

## Content

1. Endocr Dev. 2013;24:128-37. doi: 10.1159/000342841. Epub 2013 Feb 1.

Molecular IGF-1 and IGF-1 receptor defects: from genetics to clinical 
management.

Walenkamp MJ(1), Losekoot M, Wit JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. m.walenkamp@vumc.nl

Molecular defects of the insulin-like growth factor 1 gene (IGF1) are rare in 
the human. Only three homozygous and two families with heterozygous mutations of 
the IGF1 gene have been described, resulting in a variable degree of 
intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, developmental delay 
and deafness. Detailed genetic analysis and functional experiments have shown 
that IGF-1 plays a key role in pre- and postnatal growth and development in 
human. Eleven patients with heterozygous and 2 patients with compound 
heterozygous mutations in the type 1 IGF1 receptor gene (IGF1R) have been 
reported. Intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly and IGF-1 
levels above the mean of age references are consistent findings in these 
patients, although IGF-1 levels can be low initially because of feeding 
problems. The first reported patients showed the most severe phenotype, but with 
the identification of additional patients the phenotype appears to be more 
variable. The functional effect of the defects has been studied by in vitro 
experiments. From these studies, receptor haploinsufficiency, decreased IGF1R 
biosynthesis, interference with ligand binding and transmembrane signaling, and 
disruption of the intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity have been suggested as 
possible mechanisms with a variable pathogenetic spectrum. Data on GH treatment 
in these children are limited, showing a poor to modest growth response.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000342841
PMID: 23392101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]