---
reference_id: "PMID:21977988"
title: Is Roifman syndrome an X-linked ciliopathy with humoral immunodeficiency? Evidence from 2 new cases.
authors:
- Gray PE
- Sillence D
- Kakakios A
journal: Int J Immunogenet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1744-313X.2011.01041.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is Roifman syndrome an X-linked ciliopathy with humoral immunodeficiency? Evidence from 2 new cases.
**Authors:** Gray PE, Sillence D, Kakakios A
**Journal:** Int J Immunogenet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1744-313X.2011.01041.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-313X.2011.01041.x)

## Content

1. Int J Immunogenet. 2011 Dec;38(6):501-5. doi:
10.1111/j.1744-313X.2011.01041.x.  Epub 2011 Oct 7.

Is Roifman syndrome an X-linked ciliopathy with humoral immunodeficiency? 
Evidence from 2 new cases.

Gray PE(1), Sillence D, Kakakios A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Sydney Children's Hospital, 
Sydney, Australia. paul.gray@sesiahs.health.nsw.gov.au

Roifman syndrome is a rare syndrome of bone dysplasia, growth retardation, 
retinal dystrophy and humeral immunodeficiency. Six cases have been reported to 
date, all of whom are male. We report a boy with clinical features of Roifman 
syndrome, whose older sister has skewed X-inactivation and a milder phenotype of 
the same disorder, supporting the hypothesis that this is an X-linked recessive 
condition. Both children had previously had a provisional diagnosis of Jeune 
dysplasia, and the boy had neonatal hip X-rays which demonstrated 'acetabular 
spurs' which are seen in a number of diseases thought to be caused by 
dysfunction of nonmotile cilia, including Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy. 
This finding in combination with other features such as retinal dystrophy, 
hepatic and renal disease suggests that the gene which is affected in Roifman 
syndrome may be involved with the function of nonmotile cilia and that Roifman 
syndrome may be the first example of a ciliopathy with associated 
immunodeficiency.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1744-313X.2011.01041.x
PMID: 21977988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]