---
reference_id: PMID:11478735
title: "5-Aminolevulinic acid inhibits [3H]muscimol binding to human and rat brain synaptic membranes."
authors:
- Emanuelli T
- Pagel FW
- Alves LB
- Regner A
- Souza DO
journal: Neurochem Res
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1023/a:1011034409814
keywords:
- Aminolevulinic Acid/pharmacology
- Animals
- "Cerebral Cortex/drug effects, metabolism"
- GABA Agonists/metabolism
- Humans
- Kinetics
- "Muscimol/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Rats
- "Synaptic Membranes/drug effects, metabolism"
- Tritium
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 5-Aminolevulinic acid inhibits [3H]muscimol binding to human and rat brain synaptic membranes.
**Authors:** Emanuelli T, Pagel FW, Alves LB, Regner A, Souza DO
**Journal:** Neurochem Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1011034409814](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1011034409814)

## Content

1. Neurochem Res. 2001 Feb;26(2):101-5. doi: 10.1023/a:1011034409814.

5-Aminolevulinic acid inhibits [3H]muscimol binding to human and rat brain
synaptic membranes.

Emanuelli T(1), Pagel FW, Alves LB, Regner A, Souza DO.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciência e Tecnologia de Alimentos, Centro de Ciências Rurais,
Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, RS, Brasil. tati@ccr.ufsm.br

The interaction of 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) with GABA(A) receptors has been
proposed to underlie the neurological dysfunctions of ALA-accumulating
disorders, such as acute intermittent porphyria. The effects of ALA on
[3H]muscimol binding to human and rat cerebral cortical membranes were compared.
ALA (0.1-10 mM) significantly inhibited the binding of [3H]muscimol (12 nM),
with a similar potency in rat and human membranes (IC50 = 199 vs. 228 microM,
respectively). Kinetical analysis revealed that ALA (1 mM) significantly
increased the Kd and decreased the Bmax of [3H]muscimol to both rat (100 and
50%, respectively) and human (200 and 40%, respectively) membranes, indicating a
mixed-type inhibition. The similarity in the potency and mechanism of the
ALA-induced inhibition of muscimol binding in rat and human membranes indicate
that rat studies are useful to evaluate the neurotoxic properties of ALA towards
the human GABAergic system, and may help to understand the pathophysiology of
porphyria.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1011034409814
PMID: 11478735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
