---
reference_id: "PMID:35802260"
title: "The extra-cerebellar effects of spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1): looking beyond the cerebellum."
authors:
- Olmos V
- Gogia N
- Luttik K
- Haidery F
- Lim J
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-022-04419-7
keywords:
- Animals
- Cerebellum/pathology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Purkinje Cells
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The extra-cerebellar effects of spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1): looking beyond the cerebellum.
**Authors:** Olmos V, Gogia N, Luttik K, Haidery F, Lim J
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-022-04419-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-022-04419-7)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2022 Jul 8;79(8):404. doi: 10.1007/s00018-022-04419-7.

The extra-cerebellar effects of spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1): looking 
beyond the cerebellum.

Olmos V(1), Gogia N(1), Luttik K(2)(3), Haidery F(4), Lim J(5)(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, 295 Congress Avenue, BCMM 
154E, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
(2)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale School of Medicine, 295 Congress 
Avenue, BCMM 154E, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, 295 Congress Avenue, 
BCMM 154E, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
(4)Yale College, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, 295 Congress Avenue, BCMM 
154E, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. janghoo.lim@yale.edu.
(6)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale School of Medicine, 295 Congress 
Avenue, BCMM 154E, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. janghoo.lim@yale.edu.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, 295 Congress Avenue, 
BCMM 154E, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. janghoo.lim@yale.edu.
(8)Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair, Yale School 
of Medicine, 295 Congress Avenue, BCMM 154E, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. 
janghoo.lim@yale.edu.
(9)Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale School of Medicine, 295 Congress Avenue, BCMM 
154E, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. janghoo.lim@yale.edu.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is one of nine polyglutamine (polyQ) 
diseases and is characterized as an adult late-onset, progressive, dominantly 
inherited genetic disease. SCA1 is caused by an increase in the number of CAG 
repeats in the ATXN1 gene leading to an expanded polyQ tract in the ATAXIN-1 
protein. ATAXIN-1 is broadly expressed throughout the brain. However, until 
recently, SCA1 research has primarily centered on the cerebellum, given the 
characteristic cerebellar Purkinje cell loss observed in patients, as well as 
the progressive motor deficits, including gait and limb incoordination, that 
SCA1 patients present with. There are, however, also other symptoms such as 
respiratory problems, cognitive defects and memory impairment, anxiety, and 
depression observed in SCA1 patients and mouse models, which indicate that there 
are extra-cerebellar effects of SCA1 that cannot be explained solely through 
changes in the cerebellar region of the brain alone. The existing gap between 
human and mouse model studies of extra-cerebellar regions in SCA1 makes it 
difficult to answer many important questions in the field. This review will 
cover both the cerebellar and extra-cerebellar effects of SCA1 and highlight the 
need for further investigations into the impact of mutant ATXN1 expression in 
these regions. This review will also discuss implications of extra-cerebellar 
effects not only for SCA1 but other neurodegenerative diseases showing diverse 
pathology as well.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-022-04419-7
PMCID: PMC9993484
PMID: 35802260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]