---
reference_id: "PMID:21968742"
title: Interleukin-17-positive mast cells contribute to synovial inflammation in spondylarthritis.
authors:
- Noordenbos T
- Yeremenko N
- Gofita I
- van de Sande M
- Tak PP
- Caňete JD
- Baeten D
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/art.33396
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Arthritis, Psoriatic/metabolism, pathology"
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/metabolism, pathology"
- Benzamides
- Cell Degranulation/physiology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Imatinib Mesylate
- "Interleukin-17/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Mast Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Piperazines/pharmacology
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/metabolism
- Pyrimidines/pharmacology
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Spondylarthritis/metabolism, pathology"
- "Synovial Fluid/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Synovial Membrane/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Synovitis/metabolism, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interleukin-17-positive mast cells contribute to synovial inflammation in spondylarthritis.
**Authors:** Noordenbos T, Yeremenko N, Gofita I, van de Sande M, Tak PP, Caňete JD, Baeten D
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.33396](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.33396)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Jan;64(1):99-109. doi: 10.1002/art.33396.

Interleukin-17-positive mast cells contribute to synovial inflammation in
spondylarthritis.

Noordenbos T(1), Yeremenko N, Gofita I, van de Sande M, Tak PP, Caňete JD,
Baeten D.

Author information:
(1)Academic Medical Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2011 Oct 25;7(12):684. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2011.166.

OBJECTIVE: Studies comparing spondylarthritis (SpA) to rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
synovitis suggest that innate immune cells may play a predominant role in the
pathogenesis of SpA. Recent observations have indicated a marked synovial mast
cell infiltration in psoriatic SpA. We therefore undertook the present study to
investigate the potential contribution of mast cells to synovial inflammation in
SpA.
METHODS: Synovial tissue and fluid were obtained from patients with either
nonpsoriatic or psoriatic SpA (n=82) and patients with RA (n=50). Synovial
biopsy tissue was analyzed by immunostaining and used in ex vivo cultures.
Synovial fluid was analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: We observed a strong and specific increase of c-Kit-positive mast cells
in the synovium from patients with SpA compared to the synovium from patients
with RA synovitis, which was independent of disease subtype (nonpsoriatic versus
psoriatic), disease duration, and treatment. Staining of mast cell granules,
analysis of synovial fluid, and results in ex vivo tissue culture did not
indicate increased degranulation in SpA synovitis. However, mast cells expressed
significantly more interleukin-17 (IL-17) in SpA than in RA synovitis, and mast
cells constituted the major IL-17-expressing cell population in the SpA
synovium. Ex vivo targeting of synovial mast cells with the c-Kit inhibitor
imatinib mesylate significantly decreased the production of IL-17 as well as
other proinflammatory cytokines in synovial tissue cultures. Analysis of paired
pre- and posttreatment synovial tissue samples indicated that the mast
cell/IL-17 axis in SpA was not modulated by effective tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) blockade.
CONCLUSION: The specific and TNF-independent increase in IL-17-expressing mast
cells may contribute to the progression of synovial inflammation in peripheral
SpA.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.33396
PMID: 21968742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
