---
reference_id: "PMID:27939609"
title: "EPCR and Malaria Severity: The Center of a Perfect Storm."
authors:
- Bernabeu M
- Smith JD
journal: Trends Parasitol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2016.11.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EPCR and Malaria Severity: The Center of a Perfect Storm.
**Authors:** Bernabeu M, Smith JD
**Journal:** Trends Parasitol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pt.2016.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2016.11.004)

## Content

1. Trends Parasitol. 2017 Apr;33(4):295-308. doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2016.11.004. Epub 
2016 Dec 6.

EPCR and Malaria Severity: The Center of a Perfect Storm.

Bernabeu M(1), Smith JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of 
Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Electronic 
address: joe.smith@cidresearch.org.

Severe malaria due to Plasmodium falciparum infection causes nearly half a 
million deaths per year. The different symptomatology and disease manifestations 
among patients have hampered understanding of severe malaria pathology and 
complicated efforts to develop targeted disease interventions. Infected 
erythrocyte sequestration in the microvasculature plays a critical role in the 
development of severe disease, and there is increasing evidence that 
cytoadherent parasites interact with host factors to enhance the damage caused 
by the parasite. The recent discovery that parasite binding to endothelial 
protein C receptor (EPCR) is associated with severe disease has suggested new 
mechanisms of pathology and provided new avenues for severe malaria adjunctive 
therapy research.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pt.2016.11.004
PMCID: PMC5376506
PMID: 27939609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]