---
reference_id: "PMID:39787828"
title: "Efficacy of hyperimmunized egg yolk antibodies (IgY) against Campylobacter jejuni: In Vitro and In Vivo evaluations."
authors:
- Soltani N
- Rahimi S
- Khaki P
- Karimi Torshizi MA
- Eskandari B
- Grimes J
journal: Poult Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2024.104718
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of hyperimmunized egg yolk antibodies (IgY) against Campylobacter jejuni: In Vitro and In Vivo evaluations.
**Authors:** Soltani N, Rahimi S, Khaki P, Karimi Torshizi MA, Eskandari B, Grimes J
**Journal:** Poult Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psj.2024.104718](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psj.2024.104718)

## Content

1. Poult Sci. 2025 Feb;104(2):104718. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2024.104718. Epub 2025
Jan  3.

Efficacy of hyperimmunized egg yolk antibodies (IgY) against Campylobacter 
jejuni: In Vitro and In Vivo evaluations.

Soltani N(1), Rahimi S(1), Khaki P(2), Karimi Torshizi MA(1), Eskandari B(1), 
Grimes J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Poultry Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Postal code: 1411713116, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Razi Vaccine and Serum Production Research 
Institute, Agricultural Research, Education and Extension Organization (AREEO), 
Postal Code: 3197619751, Karaj, Iran.
(3)Prestage Department of Poultry Science, College of Agriculture and Life 
Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7608. Electronic 
address: jgrimes@ncsu.edu.

Campylobacter infections are a prevalent cause of diarrheal disease in humans 
and are the most significant zoonotic pathogens worldwide. Human 
campylobacteriosis is generally via ingestion of contaminated poultry products. 
However, based on recent studies chicken egg yolk antibody (IgY) powder has 
great potential to reduce the cecum load of Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni) in 
broilers. To understand the effective and economically feasible dosage, two 
immunization and challenge studies were conducted using 30 layer hens and 250 
broiler chickens and found a scientific approach, starting with in vitro 
evaluations and progressing with in vivo studies confirmed. In this study it was 
demonstrated that specific IgY powder (SIgY), produced by immunized hens via 
bacterin, was highly effective in inhibiting bacterial growth and adhesion, as 
well as exhibiting bactericidal and agglutination properties (P < 0.05). 
Notably, doses of 0.5 % and 1 % SIgY significantly enhanced both the height and 
width of intestinal villi, along with improving the villus height-to-crypt depth 
ratio when compared to the positive control group (P < 0.05). Furthermore, 
medium and high doses of SIgY were effective in preserving the integrity of the 
intestinal epithelium, as evidenced by a reduction in crypt depth and the number 
of goblet cells, which serve as important markers in the immune system (P < 
0.01). Additionally, analyses of cecal and liver bacterial counts in response to 
the 0.5 % SIgY treatment revealed a significant reduction in C. jejuni counts 
compared to other challenged groups throughout the 28 d experiment (P < 0.01). 
Based on these results, it may be concluded that specific antibodies play a 
crucial role in maintaining the integrity of intestinal villi, support the 
health of the intestinal epithelium, and reduce the colonization of C. jejuni. 
These findings could form the basis for developing an economical and effective 
strategy to enhance poultry and human health in the context of C. jejuni 
infection.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2024.104718
PMCID: PMC11761915
PMID: 39787828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest in this study.