---
reference_id: "PMID:20639382"
title: "Smoking and the risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Alonso A
- Logroscino G
- Hernán MA
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.180232
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smoking and the risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Alonso A, Logroscino G, Hernán MA
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp.2009.180232](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.2009.180232)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010 Nov;81(11):1249-52. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2009.180232. Epub 2010 Jul 16.

Smoking and the risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Alonso A(1), Logroscino G, Hernán MA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Community Health, School of Public Health, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55416, USA. 
aalogut@alumni.unav.es

BACKGROUND: Epidemiologic studies have provided inconsistent results on the 
association of cigarette smoking with the incidence of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS). To summarise published evidence and explore sources of 
heterogeneity, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of studies 
that evaluated this association.
METHODS: Published studies evaluating the association of smoking with incidence 
of ALS were searched in bibliographic databases, with relevant information 
collected from each article. A random effects approach was used to pool the 
relative rate (RR) estimates from different studies. Between study heterogeneity 
was explored with a meta-regression approach.
RESULTS: 18 publications reported associations between smoking and ALS risk in 
15 case control studies and five cohort studies. The pooled RR (95% CI) of ALS 
was 1.28 (0.97 to 1.68) for current versus never smokers and 1.12 (0.98 to 1.27) 
for ever versus never smokers. The study specifics RRs were heterogeneous 
(p<0.01). The proportion of women in the study population explained 46% of 
between study variability. The estimated RR (95% CI) of ALS for ever versus 
never smokers was 0.86 (0.71 to 1.03) in men and 1.66 (1.31 to 2.10) in women.
INTERPRETATION: This meta-analysis does not support an overall strong 
association of smoking with ALS risk but suggests that smoking might be 
associated with a higher risk of ALS in women.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.180232
PMID: 20639382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]