---
reference_id: "PMID:23677068"
title: Molecular pathogenesis of malignant mesothelioma.
authors:
- Sekido Y
journal: Carcinogenesis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt166
keywords:
- Asbestos/adverse effects
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/chemically induced, genetics, pathology"
- Disease Progression
- Disease Susceptibility/pathology
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Frequency
- "Genes, p16"
- Humans
- "Mesothelioma/chemically induced, genetics, pathology"
- "Neurofibromin 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ubiquitin Thiolesterase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular pathogenesis of malignant mesothelioma.
**Authors:** Sekido Y
**Journal:** Carcinogenesis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/carcin/bgt166](https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/bgt166)

## Content

1. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jul;34(7):1413-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt166. Epub 2013
May  14.

Molecular pathogenesis of malignant mesothelioma.

Sekido Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.

Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive tumor arising primarily from the
pleural or peritoneal cavities. It develops by asbestos exposure after a long
latency, which is characterized by insidious growth and clinical presentation at
an advanced stage of disease. MM is highly refractory to conventional therapies
even with a combination of aggressive surgical intervention and multimodality
strategies, with cure remaining elusive. Molecular genetic analysis has revealed
several key genetic alterations, which are responsible for the development and
progression of MM. The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A/alternative reading
frame (CDKN2A/ARF), neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) and BRCA1-associated
protein-1 (BAP1) genes are the most frequently mutated tumor suppressor genes
detected in MM cells; the alterations of the latter two are relatively
characteristic of MM. Merlin, which is encoded by NF2, regulates multiple cell
signaling cascades including the Hippo and mammalian target of rapamycin
pathways, which regulate cell proliferation and growth. BAP1 is involved in
histone modification and its inactivation induces the disturbance of global gene
expression profiling. The discovery of a new familial cancer syndrome with
germline mutation of BAP1 also indicates the importance of genetic factors in MM
susceptibility. Meanwhile, although frequent expression and functional
activations of oncogene products such as receptor tyrosine kinases are observed
in MM cells, activating mutations of these genes are rare. With further
comprehensive genome analyses, new genetic and epigenetic alterations in MM
cells are expected to be revealed more precisely, and the new knowledge based on
them will be applied for developing new diagnostic tools and new target
therapies against MMs.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgt166
PMID: 23677068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
