---
reference_id: "PMID:33099432"
title: Supportive Care for Patients with Systemic Light Chain Amyloidosis.
authors:
- Wong SW
- Fogaren T
journal: Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.hoc.2020.08.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Supportive Care for Patients with Systemic Light Chain Amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Wong SW, Fogaren T
**Journal:** Hematol Oncol Clin North Am (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hoc.2020.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hoc.2020.08.007)

## Content

1. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2020 Dec;34(6):1177-1191. doi: 
10.1016/j.hoc.2020.08.007.

Supportive Care for Patients with Systemic Light Chain Amyloidosis.

Wong SW(1), Fogaren T(2).

Author information:
(1)Hematology/Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Comprehensive Amyloid Program, 
University of California, 400 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. 
Electronic address: SandyW.Wong@ucsf.edu.
(2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Tufts Medical Center, 800 Washington Street, 
Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Light chain amyloidosis is a disease in which clonal plasma cells produce toxic 
immunoglobulin light chains that form amyloid fibrils with deposition in organs, 
most commonly the heart and kidneys, but also the nervous system, 
gastrointestinal tract, and soft tissues. Treatment directed at the clonal cells 
eliminates light chain production and further deposition and may enable organ 
improvement and decrease the risk of organ failure. Supportive care manages the 
symptoms of organ involvement and the side effects of treatment. Supportive care 
also addresses the psychological and social issues that may arise in patients 
with light chain amyloidosis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hoc.2020.08.007
PMID: 33099432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure S.W. Wong receives research funding 
from Bristol-Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline, Fortis, and Janssen. She also 
receives consultancy fees from Amgen and serves on the advisory board for 
Sanofi; T. Fogaren has no disclosures.