---
reference_id: "PMID:17062147"
title: Klinefelter syndrome and other sex chromosomal aneuploidies.
authors:
- Visootsak J
- Graham JM Jr
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-42
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Klinefelter syndrome and other sex chromosomal aneuploidies.
**Authors:** Visootsak J, Graham JM Jr
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-1-42](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-1-42)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2006 Oct 24;1:42. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-42.

Klinefelter syndrome and other sex chromosomal aneuploidies.

Visootsak J(1), Graham JM Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
GA 30033, USA. Jvisootsak@genetics.emory.edu

The term Klinefelter syndrome (KS) describes a group of chromosomal disorder in 
which there is at least one extra X chromosome to a normal male karyotype, 
46,XY. XXY aneuploidy is the most common disorder of sex chromosomes in humans, 
with prevalence of one in 500 males. Other sex chromosomal aneuploidies have 
also been described, although they are much less frequent, with 48,XXYY and 
48,XXXY being present in 1 per 17,000 to 1 per 50,000 male births. The incidence 
of 49,XXXXY is 1 per 85,000 to 100,000 male births. In addition, 46,XX males 
also exist and it is caused by translocation of Y material including sex 
determining region (SRY) to the X chromosome during paternal meiosis. Formal 
cytogenetic analysis is necessary to make a definite diagnosis, and more obvious 
differences in physical features tend to be associated with increasing numbers 
of sex chromosomes. If the diagnosis is not made prenatally, 47,XXY males may 
present with a variety of subtle clinical signs that are age-related. In 
infancy, males with 47,XXY may have chromosomal evaluations done for 
hypospadias, small phallus or cryptorchidism, developmental delay. The 
school-aged child may present with language delay, learning disabilities, or 
behavioral problems. The older child or adolescent may be discovered during an 
endocrine evaluation for delayed or incomplete pubertal development with 
eunuchoid body habitus, gynecomastia, and small testes. Adults are often 
evaluated for infertility or breast malignancy. Androgen replacement therapy 
should begin at puberty, around age 12 years, in increasing dosage sufficient to 
maintain age appropriate serum concentrations of testosterone, estradiol, 
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH). The effects on 
physical and cognitive development increase with the number of extra Xs, and 
each extra X is associated with an intelligence quotient (IQ) decrease of 
approximately 15-16 points, with language most affected, particularly expressive 
language skills.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-42
PMCID: PMC1634840
PMID: 17062147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]