---
reference_id: "PMID:23312968"
title: Noonan syndrome.
authors:
- Roberts AE
- Allanson JE
- Tartaglia M
- Gelb BD
journal: Lancet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61023-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noonan syndrome.
**Authors:** Roberts AE, Allanson JE, Tartaglia M, Gelb BD
**Journal:** Lancet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61023-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61023-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2013 Jan 26;381(9863):333-42. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61023-X. Epub
 2013 Jan 10.

Noonan syndrome.

Roberts AE(1), Allanson JE, Tartaglia M, Gelb BD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology and Division of Genetics, Children's Hospital 
Boston, Boston, MA 02115, USA. amy.roberts@cardio.chboston.org

Noonan syndrome is a genetic multisystem disorder characterised by distinctive 
facial features, developmental delay, learning difficulties, short stature, 
congenital heart disease, renal anomalies, lymphatic malformations, and bleeding 
difficulties. Mutations that cause Noonan syndrome alter genes encoding proteins 
with roles in the RAS-MAPK pathway, leading to pathway dysregulation. Management 
guidelines have been developed. Several clinically relevant genotype-phenotype 
correlations aid risk assessment and patient management. Increased understanding 
of the pathophysiology of the disease could help development of pharmacogenetic 
treatments.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61023-X
PMCID: PMC4267483
PMID: 23312968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest BDG and MT have received 
royalties for genetic testing for Noonan syndrome from the following: GeneDx, 
Prevention Genetics, Correlagen, Harvard/Partners, and Baylor College of 
Medicine. AER and JEA declare that they have no conflicts of interest.