---
reference_id: "PMID:20109674"
title: Bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Roos KL
- van de Beek D
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/S0072-9752(09)96004-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Roos KL, van de Beek D
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0072-9752(09)96004-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0072-9752(09)96004-3)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2010;96:51-63. doi: 10.1016/S0072-9752(09)96004-3. Epub
2010  Jan 19.

Bacterial meningitis.

Roos KL(1), van de Beek D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indiana 
University Hospital, Indianapolis, 46202, USA. kroos@iupui.edu

Bacterial meningitis is a neurological emergency. Empiric antimicrobial and 
adjunctive therapy should be initiated as soon as a single set of blood cultures 
has been obtained. Clinical signs suggestive of bacterial meningitis include 
fever, headache, meningismus, vomiting, photophobia, and an altered level of 
consciousness. The peripheral white blood cell count with a left shift, an 
elevated serum procalcitonin and C-reactive protein, and a cerebrospinal fluid 
pleocytosis with a predominance of polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and a decreased 
glucose concentration are predictive of bacterial meningitis. Patients with 
documented bacterial meningitis and those in whom the diagnosis is a strong 
possibility should be admitted to the intensive care unit. Timely recognition of 
bacterial meningitis and initiation of therapy are critical to outcome.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0072-9752(09)96004-3
PMID: 20109674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]