---
reference_id: "PMID:25999666"
title: "Thrombocytopenia in Dengue: Interrelationship between Virus and the Imbalance between Coagulation and Fibrinolysis and Inflammatory Mediators."
authors:
- de Azeredo EL
- Monteiro RQ
- de-Oliveira Pinto LM
journal: Mediators Inflamm
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1155/2015/313842
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thrombocytopenia in Dengue: Interrelationship between Virus and the Imbalance between Coagulation and Fibrinolysis and Inflammatory Mediators.
**Authors:** de Azeredo EL, Monteiro RQ, de-Oliveira Pinto LM
**Journal:** Mediators Inflamm (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2015/313842](https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/313842)

## Content

1. Mediators Inflamm. 2015;2015:313842. doi: 10.1155/2015/313842. Epub 2015 Apr
27.

Thrombocytopenia in Dengue: Interrelationship between Virus and the Imbalance 
between Coagulation and Fibrinolysis and Inflammatory Mediators.

de Azeredo EL(1), Monteiro RQ(2), de-Oliveira Pinto LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Imunologia Viral, IOC, FIOCRUZ, Avenida Brasil 4365, 
Manguinhos, 21040-360 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Bioquimica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do Rio 
de Janeiro, 21941-599 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

Dengue is an infectious disease caused by dengue virus (DENV). In general, 
dengue is a self-limiting acute febrile illness followed by a phase of critical 
defervescence, in which patients may improve or progress to a severe form. 
Severe illness is characterized by hemodynamic disturbances, increased vascular 
permeability, hypovolemia, hypotension, and shock. Thrombocytopenia and platelet 
dysfunction are common in both cases and are related to the clinical outcome. 
Different mechanisms have been hypothesized to explain DENV-associated 
thrombocytopenia, including the suppression of bone marrow and the peripheral 
destruction of platelets. Studies have shown DENV-infected hematopoietic 
progenitors or bone marrow stromal cells. Moreover, anti-platelet antibodies 
would be involved in peripheral platelet destruction as platelets interact with 
endothelial cells, immune cells, and/or DENV. It is not yet clear whether 
platelets play a role in the viral spread. Here, we focus on the mechanisms of 
thrombocytopenia and platelet dysfunction in DENV infection. Because platelets 
participate in the inflammatory and immune response by promoting cytokine, 
chemokine, and inflammatory mediator secretion, their relevance as "immune-like 
effector cells" will be discussed. Finally, an implication for platelets in 
plasma leakage will be also regarded, as thrombocytopenia is associated with 
clinical outcome and higher mortality.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/313842
PMCID: PMC4427128
PMID: 25999666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]