---
reference_id: "PMID:32198705"
title: Pinitol Prevents Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-Induced Inflammatory Responses in BV2 Microglia Mediated by TREM2.
authors:
- Kong J
- Du Z
- Dong L
journal: Neurotox Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s12640-020-00187-z
keywords:
- Animals
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/administration & dosage"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Encephalitis/chemically induced, metabolism, prevention & control"
- Inflammation Mediators/metabolism
- "Inositol/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives"
- "Lipopolysaccharides/administration & dosage"
- Membrane Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Microglia/drug effects, metabolism"
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
- "Receptors, Immunologic/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pinitol Prevents Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-Induced Inflammatory Responses in BV2 Microglia Mediated by TREM2.
**Authors:** Kong J, Du Z, Dong L
**Journal:** Neurotox Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12640-020-00187-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12640-020-00187-z)

## Content

1. Neurotox Res. 2020 Jun;38(1):96-104. doi: 10.1007/s12640-020-00187-z. Epub
2020  Mar 20.

Pinitol Prevents Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-Induced Inflammatory Responses in BV2 
Microglia Mediated by TREM2.

Kong J(1), Du Z(2), Dong L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Medicine, Zhoukou Central Hospital, Zhoukou, 466000, 
Henan, China. lujichen7351@163.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, 100300, China.
(3)Department of General Medicine, Zhoukou Central Hospital, Zhoukou, 466000, 
Henan, China.

Microglia-involved neuroinflammation in the central nervous system (CNS) has 
been shown to aggravate brain damage and is associated with the pathogenesis of 
various neurodegenerative diseases. Thus, suppression of microglial activity has 
the potential to be a strategy for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. 
Pinitol, a methylated product of D-chiro-inositol, has been used as a treatment 
for blood-sugar metabolism and as an anti-tumor agent via its anti-inflammatory 
effects in cancer. However, whether or not pinitol can inhibit 
microglia-associated neuroinflammation is still unknown. This study aims to 
determine the effects of pinitol on inflammatory responses in BV2 microglia 
induced by LPS. Here, we found that the presence of pinitol ameliorates 
LPS-induced oxidative stress by reducing the production of ROS. Pinitol 
suppresses the expression and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as 
TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6. Notably, pinitol prevents the production of NO and PGE2 
by inhibiting the expression of iNOS and COX-2. Mechanistically, our findings 
demonstrate that pinitol inhibits the phosphorylation and degradation of IκBα 
and subsequent activation of NF-κB. Furthermore, we show that pinitol increases 
the expression of TREM2 in BV2 microglia, and silencing of TREM2 abolished the 
anti-inflammatory effects of pinitol. These findings suggest that TREM2 mediates 
the protective effects of pinitol against LPS in microglia. In summary, our 
results display that pinitol possesses a robust and beneficial effect against 
the LPS-induced inflammatory response in microglia.

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-020-00187-z
PMID: 32198705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]