---
reference_id: "PMID:34756790"
title: Arterial Blood Gas and Rotational Thromboelastometry Parameters in Healthy Rescuers Incidentally Exposed to Nitroglycerin, Nitrogen Compounds, and Combustion Products.
authors:
- Petrucci E
- Cofini V
- Pizzi B
- Necozione S
- Marinangeli F
journal: Wilderness Environ Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.wem.2021.08.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial Blood Gas and Rotational Thromboelastometry Parameters in Healthy Rescuers Incidentally Exposed to Nitroglycerin, Nitrogen Compounds, and Combustion Products.
**Authors:** Petrucci E, Cofini V, Pizzi B, Necozione S, Marinangeli F
**Journal:** Wilderness Environ Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.wem.2021.08.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wem.2021.08.009)

## Content

1. Wilderness Environ Med. 2022 Mar;33(1):7-16. doi: 10.1016/j.wem.2021.08.009. 
Epub 2021 Oct 30.

Arterial Blood Gas and Rotational Thromboelastometry Parameters in Healthy 
Rescuers Incidentally Exposed to Nitroglycerin, Nitrogen Compounds, and 
Combustion Products.

Petrucci E(1), Cofini V(2), Pizzi B(3), Necozione S(2), Marinangeli F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Unit, San Salvatore Academic 
Hospital of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy. Electronic address: 
petrucciemiliano@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, University of 
L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(3)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Unit, SS Filippo and Nicola 
Academic Hospital of Avezzano, L'Aquila, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Acute exposure to nitrogen compounds combined with a massive 
inhalation of air pollutants can influence respiratory and cardiovascular 
symptoms and coagulation abnormalities in accidentally exposed healthy adults 
during cave detonation operations.
METHODS: Italian alpine and cave rescuers widened a cave in the Abisso Luca 
Kralj in Trieste, Italy. Volunteers inside the cave were accidentally exposed to 
the fumes from an uncontrolled detonation of blasting gelatin microcharges. We 
performed a retrospective cohort study on the clinical data, arterial blood gas 
analysis, and rotational thromboelastometry parameters from the rescuers 
involved in the accident.
RESULTS: Ninety-three healthy rescuers were involved in the uncontrolled 
detonation: 47 volunteers handled a mixture of nitrogen compounds (blaster 
group), and 46 volunteers did not (nonblaster group). After the accident, 
statistically significant differences (P<0.05) in arterial blood gas values were 
observed between the groups, with a pattern of mild respiratory acidosis with 
hypercapnia in the nonblaster group and severe mixed acid-base disorder with 
hypoxia and hypercapnia in the blaster group. Mild hyperfibrinolysis was 
observed in 44 volunteers in the blaster group, as were associated bleeding 
symptoms in 34 volunteers; no significant coagulation modifications were 
recorded in the nonblaster group.
CONCLUSIONS: Respiratory acidosis with hypoxia, hypercapnia, a compensatory 
metabolic response, and mild hyperfibrinolysis were probably related to the 
combined effect of nitrogen compounds and the inhaled toxic products of 
detonation. Therefore, each element exerts a determinant effect on promoting the 
biological toxicity of the others.

Copyright © 2021 Wilderness Medical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wem.2021.08.009
PMID: 34756790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]