---
reference_id: "PMID:22152683"
title: Disruption of teashirt zinc finger homeobox 1 is associated with congenital aural atresia in humans.
authors:
- Feenstra I
- Vissers LE
- Pennings RJ
- Nillessen W
- Pfundt R
- Kunst HP
- Admiraal RJ
- Veltman JA
- van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM
- Brunner HG
- Cremers CW
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.008
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18"
- Ear Canal/abnormalities
- Female
- Flatfoot
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Haploinsufficiency
- "Hearing Loss/diagnosis, genetics"
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Pedigree
- Pregnancy
- Repressor Proteins
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of teashirt zinc finger homeobox 1 is associated with congenital aural atresia in humans.
**Authors:** Feenstra I, Vissers LE, Pennings RJ, Nillessen W, Pfundt R, Kunst HP, Admiraal RJ, Veltman JA, van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM, Brunner HG, Cremers CW
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.008)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Dec 9;89(6):813-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.008.

Disruption of teashirt zinc finger homeobox 1 is associated with congenital 
aural atresia in humans.

Feenstra I(1), Vissers LE, Pennings RJ, Nillessen W, Pfundt R, Kunst HP, 
Admiraal RJ, Veltman JA, van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM, Brunner HG, Cremers CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. i.feenstra@antrg.umcn.nl

Congenital aural atresia (CAA) can occur as an isolated congenital malformation 
or in the context of a number of monogenic and chromosomal syndromes. CAA is 
frequently seen in individuals with an 18q deletion, which is characterized by 
intellectual disability, reduced white-matter myelination, foot deformities, and 
distinctive facial features. Previous work has indicated that a critical region 
for CAA is located in 18q22.3. We studied four individuals (from two families) 
with CAA and other features suggestive of an 18q deletion, and we detected 
overlapping microdeletions in 18q22.3 in both families. The minimal region of 
deletion overlap (72.9-73.4 Mb) contained only one known gene, TSHZ1, which was 
recently shown to be important for murine middle-ear development. Sequence 
analysis of the coding exons in TSHZ1 in a cohort of 11 individuals with 
isolated, nonsyndromic bilateral CAA revealed two mutations, c.723G>A 
(p.Trp241X) and c.946_947delinsA (p.Pro316ThrfsX16), and both mutations 
predicted a loss of function. Together, these results demonstrate that 
hemizygosity of TSHZ1 leads to congenital aural atresia as a result of 
haploinsufficiency.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.008
PMCID: PMC3234381
PMID: 22152683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]