---
reference_id: "PMID:37542647"
title: Anti-inflammatory Effects of Siponimod in a Mouse Model of Excitotoxicity-Induced Retinal Injury.
authors:
- Basavarajappa D
- Gupta V
- Chitranshi N
- Viswanathan D
- Gupta V
- Vander Wall R
- Palanivel V
- Mirzaei M
- You Y
- Klistorner A
- Graham SL
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03535-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-inflammatory Effects of Siponimod in a Mouse Model of Excitotoxicity-Induced Retinal Injury.
**Authors:** Basavarajappa D, Gupta V, Chitranshi N, Viswanathan D, Gupta V, Vander Wall R, Palanivel V, Mirzaei M, You Y, Klistorner A, Graham SL
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-023-03535-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-023-03535-0)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2023 Dec;60(12):7222-7237. doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03535-0.
Epub  2023 Aug 5.

Anti-inflammatory Effects of Siponimod in a Mouse Model of 
Excitotoxicity-Induced Retinal Injury.

Basavarajappa D(1), Gupta V(2), Chitranshi N(3), Viswanathan D(3), Gupta V(4), 
Vander Wall R(3), Palanivel V(3), Mirzaei M(3), You Y(3), Klistorner A(3), 
Graham SL(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, 
Macquarie University, North Ryde, Sydney, NSW, 2109, Australia. 
devaraj.basavarajappa@mq.edu.au.
(2)Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, 
Macquarie University, North Ryde, Sydney, NSW, 2109, Australia. 
vivek.gupta@mq.edu.au.
(3)Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, 
Macquarie University, North Ryde, Sydney, NSW, 2109, Australia.
(4)School of Medicine, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Australia.
(5)Save Sight Institute, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2000, Australia.

Glaucoma is a leading cause of permanent blindness worldwide and is 
characterized by neurodegeneration linked to progressive retinal ganglion cell 
(RGC) death, axonal damage, and neuroinflammation. Glutamate excitotoxicity 
mediated through N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors plays a crucial role in 
glaucomatous RGC loss. Sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors (S1PRs) are important 
mediators of neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in the brain and the 
retina. Siponimod is an immunomodulatory drug for multiple sclerosis and is a 
selective modulator of S1PR subtypes 1 and 5 and has been shown to have 
beneficial effects on the central nervous system (CNS) in degenerative 
conditions. Our previous study showed that mice administered orally with 
siponimod protected inner retinal structure and function against acute NMDA 
excitotoxicity. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms behind these protective 
effects, we investigated the inflammatory pathways affected by siponimod 
treatment in NMDA excitotoxicity model. NMDA excitotoxicity resulted in the 
activation of glial cells coupled with upregulation of the inflammatory NF-kB 
pathway and increased expression of TNFα, IL1-β, and IL-6. Siponimod treatment 
significantly reduced glial activation and suppressed the pro-inflammatory 
pathways. Furthermore, NMDA-induced activation of NLRP3 inflammasome and 
upregulation of neurotoxic inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) were 
significantly diminished with siponimod treatment. Our data demonstrated that 
siponimod induces anti-inflammatory effects via suppression of glial activation 
and inflammatory singling pathways that could protect the retina against acute 
excitotoxicity conditions. These findings provide insights into the 
anti-inflammatory effects of siponimod in the CNS and suggest a potential 
therapeutic strategy for neuroinflammatory conditions.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-023-03535-0
PMCID: PMC10657799
PMID: 37542647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.