---
reference_id: "PMID:35811432"
title: Koolen-de Vries syndrome associated with continuous spike-wave in sleep.
authors:
- Khan AQ
- Coorg RK
- Gill D
- Marini C
- Myers KA
journal: Epileptic Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1684/epd.2022.1452
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Electroencephalography
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Landau-Kleffner Syndrome/diagnosis
- Seizures
- Sleep/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Koolen-de Vries syndrome associated with continuous spike-wave in sleep.
**Authors:** Khan AQ, Coorg RK, Gill D, Marini C, Myers KA
**Journal:** Epileptic Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1684/epd.2022.1452](https://doi.org/10.1684/epd.2022.1452)

## Content

1. Epileptic Disord. 2022 Oct 1;24(5):928-933. doi: 10.1684/epd.2022.1452.

Koolen-de Vries syndrome associated with continuous spike-wave in sleep.

[Article in English]

Khan AQ(1), Coorg RK(2)(3), Gill D(4), Marini C(5), Myers KA(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of the McGill University Medical Centre, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada
(2)Department of Neurology, Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Baylor University, Houston, Texas, USA
(4)Department of Neurology, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia
(5)Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Salesi Pediatric Hospital, United Hospitals 
of Ancona, Ancona, Italy
(6)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Children’s Hospital, 
McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
(7)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Montreal Children’s 
Hospital, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

Koolen-de Vries syndrome (KdVS) is a genetic condition caused by 17q21.31 
microdeletions or pathogenic variants in KANSL1. Affected patients most commonly 
exhibit some or all of the following: neonatal hypotonia, developmental 
impairment, facial dysmorphic features, and congenital malformations. Epilepsy 
occurs in approximately half, often with phenotypes on the epilepsyaphasia 
spectrum. We describe six children with KdVS found to have continuous spike-wave 
in sleep (CSWS) on EEG, four of whom were diagnosed with epileptic 
encephalopathy with CSWS and two with Landau-Kleffner syndrome. When compared 
with other children with CSWS on EEG, patients with KdVS may present at slightly 
later ages and with a longer interval between seizure diagnosis and 
identification of CSWS. There is no clear best treatment for children with CSWS, 
but two patients in our cohort were trialed on a variation of the ketogenic 
diet, and both reported clinical improvement. In one of the patients, the 
response was dramatic, and CSWS recurred when weaning of the ketogenic diet was 
attempted. Based on our findings, an EEG capturing a prolonged period of sleep 
should be arranged in any child with KdVS presenting with developmental 
regression or plateau, particularly if they have a preceding history of 
seizures.

DOI: 10.1684/epd.2022.1452
PMID: 35811432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]