---
reference_id: "PMID:38552815"
title: "Hematoporphyrin injection mediated photodynamic therapy for secondary squamous cell carcinoma of arsenical keratosis: A case report."
authors:
- Fu T
- Shen B
- Liu X
- Ma G
- Li L
- Feng H
journal: Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2024.104071
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Photochemotherapy/methods
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/drug therapy"
- Photosensitizing Agents/therapeutic use
- Hematoporphyrins/therapeutic use
- Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Keratosis/drug therapy, chemically induced"
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematoporphyrin injection mediated photodynamic therapy for secondary squamous cell carcinoma of arsenical keratosis: A case report.
**Authors:** Fu T, Shen B, Liu X, Ma G, Li L, Feng H
**Journal:** Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pdpdt.2024.104071](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pdpdt.2024.104071)

## Content

1. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2024 Apr;46:104071. doi:
10.1016/j.pdpdt.2024.104071. Epub 2024 Mar 28.

Hematoporphyrin injection mediated photodynamic therapy for secondary squamous
cell carcinoma of arsenical keratosis: A case report.

Fu T(1), Shen B(1), Liu X(1), Ma G(1), Li L(2), Feng H(3).

Author information:
(1)Heilongjiang Provincial Hospital, Harbin City, Heilongjiang Province, China.
(2)Heilongjiang Provincial Hospital, Harbin City, Heilongjiang Province, China.
Electronic address: echomu@126.com.
(3)Heilongjiang Provincial Hospital, Harbin City, Heilongjiang Province, China.
Electronic address: king-wolf2001.co@163.com.

Hematoporphyrin injection (HpD) mediated photodynamic therapy (PDT) has
demonstrated efficacy in treating various types of Bowen's disease, including
basal-cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, extramammary Paget's disease, and
actinic keratosis. We present a case of a male patient who developed squamous
cell carcinoma as a result of repeated instances of arsenic-induced keratosis on
both his hands and feet. Due to the involvement of the joint in both hands, the
patient declined the conventional surgical resection treatment since it could
potentially impact normal physiological function. Instead, the patient chose to
undergo hemoporphyrin photodynamic therapy. After the treatment, the rash was
entirely eliminated and there were no restrictions in the movement of the joint.
Nevertheless, a local recurrence was detected throughout the two-year monitoring
period. Arsenical keratosis carries a substantial likelihood of recurring.
However, we believe that hemoporphyrin photodynamic therapy is effective in
treating this condition.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2024.104071
PMID: 38552815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest No conflicting
relationship exists for any author.
