---
reference_id: "PMID:35880537"
title: "G6PD deficiency: imbalance of functional dichotomy contributing to the severity of COVID-19."
authors:
- Mondal A
- Mukherjee S
- Dar W
- Upadhyay P
- Ranganathan A
- Pati S
- Singh S
journal: Future Microbiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2217/fmb-2021-0299
content_type: abstract_only
---

# G6PD deficiency: imbalance of functional dichotomy contributing to the severity of COVID-19.
**Authors:** Mondal A, Mukherjee S, Dar W, Upadhyay P, Ranganathan A, Pati S, Singh S
**Journal:** Future Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fmb-2021-0299](https://doi.org/10.2217/fmb-2021-0299)

## Content

1. Future Microbiol. 2022 Sep;17:1161-1170. doi: 10.2217/fmb-2021-0299. Epub 2022
 Jul 26.

G6PD deficiency: imbalance of functional dichotomy contributing to the severity 
of COVID-19.

Mondal A(1), Mukherjee S(1), Dar W(1), Upadhyay P(1), Ranganathan A(2), Pati 
S(1), Singh S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Neurobiology &amp; Disease Modelling Laboratory, 
Host-Pathogen Interactions &amp; Disease Modelling Group, School of Natural 
Sciences, Shiv Nadar University, Greater Noida, 201314, India.
(2)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New 
Delhi, India.

Human COVID-19 has affected more than 491 million people worldwide. It has 
caused over 6.1 million deaths and has especially perpetrated a high number of 
casualties among the elderly and those with comorbid illnesses. COVID-19 
triggers a pro-oxidant response, leading to the production of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) as a common innate defense mechanism. However, ROS are regulated 
by a key enzyme called G6PD via the production of reduced nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), which controls the generation and removal of ROS 
in a tissue-specific manner. Therefore, a deficiency of G6PD can lead to the 
dysregulation of ROS, which causes a severe inflammatory response in COVID-19 
patients. This report highlights the G6PD dichotomy in the regulation of ROS and 
inflammatory responses, as well as its deficiency in severity among COVID-19 
patients.

DOI: 10.2217/fmb-2021-0299
PMCID: PMC9332910
PMID: 35880537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]