---
reference_id: "PMID:24802957"
title: Dendritic cells in autoimmune disorders and cancer of the thyroid.
authors:
- Lewinski A
- Sliwka PW
- Stasiolek M
journal: Folia Histochem Cytobiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.5603/FHC.2014.0002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dendritic cells in autoimmune disorders and cancer of the thyroid.
**Authors:** Lewinski A, Sliwka PW, Stasiolek M
**Journal:** Folia Histochem Cytobiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.5603/FHC.2014.0002](https://doi.org/10.5603/FHC.2014.0002)

## Content

1. Folia Histochem Cytobiol. 2014;52(1):18-28. doi: 10.5603/FHC.2014.0002.

Dendritic cells in autoimmune disorders and cancer of the thyroid.

Lewinski A(1), Sliwka PW, Stasiolek M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Polish Mother's Memorial 
Hospital, Lodz, Poland. alewin@csk.umed.lodz.pl.

Dendritic cells (DCs), considered as one of the crucial immune regulatory 
populations, are implicated in the immune pathology of various disorders. Also 
in the thyroid gland, DCs were shown to be involved in early and chronic phases 
of various types of autoimmunity - including Hashimoto's thyroiditis and Graves' 
disease. In thyroid malignant processes, DCs are suggested as an important 
element of both tumour defence and tumour immune evasion mechanisms. Recent 
findings emphasize a crucial role of interactions between particular DC subsets 
and other regulatory cell populations (e.g. FoxP3+ regulatory T cells) in 
thyroid pathology. Additionally, an increasing attention has been paid to the 
control of DC function by thyrometabolic conditions.

DOI: 10.5603/FHC.2014.0002
PMID: 24802957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]