---
reference_id: "PMID:28126357"
title: Hepatoblastoma.
authors:
- Sharma D
- Subbarao G
- Saxena R
journal: Semin Diagn Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2016.12.015
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- "Hepatoblastoma/pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Liver Neoplasms/pathology, therapy"
- Liver Transplantation
- Male
- Neoadjuvant Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatoblastoma.
**Authors:** Sharma D, Subbarao G, Saxena R
**Journal:** Semin Diagn Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.semdp.2016.12.015](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.semdp.2016.12.015)

## Content

1. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2017 Mar;34(2):192-200. doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2016.12.015. 
Epub 2016 Dec 23.

Hepatoblastoma.

Sharma D(1), Subbarao G(2), Saxena R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, United States.
(2)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, United States.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, United States. Electronic address: rsaxena@iupui.edu.

Hepatoblastoma is the most common primary malignant hepatic tumor of infancy and 
childhood, occurring predominantly in the first two years of life. The 
management of hepatoblastoma has changed markedly over the last 3 decades; 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy is now standard, particularly in unresectable tumors 
resulting in considerable preoperative tumor shrinkage and sometimes near total 
ablation of the tumor. A 20 month old infant was incidentally found to have a 
7.6cm right sided retroperitoneal tumor on routine screening ultrasonography for 
left ureteral stenosis. Serum alpha fetoprotein was elevated. Biopsy revealed 
hepatoblastoma, mixed epithelial and embryonal type without mesenchymal 
elements. He underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Although the tumor had 
decreased considerably in size, close proximity to major vascular structures 
precluded safe resection. Liver transplantation was performed; the explanted 
liver showed complete tumor necrosis with no residual malignancy. The 
postoperative course was uncomplicated and he is continuing on sixth cycle of 
chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semdp.2016.12.015
PMID: 28126357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]