---
reference_id: "PMID:11270184"
title: Thanatophoric dysplasia type I.
authors:
- Chang TK
- Wang Y
- Liu AM
- Tung JC
journal: Acta Paediatr Taiwan
year: '2001'
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mutation
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thanatophoric dysplasia type I.
**Authors:** Chang TK, Wang Y, Liu AM, Tung JC
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr Taiwan (2001)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr Taiwan. 2001 Jan-Feb;42(1):39-41.

Thanatophoric dysplasia type I.

Chang TK(1), Wang Y, Liu AM, Tung JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shalu Tung's General Hospital, No. 8, Cheng Kung 
West St., Shalu, Taichung 43304, Taiwan.

Thanatophoric dysplasia is a sporadic, nearly always lethal congenital skeletal 
dysplasia. It is characterized by shortening of the limbs, a severely small 
thorax, macrocephaly, and platyspondyly. There are two major subtypes: a short, 
curved femur characterizes type I, and a straighter femur with cloverleaf skull 
characterizes type II. Recently, mutations in the fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 3 (FGFR-3) gene have been identified in both subtypes, which suggest 
that thanatophoric dysplasia is a genetically homogenous skeletal disorder. Most 
affected neonates die of respiratory failure, due to narrow thorax with 
pulmonary hypoplasia. Antenatal sonographic diagnosis is feasible in the second 
trimester of pregnancy, but differentiating thanatophoric dysplasia from 
non-lethal skeletal disorders is very important. At the present time, however, 
prenatal genetic screening seems unpractical.

PMID: 11270184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]