---
reference_id: "PMID:40790568"
title: Predictors of survival among children and adolescents with rhabdomyosarcoma treated in a single resource-limited centre -Uganda.
authors:
- Nyeko R
- Geriga F
- Angom R
- Kambugu JB
- van Heerden J
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-025-14735-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Uganda/epidemiology
- Female
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/mortality, therapy, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of survival among children and adolescents with rhabdomyosarcoma treated in a single resource-limited centre -Uganda.
**Authors:** Nyeko R, Geriga F, Angom R, Kambugu JB, van Heerden J
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-025-14735-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-025-14735-3)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2025 Aug 11;25(1):1299. doi: 10.1186/s12885-025-14735-3.

Predictors of survival among children and adolescents with rhabdomyosarcoma
treated in a single resource-limited centre -Uganda.

Nyeko R(1)(2), Geriga F(3), Angom R(3), Kambugu JB(3), van Heerden J(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Lira University, P.O. Box 1035,
Lira, Uganda. rnyeko2@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Paediatric Oncology, Uganda Cancer Institute, P.O. Box 3935,
Kampala, Uganda. rnyeko2@gmail.com.
(3)Division of Paediatric Oncology, Uganda Cancer Institute, P.O. Box 3935,
Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Department of Paediatric Haemato-Oncology, Antwerp University Hospital,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: The treatment outcomes for children and adolescents with
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) in low-income countries are poor. However, there is a
paucity of literature on RMS and its management outcomes in low-resource
settings. We evaluated the treatment of RMS with the aim of identifying
prognostic factors during management to improve outcomes.
METHODS: We sourced data on children under 18 years treated for rhabdomyosarcoma
at the Uganda Cancer Institute between January 2016 and December 2020.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox's proportional hazards model were used
for five-year survival analysis.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-eight RMS cases were identified, with a median age
of 6.0 years (IQR 3.6-10.0). The most common primary tumour site was the head
and neck region, comprising non-parameingeal sites, 37 (28.9%); parameingeal
sites, 32 (25.0%); and orbital tumours, 17 (13.3%). Overall, 68 (53.1%) of the
primary tumour sites were unfavourable sites. Seventeen (13.3%) patients had
metastatic disease at diagnosis, primarily to the lungs, 11 (64.8%). Embryonal
and alveolar RMS accounted for 50.0% and 20.3% of the cases, respectively. Only
31 (24.2%) of the patients underwent surgery, and 36 (28.1%) were irradiated.
The treatment completion rate was 33.6%, while 46.1% abandoned treatment. Only
25 (19.5%) patients were alive at the time of the study, 65 (50.8%) had died,
and 38 (29.7%) had an unknown status. The five-year overall and event-free
survival rates were 35% and 30%, respectively. Orbital primary tumour site
(HR = 2.86; 95% CI 1.12-7.31; p = 0.028), metastatic disease (HR = 4.09; 95% CI
2.01-8.31; p < 0.001), elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase at diagnosis above
400 U/L (HR = 2.80; 95% CI 1.46-5.33; p = 0.002), and lack of local control
(HR = 3.33; 95% CI 1.34-8.29; p = 0.010) were significant factors for poor
survival.
CONCLUSION: Rhabdomyosarcoma outcomes in Ugandan children are largely poor, with
high treatment abandonment and mortality. Concerted, multidisciplinary efforts
are needed to improve outcomes in this setting.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-025-14735-3
PMCID: PMC12337547
PMID: 40790568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines
and regulations, and the study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki. The study was approved by the Uganda Cancer Institute Research and
Ethics Committee (UCIREC-2022-45). Where a phone call to ascertain a child’s
status was required, informed verbal consent was obtained from the parents or
guardians at the point of introduction during the call. Consent for publication:
Not applicable. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
