---
reference_id: "PMID:38669583"
title: Clinicopathological and pedigree investigation of a novel spinocerebellar neurological disease in juvenile Quarter Horses in North America.
authors:
- Willis AT
- Dahlgren AR
- Woolard KD
- Ghosh S
- Donnelly CG
- de la Concha-Bermejillo A
- Pacheco A
- Watson KD
- Berryhill E
- Aleman M
- Wensley F
- Humphreys S
- Whitehead AE
- Goldsmith D
- Chesen B
- Ragsdale J
- Tompkins JE
- Nash R
- Plunkett AH
- Qualls HJ
- Rodriguez K
- Hochanadel D
- Miller AD
- Finno CJ
journal: J Vet Intern Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/jvim.17049
keywords:
- Animals
- Horses
- "Horse Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Male
- Female
- North America
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/veterinary, genetics, pathology"
- "Nervous System Diseases/veterinary, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathological and pedigree investigation of a novel spinocerebellar neurological disease in juvenile Quarter Horses in North America.
**Authors:** Willis AT, Dahlgren AR, Woolard KD, Ghosh S, Donnelly CG, de la Concha-Bermejillo A, Pacheco A, Watson KD, Berryhill E, Aleman M, Wensley F, Humphreys S, Whitehead AE, Goldsmith D, Chesen B, Ragsdale J, Tompkins JE, Nash R, Plunkett AH, Qualls HJ, Rodriguez K, Hochanadel D, Miller AD, Finno CJ
**Journal:** J Vet Intern Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jvim.17049](https://doi.org/10.1111/jvim.17049)

## Content

1. J Vet Intern Med. 2024 May-Jun;38(3):1808-1814. doi: 10.1111/jvim.17049. Epub 
2024 Apr 26.

Clinicopathological and pedigree investigation of a novel spinocerebellar 
neurological disease in juvenile Quarter Horses in North America.

Willis AT(1), Dahlgren AR(2), Woolard KD(3), Ghosh S(2), Donnelly CG(4), de la 
Concha-Bermejillo A(5), Pacheco A(6), Watson KD(7), Berryhill E(8), Aleman M(8), 
Wensley F(8), Humphreys S(9), Whitehead AE(10), Goldsmith D(11), Chesen B(12), 
Ragsdale J(13), Tompkins JE(14), Nash R(15), Plunkett AH(1), Qualls HJ(1), 
Rodriguez K(1), Hochanadel D(1), Miller AD(16), Finno CJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Weatherford Equine Medical Center, Weatherford, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of California, Davis, California, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Texas A&M Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, Texas 
A&M University System, College Station, Texas, USA.
(6)Carlson College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
Oregon, USA.
(7)California Animal Health and Food Safety Lab, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(9)Humphreys Veterinary Consulting, LLC, Salem, Oregon, USA.
(10)University of Calgary, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada.
(11)Diagnostic Services Unit, University of Calgary, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(12)Equine Comprehensive Wellness, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.
(13)New Mexico Department of Agriculture, Veterinary Diagnostic Services, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.
(14)Mountain Veterinary Clinic, Tucumcari, New Mexico, USA.
(15)Ronald Nash, DVM, Magnolia, Arkansas, USA.
(16)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, Section of 
Anatomic Pathology, Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, 
New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: In 2020, a novel neurologic disease was observed in juvenile Quarter 
Horses (QHs) in North America. It was unknown if this was an aberrant 
manifestation of another previously described neurological disorder in foals, 
such as equine neuroaxonal dystrophy/equine degenerative myeloencephalopathy 
(eNAD/EDM).
HYPOTHESIS/OBJECTIVES: To describe the clinical findings, outcomes, and 
postmortem changes with Equine Juvenile Spinocerebellar Ataxia (EJSCA), 
differentiate the disease from other similar neurological disorders, and 
determine a mode of inheritance.
ANIMALS: Twelve neurologically affected QH foals and the dams.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was isolated and pedigrees were manually constructed.
RESULTS: All foals (n = 12/12) had a history of acute onset of neurological 
deficits with no history of trauma. Neurological deficits were characterized by 
asymmetrical spinal ataxia, with pelvic limbs more severely affected than 
thoracic limbs. Clinicopathological abnormalities included high serum activity 
of gamma-glutamyl transferase and hyperglycemia. All foals became recumbent 
(median, 3 days: [0-18 days]), which necessitated humane euthanasia (n = 11/12, 
92%; the remaining case was found dead). Histological evaluation at postmortem 
revealed dilated myelin sheaths and digestion chambers within the spinal cord, 
most prominently in the dorsal spinocerebellar tracts. Pedigree analysis 
revealed a likely autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: EJSCA is a uniformly fatal, rapidly 
progressive, likely autosomal recessive neurological disease of QHs <1 month of 
age in North America that is etiologically distinct from other clinically 
similar neurological disorders. Once the causative variant for EJSCA is 
validated, carriers can be identified through genetic testing to inform breeding 
decisions.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jvim.17049
PMCID: PMC11099776
PMID: 38669583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interest.