---
reference_id: "PMID:37850747"
title: Kinetics of severe dengue virus infection and development of gut pathology in mice.
authors:
- Pliego Zamora A
- Kim J
- Vajjhala PR
- Thygesen SJ
- Watterson D
- Modhiran N
- Bielefeldt-Ohmann H
- Stacey KJ
journal: J Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.01251-23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kinetics of severe dengue virus infection and development of gut pathology in mice.
**Authors:** Pliego Zamora A, Kim J, Vajjhala PR, Thygesen SJ, Watterson D, Modhiran N, Bielefeldt-Ohmann H, Stacey KJ
**Journal:** J Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.01251-23](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.01251-23)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2023 Nov 30;97(11):e0125123. doi: 10.1128/jvi.01251-23. Epub 2023 Oct
 18.

Kinetics of severe dengue virus infection and development of gut pathology in 
mice.

Pliego Zamora A(#)(1), Kim J(#)(1), Vajjhala PR(1), Thygesen SJ(1), Watterson 
D(1)(2), Modhiran N(1), Bielefeldt-Ohmann H(1)(2), Stacey KJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland , 
St Lucia, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, The University of Queensland 
, St Lucia, Queensland, Australia.
(#)Contributed equally

Dengue virus, an arbovirus, causes an estimated 100 million symptomatic 
infections annually and is an increasing threat as the mosquito range expands 
with climate change. Dengue epidemics are a substantial strain on local 
economies and health infrastructure, and an understanding of what drives severe 
disease may enable treatments to help reduce hospitalizations. Factors 
exacerbating dengue disease are debated, but gut-related symptoms are much more 
frequent in severe than mild cases. Using mouse models of dengue infection, we 
have shown that inflammation and damage are earlier and more severe in the gut 
than in other tissues. Additionally, we observed impairment of the gut mucus 
layer and propose that breakdown of the barrier function exacerbates 
inflammation and promotes severe dengue disease. This idea is supported by 
recent data from human patients showing elevated bacteria-derived molecules in 
dengue patient serum. Therapies aiming to maintain gut integrity may help to 
abrogate severe dengue disease.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.01251-23
PMCID: PMC10688336
PMID: 37850747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.