---
reference_id: "PMID:39634276"
title: "Case report: A case of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency with respiratory tract as the initial symptom."
authors:
- Zou H
- Yang L
- Zhang R
- Qin Y
journal: Front Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1439343
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: A case of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency with respiratory tract as the initial symptom.
**Authors:** Zou H, Yang L, Zhang R, Qin Y
**Journal:** Front Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2024.1439343](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2024.1439343)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2024 Nov 20;15:1439343. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1439343. 
eCollection 2024.

Case report: A case of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency with respiratory 
tract as the initial symptom.

Zou H(1), Yang L(1), Zhang R(1), Qin Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Genetics and Metabolism, Jiangxi Provincial 
Children's Hospital, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.

INTRODUCTION: Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency (HLCSD) is a rare autosomal 
recessive genetic disorder caused by mutations in the holocarboxylase synthetase 
(HLCS) gene, which affects multiple systems. Common clinical manifestations 
include metabolic acidosis, rash, feeding difficulties, and growth retardation, 
with predominant involvement of the nervous system, skin, and hair. However, 
respiratory symptoms as the initial manifestation are relatively rare.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the case of a 1 year and 4-month-old Chinese male 
patient who presented with a 2-day history of cough, followed by half a day of 
wheezing and shortness of breath. Despite supportive treatment with antibiotics 
upon admission, the infant continued to experience rapid and deep breathing 
accompanied by groaning, and obvious wheezing. Blood gas analysis revealed 
metabolic acidosis that was difficult to correct. Blood tandem mass spectrometry 
showed elevations in C50H, C3, C4OH, and urine organic acid analysis revealed 
elevations in lactate, 3-hydroxybutyric acid, 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid, 
acetoacetic acid, 3-methylcrotonylglycine, and methylcitric acid. Genetic 
testing revealed two variants in the HLCS gene in the infant: NM_001352514: 
exon6: c.1088T>A: p.V363D variant and exon11: c.2434C>T: p.R812* heterozygous 
variant, resulting in HLCSD. Ultimately, the diagnosis of HLCSD was established, 
and oral biotin treatment achieved good clinical efficacy.
CONCLUSION: This article summarizes the clinical data of a case of HLCSD in an 
infant, primarily presenting with respiratory symptoms. It provides a 
comprehensive summary of the etiology, diagnosis, and treatment, offering 
insights for the diagnosis of rare diseases by clinical physicians.

Copyright © 2024 Zou, Yang, Zhang and Qin.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1439343
PMCID: PMC11614753
PMID: 39634276

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.