---
reference_id: "PMID:36858169"
title: "Clinical phenotype and complications of large vessel giant cell arteritis: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Lyne SA
- Ruediger C
- Lester S
- Kaur G
- Stamp L
- Shanahan EM
- Hill CL
journal: Joint Bone Spine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2023.105558
keywords:
- Humans
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical phenotype and complications of large vessel giant cell arteritis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Lyne SA, Ruediger C, Lester S, Kaur G, Stamp L, Shanahan EM, Hill CL
**Journal:** Joint Bone Spine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbspin.2023.105558](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbspin.2023.105558)

## Content

1. Joint Bone Spine. 2023 Jul;90(4):105558. doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2023.105558.
Epub  2023 Feb 28.

Clinical phenotype and complications of large vessel giant cell arteritis: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Lyne SA(1), Ruediger C(2), Lester S(2), Kaur G(3), Stamp L(4), Shanahan EM(5), 
Hill CL(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Adelaide, North Terrace, Adelaide 5005, South Australia, 
Australia; Rheumatology Department, Level 5 the Tower Block, The Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital, 28, Woodville road, Woodville 5011, South Australia, Australia; 
Rheumatology Department, Flinders Medical Centre, Flinders Drive, Bedford Park 
5042, South Australia, Australia. Electronic address: 
Suellen.Lyne@adelaide.edu.au.
(2)University of Adelaide, North Terrace, Adelaide 5005, South Australia, 
Australia; Rheumatology Department, Level 5 the Tower Block, The Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital, 28, Woodville road, Woodville 5011, South Australia, Australia.
(3)Rheumatology Department, Christchurch Hospital, 2, Riccarton avenue, 
Christchurch Central City, 4710 Christchurch, New Zealand.
(4)Rheumatology Department, Christchurch Hospital, 2, Riccarton avenue, 
Christchurch Central City, 4710 Christchurch, New Zealand; University of Otago, 
Christchurch Hospital, 2, Riccarton avenue, Christchurch Central City, 4710 
Christchurch, New Zealand.
(5)Rheumatology Department, Flinders Medical Centre, Flinders Drive, Bedford 
Park 5042, South Australia, Australia; Flinders University, Sturt Road, Bedford 
Park 5042, South Australia, Australia.
(6)University of Adelaide, North Terrace, Adelaide 5005, South Australia, 
Australia; Rheumatology Department, Level 5 the Tower Block, The Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital, 28, Woodville road, Woodville 5011, South Australia, Australia; 
Rheumatology Department, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Port Road, Adelaide 5000, 
South Australia, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA) is a heterogenous systemic granulomatous 
vasculitis involving the aorta and any of its major tributaries. Despite 
increased awareness of large vessel (LV) involvement, studies reporting 
incidence, clinical characteristics and complications of large-vessel GCA 
(LV-GCA) show conflicting results due to inconsistent disease definitions, 
differences in study methodologies and the broad spectrum of clinical 
presentations. The aim of this systematic literature review was to better define 
LV-GCA based on the available literature and identify distinguishing 
characteristics that may differentiate LV-GCA patients from those with limited 
cranial disease.
METHODS: Published studies indexed in MEDLINE and EMBASE were searched from 
database inception to 7th May 2021. Studies were included if they presented 
cohort or cross-sectional data on a minimum of 25 patients with LV-GCA. Control 
groups were included if data was available on patients with limited cranial GCA 
(C-GCA). Data was quantitatively synthesised with application of a random 
effects meta-regression model, using Stata.
RESULTS: The search yielded 3488 studies, of which 46 were included. Diagnostic 
criteria for LV-GCA differed between papers, but was typically dependent on 
imaging or histopathology. Patients with LV-GCA were generally younger at 
diagnosis compared to C-GCA patients (mean age difference -4.53 years), had 
longer delay to diagnosis (mean difference 3.03 months) and lower rates of 
positive temporal artery biopsy (OR: 0.52 [95% CI: 0.3, 0.91]). Fewer LV-GCA 
patients presented with cranial manifestations and only 53% met the 1990 ACR 
Classification Criteria for GCA. Vasculitis was detected most commonly in the 
thoracic aorta, followed by the subclavian, brachiocephalic trunk and axillary 
arteries. The mean cumulative prednisolone dose at 12-months was 6056.5mg for 
LV-GCA patients, relapse rates were similar between LV- and C-GCA patients, and 
12% of deaths in LV-GCA patients could be directly attributed to an LV 
complication.
CONCLUSION: Patients with LV-GCA have distinct disease features when compared to 
C-GCA, and this has implications on diagnosis, treatment strategies and 
surveillance of long-term sequalae.

Copyright © 2023 Société française de rhumatologie. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2023.105558
PMID: 36858169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]