---
reference_id: "PMID:23327293"
title: Impact of substrate protonation and tautomerization states on interactions with the active site of arginase I.
authors:
- Nagagarajan S
- Xue F
- MacKerell AD Jr
journal: J Chem Inf Model
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1021/ci300506y
keywords:
- "Arginase/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Arginine/chemistry, metabolism"
- Binding Sites
- Catalytic Domain
- Humans
- Isomerism
- Molecular Dynamics Simulation
- Protein Binding
- Protons
- Substrate Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of substrate protonation and tautomerization states on interactions with the active site of arginase I.
**Authors:** Nagagarajan S, Xue F, MacKerell AD Jr
**Journal:** J Chem Inf Model (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1021/ci300506y](https://doi.org/10.1021/ci300506y)

## Content

1. J Chem Inf Model. 2013 Feb 25;53(2):452-60. doi: 10.1021/ci300506y. Epub 2013
Jan 31.

Impact of substrate protonation and tautomerization states on interactions with
the active site of arginase I.

Nagagarajan S(1), Xue F, MacKerell AD Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland, School of
Pharmacy, 20 Penn Street HSFII, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Human arginase is a binuclear manganese metalloenzyme that participates in the
urea cycle. Arginase catalyzes the hydrolysis of L-arginine into L-ornithine and
urea and is linked to several disorders such as asthma and cancer. Currently,
the protonation and tautomerization state of the substrate when bound to the
active site, which contains two manganese ions, is not known. Knowledge of the
charge-dependent behavior of arginine in the arginase I environment would be of
utility toward understanding the catalytic mechanism and designing inhibitors of
this enzyme. The arginine(+/0) species, including all possible neutral
tautomers, were modeled using an aminoimidazole analog as template. All-atom
molecular dynamics simulations were then performed on each of the charged and
neutral species. In addition, a hydroxide ion was included in selected
simulations to test its importance. Results show that the positively charged
state of arginine is stable in the active site of arginase I, with that
stabilization facilitated by the presence of hydroxide. Glu277 is indicated to
play a role in stabilizing arginine in the active site and facilitating its
ability to assume a catalytically competent conformation in the presence of
hydroxide. The reported interactions and modeled arginine-bound arginase I
structures can be used as a tool for structure-based inhibitor design, as
experimental data on the structure of the substrate-enzyme complex is lacking.

DOI: 10.1021/ci300506y
PMCID: PMC3590304
PMID: 23327293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
