---
reference_id: "PMID:38301530"
title: Impact of supplementation with L-citrulline/arginine after liver transplantation in individuals with Urea Cycle Disorders.
authors:
- Posset R
- Garbade SF
- Gleich F
- Nagamani SCS
- Gropman AL
- Epp F
- Ramdhouni N
- Druck AC
- Hoffmann GF
- Kölker S
- Zielonka M
- Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC) and the European registry and network for Intoxication type Metabolic Diseases (E-IMD) consortia study group
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.108112
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Citrulline/therapeutic use
- Arginine/metabolism
- Liver Transplantation
- Pilot Projects
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/drug therapy, surgery"
- Dietary Supplements
- Urea/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of supplementation with L-citrulline/arginine after liver transplantation in individuals with Urea Cycle Disorders.
**Authors:** Posset R, Garbade SF, Gleich F, Nagamani SCS, Gropman AL, Epp F, Ramdhouni N, Druck AC, Hoffmann GF, Kölker S, Zielonka M, Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC) and the European registry and network for Intoxication type Metabolic Diseases (E-IMD) consortia study group
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.108112](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.108112)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2024 Mar;141(3):108112. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.108112.
Epub  2023 Dec 10.

Impact of supplementation with L-citrulline/arginine after liver transplantation
in individuals with Urea Cycle Disorders.

Posset R(1), Garbade SF(2), Gleich F(2), Nagamani SCS(3), Gropman AL(4), Epp
F(2), Ramdhouni N(2), Druck AC(2), Hoffmann GF(2), Kölker S(2), Zielonka M(5);
Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC) and the European registry and network for
Intoxication type Metabolic Diseases (E-IMD) consortia study group.

Collaborators: Schulze A(6), García-Cazorla A(7), Ficicioglu C(8), Harding
CO(9), Lam C(10), Coughlin CR 2nd(11), Le Mons C(12), Wong D(13), Dobbelaere
D(14), Diaz GA(15), Berry GT(16), Enns GM(17), Wilkening G(18), Lawrence Merritt
J 2nd(19), Seminara J(20), Konczal L(21), Burrage LC(3), Breilyn M(22), Lindner
M(23), Baumgartner MR(24), Mew NA(25), Gallagher RC(26), McCandless SE(27),
Berry SA(28), Stricker T(24).

Author information:
(1)Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty Heidelberg, and Center for Pediatric
and Adolescent Medicine, Department I, Division of Pediatric Neurology and
Metabolic Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
Roland.Posset@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty Heidelberg, and Center for Pediatric
and Adolescent Medicine, Department I, Division of Pediatric Neurology and
Metabolic Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine and
Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Children's National Health System and The George Washington School of
Medicine, Washington, DC, USA.
(5)Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty Heidelberg, and Center for Pediatric
and Adolescent Medicine, Department I, Division of Pediatric Neurology and
Metabolic Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
Matthias.Zielonka@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(6)The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(7)Neurometabolic Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,
CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Children' Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, USA.
(9)Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(10)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Seattle Children's Hospital, Washington,
USA.
(11)Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(12)National Urea Cycle Disorders Foundation, Pasadena, CA, USA.
(13)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(14)Centre de Référence Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme de l'Enfant et de
l'Adulte, Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, CHRU Lille, and RADEME EA 7364, Faculty of
Medicine, University Lille 2, Lille, France.
(15)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(16)Harvard Medical School and Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(17)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Lucile Packard
Children's Hospital, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(18)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(19)Seattle Children's Hospital, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(20)Children's National Health System, Washington, DC, USA.
(21)University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(22)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(23)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neuropaediatrics, Goethe University
Frankfurt, Frankfurt (Main), Germany.
(24)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Switzerland.
(25)Children's National Health System, The George Washington School of Medicine,
Washington, DC, USA.
(26)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(27)Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(28)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Liver transplantation (LTx) is an intervention when medical
management is not sufficiently preventing individuals with urea cycle disorders
(UCDs) from the occurrence of hyperammonemic events. Supplementation with
L-citrulline/arginine is regularly performed prior to LTx to support ureagenesis
and is often continued after the intervention. However, systematic studies
assessing the impact of long-term L-citrulline/arginine supplementation in
individuals who have undergone LTx is lacking to date.
METHODS: Using longitudinal data collected systematically, a comparative
analysis was carried out by studying the effects of long-term
L-citrulline/arginine supplementation vs. no supplementation on health-related
outcome parameters (i.e., anthropometric, neurological, and cognitive outcomes)
in individuals with UCDs who have undergone LTx. Altogether, 52 individuals with
male ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, citrullinemia type 1 and
argininosuccinic aciduria and a pre-transplant "severe" disease course who have
undergone LTx were investigated by using recently established and validated
genotype-specific in vitro enzyme activities.
RESULTS: Long-term supplementation of individuals with L-citrulline/arginine who
have undergone LTx (n = 16) does neither appear to alter anthropometric nor
neurocognitive endpoints when compared to their severity-adjusted counterparts
that were not supplemented (n = 36) after LTx with mean observation periods
between four to five years. Moreover, supplementation with L-citrulline/arginine
was not associated with an increase of disease-specific plasma arithmetic mean
values for the respective amino acids when compared to the non-supplemented
control cohort.
CONCLUSION: Although supplementation with L-citrulline/arginine is often
continued after LTx, this pilot study does neither identify altered long-term
anthropometric or neurocognitive health-related outcomes nor does it find an
adequate biochemical response as reflected by the unaltered plasma arithmetic
mean values for L-citrulline or L-arginine. Further prospective analyses in
larger samples and even longer observation periods will provide more insight
into the usefulness of long-term supplementation with L-citrulline/arginine for
individuals with UCDs who have undergone LTx.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.108112
PMCID: PMC12812261
PMID: 38301530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest RP receives
consultancy fees from Immedica Pharma AB. SK received funding from Immedica
Pharma AB for the European Post-Authorization Registry for Ravicti® (glycerol
phenylbutyrate) oral liquid in partnership with the E-IMD (RRPE) (EU PAS
Register no. EUPAS17267; http://www.encepp.eu/). GFH received lecture fees from
Swedish Orphan Biovitrum GmbH. AS is paid consultant and member of advisory
boards for HZNP Canada Ltd., ModernaTX Inc., and Recordati Rare Diseases Canada
Inc. AS is site PI on clinical trials sponsored by ModernaTX Inc., Ultragenyx
Canada Inc., and iECURE Inc. The sponsors have in no way influenced the design,
conductance, analysis and report of the present study. All other authors declare
that they have no conflict of interest.
