---
reference_id: "PMID:22189668"
title: "Lung volume reduction for advanced emphysema: surgical and bronchoscopic approaches."
authors:
- Tidwell SL
- Westfall E
- Dransfield MT
journal: South Med J
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/SMJ.0b013e31823c5c49
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung volume reduction for advanced emphysema: surgical and bronchoscopic approaches.
**Authors:** Tidwell SL, Westfall E, Dransfield MT
**Journal:** South Med J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SMJ.0b013e31823c5c49](https://doi.org/10.1097/SMJ.0b013e31823c5c49)

## Content

1. South Med J. 2012 Jan;105(1):56-61. doi: 10.1097/SMJ.0b013e31823c5c49.

Lung volume reduction for advanced emphysema: surgical and bronchoscopic 
approaches.

Tidwell SL(1), Westfall E, Dransfield MT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Allergy and Critical Care, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is the third leading cause of death in the 
United States, affecting more than 24 million people. Inhaled bronchodilators 
are the mainstay of therapy; they improve symptoms and quality of life and 
reduce exacerbations. These and smoking cessation and long-term oxygen therapy 
for hypoxemic patients are the only medical treatments definitively demonstrated 
to reduce mortality. Surgical approaches include lung transplantation and lung 
volume reduction and the latter has been shown to improve exercise tolerance, 
quality of life, and survival in highly selected patients with advanced 
emphysema. Lung volume reduction surgery results in clinical benefits. The 
procedure is associated with a short-term risk of mortality and a more 
significant risk of cardiac and pulmonary perioperative complications. Interest 
has been growing in the use of noninvasive, bronchoscopic methods to address the 
pathological hyperinflation that drives the dyspnea and exercise intolerance 
that is characteristic of emphysema. In this review, the mechanism by which lung 
volume reduction improves pulmonary function is outlined, along with the risks 
and benefits of the traditional surgical approach. In addition, the emerging 
bronchoscopic techniques for lung volume reduction are introduced and recent 
clinical trials examining their efficacy are summarized.

DOI: 10.1097/SMJ.0b013e31823c5c49
PMID: 22189668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]