---
reference_id: "PMID:140280"
title: Heart disease in the hypertensive patient.
authors:
- Cohn JN
journal: Med Clin North Am
year: '1977'
doi: 10.1016/s0025-7125(16)31318-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heart disease in the hypertensive patient.
**Authors:** Cohn JN
**Journal:** Med Clin North Am (1977)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0025-7125(16)31318-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0025-7125(16)31318-9)

## Content

1. Med Clin North Am. 1977 May;61(3):581-91. doi: 10.1016/s0025-7125(16)31318-9.

Heart disease in the hypertensive patient.

Cohn JN.

Uncontrolled hypertension increases the workload of the left ventricle causing 
the development of hypertrophy and an increase in myocardial oxygen consumption 
that may precipitate ischemia because of inadequate oxygen delivery related to 
accelerated coronary atherosclerosis. Control of the hypertension should prevent 
the further development of hypertrophy, delay the development of fibrosis and 
possibly also slow the rate of development of atherosclerosis. Furthermore, when 
myocardial function is impaired because of hypertrophy or other myocardial 
diseases, the level of blood pressure becomes an important determinant of left 
ventricular performance. Regardless of the level of arterial pressure, 
vasodilator drugs that lower arterial pressure may result in marked improvement 
in left ventricular performance and relief of symptoms of left ventricular 
failure. Therefore, control of blood pressure in the presence of heart disease 
may involve treatment of normotensive patients to bring them into a lower 
normotensive range as well as the more traditional treatment of hypertensives to 
bring them into the normotensive range. Although this scenario is consistent 
with conventional wisdom and clinical experience, intricacies of the 
relationship between hypertension, hypertrophy, myocardial oxygen delivery, 
atherosclerosis and intramyocardial blood flow distribution remain poorly 
understood. Until these aspects of the natural history of heart disease are 
better worked out therapy will remain largely empirical.

DOI: 10.1016/s0025-7125(16)31318-9
PMID: 140280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]