---
reference_id: "PMID:35773783"
title: Catalysis-Independent ENPP1 Protein Signaling Regulates Mammalian Bone Mass.
authors:
- Zimmerman K
- Liu X
- von Kroge S
- Stabach P
- Lester ER
- Chu EY
- Srivastava S
- Somerman MJ
- Tommasini SM
- Busse B
- Schinke T
- Carpenter TO
- Oheim R
- Braddock DT
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4640
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone and Bones/physiology
- Catalysis
- Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets
- Fibroblast Growth Factors
- Mammals/metabolism
- Mice
- Phosphates/metabolism
- "Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pyrophosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Vascular Calcification
- beta Catenin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Catalysis-Independent ENPP1 Protein Signaling Regulates Mammalian Bone Mass.
**Authors:** Zimmerman K, Liu X, von Kroge S, Stabach P, Lester ER, Chu EY, Srivastava S, Somerman MJ, Tommasini SM, Busse B, Schinke T, Carpenter TO, Oheim R, Braddock DT
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4640](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4640)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2022 Sep;37(9):1733-1749. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4640. Epub 2022
Jul 29.

Catalysis-Independent ENPP1 Protein Signaling Regulates Mammalian Bone Mass.

Zimmerman K(1), Liu X(1), von Kroge S(2), Stabach P(1), Lester ER(1), Chu
EY(3)(4), Srivastava S(1), Somerman MJ(3), Tommasini SM(5), Busse B(2), Schinke
T(2), Carpenter TO(6), Oheim R(2), Braddock DT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA.
(2)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR), National
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Department of General Dentistry, Operative Division, University of Maryland
School of Dentistry, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics at Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT, USA.

Biallelic ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1) deficiency
induces vascular/soft tissue calcifications in generalized arterial
calcification of infancy (GACI), and low bone mass with phosphate-wasting
rickets in GACI survivors (autosomal hypophosphatemic rickets type-2). ENPP1
haploinsufficiency induces early-onset osteoporosis and mild phosphate wasting
in adults. Both conditions demonstrate the unusual combination of reduced
accrual of skeletal mineral, yet excess and progressive heterotopic
mineralization. ENPP1 is the only enzyme that generates extracellular
pyrophosphate (PPi), a potent inhibitor of both bone and heterotopic
mineralization. Life-threatening vascular calcification in ENPP1 deficiency is
due to decreased plasma PPi; however, the mechanism by which osteopenia results
is not apparent from an understanding of the enzyme's catalytic activity. To
probe for catalysis-independent ENPP1 pathways regulating bone, we developed a
murine model uncoupling ENPP1 protein signaling from ENPP1 catalysis, Enpp1T238A
mice. In contrast to Enpp1asj mice, which lack ENPP1, Enpp1T238A mice have
normal trabecular bone microarchitecture and favorable biomechanical properties.
However, both models demonstrate low plasma Pi and PPi, increased fibroblast
growth factor 23 (FGF23), and by 23 weeks, osteomalacia demonstrating equivalent
phosphate wasting in both models. Reflecting findings in whole bone, calvarial
cell cultures from Enpp1asj mice demonstrated markedly decreased calcification,
elevated transcription of Sfrp1, and decreased nuclear β-catenin signaling
compared to wild-type (WT) and Enpp1T238A cultures. Finally, the decreased
calcification and nuclear β-catenin signaling observed in Enpp1asj cultures was
restored to WT levels by knockout of Sfrp1. Collectively, our findings
demonstrate that catalysis-independent ENPP1 signaling pathways regulate bone
mass via the expression of soluble Wnt inhibitors such as secreted
frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), whereas catalysis dependent pathways
regulate phosphate homeostasis through the regulation of plasma FGF23. © 2022
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

© 2022 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4640
PMCID: PMC9709593
PMID: 35773783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
