---
reference_id: "PMID:40164711"
title: "A novel case of autosomal-dominant cutis laxa caused by a de novo likely pathogenic variant in ALDH18A1: case report and literature review."
authors:
- Ahmad F
- Gadgil P
- Navandar N
- Sandal S
- Kumar M
- Shah A
- Angi M
- Chaudhary P
- Jajodia E
- Vaishnani T
- Banerjee A
- Chaudhary S
- Arora N
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-025-01334-0
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cutis Laxa/genetics, pathology, diagnosis"
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Aldehyde Dehydrogenase/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel case of autosomal-dominant cutis laxa caused by a de novo likely pathogenic variant in ALDH18A1: case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Ahmad F, Gadgil P, Navandar N, Sandal S, Kumar M, Shah A, Angi M, Chaudhary P, Jajodia E, Vaishnani T, Banerjee A, Chaudhary S, Arora N
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-025-01334-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-025-01334-0)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2025 Jun;70(6):325-329. doi: 10.1038/s10038-025-01334-0. Epub
2025  Mar 31.

A novel case of autosomal-dominant cutis laxa caused by a de novo likely
pathogenic variant in ALDH18A1: case report and literature review.

Ahmad F(1), Gadgil P(2), Navandar N(2), Sandal S(3), Kumar M(3), Shah A(4), Angi
M(4), Chaudhary P(3), Jajodia E(3), Vaishnani T(3), Banerjee A(3), Chaudhary
S(3), Arora N(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genomics, Unipath Speciality Laboratories Ltd,
Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India. drfiroz.ahmad@unipath.in.
(2)Narayana Health SRCC Children's Hospital, Mumbai, India.
(3)Department of Molecular Genomics, Unipath Speciality Laboratories Ltd,
Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.
(4)Department of Cytogenomics, Unipath Speciality Laboratories Ltd, Ahmedabad,
Gujarat, India.
(5)Department of Molecular Genomics, Unipath Speciality Laboratories Ltd,
Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India. drneeraj.arora@unipath.in.

Cutis laxa is a highly heterogeneous connective tissue disorder characterized by
progressively loose skin, often accompanied by systemic involvement. Autosomal
dominant cutis laxa (ADCL) has been linked to variants in several genes,
including ALDH18A1, which encodes Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase, a key
enzyme in proline and collagen metabolism. We report a novel case of ADCL in a
1.6-year-old patient presenting with growth delay, hypotonia, joint laxity, lax
skin, cataract, dysmorphic features, microcephaly, cranial vessel tortuosity,
hip dislocation, and psychomotor retardation. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a
de novo heterozygous c.400 T > C (p.Ser134Pro) substitution in the ALDH18A1
gene. This variant has not been previously reported, and it is the first report
of an individual with ALDH18A1-ADCL due to a substitution at a highly conserved
residue, p.Ser134 of the P5CS protein. Our findings expand the mutational
spectrum of ALDH18A1-related ADCL and highlight the importance of genetic
testing in diagnosing rare disorders.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Japan Society of Human
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-025-01334-0
PMID: 40164711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests. Ethics: The study is in accordance with the ethical
standards of our institution and with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its
later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Informed consent: Written
informed consent for the research publication was obtained. Written consent for
usage of pictures of the patient from parents was obtained.
