---
reference_id: "PMID:37147676"
title: "Hepatic fibrosis: a manifestation of the liver disease evolution in patients with Ataxia-telangiectasia."
authors:
- Barreto TLN
- de Carvalho Filho RJ
- Shigueoka DC
- Fonseca FLA
- Ferreira AC
- Kochi C
- Aranda CS
- Sarni ROS
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02720-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
- Ataxia Telangiectasia
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Liver Cirrhosis
- Liver
- Insulin Resistance
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic fibrosis: a manifestation of the liver disease evolution in patients with Ataxia-telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Barreto TLN, de Carvalho Filho RJ, Shigueoka DC, Fonseca FLA, Ferreira AC, Kochi C, Aranda CS, Sarni ROS
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02720-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02720-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 May 5;18(1):105. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02720-7.

Hepatic fibrosis: a manifestation of the liver disease evolution in patients 
with Ataxia-telangiectasia.

Barreto TLN(1), de Carvalho Filho RJ(2), Shigueoka DC(3), Fonseca FLA(4), 
Ferreira AC(4), Kochi C(5), Aranda CS(6), Sarni ROS(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy, Clinical Immunology and 
Rheumatology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), 731 Otonis St., Vila 
Clementino, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. talita.lemos@unifesp.br.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), 
1570 Loefgren St., Vila Clementino, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Universidade Federal de São Paulo 
(UNIFESP), 800 Napoleão de Barros St., Vila Clmementino, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Centro Universitário FMABC, 821 Príncipe de Gales Av., Santo André, SP, 
Brazil.
(5)Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa Casa de São Paulo (FCMSCSP), 61 Dr. 
Cesário Motta Jr. St., São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy, Clinical Immunology and 
Rheumatology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), 731 Otonis St., Vila 
Clementino, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(7)Centro Universitário Saúde FMABC, 821 Príncipe de Gales Av., Santo André, SP, 
Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a DNA repair disorder characterized 
by changes in several organs and systems. Advances in clinical protocols have 
resulted in increased survival of A-T patients, however disease progression is 
evident, mainly through metabolic and liver changes.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the frequency of significant hepatic fibrosis in A-T 
patients and to verify the association with metabolic alterations and degree of 
ataxia.
METHODS: This is a cross-sectional study that included 25 A-T patients aged 5 to 
31 years. Anthropometric data, liver, inflammatory, lipid metabolism and glucose 
biomarkers (oral glucose tolerance test with insulin curve-OGTT) were collected. 
The Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale was applied to assess the degree of ataxia. 
The following were calculated: Homeostasis Model Assessment-Insulin Resistance, 
Homeostasis Model Assessment-Adiponectin (HOMA-AD), Matsuda index, aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST): platelet ratio index, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
fibrosis score and BARD score. Liver ultrasonography and transient liver 
elastography by FibroScan® were performed.
RESULTS: Significant hepatic fibrosis was observed in 5/25 (20%). Patients in 
the group with significant hepatic fibrosis were older (p < 0.001), had lower 
platelet count values (p = 0.027), serum albumin (p = 0.019), HDL-c (p = 0.013) 
and Matsuda index (p = 0.044); and high values of LDL-c (p = 0.049), AST 
(p = 0.001), alanine aminotransferase (p = 0.002), gamma-glutamyl transferase 
(p = 0.001), ferritin (p = 0.001), 120-min glycemia by OGTT (p = 0.049), HOMA-AD 
(p = 0.016) and degree of ataxia (p = 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: A non-invasive diagnosis of significant hepatic fibrosis was 
observed in 20% of A-T patients associated with changes in liver enzymes, 
ferritin, increased HOMA-AD, and the severity of ataxia in comparison with 
patients without hepatic fibrosis.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02720-7
PMCID: PMC10161655
PMID: 37147676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.