---
reference_id: "PMID:38846216"
title: "Evaluating Changes in Pulsatile Flow With Endovascular Stents in an In Vitro Blood Vessel Model: Potential Implications for the Future Management of Neurovascular Compression Syndromes."
authors:
- Siddiqi I
- Brazdzionis J
- Hough JM
- Reier L
- Marino M
- Ko K
- Schiraldi M
- Cortez V
- Miulli DE
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.59811
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating Changes in Pulsatile Flow With Endovascular Stents in an In Vitro Blood Vessel Model: Potential Implications for the Future Management of Neurovascular Compression Syndromes.
**Authors:** Siddiqi I, Brazdzionis J, Hough JM, Reier L, Marino M, Ko K, Schiraldi M, Cortez V, Miulli DE
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.59811](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.59811)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 May 7;16(5):e59811. doi: 10.7759/cureus.59811. eCollection 2024 
May.

Evaluating Changes in Pulsatile Flow With Endovascular Stents in an In Vitro 
Blood Vessel Model: Potential Implications for the Future Management of 
Neurovascular Compression Syndromes.

Siddiqi I(1), Brazdzionis J(1), Hough JM(2)(3), Reier L(2), Marino M(1), Ko 
K(2), Schiraldi M(2), Cortez V(2), Miulli DE(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurosurgery, Riverside University Health System Medical Center, Moreno 
Valley, USA.
(2)Neurosurgery, Arrowhead Regional Medical Center, Colton, USA.
(3)Neurosurgery, California University of Science and Medicine, Colton, USA.

BACKGROUND: Neurovascular compression syndromes (NVCS), encompassing conditions 
such as trigeminal neuralgia, hemifacial spasm, and glossopharyngeal neuralgia, 
significantly impair patient quality of life through abnormal vascular 
compression and micro-pulsation of vasculature on cranial nerves at the 
Obersteiner-Redlich zone. The modulation of pulsatile flow dynamics via 
endovascular stents presents a novel research frontier for alleviating these 
syndromes.
AIM: The primary aim of this investigation was to delineate the impact of 
various endovascular stents on pulsatile flow within an in vitro model of a 
blood vessel, thereby elucidating their potential applicability in the 
therapeutic management of NVCS.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A simple in vitro analog of a posterior circulation 
artery was developed, employing an intravenous pump to replicate cardiac-induced 
blood flow. Within this model, alterations in pulsatile flow were quantitatively 
assessed following the introduction of three categorically distinct endovascular 
stents, varying in size. This assessment was facilitated through the employment 
of both micro-Doppler and Doppler ultrasound methodologies.
RESULTS: The Pipeline 5x35 mm stent (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) demonstrated 
the most significant reductions in peak systolic velocity (Vmax) and pulsatility 
index (PI), PI especially over the stent, suggesting its potential for 
drastically altering blood flow dynamics. Similarly, Neuroform Atlas 4.5x30 mm 
and Neuroform Atlas 4x24 mm stents (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) also showed notable 
decreases in hemodynamic parameters, albeit to different extents. Statistical 
analysis confirmed that these changes were significantly different from the 
control (P < 0.0001 for PI and Vmax; P < 0.05 for inter-stent comparisons), 
except for proximal PI means, which did not significantly differ from the 
control (P = 0.2777).
CONCLUSION: These findings affirm the potential of endovascular stents to 
substantially modulate arterial pulsatility. The observed decrease in pulsatile 
flow resultant from endovascular stent application has the potential to 
attenuate ectopic nerve excitation, a hallmark of NVCS. Consequently, this 
research highlights the prospective utility of endovascular stents in developing 
minimally invasive therapeutic approaches for NVCS.

Copyright © 2024, Siddiqi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.59811
PMCID: PMC11155711
PMID: 38846216

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.