---
reference_id: "PMID:28470390"
title: "Biallelic mutations in CYP24A1 or SLC34A1 as a cause of infantile idiopathic hypercalcemia (IIH) with vitamin D hypersensitivity: molecular study of 11 historical IIH cases."
authors:
- Pronicka E
- Ciara E
- Halat P
- Janiec A
- Wójcik M
- Rowińska E
- Rokicki D
- Płudowski P
- Wojciechowska E
- Wierzbicka A
- Książyk JB
- Jacoszek A
- Konrad M
- Schlingmann KP
- Litwin M
journal: J Appl Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s13353-017-0397-2
keywords:
- Adult
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Hypercalcemia/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Nephrocalcinosis/genetics
- Poland
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type IIa/genetics"
- Vitamin D
- Vitamin D3 24-Hydroxylase/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic mutations in CYP24A1 or SLC34A1 as a cause of infantile idiopathic hypercalcemia (IIH) with vitamin D hypersensitivity: molecular study of 11 historical IIH cases.
**Authors:** Pronicka E, Ciara E, Halat P, Janiec A, Wójcik M, Rowińska E, Rokicki D, Płudowski P, Wojciechowska E, Wierzbicka A, Książyk JB, Jacoszek A, Konrad M, Schlingmann KP, Litwin M
**Journal:** J Appl Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13353-017-0397-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13353-017-0397-2)

## Content

1. J Appl Genet. 2017 Aug;58(3):349-353. doi: 10.1007/s13353-017-0397-2. Epub
2017  May 3.

Biallelic mutations in CYP24A1 or SLC34A1 as a cause of infantile idiopathic
hypercalcemia (IIH) with vitamin D hypersensitivity: molecular study of 11
historical IIH cases.

Pronicka E(1)(2), Ciara E(3), Halat P(3), Janiec A(4), Wójcik M(5), Rowińska
E(4), Rokicki D(4), Płudowski P(5), Wojciechowska E(6), Wierzbicka A(5), Książyk
JB(4), Jacoszek A(7)(8), Konrad M(9), Schlingmann KP(9), Litwin M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, The Children's
Memorial Health Institute, Aleja Dzieci Polskich 20, 04-730, Warsaw, Poland.
e.pronicka@ipczd.pl.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute,
Warsaw, Poland. e.pronicka@ipczd.pl.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute,
Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, The Children's
Memorial Health Institute, Aleja Dzieci Polskich 20, 04-730, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Radioimmunology and Experimental Medicine, The
Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Department of Nephrology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw,
Poland.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland.
(8)Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Warsaw, Poland.
(9)University Children's Hospital, Münster, Germany.

Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia (IIH) is a mineral metabolism disorder
characterized by severe hypercalcemia, failure to thrive, vomiting, dehydration,
and nephrocalcinosis. The periodical increase in incidence of IIH, which
occurred in the twentieth century in the United Kingdom, Poland, and West
Germany, turned out to be a side effect of rickets over-prophylaxis. It was
recently discovered that the condition is linked to two genes, CYP24A1 and
SLC34A1. The aim of the study was to search for pathogenic variants of the genes
in adult persons who were shortlisted in infancy as IIH caused by
"hypersensitivity to vit. D". All persons were found to carry mutations in
CYP24A1 or SLC34A1, nine and two persons respectively. The changes were
biallelic, with one exception. Incidence of IIH in Polish population estimated
on the basis of allele frequency of recurrent p.R396W CYP24A1 variant, is
1:32,465 births. It indicates that at least a thousand homozygotes and compound
heterozygotes with risk of IIH live in the country. Differences in mechanism of
developing hypercalcemia indicate that its prevention may vary in both IIH
defects. Theoretically, vit. D restriction is a first indication for CYP24A1
defect (which disturbs 1,25(OH)2D degradation) and phosphate supplementation for
SLC34A1 defect (which impairs renal phosphate transport). In conclusion, we
suggest that molecular testing for CYP24A1 and SLC34A1 mutations should be
performed in each case of idiopathic hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria, both in
children and adults, to determine the proper way for acute treatment and
complications prevention.

DOI: 10.1007/s13353-017-0397-2
PMCID: PMC5509812
PMID: 28470390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was supported by projects: NSC
2014/15/B/NZ5/03541, CMHI 180/09. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: None. ETHICAL APPROVAL:
All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in
accordance with the ethical standards of the Bioethical Committee at the
Children’s Memorial Health Institute of Warsaw and with the 1964 Helsinki
declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. INFORMED
CONSENT: Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included
in the study.
