---
reference_id: "PMID:20960522"
title: Monitoring molecular response in chronic myeloid leukemia.
authors:
- Cortes J
- Quintás-Cardama A
- Kantarjian HM
journal: Cancer
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.25527
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Biomarkers, Pharmacological/analysis, metabolism"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis, genetics"
- Cytogenetic Analysis
- "Fusion Proteins, bcr-abl/genetics"
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myelogenous, Chronic, BCR-ABL Positive/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques/methods
- "Monitoring, Physiologic/methods"
- Prognosis
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monitoring molecular response in chronic myeloid leukemia.
**Authors:** Cortes J, Quintás-Cardama A, Kantarjian HM
**Journal:** Cancer (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.25527](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.25527)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2011 Mar 15;117(6):1113-22. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25527. Epub 2010 Oct 19.

Monitoring molecular response in chronic myeloid leukemia.

Cortes J(1), Quintás-Cardama A, Kantarjian HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. Jcortes@mdanderson.org

Before the advent of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy, the evaluation of
hematologic and cytogenetic responses was sufficient to gauge treatment efficacy
in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. However, with more potent TKI
therapies, the majority of patients achieve complete cytogenetic response.
Furthermore, deeper molecular responses are now commonly achieved, necessitating
a reliance on molecular monitoring to assess residual leukemic disease. The
prognostic significance between molecular responses and duration of complete
cytogenetic response, progression-free survival, and event-free survival is
described herein. A discussion of the concept of complete molecular response is
also provided, and the potential for imatinib treatment discontinuation is
evaluated. The implications of rising BCR-ABL1 transcript levels and caveats of
molecular monitoring are also described.

Copyright © 2010 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25527
PMCID: PMC4969001
PMID: 20960522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
