---
reference_id: "PMID:38751554"
title: "Balancing Efficacy and Tolerability of First-Line Systemic Therapies for Advanced Hepatocellular Carcinoma: A Network Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Celsa C
- Cabibbo G
- Pinato DJ
- Di Maria G
- Enea M
- Vaccaro M
- Battaglia S
- Rizzo GEM
- Giuffrida P
- Giacchetto CM
- Rancatore G
- Grassini MV
- Cammà C
journal: Liver Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000531744
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Balancing Efficacy and Tolerability of First-Line Systemic Therapies for Advanced Hepatocellular Carcinoma: A Network Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Celsa C, Cabibbo G, Pinato DJ, Di Maria G, Enea M, Vaccaro M, Battaglia S, Rizzo GEM, Giuffrida P, Giacchetto CM, Rancatore G, Grassini MV, Cammà C
**Journal:** Liver Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000531744](https://doi.org/10.1159/000531744)

## Content

1. Liver Cancer. 2023 Jul 25;13(2):169-180. doi: 10.1159/000531744. eCollection
2024 Apr.

Balancing Efficacy and Tolerability of First-Line Systemic Therapies for
Advanced Hepatocellular Carcinoma: A Network Meta-Analysis.

Celsa C(1)(2), Cabibbo G(1), Pinato DJ(3)(4), Di Maria G(1), Enea M(1), Vaccaro
M(5), Battaglia S(5), Rizzo GEM(1)(2), Giuffrida P(1), Giacchetto CM(1),
Rancatore G(1), Grassini MV(1), Cammà C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Promotion, Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine and
Medical Specialties, PROMISE, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(2)Department of Surgical, Oncological, and Oral Sciences, University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(3)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Division of Oncology, Department of Translational Medicine, University of
Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Scienze Economiche, Aziendali e Statistiche, University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Atezolizumab + bevacizumab represent the current standard of care
for first-line treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However,
direct comparison with other combination treatments including immune checkpoint
inhibitors (ICI) + tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are lacking.
OBJECTIVES: This network meta-analysis (NMA) aims to indirectly compare the
efficacy and the safety of first-line systemic therapies for unresectable
advanced HCC.
METHOD: A literature search of MEDLINE, Embase, and SCOPUS databases was
conducted up to October 31, 2022. Phase 3 randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
testing TKIs, including sorafenib and lenvatinib, or ICIs reporting overall
survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) were included. Individual
survival data were extracted from OS and PFS curves to calculate restricted mean
survival time. A Bayesian NMA was performed to compare treatments in terms of
efficacy (15- and 30-month OS, 6-month PFS) and safety, represented by grade ≥3
(severe) adverse events (SAEs). The incremental safety-effectiveness ratio as
measure of net health benefit was calculated as the difference in SAE
probability divided by survival difference between the 2 most effective
treatments.
RESULTS: Nine RCTs enrolling 6,600 patients were included. Atezolizumab plus
bevacizumab showed the highest probability (88%) of achieving the 30-month OS
landmark. Lenvatinib showed a probability of 86% of achieving best PFS outcomes.
ICI monotherapies ranked as most tolerable. Atezolizumab plus bevacizumab showed
the best net health benefit for OS, compared to durvalumab plus tremelimumab.
When evaluating the net health benefit for PFS, at a willingness-to-risk
threshold of 10% of SAEs for life-month gained, atezolizumab plus bevacizumab
was favoured in 78% of cases, while at threshold of 30% of SAEs for life-month
gained, lenvatinib was favoured in 76% of cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Atezolizumab plus bevacizumab is the best treatment in terms of net
benefit and therefore it should be recommended as standard of care. Compared to
atezolizumab plus bevacizumab, lenvatinib monotherapy had the best net benefit
for PFS when physicians and patients are available to accept a higher risk of
toxicity.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000531744
PMCID: PMC11095611
PMID: 38751554

Conflict of interest statement: Giuseppe Cabibbo participated in advisory board
for Bayer, Eisai, Ipsen, and AstraZeneca. Ciro Celsa received speaker fees from
Eisai, Ipsen, and MSD. David James Pinato received lecture fees from BMS, Roche,
and EISAI; travel expenses from BMS and Bayer Healthcare; consulting fees from
Mina Therapeutics, EISAI, Roche, Da Volterra, Ewopharma, and AstraZeneca;
research funding (to the institution) from MSD, GSK, and BMS; grant funding from
the Wellcome Trust Strategic Fund (PS3416) and from the Associazione Italiana
per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC MFAG Grant ID 25697); and support from the NIHR
Imperial Biomedical Research Centre, the Imperial Experimental Cancer Medicine
Centre (ECMC), and the Imperial College Tissue Bank. Calogero Cammà participated
in the advisory board for Bayer, MSD/Merck, Ipsen, AstraZeneca, Roche, and
Eisai. The other authors have no disclosure to declare.
