---
reference_id: "PMID:41355374"
title: Disrupted Transcriptional Networks in Mammalian Cells Stably Over-Expressing Pathogenic Atrophin-1.
authors:
- Nuga O
- Pourhadi M
- Rausch JP
- Todi SV
journal: J Neurosci Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jnr.70089
keywords:
- Humans
- HEK293 Cells
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive/genetics, metabolism"
- Transcriptome
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disrupted Transcriptional Networks in Mammalian Cells Stably Over-Expressing Pathogenic Atrophin-1.
**Authors:** Nuga O, Pourhadi M, Rausch JP, Todi SV
**Journal:** J Neurosci Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jnr.70089](https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.70089)

## Content

1. J Neurosci Res. 2025 Dec;103(12):e70089. doi: 10.1002/jnr.70089.

Disrupted Transcriptional Networks in Mammalian Cells Stably Over-Expressing
Pathogenic Atrophin-1.

Nuga O(1), Pourhadi M(1), Rausch JP(1), Todi SV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan, USA.

Dentatorubral-Pallidoluysian Atrophy (DRPLA) is a dominant neurodegenerative
disease caused by CAG triplet repeat expansion in ATN1, which encodes the
transcriptional co-repressor Atrophin-1. DRPLA features motor, cognitive, and
epileptic symptoms and shares pathogenic mechanisms with other polyglutamine
(polyQ) disorders, including protein misfolding, impaired autophagy, and
transcriptional dysregulation. To understand disease mechanisms, we performed
RNA-seq on HEK293T cells stably over-expressing wild-type or pathogenic ATN1.
Cells expressing pathogenic ATN1 exhibited a distinct transcriptomic profile,
including disruptions in synaptic organization, extracellular matrix remodeling,
ion channel expression, and neurotransmission. Several genes tied to
neurodevelopmental, neurodegenerative, and oncogenic pathways were fully
activated or silenced. Dysregulated pathways also included inflammation,
chromatin remodeling, stress responses, and redox imbalance. Heat shock protein
expression changes suggested proteotoxic stress and impaired protein quality
control, with some findings conserved in a previously reported Drosophila
melanogaster model of DRPLA. The transcriptomic signatures that we describe here
expand understanding of the normal functions of ATN1 and the biology of disease
of DRPLA.

© 2025 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.70089
PMID: 41355374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
