---
reference_id: "PMID:29280743"
title: "Current Nomenclature of Pseudohypoparathyroidism: Inactivating Parathyroid Hormone/Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein Signaling Disorder."
authors:
- Turan S
journal: J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.2017.S006
keywords:
- "Chromogranins/genetics, metabolism"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Parathyroid Hormone/metabolism
- Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein/metabolism
- "Pseudohypoparathyroidism/classification, genetics, physiopathology"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Nomenclature of Pseudohypoparathyroidism: Inactivating Parathyroid Hormone/Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein Signaling Disorder.
**Authors:** Turan S
**Journal:** J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4274/jcrpe.2017.S006](https://doi.org/10.4274/jcrpe.2017.S006)

## Content

1. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2017 Dec 30;9(Suppl 2):58-68. doi: 
10.4274/jcrpe.2017.S006. Epub 2017 Dec 27.

Current Nomenclature of Pseudohypoparathyroidism: Inactivating Parathyroid 
Hormone/Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein Signaling Disorder.

Turan S(1).

Author information:
(1)Marmara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric 
Endocrinology, İstanbul, Turkey.

Disorders related to parathyroid hormone (PTH) resistance and PTH signaling 
pathway impairment are historically classified under the term of 
pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP). The disease was first described and named by 
Fuller Albright and colleagues in 1942. Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) 
is described as an associated clinical entity with PHP, characterized by 
brachydactyly, subcutaneous ossifications, round face, short stature and a 
stocky build. The classification of PHP is further divided into PHP-Ia, 
pseudo-PHP (pPHP), PHP-Ib, PHP-Ic and PHP-II according to the presence or 
absence of AHO, together with an in vivo response to exogenous PTH and the 
measurement of Gsα protein activity in peripheral erythrocyte membranes in 
vitro. However, PHP classification fails to differentiate all patients with 
different clinical and molecular findings for PHP subtypes and classification 
become more complicated with more recent molecular characterization and new 
forms having been identified. So far, new classifications have been established 
by the EuroPHP network to cover all disorders of the PTH receptor and its 
signaling pathway. Inactivating PTH/PTH-related protein signaling disorder 
(iPPSD) is the new name proposed for a group of these disorders and which can be 
further divided into subtypes - iPPSD1 to iPPSD6. These are termed, starting 
from PTH receptor inactivation mutation (Eiken and Blomstrand dysplasia) as 
iPPSD1, inactivating Gsα mutations (PHP-Ia, PHP-Ic and pPHP) as iPPSD2, loss of 
methylation of GNAS DMRs (PHP-Ib) as iPPSD3, PRKAR1A mutations (acrodysostosis 
type 1) as iPPSD4, PDE4D mutations (acrodysostosis type 2) as iPPSD5 and PDE3A 
mutations (autosomal dominant hypertension with brachydactyly) as iPPSD6. iPPSDx 
is reserved for unknown molecular defects and iPPSDn+1 for new molecular defects 
which are yet to be described. With these new classifications, the aim is to 
clarify the borders of each different subtype of disease and make the 
classification according to molecular pathology. The iPPSD group is designed to 
be expandable and new classifications will readily fit into it as necessary.

DOI: 10.4274/jcrpe.2017.S006
PMCID: PMC5790322
PMID: 29280743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]