---
reference_id: "PMID:35127681"
title: Alx1 Deficient Mice Recapitulate Craniofacial Phenotype and Reveal Developmental Basis of ALX1-Related Frontonasal Dysplasia.
authors:
- Iyyanar PPR
- Wu Z
- Lan Y
- Hu YC
- Jiang R
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.777887
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alx1 Deficient Mice Recapitulate Craniofacial Phenotype and Reveal Developmental Basis of ALX1-Related Frontonasal Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Iyyanar PPR, Wu Z, Lan Y, Hu YC, Jiang R
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2022.777887](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2022.777887)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Jan 21;10:777887. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.777887. 
eCollection 2022.

Alx1 Deficient Mice Recapitulate Craniofacial Phenotype and Reveal Developmental 
Basis of ALX1-Related Frontonasal Dysplasia.

Iyyanar PPR(1), Wu Z(1), Lan Y(1)(2)(3), Hu YC(1)(3), Jiang R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(2)Division of Plastic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Surgery, University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, United States.

Loss of ALX1 function causes the frontonasal dysplasia syndrome FND3, 
characterized by severe facial clefting and microphthalmia. Whereas the 
laboratory mouse has been the preeminent animal model for studying developmental 
mechanisms of human craniofacial birth defects, the roles of ALX1 in mouse 
frontonasal development have not been well characterized because the only 
previously reported Alx1 mutant mouse line exhibited acrania due to a genetic 
background-dependent failure of cranial neural tube closure. Using 
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing, we have generated an Alx1-deletion mouse 
model that recapitulates the FND craniofacial malformations, including median 
orofacial clefting and disruption of development of the eyes and alae nasi. In 
situ hybridization analysis showed that Alx1 is strongly expressed in 
frontonasal neural crest cells that give rise to periocular and frontonasal 
mesenchyme. Alx1 del/del embryos exhibited increased apoptosis of periocular 
mesenchyme and decreased expression of ocular developmental regulators Pitx2 and 
Lmxb1 in the periocular mesenchyme, followed by defective optic stalk 
morphogenesis. Moreover, Alx1 del/del embryos exhibited disruption of 
frontonasal mesenchyme identity, with loss of expression of Pax7 and concomitant 
ectopic expression of the jaw mesenchyme regulators Lhx6 and Lhx8 in the 
developing lateral nasal processes. The function of ALX1 in patterning the 
frontonasal mesenchyme is partly complemented by ALX4, a paralogous ALX family 
transcription factor whose loss-of-function causes a milder and distinctive FND. 
Together, these data uncover previously unknown roles of ALX1 in periocular 
mesenchyme development and frontonasal mesenchyme patterning, providing novel 
insights into the pathogenic mechanisms of ALX1-related FND.

Copyright © 2022 Iyyanar, Wu, Lan, Hu and Jiang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.777887
PMCID: PMC8815032
PMID: 35127681

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.