---
reference_id: "PMID:38774881"
title: "The lysosomal trafficking regulator \"LYST\": an 80-year traffic jam."
authors:
- Turner ME
- Che J
- Mirhaidari GJM
- Kennedy CC
- Blum KM
- Rajesh S
- Zbinden JC
- Breuer CK
- Best CA
- Barker JC
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1404846
keywords:
- Humans
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Vesicular Transport Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Chediak-Higashi Syndrome/genetics
- Protein Transport
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The lysosomal trafficking regulator "LYST": an 80-year traffic jam.
**Authors:** Turner ME, Che J, Mirhaidari GJM, Kennedy CC, Blum KM, Rajesh S, Zbinden JC, Breuer CK, Best CA, Barker JC
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1404846](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1404846)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 May 7;15:1404846. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1404846. 
eCollection 2024.

The lysosomal trafficking regulator "LYST": an 80-year traffic jam.

Turner ME(#)(1)(2), Che J(#)(1), Mirhaidari GJM(1)(3), Kennedy CC(1), Blum 
KM(1)(3), Rajesh S(1), Zbinden JC(1), Breuer CK(1), Best CA(1)(2), Barker 
JC(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Abigail Wexner Research Institute at 
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, United States.
(2)Molecular and Cellular Developmental Biology Graduate Program, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, United States.
(3)The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, United States.
(4)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, The Ohio State University 
Medical Center, Columbus, OH, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Lysosomes and lysosome related organelles (LROs) are dynamic organelles at the 
intersection of various pathways involved in maintaining cellular hemostasis and 
regulating cellular functions. Vesicle trafficking of lysosomes and LROs are 
critical to maintain their functions. The lysosomal trafficking regulator (LYST) 
is an elusive protein important for the regulation of membrane dynamics and 
intracellular trafficking of lysosomes and LROs. Mutations to the LYST gene 
result in Chédiak-Higashi syndrome, an autosomal recessive immunodeficiency 
characterized by defective granule exocytosis, cytotoxicity, etc. Despite eight 
decades passing since its initial discovery, a comprehensive understanding of 
LYST's function in cellular biology remains unresolved. Accumulating evidence 
suggests that dysregulation of LYST function also manifests in other disease 
states. Here, we review the available literature to consolidate available 
scientific endeavors in relation to LYST and discuss its relevance for 
immunomodulatory therapies, regenerative medicine and cancer applications.

Copyright © 2024 Turner, Che, Mirhaidari, Kennedy, Blum, Rajesh, Zbinden, 
Breuer, Best and Barker.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1404846
PMCID: PMC11106369
PMID: 38774881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ChB and CaB are co-founders of Lyst 
Therapeutics, LLC Columbus, OH and did not receive support for the present work. 
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of 
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.