---
reference_id: "PMID:22836908"
title: "The Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome: a retrospective study of biopsied cases."
authors:
- Elias MK
- Mateen FJ
- Weiler CR
journal: J Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-012-6603-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/therapeutic use"
- Biopsy
- Bipolar Disorder
- Child
- Female
- Granuloma/pathology
- Humans
- Male
- "Melkersson-Rosenthal Syndrome/drug therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Skin/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome: a retrospective study of biopsied cases.
**Authors:** Elias MK, Mateen FJ, Weiler CR
**Journal:** J Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-012-6603-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-012-6603-6)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2013 Jan;260(1):138-43. doi: 10.1007/s00415-012-6603-6. Epub 2012
Jul  27.

The Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome: a retrospective study of biopsied cases.

Elias MK(1), Mateen FJ, Weiler CR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergic Diseases, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, USA.

Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome (MRS) is a rare neuromucocutaneous syndrome marked 
by the triad of recurrent nonpitting orofacial edema, fissured dorsal tongue 
(lingua plicata), and lower motoneuron facial paralysis. Large case series 
including treatment are limited. A retrospective records review was performed 
for the diagnoses Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome, granulomatous cheilitis, and 
orofacial granulomatosis, confirmed by noncaseating granulomas on biopsy, at the 
Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota (1979-2009). There were 72 patients [51 
women (71 %), mean age at presentation 39 years (range 8-79)] identified with 
facial edema with noncaseating granulomas on skin biopsy. Lingua plicata 
occurred in 34 cases (47 %, 95 % confidence interval 35.3-59.3 %). Unilateral or 
partial facial nerve palsy occurred in 14 cases (19.4, 95 % confidence interval 
11.4-30.8 %). Comorbidities among those with facial edema included periodontal 
disease (n = 10, 14 %), history of allergic disease (n = 10, 14 %), Crohn's 
Disease (n = 6, 8 %), migraine headaches (n = 5, 7 %), and systemic lupus 
erythematosus (n = 2, 3 %). There were no patients who had low C1q or C4 levels 
among those who were tested. Overall, the full triad canonical of 
Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome was observed in nine patients (seven female, 
median age at symptomatic presentation 35 years (range 10-74 years), 13 %, (95 % 
confidence interval 6.2-22.9 %) with a median time from first symptoms to 
diagnosis of 4 years (range 1-35). The medication treatments attempted in the 
nine patients with the full triad of symptoms included non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, oral and intra-lesional steroids, metronidazole, 
dapsone, acyclovir, methotrexate, and thalidomide with no consistent treatment 
responses. The Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome may present over the course of most 
of the lifespan and may require several years of observation to be diagnosed. 
Neurologists who observe a combination of facial edema and facial palsy in a 
patient should consider the diagnosis of MRS and proceed to a diagnostic skin 
biopsy and a trial of steroid treatment for their patient.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-012-6603-6
PMID: 22836908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]