---
reference_id: "PMID:35118639"
title: "Different blood-brain-barrier disruption profiles in multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders, and neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus."
authors:
- Jasiak-Zatońska M
- Pietrzak A
- Wyciszkiewicz A
- Więsik-Szewczyk E
- Pawlak-Buś K
- Leszczyński P
- Kozubski W
- Michalak S
- Kalinowska-Łyszczarz A
journal: Neurol Neurochir Pol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.5603/PJNNS.a2022.0013
keywords:
- Blood-Brain Barrier
- Humans
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System"
- Multiple Sclerosis/drug therapy
- "Multiple Sclerosis, Relapsing-Remitting/drug therapy"
- Neuromyelitis Optica/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Different blood-brain-barrier disruption profiles in multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders, and neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Jasiak-Zatońska M, Pietrzak A, Wyciszkiewicz A, Więsik-Szewczyk E, Pawlak-Buś K, Leszczyński P, Kozubski W, Michalak S, Kalinowska-Łyszczarz A
**Journal:** Neurol Neurochir Pol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.5603/PJNNS.a2022.0013](https://doi.org/10.5603/PJNNS.a2022.0013)

## Content

1. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2022;56(3):246-255. doi: 10.5603/PJNNS.a2022.0013. Epub
2022 Feb 4.

Different blood-brain-barrier disruption profiles in multiple sclerosis,
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders, and neuropsychiatric systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Jasiak-Zatońska M(1), Pietrzak A(2), Wyciszkiewicz A(2), Więsik-Szewczyk E(3),
Pawlak-Buś K(4), Leszczyński P(4), Kozubski W(2), Michalak S(5),
Kalinowska-Łyszczarz A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry and Neuropathology, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland. michalina.ja@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan,
Poland.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Pulmonology, Allergy and Clinical
Immunology, Central Clinical Hospital of the Ministry of National Defence,
Military Institute of Medicine, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Rehabilitation and Internal Medicine, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(5)Department of Neurochemistry and Neuropathology, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

AIM OF THE STUDY: To assess differences in BBB damage profiles by measuring
serum levels of soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1), soluble
platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (sPECAM-1), soluble intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), and S100 calcium-binding protein B (S100B) in
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS), neuromyelitis optica spectrum
disorders (NMOsd), and neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE)
patients.
CLINICAL RATIONALE FOR THE STUDY: Blood-brain-barrier (BBB) disruption is one of
the key pathological processes involved in various demyelinating diseases of the
central nervous system (CNS) and is associated with shedding of cell adhesion
molecules and S100B into the serum compartment. Therefore, making an assessment
of serum levels of the above-mentioned molecules could provide information about
disease pathogenesis, severity of BBB disruption, and disease activity.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We recruited 42 RRMS, 19 NMOsd and 35 NPSLE patients.
Subjects were treated with beta-interferons or glatiramer acetate (RRMS), oral
steroids and/or azathioprine (NMOsd, NPSLE), other immunosuppressants (NPSLE),
or antimalarials (NPSLE). The clinical condition of the patients was assessed
using the Kurtzke Expanded Disability Status Scale for MS and NMOsd, and the
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index for NPSLE. Serum levels of
sVCAM-1, sPECAM-1, sICAM-1 and S100B were determined using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: We found the lowest levels of sPECAM-1, sICAM-1 and S100B in sera from
NMOsd patients. The highest levels of sPECAM-1 and sICAM-1 were observed in
NPSLE, and in NPSLE and MS, respectively. There were no statistically
significant differences in sVCAM-1 levels between the examined groups. In MS and
NMOsd, there was a negative correlation between the EDSS score and the following
molecules: sPECAM-1, sICAM-1 and S100B.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: We conclude that there is a different
profile of blood-brain-barrier disruption reflected by cell adhesion molecules
shedding in the spectrum of autoimmune CNS disorders with disseminated white
matter lesions. These molecules could become new biomarkers to be used in CNS
demyelinating diseases differential diagnoses and monitoring disease activity,
but further studies on larger groups of patients are necessary.

DOI: 10.5603/PJNNS.a2022.0013
PMID: 35118639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
