---
reference_id: "PMID:28885371"
title: "Clinical and diagnostic features of angiosarcoma with pulmonary metastases: A retrospective observational study."
authors:
- Wang H
- Shi J
- Liu H
- Chen Y
- Wang Y
- Wang W
- Zhang L
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000008033
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Diagnostic Errors
- "Hemangiosarcoma/diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Lung/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, secondary, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and diagnostic features of angiosarcoma with pulmonary metastases: A retrospective observational study.
**Authors:** Wang H, Shi J, Liu H, Chen Y, Wang Y, Wang W, Zhang L
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000008033](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000008033)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017 Sep;96(36):e8033. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000008033.

Clinical and diagnostic features of angiosarcoma with pulmonary metastases: A
retrospective observational study.

Wang H(1), Shi J, Liu H, Chen Y, Wang Y, Wang W, Zhang L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine Pathology Department Department of
Thoracic Surgery Radiology Department, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Dong Cheng District, Beijing, China.

Angiosarcoma with pulmonary metastasis is a rare, fatal disease that often
presents with multiple pulmonary nodules and diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. We
herein review the detailed clinical characteristics of pulmonary metastatic
angiosarcoma and determine a reasonable diagnostic strategy.The medical records
of 11 patients with pulmonary angiosarcoma were reviewed.The mean age of the
patients was 45.7 years (range, 30-71 years). All patients were male. The most
common symptom was hemoptysis (8/11). Common initial misdiagnoses were
tuberculosis (5/11), vasculitis (2/11), nontuberculous infectious disease
(1/11), and constrictive pericarditis (1/11). Chest computed tomography (CT) of
patients with hemoptysis showed bilateral, randomly distributed, variably
shaped, and differently sized nodules, as well as ground-glass opacities (GGO)
(8/11). The right heart was the most common primary tumor site (8/11), but the
sensitivity of echocardiography was limited; CT angiography and cardiac magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) revealed more atrial masses. CT-guided needle biopsy was
difficult to perform in most patients because of the small size of the nodules.
The diagnosis was made by surgical biopsy of either the lung (3/9) or heart
(6/9). The median overall survival of patients who underwent lung biopsy and
those who underwent cardiac/pericardiac biopsy was 4.1 and 1.4 months,
respectively (P = .098). The median overall survival of the 9 available patients
was 5.0 months (95% confidence interval, 0.500-8.544).Angiosarcoma with
pulmonary metastases should be considered in patients with hemoptysis and
concurrent GGO and nodules on their chest CT scan. Careful cardiologic
monitoring is necessary for these patients, even without any cardiac symptoms or
signs, and enhanced cardiac MRI is the first recommendation. Surgical biopsy is
reliable for histological diagnosis, but the safety of the lung biopsy should be
carefully assessed. When primary cardiac tumors are identified, heart biopsy
should be preferentially considered.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000008033
PMCID: PMC6392612
PMID: 28885371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
