---
reference_id: "PMID:38225193"
title: A curious case of expanded dengue syndrome.
authors:
- Ahmed M
- Wasim MA
- Kazi AN
- Akber H
- Sheikh M
- Patel MJ
journal: Trop Doct
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/00494755231224493
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A curious case of expanded dengue syndrome.
**Authors:** Ahmed M, Wasim MA, Kazi AN, Akber H, Sheikh M, Patel MJ
**Journal:** Trop Doct (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00494755231224493](https://doi.org/10.1177/00494755231224493)

## Content

1. Trop Doct. 2024 Apr;54(2):179-181. doi: 10.1177/00494755231224493. Epub 2024
Jan  15.

A curious case of expanded dengue syndrome.

Ahmed M(1), Wasim MA(1), Kazi AN(1), Akber H(1), Sheikh M(1), Patel MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Resident, Department of Internal Medicine, Indus Hospital and Health Network, 
Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Professor, Department of Internal Medicine, Indus Hospital and Health 
Network, Karachi, Pakistan.

Dengue fever (DF) primarily presents with fever, headache, malaise, bleeding 
manifestations and haemoconcentration. World Health Organization (WHO) 
classifies DF according to levels of severity: (a) without warning signs; (b) 
with warning signs, such as abdominal pain, persistent vomiting, fluid 
accumulation, mucosal bleeding, lethargy, liver enlargement, increasing 
haematocrit and thrombocytopenia; and (c) severe dengue with severe plasma 
leakage, severe bleeding or organ failure. Atypical clinical presentations of DF 
are defined as expanded dengue syndrome: this includes renal, cardiac, hepatic 
or cerebral damage. We report such a severe case where a young man developed 
acute kidney injury, acute fulminant liver failure and acute pancreatitis 
secondary to DF, but recovered.

DOI: 10.1177/00494755231224493
PMID: 38225193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.