---
reference_id: "PMID:38927059"
title: Molecular Mechanisms in Tumorigenesis of Hepatocellular Carcinoma and in Target Treatments-An Overview.
authors:
- Szilveszter RM
- Muntean M
- Florea A
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14060656
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Liver Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Carcinogenesis/genetics, pathology"
- Tumor Microenvironment/genetics
- Signal Transduction
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Mechanisms in Tumorigenesis of Hepatocellular Carcinoma and in Target Treatments-An Overview.
**Authors:** Szilveszter RM, Muntean M, Florea A
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14060656](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14060656)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 Jun 4;14(6):656. doi: 10.3390/biom14060656.

Molecular Mechanisms in Tumorigenesis of Hepatocellular Carcinoma and in Target
Treatments-An Overview.

Szilveszter RM(1)(2)(3), Muntean M(2), Florea A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, "Iuliu Hațieganu" University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, 400340 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, "Iuliu
Hațieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 400349 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(3)Cluj County Emergency Clinical Hospital, 400340 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.

Hepatocellular carcinoma is the most common primary malignancy of the liver,
with hepatocellular differentiation. It is ranked sixth among the most common
cancers worldwide and is the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths. The
most important etiological factors discussed here are viral infection (HBV,
HCV), exposure to aflatoxin B1, metabolic syndrome, and obesity (as an
independent factor). Directly or indirectly, they induce chromosomal
aberrations, mutations, and epigenetic changes in specific genes involved in
intracellular signaling pathways, responsible for synthesis of growth factors,
cell proliferation, differentiation, survival, the metastasis process (including
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and the expression of adhesion molecules),
and angiogenesis. All these disrupted molecular mechanisms contribute to
hepatocarcinogenesis. Furthermore, equally important is the interaction between
tumor cells and the components of the tumor microenvironment: inflammatory cells
and macrophages-predominantly with a pro-tumoral role-hepatic stellate cells,
tumor-associated fibroblasts, cancer stem cells, extracellular vesicles, and the
extracellular matrix. In this paper, we reviewed the molecular biology of
hepatocellular carcinoma and the intricate mechanisms involved in
hepatocarcinogenesis, and we highlighted how certain signaling pathways can be
pharmacologically influenced at various levels with specific molecules.
Additionally, we mentioned several examples of recent clinical trials and
briefly described the current treatment protocol according to the NCCN
guidelines.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14060656
PMCID: PMC11201617
PMID: 38927059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
