---
reference_id: "PMID:21447005"
title: Advances in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndromes.
authors:
- Madkaikar M
- Mhatre S
- Gupta M
- Ghosh K
journal: Eur J Haematol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2011.01617.x
keywords:
- Apoptosis
- "Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome/classification, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Autoimmunity
- Cell Proliferation
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation
- Neoplasms/etiology
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
- Signal Transduction
- fas Receptor/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndromes.
**Authors:** Madkaikar M, Mhatre S, Gupta M, Ghosh K
**Journal:** Eur J Haematol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0609.2011.01617.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0609.2011.01617.x)

## Content

1. Eur J Haematol. 2011 Jul;87(1):1-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2011.01617.x.

Advances in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndromes.

Madkaikar M(1), Mhatre S, Gupta M, Ghosh K.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Immunohaematology, KEM Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, India.
madkaikarm@icmr.org.in

Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is a disorder of lymphocyte
homeostasis. It is characterized by non-malignant lymphoproliferation
autoimmunity mostly directed toward blood cells and increased risk of lymphoma.
Majority of patients with ALPS harbor heterozygous germline mutations in the
gene for the TNF receptor-family member Fas (CD 95, Apo-1) which are inherited
in an autosomal dominant fashion. Somatic Fas mutations are the second most
common genetic etiology of ALPS. Additionally mutations in the genes encoding
Fas-ligand (FASLG), caspase 10 (CASP10) and caspase 8 (CASP8), NRAS and KRAS
have been identified in a small number of patients with ALPS and related
disorders. Approximately one-third of patients with ALPS have yet unidentified
defect. ALPS was initially thought to be a very rare disease, but recent studies
have shown that it may be more common than previously thought. Testing for ALPS
should therefore be considered in patients with unexplained lymphadenopathy,
cytopenias, and hepatosplenomegaly. There have been significant advances in the
understanding of the pathophysiology of ALPS in last few years which has
resulted in the development of new diagnostic criteria and a number of targeted
therapies. This review describes the clinical and laboratory manifestations
found in patients with ALPS, as well as the molecular basis for the disease and
new advances in treatment.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2011.01617.x
PMID: 21447005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
