---
reference_id: "PMID:12028152"
title: "Papular xanthoma: a clinicopathological study of 10 cases."
authors:
- Breier F
- Zelger B
- Reiter H
- Gschnait F
- Zelger BW
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0560.2002.290402.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Biomarkers/analysis
- Female
- "Histiocytosis, Non-Langerhans-Cell/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Immunoenzyme Techniques
- "Macrophages/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Skin/metabolism, pathology"
- "Skin Diseases, Papulosquamous/metabolism, pathology"
- "Xanthomatosis/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Papular xanthoma: a clinicopathological study of 10 cases.
**Authors:** Breier F, Zelger B, Reiter H, Gschnait F, Zelger BW
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1034/j.1600-0560.2002.290402.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0560.2002.290402.x)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2002 Apr;29(4):200-6. doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0560.2002.290402.x.

Papular xanthoma: a clinicopathological study of 10 cases.

Breier F(1), Zelger B, Reiter H, Gschnait F, Zelger BW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Lainz Municipal Hospital, Vienna, Austria. 
brf@der.khl.magwien.gv.at

BACKGROUND: Papular xanthoma (PX) is one of several clinicopathologic variants 
of normolipemic cutaneous non-Langerhans cell histiocytoses (n-LCH). PX 
represents a monomorphous reaction pattern of n-LCH characterized by the 
presence of predominantly xanthomatized macrophages.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to identify the clinical, histological 
and immunohistochemical characteristics of PX.
METHODS: A series of 10 cases of PX was identified and the results compared with 
the other histologic subtypes, namely the polymorphous and the remaining other 
monomorphous reaction patterns in n-LCH.
RESULTS: In this clinicopathologic study, papular xanthoma presented clinically 
mainly as solitary papule, with a male to female ratio of4 : 1, in an age range 
from 13 to 57 years and a biphasic occurrence: in the young adolescence and 
middle ages. It was predominantly located on the trunk, the extremities, and 
rarely on the head. Clinically, PX was described as xanthoma, 'cutaneous tumor', 
but also as atheroma, keloid, histiocytoma, Spitz's nevus or clear cell 
acanthoma. Histology showed moderately well circumscribed exoendophytic papules 
with a regular epidermis and a dense infiltration of xanthomatized macrophages 
interspersed by numerous Touton type giant cells. Immunohistochemically mono- 
and multinucleated macrophages were consistently positive with KiM1p; while only 
giant cells were labeled with KP1 (CD68), the reactivity with HAM 56 was much 
more variable. Up to 50% of the xanthomatized cells labeled positive for the 
lectin peanut agglutinin. In one case the xanthomatized cells stained positive 
for CD34. Staining for factor XIIIa and CD1a were negative.
CONCLUSIONS: This series confirms PX as a rare, but distinguished 
clinicopathologic entity in the spectrum of n-LCH of the skin.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0560.2002.290402.x
PMID: 12028152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]