---
reference_id: "PMID:28689307"
title: Long-term follow-up in osteogenesis imperfecta type VI.
authors:
- Trejo P
- Palomo T
- Montpetit K
- Fassier F
- Sato A
- Glorieux FH
- Rauch F
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-017-4141-x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Bone Density/drug effects
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Denosumab/therapeutic use
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Fractures, Bone/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- Lumbar Vertebrae/physiopathology
- Male
- Mutation
- Nerve Growth Factors/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology, surgery"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Scoliosis/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- Serpins/genetics
- Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term follow-up in osteogenesis imperfecta type VI.
**Authors:** Trejo P, Palomo T, Montpetit K, Fassier F, Sato A, Glorieux FH, Rauch F
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-017-4141-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-017-4141-x)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2017 Oct;28(10):2975-2983. doi: 10.1007/s00198-017-4141-x.
Epub  2017 Jul 9.

Long-term follow-up in osteogenesis imperfecta type VI.

Trejo P(1), Palomo T(1), Montpetit K(1), Fassier F(1), Sato A(1), Glorieux 
FH(1), Rauch F(2).

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, 1003 Boulevard Decarie, 
Montreal, Québec, H4A 0A9, Canada.
(2)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, 1003 Boulevard Decarie, 
Montreal, Québec, H4A 0A9, Canada. frauch@shriners.mcgill.ca.

This retrospective study on long-term outcomes in osteogenesis imperfecta type 
VI found that patients who received intravenous bisphosphonate treatment had an 
increase in lumbar spine areal bone mineral density, a higher final height 
z-score, and some reshaping of vertebral bodies.
INTRODUCTION: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type VI is an ultra-rare bone 
fragility disorder caused by recessive mutations in SERPINF1. Here, we describe 
long-term outcomes in OI type VI and compare the clinical phenotypes caused by 
different types of SERPINF1 mutations.
METHODS: This study includes a retrospective chart review of 13 individuals with 
OI type VI.
RESULTS: In the absence of therapy, lumbar spine areal bone mineral density 
(BMD) did not increase during childhood and longitudinal growth seemed to stall 
after the age of 6 to 8 years. The phenotype was similar between individuals 
with different types of SERPINF1 mutations. Intravenous bisphosphonate treatment 
was associated with an increase in lumbar spine areal BMD and some reshaping of 
compressed vertebral bodies. Patients who had started bisphosphonate treatment 
early (before the age of 6 years) were taller than patients who had received 
bisphosphonate treatment later during their growing years. Lower extremity 
fractures were frequent despite bisphosphonate treatment and scoliosis was 
present in all patients who had reached the final height. Most patients had 
restricted mobility. In four patients, intravenous bisphosphonate treatment was 
eventually substituted by subcutaneous injections of denosumab, without clear 
changes in the clinical picture.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with OI type VI who received intravenous bisphosphonate 
treatment during growth had an increase in lumbar spine areal BMD, a higher 
final height z-score, and presented some reshaping of vertebral bodies. More 
effective treatment modalities are clearly required in OI type VI.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-017-4141-x
PMID: 28689307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]