---
reference_id: "PMID:8493454"
title: Erythrocyte rosetting in Plasmodium falciparum malaria--with special reference to the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria.
authors:
- Carlson J
journal: Scand J Infect Dis Suppl
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythrocyte rosetting in Plasmodium falciparum malaria--with special reference to the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria.
**Authors:** Carlson J
**Journal:** Scand J Infect Dis Suppl (1993)

## Content

1. Scand J Infect Dis Suppl. 1993;86:1-79.

Erythrocyte rosetting in Plasmodium falciparum malaria--with special reference 
to the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria.

Carlson J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Akademiska sjukhuset, Uppsala, Sweden.

Spontaneous rosette formation of uninfected erythrocytes around an erythrocyte 
infected with Plasmodium falciparum is a recently described in vitro phenomenon 
which is also present in infections with some other malarial species where 
sequestration of parasite infected erythrocytes is a characteristic. In the 
present studies, rosetting was established as a P. falciparum virulence factor, 
the expression of which is modified by a variety of host factors, such as host 
immunity, ABO blood group and haemoglobin phenotype. The molecules involved in 
rosetting seem to be distinct from those involved in endothelial cytoadherence, 
although they are often co-expressed on the same parasitised red cell. Rosette 
formation was shown not only to be a phenomenon of laboratory-propagated 
strains, but also to exist in wild clinical isolates from all major malarious 
areas of the world. In two studies performed in The Gambia, comprising 211 
children with uncomplicated or cerebral malaria, a strong association was found 
between in vitro rosette formation and cerebral malaria, indicating that 
rosetting plays a role in the pathogenesis of severe P. falciparum disease. 
Anti-rosetting activity, presumably mediated by antibodies, was found in sera 
from patients in malaria-endemic areas, and it was demonstrated that such 
activity was more abundant in individuals with uncomplicated malaria than in 
those with cerebral disease, suggesting that humoral immunity protects against 
rosette formation in vivo. It was also demonstrated, by the use of several 
independent assays, that erythrocytes from individuals with sickle-cell trait, 
alpha- and beta-thalassaemia trait or with HbE, formed smaller and weaker 
rosettes than did normal (HbAA) red cells. The results also suggest that 
microcytosis per se is correlated to impaired rosette formation. Differences in 
rosetting ability were also seen between red cells of different ABO blood 
groups, with a diminished rosetting potential in blood group O red cells. 
Impaired rosette formation may thus contribute to the innate resistance to 
severe P. falciparum malaria that is known to exist in certain red cell 
disorders and in individuals of blood group O. Rosette formation was found to be 
governed by strong adhesive forces, with lectin-like bindings between 
parasite-derived proteins exposed on the P. falciparum-infected red cell 
surface, rosettins, and various carbohydrate moieties present on the uninfected 
erythrocyte. The strongest carbohydrate receptors seem to be contained within 
the blood group A or B antigens, and the rosettes were abolished by 
oligosaccharides mimicking these antigens. The binding between infected and 
uninfected erythrocytes was dependent on divalent cations and was sometimes 
sensitive to pH.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 8493454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]