---
reference_id: "PMID:37887285"
title: Immunity against Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer and the Effect of Immunosuppressive Medication on Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer Risk in Solid Organ Transplant Recipients.
authors:
- Bakker D
- Bakker WJ
- Bekkenk MW
- Luiten RM
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12202441
keywords:
- Humans
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/epidemiology, etiology, drug therapy"
- Transplant Recipients
- Immunosuppressive Agents/adverse effects
- Organ Transplantation/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunity against Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer and the Effect of Immunosuppressive Medication on Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer Risk in Solid Organ Transplant Recipients.
**Authors:** Bakker D, Bakker WJ, Bekkenk MW, Luiten RM
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12202441](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12202441)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Oct 11;12(20):2441. doi: 10.3390/cells12202441.

Immunity against Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer and the Effect of Immunosuppressive
Medication on Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer Risk in Solid Organ Transplant
Recipients.

Bakker D(1)(2), Bakker WJ(1)(2), Bekkenk MW(1)(2)(3), Luiten RM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Netherlands Institute for Pigment Disorders,
Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam Institute for Infection and Immunity, 1081
HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Amsterdam University Medical Centers, VU University of Amsterdam, 1081 HV
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSCs) occur frequently in the Caucasian population
and are considered a burden for health care. Risk factors include ultraviolet
(UV) radiation, ethnicity and immunosuppression. The incidence of NMSC is
significantly higher in solid organ transplant recipients (SOTRs) than in
immunocompetent individuals, due to immunosuppressive medication use by SOTRs.
While the immunosuppressive agents, calcineurin inhibitors and purine analogues
increase the incidence of NMSC in transplant recipients, mTOR inhibitors do not.
This is most likely due to the different immunological pathways that are
inhibited by each class of drug. This review will focus on what is currently
known about the immune response against cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC)
and basal cell carcinoma (BCC), two of the main types of NMSC. Furthermore, we
will describe the different classes of immunosuppressants given to SOTRs, which
part of the immune system they target and how they can contribute to NMSC
development. The risk of developing NMSC in SOTRs is the result of a combination
of inhibiting immunological pathways involved in immunosurveillance against NMSC
and the direct (pro/anti) tumor effects of immunosuppressants.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12202441
PMCID: PMC10605268
PMID: 37887285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
