---
reference_id: "PMID:29040705"
title: The MRPP1/MRPP2 complex is a tRNA-maturation platform in human mitochondria.
authors:
- Reinhard L
- Sridhara S
- Hällberg BM
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx902
keywords:
- 3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases/metabolism
- Humans
- Methyltransferases/metabolism
- "Mitochondria/enzymology, genetics"
- Neoplasm Proteins/metabolism
- "RNA Processing, Post-Transcriptional"
- "RNA, Transfer/metabolism"
- Ribonuclease P/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The MRPP1/MRPP2 complex is a tRNA-maturation platform in human mitochondria.
**Authors:** Reinhard L, Sridhara S, Hällberg BM
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkx902](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx902)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Dec 1;45(21):12469-12480. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx902.

The MRPP1/MRPP2 complex is a tRNA-maturation platform in human mitochondria.

Reinhard L(1)(2), Sridhara S(1)(2), Hällberg BM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Röntgen-Ångström-Cluster, Karolinska Institutet Outstation, Centre for 
Structural Systems Biology (CSSB), DESY-Campus, 22607 Hamburg, Germany.
(3)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hamburg Unit, 22603 Hamburg, Germany.

Mitochondrial polycistronic transcripts are extensively processed to give rise 
to functional mRNAs, rRNAs and tRNAs; starting with the release of tRNA elements 
through 5'-processing by RNase P (MRPP1/2/3-complex) and 3'-processing by RNase 
Z (ELAC2). Here, we show using in vitro experiments that MRPP1/2 is not only a 
component of the mitochondrial RNase P but that it retains the tRNA product from 
the 5'-processing step and significantly enhances the efficiency of 
ELAC2-catalyzed 3'-processing for 17 of the 22 tRNAs encoded in the human 
mitochondrial genome. Furthermore, MRPP1/2 retains the tRNA product after ELAC2 
processing and presents the nascent tRNA to the mitochondrial CCA-adding enzyme. 
Thus, in addition to being an essential component of the RNase P reaction, 
MRPP1/2 serves as a processing platform for several down-stream tRNA maturation 
steps in human mitochondria. These findings are of fundamental importance for 
our molecular understanding of disease-related mutations in MRPP1/2, ELAC2 and 
mitochondrial tRNA genes.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx902
PMCID: PMC5716156
PMID: 29040705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]