---
reference_id: "PMID:37245047"
title: A systematic review and meta-analysis of long COVID symptoms.
authors:
- Natarajan A
- Shetty A
- Delanerolle G
- Zeng Y
- Zhang Y
- Raymont V
- Rathod S
- Halabi S
- Elliot K
- Shi JQ
- Phiri P
journal: Syst Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13643-023-02250-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review and meta-analysis of long COVID symptoms.
**Authors:** Natarajan A, Shetty A, Delanerolle G, Zeng Y, Zhang Y, Raymont V, Rathod S, Halabi S, Elliot K, Shi JQ, Phiri P
**Journal:** Syst Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13643-023-02250-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-023-02250-0)

## Content

1. Syst Rev. 2023 May 27;12(1):88. doi: 10.1186/s13643-023-02250-0.

A systematic review and meta-analysis of long COVID symptoms.

Natarajan A(#)(1), Shetty A(#)(2)(3), Delanerolle G(#)(4), Zeng Y(#)(5), Zhang 
Y(#)(6), Raymont V(7), Rathod S(8), Halabi S(#)(9), Elliot K(#)(8), Shi 
JQ(#)(5), Phiri P(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Hillingdon Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Pain Services, Uxbridge, UK.
(2)University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)University College London, London, UK.
(4)Nuffield Department of Primary Health Care Sciences, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.
(5)Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and 
Technology, Shezhen, China.
(6)West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(8)Research & Innovation Department, Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust, 
Southampton, UK.
(9)O'Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law, Georgetown University 
Law Center, Washington, DC, USA.
(10)Research & Innovation Department, Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust, 
Southampton, UK. peter.phiri@southernhealth.nhs.uk.
(11)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Environmental and Life Sciences, 
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. peter.phiri@southernhealth.nhs.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Ongoing symptoms or the development of new symptoms following a 
SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis has caused a complex clinical problem known as "long COVID" 
(LC). This has introduced further pressure on global healthcare systems as there 
appears to be a need for ongoing clinical management of these patients. LC 
personifies heterogeneous symptoms at varying frequencies. The most complex 
symptoms appear to be driven by the neurology and neuropsychiatry spheres.
METHODS: A systematic protocol was developed, peer reviewed, and published in 
PROSPERO. The systematic review included publications from the 1st of December 
2019-30th June 2021 published in English. Multiple electronic databases were 
used. The dataset has been analyzed using a random-effects model and a subgroup 
analysis based on geographical location. Prevalence and 95% confidence intervals 
(CIs) were established based on the data identified.
RESULTS: Of the 302 studies, 49 met the inclusion criteria, although 36 studies 
were included in the meta-analysis. The 36 studies had a collective sample size 
of 11,598 LC patients. 18 of the 36 studies were designed as cohorts and the 
remainder were cross-sectional. Symptoms of mental health, gastrointestinal, 
cardiopulmonary, neurological, and pain were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: The quality that differentiates this meta-analysis is that they are 
cohort and cross-sectional studies with follow-up. It is evident that there is 
limited knowledge available of LC and current clinical management strategies may 
be suboptimal as a result. Clinical practice improvements will require more 
comprehensive clinical research, enabling effective evidence-based approaches to 
better support patients.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13643-023-02250-0
PMCID: PMC10220332
PMID: 37245047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PP has received a research grant from Novo 
Nordisk, and the other, educational from Queen Mary University of London, from 
John Wiley & Sons, and other from Otsuka, outside the submitted work. SR reports 
research funding associated with other studies from Janssen, Otsuka, and 
Lundbeck. AS reports funding associated with other projects from Medtronic. GD 
reports research funding associated with NIHR RCF. VR reports funding associated 
with other studies from the Medical Research Council. This research is based on 
evidence gathered systematically and has not been influenced unduly by 
expertise. All other authors declare that they have no competing interests. The 
views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, 
the National Institute for Health Research, Department of Health and Social Care 
or Academic institutions.