---
reference_id: "PMID:36054518"
title: "Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction: The Jefferson Experience."
authors:
- Siddiqui SH
- Sagalow ES
- Fiorella MA
- Jain N
- Spiegel JR
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/lary.30346
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction: The Jefferson Experience.
**Authors:** Siddiqui SH, Sagalow ES, Fiorella MA, Jain N, Spiegel JR
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.30346](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.30346)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2023 May;133(5):1081-1085. doi: 10.1002/lary.30346. Epub 2022
Aug  23.

Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction: The Jefferson Experience.

Siddiqui SH(1), Sagalow ES(1), Fiorella MA(1), Jain N(1), Spiegel JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Jefferson Voice and 
Swallowing Center, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, U.S.A.

OBJECTIVES: To describe our center's experience with the identification and 
treatment of retrograde cricopharyngeus dysfunction (R-CPD), a syndrome 
involving the inability to belch previously described by only one institution. 
Additionally, because all patients initially learned of their condition and 
sought treatment as a result of social media posts, we queried their source and 
comfort with this form of medical referral.
METHODS: Retrospective chart review of patients who underwent botulism toxin 
injection into the cricopharyngeus muscle for treatment of R-CPD from 2019 to 
2022. Demographic data, most common symptoms at presentation, and response to 
treatment and complications were documented. Post-treatment questionnaires were 
reviewed.
RESULTS: A total of 85 patients were identified. Mean age at surgery was 
27 years. There were 54 (63.5%) females and 31 (36.5%) males. The inability to 
burp (98.8%), bloating (92.9%), gurgling noises (31.8%), and excessive 
flatulence (21.2%) were the most common symptoms. The minimum units of botox 
utilized were 25, whereas the maximum was 100. The majority of patients (88.2%) 
had a successful response at initial follow-up visit. The most common 
complication was mild dysphagia (30.6%), which was transient for all patients. 
Most patients learned of our practice through social media, with only one 
patient being referred by a medical provider.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of patients in our cohort were young and female. The 
inability to burp and bloating were the most common presenting symptoms. Social 
media was the primary source of referral. Our institution favors 80-100 units 
for an effective response. Laryngoscope, 133:1081-1085, 2023.

© 2022 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.30346
PMID: 36054518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]