---
reference_id: "PMID:36062404"
title: Mortality and care of eating disorders.
authors:
- Castellini G
- Caini S
- Cassioli E
- Rossi E
- Marchesoni G
- Rotella F
- "De Bonfioli Cavalcabo' N"
- Fontana M
- Mezzani B
- Alterini B
- Lucarelli S
- Ricca V
journal: Acta Psychiatr Scand
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/acps.13487
keywords:
- Humans
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/epidemiology, therapy"
- Bulimia Nervosa/therapy
- "Binge-Eating Disorder/psychology, therapy"
- "Anorexia Nervosa/therapy, psychology"
- Italy/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mortality and care of eating disorders.
**Authors:** Castellini G, Caini S, Cassioli E, Rossi E, Marchesoni G, Rotella F, De Bonfioli Cavalcabo' N, Fontana M, Mezzani B, Alterini B, Lucarelli S, Ricca V
**Journal:** Acta Psychiatr Scand (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/acps.13487](https://doi.org/10.1111/acps.13487)

## Content

1. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2023 Feb;147(2):122-133. doi: 10.1111/acps.13487. Epub
2022 Aug 12.

Mortality and care of eating disorders.

Castellini G(1)(2), Caini S(3), Cassioli E(1), Rossi E(1), Marchesoni G(1),
Rotella F(2), De Bonfioli Cavalcabo' N(3), Fontana M(4), Mezzani B(5), Alterini
B(6), Lucarelli S(7), Ricca V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Psychiatry Unit, Department of Health Sciences, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy.
(2)Psychiatry Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Cancer Risk Factors and Lifestyle Epidemiology Unit, Institute for Cancer
Research, Prevention and Clinical Network (ISPRO), Florence, Italy.
(4)Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Institute for Cancer Research, Prevention and
Clinical Network (ISPRO), Florence, Italy.
(5)Casa di cura "Villa dei Pini", Florence, Italy.
(6)Division of Cardiovascular and Perioperative Medicine, Careggi University
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(7)UFS Eating Disorders ASL Toscana Centro, Florence, Italy.

Comment in
    Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2023 Apr;147(4):389-391. doi: 10.1111/acps.13538.

INTRODUCTION: Eating disorders (EDs) are considered serious mental illnesses,
with one of the highest lethality among psychiatric disorders, even though the
issue of mortality due to these conditions is still controversial. The present
study was aimed at comparing the mortality rate in a cohort of ED patients
representative of the geographic area with that of the age and gender-matched
general population of central Italy.
METHODS: Patients were enrolled between 1994 and 2018, among those attending the
eating disorders treatment network of the Florence area (EDTN), which is a
regional multidisciplinary treatment reference center for EDs covering the
clinical population of the metropolitan Florence area (Italy). The life status
of participants was determined through linkage with the Regional Mortality
Registry.
RESULTS: A total of 1277 individuals with EDs were included, including 368 with
Anorexia Nervosa (AN), 312 with Bulimia Nervosa (BN), and 597 individuals with
Binge Eating Disorder (BED). Twenty-two patients (1.72%) died, during a median
follow-up of 7.4 years. The mortality rates among ED patients did not
significantly differ from that of the general population of the same age and sex
with a Standardized Mortality Ratio (SMR) of 1.19, 95% CI 0.79-1.81. Only among
BN patients, the mortality was significantly increased after 10 years from
clinical evaluation (SMR 11.24, 95% CI 3.62-34.84).
CONCLUSION: The low mortality in EDs, compared to published studies, might be
due to the EDTN treatment strategy, based on a large network which makes an
integrated multidisciplinary team available for almost all the patients with EDs
of the geographical area.

© 2022 The Authors. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acps.13487
PMCID: PMC10086824
PMID: 36062404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.
