---
reference_id: "PMID:31668194"
title: Invasive Pneumococcal and Meningococcal Disease.
authors:
- Fitzgerald D
- Waterer GW
journal: Infect Dis Clin North Am
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.idc.2019.08.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Invasive Pneumococcal and Meningococcal Disease.
**Authors:** Fitzgerald D, Waterer GW
**Journal:** Infect Dis Clin North Am (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.idc.2019.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idc.2019.08.007)

## Content

1. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2019 Dec;33(4):1125-1141. doi: 
10.1016/j.idc.2019.08.007.

Invasive Pneumococcal and Meningococcal Disease.

Fitzgerald D(1), Waterer GW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sir Charles Gardiner Hospital, Verdun 
Street, Nedlands, Perth 6009, Australia.
(2)University of Western Australia, Royal Perth Hospital, Wellington Street, 
Perth 6000, Australia. Electronic address: grant.waterer@uwa.edu.au.

This review focuses on current knowledge of the epidemiology, prevention, and 
treatment of invasive pneumococcal (IPD) and meningococcal disease (IMD). IPD 
decreased significantly with the introduction of effective conjugate vaccines 
but is on the rise again. Effective antibiotic therapy of IPD includes the 
combination of a beta-lactam and a macrolide with additional considerations in 
meningitis. Steroids are mandatory in pneumococcal meningitis but not indicated 
in pneumococcal pneumonia except in the setting of refractory shock. There is 
increasing concern about the cardiovascular complications of IPD. IMD continues 
to be a significant health problem with major concerns about rising antibiotic 
resistance.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idc.2019.08.007
PMID: 31668194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]