---
reference_id: "PMID:11570544"
title: Dental and oral manifestations of sclerosteosis.
authors:
- Stephen LX
- Hamersma H
- Gardner J
- Beighton P
journal: Int Dent J
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1002/j.1875-595x.2001.tb00840.x
keywords:
- Adult
- Anodontia/etiology
- Exostoses/etiology
- Facial Asymmetry/etiology
- Facial Muscles/physiopathology
- Facial Nerve/physiopathology
- Facial Paralysis/etiology
- Humans
- "Hyperostosis/complications, genetics"
- Jaw Diseases/etiology
- Mandibular Diseases/etiology
- Mastication/physiology
- Maxillary Diseases/etiology
- Muscle Weakness/etiology
- Nerve Compression Syndromes/etiology
- "Osteosclerosis/complications, genetics"
- "Palate, Hard/pathology"
- Sialorrhea/etiology
- South Africa
- Tooth Diseases/etiology
- Tooth Eruption/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dental and oral manifestations of sclerosteosis.
**Authors:** Stephen LX, Hamersma H, Gardner J, Beighton P
**Journal:** Int Dent J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1875-595x.2001.tb00840.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1875-595x.2001.tb00840.x)

## Content

1. Int Dent J. 2001 Aug;51(4):287-90. doi: 10.1002/j.1875-595x.2001.tb00840.x.

Dental and oral manifestations of sclerosteosis.

Stephen LX(1), Hamersma H, Gardner J, Beighton P.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: Documentation of the oral and dental manifestations of
Sclerosteosis.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Sclerosteosis is a member of the family of genetic
craniotubular hyperostoses. This severe progressive sclerosing bone dysplasia
has important orofacial manifestations and a wide geographical distribution.
Comprehensive oral and dental evaluation of eight affected adults in the
Afrikaner community of South Africa was undertaken.
RESULTS: Gross asymmetrical hypertrophy of the mandible was present in all eight
patients, bilateral or unilateral facial paralysis with weakness of facial
muscles due to facial nerve entrapment was present in six. Drooling of saliva
and difficulties with mastication were frequent problems in these persons. The
teeth were structurally and mechanically normal although there was partial
anodontia in two patients and delayed eruption in another. Maxillary (palatal)
and mandibular tori were present in every affected person. Due to the
hyperostosis of the maxilla and mandible, tooth extraction was often a very
difficult matter. There were no instances of post-extraction osteomyelitis of
the mandible.
CONCLUSIONS: Accurate differentiation of sclerosteosis from the other sclerosing
bone dysplasias is crucial for effective dental prognostication and management.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1875-595x.2001.tb00840.x
PMID: 11570544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
