---
reference_id: "PMID:23315216"
title: "Transaldolase deficiency: report of 12 new cases and further delineation of the phenotype."
authors:
- Eyaid W
- Al Harbi T
- Anazi S
- Wamelink MM
- Jakobs C
- Al Salammah M
- Al Balwi M
- Alfadhel M
- Alkuraya FS
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-012-9577-8
keywords:
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- Family
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Transaldolase/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transaldolase deficiency: report of 12 new cases and further delineation of the phenotype.
**Authors:** Eyaid W, Al Harbi T, Anazi S, Wamelink MM, Jakobs C, Al Salammah M, Al Balwi M, Alfadhel M, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-012-9577-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-012-9577-8)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2013 Nov;36(6):997-1004. doi: 10.1007/s10545-012-9577-8.
Epub 2013 Jan 12.

Transaldolase deficiency: report of 12 new cases and further delineation of the
phenotype.

Eyaid W(1), Al Harbi T, Anazi S, Wamelink MM, Jakobs C, Al Salammah M, Al Balwi
M, Alfadhel M, Alkuraya FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Genetics division, King AbdulAziz Medical City,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, eyaidw@ngha.med.sa.

PURPOSE: Transaldolase deficiency is a recently described inborn error of
pentose phosphate pathway. We conducted this study to further delineate the
associated phenotype.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report on 12 new cases representing six families with
this metabolic defect that were observed over an 8 year span. None of these
cases received the correct diagnosis initially because of significant overlap in
the presenting symptoms (growth retardation, dysmorphic features, cutis laxa,
congenital heart disease, hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, and bleeding
tendency) with a wide range of genetic disorders. However, the consanguineous
nature of these families allowed us to pursue autozygome analysis, which
highlighted TALDO as the likely candidate gene and sequencing confirmed
segregation of a novel homozygous mutation with the disease in all the studied
families. Biochemical analysis was also consistent with transaldolase
deficiency.
CONCLUSION: This study expands the clinical definition of transaldolase
deficiency, and adds to its allelic heterogeneity. In addition, we emphasize the
diagnostic challenge posed by this rare and pleiotropic metabolic disorder.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-012-9577-8
PMID: 23315216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
