---
reference_id: "PMID:8864599"
title: Mucha-Habermann disease and its febrile ulceronecrotic variant.
authors:
- Tsuji T
- Kasamatsu M
- Yokota M
- Morita A
- Schwartz RA
journal: Cutis
year: '1996'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biopsy, Needle"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- "Remission, Spontaneous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucha-Habermann disease and its febrile ulceronecrotic variant.
**Authors:** Tsuji T, Kasamatsu M, Yokota M, Morita A, Schwartz RA
**Journal:** Cutis (1996)

## Content

1. Cutis. 1996 Aug;58(2):123-31.

Mucha-Habermann disease and its febrile ulceronecrotic variant.

Tsuji T(1), Kasamatsu M, Yokota M, Morita A, Schwartz RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nagoya City University Medical School, Nagoya,
Japan.

In 1916 Mucha and in 1925 Habermann reported an acute form of pityriasis
lichenoides characterized by the abrupt onset of papulovesicular eruptions and
gave the name, pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) or
Mucha-Habermann disease (MH). In 1966, Degos reported a rare febrile
ulceronecrotic variant of MH. MH occurs mainly in young adults, while febrile
ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann's disease (FUMHD) occurs more frequently in
children. The etiology of MH remains obscure, but it may be the result of a
hypersensitivity reaction to an infectious agent. Although clinical and
histologic features of the disease in children are similar to those of adults,
more diseases need to be differentiated in pediatric patients. In addition, a
number of effective therapeutic options in adults with MH are unsuitable for use
in pediatric patients, to whom beginning with oral antibiotics, usually
erythromycin, is recommended. A summary of previously reported fifteen cases
with FUMHD, including our case, is listed.

PMID: 8864599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
