---
reference_id: "PMID:37480106"
title: Citrulline in the management of patients with urea cycle disorders.
authors:
- Imbard A
- Bouchereau J
- Arnoux JB
- Brassier A
- Schiff M
- Bérat CM
- Pontoizeau C
- Benoist JF
- Josse C
- Montestruc F
- de Lonlay P
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02800-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Citrulline in the management of patients with urea cycle disorders.
**Authors:** Imbard A, Bouchereau J, Arnoux JB, Brassier A, Schiff M, Bérat CM, Pontoizeau C, Benoist JF, Josse C, Montestruc F, de Lonlay P
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02800-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02800-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Jul 21;18(1):207. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02800-8.

Citrulline in the management of patients with urea cycle disorders.

Imbard A(1)(2), Bouchereau J(3), Arnoux JB(3), Brassier A(3), Schiff M(3)(4)(5), 
Bérat CM(1)(4), Pontoizeau C(1)(4), Benoist JF(1)(2), Josse C(6), Montestruc 
F(6), de Lonlay P(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, 
France.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, Paris, France.
(3)Reference Center for Inborn Error of Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
Necker Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, G2M network, MetabERN, 
Paris, France.
(4)Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(5)Inserm UMR _S1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(6)eXYSTAT, Malakoff, 92240, France.
(7)Reference Center for Inborn Error of Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
Necker Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, G2M network, MetabERN, 
Paris, France. pascale.delonlay@aphp.fr.
(8)Université de Paris, Paris, France. pascale.delonlay@aphp.fr.
(9)Inserm UMR S1151, Institut Necker-Enfants Malades (INEM), Paris, France. 
pascale.delonlay@aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: Treatment recommendations for urea cycle disorders (UCDs) include 
supplementation with amino acids involved in the urea cycle (arginine and/or 
citrulline, depending on the enzyme deficiency), to maximize ammonia excretion 
through the urea cycle, but limited data are available regarding the use of 
citrulline. This study retrospectively reviewed clinical and biological data 
from patients with UCDs treated with citrulline and/or arginine at a reference 
center since 1990. The aim was to describe the prescription, impact, and safety 
of these therapies. Data collection included patient background, treatment 
details, changes in biochemical parameters (plasma ammonia and amino acids 
concentrations), decompensations, and patient outcomes.
RESULTS: Overall, 79 patients (median age at diagnosis, 0.9 months) received 
citrulline and/or arginine in combination with a restricted protein diet, most 
with ornithine transcarbamylase (n = 57, 73%) or carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 
1 (n = 15, 19%) deficiencies. Most patients also received ammonium scavengers. 
Median follow-up was 9.5 years and median exposure to first treatment with 
arginine + citrulline, citrulline monotherapy, or arginine monotherapy was 5.5, 
2.5, or 0.3 years, respectively. During follow-up, arginine or citrulline was 
administered at least once (as monotherapy or in combination) in the same 
proportion of patients (86.1%); the overall median duration of exposure was 5.9 
years for arginine + citrulline, 3.1 years for citrulline monotherapy, and 0.6 
years for arginine monotherapy. The most common switch was from monotherapy to 
combination therapy (41 of 75 switches, 54.7%). During treatment, mean ammonia 
concentrations were 35.9 µmol/L with citrulline, 49.8 µmol/L with arginine, and 
53.0 µmol/L with arginine + citrulline. Mean plasma arginine concentrations 
increased significantly from the beginning to the end of citrulline treatment 
periods (from 67.6 µmol/L to 84.9 µmol/L, P < 0.05). At last evaluation, mean 
height and weight for age were normal and most patients showed normal or adapted 
behavior (98.7%) and normal social life (79.0%). Two patients (2.5%) experienced 
three treatment-related gastrointestinal adverse reactions.
CONCLUSIONS: This study underlines the importance of citrulline supplementation, 
either alone or together with arginine, in the management of patients with UCDs. 
When a monotherapy is considered, citrulline would be the preferred option in 
terms of increasing plasma arginine concentrations.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02800-8
PMCID: PMC10362745
PMID: 37480106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J-BA has acted as a consultant for Pierre Fabre 
Medicament. The remaining authors declare that they have no competing interests.