---
reference_id: "PMID:41563842"
title: "A New Hope for Treating Podocytopathies: Emerging Role of Anti-Nephrin Antibody."
authors:
- Liaukouskaya N
- Hengel FE
- Mühlig A
- Tomas NM
- Huber TB
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.0000001008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A New Hope for Treating Podocytopathies: Emerging Role of Anti-Nephrin Antibody.
**Authors:** Liaukouskaya N, Hengel FE, Mühlig A, Tomas NM, Huber TB
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.0000001008](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.0000001008)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2026 Jan 21. doi: 10.2215/CJN.0000001008. Online ahead
of  print.

A New Hope for Treating Podocytopathies: Emerging Role of Anti-Nephrin Antibody.

Liaukouskaya N(1)(2), Hengel FE(1)(2), Mühlig A(2)(3), Tomas NM(1)(2), Huber 
TB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)III. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Hamburg Center for Kidney Health, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

The etiology of primary podocytopathies including childhood nephrotic syndrome, 
minimal change disease, primary FSGS as well as recurrent FSGS had long remained 
elusive. The development of robust anti-nephrin autoantibody detection methods, 
the identification of these antibodies in idiopathic nephrotic syndrome, and the 
demonstration of their causal role in podocytopathy have led to a paradigm shift 
in our understanding of these diseases, offering new insights into 
pathophysiology and promising improved diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic 
approaches. Prognostication and risk stratification on the basis of anti-nephrin 
antibody detection as well as personalized therapeutic strategies including 
therapies targeting antibody-producing B cells or even antigen-specific 
depletion of autoreactive B cells could markedly improve treatment outcomes and 
patient quality of life in the future. In this review, we explore the prevalence 
of anti-nephrin antibodies in various glomerular diseases, current treatment 
options for primary podocytopathies, and how the emerging evidence of 
anti-nephrin antibody-mediated podocytopathy could influence future treatment 
approaches for affected patients.

Copyright © 2026 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.0000001008
PMID: 41563842