---
reference_id: "PMID:33516786"
title: Analysis of vitamin D(3) metabolites in survivors of infantile idiopathic hypercalcemia caused by CYP24A1 mutation or SLC34A1 mutation.
authors:
- Kowalska E
- Rola R
- Wójcik M
- Łaszcz N
- Płudowski P
- Wierzbicka A
- Janiec A
- Książyk J
- Halat P
- Ciara E
- Obrycki Ł
- Pronicka E
- Litwin M
journal: J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2021.105824
keywords:
- "Cholecalciferol/administration & dosage, genetics, metabolism"
- "Chromatography, Liquid"
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypercalcemia/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type IIa/genetics"
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
- "Vitamin D/genetics, metabolism"
- "Vitamin D3 24-Hydroxylase/blood, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of vitamin D(3) metabolites in survivors of infantile idiopathic hypercalcemia caused by CYP24A1 mutation or SLC34A1 mutation.
**Authors:** Kowalska E, Rola R, Wójcik M, Łaszcz N, Płudowski P, Wierzbicka A, Janiec A, Książyk J, Halat P, Ciara E, Obrycki Ł, Pronicka E, Litwin M
**Journal:** J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jsbmb.2021.105824](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2021.105824)

## Content

1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2021 Apr;208:105824. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2021.105824. Epub 2021 Jan 28.

Analysis of vitamin D(3) metabolites in survivors of infantile idiopathic
hypercalcemia caused by CYP24A1 mutation or SLC34A1 mutation.

Kowalska E(1), Rola R(1), Wójcik M(1), Łaszcz N(1), Płudowski P(1), Wierzbicka
A(1), Janiec A(2), Książyk J(2), Halat P(3), Ciara E(3), Obrycki Ł(4), Pronicka
E(3), Litwin M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Radioimmunology and Experimental Medicine, The
Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Nutrition, The Children's Memorial Health
Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute,
Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Nephrology and Arterial Hypertension, The Children's Memorial
Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Nephrology and Arterial Hypertension, The Children's Memorial
Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: m.litwin@ipczd.pl.

Infantile hypercalcemia (IH), is a rare disorder caused by CYP24A1 or SLC34A1
variants which lead to disturbed catabolism of 25(OH)D3 and 125(OH)2D3 or
increased generation of 125(OH)2D3.
AIM OF STUDY: To assess the status of 2425(OH)2D3 and other markers of vitamin D
in IH survivors, in whom variants of CYP24A1 or SLC34A1 gene were found and to
compare these unique biochemical features with those obtained from subjects who
were diagnosed in the first year of life with hypercalcemia, elevated 25(OH)D3
and low PTH but in whom neither CYP24A1 nor SLC34A1 variant was found.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 16 IH survivors in whom CYP24A1 (n = 13) or SLC34A1 (n =
3) variants were found and 41 subjects in whom hypercalcemia was diagnosed in
the first year of life but in whom CYP24A1 or SLC34A1 variants were not found
were included in the study. 25(OH)D3, 3-epi-25(OH)D3, 25(OH)D2, 2425(OH)2D3 were
assessed by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry.
125(OH)2D3 concentrations were assessed by chemiluminescence.
RESULTS: Subjects with CYP24A1 variants, despite normal 25(OH)D3 levels, had
higher 25(OH)D3/2425(OH)2D3 ratio values (487; 265-1073 ng/mL) when compared to
subjects with SLC34A1 variants (16; 16-23 ng/mL) and with subjects in whom
CYP24A1 or SLC34A1 were not found (56; 9-56 ng/mL) (p = 0.00003). Separation of
interfering metabolite further increased differences between subjects with and
without CYP24A1 mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Survivors of IH with CYP24A1 variant, despite being normocalcemic,
still presented extremely high 25(OH)D3/2425(OH)2D3 ratio values. Separation of
interfering compound further increased differences between subjects with CYP24A1
mutation and without this mutation.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2021.105824
PMID: 33516786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
