---
reference_id: "PMID:28529722"
title: "Recent advances in understanding Cushing disease: resistance to glucocorticoid negative feedback and somatic USP8 mutations."
authors:
- Daniel E
- Newell-Price J
journal: F1000Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.12688/f1000research.10968.1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in understanding Cushing disease: resistance to glucocorticoid negative feedback and somatic USP8 mutations.
**Authors:** Daniel E, Newell-Price J
**Journal:** F1000Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.12688/f1000research.10968.1](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.10968.1)

## Content

1. F1000Res. 2017 May 2;6:613. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.10968.1. eCollection
2017.

Recent advances in understanding Cushing disease: resistance to glucocorticoid
negative feedback and somatic USP8 mutations.

Daniel E(1), Newell-Price J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Metabolism, University of Sheffield Medical
School, Sheffield, UK.

Cushing's disease is a rare disease with a characteristic phenotype due to
significant hypercortisolism driven by over-secretion of adrenocorticotropic
hormone and to high morbidity and mortality if untreated. It is caused by a
corticotroph adenoma of the pituitary, but the exact mechanisms leading to
tumorigenesis are not clear. Recent advances in molecular biology such as the
discovery of somatic mutations of the ubiquitin-specific peptidase 8 ( USP8)
gene allow new insights into the pathogenesis, which could be translated into
exciting and much-needed therapeutic applications.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.10968.1
PMCID: PMC5414817
PMID: 28529722

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that
they have no competing interests.No competing interests were disclosed.No
competing interests were disclosed.
