---
reference_id: "PMID:21768372"
title: Deletion of mouse Porcn blocks Wnt ligand secretion and reveals an ectodermal etiology of human focal dermal hypoplasia/Goltz syndrome.
authors:
- Barrott JJ
- Cash GM
- Smith AP
- Barrow JR
- Murtaugh LC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1006437108
keywords:
- Acyltransferases
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- Body Patterning/genetics
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Ectoderm/embryology, metabolism"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/cytology, embryology, metabolism"
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- "Focal Dermal Hypoplasia/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "TCF Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Wnt Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Wnt-5a Protein
- "Wnt1 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Wnt3 Protein
- "beta Catenin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletion of mouse Porcn blocks Wnt ligand secretion and reveals an ectodermal etiology of human focal dermal hypoplasia/Goltz syndrome.
**Authors:** Barrott JJ, Cash GM, Smith AP, Barrow JR, Murtaugh LC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1006437108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1006437108)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 2;108(31):12752-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1006437108. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Deletion of mouse Porcn blocks Wnt ligand secretion and reveals an ectodermal 
etiology of human focal dermal hypoplasia/Goltz syndrome.

Barrott JJ(1), Cash GM, Smith AP, Barrow JR, Murtaugh LC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, 
USA.

The Drosophila porcupine gene is required for secretion of wingless and other 
Wnt proteins, and sporadic mutations in its unique human ortholog, PORCN, cause 
a pleiotropic X-linked dominant disorder, focal dermal hypoplasia (FDH, also 
known as Goltz syndrome). We generated a conditional allele of the X-linked 
mouse Porcn gene and analyzed its requirement in Wnt signaling and embryonic 
development. We find that Porcn-deficient cells exhibit a cell-autonomous defect 
in Wnt ligand secretion but remain responsive to exogenous Wnts. Consistent with 
the female-specific inheritance pattern of FDH, Porcn hemizygous male embryos 
arrest during early embryogenesis and fail to generate mesoderm, a phenotype 
previously associated with loss of Wnt activity. Heterozygous Porcn mutant 
females exhibit a spectrum of limb, skin, and body patterning abnormalities 
resembling those observed in human patients with FDH. Many of these defects are 
recapitulated by ectoderm-specific deletion of Porcn, substantiating a 
long-standing hypothesis regarding the etiology of human FDH and extending 
previous studies that have focused on downstream elements of Wnt signaling, such 
as β-catenin. Conditional deletion of Porcn thus provides an experimental model 
of FDH, as well as a valuable tool to probe Wnt ligand function in vivo.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1006437108
PMCID: PMC3150921
PMID: 21768372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.