---
reference_id: "PMID:39363269"
title: "Identification of a Novel Frameshift variant of the ATRX gene: a Case Report and Review of the genotype-phenotype relationship."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Ma Q
- Chen J
- Li S
- Zheng F
- Shi L
- Li X
- Li S
- Tong G
- Li H
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-024-05088-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Frameshift Mutation
- Male
- X-linked Nuclear Protein/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/genetics, diagnosis"
- "alpha-Thalassemia/genetics, diagnosis"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Phenotype
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a Novel Frameshift variant of the ATRX gene: a Case Report and Review of the genotype-phenotype relationship.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Ma Q, Chen J, Li S, Zheng F, Shi L, Li X, Li S, Tong G, Li H
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-024-05088-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-024-05088-0)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2024 Oct 3;24(1):631. doi: 10.1186/s12887-024-05088-0.

Identification of a Novel Frameshift variant of the ATRX gene: a Case Report and 
Review of the genotype-phenotype relationship.

Wang Y(1), Ma Q(1), Chen J(1), Li S(1), Zheng F(1), Shi L(1), Li X(1), Li S(1), 
Tong G(1), Li H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, Anhui Provincial Children's Hospital, Hefei, 
China.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, Anhui Provincial Children's Hospital, Hefei, 
China. lhong_mail@163.com.

BACKGROUND: X-linked intellectual disability-hypotonic facies syndrome-1 
(MRXHF1) and Alpha-thalassemia X-linked intellectual disability (ATR-X) syndrome 
are caused by pathogenic variant in the ATRX gene, a member of the 
switch/sucrose non-fermentable (SWI-SNF) protein family that exhibits chromatin 
remodeling activity. These syndromes show a wide spectrum of clinical 
manifestations, such as distinctive dysmorphic features, mild-to-profound 
intellectual disability, motor development delay, seizures, urogenital 
abnormalities, and gastrointestinal disorders.
CASE PRESENTATION AND LITERATURE REVIEW: A 3-year-old boy from a Chinese 
non-consanguineous family was diagnosed with MRXHF1 by whole-exome sequencing. 
Comprehensive family history information was obtained. The Medline database was 
searched until 1st Aug 2023 for articles related to ATRX pathogenic variant. 
Data on gene/protein mutations and clinical symptoms were extracted. The proband 
showed intellectual disability, motor development delay, typical facial 
abnormalities, urogenital defect, behavior problems, and optical nerve 
dysplasia. A novel frameshift mutation c.399_400dup, (p.Leu134Cysfs*2) in the 
ATRX gene was the primary cause, which occurs right before the ATRXDNMT3-DNMT3L 
(ADD) domain of ATRX protein. Missense mutation is the most common variation 
type. The ADD and helicase-like domains are the most frequently affected 
domains. Epilepsy, congenital heart disease, urogenital defect, acoustic defect, 
and optical defect are more prevalent in patients with frameshift mutations 
compared to those with missense mutations. There are more urogenital defects 
with C-terminal frameshift mutations than with N-terminal frameshift mutations.
CONCLUSION: We described a novel frameshift mutation in the ATRX gene in a 
patient with MRXHF1 syndrome and summarized the genotype-phenotype relationship 
of ATRX pathogenic variant by variation type and affected protein domain. The 
regulatory mechanism underlying ATRX variant requires comprehensive analysis in 
future studies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-024-05088-0
PMCID: PMC11448441
PMID: 39363269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.