---
reference_id: "PMID:21252480"
title: Pneumothorax and bullae in Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Karpman C
- Aughenbaugh GL
- Ryu JH
journal: Respiration
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1159/000322958
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pneumothorax and bullae in Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Karpman C, Aughenbaugh GL, Ryu JH
**Journal:** Respiration (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000322958](https://doi.org/10.1159/000322958)

## Content

1. Respiration. 2011;82(3):219-24. doi: 10.1159/000322958. Epub 2011 Jan 22.

Pneumothorax and bullae in Marfan syndrome.

Karpman C(1), Aughenbaugh GL, Ryu JH.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Graduate School of Medicine, Rochester, Minn., USA.

BACKGROUND: Increased risk of spontaneous pneumothorax has been described in 
patients with Marfan syndrome and has been attributed, in part, to the presence 
of apical blebs and bullae.
OBJECTIVES: We assess the risk of pneumothorax and its relationship to the 
presence of apical blebs and bullae in patients with Marfan syndrome in the era 
of CT imaging.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed of all patients 13 years or 
older with Marfan syndrome evaluated at the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn., USA, 
from 1998 through 2008. One hundred and sixty-six patients met the current 
diagnostic criteria for Marfan syndrome and had chest imaging studies available 
for review.
RESULTS: The median age was 40 years (range 14-71); 37% had a smoking history. 
Eight of 166 patients (4.8%) had experienced 1 or more episodes of spontaneous 
pneumothorax, and 2 of these 8 patients had 2 or more episodes. Apical blebs or 
bullae were identified on radiologic imaging in 16 patients (9.6%). Four of 16 
(25%) patients with apical blebs or bullae had a history of spontaneous 
pneumothorax compared to 4 of 150 patients (2.7%) without blebs or bullae (p = 
0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: The frequency of blebs is relatively low in patients with Marfan 
syndrome but the risk of pneumothorax is significantly higher in those with 
radiologically detectable blebs or bullae. Chest CT scanning to identify blebs 
and bullae may allow risk stratification for pneumothorax in patients with 
Marfan syndrome.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000322958
PMID: 21252480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]