---
reference_id: "PMID:39590356"
title: An Actual Insight into the Pathogenic Pathways of Ankylosing Spondylitis.
authors:
- Păsăran ED
- Diaconu AE
- Oancea C
- Bălănescu AR
- Aurelian SM
- Homentcovschi C
journal: Curr Issues Mol Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cimb46110762
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Actual Insight into the Pathogenic Pathways of Ankylosing Spondylitis.
**Authors:** Păsăran ED, Diaconu AE, Oancea C, Bălănescu AR, Aurelian SM, Homentcovschi C
**Journal:** Curr Issues Mol Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cimb46110762](https://doi.org/10.3390/cimb46110762)

## Content

1. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 2024 Nov 11;46(11):12800-12812. doi:
10.3390/cimb46110762.

An Actual Insight into the Pathogenic Pathways of Ankylosing Spondylitis.

Păsăran ED(1), Diaconu AE(1), Oancea C(1)(2), Bălănescu AR(1)(3), Aurelian 
SM(1)(2), Homentcovschi C(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, 'Carol Davila' University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
020021 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 'Carol Davila' University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy, 020021 Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, 'Carol Davila' University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 020021 Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Department of Medical Semiology, 'Carol Davila' University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 020021 Bucharest, Romania.

Spondyloarthritis refers to a broad group of conditions that include ankylosing 
spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, reactive arthritis, and enteropathic arthritis 
associated with Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis. They have been classified 
by the ASAS group (ASsessment in Ankylosing Spondylitis) into axial 
spondyloarthritis and peripheral spondyloarthritis. Common features include the 
absence of autoantibodies, genetic predisposition, and clinical aspects such as 
axial joint involvement, peripheral manifestations, and extra-articular 
involvement. However, the pathogenic mechanisms remain complex and incompletely 
elucidated, despite the fact that the specialized literature has described 
several pathways that act in synergy: genetic predisposition, environmental 
factors (infections and mechanical stress), or innate and acquired immune 
mechanisms. Finally, an inflammatory response is triggered by the recruitment of 
a large number of inflammatory cells and the release of innate cytokines in the 
affected areas: joints or periarticular or extraarticular tissues. The current 
article aims to update and systematize the knowledge accumulated so far on this 
topic, focusing on the mechanisms that have been involved in the onset, 
progression, and severity of ankylosing spondylitis.

DOI: 10.3390/cimb46110762
PMCID: PMC11592934
PMID: 39590356

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.