---
reference_id: "PMID:36167633"
title: Polyclonal evolution of Fanconi anemia to MDS and AML revealed at single cell resolution.
authors:
- Chang L
- Cui Z
- Shi D
- Chu Y
- Wang B
- Wan Y
- Ma Q
- Zhang R
- Li H
- Cheng X
- Cheng T
- Zhu X
- Li C
- Yuan W
journal: Exp Hematol Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s40164-022-00319-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polyclonal evolution of Fanconi anemia to MDS and AML revealed at single cell resolution.
**Authors:** Chang L, Cui Z, Shi D, Chu Y, Wang B, Wan Y, Ma Q, Zhang R, Li H, Cheng X, Cheng T, Zhu X, Li C, Yuan W
**Journal:** Exp Hematol Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40164-022-00319-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40164-022-00319-5)

## Content

1. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2022 Sep 27;11(1):64. doi: 10.1186/s40164-022-00319-5.

Polyclonal evolution of Fanconi anemia to MDS and AML revealed at single cell 
resolution.

Chang L(#)(1), Cui Z(#)(2), Shi D(#)(1), Chu Y(#)(1), Wang B(1), Wan Y(1), Ma 
Q(1), Zhang R(1), Li H(1), Cheng X(1), Cheng T(1), Zhu X(3), Li C(4), Yuan W(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, National Clinical Research 
Center for Blood Diseases, Haihe Laboratory of Cell Ecosystem, Institute of 
Hematology & Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, 300020, China.
(2)Joint Graduate Program of Peking-Tsinghua-NIBS, Academy for Advanced 
Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, National Clinical Research 
Center for Blood Diseases, Haihe Laboratory of Cell Ecosystem, Institute of 
Hematology & Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, 300020, China. xfzhu@ihcams.ac.cn.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Center for Bioinformatics, Center for Statistical 
Science, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China. cheng_li@pku.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, National Clinical Research 
Center for Blood Diseases, Haihe Laboratory of Cell Ecosystem, Institute of 
Hematology & Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, 300020, China. wpyuan@ihcams.ac.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare disease of bone marrow failure. FA 
patients are prone to develop myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML). However, the molecular clonal evolution of the progression from 
FA to MDS/AML remains elusive.
METHODS: Herein, we performed a comprehensive genomic analysis using an FA 
patient (P1001) sample that transformed to MDS and subsequently AML, together 
with other three FA patient samples at the MDS stage.
RESULTS: Our finding showed the existence of polyclonal pattern in these cases 
at MDS stage. The clonal evolution analysis of FA case (P1001) showed the 
mutations of UBASH3A, SF3B1, RUNX1 and ASXL1 gradually appeared at the later 
stage of MDS, while the IDH2 alteration become the dominant clone at the 
leukemia stage. Moreover, single-cell sequencing analyses further demonstrated a 
polyclonal pattern was present at either MDS or AML stages, whereas IDH2 mutated 
cell clones appeared only at the leukemia stage.
CONCLUSIONS: We thus propose a clonal evolution model from FA to MDS and AML for 
this patient. The results of our study on the clonal evolution and mutated genes 
of the progression of FA to AML are conducive to understanding the progression 
of the disease that still perplexes us.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40164-022-00319-5
PMCID: PMC9513989
PMID: 36167633

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.