---
reference_id: "PMID:27081765"
title: "Adverse effects of herbal or dietary supplements in G6PD deficiency: a systematic review."
authors:
- Lee SW
- Lai NM
- Chaiyakunapruk N
- Chong DW
journal: Br J Clin Pharmacol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/bcp.12976
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adverse effects of herbal or dietary supplements in G6PD deficiency: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Lee SW, Lai NM, Chaiyakunapruk N, Chong DW
**Journal:** Br J Clin Pharmacol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bcp.12976](https://doi.org/10.1111/bcp.12976)

## Content

1. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2017 Jan;83(1):172-179. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12976. Epub 2016
 May 21.

Adverse effects of herbal or dietary supplements in G6PD deficiency: a 
systematic review.

Lee SW(1), Lai NM(2), Chaiyakunapruk N(1)(3)(4)(5), Chong DW(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Monash University Malaysia.
(2)School of Medicine, Taylor's University, Malaysia.
(3)Center of Pharmaceutical Outcomes Research (CPOR), Department of Pharmacy 
Practice, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Naresuan University, Phitsanulok, 
Thailand.
(4)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA.
(5)School of Population Health, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(6)School of Pharmacy, International Medical University, Malaysia.

AIM: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is a common genetic 
disorder, affecting nearly 400 million individuals worldwide. Whilst it is known 
that a number of drugs, foods and chemicals can trigger haemolysis in G6PD 
deficient individuals, the association between herbal and dietary supplements 
and haemolysis is less clear. The objective of this study was to evaluate the 
association between herbal or dietary supplements and adverse events in G6PD 
deficient individuals.
METHODS: We searched 14 electronic databases from their inception until November 
2015 for articles describing the use of herbal or dietary supplements in G6PD 
deficient individuals. Additional publications were identified from manually 
searching textbooks, conference abstracts and the grey literature. All study 
designs were included as long as they contained clinical information. These 
gathered findings were summarized narratively.
RESULTS: Thirty-two publications met inclusion criteria. These reported on 10 
herbal and dietary supplements. Overall evidence linking haemolysis to a 
herbal/dietary supplement was only found for henna. No evidence of harm was 
observed for vitamin C, vitamin E, vitamin K, Gingko biloba and α-lipoic acid.
CONCLUSIONS: The review showed that there was insufficient evidence to 
contravene the use of most herbal or dietary products at therapeutic doses in 
G6PD deficient subjects.

© 2016 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12976
PMCID: PMC5338162
PMID: 27081765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]