---
reference_id: "PMID:36510335"
title: "Bone Turnover Markers: Basic Biology to Clinical Applications."
authors:
- Schini M
- Vilaca T
- Gossiel F
- Salam S
- Eastell R
journal: Endocr Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1210/endrev/bnac031
keywords:
- Humans
- Collagen Type I
- Acid Phosphatase
- Alkaline Phosphatase
- Bone Remodeling
- Biology
- Bone Resorption
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone Turnover Markers: Basic Biology to Clinical Applications.
**Authors:** Schini M, Vilaca T, Gossiel F, Salam S, Eastell R
**Journal:** Endocr Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1210/endrev/bnac031](https://doi.org/10.1210/endrev/bnac031)

## Content

1. Endocr Rev. 2023 May 8;44(3):417-473. doi: 10.1210/endrev/bnac031.

Bone Turnover Markers: Basic Biology to Clinical Applications.

Schini M(1)(2), Vilaca T(1), Gossiel F(1), Salam S(1)(2), Eastell R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Metabolism, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 
2HQ, UK.
(2)Metabolic Bone Centre, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Sheffield S5 7AU, UK.

Bone turnover markers (BTMs) are used widely, in both research and clinical 
practice. In the last 20 years, much experience has been gained in measurement 
and interpretation of these markers, which include commonly used bone formation 
markers (bone alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and procollagen I 
N-propeptide); and commonly used resorption markers (serum C-telopeptides of 
type I collagen, urinary N-telopeptides of type I collagen, and 
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase type 5b). BTMs are usually measured by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or automated immunoassay. Sources contributing 
to BTM variability include uncontrollable factors (eg, age, gender, ethnicity) 
and controllable factors, particularly relating to collection conditions (eg, 
fasting/feeding state, and timing relative to circadian rhythms, menstrual 
cycling, and exercise). Pregnancy, season, drugs, and recent fracture(s) can 
also affect BTMs. BTMs correlate with other methods of assessing bone turnover, 
such as bone biopsies and radiotracer kinetics, and can usefully contribute to 
diagnosis and management of several diseases such as osteoporosis, osteomalacia, 
Paget's disease, fibrous dysplasia, hypophosphatasia, primary 
hyperparathyroidism, and chronic kidney disease-mineral bone disorder.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/endrev/bnac031
PMCID: PMC10166271
PMID: 36510335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest M.S. received funding for 
her fellowship from the Medical Research Council Centre of Excellence for 
Musculoskeletal Ageing and from the Osteoporosis 2000 support group, grant 
funding from Roche Diagnostics, and honorarium from Kyowa Kirin. T.V. received 
consultancy and grant funding from Pharmacosmos. F.G. has no disclosures. S.S. 
received project grant funding from Immunodiagnostic Systems. R.E. receives 
consultancy funding from Immunodiagnostic Systems, Sandoz, Samsung, Haoma 
Medica, CL Bio, Biocon, Amgen, Pharmacosmos, and Takeda and grant funding from 
Roche Diagnostics, Pharmacosmos, and Alexion.