---
reference_id: "PMID:20672378"
title: Keratosis Follicularis Spinulosa Decalvans is caused by mutations in MBTPS2.
authors:
- Aten E
- Brasz LC
- Bornholdt D
- Hooijkaas IB
- Porteous ME
- Sybert VP
- Vermeer MH
- Vossen RH
- van der Wielen MJ
- Bakker E
- Breuning MH
- Grzeschik KH
- Oosterwijk JC
- den Dunnen JT
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21335
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- "Darier Disease/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Metalloendopeptidases/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Netherlands
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Keratosis Follicularis Spinulosa Decalvans is caused by mutations in MBTPS2.
**Authors:** Aten E, Brasz LC, Bornholdt D, Hooijkaas IB, Porteous ME, Sybert VP, Vermeer MH, Vossen RH, van der Wielen MJ, Bakker E, Breuning MH, Grzeschik KH, Oosterwijk JC, den Dunnen JT
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21335](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21335)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Oct;31(10):1125-33. doi: 10.1002/humu.21335.

Keratosis Follicularis Spinulosa Decalvans is caused by mutations in MBTPS2.

Aten E(1), Brasz LC, Bornholdt D, Hooijkaas IB, Porteous ME, Sybert VP, Vermeer
MH, Vossen RH, van der Wielen MJ, Bakker E, Breuning MH, Grzeschik KH,
Oosterwijk JC, den Dunnen JT.

Author information:
(1)Center of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Nederlands. E.Aten@lumc.nl

Keratosis Follicularis Spinulosa Decalvans (KFSD) is a rare genetic disorder
characterized by development of hyperkeratotic follicular papules on the scalp
followed by progressive alopecia of the scalp, eyelashes, and eyebrows.
Associated eye findings include photophobia in childhood and corneal dystrophy.
Due to the genetic and clinical heterogeneity of similar disorders, a definitive
diagnosis of KFSD is often challenging. Toward identification of the causative
gene we reanalyzed a large Dutch KFSD family. SNP arrays (1 M) redefined the
locus to a 2.9-Mb region at Xp22.12-Xp22.11. Screening of all 14 genes in the
candidate region identified MBTPS2 as the candidate gene carrying a c.1523A>G
(p.Asn508Ser) missense mutation. The variant was also identified in two
unrelated X-linked KFSD families and cosegregated with KFSD in all families. In
symptomatic female carriers, skewed X-inactivation of the normal allele matched
with increased severity of symptoms. MBTPS2 is required for cleavage of sterol
regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs). In vitro functional expression
studies of the c.1523A>G mutation showed that sterol responsiveness was reduced
by half. Other missense mutations in MBTPS2 have recently been identified in
patients with IFAP syndrome. We postulate that both phenotypes are in the
spectrum of one genetic disorder with a partially overlapping phenotype.

Hum Mutat 31:1125-1133, 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21335
PMID: 20672378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
