---
reference_id: "PMID:39248612"
title: Incorporating Next-Generation Sequencing as a Second-Tier Test for Primary Carnitine Deficiency.
authors:
- Lin Y
- Zheng Z
- Lin W
- Peng W
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incorporating Next-Generation Sequencing as a Second-Tier Test for Primary Carnitine Deficiency.
**Authors:** Lin Y, Zheng Z, Lin W, Peng W
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.70003](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.70003)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2024 Sep;12(9):e70003. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70003.

Incorporating Next-Generation Sequencing as a Second-Tier Test for Primary 
Carnitine Deficiency.

Lin Y(1), Zheng Z(1), Lin W(2), Peng W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's 
Hospital, Quanzhou, Fujian, China.
(2)Neonatal Disease Screening Center, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's 
Hospital, Quanzhou, Fujian, China.

BACKGROUND: Newborn screening (NBS) for primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) has 
poor performance. This study aimed to evaluate the feasibility of incorporating 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) as a second-tier PCD test.
METHODS: Between March and December 2020, 60,070 newborns were screened for 
inherited metabolic disorders. Newborns with free carnitine (C0) levels below 
8.5 μmol/L were selected for second-tier genetic testing.
RESULTS: In total, 130 (0.22%) newborns with low C0 levels underwent second-tier 
genetic testing, 87 (66.92%) had positive genetic testing results, and 30 
(23.08%) carried pathogenic variants of the SLC22A5 gene. Six newborns were 
diagnosed with PCD. The incidence of PCD was approximately 1 in 1:10,012 
newborns. The PPV reached 20% after combining with second-tier NGS. Of the eight 
variants identified in patients with PCD, the three most common variants were 
c.760C>T (p.Arg254*), c.51C>G (p.Phe17Leu), and c.1400C>G (p.Ser467Cys). The C0 
levels of patients with PCD were significantly lower than those of PCD carriers 
(p = 0.0026) and PCD-negative individuals (p = 0.0005).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that the PPV reached 20% after combining with 
second-tier NGS. The MS/MS-based NBS and second-tier NGS combination can 
effectively reduce the false-positive rate and detect PCD in patients.

© 2024 The Author(s). Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.70003
PMCID: PMC11382357
PMID: 39248612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.