---
reference_id: "PMID:23478494"
title: Arachnodactyly--a key to diagnosing heritable disorders of connective tissue.
authors:
- Grahame R
- Hakim AJ
journal: Nat Rev Rheumatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2013.24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arachnodactyly--a key to diagnosing heritable disorders of connective tissue.
**Authors:** Grahame R, Hakim AJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Rheumatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrrheum.2013.24](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrrheum.2013.24)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2013 Jun;9(6):358-64. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2013.24. Epub
2013  Mar 12.

Arachnodactyly--a key to diagnosing heritable disorders of connective tissue.

Grahame R(1), Hakim AJ.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Rheumatology, University College Hospital London, Third Floor 
Central, 250 Euston Road, London NW1 2PQ, UK. r.grahame@ucl.ac.uk

Arachnodactyly literally means spidery fingers, and describes the long, slender 
fingers typical of patients with Marfan syndrome (MFS). Many clinicians regard 
arachnodactyly as pathognomonic of MFS; however, this view is misleading as 
arachnodactyly is a key element of the marfanoid habitus, which is present in 
several heritable disorders of connective tissue (HDCTs). Other features of the 
marfanoid habitus include long hands and feet, increased skin stretch, joint 
hypermobility and characteristic changes in the physiology of the pectum. Here, 
we focus on the differential diagnosis of diseases with features of the 
marfanoid habitus. Ectopia lentis (lens dislocation) and aortic root dilation or 
dissection are cardinal features of MFS. Distinguishing MFS from other HCDTs has 
important implications for treatment, as cardiovascular and ocular complications 
commonly seen in patients with MFS are not seen in all HDCTs. Joint 
hypermobility syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are also HDCTs, neither of 
which is associated with ectopia lentis or aortic changes. Some of the rarer 
forms of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are associated with severe vascular, dental and 
skin pathologies. This Review serves as a guide for correctly diagnosing members 
of the HDCT family.

DOI: 10.1038/nrrheum.2013.24
PMID: 23478494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]