---
reference_id: "PMID:34191271"
title: Pathogenic variants in plakophilin-2 gene (PKP2) are associated with better survival in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Biernacka EK
- Borowiec K
- Franaszczyk M
- Szperl M
- Rampazzo A
- Woźniak O
- Roszczynko M
- Śmigielski W
- Lutyńska A
- Hoffman P
journal: J Appl Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s13353-021-00647-y
keywords:
- Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Plakophilins/genetics
- Stroke Volume
- "Ventricular Function, Left"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic variants in plakophilin-2 gene (PKP2) are associated with better survival in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Biernacka EK, Borowiec K, Franaszczyk M, Szperl M, Rampazzo A, Woźniak O, Roszczynko M, Śmigielski W, Lutyńska A, Hoffman P
**Journal:** J Appl Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13353-021-00647-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13353-021-00647-y)

## Content

1. J Appl Genet. 2021 Dec;62(4):613-620. doi: 10.1007/s13353-021-00647-y. Epub
2021  Jun 30.

Pathogenic variants in plakophilin-2 gene (PKP2) are associated with better 
survival in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.

Biernacka EK(1), Borowiec K(2), Franaszczyk M(3), Szperl M(3), Rampazzo A(4), 
Woźniak O(1), Roszczynko M(3), Śmigielski W(5), Lutyńska A(6), Hoffman P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Congenital Heart Diseases, National Institute of Cardiology, 
Alpejska 42, 04-628, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Congenital Heart Diseases, National Institute of Cardiology, 
Alpejska 42, 04-628, Warsaw, Poland. kborowiec@ikard.pl.
(3)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Medical Biology, National 
Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(5)Department of Demography, University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(6)Department of Medical Biology, National Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, 
Poland.

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is mainly caused by 
mutations in genes encoding desmosomal proteins. Variants in plakophilin-2 gene 
(PKP2) are the most common cause of the disease, associated with conventional 
ARVC phenotype. The study aims to evaluate the prevalence of PKP2 variants and 
examine genotype-phenotype correlation in Polish ARVC cohort. All 56 ARVC 
patients fulfilling the current criteria were screened for genetic variants in 
PKP2 using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography or next-generation 
sequencing. The clinical evaluation involved medical history, electrocardiogram, 
echocardiography, and follow-up. Ten variants (5 frameshift, 2 nonsense, 2 
splicing, and 1 missense) in PKP2 were found in 28 (50%) cases. All truncating 
variants are classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic, while the missense 
variant is classified as variant of uncertain significance. Patients carrying a 
PKP2 mutation were younger at diagnosis (p = 0.003), more often had negative T 
waves in V1-V3 (p = 0.01), had higher left ventricular ejection fraction 
(p = 0.04), and were less likely to present symptoms of heart failure (p = 0.01) 
and left ventricular damage progression (p = 0.04). Combined endpoint of death 
or heart transplant was more frequent in subgroup without PKP2 mutation 
(p = 0.03). Pathogenic variants in PKP2 are responsible for 50% of ARVC cases in 
the Polish population and are associated with a better prognosis. ARVC patients 
with PKP2 mutation are less likely to present left ventricular involvement and 
heart failure symptoms. Combined endpoint of death or heart transplant was less 
frequent in this group.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13353-021-00647-y
PMCID: PMC8571136
PMID: 34191271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.