---
reference_id: "PMID:40813394"
title: A humanized anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-directed antibody-drug conjugate with pyrrolobenzodiazepine payload demonstrates efficacy in ALK-expressing cancers.
authors:
- Guerra AD
- Matkar S
- Acholla C
- Casey C
- Li G
- Mazzeschi M
- Patel K
- Krytska K
- Chen C
- Balyasny S
- Kalna J
- Kamitsuka P
- Gerelus M
- Polkosnik G
- Groff D
- Mukherje A
- Adams C
- Witek G
- Hamilton AK
- Martinez D
- Pogoriler J
- Spear TT
- Li Y
- Jung P
- Alvarado D
- Lauriola M
- Maris JM
- Wolpaw AJ
- Bosse KR
- Dimitrov D
- Mir M
- Jelev DV
- Mossé YP
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-62979-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/metabolism, genetics, antagonists & inhibitors, immunology"
- Animals
- "Benzodiazepines/chemistry, pharmacology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- "Immunoconjugates/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Mice
- "Neuroblastoma/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Pyrroles/chemistry, pharmacology"
- Female
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/pharmacology"
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/drug therapy, genetics"
- Colorectal Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Mice, SCID"
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A humanized anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-directed antibody-drug conjugate with pyrrolobenzodiazepine payload demonstrates efficacy in ALK-expressing cancers.
**Authors:** Guerra AD, Matkar S, Acholla C, Casey C, Li G, Mazzeschi M, Patel K, Krytska K, Chen C, Balyasny S, Kalna J, Kamitsuka P, Gerelus M, Polkosnik G, Groff D, Mukherje A, Adams C, Witek G, Hamilton AK, Martinez D, Pogoriler J, Spear TT, Li Y, Jung P, Alvarado D, Lauriola M, Maris JM, Wolpaw AJ, Bosse KR, Dimitrov D, Mir M, Jelev DV, Mossé YP
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-62979-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-62979-1)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 Aug 15;16(1):7578. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-62979-1.

A humanized anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-directed antibody-drug conjugate
with pyrrolobenzodiazepine payload demonstrates efficacy in ALK-expressing
cancers.

Guerra AD(1), Matkar S(1), Acholla C(1), Casey C(1), Li G(1), Mazzeschi M(2),
Patel K(1), Krytska K(1), Chen C(3), Balyasny S(1), Kalna J(1), Kamitsuka P(1),
Gerelus M(1), Polkosnik G(1), Groff D(1), Mukherje A(4), Adams C(3), Witek G(1),
Hamilton AK(1), Martinez D(1), Pogoriler J(1), Spear TT(1), Li Y(1), Jung P(1),
Alvarado D(5), Lauriola M(2)(6), Maris JM(1)(7), Wolpaw AJ(1)(7), Bosse
KR(1)(7), Dimitrov D(3), Mir M(8), Jelev DV(3), Mossé YP(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Oncology and Center for
Childhood Cancer Research, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)University of Pittsburgh Medical School, Department of Medicine, Division of
Infectious Diseases, Center for Antibody Therapeutics, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)University of Pennsylvania, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Celldex Therapeutics, Antibody Therapeutics Department, Hampton, NJ, USA.
(6)University of Bologna, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Bologna,
Italy.
(7)Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Department of
Pediatrics, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Center for Computational and Genomic
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Oncology and Center for
Childhood Cancer Research, Philadelphia, PA, USA. mosse@chop.edu.
(10)Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Department of
Pediatrics, Philadelphia, PA, USA. mosse@chop.edu.

The Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) gene is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
with expression restricted to the developing nervous system. Most neuroblastomas
express native ALK protein on the cell surface and ALK is uniformly
overexpressed in fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma and in subsets of metastatic
colorectal carcinoma, melanoma, ovarian carcinoma, and breast carcinoma. Here,
we first confirm that ALK RNA, protein, and tumor cell surface expression is
elevated in multiple pediatric and adult malignancies with minimal expression in
childhood normal tissues. We then demonstrate that a humanized ALK-directed
antibody conjugated to pyrrolobenzodiazepine (CDX0239-PBD) is internalized in
ALK-expressing neuroblastoma cell lines with cell surface expression-dependent
cytotoxicity. Finally, we show that CDX0239-PBD exhibits potent antitumor
efficacy including maintained complete responses in ALK-expressing patient and
cell line-derived neuroblastoma, fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma, and
colorectal carcinoma xenograft models. These data support the clinical
development of a first-in-class ALK-directed antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) for
multiple pediatric and adult ALK-expressing malignancies.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-62979-1
PMCID: PMC12354906
PMID: 40813394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests.
