---
reference_id: "PMID:18980473"
title: "Cardiovascular complications after acute spinal cord injury: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management."
authors:
- Furlan JC
- Fehlings MG
journal: Neurosurg Focus
year: '2008'
doi: 10.3171/FOC.2008.25.11.E13
keywords:
- Animals
- Autonomic Nervous System Diseases/etiology
- Autonomic Pathways/physiopathology
- Cardiovascular Diseases/etiology
- Cardiovascular System/physiopathology
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Humans
- Spinal Cord/physiopathology
- "Spinal Cord Injuries/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Thromboembolism/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular complications after acute spinal cord injury: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management.
**Authors:** Furlan JC, Fehlings MG
**Journal:** Neurosurg Focus (2008)
**DOI:** [10.3171/FOC.2008.25.11.E13](https://doi.org/10.3171/FOC.2008.25.11.E13)

## Content

1. Neurosurg Focus. 2008;25(5):E13. doi: 10.3171/FOC.2008.25.11.E13.

Cardiovascular complications after acute spinal cord injury: pathophysiology,
diagnosis, and management.

Furlan JC(1), Fehlings MG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Development, Toronto Western Research Institute,
University Health Network, Ontario, Canada.

Cardiovascular complications in the acute stage following traumatic spinal cord
injury (SCI) require prompt medical attention to avoid neurological compromise,
morbidity, and death. In this review, the authors summarize the neural
regulation of the cardiovascular system as well as the pathophysiology,
diagnosis, and management of major cardiovascular complications that can occur
following acute (up to 30 days) traumatic SCI. Hypotension (both supine and
orthostatic), autonomic dysreflexia, and cardiac arrhythmias (including
persistent bradycardia) are attributed to the loss of supraspinal control of the
sympathetic nervous system that commonly occurs in patients with severe spinal
cord lesions at T-6 or higher. Current evidence-based guidelines recommend: 1)
monitoring of cardiac and hemodynamic parameters in the acute phase of SCI; 2)
maintenance of a minimum mean arterial blood pressure of 85 mm Hg during the
hyperacute phase (1 week after SCI); 3) timely detection and appropriate
treatment of neurogenic shock and cardiac arrhythmias; and 4) immediate and
adequate treatment of episodes of acute autonomic dysreflexia. In addition to
these forms of cardiovascular dysfunction, individuals with acute SCIs are at
high risk for deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism due to loss of
mobility and, potentially, altered fibrinolytic activity, abnormal platelet
function, and impaired circadian variations of hemostatic and fibrinolytic
parameters. Current evidence supports a recommendation for thromboprophylaxis
using mechanical methods and anticoagulants during the acute stage up to 3
months following SCI, depending on the severity and level of injury.
Low-molecular-weight heparin is the first choice for anticoagulant prophylaxis
in patients with acute SCI. Although there is insufficient evidence to recommend
(or refute) the use of screening tests for DVT in asymptomatic adults with acute
SCI, this strategy may detect asymptomatic DVT in at least 9.4% of individuals
who undergo thromboprophylaxis using lowmolecular- weight heparin. Indications
and treatment of DVT and acute pulmonary embolism are well established and are
summarized in this review. Recognition of cardiovascular complications after
acute SCI is essential to minimize adverse outcomes and to optimize recovery.

DOI: 10.3171/FOC.2008.25.11.E13
PMID: 18980473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
