---
reference_id: "PMID:34617361"
title: "Visual illusions in Parkinson's disease: an interview survey of symptomatology."
authors:
- Sasaki C
- Yokoi K
- Takahashi H
- Hatakeyama T
- Obara K
- Wada C
- Hirayama K
journal: Psychogeriatrics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/psyg.12771
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual illusions in Parkinson's disease: an interview survey of symptomatology.
**Authors:** Sasaki C, Yokoi K, Takahashi H, Hatakeyama T, Obara K, Wada C, Hirayama K
**Journal:** Psychogeriatrics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/psyg.12771](https://doi.org/10.1111/psyg.12771)

## Content

1. Psychogeriatrics. 2022 Jan;22(1):38-48. doi: 10.1111/psyg.12771. Epub 2021 Oct
 6.

Visual illusions in Parkinson's disease: an interview survey of symptomatology.

Sasaki C(1)(2)(3), Yokoi K(1), Takahashi H(2), Hatakeyama T(2), Obara K(2), Wada 
C(2), Hirayama K(1).

Author information:
(1)Yamagata Prefectural University of Health Sciences, Yamagata, Japan.
(2)National Hospital Organization Akita Hospital, Akita, Japan.
(3)National Hospital Organization Miyagi Hospital, Yamamoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Several types of visual illusions can occur in Parkinson's disease 
(PD). However, the prevalence and types of specific illusions experienced by 
patients with PD remain unclear. This study aimed to investigate the types of 
illusions.
METHODS: A questionnaire of visual illusions was developed through a literature 
review in consultation with clinicians and neurologists. Based on the 
questionnaire, 40 consecutive patients with PD were asked a series of Yes/No 
questions regarding 20 types of visual illusions since the onset of PD. If 
participants answered 'Yes', they were then asked to detail their experience(s).
RESULTS: In total, 30 patients with PD had experienced visual illusions since 
disease onset; among them, 25 were still experiencing them at the time of the 
study. The most commonly observed illusion types were dysmorphopsia, complex 
visual illusions, metachromatopsia, and diplopia. Other observed illusions 
included textural illusions, macropsia, micropsia, teleopsia, pelopsia, 
kinetopsia, akinetopsia, Zeitraffer/Zeitlupen phenomena, tilt illusion, 
upside-down illusion, and palinopsia. Additionally, aberrant perception of 
surface orientation (inclination) was reported, which is yet to be reported in 
association with any disease. Visual illusions had detrimental effects on the 
patients' daily lives in some cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Systematic interviews regarding the incidence and details of visual 
illusions experienced by patients with PD could offer important information 
regarding their quality of life.

© 2021 The Authors. Psychogeriatrics published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, 
Ltd on behalf of Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/psyg.12771
PMCID: PMC9293438
PMID: 34617361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]