---
reference_id: "PMID:22269949"
title: Berardinelli-seip congenital lipodystrophy 2/seipin is a cell-autonomous regulator of lipolysis essential for adipocyte differentiation.
authors:
- Chen W
- Chang B
- Saha P
- Hartig SM
- Li L
- Reddy VT
- Yang Y
- Yechoor V
- Mancini MA
- Chan L
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.06465-11
keywords:
- "Adipocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- Adipogenesis/drug effects
- "Adipose Tissue, White/metabolism"
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cyclic AMP/metabolism
- Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinases/metabolism
- "Fatty Liver/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- GTP-Binding Protein gamma Subunits
- Gene Deletion
- "Heterotrimeric GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- "Lipase/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Lipolysis
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- PPAR gamma/agonists
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Berardinelli-seip congenital lipodystrophy 2/seipin is a cell-autonomous regulator of lipolysis essential for adipocyte differentiation.
**Authors:** Chen W, Chang B, Saha P, Hartig SM, Li L, Reddy VT, Yang Y, Yechoor V, Mancini MA, Chan L
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.06465-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.06465-11)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Mar;32(6):1099-111. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06465-11. Epub 2012
Jan  23.

Berardinelli-seip congenital lipodystrophy 2/seipin is a cell-autonomous 
regulator of lipolysis essential for adipocyte differentiation.

Chen W, Chang B, Saha P, Hartig SM, Li L, Reddy VT, Yang Y, Yechoor V, Mancini 
MA, Chan L.

Mutations in BSCL2 underlie human congenital generalized lipodystrophy. We 
inactivated Bscl2 in mice to examine the mechanisms whereby absence of Bscl2 
leads to adipose tissue loss and metabolic disorders. Bscl2(-/-) mice develop 
severe lipodystrophy of white adipose tissue (WAT), dyslipidemia, insulin 
resistance, and hepatic steatosis. In vitro differentiation of both Bscl2(-/-) 
murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and stromal vascular cells (SVCs) reveals 
normal early-phase adipocyte differentiation but a striking failure in terminal 
differentiation due to unbridled cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase A 
(PKA)-activated lipolysis, which leads to loss of lipid droplets and silencing 
of the expression of adipose tissue-specific transcription factors. Importantly, 
such defects in differentiation can be largely rescued by inhibitors of 
lipolysis but not by a gamma peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPARγ) 
agonist. The residual epididymal WAT (EWAT) in Bscl2(-/-) mice displays enhanced 
lipolysis. It also assumes a "brown-like" phenotype with marked upregulation of 
UCP1 and other brown adipose tissue-specific markers. Together with decreased 
Pref1 but increased C/EBPβ levels, these changes highlight a possible increase 
in cAMP signaling that impairs terminal adipocyte differentiation in the EWAT of 
Bscl2(-/-) mice. Our study underscores the fundamental role of regulated 
cAMP/PKA-mediated lipolysis in adipose differentiation and identifies Bscl2 as a 
novel cell-autonomous determinant of activated lipolysis essential for terminal 
adipocyte differentiation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.06465-11
PMCID: PMC3295006
PMID: 22269949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]