---
reference_id: "PMID:25732994"
title: "Is L-Carnitine Supplementation Beneficial in 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA Carboxylase Deficiency?"
authors:
- Thomsen JA
- Lund AM
- Olesen JH
- Mohr M
- Rasmussen J
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_393
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is L-Carnitine Supplementation Beneficial in 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA Carboxylase Deficiency?
**Authors:** Thomsen JA, Lund AM, Olesen JH, Mohr M, Rasmussen J
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2014_393](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2014_393)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2015;21:79-88. doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_393. Epub 2015 Mar 3.

Is L-Carnitine Supplementation Beneficial in 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA Carboxylase
Deficiency?

Thomsen JA(1), Lund AM, Olesen JH, Mohr M, Rasmussen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Hospital, J.C Svabosgøta 43,
FO-100, Torshavn, Faroe Islands, lsjakth@ls.fo.

BACKGROUND: 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency (3-MCCd) is an autosomal
recessive disorder in the catabolism of leucine. In the present study, we
investigated the current and prior medical condition of patients with 3-MCCd in
the Faroe Islands and their carnitine levels in blood, urine and muscle tissue
with and without L-carnitine supplementation to evaluate the current treatment
strategy of not recommending L-carnitine supplementation to Faroese 3-MCCd
patients.
METHODS: Blood and urine samples and muscle biopsies were collected from
patients at inclusion and at 3 months. Eight patients received L-carnitine
supplementation when recruited; five did not. Included patients who received
supplementation were asked to stop L-carnitine, the others were asked to
initiate L-carnitine supplementation during the study. Symptoms were determined
by review of hospital medical records and questionnaires answered at baseline
and after the intervention.
RESULTS: The prevalence of 3-MCCd in the Faroe Islands was 1:2,400, the highest
reported worldwide. All patients were homozygous for the MCCC1 mutation
c.1526delG. When not administered L-carnitine, the 3-MCCd patients (n = 13) had
low plasma and muscle free carnitine levels, 6.9 (SD 1.4) μmol/L and 785 (SD
301) nmol/g wet weight, respectively. L-Carnitine supplementation increased
muscle and plasma carnitine levels to a low-normal range, 25.5 (SD 10.9) μmol/L
and 1,827 (SD 523) nmol/g wet weight, p < 0.01, respectively. Seven of the
thirteen 3-MCCd subjects suffered from self-reported fatigue with some
alleviation after L-carnitine supplementation.
CONCLUSION: 3-MCCd is common in the Faroe Islands. Some symptomatic 3-MCCd
patients may benefit biochemically and clinically from L-carnitine
supplementation, a more general recommendation cannot be given.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2014_393
PMCID: PMC4470948
PMID: 25732994
