---
reference_id: "PMID:21415852"
title: Recurrent DNMT3A mutations in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
authors:
- Walter MJ
- Ding L
- Shen D
- Shao J
- Grillot M
- McLellan M
- Fulton R
- Schmidt H
- Kalicki-Veizer J
- "O'Laughlin M"
- Kandoth C
- Baty J
- Westervelt P
- DiPersio JF
- Mardis ER
- Wilson RK
- Ley TJ
- Graubert TA
journal: Leukemia
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.44
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Codon/genetics
- CpG Islands/genetics
- DNA (Cytosine-5-)-Methyltransferases/genetics
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- DNA Methyltransferase 3A
- "DNA, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Disease Progression
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Granulocyte Precursor Cells/enzymology
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/enzymology, genetics, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/enzymology, genetics, mortality"
- Prognosis
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent DNMT3A mutations in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
**Authors:** Walter MJ, Ding L, Shen D, Shao J, Grillot M, McLellan M, Fulton R, Schmidt H, Kalicki-Veizer J, O'Laughlin M, Kandoth C, Baty J, Westervelt P, DiPersio JF, Mardis ER, Wilson RK, Ley TJ, Graubert TA
**Journal:** Leukemia (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/leu.2011.44](https://doi.org/10.1038/leu.2011.44)

## Content

1. Leukemia. 2011 Jul;25(7):1153-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.44. Epub 2011 Mar 18.

Recurrent DNMT3A mutations in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.

Walter MJ(1), Ding L, Shen D, Shao J, Grillot M, McLellan M, Fulton R, Schmidt 
H, Kalicki-Veizer J, O'Laughlin M, Kandoth C, Baty J, Westervelt P, DiPersio JF, 
Mardis ER, Wilson RK, Ley TJ, Graubert TA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Oncology, Washington University, 
St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2011 Jul;25(7):1059-63. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.92.

Alterations in DNA methylation have been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), although the underlying mechanism remains 
largely unknown. Methylation of CpG dinucleotides is mediated by DNA 
methyltransferases, including DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B. DNMT3A mutations have 
recently been reported in patients with de novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML), 
providing a rationale for examining the status of DNMT3A in MDS samples. In this 
study, we report the frequency of DNMT3A mutations in patients with de novo MDS, 
and their association with secondary AML. We sequenced all coding exons of 
DNMT3A using DNA from bone marrow and paired normal cells from 150 patients with 
MDS and identified 13 heterozygous mutations with predicted translational 
consequences in 12/150 patients (8.0%). Amino acid R882, located in the 
methyltransferase domain of DNMT3A, was the most common mutation site, 
accounting for 4/13 mutations. DNMT3A mutations were expressed in the majority 
of cells in all tested mutant samples regardless of myeloblast counts, 
suggesting that DNMT3A mutations occur early in the course of MDS. Patients with 
DNMT3A mutations had worse overall survival compared with patients without 
DNMT3A mutations (P=0.005) and more rapid progression to AML (P=0.007), 
suggesting that DNMT3A mutation status may have prognostic value in de novo MDS.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2011.44
PMCID: PMC3202965
PMID: 21415852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.