---
reference_id: "PMID:39023049"
title: "Understanding Intensive Care Unit Family Caregivers' Vulnerability to Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder: The Impact of Neurotic Personality Traits, Emotional Suppression, and Perceptions of Unexpected Death."
authors:
- Gerhart J
- Bruins G
- Hoerger M
- Boehm LM
- White K
- Brugh C
- Greenberg JA
journal: J Palliat Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1089/jpm.2023.0689
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding Intensive Care Unit Family Caregivers' Vulnerability to Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder: The Impact of Neurotic Personality Traits, Emotional Suppression, and Perceptions of Unexpected Death.
**Authors:** Gerhart J, Bruins G, Hoerger M, Boehm LM, White K, Brugh C, Greenberg JA
**Journal:** J Palliat Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1089/jpm.2023.0689](https://doi.org/10.1089/jpm.2023.0689)

## Content

1. J Palliat Med. 2024 Oct;27(10):1332-1338. doi: 10.1089/jpm.2023.0689. Epub
2024  Jul 18.

Understanding Intensive Care Unit Family Caregivers' Vulnerability to 
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder: The Impact of Neurotic Personality Traits, 
Emotional Suppression, and Perceptions of Unexpected Death.

Gerhart J(1)(2), Bruins G(1), Hoerger M(3), Boehm LM(4), White K(5), Brugh C(1), 
Greenberg JA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Central Michigan University, Mt. Pleasant, 
Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Rush University Medical 
Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Departments of Psychology and Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, USA.
(4)School of Nursing, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Rationale: Family members of patients who die in an intensive care unit (ICU) 
are at heightened risk of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms. Not 
all surrogates develop these symptoms and heterogeneity exists in PTSD symptom 
clusters. Objectives: The study tested a personality model of PTSD symptoms in 
bereaved family caregivers of ICU patients. It was hypothesized that family 
members endorsing higher levels of neurotic personality traits would report 
higher levels of PTSD symptom clusters and that these associations would be 
explained by tendencies to view the patient's death as unexpected and to cope by 
suppressing their emotions. Methods: Participants were family members of ICU 
patients at an urban, academic medical center who either died or were discharged 
to an inpatient hospice unit. Participants were contacted for participation at 
least six months after the patient's death. Participants completed measures of 
personality, emotion regulation, and PTSD symptoms. Data were analyzed using 
path analysis. Results: Approximately one-third (35%) of the sample of 162 
caregivers endorsed at-risk levels of PTSD. Individuals reporting higher levels 
of neurotic personality traits reported more PTSD symptoms (r = 0.53, p < 
0.001). Perceptions that the patient death was unexpected partially explained 
the association of neuroticism with the intrusive re-experiencing PTSD symptoms 
(B = 0.45, p = 0.031). In contrast, emotional suppression partially explained 
the association of neuroticism with avoidance (B = 0.70, p = 0.010) and 
hyperarousal symptom clusters (B = 0.37, p = 0.041). Conclusions: Family 
vulnerability to PTSD after an ICU death can be conceptualized based on neurotic 
personality traits. Tendencies to view the patient's death as unexpected may 
contribute to intrusive thoughts and memories of the ICU experience. Individuals 
may avoid reminders and remain at heightened levels of arousal when they 
suppress their emotional experiences. Key Message: Family members who experience 
the death of a loved one following ICU treatment are vulnerable to PTSD 
symptoms. These reactions to ICU-related losses may be shaped by family members' 
personalities, expectations, and emotion regulation styles. Understanding these 
characteristics could inform family screening and intervention efforts in the 
ICU.

DOI: 10.1089/jpm.2023.0689
PMID: 39023049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]