---
reference_id: "PMID:38544795"
title: "Consensus and controversy in the management of paediatric and adult patients with ovarian immature teratoma: the Malignant Germ Cell International Consortium perspective."
authors:
- Pashankar F
- Murray MJ
- Gell J
- MacDonald N
- Shamash J
- Billmire DF
- Klosterkemper L
- Olson T
- Hirsch MS
- Lockley M
- Stoneham S
- Frazier AL
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102453
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consensus and controversy in the management of paediatric and adult patients with ovarian immature teratoma: the Malignant Germ Cell International Consortium perspective.
**Authors:** Pashankar F, Murray MJ, Gell J, MacDonald N, Shamash J, Billmire DF, Klosterkemper L, Olson T, Hirsch MS, Lockley M, Stoneham S, Frazier AL
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102453](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102453)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2024 Feb 6;69:102453. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102453. 
eCollection 2024 Mar.

Consensus and controversy in the management of paediatric and adult patients 
with ovarian immature teratoma: the Malignant Germ Cell International Consortium 
perspective.

Pashankar F(1), Murray MJ(2)(3), Gell J(4)(5)(6), MacDonald N(7), Shamash J(8), 
Billmire DF(9), Klosterkemper L(10)(11), Olson T(12), Hirsch MS(13), Lockley 
M(14)(15), Stoneham S(16), Frazier AL(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Tennis Court Road, University of Cambridge, CB2 1QP, 
UK.
(3)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Cambridge University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.
(4)The Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Connecticut Children's Medical 
Center, Hartford, CT, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Connecticut Medical School, 
Farmington, CT, USA.
(6)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.
(7)Department of Gynaecological Surgery, University College Hospital, University 
College London Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, W 
Smithfield, London, EC1A 7BE, UK.
(9)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN, USA.
(10)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Dana Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(13)Department of Pathology, Women's and Perinatal Division, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Department of Medical Oncology, University College Hospital, University 
College London Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(15)Centre for Cancer Genomics and Computational Biology, Barts Cancer 
Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(16)Department of Paediatrics, University College Hospital, University College 
London Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.

Ovarian immature teratoma (IT) is a rare neoplasm comprising ∼3% of ovarian 
cancers, occurring primarily in young females. Management presents several 
challenges, including those with elevated serum alpha-fetoprotein, potential 
confusion regarding pathology interpretation, and paucity of data to support 
decision-making. MaGIC (https://magicconsortium.com/) is an interdisciplinary 
international consortium of GCT experts from multiple subspecialties, with 
members receiving frequent queries regarding IT patient management. With 
evidence from published literature where available, we summarise consensus 
management of such patients. Given lack of published data, controversy in 
certain areas remains. The most obvious variance in practice is between 
paediatric and adult teams, despite very similar outcomes. Paediatric teams 
typically employ a surgery-only approach, whereas in adult practice, all 
patients, except those with stage IA, grade 1 (low-grade) tumours, still 
generally receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Given the rarity of ovarian IT and lack 
of published data, discussion with GCT experts and/or national advisory panels 
is recommended.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102453
PMCID: PMC10965411
PMID: 38544795

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts to declare.