---
reference_id: "PMID:34813355"
title: Pathogenic Mechanisms Underlying Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis.
authors:
- Moss BJ
- Ryter SW
- Rosas IO
journal: Annu Rev Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-pathol-042320-030240
keywords:
- Endothelial Cells/pathology
- Humans
- "Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Lung/metabolism, pathology"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic Mechanisms Underlying Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Moss BJ, Ryter SW, Rosas IO
**Journal:** Annu Rev Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-pathol-042320-030240](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-pathol-042320-030240)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Pathol. 2022 Jan 24;17:515-546. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-pathol-042320-030240. Epub 2021 Nov 23.

Pathogenic Mechanisms Underlying Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis.

Moss BJ(1), Ryter SW(2), Rosas IO(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA; email: 
benjamin.moss@bcm.edu, ivan.rosas@bcm.edu.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA; email: str2020@med.cornell.edu.

The pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) involves a complex 
interplay of cell types and signaling pathways. Recurrent alveolar epithelial 
cell (AEC) injury may occur in the context of predisposing factors (e.g., 
genetic, environmental, epigenetic, immunologic, and gerontologic), leading to 
metabolic dysfunction, senescence, aberrant epithelial cell activation, and 
dysregulated epithelial repair. The dysregulated epithelial cell interacts with 
mesenchymal, immune, and endothelial cells via multiple signaling mechanisms to 
trigger fibroblast and myofibroblast activation. Recent single-cell RNA 
sequencing studies of IPF lungs support the epithelial injury model. These 
studies have uncovered a novel type of AEC with characteristics of an aberrant 
basal cell, which may disrupt normal epithelial repair and propagate a 
profibrotic phenotype. Here, we review the pathogenesis of IPF in the context of 
novel bioinformatics tools as strategies to discover pathways of disease, 
cell-specific mechanisms, and cell-cell interactions that propagate the 
profibrotic niche.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-pathol-042320-030240
PMID: 34813355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]