---
reference_id: "PMID:6690005"
title: Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the tonsil. A clinicopathologic study of 65 cases.
authors:
- Barton JH
- Osborne BM
- Butler JJ
- Meoz RT
- Kong J
- Fuller LM
- Sullivan JA
journal: Cancer
year: '1984'
doi: "10.1002/1097-0142(19840101)53:1<86::aid-cncr2820530116>3.0.co;2-e"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the tonsil. A clinicopathologic study of 65 cases.
**Authors:** Barton JH, Osborne BM, Butler JJ, Meoz RT, Kong J, Fuller LM, Sullivan JA
**Journal:** Cancer (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1097-0142(19840101)53:1<86::aid-cncr2820530116>3.0.co;2-e](https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0142(19840101)53:1<86::aid-cncr2820530116>3.0.co;2-e)

## Content

1. Cancer. 1984 Jan 1;53(1):86-95. doi: 
10.1002/1097-0142(19840101)53:1<86::aid-cncr2820530116>3.0.co;2-e.

Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the tonsil. A clinicopathologic study of 65 cases.

Barton JH, Osborne BM, Butler JJ, Meoz RT, Kong J, Fuller LM, Sullivan JA.

Sixty-five patients presenting to M. D. Anderson Hospital and Tumor Institute 
with Stages IE and IIE primary tonsillar lymphoma between 1954 and 1981 were 
reviewed. All cases were non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, with the majority being 
diffuse large cell lymphoma (85%). Initial therapy was radiotherapy alone in 54 
patients, radiotherapy combined with chemotherapy in 8 patients, and 
chemotherapy alone in 3 patients. Stage was the most important prognostic 
factor, with 86% and 41% 5-year survivals for Stages IE and IIE, respectively (P 
= 0.006). Lymphangiography was crucial in staging patients with clinically 
positive cervical lymph nodes because 94% of clinically staged IIE patients 
developed recurrent disease, in comparison with only 50% of 
lymphangiogram-staged IIE patients. The incidence of large cell lymphoma was so 
high as to preclude analysis of survival by histologic type. From this limited 
series, radiotherapy alone would appear to be sufficient initial therapy for 
Stage IE patients, whereas Stage IIE patients probably benefit from the addition 
of prophylactic chemotherapy. Relapses were most common in nonirradiated 
lymph-node-bearing areas, with the majority presenting in the first 2 years 
following initial therapy. The salvage of relapsing patients has been 
disappointing, with the best hope residing in combination chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0142(19840101)53:1<86::aid-cncr2820530116>3.0.co;2-e
PMID: 6690005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]