---
reference_id: "PMID:24425068"
title: "Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders with aquaporin-4 and myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies: a comparative study."
authors:
- Kitley J
- Waters P
- Woodhall M
- Leite MI
- Murchison A
- George J
- Küker W
- Chandratre S
- Vincent A
- Palace J
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.5857
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Age of Onset
- Alcohol Oxidoreductases
- Aquaporin 4/immunology
- Autoantibodies/blood
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Disability Evaluation
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Hirudins
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/immunology
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, immunology, pathology"
- Recombinant Proteins
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sex Factors
- Urokinase-Type Plasminogen Activator
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders with aquaporin-4 and myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies: a comparative study.
**Authors:** Kitley J, Waters P, Woodhall M, Leite MI, Murchison A, George J, Küker W, Chandratre S, Vincent A, Palace J
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.5857](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.5857)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Mar;71(3):276-83. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.5857.

Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders with aquaporin-4 and 
myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies: a comparative study.

Kitley J(1), Waters P(1), Woodhall M(1), Leite MI(1), Murchison A(1), George 
J(1), Küker W(2), Chandratre S(3), Vincent A(1), Palace J(1).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Oxford University Hospitals 
National Health Service Trust, University of Oxford, Oxford, England.
(2)Department of Neuroradiology, Oxford University Hospitals National Health 
Service Trust, Oxford, England.
(3)Children's Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals National Health Service 
Trust, Oxford, England.

Comment in
    JAMA Neurol. 2014 Mar;71(3):271-2. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.5865.
    J Neurol. 2014 Mar;261(3):640-2. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7277-z.
    JAMA Neurol. 2014 Jul 1;71(7):923-4. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.764.
    JAMA Neurol. 2014 Jul 1;71(7):924. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.940.

IMPORTANCE: Most patients with neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and many with NMO 
spectrum disorder have autoantibodies against aquaporin-4 (AQP4-Abs), but 
recently, myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies (MOG-Abs) have been 
found in some patients. Here, we showed that patients with NMO/NMOSD with 
MOG-Abs demonstrate differences when compared with patients with AQP4-Abs.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the features of patients with NMO/NMOSD with MOG-Abs 
and compare them with patients with AQP4-Ab-positive NMO/NMOSD.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This observational study was conducted at a 
single UK specialist center for NMO. Patients with a first demyelinating event 
between January 1, 2010, and April 1, 2013, seen within the Oxford NMO service 
and who tested positive for MOG-Abs or AQP4-Abs were included in the study.
EXPOSURE: Cell-based assays using C-terminal-truncated human MOG and full-length 
M23-AQP4 were used to test patient serum samples for AQP4-Abs and MOG-Abs.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Demographic, clinical, and disability data, and 
magnetic resonance imaging findings.
RESULTS: Twenty AQP4-Ab-positive patients and 9 MOG-Ab-positive patients were 
identified. Most patients in both groups were white. Ninety percent of 
AQP4-Ab-positive patients but only 44% MOG-Ab-positive patients were females (P 
= .02) with a trend toward older age at disease onset in AQP4-Ab-positive 
patients (44.9 vs 32.3 years; P = .05). MOG-Ab-positive patients more frequently 
presented with simultaneous/sequential optic neuritis and myelitis (44% vs 0%; P 
= .005). Onset episode severity did not differ between the 2 groups, but 
patients with MOG-Abs had better outcomes from the onset episode, with better 
recovery Expanded Disability Status Scale scores and a lower risk for visual and 
motor disability. Myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-positive patients 
were more likely to have conus involvement on spinal magnetic resonance imaging 
(75% vs 17%; P = .02) and involvement of deep gray nuclei on brain magnetic 
resonance imaging (P = .03). Cerebrospinal fluid characteristics were similar in 
the 2 groups. A higher proportion of AQP4-Ab-positive patients relapsed (40% vs 
0%; P = .03) despite similar follow-up durations.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Despite the fact that patients with MOG-Abs can 
fulfill the diagnostic criteria for NMO, there are differences when compared 
with those with AQP4-Abs. These include a higher proportion of males, younger 
age, and greater likelihood of involvement of the conus and deep gray matter 
structures on imaging. Additionally, patients with MOG-Abs had more favorable 
outcomes. Patients with AQP4-Ab-negative NMO/NMOSD should be tested for MOG-Abs.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.5857
PMID: 24425068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]