---
reference_id: "PMID:30137827"
title: Ataxia-Telangiectasia.
authors:
- Riboldi GM
- Samanta D
- Asuncion RMD
- Frucht S
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia-Telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Riboldi GM, Samanta D, Asuncion RMD, Frucht S

## Content

1. Ataxia-Telangiectasia.

Riboldi GM(1), Samanta D(2), Asuncion RMD(3), Frucht S(4).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2024 Mar 6.

Author information:
(1)New York University
(2)University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
(3)University of Santo Tomas, Medicine and Surgery
(4)NYU Langone School of Medicine

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare inherited form of autosomal recessive 
neurodegenerative ataxia with onset in early childhood. Clinically, this 
syndrome manifests a combination of neurological and systemic symptoms due to 
the mutation of the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. Clinical hallmarks 
of A-T include cerebellar ataxia and dilated capillaries in the oculocutaneous 
region (telangiectasias). Ataxia often presents in early childhood and is 
heralded by truncal instability as an affected child begins to sit and walk. A 
plethora of associated neurological and systemic signs and symptoms characterize 
A-T: neurologically, dysarthria, oculomotor apraxia, extrapyramidal symptoms, 
axonal neuropathy, and cognitive impairment are common; more broadly, 
individuals with A-T can experience immunological and endocrine abnormalities, 
and their risk of neoplastic disease is elevated. Serum levels of 
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) are elevated.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30137827

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Giulietta Maria Riboldi declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Debopam 
Samanta declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Ria Monica Asuncion declares no relevant financial relationships 
with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Steven Frucht declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies.