---
reference_id: "PMID:8783513"
title: Current status of oral rehydration as a strategy for the control of diarrhoeal diseases.
authors:
- Mahalanabis D
journal: Indian J Med Res
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current status of oral rehydration as a strategy for the control of diarrhoeal diseases.
**Authors:** Mahalanabis D
**Journal:** Indian J Med Res (1996)

## Content

1. Indian J Med Res. 1996 Jul;104:115-24.

Current status of oral rehydration as a strategy for the control of diarrhoeal 
diseases.

Mahalanabis D(1).

Author information:
(1)Society for Applied Studies, Calcutta.

For more than two decades, WHO and UNICEF have recommended a single formulation 
of oral rehydration salts (ORS) solution based on glucose and three salts. This 
product has proven safe and highly effective in treating and preventing 
dehydration from diarrhoea of all causes and in all age groups in worldwide use 
and has substantially contributed to the saving of lives in developing 
countries. However, oral rehydration therapy (ORT) using this formulation does 
not make diarrhoea any less severe or stop it sooner; which is what is required. 
During the last 16 yr numerous studies were undertaken to develop an improved 
ORS that could, in addition to being effective therapy to treat and prevent 
dehydration, reduce severity and duration of diarrhoea. Controlled clinical 
trials of ORS formulations containing aminoacids showed that, while they were 
substantially more absorption efficient in cholera, they were no more effective 
than standard ORS in infants and children with noncholera diarrhoea; none of 
these formulations are considered a suitable replacement for standard ORS. 
Rice-based ORS, in a number of studies, was found superior to standard ORS in 
adults and children with cholera and its use in such patients is recommended. 
However, the benefit of using rice-based ORS in infants and small children was 
either small or insignificant compared to standard ORS, when feeding during ORT 
was actively pursued. Rice-based ORS was also as effective as standard ORS in 
infants under 6 months of age and in severely malnourished children. Recently, 
several studies evaluated glucose-based ORS made hypoosmolar by reducing the 
concentration of glucose and sodium (with glucose concentration of 75-90 and 
sodium 60-75 mmol/l and osmolarity of 225-250 mosm/l). These hypoosmolar 
solutions showed clinically significant benefit in reducing the severity of 
diarrhoea and the need for supplemental i.v. therapy in infants and children. In 
limited studies, similar results were obtained in adults with cholera; however, 
marked hyponatraemia was noted in a small proportion of high purging cholera 
patients. Two multicentric trials of a hypoosmolar solution, one in adults with 
cholera and one in children with non-cholera diarrhoea, are ongoing; results of 
these trials should help us decide whether such a solution could be a practical 
replacement for standard ORS.

PMID: 8783513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]