---
reference_id: "PMID:18513680"
title: Identification of CC2D2A as a Meckel syndrome gene adds an important piece to the ciliopathy puzzle.
authors:
- Tallila J
- Jakkula E
- Peltonen L
- Salonen R
- Kestilä M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.05.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of CC2D2A as a Meckel syndrome gene adds an important piece to the ciliopathy puzzle.
**Authors:** Tallila J, Jakkula E, Peltonen L, Salonen R, Kestilä M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.05.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.05.004)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jun;82(6):1361-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.05.004.

Identification of CC2D2A as a Meckel syndrome gene adds an important piece to 
the ciliopathy puzzle.

Tallila J(1), Jakkula E, Peltonen L, Salonen R, Kestilä M.

Author information:
(1)National Public Health Institute, Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, 
Helsinki 00290, Finland.

Meckel syndrome (MKS) is a lethal malformation disorder characterized 
classically by encephalocele, polycystic kidneys, and polydactyly. MKS is also 
one of the major contributors to syndromic neural tube defects (NTDs). Recent 
findings have shown primary cilia dysfunction in the molecular background of 
MKS, indicating that cilia are critical for early human development. However, 
even though four genes behind MKS have been identified to date, they elucidate 
only a minor proportion of the MKS cases. In this study, instead of traditional 
linkage analysis, we selected 10 nonrelated affected fetuses and looked for the 
homozygous regions shared by them. Based on this strategy, we identified the 
sixth locus and the fifth gene, CC2D2A (MKS6), behind MKS. The biological 
function of CC2D2A is uncharacterized, but the corresponding polypeptide is 
predicted to be involved in ciliary functions and it has a calcium binding 
domain (C2). Immunofluorescence staining of patient's fibroblast cells 
demonstrates that the cells lack cilia, providing evidence for the critical role 
of CC2D2A in cilia formation. Our finding is very significant not only to 
understand the molecular background of MKS, but also to obtain additional 
information about the function of the cilia, which can help to understand their 
significance in normal development and also in other ciliopathies, which are an 
increasing group of disorders with overlapping phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.05.004
PMCID: PMC2427307
PMID: 18513680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]