---
reference_id: "PMID:24441152"
title: "Vasculitis associated with rheumatoid arthritis: a case-control study."
authors:
- Makol A
- Crowson CS
- Wetter DA
- Sokumbi O
- Matteson EL
- Warrington KJ
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ket475
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Aged
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/complications, mortality"
- Case-Control Studies
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rheumatoid Vasculitis/epidemiology, etiology, mortality"
- Risk Factors
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vasculitis associated with rheumatoid arthritis: a case-control study.
**Authors:** Makol A, Crowson CS, Wetter DA, Sokumbi O, Matteson EL, Warrington KJ
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/ket475](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/ket475)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2014 May;53(5):890-9. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ket475.
 Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Vasculitis associated with rheumatoid arthritis: a case-control study.

Makol A(1), Crowson CS, Wetter DA, Sokumbi O, Matteson EL, Warrington KJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 
1st Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. makol.ashima@mayo.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2014 May;10(5):261-2. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2014.31.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine the clinical correlates and 
predictors of rheumatoid vasculitis (RV).
METHODS: A retrospective cohort of patients with RV evaluated at a tertiary 
referral centre between 1 January 2000 and 1 January 2010 was identified. RV 
cases were compared in a 1:2 ratio to controls (RA without vasculitis) to 
identify risk factors for developing RV.
RESULTS: Eighty-six RV cases (58% women, 88% white) were identified. 
Histopathological confirmation was available for 58% of patients. Cutaneous 
vasculitis was the most common presentation, followed by vasculitic neuropathy. 
The median age at presentation was 63 years and the median duration of RA was 
10.8 years. One third were current smokers. The majority were seropositive and 
had elevated inflammatory markers. Treatment was with a range of 
immunomodulating agents. At 6 months, 38% of patients achieved complete 
remission, 52% had partial improvement and 10% noted no clinical improvement. 
Thirty-six per cent relapsed by 5 years and 26% died. After adjusting for age 
and disease duration, current smoking at RA diagnosis [odds ratio (OR) 1.98], 
coexistent peripheral vascular disease (OR 3.98), cerebrovascular disease (OR 
6.48), severe RA (OR 2.02) (characterized by radiographic erosions, nodulosis on 
clinical examination or requirement of joint surgery) and the use of biologics 
(OR 2.80) were found to increase the odds for developing RV; the use of HCQ (OR 
0.54, CI 0.31, 0.94) and low-dose aspirin (OR 0.42, CI 0.21, 0.85) was 
associated with decreased odds for developing RV.
CONCLUSION: This largest single-centre series of patients with RV suggests that 
even in recent years, RV remains a serious complication of RA and is associated 
with significant mortality.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/ket475
PMCID: PMC3999374
PMID: 24441152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]