---
reference_id: "PMID:32658383"
title: "Rhabdomyosarcoma associated with germline TP53 alteration in children and adolescents: The French experience."
authors:
- Pondrom M
- Bougeard G
- Karanian M
- Bonneau-Lagacherie J
- Boulanger C
- Boutroux H
- Briandet C
- Chevreau C
- Corradini N
- Coze C
- Defachelles AS
- Galmiche-Roland L
- Orbach D
- Piguet C
- Scoazec JY
- Vérité C
- Willems M
- Frebourg T
- Minard V
- Brugières L
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.28486
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Survival Rate
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhabdomyosarcoma associated with germline TP53 alteration in children and adolescents: The French experience.
**Authors:** Pondrom M, Bougeard G, Karanian M, Bonneau-Lagacherie J, Boulanger C, Boutroux H, Briandet C, Chevreau C, Corradini N, Coze C, Defachelles AS, Galmiche-Roland L, Orbach D, Piguet C, Scoazec JY, Vérité C, Willems M, Frebourg T, Minard V, Brugières L
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.28486](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.28486)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2020 Sep;67(9):e28486. doi: 10.1002/pbc.28486. Epub 2020
 Jul 13.

Rhabdomyosarcoma associated with germline TP53 alteration in children and
adolescents: The French experience.

Pondrom M(1)(2), Bougeard G(3), Karanian M(4), Bonneau-Lagacherie J(5),
Boulanger C(6), Boutroux H(7), Briandet C(8), Chevreau C(9), Corradini N(10),
Coze C(11), Defachelles AS(12), Galmiche-Roland L(13), Orbach D(14), Piguet
C(15), Scoazec JY(16), Vérité C(17), Willems M(18), Frebourg T(3), Minard V(1),
Brugières L(1).

Author information:
(1)Gustave Roussy Cancer Center, Department of Children and Adolescents
Oncology, Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, France.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Nice University Hospital, Nice,
France.
(3)Rouen University Hospital, Normandy University, UNIROUEN, Inserm, Department
of Genetics, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen,
France.
(4)Department of Pathology, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France.
(5)Department of Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Rennes University Hospital, Rennes,
France.
(6)Department of Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Toulouse University Hospital,
Toulouse, France.
(7)Department of Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Trousseau Hospital, Paris, France.
(8)Department of Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon,
France.
(9)Department of Oncology, Institut Claudius Regaud, Toulouse, France.
(10)Léon Bérard Cancer Center, IHOPe, Lyon, France.
(11)Hôpital d'Enfants La Timone, Department of Pediatric Onco-Hematology,
Aix-Marseille University, APHM, Marseille, France.
(12)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Oscar Lambret Cancer Center, Lille,
France.
(13)Department of Pathology, Necker-Enfants Malades University Hospital, Paris,
France.
(14)SIREDO Oncology Center (Care, Innovation and Research for Children,
Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer), Institut Curie, PSL University,
Paris, France.
(15)Department of Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Limoges University Hospital,
Limoges, France.
(16)Gustave Roussy Cancer Center, Department of Pathology, Paris-Saclay
University, Villejuif, France.
(17)Department of Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Bordeaux University Hospital,
Bordeaux, France.
(18)Department of Genetics, Montpellier University Hospital, Montpellier,
France.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical characteristics and outcome of patients with
Li-Fraumeni-associated rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS).
METHOD: Retrospective analysis of data from 31 French patients with RMS
diagnosed before the age of 20 years associated with a TP53 pathogenic germline
variant. Cases were identified through the French Li-Fraumeni database. Central
histologic review was performed in 16 cases.
RESULTS: The median age at diagnosis was 2.3 years, and the median follow-up was
9.1 years (0.3-34.8). The main tumor sites were head and neck (n = 13),
extremities (n = 8), and trunk (n = 8). The local pathology report classified
the 31 tumors in embryonal (n = 26), alveolar (n = 1), pleomorphic (n = 1), and
spindle-cell (n = 1) RMS (missing = 2). After histological review, anaplasia
(diffuse or focal) was reported in 12/16 patients. Twenty-five patients had
localized disease, three had lymph node involvement, and three distant
metastases. First-line therapy combined surgery (n = 27), chemotherapy (n = 30),
and radiotherapy (n = 14) and led to RMS control in all, but one patient. Eleven
patients relapsed, and 18 patients had second malignancies. The 10-year
event-free, progression-free, and overall survival rates were 36% (95% CI:
20-56), 62% (95% CI: 43-77) and 76% (95% CI: 56-88), respectively. The 10-year
cumulative risk of second malignancies was 40% (95% CI: 22-60).
CONCLUSION: The high incidence of multiple primary tumors strongly influences
the long-term prognosis of RMS associated with TP53 pathogenic germline
variants. Anaplastic RMS in childhood, independently of the familial history,
should lead to TP53 analysis at treatment initiation to reduce, whenever
possible, the burden of genotoxic drugs and radiotherapy in carriers and to
ensure the early detection of second malignancies.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.28486
PMID: 32658383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
