---
reference_id: "PMID:15112010"
title: "Tobacco smoking and oral clefts: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Little J
- Cardy A
- Munger RG
journal: Bull World Health Organ
year: '2004'
keywords:
- Case-Control Studies
- "Cleft Lip/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Cleft Palate/epidemiology, etiology"
- Cohort Studies
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Female
- Global Health
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Pregnancy
- Smoking/adverse effects
- Nicotiana
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tobacco smoking and oral clefts: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Little J, Cardy A, Munger RG
**Journal:** Bull World Health Organ (2004)

## Content

1. Bull World Health Organ. 2004 Mar;82(3):213-8. Epub 2004 Apr 16.

Tobacco smoking and oral clefts: a meta-analysis.

Little J(1), Cardy A, Munger RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Aberdeen, 
Foresterhill, Scotland.

Comment in
    Evid Based Dent. 2005;6(2):43-4. doi: 10.1038/sj.ebd.6400321.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between maternal smoking and non-syndromic 
orofacial clefts in infants.
METHODS: A meta-analysis of the association between maternal smoking during 
pregnancy was carried out using data from 24 case-control and cohort studies.
FINDINGS: Consistent, moderate and statistically significant associations were 
found between maternal smoking and cleft lip, with or without cleft palate 
(relative risk 1.34, 95% confidence interval 1.25-1.44) and between maternal 
smoking and cleft palate (relative risk 1.22, 95% confidence interval 
1.10-1.35). There was evidence of a modest dose-response effect for cleft lip 
with or without cleft palate.
CONCLUSION: The evidence of an association between maternal tobacco smoking and 
orofacial clefts is strong enough to justify its use in anti-smoking campaigns.

PMCID: PMC2585921
PMID: 15112010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]