---
reference_id: "PMID:25152581"
title: Genetic predisposition to pancreatic cancer.
authors:
- Ghiorzo P
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i31.10778
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic predisposition to pancreatic cancer.
**Authors:** Ghiorzo P
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v20.i31.10778](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i31.10778)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Aug 21;20(31):10778-89. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v20.i31.10778.

Genetic predisposition to pancreatic cancer.

Ghiorzo P(1).

Author information:
(1)Paola Ghiorzo, Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, 
University of Genoa and IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria San Martino-IST 
Istituto Nazioanle per la Ricerca sul Cancro, 16132 Genoa, Italy.

Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PC) is the most deadly of the common cancers. Owing 
to its rapid progression and almost certain fatal outcome, identifying 
individuals at risk and detecting early lesions are crucial to improve outcome. 
Genetic risk factors are believed to play a major role. Approximately 10% of PC 
is estimated to have familial inheritance. Several germline mutations have been 
found to be involved in hereditary forms of PC, including both familial PC (FPC) 
and PC as one of the manifestations of a hereditary cancer syndrome or other 
hereditary conditions. Although most of the susceptibility genes for FPC have 
yet to be identified, next-generation sequencing studies are likely to provide 
important insights. The risk of PC in FPC is sufficiently high to recommend 
screening of high-risk individuals; thus, defining such individuals 
appropriately is the key. Candidate genes have been described and patients 
considered for screening programs under research protocols should first be 
tested for presence of germline mutations in the BRCA2, PALB2 and ATM genes. In 
specific PC populations, including in Italy, hereditary cancer predisposition 
genes such as CDKN2A also explain a considerable fraction of FPC.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i31.10778
PMCID: PMC4138458
PMID: 25152581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]