---
reference_id: "PMID:29484515"
title: Early stage non-small cell lung cancer patients need brain imaging regardless of symptoms.
authors:
- Ando T
- Kage H
- Saito M
- Amano Y
- Goto Y
- Nakajima J
- Nagase T
journal: Int J Clin Oncol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10147-018-1254-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early stage non-small cell lung cancer patients need brain imaging regardless of symptoms.
**Authors:** Ando T, Kage H, Saito M, Amano Y, Goto Y, Nakajima J, Nagase T
**Journal:** Int J Clin Oncol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10147-018-1254-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10147-018-1254-y)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Oncol. 2018 Aug;23(4):641-646. doi: 10.1007/s10147-018-1254-y. Epub
 2018 Feb 26.

Early stage non-small cell lung cancer patients need brain imaging regardless of 
symptoms.

Ando T(1), Kage H(2), Saito M(1), Amano Y(1), Goto Y(1), Nakajima J(3), Nagase 
T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. kageh-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Japanese Lung Cancer Society and ESMO guideline recommends screening 
for brain metastasis in all patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), 
while NCCN/ACCP guidelines do not recommend screening patients who are 
asymptomatic and with clinical stage I NSCLC. However, brain metastasis 
sometimes occurs in early stage NSCLC patients without any neurological 
symptoms.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed medical records of 124 patients admitted to 
the University of Tokyo Hospital with stage IV NSCLC from January 2012 to April 
2016. We analyzed clinical stage, the presence of the central nervous system 
manifestations and the number of brain metastases.
RESULTS: Forty-six out of 124 cases had brain metastasis at presentation. The 
brain metastasis group had larger number of female, never smokers and patients 
with EGFR mutation compared with extracranial metastasis group. Twenty-one of 35 
adenocarcinoma cases with brain metastasis had EGFR mutations. Out of 46 brain 
metastasis patients, 29 patients (63%) were asymptomatic and patients with EGFR 
mutations were significantly less likely to have neurological symptoms (4/21 vs. 
7/14, p = 0.049). Six out of 46 cases with brain metastasis (13%) were clinical 
T1-2aN0. In clinical T1-2aN0 cases, only one patient had neurological symptoms 
at presentation.
CONCLUSION: In clinical T1-2aN0 lung cancer patients with brain metastasis, 
almost all patients were asymptomatic. Patients with EGFR mutations and brain 
metastasis were likely to be asymptomatic. Regardless of central nervous system 
symptoms, routine brain imaging seems warranted in all NSCLC patients, 
especially in areas where patients have a higher frequency of EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-018-1254-y
PMID: 29484515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]