---
reference_id: "PMID:9090382"
title: Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata is a peroxisomal protein targeting disease caused by a non-functional PTS2 receptor.
authors:
- Motley AM
- Hettema EH
- Hogenhout EM
- Brites P
- ten Asbroek AL
- Wijburg FA
- Baas F
- Heijmans HS
- Tabak HF
- Wanders RJ
- Distel B
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1038/ng0497-377
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata, Rhizomelic/genetics"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- Fibroblasts
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Peroxisomal Targeting Signal 2 Receptor
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata is a peroxisomal protein targeting disease caused by a non-functional PTS2 receptor.
**Authors:** Motley AM, Hettema EH, Hogenhout EM, Brites P, ten Asbroek AL, Wijburg FA, Baas F, Heijmans HS, Tabak HF, Wanders RJ, Distel B
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0497-377](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0497-377)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1997 Apr;15(4):377-80. doi: 10.1038/ng0497-377.

Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata is a peroxisomal protein targeting disease 
caused by a non-functional PTS2 receptor.

Motley AM(1), Hettema EH, Hogenhout EM, Brites P, ten Asbroek AL, Wijburg FA, 
Baas F, Heijmans HS, Tabak HF, Wanders RJ, Distel B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is an autosomal recessive disease 
characterized clinically by a disproportionately short stature primarily 
affecting the proximal parts of the extremities, typical dysmorphic facial 
appearance, congenital contractures and severe growth and mental retardation. 
Although some patients have single enzyme deficiencies, the majority of RCDP 
patients (86%) belong to a single complementation group (CG11, also known as 
complementation group I, Amsterdam nomenclature). Cells from CG11 show a tetrad 
of biochemical abnormalities: a deficiency of i) dihydroxyacetonephosphate 
acyltransferase, ii) alkyldihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase, iii) phytanic acid 
alpha-oxidation and iv) inability to import peroxisomal thiolase. These 
deficiencies indicate involvement of a component required for correct targeting 
of these peroxisomal proteins. Deficiencies in peroxisomal targeting are also 
found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae pex5 and pex7 mutants, which show differential 
protein import deficiencies corresponding to two peroxisomal targeting sequences 
(PTS1 and PTS2). These mutants lack their PTS1 and PTS2 receptors, respectively. 
Like S. cerevisiae pex cells, RCDP cells from CG11 cannot import a PTS2 reporter 
protein. Here we report the cloning of PEX7 encoding the human PTS2 receptor, 
based on its similarity to two yeast orthologues. All RCDP patients from CG11 
with detectable PEX7 mRNA were found to contain mutations in PEX7. A mutation 
resulting in C-terminal truncation of PEX7 cosegregates with the disease and 
expression of PEX7 in RCDP fibroblasts from CG11 rescues the PTS2 protein import 
deficiency. These findings prove that mutations in PEX7 cause RCDP, CG11.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0497-377
PMID: 9090382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]