---
reference_id: "PMID:20600464"
title: Genetic findings in schizophrenia patients related to alterations in the intracellular Ca-homeostasis.
authors:
- Giegling I
- Genius J
- Benninghoff J
- Rujescu D
journal: Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.06.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic findings in schizophrenia patients related to alterations in the intracellular Ca-homeostasis.
**Authors:** Giegling I, Genius J, Benninghoff J, Rujescu D
**Journal:** Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.06.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.06.018)

## Content

1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Dec 1;34(8):1375-80. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.06.018. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Genetic findings in schizophrenia patients related to alterations in the 
intracellular Ca-homeostasis.

Giegling I(1), Genius J, Benninghoff J, Rujescu D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular and Clinical Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Nußbaumstr. 7, 80336 Munich, Germany.

There is a relatively high genetic heritability of schizophrenia as shown by 
family, twin and adoption studies. A large number of hypotheses on the causes of 
schizophrenia occurred over time. In this review we focus on genetic findings 
related to potential alterations of intracellular Ca-homeostasis in association 
with schizophrenia. First, we provide evidence for the NMDA/glutamatergic theory 
of schizophrenia including calcium processes. We mainly focus on genes 
including: DAO (D-amino acid oxidase), DAOA (D-amino acid oxidase activator), 
DTNBP1 (Dysbindin 1, dystrobrevin-binding protein 1), NRG1 (Neuregulin 1), ERBB4 
(v-erb-a erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 4, avian), NOS1 (nitric 
oxide synthase 1, neuronal) and NRGN (Neurogranin). Furthermore, a gene coding 
for a calcium channel subunit (CACNA1C: calcium channel, voltage-dependent, L 
type, alpha 1C subunit) is discussed in the light of schizophrenia whereas 
genetic findings related to alterations in the intracellular Ca-homeostasis 
associated specifically with dopaminergic and serotonergic neurotransmission in 
schizophrenia are not herein closer reviewed. Taken together there is converging 
evidence for the contribution of genes potentially related to alterations in 
intracellular Ca-homeostasis to the risk of schizophrenia. Replications and 
functional studies will hopefully provide further insight into these genetic 
variants and the underlying processes.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.06.018
PMID: 20600464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]