---
reference_id: "PMID:24971490"
title: Human frataxin activates Fe-S cluster biosynthesis by facilitating sulfur transfer chemistry.
authors:
- Bridwell-Rabb J
- Fox NG
- Tsai CL
- Winn AM
- Barondeau DP
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1021/bi500532e
keywords:
- Cysteine/chemistry
- Humans
- "Iron-Binding Proteins/chemistry, physiology"
- "Iron-Sulfur Proteins/biosynthesis, chemistry, metabolism"
- "Membrane Transport Proteins/chemistry, physiology"
- Protein Binding/physiology
- Substrate Specificity/physiology
- "Sulfur/chemistry, metabolism"
- Frataxin
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Human frataxin activates Fe-S cluster biosynthesis by facilitating sulfur transfer chemistry.
**Authors:** Bridwell-Rabb J, Fox NG, Tsai CL, Winn AM, Barondeau DP
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi500532e](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi500532e)

## Content

1. Biochemistry. 2014 Aug 5;53(30):4904-13. doi: 10.1021/bi500532e. Epub 2014 Jul
 18.

Human frataxin activates Fe-S cluster biosynthesis by facilitating sulfur
transfer chemistry.

Bridwell-Rabb J(1), Fox NG, Tsai CL, Winn AM, Barondeau DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University , College Station, Texas 77842,
United States.

Iron-sulfur clusters are ubiquitous protein cofactors with critical cellular
functions. The mitochondrial Fe-S assembly complex, which consists of the
cysteine desulfurase NFS1 and its accessory protein (ISD11), the Fe-S assembly
protein (ISCU2), and frataxin (FXN), converts substrates l-cysteine, ferrous
iron, and electrons into Fe-S clusters. The physiological function of FXN has
received a tremendous amount of attention since the discovery that its loss is
directly linked to the neurodegenerative disease Friedreich's ataxia. Previous
in vitro results revealed a role for human FXN in activating the cysteine
desulfurase and Fe-S cluster biosynthesis activities of the Fe-S assembly
complex. Here we present radiolabeling experiments that indicate FXN accelerates
the accumulation of sulfur on ISCU2 and that the resulting persulfide species is
viable in the subsequent synthesis of Fe-S clusters. Additional mutagenesis,
enzyme kinetic, UV-visible, and circular dichroism spectroscopic studies suggest
conserved ISCU2 residue C104 is critical for FXN activation, whereas C35, C61,
and C104 are all essential for Fe-S cluster formation on the assembly complex.
These results cannot be fully explained by the hypothesis that FXN functions as
an iron donor for Fe-S cluster biosynthesis, and further support an allosteric
regulator role for FXN. Together, these results lead to an activation model in
which FXN accelerates persulfide formation on NFS1 and favors a helix-to-coil
interconversion on ISCU2 that facilitates the transfer of sulfur from NFS1 to
ISCU2 as an initial step in Fe-S cluster biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1021/bi500532e
PMCID: PMC4215901
PMID: 24971490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Sulfur is
a critical element
for all life forms and is found in a variety of protein cofactors,
including molybdopterins, lipoic acid, thiamin, biotin, and iron–sulfur
(Fe–S) clusters. Even though the functions of these cofactors
are well understood, mechanistic details about how sulfur is incorporated
into these biomolecules are just emerging.1,2 Bacteria,
archaea, and eukaryotic organelles use one or more of the ISC, NIF,
and SUF systems for the biosynthesis of Fe–S clusters, and
a common early step for these pathways is the PLP-dependent degradation
of l-cysteine to l-alanine by a cysteine desulfurase
and the generation of a cysteine desulfurase-bound persulfide species.
This activated sulfur is reductively cleaved by distinct acceptor
proteins for the biosynthesis of sulfur-containing cofactors and modification
of tRNA.1 Redox agents such as cysteine
and DTT (in vitro) can also release the terminal
sulfur of the persulfide in an often rate-determining step for the
cysteine desulfurase that produces hydrogen sulfide.3,4

Studies of the ISC Fe–S assembly system have yet to
identify
intermediates on the Fe–S assembly complex during cluster biosynthesis
or establish if sulfur is viably transferred from the cysteine desulfurase
to the scaffold protein before, after, or during iron incorporation.
The persulfide intermediate formed on Escherichia coli cysteine desulfurase IscS5 is at residue
C328 (equivalent to C381 in human NFS1), and the transfer of sulfur
to the scaffold protein IscU can be monitored by radiolabeling and
mass spectrometry; however, the persulfide (or polysulfide) species
that were bound to IscU did not appear to be viable in Fe–S
cluster formation.6−8 IscS C328 is present on a flexible loop that could
potentially traverse the ∼30 Å distance between an IscS
substrate–PLP adduct and conserved cysteine residues of the
scaffold IscU, C37, C63, and C106.9,10 Consistent
with this proposed flexibility, IscS C328 can form disulfide cross-links
with IscU residues C378 and C63;11 however, a role for IscU C63 in the stimulation
of sulfide production by IscS in the presence of reducing agents is
controversial.11−13 Proposals for which IscU residues act as sulfane
sulfur acceptors include C63,11 C106,14 either C37 or C63,10 and any of the three conserved cysteines.8 Experimental factors contributing to these different proposals include
changes in the binding affinities of IscU variants for IscS, the facile
reactivity of persulfide species with thiol-containing molecules,
and differences in experimental design such as bypassing IscS (chemical
reconstitution), using catalytic amounts of IscS, or using conditions
consistent with the IscS–IscU complex.

In eukaryotes,
recent evidence suggests Fe–S cluster biosynthesis
is catalyzed by an assembly complex that exists in at least two forms:
the mostly inactive SDU complex, which contains subunits NFS1, ISD11,
and ISCU2, and the activated SDUF complex, which additionally contains
frataxin (FXN).15,16 In humans, the 94 kDa homodimeric
cysteine desulfurase NFS1 (homologue of IscS)3,17 provides
sulfur for Fe–S cluster biosynthesis. ISD11 is a eukaryote-specific
protein that interacts with, stabilizes, and may activate NFS1.18−23 Cluster assembly is templated by the scaffold protein ISCU2 (homologue
of IscU), whereas FXN stimulates the cysteine desulfurase and Fe–S
cluster assembly reactions.15,24−26 Defects in FXN are linked to the neurodegenerative disease Friedreich’s
ataxia (FRDA),27,28 and FXN variants encoded by FRDA
missense mutations have a compromised ability to bind and activate
the Fe–S assembly complex.24,25

The
primary models for the role of FXN in Fe–S cluster biosynthesis
are as an iron donor and as an allosteric activator that participates
in sulfur transfer chemistry. We provide experiments to test this
second model. The ability of FXN to enhance the cysteine desulfurase
and Fe–S assembly activities implies that it is involved in
sulfur mobilization and/or transfer chemistry from the cysteine desulfurase
NFS1 to the scaffold protein ISCU2. A 35S radiolabeling
experiment using Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondria
revealed a NFS1 persulfide species under iron-depleted conditions
and radiolabeled ferredoxin under iron-replete conditions.23 However, few details about the eukaryotic sulfur
hand-off mechanism from NFS1 to ISCU2 (see Figure 1 for a model of the human NFS1–ISCU2 complex) and the
role of FXN in this process are known. One advantage of this experimental
system compared to the bacterial ISC systems is the significant rate
enhancement of the cysteine desulfurase reaction upon FXN binding.
Here we build upon this observation and present experiments that support
a model in which FXN stabilizes a conformation that both accelerates
the formation of persulfide on NFS1 and also interprotein sulfur transfer
from NFS1 to residue C104 on ISCU2 (equivalent to E. coli IscU C106) as an early step in Fe–S cluster biosynthesis.
Furthermore, we establish that the persulfide formed on ISCU2 in the
sulfur transfer reaction is viable in a subsequent Fe–S cluster
synthesis reaction, consistent with a sulfur-first mechanism.

Human NFS1–ISCU2
complex modeled from the crystal structure
of the analogous IscS–IscU complex (Protein Data Bank entry 3LVL). NFS1 subunits
are colored green and cyan, whereas ISCU2 is colored magenta.

Eight human ISCU2
cysteine variants (C96S, C35A, C35S, C61A, C61S, C104A, C104S, and
C35A/C61A) were created by QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis (Stratagene)
using a pET11a-ISCU2 plasmid template,15 and the mutation sites were confirmed by DNA sequencing (Gene Technologies
Lab at Texas A&M University). The resulting plasmids containing
ISCU2 with the desired mutations were transformed into BL21(DE3) cells
and grown at 37 °C until the OD600 reached 0.6. Protein
expression was induced at 16 °C with 0.5 mM IPTG, and the cells
were harvested 16 h later. The ISCU2 variants along with human NFS1-ISD11
(SD) and FXN were purified as previously described15 with the exception of adding 10% glycerol to the buffers
for the C61A and C35A/C61A variants.

A pET9a plasmid (Novagen)
encoding human ferredoxin (FDX, gift from J. Markley)29 was transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3)
cells and grown at 37 °C until the OD600 reached 0.6.
Expression was induced for 16 h with 0.4 mM IPTG, 1 mM cysteine, and
0.1 mg/mL ferric ammonium citrate. Cells were lysed by sonication,
and the supernatant was loaded onto an anion exchange column (26/20
POROS 50HQ, Applied Biosystems) and eluted with a linear gradient
from 0 to 1000 mM NaCl in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5). Fractions containing
FDX were further purified on a Sephacryl S100 (26/60, GE Healthcare)
size exclusion column equilibrated in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4) and 50 mM
NaCl. Apo FDX was prepared by precipitating the purified FDX with
a 10% trichloroacetic acid solution containing 10 mM DTT on ice for
10 min, after which the sample was pelleted by centrifugation.30 The protein pellet was rinsed twice with water
and then resuspended anaerobically (mBraun glovebox, ∼12 °C
and <1 ppm oxygen) in buffer A [50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and 250 mM
NaCl].30 The protein concentration was
determined by the Bradford method for reconstituted FDX using an extinction
coefficient (ε280) of 2980 M–1 cm–1 for apo FDX.

Reaction
mixtures (30 μL) for monitoring sulfur transfer included 3 μM
SD, 9–120 μM ISCU2, buffer A, and either 0 or 9 μM
FXN. A similar experiment was performed in which FRDA FXN variants
N146K, Q148R, I154F, W155R, and R165C (each at 9 μM), which
were purified as previously described,24,25 were substituted
for native FXN. “Hot” l-cysteine (100 μM)
was prepared by adding 50 Ci/mmol [35S]cysteine (American
Radiolabeled Chemicals Inc.) to a 1 mM “cold” cysteine
stock solution. The hot l-cysteine was added to the samples
and reacted for 2 min at 37 °C, and the reactions were terminated
by centrifugation through a Micro Bio-Spin P-6 gel filtration column
(Bio-Rad). The spin column flow-through was combined with nonreducing
SDS–PAGE sample loading buffer and then loaded on a nonreducing
14% SDS–PAGE gel. The gel was dried on chromatography paper
in a gel-drying oven at 60 °C under vacuum before a 12 h exposure
to a phosphor screen. Incorporation of the 35S label was
visualized using a Phosphorimager (Typhoon Trio, GE Healthcare).

To test if the 35S radiolabel from the substrate l-cysteine can be transferred
to ISCU2 and then to the [2Fe-2S] cluster of FDX, a sample that contained
80 μM SD, 240 μM ISCU2, 240 μM FXN, and buffer A
in a total volume of 400 μL was prepared. The reaction was initiated
via the addition of 20 Ci/mmol l-[35S]cysteine
and allowed to proceed for 40 min anaerobically at 10 °C. The
sample was then loaded onto a 1 mL HisTrap HP column (GE Healthcare)
equilibrated in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 200 mM NaCl, and 5 mM imidazole
and eluted with a linear gradient from 5 to 500 mM imidazole. To evaluate
[35S]persulfide incorporation, 30 μL of each fraction
from the 1 mL HisTrap HP column was centrifuged through a Micro Bio-Spin
P-6 gel filtration column (Bio-Rad), combined with 8 μL of nonreducing
SDS gel loading dye, and the proteins were separated on a 14% SDS–PAGE
gel that was dried, exposed, and imaged as described above. Fractions
containing labeled NFS1 and ISCU2 were concentrated to 70 μL,
of which 20 μL was analyzed for SDUF complex formation using
a 6.5% native gel.15 The remaining 50 μL
of the radiolabeled SDUF complex was incubated anaerobically at 10
°C with 600 μM Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2, 160 μM l-cysteine, and 1 mM DTT for
1 h. After incubation, the excess reaction components were removed
using a Micro Bio-Spin P-6 column that was buffer exchanged into buffer
A. The material that flowed through the Bio-Spin P-6 column was incubated
with 200 μM apo FDX anaerobically at 10 °C for 1 h. The
sample was then loaded and eluted from a 1 mL HisTrap HP column as
described above, except that the absorbance was monitored at 405 nm
rather than 280 nm. The flow-through fractions corresponding to non-His-tagged
FDX were concentrated to a volume of 20 μL before being loaded
onto a nonreducing 6.5% native gel.

In a separate experiment,
we assessed the ability of reductants to cleave persulfide species
from the SDUF complex. Reaction mixtures (30 μL) that included
5 μM SD, 15 μM ISCU2, and 15 μM FXN (SDUF sample)
or just 15 μM ISCU2 were prepared in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) and
250 mM NaCl and reacted with 100 μM l-[35S]cysteine (described above) for 4 min at 14 °C. The samples
were then treated with 10 mM reductant (DTT, GSH, BME, or TCEP) for
1 min, and the reactions were terminated by centrifugation through
a Micro Bio-Spin P-6 gel filtration column (Bio-Rad). The spin column
flow-through was combined with nonreducing SDS–PAGE sample
loading buffer and then loaded on a nonreducing 14% SDS–PAGE
gel. The incorporation of the radiolabel was analyzed with a phosphorimager
as described above.

Protein titrations, monitored by cysteine desulfurase
activity measurements, were performed to determine the number of ISCU2
and FXN equivalents to overcome any loss of binding affinity for the
SDUF complex due to ISCU2 mutations. For the titration of ISCU2 variants,
the reactions were initiated with 100 μM l-cysteine
and included 0.5 μM SD, 2 mM DTT, 10 μM PLP, and buffer
A. Sulfide production was measured using a previously described methylene
blue assay.15,31,32 The concentration of the ISCU2 variant required to no longer change
or saturate the cysteine desulfurase activities of the SD complex
was determined to be 1.5 μM for native ISCU2, 1.5 μM for
the C35A and C104A variants, 5 μM for the C104S variant, 10
μM for the C35S variant, 15 μM for the C96S variant, 40
μM for the C61A and C61S variants, and 100 μM for the
C35A/C61A variant. Once the saturating amounts of the ISCU2 variants
had been determined, additional titrations were performed to determine
the concentration of FXN needed to maximize the activity of the respective
SDU complexes. The required FXN concentration was determined to be
1.5 μM for the native SDU complex, 2.5 μM for the SDUC96S complex, 15 μM for the SDUC104A complex,
25 μM for the SDUC104S complex, 40 μM for the
SDUC35A and SDUC35S complexes, 100 μM
for the SDUC61A and SDUC61S complexes, and 200
μM for the SDUC35A/C61A complex. The numbers of equivalents
(relative to the SD concentration) of the ISCU2 variants and FXN that
are required to form the different SDUF complexes are summarized in
Table 1. After the number of equivalents of
FXN needed to maximize the cysteine desulfurase activity had been
determined, additional equivalents of ISCU2 variants were added and
the cysteine desulfurase activity was measured. The cysteine desulfurase
activity did not further increase, confirming saturation of ISCU2
subunits in the SDUF complex.

Kinetics performed with 10 equiv
of Fe2+.

Calculated
by dividing the kcat for assays with iron
by kcat for assays without iron (provided
in Table S1 of the Supporting Information).

Reaction mixtures included 0.5
μM SD, 2 mM DTT, 10 μM PLP, buffer A, and a saturating
amount of the ISCU2 variant and FXN (determined above) under standard
conditions [in the presence or absence of 5 μM Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2]. The samples were incubated
in a glovebox for 30 min before initiation of the reaction with 12.5–1000
μM l-cysteine. The amount of sulfide generated was
quantified as previously described,15 and
the kcat values for the different ISCU2
variants were determined by fitting to the Michaelis–Menten
equation using KaleidaGraph (Synergy Software). The cysteine desulfurase
activities for the different SDU complexes were also determined in
triplicate using a physiological l-cysteine concentration
of 0.1 mM with 0.5 μM SD, 2 mM DTT, 10 μM PLP, buffer
A, and saturating amounts of the different ISCU2 variants (above).
Similar experiments were also performed with a saturating level of
FXN in the absence or presence of 5 μM Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2.

The Fe–S cluster
assembly activity was measured using a standard UV–visible
assay15 and also with a circular dichroism
(CD) assay. For the UV–visible assay, the reaction mixture
contained 8 μM SD, 5 mM DTT, 200 μM Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2, 100 μM l-cysteine,
and buffer A in a total volume of 0.2 mL. In addition, saturating
amounts of the ISCU2 variants with or without saturating amounts of
FXN were added to the assay mixture. Specifically, the SDUF complex
includes 24 μM ISCU2 and FXN. The SDUC35AF complex
includes 24 μM C35A ISCU2 and 640 μM FXN. The SDUC61AF complex includes 640 μM C61A and 1600 μM
FXN. The SDUC96SF complex includes 240 μM C96S and
40 μM FXN. The SDUC104AF complex includes 24 μM
C104A and 240 μM FXN. The ISCU2 variants were incubated for
1 h with 5 mM DTT in an anaerobic glovebox before addition of the
remaining reaction components in an anaerobic cuvette. The reactions
were initiated by injecting 100 μM l-cysteine with
a gastight syringe. Fe–S cluster formation was monitored at
456 nm and room temperature for 3000 s at 20 °C. Anaerobic CD-monitored
Fe–S cluster assembly assay mixtures contained 10 μM
SD, saturating amounts of ISCU2 variants and FXN, 200 μM Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2, 1 mM l-cysteine, and buffer A in a total volume of 0.4 mL. The reactions
were initiated with injection of 1 mM l-cysteine, and the
ellipticity was measured over the wavelength range of 300–600
nm for 60 min at 20 °C using a CD spectrometer (Chirascan).

Binding of FXN dramatically increases the cysteine
desulfurase and Fe–S cluster biosynthesis activities of the
SDU complex.15 To test the hypothesis that
FXN activation promotes the formation of persulfide species on ISCU2,
we monitored the transfer of radioactive sulfur from an l-[35S]cysteine substrate to ISCU2 in the presence of the
SD complex and the presence or absence of FXN (see Experimental Procedures). The samples were incubated with
the radiolabeled substrate; excess label was removed anaerobically
with a desalting column, and then the individual subunits of the SDU
or SDUF complexes were analyzed via nonreducing SDS–PAGE. Labeling
of both NFS1 and ISCU2 indicated the formation of a covalent adduct
[likely a persulfide species (see Discussion)] and was promoted by the addition of FXN (Figure 2). SDUF samples exhibited >3-fold larger amounts of label
on NFS1 and >2-fold larger amounts of label on ISCU2 than SDU samples
(Figure S1 of the Supporting Information). Next, the abilities of FRDA FXN variants were tested using the
same radiolabeling procedure. Samples of the SDU and SDUF complexes
were compared to SDUF samples containing the N146K, Q148R, I154F,
W155R, and R165C FRDA FXN variants (Figure 3). FXN variants exhibited 50–70% lower levels of label incorporation
on NFS1 and 45–76% lower levels of label incorporation on ISCU2
relative to the SDUF sample (Figure S2 of the Supporting Information). Interestingly, the R165C FXN variant
was also labeled in this experiment, although this is probably a nonphysiological
event. Together, these results indicate an increased level of covalent
incorporation of sulfur into both NFS1 and ISCU2 in the presence of FXN and that this level
of incorporation is reduced for FRDA FXN variants. Alone, these data
do not distinguish if the FXN-dependent increase in the level of incorporation
of sulfur into ISCU2 is solely due to the promotion of the NFS1 cysteine
desulfurase activity or also to the acceleration of the transfer of
sulfur between NFS1 and ISCU2.

FXN enhances the accumulation of sulfur
on NFS1 and ISCU2. Radiolabeled
sulfur incorporation from l-[35S]cysteine substrate
on NFS1 with subsequent transfer to ISCU2 was monitored by nonreducing
SDS–PAGE separation coupled to phosphor imaging. Samples of
3 μM SD and 3–40 equiv of ISCU2 (relative to SD) without
FXN and with 9 μM FXN were incubated for 2 min with l-[35S]cysteine and analyzed by SDS–PAGE. The first
three lanes correspond to SD, ISCU2, or FXN controls that were incubated
for 2 min with l-[35S]cysteine.

FRDA variants decrease the level of accumulation of sulfur
on NFS1
and ISCU2. SD (3 μM) was reacted with 9 μM ISCU2 and 9
μM FXN variants (native FXN, N146K, Q148R, I154F, W155R, and
R165C) and analyzed as described in the legend of Figure 2.

To establish that
the 35S-labeled ISCU2 can function
as a Fe–S cluster assembly intermediate, we tracked the progression
of the 35S label in a two-step reaction equivalent. In
the first step, we generated a 35S-labeled form of ISCU2
by adding l-[35S]cysteine, 3 equiv of ISCU2, and
3 equiv of FXN to SD that contained NFS1 labeled with a six-His tag
(see Experimental Procedures). The reaction
mixture was applied to a HisTrap column and washed with buffer, and
proteins associated with six-His NFS1 were eluted with imidazole (Figure 4A). The 35S label was primarily in bound
fractions (fractions 11–13) and corresponded to both radiolabeled
NFS1 and radiolabeled ISCU2 (Figure 4B). Very
little radioactivity was associated with the noncomplexed flow-through
fractions (Figure 4B, bottom). A nonreducing
native gel showed that the radioactivity was linked to a slower migrating
band (Figure 4C) that had been previously shown15 to be associated with the SDUF complex (Figure
S3 of the Supporting Information).

35S radiolabel tracking from a cysteine substrate to
a Fe–S cluster on FDX. The SDUF complex was reacted (see Experimental Procedures) with l-[35S]cysteine and (A) fractionated with a HisTrap column. (B) Fractions
were analyzed for protein (top) and radioactivity (bottom) via nonreducing
14% SDS–PAGE, and (C) fractions 11–13 corresponding
to [35S]SDUF were combined and analyzed for protein (top)
and radioactivity (bottom) via nonreducing 6.5% Native PAGE. [35S]SDUF was then reacted with iron (see Experimental
Procedures) and (D) fractionated on a second HisTrap column.
(E) Fractions 2 and 3 from panel D were combined and analyzed via
native PAGE in the absence (labeled 1) and presence (labeled 2) of
DTT. Standards SD, ISCU2, FXN, FDX, and SDU were included for the
native gels; proteins were stained using Coomassie blue, and radioactivity
was detected using a Phosphorimager. The absorbance (blue) at 280
(A) or 405 nm (D) was overlaid with a 5 to 500 mM imidazole gradient
(pink).

In the second step, we followed
the progression of the 35S label onto the human ferredoxin
(FDX) substrate. The purified 35S-labeled SDUF complex
(fractions 11–13 from the HisTrap
column) was incubated with ferrous iron, nonradioactive l-cysteine, and DTT as an electron source, which are conditions consistent
with synthesizing Fe–S clusters (see below). Notably, a separate
experiment established that the radiolabel on ISCU2, but not NFS1,
is resistant to DTT-dependent cleavage (Figure S4 of the Supporting Information). A desalting column was
used to remove any generated sulfide and unreacted substrates, and
the sample was incubated with apo-FDX and loaded onto a HisTrap column,
washed with buffer, and eluted with imidazole. Flow-through fractions
2 and 3 had absorbance at 405 nm (Figure 4D),
consistent with a Fe–S cluster, as did fractions 11–13,
which likely represents NFS1-bound PLP and potentially some untransferred
Fe–S clusters associated with the SDUF complex. Bands in flow-through
fractions 2 and 3 migrated similarly on a native gel as a Fe–S
cluster-containing FDX standard (Figure 4E,
top). Moreover, phosphorimaging analysis revealed the 35S label was associated with the same fractions and was resistant
to the addition of DTT, consistent with an FDX-bound Fe–S cluster
(Figure 4E, bottom). Thus, these data support
a persulfide-bound ISCU2 species being a viable intermediate and the
terminal sulfur of the persulfide species being converted into the
inorganic sulfide of a Fe–S cluster during cofactor biosynthesis.

To identify the roles of the nonconserved cysteine
(C96) and the conserved cysteines (C35, C61, and C104) in ISCU2, we
introduced substitutions of the cysteines to serine and alanine, which
has no ability to function in sulfur transfer or cluster ligation.
As these surface substitutions could affect the binding affinity of
ISCU2 and/or FXN for the SD complex, we first determined the ability
of these ISCU2 variants to form the SDUF complex using native gel
analysis. Native gel analysis revealed that the SDUC35AF, SDUC61AF, and SDUC104AF complexes formed
the slower-migrating band that is characteristic of the four-protein
SDUF complex (Figure S3 of the Supporting Information).15 Interestingly, the slower-migrating
band was less defined for the C61A variant, suggesting this variant
may have a larger impact on binding to the complex. Second, we determined
the number of equivalents of ISCU2 and FXN that maximized changes
in cysteine desulfurase activity as measured by a methylene blue assay
(Table 1). In particular, C61 variants appeared
to have the largest effect on binding, whereas mutations affecting
C104 and the nonconserved C96 had modest binding effects. Saturating
amounts of ISCU2 and FXN were used for subsequent activity measurements
to remove complications from changes in binding affinity due to the
incorporated ISCU2 mutations.

Next, we determined that assembly
complexes that included C104 variants behaved differently than the
other cysteine variants with respect to sulfur transfer chemistry.
In the absence of FXN, all of the SDU variant complexes exhibited
typical unstimulated cysteine desulfurase activities that were similar
to the native SDU complex (Figure 5A). In the
presence of FXN, the SDUC96SF, SDUC35AF, SDUC35SF, and SDUC61AF complexes exhibited kcat values similar (9.4–11.1 min–1) to the value of 10.7 min–1 for
the native SDUF complex (Table 1). The kcat values for the SDUC61SF (5.9
min–1) and SDUC35A/C61AF (6.4 min–1) complexes were slightly compromised compared to
that of the native SDUF complex, whereas complexes for the C104A (0.9
min–1) and C104S (2.7 min–1) variants
were more similar to samples that lacked FXN (0.8 min–1). Previously, iron was found to further increase the FXN-based stimulation
of the cysteine desulfurase activity and was observed for reactions
with the activated SDUF but not unactivated SDU Fe–S assembly
complex.15 Here, all SDUF variant complexes,
except those that include substitutions at C104, exhibited this characteristic
iron-based stimulation of the cysteine desulfurase activity (Figure 5B and Table 1). The loss
of Fe-based stimulation under standard conditions was not simply due
to the increased concentrations of the ISCU2 variant or FXN, which
may compete for iron binding, but was specifically associated with
the C104 variants. For example, the SDUC61AF complex exhibited
the most dramatic Fe-based stimulation (Figure 5B and Table 1) and includes ∼27-fold
more ISCU2 and ∼7-fold more FXN than the SDUC104AF complex. CD spectroscopy established that the C104 substitutions
did not impart a global change in the ISCU2 structure (Figure S5 of
the Supporting Information). These data
revealed that mutations at position C104, but not the other cysteine
residues, were compromised in their FXN-associated stimulation of
the cysteine desulfurase reaction and suggested a link between ISCU2
residue C104 and FXN activation.

Cysteine desulfurase activity for Fe–S
assembly complexes
containing different ISCU2 variants. (A) Cysteine desulfurase activity
for SDU complexes with different ISCU2 variants compared to the native
SDUF complex. The double mutant is ISCU2 variant C35A/C61A. (B) Cysteine
desulfurase activity for the SDUF complexes with saturating amounts
of FXN and the ISCU2 variant in the presence and absence of 5 μM
Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2. Error
bars in panels A and B are for three independent measurements. All
assays were performed with 100 μM l-cysteine.

We then measured Fe–S cluster formation
rates for ISCU2 variants using two different spectroscopic assays.
First, the increase in absorbance at 456 nm was used as a measure
of the Fe–S cluster assembly activity. The ISCU2 C96S variant,
which eliminates the nonconserved cysteine, had a Fe–S cluster
assembly activity similar to those of the native SDU and SDUF complexes
(Figure 6A), indicating that this residue is
essential neither for cluster ligation nor for the mechanism of cluster
formation. In contrast, SDUF complexes containing the C35A, C61A,
and C104A ISCU2 variants had a dramatic loss of activity relative
to that of native SDUF (Figure 6A). Interestingly,
there is a low-level increase in absorbance for samples containing
the C35A, C61A, and C104A variants or native ISCU2 in the absence
of FXN, which would be consistent with sulfide- and iron-dependent
solution chemistry. Consistent with this idea, the samples with the
lowest cysteine desulfurase activity, SDU and SDUC104AF
(Table 1), exhibited the slowest increase in
absorbance (Figure 6A). Second, we monitored
the 300–600 nm region under DTT-free conditions using circular
dichroism (CD) spectroscopy, which is sensitive to the PLP cofactor
and to protein-bound Fe–S cluster species. A CD signal with
maxima at 330 and 430 nm developed for samples of SDUF containing
the native ISCU2 or the C96S variant (Figure 6B) that appeared to be similar to the [2Fe-2S] cluster bound to bacterial
IscU.14 The development of this Fe–S
signal was absent for assembly complex samples that contained the
C35A, C61A, and C104A variants. These samples had a CD signal with
a maximum at 420 nm, but this signal is due to the PLP cofactor of
NFS1 rather than an Fe–S cluster. Together, these data indicate
that C96 is not required for the Fe–S assembly reaction and
that all three conserved cysteines (C35, C61, and C104) are essential
for enzymatic Fe–S cluster formation.

Conserved cysteines are
critical for Fe–S cluster formation
on ISCU2. (A) Fe–S cluster formation was monitored at 456 nm
by UV–vis spectroscopy as a function of time. (B) Fe–S
cluster formation was monitored by CD spectroscopy, and the 60 min
time point is displayed. Samples include SDU (yellow), SDUF (red),
SDUC35AF (blue), SDUC61AF (black) SDUC96SF (purple), and SDUC104AF (green).

Despite many excellent studies of the ISC
biosynthetic system,
details of the sulfur transfer mechanism and intermediates in Fe–S
cluster biosynthesis remain unknown. Currently, three minimalist models
have been proposed for Fe–S cluster biosynthesis that differ
in the order of substrate addition: the sulfur-first, iron-first,
and persulfide radical mechanisms.33,34 In the sulfur-first
mechanism, the first step is the transfer of the terminal sulfur of
a persulfide species onto the cysteine desulfurase (bacterial IscS
or human NFS1) to a cysteine residue on the scaffold protein (bacterial
IscU or human ISCU2).35 This is followed,
in an undefined order, by a second sulfur transfer event, the incorporation
of two ferrous irons, and the addition of two electrons to form a
[2Fe-2S]2+ intermediate. This model is supported by the
ability of E. coli and Azotobacter vinelandii IscS to transfer sulfur from l-cysteine to form persulfide-
or polysulfide-bound IscU.6,7 In the Fe-first mechanism,
ferrous iron binds to the cysteines of the scaffold protein as an
initiating step in forming the [2Fe-2S]2+ intermediate.
This model is supported by the ability of Thermotoga maritima IscU to bind ferrous iron36 and by the
stabilization of Haemophilus influenza IscU by binding
of divalent metal ions such as zinc to the active site cysteines.37,38 The third mechanism is based on the observation that reduced ferredoxin
is oxidized upon the addition of cysteine to IscS and postulates the
presence of a stable persulfide radical intermediate that is transferred
to IscU and then further reduced by iron to generate a ferric sulfide
intermediate.34,39 However, there is no direct experimental
support for the persulfide radical species, and neither the persulfide-bound
nor iron-bound IscU has been demonstrated to be a viable intermediate
in Fe–S cluster biosynthesis.

Even less is known about
the sulfur transfer mechanism in eukaryotes,
and two additional components (FXN and ISD11) are implicated in modulating
the cysteine desulfurase activity of NFS1.15,18−23 Here our objective was to directly test if a persulfide generated
on ISCU2 is viable in forming a Fe–S cluster. Our strategy
was to track the 35S radiolabel from a cysteine substrate
to a persulfide species on the human Fe–S cluster assembly
complex and then show that this persulfide species is viable in forming
an iron–sulfur cluster on an acceptor protein. The addition
of an l-[35S]cysteine substrate to the SDUF complex
resulted in comigration of the radiolabel with both NFS1 and ISCU2
on a nonreducing SDS–PAGE gel (Figure 4), consistent with the formation of a covalent adduct. As the labeling
experiments were performed under anaerobic conditions and the excess
label was removed before the analysis via SDS–PAGE, the covalent
adduct is likely a persulfide species rather than a cystine formed
by oxidative disulfide bond formation between a radiolabeled cysteine
and a cysteine residue on NFS1 or ISCU2. This SDUF complex with a
persulfide-bound ISCU2 subunit was reacted with iron, DTT as an electron
source, and additional nonradiolabeled cysteine. The sample was desalted
to remove any generated sulfide or unreacted reagents and then incubated
with apo-FDX. Our results indicate the radiolabel was transferred
to FDX and was associated with a DTT-resistant species that absorbs
at 405 nm (Figure 4), which is consistent with
a Fe–S cluster. We favor persulfide reduction on ISCU2 after
iron addition to generate the inorganic sulfide of the [2Fe-2S] cluster,
consistent with the resistance of the persulfide species on ISCU2
to reductants in the absence of iron (Figure S4 of the Supporting Information). Together, these experiments
show that a persulfide species can be formed on the ISCU2 subunit
of the SDUF complex and that this species has properties consistent
with an intermediate in a sulfur-first mechanism for eukaryotic Fe–S
cluster biosynthesis.

In addition, these results help clarify
the role of FXN in Fe–S
cluster biosynthesis. FXN accelerates both the in vitro cysteine desulfurase (sulfide production) and Fe–S assembly
(increase in 456 nm absorbance) activities of the human SDU complex.15 FXN could stimulate the rates of these reactions
by inducing a conformational change that (i) increases active site
accessibility, (ii) enhances a step associated with PLP chemistry
on NFS1, and/or (iii) facilitates interprotein transfer of sulfur
from NFS1 to ISCU2. The first mechanism suggests a FXN-dependent increase
in active site accessibility that allows DTT to intercept a catalytic
intermediate and generate sulfide, which could drive nonenzymatic
assembly of Fe–S species.40 This
explanation would predict that the rates of the cysteine desulfurase
and Fe–S assembly reactions should be correlated, which is
generally true for SDUF samples containing FRDA variants24,25 and for the SDUC104AF complex that exhibits activities
similar to those of samples that lack FXN. However, this is not true
for the SDUC35AF and SDUC61AF complexes that
exhibit nativelike cysteine desulfurase activities (Table 1) but compromised Fe–S cluster assembly activities
(Figure 6). This suggests that the absorbance
assay is sensitive to enzymatic Fe–S cluster biosynthesis and
is not just a reflection of the cysteine desulfurase activity that
drives nonenzymatic Fe–S solution chemistry. A model in which
a FXN-induced conformational change increases active site accessibility
would also not explain the increase in the level of accumulation of
the radiolabel on ISCU2 (Figures 2 and 3) or the FXN depletion phenotype that results in
the loss of Fe–S cluster activity. Thus, these results indicate
a functional role for FXN in directly or indirectly facilitating sulfur
transfer chemistry that promotes Fe–S cluster biosynthesis.

FXN induces a SDU conformational change that stimulates the in vitro cysteine desulfurase and Fe–S cluster activities
by affecting the PLP chemistry on NFS1. This second mechanism, involving
enhancement of persulfide formation on NFS1, suggests that FXN but
not FRDA FXN variants should increase the level of accumulation of
the 35S radiolabel on NFS1, which was observed (Figures 2 and 3). This result is also
consistent with the effects of FXN on the KM for l-cysteine in the cysteine desulfurase reaction,15,26 and with recent results in S. cerevisiae.41 To be consistent with this mechanism, the C104
ISCU2 variants, which are compromised in FXN-based stimulation, would
need to adopt a conformation different from that of either native
ISCU2 or the other ISCU2 variants. We disfavor this hypothesis as
the exclusive cause of the loss of activation due to the conservative
nature of the C104 substitutions, the similar CD spectra for ISCU2
and C104 variants in the absence of SD and FXN (Figure S5 of the Supporting Information), and the lack of correlation
between the cysteine desulfurase activation level and relative ISCU2
and FXN binding to the SD complex [C35 and C61 variants exhibit weaker
binding but greater activation than C104 (Table 1)], which is an indirect reporter of conformational state. Nevertheless,
these results further support a role for FXN as an allosteric activator
that affects the PLP-dependent cysteine desulfurase chemistry on NFS1.

FXN may also function in facilitating the transfer of sulfur from
NFS1 to ISCU2. The third mechanism, involving FXN-dependent acceleration
of interprotein sulfur transfer, is more difficult to separate from
acceleration of a rate-limiting formation of a persulfide on NFS1,
despite the increase in the level of accumulation of the 35S radiolabel on ISCU2 (Figure 2). However,
we also observe a correlation between ISCU2 residue C104 and FXN-based
activation. This effect could be explained by FXN-mediated sulfur
transfer to C104, which then partitions between rapid DTT cleavage
that enhances the cysteine desulfurase activity and intraprotein sulfur
transfer that prepares ISCU2 for iron incorporation and another round
of sulfur transfer. We excluded an alternate activation model, the
transfer of sulfur from NFS1 to ISCU2 residue C35 or C61 followed
by intraprotein transfer of sulfur to C104 and reductive cleavage
to generate sulfide, by determining that the C35A/C61A variant exhibited
a kcat for the cysteine desulfurase reaction
that was more similar to that of native ISCU2 than to those of the
C104 variants (Table 1). Thus, we favor a model
in which C104 acts as a primary rather than secondary sulfur acceptor,
consistent with conclusions from a bacterial ISC system,14 and this sulfur species partitions in our assays
between being intercepted and reductively cleaved to produce sulfide
(cysteine desulfurase assay), functioning as an intermediate in Fe–S
cluster formation (Fe–S biosynthesis assay) on the assembly
complex. Taken together, these data are consistent with a role for
FXN in accelerating both the formation of persulfide on NFS1 and interprotein
sulfur transfer to ISCU2.

Accumulating evidence suggests FXN
functions at the sulfur transfer
step in eukaryotic Fe–S cluster biosynthesis,15,26,41 and that this sulfur transfer
reaction initiates Fe–S cluster biosynthesis (Figure 4). Moreover, these FXN-dependent effects cannot
be explained by the iron donor hypothesis and are consistent with
the loss of Fe–S enzyme activity phenotype upon FXN depletion.
We propose that a key aspect of the FXN-based activation of the cysteine
desulfurase and Fe–S biosynthesis reactions revolves around
the conformation of the C-terminal α-helix of ISCU2 (Figure 7). We propose an equilibrium mixture between nonfunctional
(helix) and functional (coil) conformational states of this α-helix
and that FXN functions as an allosteric activator by binding and stabilizing
the coil conformation. This proposal is reminiscent of the different
conformations for the C-terminal helix in the Aquifex aeolicus IscU crystal structure,42 and the mixture
of ordered and disordered states proposed for E. coli IscU by the Markley group.43,44 More specifically,
we suggest this conformational change is responsible for the enhanced
PLP-dependent chemistry on NFS1 and may also facilitate the transfer
of sulfur from NFS1 C381 to ISCU2 C104 as an initiating step in Fe–S
cluster biosynthesis. Finally, we hypothesize that iron binds to the
activated (coil) conformation of the SDU complex and is incorporated
into the active site after the transfer of sulfur from NFS1 to ISCU2
residue C104, consistent with the link between C104 and the iron-based
stimulation in the cysteine desulfurase activity (Table 1). Future experiments will focus on testing and expanding
upon this model with the ultimate goal of developing new strategies
for treating FRDA.

Cartoon model of FXN activation of the Fe–S assembly
complex.
(A) SDU complexes exist as an equilibrium mixture between a stable
inactive (helix) and less stable active (coil) conformation. (B) FXN
binds to the coil conformation for the C-terminal helix and shifts
the equilibrium from the inactive to active form. (C) NFS1 reacts
with l-cysteine to form a persulfide species on residue C381.
(D) Sulfur is transferred from NFS1 to ISCU2 residue C104. (E) Addition
of the remaining substrates results in [2Fe-2S] cluster formation
on ISCU2. (F) The Fe–S cluster is transferred to an apo target,
and the active SDUF assembly complex is re-formed. This last step
may involve subunit dissociation and/or chaperone proteins.
