---
reference_id: "PMID:15625620"
title: Mutations that cause osteoglophonic dysplasia define novel roles for FGFR1 in bone elongation.
authors:
- White KE
- Cabral JM
- Davis SI
- Fishburn T
- Evans WE
- Ichikawa S
- Fields J
- Yu X
- Shaw NJ
- McLellan NJ
- McKeown C
- Fitzpatrick D
- Yu K
- Ornitz DM
- Econs MJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/427956
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Face/abnormalities
- Humans
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Maxillofacial Development/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
- Skull/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations that cause osteoglophonic dysplasia define novel roles for FGFR1 in bone elongation.
**Authors:** White KE, Cabral JM, Davis SI, Fishburn T, Evans WE, Ichikawa S, Fields J, Yu X, Shaw NJ, McLellan NJ, McKeown C, Fitzpatrick D, Yu K, Ornitz DM, Econs MJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/427956](https://doi.org/10.1086/427956)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Feb;76(2):361-7. doi: 10.1086/427956. Epub 2004 Dec 28.

Mutations that cause osteoglophonic dysplasia define novel roles for FGFR1 in 
bone elongation.

White KE(1), Cabral JM, Davis SI, Fishburn T, Evans WE, Ichikawa S, Fields J, Yu 
X, Shaw NJ, McLellan NJ, McKeown C, Fitzpatrick D, Yu K, Ornitz DM, Econs MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Activating mutations in the genes for fibroblast growth factor receptors 1-3 
(FGFR1-3) are responsible for a diverse group of skeletal disorders. In general, 
mutations in FGFR1 and FGFR2 cause the majority of syndromes involving 
craniosynostosis, whereas the dwarfing syndromes are largely associated with 
FGFR3 mutations. Osteoglophonic dysplasia (OD) is a "crossover" disorder that 
has skeletal phenotypes associated with FGFR1, FGFR2, and FGFR3 mutations. 
Indeed, patients with OD present with craniosynostosis, prominent supraorbital 
ridge, and depressed nasal bridge, as well as the rhizomelic dwarfism and 
nonossifying bone lesions that are characteristic of the disorder. We 
demonstrate here that OD is caused by missense mutations in highly conserved 
residues comprising the ligand-binding and transmembrane domains of FGFR1, thus 
defining novel roles for this receptor as a negative regulator of long-bone 
growth.

DOI: 10.1086/427956
PMCID: PMC1196382
PMID: 15625620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]