---
reference_id: "PMID:33150395"
title: Long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for late-infantile Krabbe disease.
authors:
- Yoon IC
- Bascou NA
- Poe MD
- Szabolcs P
- Escolar ML
journal: Blood
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2020005477
keywords:
- "Brain/growth & development, physiopathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cognition
- Female
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Language Development
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/physiopathology, therapy"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for late-infantile Krabbe disease.
**Authors:** Yoon IC, Bascou NA, Poe MD, Szabolcs P, Escolar ML
**Journal:** Blood (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2020005477](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020005477)

## Content

1. Blood. 2021 Apr 1;137(13):1719-1730. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020005477.

Long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
for late-infantile Krabbe disease.

Yoon IC(1), Bascou NA(1), Poe MD(1), Szabolcs P(1), Escolar ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Program for the Study of Neurodevelopment in Rare Disorders, Department of 
Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

Krabbe disease is a rare neurodegenerative disorder caused by a deficiency in 
galactocerebrosidase. The only effective treatment is hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT). Approximately 85% of Krabbe disease cases are the 
infantile subtypes, among which ∼20% are late infantile. Prior studies have 
demonstrated that HSCT is effective for early-infantile patients (0-6 months of 
age) who undergo transplantation while asymptomatic, compared with those 
receiving transplants while symptomatic. However, no studies evaluated the 
efficacy of HSCT for late-infantile patients (6-36 months). In this prospective, 
longitudinal study, patients were evaluated at a single site according to a 
standardized protocol. Survival analysis was performed using the Kaplan-Meier 
method. Differences between groups were estimated using mixed regression models 
to account for within-person repeated measures. Nineteen late-infantile patients 
underwent HSCT (March 1997 to January 2020). Compared with untreated patients, 
transplant recipients had a longer survival probability and improved cognitive 
and language function. Gross and fine motor development were most affected, with 
variable results. Asymptomatic patients benefitted the most from 
transplantation, with normal to near-normal development in all domains and some 
gross motor delays. Among symptomatic patients, those with disease onset at >12 
months of age had better cognitive outcomes than untreated patients. Those with 
disease onset at ≤12 months were comparable to untreated patients. We found that 
HSCT prolonged the lifespan and improved the functional abilities of 
late-infantile patients with Krabbe disease, particularly those who underwent 
transplantation before onset of symptoms. In addition, our findings support 
prior literature that reclassifies late-infantile Krabbe disease to be symptom 
onset at 12 to 36 months of age.

© 2021 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020005477
PMCID: PMC8020262
PMID: 33150395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest-disclosure: M.L.E. and P.S. 
have financial interest in Forge Biologics, and M.L.E. is a part-time employee. 
The remaining authors declare no competing financial interests.