---
reference_id: "PMID:21196242"
title: Contribution of PKB/AKT signaling to thyroid cancer.
authors:
- Viglietto G
- Amodio N
- Malanga D
- Scrima M
- De Marco C
journal: Front Biosci (Landmark Ed)
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2741/3799
keywords:
- Apoptosis/physiology
- Carcinoma/physiopathology
- "Carcinoma, Papillary, Follicular/physiopathology"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Humans
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/metabolism
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/metabolism
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/drug effects, physiology"
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/physiology
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- ras Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of PKB/AKT signaling to thyroid cancer.
**Authors:** Viglietto G, Amodio N, Malanga D, Scrima M, De Marco C
**Journal:** Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2741/3799](https://doi.org/10.2741/3799)

## Content

1. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2011 Jan 1;16(4):1461-87. doi: 10.2741/3799.

Contribution of PKB/AKT signaling to thyroid cancer.

Viglietto G(1), Amodio N, Malanga D, Scrima M, De Marco C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Magna Graecia University of 
Catanzaro, University Campus Germaneto, Catanzaro 88100, Italy. 
viglietto@unicz.it

The family of serine/threonine kinases B/Akt (hereafter Akt) represents a 
central node in signalling pathways downstream of growth factors, cytokines, and 
other cellular stimuli. In mammalian cells the Akt family comprises three highly 
homologous members -known as Akt1/PKBalpha, Akt2/PKBbeta, and Akt3/PKBgamma- 
that regulate several processes including cell proliferation and survival, 
growth and response to nutrient availability, migration, tissue invasion and 
angiogenesis. Aberrant activation of Akt is involved in a variety of human 
cancers including those arising in the thyroid gland. Here, we review the 
contribution of Akt-dependent pathway in the proliferation of normal thyrocytes, 
the different pathogenic mechanisms underlying aberrant Akt signalling in 
thyroid malignancies as well as the relative roles of Akt substrates that most 
likely contribute to the onset and/or progression of thyroid cancer. Finally, we 
discuss the current therapeutic strategies targeting the components of the 
PI3K/Akt pathway in the context of thyroid malignancy.

DOI: 10.2741/3799
PMID: 21196242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]