---
reference_id: "PMID:29754261"
title: Compound heterozygous mutations in two different domains of ALDH18A1 do not affect the amino acid levels in a patient with hereditary spastic paraplegia.
authors:
- Steenhof M
- Kibæk M
- Larsen MJ
- Christensen M
- Lund AM
- Brusgaard K
- Hertz JM
journal: Neurogenetics
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10048-018-0547-7
keywords:
- "Aldehyde Dehydrogenase/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Amino Acids/blood, metabolism"
- Genetic Testing
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Protein Domains/genetics
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/blood, genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compound heterozygous mutations in two different domains of ALDH18A1 do not affect the amino acid levels in a patient with hereditary spastic paraplegia.
**Authors:** Steenhof M, Kibæk M, Larsen MJ, Christensen M, Lund AM, Brusgaard K, Hertz JM
**Journal:** Neurogenetics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10048-018-0547-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10048-018-0547-7)

## Content

1. Neurogenetics. 2018 Aug;19(3):145-149. doi: 10.1007/s10048-018-0547-7. Epub
2018  May 12.

Compound heterozygous mutations in two different domains of ALDH18A1 do not
affect the amino acid levels in a patient with hereditary spastic paraplegia.

Steenhof M(1)(2), Kibæk M(3), Larsen MJ(4)(5), Christensen M(6), Lund AM(7),
Brusgaard K(4)(5), Hertz JM(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, J. B. Winsløws
Vej 4, 5000, Odense C, Denmark. maria.steenhof@rsyd.dk.
(2)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark. maria.steenhof@rsyd.dk.
(3)H. C. Andersen Children's Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, J. B. Winsløws
Vej 4, 5000, Odense C, Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Departments of Paediatrics and
Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Mutations in ALDH18A1 can cause autosomal recessive and dominant hereditary
spastic paraplegia and autosomal recessive and dominant cutis laxa. ALDH18A1
encodes delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase (P5CS), which consists of two
domains, the glutamate 5-kinase (G5K) and the gamma-glutamyl phosphate reductase
(GR5P) domain. The location of the mutations in the gene has influence on
whether the amino acid levels are affected. Mutations affecting the G5K domain
have previously been found to cause reduced plasma levels of proline, citrulline
and arginine, whereas such effect is not seen with mutations affecting the GR5P
domain. We present a 19-year old male patient with autosomal recessive spastic
paraplegia and compound heterozygosity for two ALDH18A1 mutations, one in each
of the P5CS domains. This young man has spastic paraplegia with onset in
childhood and temporal lobe epilepsy, but normal levels of proline, ornithine
and arginine. To our knowledge, this is the first case with compound
heterozygous mutations affecting both P5CS domains, where levels of plasma amino
acids have been reported.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-018-0547-7
PMID: 29754261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
