---
reference_id: "PMID:33094597"
title: "Coexistence of Constitutional Mismatch Repair Deficiency syndrome and Lynch syndrome in a family of seven : MSH6 mutation and childhood colorectal cancer - a case series."
authors:
- Athanasiadis DI
- Athanasiadou KI
- Voulgaridou A
- Zafeiriou DI
- Kattamis A
- Christodoulou DK
- Papakonstantinou E
journal: Acta Gastroenterol Belg
year: '2020'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coexistence of Constitutional Mismatch Repair Deficiency syndrome and Lynch syndrome in a family of seven : MSH6 mutation and childhood colorectal cancer - a case series.
**Authors:** Athanasiadis DI, Athanasiadou KI, Voulgaridou A, Zafeiriou DI, Kattamis A, Christodoulou DK, Papakonstantinou E
**Journal:** Acta Gastroenterol Belg (2020)

## Content

1. Acta Gastroenterol Belg. 2020 Jul-Sep;83(3):479-481.

Coexistence of Constitutional Mismatch Repair Deficiency syndrome and Lynch 
syndrome in a family of seven : MSH6 mutation and childhood colorectal cancer - 
a case series.

Athanasiadis DI(#)(1), Athanasiadou KI(#)(2), Voulgaridou A(2), Zafeiriou DI(3), 
Kattamis A(4), Christodoulou DK(5), Papakonstantinou E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN, USA.
(2)Pediatric Oncology Department, Hippokration Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)1st Department of Pediatrics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
Hippokration Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Hematology/Oncology Unit, 1st Department of Pediatrics, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital and Medical School of 
Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: To present a case series of two fraternal twin girls who passed away 
from brain and colorectal cancers attributed to Constitutional Mismatch Repair 
Deficiency syndrome (CMMRD). A review of literature for CMMRD-related pediatric 
malignancies is also presented.
METHODS: The two girls were diagnosed with cancer at the age of 11 and 13 
respectively. The early onset of multiple malignancies in the family raised 
clinical suspicion for a potential genetic mutation. The presence of 
café-au-lait spots at clinical examination led to further investigations for 
neurofibromatosis.
RESULTS: Neurofibromatosis type 1 testing was negative in both children. Genetic 
analysis turned out positive for biallelic MSH6 mutations in the two girls, 
leading to CMMRD syndrome diagnosis. Both parents and two out of three alive 
siblings were diagnosed with Lynch syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: Colorectal cancer is a very rare finding in childhood and should 
raise suspicion for CMMRD syndrome and should be followed by regular screening.

© Acta Gastro-Enterologica Belgica.

PMID: 33094597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest