---
reference_id: "PMID:37497568"
title: Characterizing the autism spectrum phenotype in DYRK1A-related syndrome.
authors:
- Kurtz-Nelson EC
- Rea HM
- Petriceks AC
- Hudac CM
- Wang T
- Earl RK
- Bernier RA
- Eichler EE
- Neuhaus E
journal: Autism Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/aur.2995
keywords:
- Humans
- Autism Spectrum Disorder/complications
- "Autistic Disorder/genetics, complications"
- "Intellectual Disability/epidemiology, genetics, complications"
- Phenotype
- Social Behavior
- Dyrk Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterizing the autism spectrum phenotype in DYRK1A-related syndrome.
**Authors:** Kurtz-Nelson EC, Rea HM, Petriceks AC, Hudac CM, Wang T, Earl RK, Bernier RA, Eichler EE, Neuhaus E
**Journal:** Autism Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/aur.2995](https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.2995)

## Content

1. Autism Res. 2023 Aug;16(8):1488-1500. doi: 10.1002/aur.2995. Epub 2023 Jul 27.

Characterizing the autism spectrum phenotype in DYRK1A-related syndrome.

Kurtz-Nelson EC(1), Rea HM(2), Petriceks AC(2), Hudac CM(3)(4), Wang T(5)(6)(7), 
Earl RK(2), Bernier RA(2), Eichler EE(8)(9), Neuhaus E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South 
Carolina, USA.
(4)Carolina Autism and Neurodevelopment Research Center, University of South 
Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Center for Medical Genetics, School of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.
(6)Neuroscience Research Institute, Peking University; Key Laboratory for 
Neuroscience, Ministry of Education of China & National Health Commission of 
China, Beijing, China.
(7)Autism Research Center, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, 
China.
(8)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(9)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.

Likely gene-disrupting (LGD) variants in DYRK1A are causative of DYRK1A syndrome 
and associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability 
(ID). While many individuals with DYRK1A syndrome are diagnosed with ASD, they 
may present with a unique profile of ASD traits. We present a comprehensive 
characterization of the ASD profile in children and young adults with LGDs in 
DYRK1A. Individuals with LGD variants in DYRK1A (n = 29) were compared to 
children who had ASD with no known genetic cause, either with low nonverbal IQ 
(n = 14) or average or above nonverbal IQ (n = 41). ASD was assessed using the 
ADOS-2, ADI-R, SRS-2, SCQ, and RBS-R. Quantitative score comparisons were 
conducted, as were qualitative analyses of clinicians' behavioral observations. 
Diagnosis of ASD was confirmed in 85% and ID was confirmed in 89% of 
participants with DYRK1A syndrome. Individuals with DYRK1A syndrome showed 
broadly similar social communication behaviors to children with idiopathic ASD 
and below-average nonverbal IQ, with specific challenges noted in social 
reciprocity and nonverbal communication. Children with DYRK1A syndrome also 
showed high rates of sensory-seeking behaviors. Phenotypic characterization of 
individuals with DYRK1A syndrome may provide additional information on 
mechanisms contributing to co-occurring ASD and ID and contribute to the 
identification of genetic predictors of specific ASD traits.

© 2023 International Society for Autism Research and Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/aur.2995
PMCID: PMC10530559
PMID: 37497568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: E.E.E. is a scientific 
advisory board (SAB) member of Variant Bio, Inc. All other authors report no 
biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.