---
reference_id: "PMID:33619377"
title: Murine neonatal ketogenesis preserves mitochondrial energetics by preventing protein hyperacetylation.
authors:
- Arima Y
- Nakagawa Y
- Takeo T
- Ishida T
- Yamada T
- Hino S
- Nakao M
- Hanada S
- Umemoto T
- Suda T
- Sakuma T
- Yamamoto T
- Watanabe T
- Nagaoka K
- Tanaka Y
- Kawamura YK
- Tonami K
- Kurihara H
- Sato Y
- Yamagata K
- Nakamura T
- Araki S
- Yamamoto E
- Izumiya Y
- Sakamoto K
- Kaikita K
- Matsushita K
- Nishiyama K
- Nakagata N
- Tsujita K
journal: Nat Metab
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s42255-021-00342-6
keywords:
- 3-Hydroxybutyric Acid/metabolism
- Acetylation
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Energy Metabolism/physiology
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/genetics, metabolism"
- Ketone Bodies/biosynthesis
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred ICR"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Microvessels/physiology
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Mitochondrial Proteins/metabolism
- Oxygen Consumption
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Murine neonatal ketogenesis preserves mitochondrial energetics by preventing protein hyperacetylation.
**Authors:** Arima Y, Nakagawa Y, Takeo T, Ishida T, Yamada T, Hino S, Nakao M, Hanada S, Umemoto T, Suda T, Sakuma T, Yamamoto T, Watanabe T, Nagaoka K, Tanaka Y, Kawamura YK, Tonami K, Kurihara H, Sato Y, Yamagata K, Nakamura T, Araki S, Yamamoto E, Izumiya Y, Sakamoto K, Kaikita K, Matsushita K, Nishiyama K, Nakagata N, Tsujita K
**Journal:** Nat Metab (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42255-021-00342-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-021-00342-6)

## Content

1. Nat Metab. 2021 Feb;3(2):196-210. doi: 10.1038/s42255-021-00342-6. Epub 2021
Feb  18.

Murine neonatal ketogenesis preserves mitochondrial energetics by preventing
protein hyperacetylation.

Arima Y(#)(1)(2), Nakagawa Y(#)(3), Takeo T(#)(3), Ishida T(4), Yamada T(4),
Hino S(5), Nakao M(5), Hanada S(6), Umemoto T(6), Suda T(6), Sakuma T(7),
Yamamoto T(7), Watanabe T(8), Nagaoka K(8), Tanaka Y(8), Kawamura YK(9)(10),
Tonami K(9), Kurihara H(9), Sato Y(11), Yamagata K(11)(12), Nakamura T(4)(13),
Araki S(4), Yamamoto E(4), Izumiya Y(4)(14), Sakamoto K(4), Kaikita K(4),
Matsushita K(4), Nishiyama K(6), Nakagata N(3), Tsujita K(4)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. arimay@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)International Research Center for Medical Sciences (IRCMS), Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan. arimay@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(3)Division of Reproductive Engineering, Center for Animal Resources and
Development (CARD), Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(5)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(6)International Research Center for Medical Sciences (IRCMS), Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(7)Division of Integrated Sciences for Life, Graduate School of Integrated
Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(9)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(11)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(12)Center for Metabolic Regulation of Healthy Aging (CMHA), Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(13)Department of Medical Information Science and Administration Planning,
Kumamoto University Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan.
(14)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Osaka City University Graduate School
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Ketone bodies are generated in the liver and allow for the maintenance of
systemic caloric and energy homeostasis during fasting and caloric restriction.
It has previously been demonstrated that neonatal ketogenesis is activated
independently of starvation. However, the role of ketogenesis during the
perinatal period remains unclear. Here, we show that neonatal ketogenesis plays
a protective role in mitochondrial function. We generated a mouse model of
insufficient ketogenesis by disrupting the rate-limiting
hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA synthase 2 enzyme gene (Hmgcs2). Hmgcs2 knockout (KO)
neonates develop microvesicular steatosis within a few days of birth. Electron
microscopic analysis and metabolite profiling indicate a restricted energy
production capacity and accumulation of acetyl-CoA in Hmgcs2 KO mice.
Furthermore, acetylome analysis of Hmgcs2 KO cells revealed enhanced acetylation
of mitochondrial proteins. These findings suggest that neonatal ketogenesis
protects the energy-producing capacity of mitochondria by preventing the
hyperacetylation of mitochondrial proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/s42255-021-00342-6
PMID: 33619377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
