---
reference_id: "PMID:36255854"
title: Characteristics of Corneal Endothelium in Axenfeld Rieger Spectrum.
authors:
- Achanta DSR
- Chaurasia S
- Mohamed A
- Barur SR
- Ramappa M
- Edward DP
journal: Cornea
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics of Corneal Endothelium in Axenfeld Rieger Spectrum.
**Authors:** Achanta DSR, Chaurasia S, Mohamed A, Barur SR, Ramappa M, Edward DP
**Journal:** Cornea (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICO.0000000000003163](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICO.0000000000003163)

## Content

1. Cornea. 2023 Oct 1;42(10):1216-1220. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003163. Epub 
2022 Oct 17.

Characteristics of Corneal Endothelium in Axenfeld Rieger Spectrum.

Achanta DSR(1)(2), Chaurasia S(1)(2)(3), Mohamed A(1)(4), Barur SR(3), Ramappa 
M(1)(2)(3), Edward DP(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Rare Eye Diseases and Ocular Genetics, L V Prasad Eye 
Institute, Hyderabad, India.
(2)Jasti V Ramanamma Children's Eye Care Center, L V Prasad Eye Institute, 
Hyderabad, India.
(3)The Cornea Institute, L V Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, India.
(4)Ophthalmic Biophysics, L V Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, India; and.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and Pathology, University of 
Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, IL.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to compare the corneal endothelial 
characteristics in Axenfeld anomaly (AXA), Rieger anomaly (RGA), and 
Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly/syndrome with age-matched healthy controls.
METHODS: This is a retrospective, comparative case-control study of 52 eyes of 
30 patients with AXA/RGA and AXA/S and 36 controls.
RESULTS: Median age at endothelial imaging was 21.5 years (interquartile range, 
13.8-33.3 years). In the study group, the mean endothelial cell density (ECD) 
was 2112.4 ± 78.5 cells/mm 2 , the mean cell area (MCA) was 526.9 ± 28.5 μm 2 , 
and the coefficient of variation of cell size was 41.2 ± 1.8%. The ECD was 
significantly (all, P < 0.0001) lower than controls, while MCA ( P < 0.0001), SD 
of cell size ( P < 0.0001), and maximum cell area ( P = 0.0007) were 
significantly higher than controls. Four eyes of 3 patients had guttae on 
slitlamp evaluation and endothelial imaging. There were no differences in the 
corneal endothelial characteristics among the clinical subtypes.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with AXA, RGA, and Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly/syndrome have 
lower ECD and increased MCA compared with normal eyes. The reduced ECD 
associated with inherent anterior segment alterations can predispose to the risk 
of postcataract surgery endothelial decompensation in these eyes. The 
association of guttae in some eyes needs further investigational studies.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003163
PMID: 36255854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest statement: The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to disclose.