---
reference_id: "PMID:35363810"
title: Effects of Guangzhou seasonal climate change on the development of Aedes albopictus and its susceptibility to DENV-2.
authors:
- Wu S
- He Y
- Wei Y
- Fan P
- Ni W
- Zhong D
- Zhou G
- Zheng X
journal: PLoS One
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0266128
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of Guangzhou seasonal climate change on the development of Aedes albopictus and its susceptibility to DENV-2.
**Authors:** Wu S, He Y, Wei Y, Fan P, Ni W, Zhong D, Zhou G, Zheng X
**Journal:** PLoS One (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0266128](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266128)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2022 Apr 1;17(4):e0266128. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0266128. 
eCollection 2022.

Effects of Guangzhou seasonal climate change on the development of Aedes 
albopictus and its susceptibility to DENV-2.

Wu S(1), He Y(1), Wei Y(1), Fan P(1), Ni W(1), Zhong D(2), Zhou G(2), Zheng 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology, School of Public Health, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Program in Public Health, College of Health Sciences, University of 
California, Irvine, CA, United States of America.

The susceptibility of Asian tiger mosquitoes to DENV-2 in different seasons was 
observed in simulated field environments as a reference to design dengue fever 
control strategies in Guangzhou. The life table experiments of mosquitoes in 
four seasons were carried out in the field. The susceptibility of Ae. albopictus 
to dengue virus was observed in both environments in Guangzhou in summer and 
winter. Ae. albopictus was infected with dengue virus by oral feeding. On day 7 
and 14 after infection, the viral load in the head, ovary, and midgut of the 
mosquito was detected using real-time fluorescent quantitative PCR. 
Immune-associated gene expression in infected mosquitoes was performed using 
quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase PCR. The hatching rate and pupation 
rate of Ae. albopictus larvae in different seasons differed significantly. The 
winter hatching rate of larvae was lower than that in summer, and the incubation 
time was longer than in summer. In the winter field environment, Ae. albopictus 
still underwent basic growth and development processes. Mosquitoes in the 
simulated field environment were more susceptible to DENV-2 than those in the 
simulated laboratory environment. In the midgut, viral RNA levels on day 7 in 
summer were higher than those on day 7 in winter (F = 14.459, P = 0.01); ovarian 
viral RNA levels on day 7 in summer were higher than those on day 7 in winter (F 
= 8.656, P < 0.001), but there was no significant difference in the viral load 
at other time points (P > 0.05). Dicer-2 mRNA expression on day 7 in winter was 
4.071 times than that on day 7 in summer: the viral load and Dicer-2 expression 
correlated moderately. Ae. albopictus could still develop and transmit dengue 
virus in winter in Guangzhou. Mosquitoes under simulated field conditions were 
more susceptible to DENV-2 than those under simulated laboratory conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0266128
PMCID: PMC8975156
PMID: 35363810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.