---
reference_id: "PMID:25998441"
title: "Thickness of the bony otic capsule: etiopathogenetic perspectives on superior canal dehiscence syndrome."
authors:
- Park JH
- Kang SI
- Choi HS
- Lee SY
- Kim JS
- Koo JW
journal: Audiol Neurootol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1159/000371810
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Bone Development
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Labyrinth Diseases/diagnostic imaging, embryology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Organ Size
- Semicircular Canals/diagnostic imaging
- Temporal Bone/diagnostic imaging
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thickness of the bony otic capsule: etiopathogenetic perspectives on superior canal dehiscence syndrome.
**Authors:** Park JH, Kang SI, Choi HS, Lee SY, Kim JS, Koo JW
**Journal:** Audiol Neurootol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000371810](https://doi.org/10.1159/000371810)

## Content

1. Audiol Neurootol. 2015;20(4):243-50. doi: 10.1159/000371810. Epub 2015 May 12.

Thickness of the bony otic capsule: etiopathogenetic perspectives on superior 
canal dehiscence syndrome.

Park JH(1), Kang SI, Choi HS, Lee SY, Kim JS, Koo JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Dongguk University 
Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, South Korea.

The etiology of superior canal dehiscence (SCD) is controversial. An 
embryological perspective suggests that SCD may occur through the failure of 
postnatal bone formation over the superior semicircular canal (SC), whereas an 
acquired theory suggests that trauma or pressure from the overlying temporal 
lobe could break or gradually thin the SC. We infer the etiology of SCD by 
comparing the thickness of the bony otic capsule of the unaffected side of SCD 
patients with that of non-SCD participants. Twelve SCD patients (13 SCD ears and 
11 normal ears) and 34 age-matched controls (68 ears) were included. The control 
group was subdivided into an aerated group (49 ears) and a nonaerated group (19 
ears), as defined by the presence of air cells above the SC. A high-resolution 
temporal bone CT was performed in all participants. The thicknesses of the SC, 
horizontal canal (HC) and posterior canal (PC) of the unaffected ears of SCD 
patients were compared with those of the controls. The SC of the unaffected side 
in the SCD group (n = 11, 0.41 ± 0.23 mm) was significantly thinner than the one 
in the control group (n = 68, 0.64 ± 0.21 mm, p = 0.002). The HC and PC were 
also thinner in the SCD group (n = 24, 0.58 ± 0.11 and 1.39 ± 0.31 mm, 
respectively) than in the controls (0.70 ± 0.08 and 1.61 ± 0.32 mm; p < 0.0001 
and p = 0.005, respectively). The SC, HC and PC thicknesses were also compared 
between the aerated and nonaerated ears within the control group. The SC was 
significantly thicker in the aerated group (0.73 ± 0.14 mm) than in the 
nonaerated group (0.60 ± 0.23 mm; p = 0.046); however, no significant difference 
was observed for the HC and PC thickness (aerated group, n = 49, 0.72 ± 0.07 and 
1.67 ± 0.34 mm; nonaerated group, n = 19, 0.70 ± 0.09 and 1.59 ± 0.34 mm; p = 
0.350 and p = 0.428, respectively). The bony otic capsule was significantly 
thinner in the SCD patients than in the controls. However, even within 
unaffected individuals, SCs lacking overlying air cells were also thinner than 
those with overlying air cells. These results suggest that both embryological 
and acquired factors affect the occurrence of SCD.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000371810
PMID: 25998441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]