---
reference_id: "PMID:30626246"
title: "Comprehensive treatment in severe dengue during preterm and term labor: could tocolysis be useful?"
authors:
- Escobar MF
- Mora BL
- Cedano JA
- Loaiza S
- Rosso F
journal: J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/14767058.2018.1554044
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive treatment in severe dengue during preterm and term labor: could tocolysis be useful?
**Authors:** Escobar MF, Mora BL, Cedano JA, Loaiza S, Rosso F
**Journal:** J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14767058.2018.1554044](https://doi.org/10.1080/14767058.2018.1554044)

## Content

1. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2020 Jul;33(14):2445-2450. doi: 
10.1080/14767058.2018.1554044. Epub 2019 Jan 9.

Comprehensive treatment in severe dengue during preterm and term labor: could 
tocolysis be useful?

Escobar MF(1), Mora BL(2), Cedano JA(2), Loaiza S(2), Rosso F(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)High Complexity Obstetric Unit, Fundación Valle Del Lili, Cali, Colombia.
(2)Clinical Research Center, Fundación Valle Del Lili, Cali, Colombia.
(3)Infectious Diseases Service, Fundación Valle Del Lili, Cali, Colombia.

Objective: There is lack of data on the management of severe dengue infection 
during labor. The objective of this study was to describe our experience in the 
management of preterm and term labor of pregnant patients with severe dengue 
infection and thrombocytopenia.Materials and methods: We describe patients with 
dengue infection confirmed by dengue serology or NS1 antigen in Cali, Colombia. 
All of the patients had warning or severity signs for dengue and initiated 
labor, either term or preterm, during their hospital stay. All had 
thrombocytopenia at the moment labor started. Therefore, we treated them with 
support management, including intravenous fluids and a tocolytic agent (either 
atosiban, magnesium sulfate or nifedipine). Tocolytics aimed to stop 
contractions until platelets were in a safe range previous to delivery. 
Platelets transfusions were performed if the count was less than 10,000 cells/ml 
and active bleeding was present. The primary outcome we evaluated was postpartum 
hemorrhage (defined as a loss of >500 ml following a vaginal delivery or 
>1000 ml after cesarean section) or maternal and neonatal morbidity and 
mortality.Results: We present a total of six pregnant women. The median platelet 
count 24 h previous to delivery was 94,000 cells/ml and after tocolysis was 
132,500 cells/ml. Two patients suffered postpartum hemorrhage despite the 
management. Only one woman required platelet transfusion. No maternal or newborn 
mortality were present. Three patients were diagnosed with preeclampsia. Four 
patients had delivery via cesarean section. Five out of six newborns required 
hospitalization, three of them due to neonatal respiratory distress 
syndrome.Conclusion: Comprehensive treatment including fluids resuscitation and 
uterine inhibition in pregnant women with severe dengue in preterm or term labor 
could be useful. More clinical studies are required to evaluate the benefit of 
this intervention in tropical countries.Brief rationale: We present an original 
research article and literature review entitled "Comprehensive treatment in 
severe dengue during preterm and term labor: could tocolysis be useful?". Our 
article describes the clinical manifestation, laboratory findings, complications 
and management provided to a group of six patients that presented to the 
hospital with acute dengue virus infection and initiated labor while viremic and 
thrombocytopenic in this study.In the present study, we found that most of our 
patients (5 out of 6), presented with signs of severe dengue fever and all of 
the patients had warning signs. In this population, we decided to provide 
support treatment and tocolytic agents to these patients with the aim of 
delaying labor to allow platelet count to rise, thus reducing the odds of 
hemorrhagic complications. We concluded that although tocolysis is not regularly 
used in patients with dengue fever, our results suggest that our protocol could 
benefit pregnant patients with thrombocytopenia due to dengue; however, 
prospective studies which determine the safety and effectiveness of our 
intervention are needed.

DOI: 10.1080/14767058.2018.1554044
PMID: 30626246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]