---
reference_id: "PMID:11974501"
title: "[Ten clues to the histopathologic diagnosis of infectious skin diseases]."
authors:
- Zelger B
journal: Pathologe
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/s00292-001-0505-1
keywords:
- Animals
- Bites and Stings/pathology
- "Dermatomycoses/classification, pathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Necrosis
- Pathology/methods
- "Skin Diseases, Bacterial/classification, pathology"
- "Skin Diseases, Infectious/pathology"
- Spiders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Ten clues to the histopathologic diagnosis of infectious skin diseases].
**Authors:** Zelger B
**Journal:** Pathologe (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00292-001-0505-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00292-001-0505-1)

## Content

1. Pathologe. 2002 Jan;23(1):38-45. doi: 10.1007/s00292-001-0505-1.

[Ten clues to the histopathologic diagnosis of infectious skin diseases].

[Article in German]

Zelger B(1).

Author information:
(1)Universitätsklinik für Dermatologie und Venerologie, Universität Innsbruck,
Innsbruck. Bernhard.Zelger@uibk.ac.at

Specific diagnoses of infectious skin diseases can be established in
dermatopathology by several methods: by algorithms based on pattern analysis, by
differential diagnosis of clinicopathologically similar disorders, by attention
to pitfalls, by exceptions to the rules and finally, very elegantly by clues.
Ten clues to specific diagnoses of infectious skin diseases which are of
importance in routine practice are presented. Clue 1: Features of an
angiocentric angiodestructive lymphoma in the centre of a wedge-shaped necrotic
insect bite reaction are a clue to a bite by a spider. Clue 2: Parakeratosis
with spiky imprints on the surface above features of an insect bite reaction are
a clue to scabies. Clue 3: A faintly eosinophilic section of a skin specimen
with prominent fibrin thrombi and extravasated erythrocytes are a clue to a
septic fungal vasculitis. Clue 4: Infectious agents in association with
otherwise typical features of leukocytoclastic vasculitis are a clue to septic
vasculitis. Clue 5: Steel-grey nuclei with marginated nucleoplasm of
keratinocytes are a clue to the diagnosis of early infection by herpes virus.
Clue 6: Owleye-like cells are a clue to infection by cytomegalovirus. Clue 7:
Detection of Entamoeba histolytica in perianal and perineal ulcers are a clue to
amebiasis. Clue 8: Round-oval to rectangular spaces within the stratum spinosum
of the epidermis are a clue to larva migrans. Clue 9: Macrophages and plasma
cells in association with otherwise typical features of pityriasis lichenoides
are a clue to secondary syphilis. Clue 10: A lichenoid infiltrate of lymphocytes
and plasma cells are a clue to acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans.

DOI: 10.1007/s00292-001-0505-1
PMID: 11974501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
