---
reference_id: PMID:40108711
title: "Genotype and cardiac outcome in patients with cardiocutaneous syndrome (Naxos disease variant: Carvajal syndrome)."
authors:
- Binfadel M
- Aleem MU
- Alhabdan M
- Alruwaili N
- AlHassnan Z
- Vriz O
- Tulbah S
- Albert-Brotons DC
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03612-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Child
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Retrospective Studies
- Genotype
- Hair Diseases/genetics
- Adolescent
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- Saudi Arabia
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/genetics"
- Cardiomyopathies/genetics
- Infant
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/genetics"
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/genetics"
- Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype and cardiac outcome in patients with cardiocutaneous syndrome (Naxos disease variant: Carvajal syndrome).
**Authors:** Binfadel M, Aleem MU, Alhabdan M, Alruwaili N, AlHassnan Z, Vriz O, Tulbah S, Albert-Brotons DC
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03612-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03612-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Mar 19;20(1):137. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03612-8.

Genotype and cardiac outcome in patients with cardiocutaneous syndrome (Naxos
disease variant: Carvajal syndrome).

Binfadel M(#)(1), Aleem MU(#)(2), Alhabdan M(3), Alruwaili N(4), AlHassnan Z(5),
Vriz O(6), Tulbah S(7), Albert-Brotons DC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Heart Center, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital & Research Center, 11211, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. mbinfadhle@gmail.com.
(2)College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, 11533, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Heart Center, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital & Research Center, 11211, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Clinical Research Department, Heart Center, King Faisal Specialist Hospital &
Research Center, 11211, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Genetic Department, Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, 11211,
Riyadh, King, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Friuli Centrale,
33100, San Daniele, Udiene, Italy.
(7)Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomic Medicine, King
Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, 11211, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Naxos disease variant (Carvajal syndrome) is a cardiocutaneous
genetic disease caused by Plakoglobin and Desmoplakin gene mutation, and usually
manifests with woolly hair, palmoplantar keratoderma, and cardiomyopathy, and
are found to have a high risk for uncontrolled arrhythmia.
METHODS: An observational retrospective cohort study was conducted at King
Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, a tertiary
care hospital, which included 10 Saudi pediatric patients with clinical
manifestations that indicate Naxos disease variant. The medical records of the
patients were analyzed such as Echocardiography parameters (for ventricular
function assessment), electrocardiography (ECG), 24-h Holter (for arrhythmias),
and genetic analysis results were collected to confirm the medical diagnosis.
RESULT: We report 10 Saudi pediatric patients with Naxos disease variant who
presented with severe dilated cardiomyopathy manifestation. All the patients had
woolly hair, and half had palmoplantar keratoderma. They all had severely
dilated and depressed left ventricular systolic function, and nine of them also
had depressed right ventricular systolic function. Frequent premature
ventricular tachycardias (PVCs) were reported in nine cases, and an implantable
cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) was implanted in 3 patients for uncontrolled
ventricular tachycardias. Moreover, four patients underwent heart
transplantation, and three died suddenly while waiting for a heart donation.
Finally, in 8 patients, genetic studies were homozygous for Desmoplakin gene
(DSP), confirming the diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Naxos disease variant is accompanied by high risk of arrhythmia and
sudden cardiac deaths, so family members of proband need an extensive genetic
workup for identification of gene carriers for counseling, especially in our
Arab countries where consanguineous marriage is common. Moreover, hair and skin
phenotypes in a child should alert for signs of cardiomyopathy manifestation.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03612-8
PMCID: PMC11924745
PMID: 40108711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: This study has been approved by the Research Ethics
Committee-Research Advisory Council (RAC), Riyadh (RAC #2211178). Consent for
publication: Verbal informed consent was obtained from the legal guardians of
all patients (to submit any details needed, including family pedigrees).
Competing interests: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
