---
reference_id: "PMID:36939732"
title: "Drug-based cardiovascular prevention in patients with Marfan Syndrome: a systematic review."
authors:
- Pavasini R
- Sanguettoli F
- Deserio MA
- Bianchi N
- Zanarelli L
- Fabbri G
- Tonet E
- Passarini G
- Serenelli M
- Campo G
journal: Minerva Cardiol Angiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.23736/S2724-5683.23.06184-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug-based cardiovascular prevention in patients with Marfan Syndrome: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Pavasini R, Sanguettoli F, Deserio MA, Bianchi N, Zanarelli L, Fabbri G, Tonet E, Passarini G, Serenelli M, Campo G
**Journal:** Minerva Cardiol Angiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S2724-5683.23.06184-7](https://doi.org/10.23736/S2724-5683.23.06184-7)

## Content

1. Minerva Cardiol Angiol. 2023 Dec;71(6):611-621. doi: 
10.23736/S2724-5683.23.06184-7. Epub 2023 Mar 20.

Drug-based cardiovascular prevention in patients with Marfan Syndrome: a 
systematic review.

Pavasini R(1), Sanguettoli F(1), Deserio MA(1), Bianchi N(1), Zanarelli L(1), 
Fabbri G(1), Tonet E(1), Passarini G(1), Serenelli M(1), Campo G(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Cardiology, University Hospital of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(2)Unit of Cardiology, University Hospital of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy - 
giulia.bugani@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Marfan Syndrome (MFS) is a rare and complex genetic disorder 
associated with increased aortic growth and aortic disease. The effectiveness of 
cardiovascular medical therapies aiming to slow down aortic growth has been 
tested in several trials, particularly beta-blockers and angiotensin receptor 
blockers, however showing conflicting results.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: We conducted a systematic review on PubMed (Medline), 
Cochrane library, Google Scholar, and Biomed Central databases between January 
and February 2022. We selected relevant articles focusing on patients with MFS 
treated with beta-blockers, angiotensin receptors blockers, or both, and 
reporting data on the effect of the drugs on 1) slowing down aortic dilatation; 
2) the reduction of aortic complication (aortic dissection, mortality, aortic 
surgery); and with a 3) follow-up length of at least two years. A total of 16 
studies were selected.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: Beta-blockers remain the mainstay of therapy as they have 
proven to slow aortic enlargement. Angiotensin receptor blockers are a useful 
alternative and with proven benefit as an add-on therapy to limit aortic growth. 
Neither beta-blockers, nor angiotensin receptor blockers have shown meaningful 
results on clinical aortic endpoints.
CONCLUSIONS: The current evidence of pharmacological treatment for MFS patients 
is conflicting due to the lack of large, randomized clinical trials with 
adequate follow-up studies and homogeneous age grouping. Beta-blockers and 
angiotensin receptor blockers are the only available treatments to reduce aortic 
growth. A recently published patient-level meta-analysis confirmed that 
angiotensin receptor blockers and beta-blockers have a similar effect on 
reducing the rate of increase of the aortic root Z score, used singularly or as 
add-on therapy. Considering the current evidence on new features related with 
MFS (such as mitral annular disjunction - MAD) bearing a potential additional 
increased arrhythmic risk, it is of paramount importance to establish the role 
of beta-blockers and angiotensin receptor blockers in clinical endpoints of this 
population as well.

DOI: 10.23736/S2724-5683.23.06184-7
PMID: 36939732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]