---
reference_id: "PMID:30855285"
title: Pitfalls in the interpretation of the cosyntropin stimulation test for the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency.
authors:
- Burgos N
- Ghayee HK
- Singh-Ospina N
journal: Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000473
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pitfalls in the interpretation of the cosyntropin stimulation test for the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency.
**Authors:** Burgos N, Ghayee HK, Singh-Ospina N
**Journal:** Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MED.0000000000000473](https://doi.org/10.1097/MED.0000000000000473)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2019 Jun;26(3):139-145. doi: 
10.1097/MED.0000000000000473.

Pitfalls in the interpretation of the cosyntropin stimulation test for the 
diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency.

Burgos N(1), Ghayee HK(2)(3), Singh-Ospina N(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Department, VA Caribbean Healthcare System, San Juan, 
Puerto Rico.
(2)Division Of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Malcom Randall VA Medical 
Center.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, & Metabolism, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Adrenal insufficiency is a rare disease characterized by 
cortisol deficiency. The evaluation of patients suspected of having adrenal 
insufficiency can be challenging because of the rarity of the disease and 
limitations in the biochemical assessment of the cortisol status by either basal 
or dynamic testing [adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test]. Prompt 
and adequate diagnosis is of paramount importance to avoid adverse outcomes. We 
aimed to summarize the recent developments in the conduction and interpretation 
of the ACTH stimulation test for the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency.
RECENT FINDINGS: The ACTH stimulation test is commonly performed in patients 
suspected of having adrenal insufficiency when the basal serum cortisol levels 
are inconclusive. Recent literature has evaluated the impact of technical 
aspects such as time of the day the test is performed, type of assay and sample 
source used for cortisol measurement on the clinical value of this test, as well 
as the feasibility of reliable low dose ACTH testing.
SUMMARY: Clinicians evaluating patients with suspected adrenal insufficiency 
should take into consideration the clinical presentation (likelihood of adrenal 
insufficiency before testing) when interpreting the results of the ACTH 
stimulation test and be aware of clinical and technical factors that can affect 
cortisol values and diagnostic accuracy of this test.

DOI: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000473
PMID: 30855285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]