---
reference_id: "PMID:40480277"
title: Prenatal Diagnosis and 10-Year Follow-up of Type-II Generalized Arterial Calcification of the Infancy.
authors:
- De Luca D
- Laux D
- Regiroli G
- Benachi A
- Vivanti AJ
journal: Am J Perinatol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1055/a-2628-9607
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vascular Calcification/genetics, diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/genetics"
- Mutation
- Pregnancy
- Male
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- "Hypertension/etiology, drug therapy"
- "Diseases in Twins/genetics, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal Diagnosis and 10-Year Follow-up of Type-II Generalized Arterial Calcification of the Infancy.
**Authors:** De Luca D, Laux D, Regiroli G, Benachi A, Vivanti AJ
**Journal:** Am J Perinatol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2628-9607](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2628-9607)

## Content

1. Am J Perinatol. 2026 Feb;43(3):430-432. doi: 10.1055/a-2628-9607. Epub 2025
Jun  6.

Prenatal Diagnosis and 10-Year Follow-up of Type-II Generalized Arterial
Calcification of the Infancy.

De Luca D(1)(2), Laux D(3), Regiroli G(1)(2), Benachi A(4), Vivanti AJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics and Neonatal Critical Care, APHP-Paris Saclay
University, Paris, France.
(2)Physiopathology and Therapeutic Innovation Unit-INSERM U999, Paris Saclay
University, Paris, France.
(3)Pediatric Cardiology, Marie Lannelongue Medical Centre, Paris, France.
(4)Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, APHP-Paris Saclay University, Paris,
France.

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is an ultra-rare,
potentially life-threatening disorder of the mineralization of which
obstetricians and neonatologists shall be aware.This study aimed to describe
twins with ATP binding cassette subfamily C member-6 (ABCC6) mutations leading
to type II-GACI phenotype in one of them, their multidisciplinary management,
and very long-term (10 years) follow-up.One of the twins had typical
calcifications in the ascending aorta and the aortic arc, leading to severe
neonatal arterial hypertension needing anti-hypertensive treatment. A therapy
with bisphosphonates was also provided for 3 weeks with the disappearance of
calcifications and resolution of hypertension. Ten-year follow-up was completely
normal. Patients were found to carry a heterozygous mutation of ABCC6.Type
II-GACI can be managed with a multi-disciplinary approach and good long-term
outcomes despite the occurrence of severe neonatal arterial hypertension. · GACI
is an ultra-rare, potentially life-threatening disorder of the mineralization
processes of which obstetricians and neonatologists shall be aware.. · Type
II-GACI can be managed with a multi-disciplinary approach and good long-term
outcome despite the occurrence of severe neonatal arterial hypertension.. ·
Type-II GACI phenotype can be similar to that of pseudoxanthoma elasticum due to
heterozygous mutations of the ABCC6 gene.. · Further research is needed to
understand the pathobiology of this disorder..

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2628-9607
PMID: 40480277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.
