---
reference_id: "PMID:37827202"
title: Deciphering disease signatures and molecular targets in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome through transcriptome and miRNome sequencing of dermal fibroblasts.
authors:
- Chiarelli N
- Cinquina V
- Martini P
- Bertini V
- Zoppi N
- Venturini M
- Ritelli M
- Colombi M
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166915
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deciphering disease signatures and molecular targets in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome through transcriptome and miRNome sequencing of dermal fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Chiarelli N, Cinquina V, Martini P, Bertini V, Zoppi N, Venturini M, Ritelli M, Colombi M
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166915](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166915)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2024 Jan;1870(1):166915. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166915. Epub 2023 Oct 10.

Deciphering disease signatures and molecular targets in vascular Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome through transcriptome and miRNome sequencing of dermal fibroblasts.

Chiarelli N(1), Cinquina V(2), Martini P(2), Bertini V(2), Zoppi N(2), Venturini 
M(3), Ritelli M(2), Colombi M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational 
Medicine, University of Brescia, 25121 Brescia, Italy. Electronic address: 
nicola.chiarelli@unibs.it.
(2)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational 
Medicine, University of Brescia, 25121 Brescia, Italy.
(3)Division of Dermatology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, 
Spedali Civili University Hospital Brescia, 25121 Brescia, Italy.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a severe connective tissue disorder 
caused by dominant mutations in the COL3A1 gene encoding type III collagen 
(COLLIII). COLLIII is primarily found in blood vessels and hollow organs, and 
its deficiency leads to soft connective tissues fragility, resulting in 
life-threatening arterial and organ ruptures. There are no current targeted 
therapies available. Although the disease usually results from COLLIII 
misfolding due to triple helix structure disruption, the underlying 
pathomechanisms are largely unknown. To address this knowledge gap, we performed 
a comprehensive transcriptome analysis using RNA- and miRNA-seq on a large 
cohort of dermal fibroblasts from vEDS patients and healthy donors. Our 
investigation revealed an intricate interplay between proteostasis 
abnormalities, inefficient endoplasmic reticulum stress response, and 
compromised autophagy, which may significantly impact the molecular pathology. 
We also present the first detailed miRNAs expression profile in patient cells, 
demonstrating that several aberrantly expressed miRNAs can disrupt critical 
cellular functions involved in vEDS pathophysiology, such as autophagy, 
proteostasis, and mTOR signaling. Target prediction and regulatory networks 
analyses suggested potential interactions among miRNAs, lncRNAs, and candidate 
target genes linked to extracellular matrix organization and autophagy-lysosome 
pathway. Our results highlight the importance of understanding the functional 
role of ncRNAs in vEDS pathogenesis, shedding light on possible miRNAs and 
lncRNAs signatures and their functional implications for dysregulated pathways 
related to disease. Deciphering this complex molecular network of RNA 
interactions may yield additional evidence for potential disease biomolecules 
and targets, assisting in the design of effective patient treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166915
PMID: 37827202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.