---
reference_id: "PMID:28541499"
title: "Hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias: executive summary of a consensus document from the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) and ESC Council on Hypertension, endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), Asia-Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS), and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Estimulación Cardíaca y Electrofisiología (SOLEACE)."
authors:
- Lip GYH
- Coca A
- Kahan T
- Boriani G
- Manolis AS
- Olsen MH
- Oto A
- Potpara TS
- Steffel J
- Marín F
- de Oliveira Figueiredo MJ
- de Simone G
- Tzou WS
- En Chiang C
- Williams B
journal: Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/ehjcvp/pvx019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias: executive summary of a consensus document from the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) and ESC Council on Hypertension, endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), Asia-Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS), and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Estimulación Cardíaca y Electrofisiología (SOLEACE).
**Authors:** Lip GYH, Coca A, Kahan T, Boriani G, Manolis AS, Olsen MH, Oto A, Potpara TS, Steffel J, Marín F, de Oliveira Figueiredo MJ, de Simone G, Tzou WS, En Chiang C, Williams B
**Journal:** Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ehjcvp/pvx019](https://doi.org/10.1093/ehjcvp/pvx019)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother. 2017 Oct 1;3(4):235-250. doi: 
10.1093/ehjcvp/pvx019.

Hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias: executive summary of a consensus document 
from the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) and ESC Council on 
Hypertension, endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), Asia-Pacific Heart 
Rhythm Society (APHRS), and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Estimulación Cardíaca y 
Electrofisiología (SOLEACE).

Lip GYH(1)(2), Coca A(3), Kahan T(4)(5), Boriani G(6), Manolis AS(7), Olsen 
MH(8), Oto A(9), Potpara TS(10), Steffel J(11), Marín F(12), de Oliveira 
Figueiredo MJ(13), de Simone G(14), Tzou WS(15), En Chiang C(16), Williams 
B(17).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University of Birmingham, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg Thrombosis Research Unit, Aalborg 
University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Hypertension and Vascular Risk Unit, 
Hospital Clínic (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, c/Villarroel 170, 08036 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Karolinska Institutet, Danderyd Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Danderyd University Hospital Corp, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(6)Cardiology Department, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Policlinico di 
Modena, Modena, Italy.
(7)Third Department of Cardiology, Athens University School of Medicine, Athens, 
Greece.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Holbaek Hospital and Centre for 
Individualized Medicine in Arterial Diseases (CIMA), Odense University Hospital, 
University of Southern Denmark, Denmark.
(9)Department of Cardiology, Memorial Ankara Hospital; Heart and Health 
Foundation of Turkey, Ankara, Turkey.
(10)School of Medicine, Cardiology Clinic, Belgrade University, Clinical Centre 
of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(11)Department of Cardiology, Electrophysiology and Cardiac Devices, University 
Heart Center Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(12)Department of Cardiology, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, 
IMIB-Arrixaca, University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain.
(13)Cardiology Department, Medicine School, State University of Campinas, Sao 
Paulo, Brazil.
(14)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Federico II University 
Hospital, via S. Pansini 5, bld # 1, Napoli 80131, Italy.
(15)Division of Cardiology, Cardiac Electrophysiology, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(16)Division of Cardiology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei Veterans 
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(17)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College London, UK.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother. 2017 Oct 1;3(4):251-252. doi: 
10.1093/ehjcvp/pvx022.

Hypertension (HTN) is a common cardiovascular risk factor leading to heart 
failure (HF), coronary artery disease (CAD), stroke, peripheral artery disease 
and chronic renal failure. Hypertensive heart disease can manifest as many types 
of cardiac arrhythmias, most commonly being atrial fibrillation (AF). Both 
supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias may occur in HTN patients, 
especially in those with left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), CAD, or HF. In 
addition, high doses of thiazide diuretics commonly used to treat HTN, may 
result in electrolyte abnormalities (e.g. hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia), 
contributing further to arrhythmias, while effective blood pressure control may 
prevent the development of the arrhythmias such as AF. In recognizing this close 
relationship between HTN and arrhythmias, the European Heart Rhythm Association 
(EHRA) and the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Council on Hypertension 
convened a Task Force, with representation from the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), 
Asia-Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS), and Sociedad Latinoamericana de 
Estimulación Cardíaca y Electrofisiología (SOLEACE), with the remit of 
comprehensively reviewing the available evidence and publishing a joint 
consensus document on HTN and cardiac arrhythmias, and providing up-to-date 
consensus recommendations for use in clinical practice. The ultimate judgment on 
the care of a specific patient must be made by the healthcare provider and the 
patient in light of all individual factors presented. This is an executive 
summary of the full document co-published by EHRA in EP-Europace.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. 
© The Author 2017. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ehjcvp/pvx019
PMID: 28541499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]