---
reference_id: "PMID:3306755"
title: Familial Mediterranean fever (recurrent hereditary polyserositis) in Arabs--a study of 175 patients and review of the literature.
authors:
- Barakat MH
- Karnik AM
- Majeed HW
- el-Sobki NI
- Fenech FF
journal: Q J Med
year: '1986'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean fever (recurrent hereditary polyserositis) in Arabs--a study of 175 patients and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Barakat MH, Karnik AM, Majeed HW, el-Sobki NI, Fenech FF
**Journal:** Q J Med (1986)

## Content

1. Q J Med. 1986 Sep;60(233):837-47.

Familial Mediterranean fever (recurrent hereditary polyserositis) in Arabs--a 
study of 175 patients and review of the literature.

Barakat MH, Karnik AM, Majeed HW, el-Sobki NI, Fenech FF.

Recurrent hereditary polyserositis (RHP) or familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) 
is a chronic inherited illness of obscure aetiology. The disease is 
characterised by paroxysmal attacks of fever, peritonitis, pleuritis or 
arthritis, and predominantly affects Sephardic Jews, Arabs, Turks and Armenians. 
In this study, we report our 11-year experience of 175 Arab patients with this 
disease. As with other ethnic groups, the most common manifestation (93.7 per 
cent) was peritonitis. Arthritis (33.7 per cent) and pleurisy (32 per cent) were 
next in frequency. Adult patients in this series unlike those in other ethnic 
groups, rarely presented with arthritis. Similarly rare were amyloidosis, 
rashes, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly or lymphadenopathy. The aetiology of this 
disease is not clear but we suspect that abnormalities in catecholamine 
metabolism may be a factor in the pathogenesis.

PMID: 3306755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]