---
reference_id: "PMID:15868465"
title: Molecular mechanism of dominant expression in 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency.
authors:
- Baumgartner MR
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-005-7054-3
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
- Gene Dosage
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/enzymology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mechanism of dominant expression in 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency.
**Authors:** Baumgartner MR
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-005-7054-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-005-7054-3)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2005;28(3):301-9. doi: 10.1007/s10545-005-7054-3.

Molecular mechanism of dominant expression in 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase
deficiency.

Baumgartner MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism and Molecular Pediatrics, University Children's
Hospital Zürich, Switzerland. Matthias.Baumgartner@kispi.unizh.ch

Most enzyme deficiencies in humans are inherited as autosomal recessive traits.
The term dominant negative is applied to mutant alleles in which a mutant
protein interferes in one way or another with the function of the normal protein
being produced from the wild-type allele in a heterozygote. Such a dominant
negative effect usually involves homomeric or heteromeric proteins.
3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCC) is a heteromeric mitochondrial enzyme
comprised of biotin containing MCCalpha subunits and smaller MCCbeta subunits,
encoded by the genes MCCA and MCCB, respectively. Mutations in these genes cause
isolated MCC deficiency, an autosomal recessive disorder with a variable
phenotype ranging from severe neonatal to asymptomatic adult forms. Patients
with MCC deficiency have a characteristic organic aciduria with greatly
increased excretion of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid (3-HIVA) and
3-methylcrotonyl-glycine (3-MCG). Here, two patients with elevated excretion of
3-MCG and 3-HIVA and partial deficiency of MCC are discussed, one of them with
severe neurological symptoms. Both showed evidence of biotin responsiveness and
were heterozygous for the missense mutation MCCA-R385S. Evidence is presented
that MCCA-R385S is a dominant negative allele leading to biochemical
abnormalities and clinical symptoms in heterozygous individuals and that it is
responsive to pharmacological doses of biotin in vivo.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-005-7054-3
PMID: 15868465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
