---
reference_id: "PMID:23881344"
title: "Odontoid infiltration and spinal compression in Farber Disease: reversal by haematopoietic stem cell transplantation."
authors:
- Jarisch A
- Steward CG
- Sörensen J
- Porto L
- Kieslich M
- Klingebiel T
- Bader P
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-013-2098-0
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Farber Lipogranulomatosis/complications, pathology, therapy"
- Female
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Infant
- Odontoid Process/pathology
- Spinal Cord Compression/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Odontoid infiltration and spinal compression in Farber Disease: reversal by haematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
**Authors:** Jarisch A, Steward CG, Sörensen J, Porto L, Kieslich M, Klingebiel T, Bader P
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-013-2098-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-013-2098-0)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2014 Oct;173(10):1399-403. doi: 10.1007/s00431-013-2098-0. Epub
 2013 Jul 24.

Odontoid infiltration and spinal compression in Farber Disease: reversal by
haematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Jarisch A(1), Steward CG, Sörensen J, Porto L, Kieslich M, Klingebiel T, Bader
P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Oncology and Haematology, Goethe University
Frankfurt, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Theodor-Stern-Kai 5, 60590,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany, andrea.jarisch@kgu.de.

Farber disease (FD) is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by accumulation of
ceramide in various organs and tissues, most notably the central nervous system,
subcutaneous tissues and respiratory tract. We report a girl who developed major
destructive bone involvement, which affected the odontoid process and produced
spinal compression at 9 years of age. Bone involvement was proven histologically
but resolved, as assessed by serial MRI scanning, following matched unrelated
donor haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. This transplant resulted in only
partial donor chimerism (less than 10 % donor cells in peripheral blood), yet
this was sufficient to almost normalize acid ceramidase levels in leukocytes and
to produce dramatic improvements in subcutaneous nodules and joint mobility as
well as the beneficial effect on the involved bone. Unfortunately, the
transplant was rejected after 2 years but the patient was rescued from an
aplastic state by successful haploidentical peripheral blood stem cell
transplantation and remained a full donor chimera without recurrence of the bone
involvement and with steadily improving mobility at the age of 17 years. We
describe an FD patient who presented with severe destruction of the odontoid by
inflammatory tissue which was reversed after long-term control achieved by
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. After extensive literature
search, we believe that this is the first report of bony involvement in Farber
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-013-2098-0
PMID: 23881344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
