---
reference_id: "PMID:29945778"
title: Estimating the effective reproduction number of dengue considering temperature-dependent generation intervals.
authors:
- Codeço CT
- Villela DAM
- Coelho FC
journal: Epidemics
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.epidem.2018.05.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimating the effective reproduction number of dengue considering temperature-dependent generation intervals.
**Authors:** Codeço CT, Villela DAM, Coelho FC
**Journal:** Epidemics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.epidem.2018.05.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epidem.2018.05.011)

## Content

1. Epidemics. 2018 Dec;25:101-111. doi: 10.1016/j.epidem.2018.05.011. Epub 2018
May  31.

Estimating the effective reproduction number of dengue considering 
temperature-dependent generation intervals.

Codeço CT(1), Villela DAM(2), Coelho FC(3).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Computing Program/Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
Electronic address: claudia.codeco@fiocruz.br.
(2)Scientific Computing Program/Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)School of Applied Mathematics/Getulio Vargas Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.

The effective reproduction number, Rt, is a measure of transmission that can be 
calculated from standard incidence data to timely detect the beginning of 
epidemics. It has being increasingly used for surveillance of directly 
transmitted diseases. However, current methods for Rt estimation do not apply 
for vector borne diseases, whose transmission cycle depends on temperature. Here 
we propose a method that provides dengue's Rt estimates in the presence of 
temperature-mediated seasonality and apply this method to simulated and real 
data from two cities in Brazil where dengue is endemic. The method shows good 
precision in the simulated data. When applied to the real data, it shows 
differences in the transmission profile of the two cities and identifies periods 
of higher transmission.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.epidem.2018.05.011
PMID: 29945778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]