---
reference_id: "PMID:28632866"
title: "Risks of Breast, Ovarian, and Contralateral Breast Cancer for BRCA1 and BRCA2 Mutation Carriers."
authors:
- Kuchenbaecker KB
- Hopper JL
- Barnes DR
- Phillips KA
- Mooij TM
- Roos-Blom MJ
- Jervis S
- van Leeuwen FE
- Milne RL
- Andrieu N
- Goldgar DE
- Terry MB
- Rookus MA
- Easton DF
- Antoniou AC
- BRCA1 and BRCA2 Cohort Consortium
- McGuffog L
- Evans DG
- Barrowdale D
- Frost D
- Adlard J
- Ong KR
- Izatt L
- Tischkowitz M
- Eeles R
- Davidson R
- Hodgson S
- Ellis S
- Nogues C
- Lasset C
- Stoppa-Lyonnet D
- Fricker JP
- Faivre L
- Berthet P
- Hooning MJ
- van der Kolk LE
- Kets CM
- Adank MA
- John EM
- Chung WK
- Andrulis IL
- Southey M
- Daly MB
- Buys SS
- Osorio A
- Engel C
- Kast K
- Schmutzler RK
- Caldes T
- Jakubowska A
- Simard J
- Friedlander ML
- McLachlan SA
- Machackova E
- Foretova L
- Tan YY
- Singer CF
- Olah E
- Gerdes AM
- Arver B
- Olsson H
journal: JAMA
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.7112
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Breast Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- Family
- Female
- "Genes, BRCA1"
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms, Second Primary/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- Prospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risks of Breast, Ovarian, and Contralateral Breast Cancer for BRCA1 and BRCA2 Mutation Carriers.
**Authors:** Kuchenbaecker KB, Hopper JL, Barnes DR, Phillips KA, Mooij TM, Roos-Blom MJ, Jervis S, van Leeuwen FE, Milne RL, Andrieu N, Goldgar DE, Terry MB, Rookus MA, Easton DF, Antoniou AC, BRCA1 and BRCA2 Cohort Consortium, McGuffog L, Evans DG, Barrowdale D, Frost D, Adlard J, Ong KR, Izatt L, Tischkowitz M, Eeles R, Davidson R, Hodgson S, Ellis S, Nogues C, Lasset C, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Fricker JP, Faivre L, Berthet P, Hooning MJ, van der Kolk LE, Kets CM, Adank MA, John EM, Chung WK, Andrulis IL, Southey M, Daly MB, Buys SS, Osorio A, Engel C, Kast K, Schmutzler RK, Caldes T, Jakubowska A, Simard J, Friedlander ML, McLachlan SA, Machackova E, Foretova L, Tan YY, Singer CF, Olah E, Gerdes AM, Arver B, Olsson H
**Journal:** JAMA (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2017.7112](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2017.7112)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2017 Jun 20;317(23):2402-2416. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.7112.

Risks of Breast, Ovarian, and Contralateral Breast Cancer for BRCA1 and BRCA2
Mutation Carriers.

Kuchenbaecker KB(1), Hopper JL(2), Barnes DR(3), Phillips KA(4), Mooij TM(5),
Roos-Blom MJ(6), Jervis S(7), van Leeuwen FE(5), Milne RL(8), Andrieu N(9),
Goldgar DE(10), Terry MB(11), Rookus MA(5), Easton DF(3), Antoniou AC(3); BRCA1
and BRCA2 Cohort Consortium; McGuffog L(3), Evans DG(12), Barrowdale D(3), Frost
D(3), Adlard J(13), Ong KR(14), Izatt L(15), Tischkowitz M(16), Eeles R(17),
Davidson R(18), Hodgson S(19), Ellis S(3), Nogues C(20), Lasset C(21),
Stoppa-Lyonnet D(22), Fricker JP(23), Faivre L(24), Berthet P(25), Hooning
MJ(26), van der Kolk LE(27), Kets CM(28), Adank MA(29), John EM(30), Chung
WK(31), Andrulis IL(32), Southey M(33), Daly MB(34), Buys SS(35), Osorio A(36),
Engel C(37), Kast K(38), Schmutzler RK(39), Caldes T(40), Jakubowska A(41),
Simard J(42), Friedlander ML(43), McLachlan SA(44), Machackova E(45), Foretova
L(45), Tan YY(46), Singer CF(47), Olah E(48), Gerdes AM(49), Arver B(50), Olsson
H(51).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England2Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, England.
(2)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population
Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England.
(4)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population
Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia4Division of Cancer
Medicine, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia5Department of
Medicine, St Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Australia6Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Australia.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands8Department of Medical Informatics, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(7)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England9Mathematics Institute,
University of Warwick, Coventry, England.
(8)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population
Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia10Cancer Epidemiology and
Intelligence Division, Cancer Council Victoria, Melbourne, Australia.
(9)Inserm U900, Paris, France12Institut Curie, Paris, France13Mines ParisTech,
Fontainebleau, France14PSL Research University, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Dermatology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah.
(11)Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(12)Genomic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Institute of
Human Development, Manchester University, Central Manchester University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, England.
(13)Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds,
England.
(14)West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women's Hospital
Healthcare NHS Trust, Birmingham, England.
(15)Clinical Genetics, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London,
England.
(16)Department of Medical Genetics and National Institute for Health Research
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
England.
(17)Oncogenetics Team, Institute of Cancer Research and Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, Sutton, England.
(18)Department of Clinical Genetics, South Glasgow University Hospitals,
Glasgow, Scotland.
(19)Department of Clinical Genetics, St George's, University of London, London,
England.
(20)Oncogénétique Clinique, Hôpital René Huguenin/Institut Curie, Saint-Cloud,
France.
(21)Unité de Prévention et d'Epidémiologie Génétique, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon,
France.
(22)Institut Curie, Department of Tumour Biology, Paris, France28Institut Curie,
INSERM U830, Paris, France29Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Paris, France.
(23)Unité d'Oncogénétique, Centre Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, France.
(24)Centre de Lutte Contre le Cancer Georges François Leclerc, Dijon,
France32Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d'Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France.
(25)Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France.
(26)Department of Medical Oncology, Family Cancer Clinic, Erasmus MC Cancer
Institute, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(27)Family Cancer Clinic, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(28)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands.
(29)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam,
the Netherlands.
(30)Department of Epidemiology, Cancer Prevention Institute of California,
Fremont.
(31)Departments of Pedicatrics and Medicine, Columbia University, New York, New
York.
(32)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada41Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(33)Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(34)Department of Clinical Genetics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(35)Department of Medicine, Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(36)Human Genetics Group, Spanish National Cancer Centre, Madrid,
Spain46Biomedical Network on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain.
(37)Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University
of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany48LIFE-Leipzig Research Centre for Civilization
Diseases, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(38)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Carl Gustav
Carus, Dresden, Germany50National Center for Tumor Diseases, Partner Site
Dresden, Dresden, Germany51German Cancer Consortium, Dresden and German Cancer
Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
(39)Center for Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Center for Integrated
Oncology, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne and University Hospital
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(40)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(41)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University,
Szczecin, Poland.
(42)Genomics Center, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec Research Center
and Laval University, Québec City, Québec, Canada.
(43)Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia57Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick,
Australia.
(44)Division of Cancer Medicine, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne,
Australia58Department of Medical Oncology, St Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy,
Australia.
(45)Department of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, Masaryk Memorial Cancer
Institute, Brno, Czech Republic.
(46)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria61QIMR Berghofer Medical Research
Institute, Herston, Australia.
(47)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(48)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Oncology, Budapest,
Hungary.
(49)Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital
Rigshospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(50)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(51)Department of Oncology, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

IMPORTANCE: The clinical management of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers
requires accurate, prospective cancer risk estimates.
OBJECTIVES: To estimate age-specific risks of breast, ovarian, and contralateral
breast cancer for mutation carriers and to evaluate risk modification by family
cancer history and mutation location.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Prospective cohort study of 6036 BRCA1 and
3820 BRCA2 female carriers (5046 unaffected and 4810 with breast or ovarian
cancer or both at baseline) recruited in 1997-2011 through the International
BRCA1/2 Carrier Cohort Study, the Breast Cancer Family Registry and the Kathleen
Cuningham Foundation Consortium for Research into Familial Breast Cancer, with
ascertainment through family clinics (94%) and population-based studies (6%).
The majority were from large national studies in the United Kingdom (EMBRACE),
the Netherlands (HEBON), and France (GENEPSO). Follow-up ended December 2013;
median follow-up was 5 years.
EXPOSURES: BRCA1/2 mutations, family cancer history, and mutation location.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Annual incidences, standardized incidence ratios,
and cumulative risks of breast, ovarian, and contralateral breast cancer.
RESULTS: Among 3886 women (median age, 38 years; interquartile range [IQR],
30-46 years) eligible for the breast cancer analysis, 5066 women (median age, 38
years; IQR, 31-47 years) eligible for the ovarian cancer analysis, and 2213
women (median age, 47 years; IQR, 40-55 years) eligible for the contralateral
breast cancer analysis, 426 were diagnosed with breast cancer, 109 with ovarian
cancer, and 245 with contralateral breast cancer during follow-up. The
cumulative breast cancer risk to age 80 years was 72% (95% CI, 65%-79%) for
BRCA1 and 69% (95% CI, 61%-77%) for BRCA2 carriers. Breast cancer incidences
increased rapidly in early adulthood until ages 30 to 40 years for BRCA1 and
until ages 40 to 50 years for BRCA2 carriers, then remained at a similar,
constant incidence (20-30 per 1000 person-years) until age 80 years. The
cumulative ovarian cancer risk to age 80 years was 44% (95% CI, 36%-53%) for
BRCA1 and 17% (95% CI, 11%-25%) for BRCA2 carriers. For contralateral breast
cancer, the cumulative risk 20 years after breast cancer diagnosis was 40% (95%
CI, 35%-45%) for BRCA1 and 26% (95% CI, 20%-33%) for BRCA2 carriers (hazard
ratio [HR] for comparing BRCA2 vs BRCA1, 0.62; 95% CI, 0.47-0.82; P=.001 for
difference). Breast cancer risk increased with increasing number of first- and
second-degree relatives diagnosed as having breast cancer for both BRCA1 (HR for
≥2 vs 0 affected relatives, 1.99; 95% CI, 1.41-2.82; P<.001 for trend) and BRCA2
carriers (HR, 1.91; 95% CI, 1.08-3.37; P=.02 for trend). Breast cancer risk was
higher if mutations were located outside vs within the regions bounded by
positions c.2282-c.4071 in BRCA1 (HR, 1.46; 95% CI, 1.11-1.93; P=.007) and
c.2831-c.6401 in BRCA2 (HR, 1.93; 95% CI, 1.36-2.74; P<.001).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These findings provide estimates of cancer risk based
on BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carrier status using prospective data collection and
demonstrate the potential importance of family history and mutation location in
risk assessment.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2017.7112
PMID: 28632866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
