---
reference_id: "PMID:30327219"
title: "A new described mechanisms of intestinal glandular atrophy induced by vagal nerve/Auerbach network degeneration following subarachnoid hemorrhage: The first experimental study."
authors:
- Cakir M
- Ahiskalioglu A
- Karadeniz E
- Aydin MD
- Malcok UA
- Soyalp C
- Calikoglu C
- Sengul G
- Sipal S
- Yayik AM
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2018.10.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new described mechanisms of intestinal glandular atrophy induced by vagal nerve/Auerbach network degeneration following subarachnoid hemorrhage: The first experimental study.
**Authors:** Cakir M, Ahiskalioglu A, Karadeniz E, Aydin MD, Malcok UA, Soyalp C, Calikoglu C, Sengul G, Sipal S, Yayik AM
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2018.10.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2018.10.009)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2019 Jan;59:305-309. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2018.10.009. Epub
2018  Oct 14.

A new described mechanisms of intestinal glandular atrophy induced by vagal 
nerve/Auerbach network degeneration following subarachnoid hemorrhage: The first 
experimental study.

Cakir M(1), Ahiskalioglu A(2), Karadeniz E(3), Aydin MD(1), Malcok UA(4), Soyalp 
C(5), Calikoglu C(1), Sengul G(1), Sipal S(6), Yayik AM(7).

Author information:
(1)Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Department of Neurosurgery, Erzurum, 
Turkey.
(2)Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Department of Anesthesiology and 
Reanimation, Erzurum, Turkey. Electronic address: 
ali.ahiskalioglu@atauni.edu.tr.
(3)Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Department of General Surgery, Erzurum, 
Turkey.
(4)Onsekiz Mart University, Medical Faculty, Department of Neurosurgery, 
Canakkale, Turkey.
(5)100. Yil University, Medical Faculty, Anesthesiology and Reanimation, Van, 
Turkey.
(6)Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pathology, Erzurum, 
Turkey.
(7)Regional Training Hospital, Department of Anesthesiology and Reanimation, 
Erzurum, Turkey.

Stress ulcers is a trouble complication of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). 
Although gastrointestinal ulcerations may be attributed to increased HCL 
secretion in SAH; the exact mechanism of that complication has not been 
investigated definitively. We studied if vagal network degeneration may cause 
intestinal atrophy following SAH. Study was conducted on 25 rabbits, with 5 
control group (Group-A), 5 SHAM group (Group-B), and 15 SAH group via injection 
of autologue blood to cisterna magna. Seven animals followed for seven days 
(Early Decapitated-Group-C) and eight animals followed 21 days (Late 
Decapitated-Group-D). The vagal nodosal ganglia (NGs), Auerbach plexuses and 
goblet cells of duodenums were examined by current stereological methods and 
compared statistically. The mean numbers of degenerated axon density/mm2 of 
gastric branches of vagal nerves was 8 ± 2, 34 ± 11, 189 ± 49 and 322 ± 81 in 
the Group A, B, C, and D respectively. The mean numbers of degenerated neuron 
density/mm3 of NGs was 5 ± 2, 54 ± 7, 691 ± 87 and 2930 ± 410 in the Group A, B, 
C, and D respectively. The mean numbers of degenerated Auerbach neurons 2 ± 1, 
4 ± 1, 12 ± 3 and 27 ± 5/mm3 in the Group A, B, C, and D respectively. The mean 
numbers of degenerated goblet cells/mm3 were 4.3 ± 1.02, 11.5 ± 0.26, 143 ± 26 
and 937 ± 65 Group A, B, C, and D respectively. Statistical analysis showed that 
vagal network ischemia could cause intestinal bleeding and so atrophy in SAH 
progression. Statistical analyses of groups were; Group-D/Group-A < 0.001, 
Group-D/Group-B < 0.005, Group-C/Group-A < 0.005. Undiscovered effect of 
ischemic vagal network injuries should be regarded as a major cause of stress 
ulcerations following SAH which has not been mentioned in the literature.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2018.10.009
PMID: 30327219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]