---
reference_id: "PMID:33619250"
title: The influence of spaceflight and simulated microgravity on bacterial motility and chemotaxis.
authors:
- Acres JM
- Youngapelian MJ
- Nadeau J
journal: NPJ Microgravity
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41526-021-00135-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The influence of spaceflight and simulated microgravity on bacterial motility and chemotaxis.
**Authors:** Acres JM, Youngapelian MJ, Nadeau J
**Journal:** NPJ Microgravity (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41526-021-00135-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-021-00135-x)

## Content

1. NPJ Microgravity. 2021 Feb 22;7(1):7. doi: 10.1038/s41526-021-00135-x.

The influence of spaceflight and simulated microgravity on bacterial motility 
and chemotaxis.

Acres JM(1), Youngapelian MJ(2), Nadeau J(2).

Author information:
(1)Portland State University, Portland, OR, USA. acres@pdx.edu.
(2)Portland State University, Portland, OR, USA.

As interest in space exploration rises, there is a growing need to quantify the 
impact of microgravity on the growth, survival, and adaptation of 
microorganisms, including those responsible for astronaut illness. Motility is a 
key microbial behavior that plays important roles in nutrient assimilation, 
tissue localization and invasion, pathogenicity, biofilm formation, and 
ultimately survival. Very few studies have specifically looked at the effects of 
microgravity on the phenotypes of microbial motility. However, genomic and 
transcriptomic studies give a broad general picture of overall gene expression 
that can be used to predict motility phenotypes based upon selected genes, such 
as those responsible for flagellar synthesis and function and/or taxis. In this 
review, we focus on specific strains of Gram-negative bacteria that have been 
the most studied in this context. We begin with a discussion of Earth-based 
microgravity simulation systems and how they may affect the genes and phenotypes 
of interest. We then summarize results from both Earth- and space-based systems 
showing effects of microgravity on motility-related genes and phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41526-021-00135-x
PMCID: PMC7900230
PMID: 33619250

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.