---
reference_id: "PMID:25086404"
title: Role of C-type natriuretic peptide signalling in maintaining cartilage and bone function.
authors:
- Peake NJ
- Hobbs AJ
- Pingguan-Murphy B
- Salter DM
- Berenbaum F
- Chowdhury TT
journal: Osteoarthritis Cartilage
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2014.07.018
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Development
- "Cartilage/growth & development, metabolism"
- Growth Plate/metabolism
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- "Natriuretic Peptide, C-Type/physiology"
- Osteogenesis/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of C-type natriuretic peptide signalling in maintaining cartilage and bone function.
**Authors:** Peake NJ, Hobbs AJ, Pingguan-Murphy B, Salter DM, Berenbaum F, Chowdhury TT
**Journal:** Osteoarthritis Cartilage (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.joca.2014.07.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2014.07.018)

## Content

1. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014 Nov;22(11):1800-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.joca.2014.07.018. Epub 2014 Jul 31.

Role of C-type natriuretic peptide signalling in maintaining cartilage and bone 
function.

Peake NJ(1), Hobbs AJ(2), Pingguan-Murphy B(3), Salter DM(4), Berenbaum F(5), 
Chowdhury TT(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Materials Science, 
Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, UK.
(2)William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 
6BQ, UK.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of 
Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Centre for Genomics and Experimental Medicine, MRC Institute of Genetics and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Crew Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.
(5)Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie Paris 06, INSERM UMRS 
938, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Department of Rheumatology and DHU 
i2B, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France.
(6)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Materials Science, 
Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, UK. Electronic 
address: t.t.chowdhury@qmul.ac.uk.

C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) has been demonstrated in human and mouse models 
to play critical roles in cartilage homeostasis and endochondral bone formation. 
Indeed, targeted inactivation of the genes encoding CNP results in severe 
dwarfism and skeletal defects with a reduction in growth plate chondrocytes. 
Conversely, cartilage-specific overexpression of CNP was observed to rescue the 
phenotype of CNP deficient mice and significantly enhanced bone growth caused by 
growth plate expansion. In vitro studies reported that exogenous CNP influenced 
chondrocyte differentiation, proliferation and matrix synthesis with the 
response dependent on CNP concentration. The chondroprotective effects were 
shown to be mediated by natriuretic peptide receptor (Npr)2 and enhanced 
synthesis of cyclic guanosine-3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP) production. Recent 
studies also showed certain homeostatic effects of CNP are mediated by the 
clearance inactivation receptor, Npr3, highlighting several mechanisms in 
maintaining tissue homeostasis. However, the CNP signalling systems are complex 
and influenced by multiple factors that will lead to altered signalling and 
tissue dysfunction. This review will discuss the differential role of CNP 
signalling in regulating cartilage and bone homeostasis and how the pathways are 
influenced by age, inflammation or sex. Evidence indicates that enhanced CNP 
signalling may prevent growth retardation and protect cartilage in patients with 
inflammatory joint disease.

Copyright © 2014 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joca.2014.07.018
PMID: 25086404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]