---
reference_id: "PMID:22617649"
title: Aspartoacylase supports oxidative energy metabolism during myelination.
authors:
- Francis JS
- Strande L
- Markov V
- Leone P
journal: J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.66
keywords:
- Amidohydrolases/metabolism
- Animals
- "Aspartic Acid/analogs & derivatives, metabolism, pharmacology"
- Biomarkers
- "Canavan Disease/enzymology, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- "Demyelinating Diseases/metabolism, pathology"
- Dependovirus/genetics
- Energy Metabolism/physiology
- Glucose/deficiency
- Immunohistochemistry
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Mutation/physiology
- Myelin Sheath/physiology
- Oligodendroglia/metabolism
- Oxidation-Reduction
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspartoacylase supports oxidative energy metabolism during myelination.
**Authors:** Francis JS, Strande L, Markov V, Leone P
**Journal:** J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jcbfm.2012.66](https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2012.66)

## Content

1. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012 Sep;32(9):1725-36. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.66.
Epub 2012 May 23.

Aspartoacylase supports oxidative energy metabolism during myelination.

Francis JS(1), Strande L, Markov V, Leone P.

Author information:
(1)Cell and Gene Therapy Center, Department of Cell Biology, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of NJ, Stratford, New Jersey 08084, USA.
francijs@umdnj.edu

The inherited leukodystrophy Canavan disease arises due to a loss of the ability
to catabolize N-acetylaspartic acid (NAA) in the brain and constitutes a major
point of focus for efforts to define NAA function. Accumulation of
noncatabolized NAA is diagnostic for Canavan disease, but contrasts with the
abnormally low NAA associated with compromised neuronal integrity in a broad
spectrum of other clinical conditions. Experimental evidence for NAA function
supports a role in white matter lipid synthesis, but does not explain how both
elevated and lowered NAA can be associated with pathology in the brain. We have
undertaken a systematic analysis of postnatal development in a mouse model of
Canavan disease that delineates development and pathology by identifying markers
of oxidative stress preceding oligodendrocyte loss and dysmyelination. These
data suggest a role for NAA in the maintenance of metabolic integrity in
oligodendrocytes that may be of relevance to the strong association between NAA
and neuronal viability. N-acetylaspartic acid is proposed here to support lipid
synthesis and energy metabolism via the provision of substrate for both cellular
processes during early postnatal development.

DOI: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.66
PMCID: PMC3434629
PMID: 22617649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
