---
reference_id: "PMID:27598709"
title: "A New Method to Directly Observe Tuberculosis Treatment: Skype Observed Therapy, a Patient-Centered Approach."
authors:
- Buchman T
- Cabello C
journal: J Public Health Manag Pract
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000000339
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A New Method to Directly Observe Tuberculosis Treatment: Skype Observed Therapy, a Patient-Centered Approach.
**Authors:** Buchman T, Cabello C
**Journal:** J Public Health Manag Pract (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PHH.0000000000000339](https://doi.org/10.1097/PHH.0000000000000339)

## Content

1. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2017 Mar/Apr;23(2):175-177. doi: 
10.1097/PHH.0000000000000339.

A New Method to Directly Observe Tuberculosis Treatment: Skype Observed Therapy, 
a Patient-Centered Approach.

Buchman T(1), Cabello C.

Author information:
(1)Nassau County Department of Health, Mineola, New York.

CONTEXT: Tuberculosis (TB) treatment completion is in part determined by 
patient's adherence to long-term drug regimens. To best ensure compliance, 
directly observed therapy (DOT) is considered the standard of practice. Nassau 
County Department of Health TB Control is responsible for providing DOT to 
patients with TB.
OBJECTIVE: Tuberculosis Control sought to use and evaluate Skype Observed 
Therapy (SOT) as an alternative to DOT for eligible patients.
DESIGN: The evaluation included analysis of patient's acceptance and adherence 
to drug regimen using SOT. Tuberculosis Control assessed staff efficiency and 
cost savings for this program.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Percentages of SOT of patients and successful SOT visits, 
mileage, and travel time savings.
RESULTS: Twenty percent of the caseload used SOT and 100% of patients who were 
eligible opted in. Average SOT success was 79%. Total mileage savings and time 
saved were $9,929.07 and 614 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: Because SOT saves cost and time and is a suitable alternative to 
DOT for patients, it should be considered as part of new policies and practices 
in TB control programs.

DOI: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000000339
PMID: 27598709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]