---
reference_id: "PMID:39519012"
title: "Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Genetic Journey from Past to Future."
authors:
- Newman NA
- Burke MA
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms252111460
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Genetic Journey from Past to Future.
**Authors:** Newman NA, Burke MA
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms252111460](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms252111460)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Oct 25;25(21):11460. doi: 10.3390/ijms252111460.

Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Genetic Journey from Past to Future.

Newman NA(1), Burke MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by reduced systolic function and 
cardiac dilation. Cases without an identified secondary cause are classified as 
idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDC). Over the last 35 years, many cases of 
IDC have increasingly been recognized to be genetic in etiology with a core set 
of definitively causal genes in up to 40% of cases. While over 200 genes have 
been associated with DCM, the evidence supporting pathogenicity for most remains 
limited. Further, rapid advances in sequencing and bioinformatics have recently 
revealed a complex genetic spectrum ranging from monogenic to polygenic in DCM. 
These advances have also led to the discovery of causal and modifier genetic 
variants in secondary forms of DCM (e.g., alcohol-induced cardiomyopathy). 
Current guidelines recommend genetic counseling and screening, as well as 
endorsing a handful of genotype-specific therapies (e.g., device placement in 
LMNA cardiomyopathy). The future of genetics in DCM will likely involve 
polygenic risk scores, direct-to-consumer testing, and pharmacogenetics, 
requiring providers to have a thorough understanding of this rapidly developing 
field. Herein we outline three decades of genetics in DCM, summarize recent 
advances, and project possible future avenues for the field.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252111460
PMCID: PMC11546582
PMID: 39519012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.