---
reference_id: "PMID:20439846"
title: Mexiletine is an effective antimyotonia treatment in myotonic dystrophy type 1.
authors:
- Logigian EL
- Martens WB
- Moxley RT 4th
- McDermott MP
- Dilek N
- Wiegner AW
- Pearson AT
- Barbieri CA
- Annis CL
- Thornton CA
- Moxley RT 3rd
journal: Neurology
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181dc1a3a
keywords:
- Adult
- Anti-Arrhythmia Agents/therapeutic use
- Cross-Over Studies
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mexiletine/therapeutic use
- Middle Aged
- "Myotonia/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Myotonic Dystrophy/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Patient Selection
- Placebos/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mexiletine is an effective antimyotonia treatment in myotonic dystrophy type 1.
**Authors:** Logigian EL, Martens WB, Moxley RT 4th, McDermott MP, Dilek N, Wiegner AW, Pearson AT, Barbieri CA, Annis CL, Thornton CA, Moxley RT 3rd
**Journal:** Neurology (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181dc1a3a](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181dc1a3a)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2010 May 4;74(18):1441-8. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181dc1a3a.

Mexiletine is an effective antimyotonia treatment in myotonic dystrophy type 1.

Logigian EL(1), Martens WB, Moxley RT 4th, McDermott MP, Dilek N, Wiegner AW,
Pearson AT, Barbieri CA, Annis CL, Thornton CA, Moxley RT 3rd.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.
eric_logigian@urmc.rochester.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2011 Jan 25;76(4):409; author reply 409. doi:
10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181fe72d7.

OBJECTIVE: To determine if mexiletine is safe and effective in reducing myotonia
in myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1).
BACKGROUND: Myotonia is an early, prominent symptom in DM1 and contributes to
decreased dexterity, gait instability, difficulty with speech/swallowing, and
muscle pain. A few preliminary trials have suggested that the antiarrhythmic
drug mexiletine is useful, symptomatic treatment for nondystrophic myotonic
disorders and DM1.
METHODS: We performed 2 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover
trials, each involving 20 ambulatory DM1 participants with grip or percussion
myotonia on examination. The initial trial compared 150 mg of mexiletine 3 times
daily to placebo, and the second trial compared 200 mg of mexiletine 3 times
daily to placebo. Treatment periods were 7 weeks in duration separated by a 4-
to 8-week washout period. The primary measure of myotonia was time for isometric
grip force to relax from 90% to 5% of peak force after a 3-second maximum grip
contraction. EKG measurements and adverse events were monitored in both trials.
RESULTS: There was a significant reduction in grip relaxation time with both 150
and 200 mg dosages of mexiletine. Treatment with mexiletine at either dosage was
not associated with any serious adverse events, or with prolongation of the PR
or QTc intervals or of QRS duration. Mild adverse events were observed with both
placebo and mexiletine treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Mexiletine at dosages of 150 and 200 mg 3 times daily is effective,
safe, and well-tolerated over 7 weeks as an antimyotonia treatment in DM1.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class I evidence that mexiletine
at dosages of 150 and 200 mg 3 times daily over 7 weeks is well-tolerated and
effective in reducing handgrip relaxation time in DM1.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181dc1a3a
PMCID: PMC2871004
PMID: 20439846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
