---
reference_id: "PMID:40544107"
title: "Four decades of the RET gene: From discovery to tumor-agnostic therapy."
authors:
- Takahashi M
journal: J Formos Med Assoc
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2025.06.033
keywords:
- Humans
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy"
- "Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Glial Cell Line-Derived Neurotrophic Factor Receptors/metabolism
- Glial Cell Line-Derived Neurotrophic Factor/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Four decades of the RET gene: From discovery to tumor-agnostic therapy.
**Authors:** Takahashi M
**Journal:** J Formos Med Assoc (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jfma.2025.06.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfma.2025.06.033)

## Content

1. J Formos Med Assoc. 2025 Oct;124(10):895-901. doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2025.06.033.
 Epub 2025 Jun 20.

Four decades of the RET gene: From discovery to tumor-agnostic therapy.

Takahashi M(1).

Author information:
(1)International Center for Cell and Gene Center, Fujita Health University, 1-98
Dengakugakubo, Kutsukake-cho, Toyoake, 470-1192, Japan. Electronic address:
masahide.takahashi@fujita-hu.ac.jp.

The physiological and disease-related roles of the Rearranged during
Transfection (RET) gene have been extensively studied since its discovery four
decades ago. RET encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase whose ligands are members of
the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family. Unlike other
receptor tyrosine kinase ligands, GDNF family ligands (GFLs) do not bind to RET
directly; instead, RET requires GDNF family receptor αs (GFRαs) as coreceptors
for their binding. The resulting GFL/GFRα/RET ternary complex plays
physiologically crucial roles in developing some organ systems. RET alterations
cause various human cancers and developmental disorders. Gene rearrangements
occur in 5-20 % of papillary thyroid carcinoma, 1-2 % of non-small cell lung
carcinoma, and <1 % of other solid cancers. Germline and somatic RET point
mutations have been detected in almost all multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2
families and 40-70 % of sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma. Moreover, RET
loss-of-function mutations or deletions cause Hirschsprung's disease. Selective
RET kinase inhibitors have recently shown remarkable progress for the treatment
of advanced non-small cell lung and thyroid cancers. As RET alterations occur
across multiple tumor types, RET inhibitor development is enabling a new
paradigm of tumor-agnostic therapies. This review highlights clinical efficacy
of selective RET inhibitors.

Copyright © 2025 Formosan Medical Association. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfma.2025.06.033
PMID: 40544107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest I declare that
there are no conflicts of interest.
