---
reference_id: "PMID:29621837"
title: "Leptospirosis: An important zoonosis acquired through work, play and travel."
authors:
- Lau CL
- Townell N
- Stephenson E
- van den Berg D
- Craig SB
journal: Aust J Gen Pract
year: '2018'
doi: 10.31128/AFP-07-17-4286
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leptospirosis: An important zoonosis acquired through work, play and travel.
**Authors:** Lau CL, Townell N, Stephenson E, van den Berg D, Craig SB
**Journal:** Aust J Gen Pract (2018)
**DOI:** [10.31128/AFP-07-17-4286](https://doi.org/10.31128/AFP-07-17-4286)

## Content

1. Aust J Gen Pract. 2018 Mar;47(3):105-110. doi: 10.31128/AFP-07-17-4286.

Leptospirosis: An important zoonosis acquired through work, play and travel.

Lau CL(1), Townell N(2), Stephenson E(3), van den Berg D(4), Craig SB(5).

Author information:
(1)MBBS, MPH@TM, PhD, FRACGP, NHMRC Fellow, Department of Global Health, 
Research School of Population Health, Australian National University, Canberra, 
ACT; Travel Medicine Consultant, Travel Medicine Alliance Clinics Australia. 
colleen.lau@anu.edu.au.
(2)MBChB, BSc, FRCPA, FRACP, Infectious Disease Physician, Infectious Disease 
Department, Mater Hospital Brisbane, Mater Health, South Brisbane, Qld.
(3)MSc, BSc, PhD candidate and sessional academic, Environmental Futures 
Research Institute, Griffith University, Brisbane, Qld.
(4)MPH, RN, Public Health Officer, Communicable Disease Surveillance, North 
Coast Public Health Unit, Lismore, NSW.
(5)PhD, MSc, BSc(Hon), BSSc, Senior Supervising Scientist, WHO Collaborating 
Centre for Reference and Research on Leptospirosis, Queensland Health Forensic 
and Scientific Services, Qld.

BACKGROUND: Leptospirosis is one of the most common zoonotic diseases worldwide. 
Infection occurs through contact with infected animals, or soil or water that 
has been contaminated by the urine of infected animals. Risk factors include 
occupational and recreational exposures, contact with floodwaters, and travel to 
areas with a high risk of leptospirosis, particularly tropical, developing 
countries. With climate change, flood-related outbreaks are becoming more 
common.
OBJECTIVE: This article aims to improve awareness of leptospirosis, and provide 
an update for general practitioners on its epidemiology, risk factors, clinical 
presentation, laboratory diagnosis, management and prevention.
DISCUSSION: Leptospirosis is sometimes misdiagnosed because clinical 
presentation can be non-specific and overlap with many other causes of acute 
febrile illnesses. In patients with risk factors for leptospirosis, a high index 
of clinical suspicion is important to ensure early diagnosis and treatment. 
Delays in treatment could increase the risk of severe complications, including 
pulmonary haemorrhage, acute renal failure and acute liver failure.

DOI: 10.31128/AFP-07-17-4286
PMID: 29621837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]