---
reference_id: PMID:39475213
title: "Mycoplasma pneumoniae: not a typical respiratory pathogen."
authors:
- Rowlands RS
- Meyer Sauteur PM
- Beeton ML
- On Behalf Of The Escmid Study Group For Mycoplasma And Chlamydia Infections Esgmac
journal: J Med Microbiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.001910
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mycoplasma pneumoniae/immunology, pathogenicity"
- "Pneumonia, Mycoplasma/microbiology, immunology, epidemiology, drug therapy"
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Drug Resistance, Bacterial"
- "Community-Acquired Infections/microbiology, immunology, epidemiology"
- Virulence Factors
- "Macrolides/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Europe/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycoplasma pneumoniae: not a typical respiratory pathogen.
**Authors:** Rowlands RS, Meyer Sauteur PM, Beeton ML, On Behalf Of The Escmid Study Group For Mycoplasma And Chlamydia Infections Esgmac
**Journal:** J Med Microbiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1099/jmm.0.001910](https://doi.org/10.1099/jmm.0.001910)

## Content

1. J Med Microbiol. 2024 Oct;73(10):001910. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.001910.

Mycoplasma pneumoniae: not a typical respiratory pathogen.

Rowlands RS(1), Meyer Sauteur PM(2), Beeton ML(1), On Behalf Of The Escmid Study 
Group For Mycoplasma And Chlamydia Infections Esgmac.

Author information:
(1)Microbiology and Infection Research Group, Department of Biomedical Sciences, 
Cardiff Metropolitan University, Western Avenue, Cardiff. CF5 2YB, UK.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, Children's 
Research Center, University Children's Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.

Mycoplasma pneumoniae is a leading cause of community-acquired pneumonia among 
school-aged children and young adults. Infections occur throughout the year but 
tend to surge during winter months across Europe. A characteristic epidemic 
cycle, where a substantial surge in the number of infections occurs, is seen 
approximately every 1-4 years and hypothesized to be driven by changes in 
immunity and a shift in circulating variants. Once thought to be an organism of 
low virulence, it has now been found to possess several virulence factors, 
including toxin production, biofilm formation and evasion of antibody-mediated 
immunity. The lack of a cell wall and reduced metabolic pathways limit the 
options for antibiotic treatment. Acquired macrolide resistance is a growing 
concern, with >80% of cases in China being macrolide-resistant. Although efforts 
have been made to develop a vaccine, there are still substantial hurdles to 
overcome in relation to vaccine-enhanced disease, which results from an 
inappropriate immune response among vaccinated individuals.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.001910
PMCID: PMC11523975
PMID: 39475213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of interest has been identified for 
any author.