---
reference_id: "PMID:24598000"
title: SLC26A2 disease spectrum in Sweden - high frequency of recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (rMED).
authors:
- Mäkitie O
- Geiberger S
- Horemuzova E
- Hagenäs L
- Moström E
- Nordenskjöld M
- Grigelioniene G
- Nordgren A
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12371
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLC26A2 disease spectrum in Sweden - high frequency of recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (rMED).
**Authors:** Mäkitie O, Geiberger S, Horemuzova E, Hagenäs L, Moström E, Nordenskjöld M, Grigelioniene G, Nordgren A
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12371](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12371)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2015 Mar;87(3):273-8. doi: 10.1111/cge.12371. Epub 2014 Apr 1.

SLC26A2 disease spectrum in Sweden - high frequency of recessive multiple 
epiphyseal dysplasia (rMED).

Mäkitie O(1), Geiberger S, Horemuzova E, Hagenäs L, Moström E, Nordenskjöld M, 
Grigelioniene G, Nordgren A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, 
Finland.

Diastrophic dysplasia (DTD) is an autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia caused 
by SLC26A2 mutations. Clinical features include short stature, joint 
contractures, spinal deformities, and cleft palate. SLC26A2 mutations also 
result in other skeletal dysplasias, including the milder recessive multiple 
epiphyseal dysplasia (rMED). DTD is overrepresented in Finland and we speculated 
that this may have influenced the prevalence and spectrum of SLC26A2-related 
skeletal conditions also in Sweden. We reviewed the patient registry at 
Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm to 
identify subjects with SLC26A2 mutations. Seven patients from six families were 
identified; clinical data were available for six patients. All but one patient 
had one or two copies of the Finnish SLC26A2 founder mutation IVS1+2T>C. 
Arg279Trp mutation was present in compound heterozygous form in five patients 
with phenotypes consistent with rMED. Their heights ranged from -2.6 to -1.4 
standard deviation units below normal mean and radiographic features included 
generalised epiphyseal dysplasia and double-layered patellae. Two rMED patients 
had hypoplastic C2 and cervical kyphosis, a severe manifestation previously 
described only in DTD. Our study confirms a high prevalence of rMED in Sweden 
and expands the phenotypic manifestations of rMED.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12371
PMID: 24598000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]