---
reference_id: "PMID:10590428"
title: "Prenatal diagnosis of congenital parvovirus B19 infection: value of serological and PCR techniques in maternal and fetal serum."
authors:
- Dieck D
- Schild RL
- Hansmann M
- Eis-Hübinger AM
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '1999'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal diagnosis of congenital parvovirus B19 infection: value of serological and PCR techniques in maternal and fetal serum.
**Authors:** Dieck D, Schild RL, Hansmann M, Eis-Hübinger AM
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (1999)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 1999 Dec;19(12):1119-23.

Prenatal diagnosis of congenital parvovirus B19 infection: value of serological 
and PCR techniques in maternal and fetal serum.

Dieck D(1), Schild RL, Hansmann M, Eis-Hübinger AM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany.

Intrauterine infection with parvovirus B19 (B19) is associated with non-immune 
hydrops fetalis, miscarriage and stillbirth. Accurate laboratory tests for 
diagnosis of B19 infection are required to exclude other diagnoses. We analysed 
the diagnostic value of B19 IgM antibody testing and polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) in the sera from 57 patients and their fetuses with abnormal 
ultrasonography. Viral DNA was found in 16 of the 58 fetuses (one twin 
pregnancy) whereas only 7 of these were tested positive for B19 IgM antibodies. 
The sera of all 16 mothers were also positive for B19 DNA. False-positive B19 
IgM results were obtained from two fetuses. The study highlights the limitations 
of B19 IgM serology and shows for the first time that, if a sensitive PCR assay 
is used, DNA measurement is the best indicator of infection not only in the 
fetal blood but also in the maternal blood. This improves the diagnostic value 
of the laboratory results considerably. DNA assays are essential in cases of 
doubtful serological results.

Copyright 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 10590428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]