---
reference_id: "PMID:24408909"
title: A Saccharomyces cerevisiae model reveals in vivo functional impairment of the Ogden syndrome N-terminal acetyltransferase NAA10 Ser37Pro mutant.
authors:
- Van Damme P
- Støve SI
- Glomnes N
- Gevaert K
- Arnesen T
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.035402
keywords:
- Acetylation
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Humans
- "N-Terminal Acetyltransferase A/genetics, metabolism"
- "N-Terminal Acetyltransferase E/genetics, metabolism"
- "N-Terminal Acetyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Proline/metabolism
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics, growth & development"
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Serine/metabolism
- Species Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Saccharomyces cerevisiae model reveals in vivo functional impairment of the Ogden syndrome N-terminal acetyltransferase NAA10 Ser37Pro mutant.
**Authors:** Van Damme P, Støve SI, Glomnes N, Gevaert K, Arnesen T
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M113.035402](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.035402)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Aug;13(8):2031-41. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.035402.
Epub  2014 Jan 9.

A Saccharomyces cerevisiae model reveals in vivo functional impairment of the 
Ogden syndrome N-terminal acetyltransferase NAA10 Ser37Pro mutant.

Van Damme P(1), Støve SI(2), Glomnes N(3), Gevaert K(4), Arnesen T(5).

Author information:
(1)From the ‡Department of Medical Protein Research, VIB, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium; 
§Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium; 
Petra.vandamme@vib-ugent.be thomas.arnesen@mbi.uib.no.
(2)¶Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, 
Norway; **Department of Surgery, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, 
Norway.
(3)¶Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, 
Norway; ‖Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, 
Norway; and.
(4)From the ‡Department of Medical Protein Research, VIB, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium; 
§Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium;
(5)¶Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, 
Norway; **Department of Surgery, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, 
Norway Petra.vandamme@vib-ugent.be thomas.arnesen@mbi.uib.no.

N-terminal acetylation (Nt-acetylation) occurs on the majority of eukaryotic 
proteins and is catalyzed by N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs). 
Nt-acetylation is increasingly recognized as a vital modification with 
functional implications ranging from protein degradation to protein 
localization. Although early genetic studies in yeast demonstrated that 
NAT-deletion strains displayed a variety of phenotypes, only recently, the first 
human genetic disorder caused by a mutation in a NAT gene was reported; boys 
diagnosed with the X-linked Ogden syndrome harbor a p.Ser37Pro (S37P) mutation 
in the gene encoding Naa10, the catalytic subunit of the NatA complex, and 
suffer from global developmental delays and lethality during infancy. Here, we 
describe a Saccharomyces cerevisiae model developed by introducing the human 
wild-type or mutant NatA complex into yeast lacking NatA (NatA-Δ). The wild-type 
human NatA complex phenotypically complemented the NatA-Δ strain, whereas only a 
partial rescue was observed for the Ogden mutant NatA complex suggesting that 
hNaa10 S37P is only partially functional in vivo. Immunoprecipitation 
experiments revealed a reduced subunit complexation for the mutant hNatA S37P 
next to a reduced in vitro catalytic activity. We performed quantitative 
Nt-acetylome analyses on a control yeast strain (yNatA), a yeast NatA deletion 
strain (yNatA-Δ), a yeast NatA deletion strain expressing wild-type human NatA 
(hNatA), and a yeast NatA deletion strain expressing mutant human NatA (hNatA 
S37P). Interestingly, a generally reduced degree of Nt-acetylation was observed 
among a large group of NatA substrates in the yeast expressing mutant hNatA as 
compared with yeast expressing wild-type hNatA. Combined, these data provide 
strong support for the functional impairment of hNaa10 S37P in vivo and suggest 
that reduced Nt-acetylation of one or more target substrates contributes to the 
pathogenesis of the Ogden syndrome. Comparative analysis between human and yeast 
NatA also provided new insights into the co-evolution of the NatA complexes and 
their substrates. For instance, (Met-)Ala- N termini are more prevalent in the 
human proteome as compared with the yeast proteome, and hNatA displays a 
preference toward these N termini as compared with yNatA.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M113.035402
PMCID: PMC4125735
PMID: 24408909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]