---
reference_id: "PMID:32926582"
title: Development of a pathogenesis-based therapy for peeling skin syndrome type 1.
authors:
- Valentin F
- Wiegmann H
- Tarinski T
- Nikolenko H
- Traupe H
- Liebau E
- Dathe M
- Oji V
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.19546
keywords:
- "Dermatitis, Exfoliative"
- Glycoproteins
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Quality of Life
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of a pathogenesis-based therapy for peeling skin syndrome type 1.
**Authors:** Valentin F, Wiegmann H, Tarinski T, Nikolenko H, Traupe H, Liebau E, Dathe M, Oji V
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.19546](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.19546)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2021 Jun;184(6):1123-1131. doi: 10.1111/bjd.19546. Epub 2020
Nov  2.

Development of a pathogenesis-based therapy for peeling skin syndrome type 1.

Valentin F(1)(2), Wiegmann H(1), Tarinski T(1), Nikolenko H(3), Traupe H(1), 
Liebau E(4), Dathe M(3), Oji V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, 48149, 
Germany.
(2)Institute for Transfusion Medicine and Cell Therapy, University Hospital 
Münster, Münster, 48149, Germany.
(3)Leibniz Research Institute of Molecular Pharmacology (FMP), Berlin, 13125, 
Germany.
(4)Institute of Animal Physiology, Department of Molecular Physiology, 
University of Münster, Münster, 48143, Germany.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2021 Jun;184(6):998-999. doi: 10.1111/bjd.19698.

BACKGROUND: Peeling skin syndrome type 1 (PSS1) is a rare and severe autosomal 
recessive form of congenital ichthyosis. Patients are affected by pronounced 
erythroderma accompanied by pruritus and superficial generalized peeling of the 
skin. The disease is caused by nonsense mutations or complete deletion of the 
CDSN gene encoding for corneodesmosin (CDSN). PSS1 severely impairs quality of 
life and therapeutic approaches are totally unsatisfactory.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to develop the first steps towards a 
specific protein replacement therapy for CDSN deficiency. Using this approach, 
we aimed to restore the lack of CDSN and improve cell-cell cohesion in the 
transition area of the stratum granulosum (SG) to the stratum corneum.
METHODS: Human CDSN was recombinantly expressed in Escherichia coli. A 
liposome-based carrier system, prepared with a cationic lipopeptide to mediate 
the transport to the outer membrane of keratinocytes, was developed. This 
formulation was chosen for CDSN delivery into the skin. The liposomal carrier 
system was characterized with respect to size, stability and toxicity. 
Furthermore, the interaction with primary keratinocytes and human epidermal 
equivalents was investigated.
RESULTS: The liposomes showed an accumulation at the membranes of keratinocytes. 
CDSN-deficient epidermal equivalents that were treated with liposomal 
encapsulated CDSN demonstrated presence of CDSN in the SG. Finally, the 
penetration assay and histological examinations revealed an improved epidermal 
integrity for CDSN-deficient epidermal equivalents, if they were treated with 
liposomal encapsulated CDSN.
CONCLUSIONS: This study presents the first preclinical in vitro experiments for 
a future specific protein replacement therapy for patients affected by PSS1.

© 2020 The Authors. British Journal of Dermatology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.19546
PMID: 32926582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]