---
reference_id: "PMID:37621152"
title: "Mutations in the bZip region of the CEBPA gene: A novel prognostic factor in patients with acute myeloid leukemia."
authors:
- Rivera JC
- Nuñez D
- Millar E
- Ramirez K
- Chandía M
- Aguayo C
journal: Int J Lab Hematol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/ijlh.14157
keywords:
- Humans
- Prognosis
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- CCAAT-Enhancer-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the bZip region of the CEBPA gene: A novel prognostic factor in patients with acute myeloid leukemia.
**Authors:** Rivera JC, Nuñez D, Millar E, Ramirez K, Chandía M, Aguayo C
**Journal:** Int J Lab Hematol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijlh.14157](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijlh.14157)

## Content

1. Int J Lab Hematol. 2023 Dec;45(6):833-838. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.14157. Epub 2023 
Aug 24.

Mutations in the bZip region of the CEBPA gene: A novel prognostic factor in 
patients with acute myeloid leukemia.

Rivera JC(1), Nuñez D(1), Millar E(1), Ramirez K(1), Chandía M(2), Aguayo 
C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department Medical Technology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Concepción, 
Concepción, Chile.
(2)Flow Cytometry Laboratory, Pathological Anatomy Unit, Hospital Regional 
Clinical Dr. Guillermo Grant Benavente, Concepción, Chile.
(3)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
University of Concepción, Concepción, Chile.
(4)Group of Research and Innovation in Vascular Health (GRIVAS Health), Chillan, 
Chile.

BACKGROUND: Hematopoiesis, the process of blood cell formation involves on a 
complex network of transcription factors. Among them, the CCAAT-enhancer-binding 
protein alpha (CEBPA) plays a crucial role in maintaining the balance between 
myeloid proliferation and differentiation. Imbalances in this network can lead 
to disrupted differentiation and contribute to the development of malignant 
diseases.
AIM: Understanding of disease development and explore potential therapeutic 
strategies for hematological disorders associated CEPBA gen.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The research involved a comprehensive analysis of CEBPA 
gene mutations in the context of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). This encompassed 
a thorough exploration of point mutations and double mutations in AML patients.
RESULTS: In the context of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), mutations in the CEBPA 
gene, especially point mutations, are frequently observed. A significant number 
of AML patients present with double mutations in CEBPA, which have been linked 
to a more favorable prognosis in terms of overall survival and event-free 
survival. These patients also tend to exhibit enhanced responsiveness to 
treatment.
DISCUSSION: Unraveling the intricate interplay of transcription factors, 
particularly CEBPA, holds significant implications for decoding the mechanisms 
governing hematopoiesis. This understanding offers a potential avenue for 
deciphering disease development and devising novel therapeutic strategies for 
hematological disorders.
CONCLUSION: The findings underscore that CEBPA mutations correlate with enhanced 
overall survival and event-free survival, with relevance to those presenting 
within the bZip framework. This knowledge may contribute to advancing 
personalized treatments for hematological conditions.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijlh.14157
PMID: 37621152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]