---
reference_id: "PMID:25430853"
title: Endothelial dysfunction in dengue virus pathology.
authors:
- Vervaeke P
- Vermeire K
- Liekens S
journal: Rev Med Virol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/rmv.1818
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endothelial dysfunction in dengue virus pathology.
**Authors:** Vervaeke P, Vermeire K, Liekens S
**Journal:** Rev Med Virol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/rmv.1818](https://doi.org/10.1002/rmv.1818)

## Content

1. Rev Med Virol. 2015 Jan;25(1):50-67. doi: 10.1002/rmv.1818. Epub 2014 Nov 27.

Endothelial dysfunction in dengue virus pathology.

Vervaeke P(1), Vermeire K, Liekens S.

Author information:
(1)KU Leuven, Rega Institute for Medical Research, Leuven, Belgium.

Dengue virus (DENV) is a leading cause of illness and death, mainly in the 
(sub)tropics, where it causes dengue fever and/or the more serious diseases 
dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome that are associated with 
changes in vascular permeability. Despite extensive research, the pathogenesis 
of DENV is still poorly understood and, although endothelial cells represent the 
primary fluid barrier of the blood vessels, the extent to which these cells 
contribute to DENV pathology is still under debate. The primary target cells for 
DENV are dendritic cells and monocytes/macrophages that release various 
chemokines and cytokines upon infection, which can activate the endothelium and 
are thought to play a major role in DENV-induced vascular permeability. However, 
recent studies indicate that DENV also replicates in endothelial cells and that 
DENV-infected endothelial cells may directly contribute to viremia, immune 
activation, vascular permeability and immune targeting of the endothelium. Also, 
the viral non-structural protein-1 and antibodies directed against this secreted 
protein have been reported to be involved in endothelial cell dysfunction. This 
review provides an extensive overview of the effects of DENV infection on 
endothelial cell physiology and barrier function.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.1818
PMID: 25430853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]