---
reference_id: "PMID:31010905"
title: Health Supervision for Children With Neurofibromatosis Type 1.
authors:
- Miller DT
- Freedenberg D
- Schorry E
- Ullrich NJ
- Viskochil D
- Korf BR
- COUNCIL ON GENETICS
- AMERICAN COLLEGE OF MEDICAL GENETICS AND GENOMICS
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2019-0660
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Health Promotion/methods, standards"
- Humans
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/diagnostic imaging, genetics, therapy"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic/standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Health Supervision for Children With Neurofibromatosis Type 1.
**Authors:** Miller DT, Freedenberg D, Schorry E, Ullrich NJ, Viskochil D, Korf BR, COUNCIL ON GENETICS, AMERICAN COLLEGE OF MEDICAL GENETICS AND GENOMICS
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2019-0660](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019-0660)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2019 May;143(5):e20190660. doi: 10.1542/peds.2019-0660.

Health Supervision for Children With Neurofibromatosis Type 1.

Miller DT, Freedenberg D, Schorry E, Ullrich NJ, Viskochil D, Korf BR; COUNCIL 
ON GENETICS; AMERICAN COLLEGE OF MEDICAL GENETICS AND GENOMICS.

Collaborators: Chen E, Trotter TL, Berry SA, Burke LW, Geleske TA, Hamid R, 
Hopkin RJ, Introne WJ, Lyons MJ, Scheuerle AE, Stoler JM.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a multisystem disorder that primarily involves 
the skin and peripheral nervous system. Its population prevalence is 
approximately 1 in 3000. The condition is usually recognized in early childhood, 
when pigmentary manifestations emerge. Although NF1 is associated with marked 
clinical variability, most children affected follow patterns of growth and 
development within the normal range. Some features of NF1 can be present at 
birth, but most manifestations emerge with age, necessitating periodic 
monitoring to address ongoing health and developmental needs and minimize the 
risk of serious medical complications. In this report, we provide a review of 
the clinical criteria needed to establish a diagnosis, the inheritance pattern 
of NF1, its major clinical and developmental manifestations, and guidelines for 
monitoring and providing intervention to maximize the health and quality of life 
of a child affected.

Copyright © 2019 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2019-0660
PMID: 31010905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have 
indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.