---
reference_id: "PMID:39726042"
title: Comparative profiling of white matter development in the human and mouse brain reveals volumetric deficits and delayed myelination in Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Ozarkar SS
- Patel RK
- Vulli T
- Smith AL
- Styner MA
- Hsu LM
- Lee SH
- Shih YI
- Hazlett HC
- Shen MD
- Burette AC
- Philpot BD
journal: Mol Autism
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13229-024-00636-y
keywords:
- Animals
- "Angelman Syndrome/genetics, pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- "White Matter/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Myelin Sheath/metabolism, pathology"
- Infant
- Child
- Mice
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Organ Size
- "Mice, Knockout"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative profiling of white matter development in the human and mouse brain reveals volumetric deficits and delayed myelination in Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Ozarkar SS, Patel RK, Vulli T, Smith AL, Styner MA, Hsu LM, Lee SH, Shih YI, Hazlett HC, Shen MD, Burette AC, Philpot BD
**Journal:** Mol Autism (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13229-024-00636-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-024-00636-y)

## Content

1. Mol Autism. 2024 Dec 26;15(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s13229-024-00636-y.

Comparative profiling of white matter development in the human and mouse brain
reveals volumetric deficits and delayed myelination in Angelman syndrome.

Ozarkar SS(1)(2), Patel RK(1)(2), Vulli T(1)(2), Smith AL(1)(2), Styner
MA(3)(4)(5), Hsu LM(6)(7)(8), Lee SH(6)(7)(8), Shih YI(6)(7)(8), Hazlett
HC(3)(4), Shen MD(#)(9)(10)(11), Burette AC(#)(12)(13), Philpot
BD(#)(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(5)Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Center for Animal MRI, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(7)Biomedical Research Imaging Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(9)Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA. mark_shen@med.unc.edu.
(10)Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. mark_shen@med.unc.edu.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA. mark_shen@med.unc.edu.
(12)Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA. alain_burette@med.unc.edu.
(13)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. alain_burette@med.unc.edu.
(14)Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA. bphilpot@med.unc.edu.
(15)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. bphilpot@med.unc.edu.
(16)Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. bphilpot@med.unc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    Res Sq. 2024 Aug 09:rs.3.rs-4681861. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-4681861/v1.

BACKGROUND: Angelman syndrome (AS), a severe neurodevelopmental disorder
resulting from the loss of the maternal UBE3A gene, is marked by changes in the
brain's white matter (WM). The extent of WM abnormalities seems to correlate
with the severity of clinical symptoms, but these deficits are still poorly
characterized or understood. This study provides the first large-scale
measurement of WM volume reduction in children with AS. Furthermore, we probed
the possibility of underlying WM neuropathology by examining the progression of
myelination in an AS mouse model.
METHODS: We conducted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on children with AS
(n = 32) and neurotypical controls (n = 99) aged 0.5-12 years. In parallel, we
examined myelination in postnatal Ube3a maternal-null mice (Ube3am-/p+; AS
model), Ube3a paternal-null mice (Ube3am+/p-), and wildtype controls
(Ube3am+/p+) using MRI, immunohistochemistry, western blotting, and electron
microscopy.
RESULTS: Our data revealed that AS individuals exhibit significant reductions in
brain volume by ~ 1 year of age, and by 6-12 years of age WM is reduced by 26%
and gray matter by 21%-approximately twice the reductions observed in the adult
AS mouse model. Our AS mouse model saw a global delay in the onset of
myelination, which normalized within days (likely corresponding to months or
years in human development). This myelination delay is caused by the loss of
UBE3A in neurons rather than UBE3A haploinsufficiency in oligodendrocytes.
Interestingly, ultrastructural analyses did not reveal abnormalities in
myelinated or unmyelinated axons.
LIMITATIONS: It is difficult to extrapolate the timing and duration of the
myelination delay observed in AS model mice to individuals with AS.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals WM deficits as a hallmark in children with AS,
demonstrating for the first time that these deficits are already apparent at 1
year of age. Parallel studies in a mouse model of AS show these deficits occur
alongside the delayed onset of myelination, which results from the loss of
neuronal (but not glial) UBE3A, though the causal relationship between these
phenotypes remains to be determined. These findings emphasize the potential of
WM as both a therapeutic target for interventions and a valuable biomarker for
tracking the progression of AS and the effectiveness of potential treatments.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13229-024-00636-y
PMCID: PMC11670556
PMID: 39726042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ethics approval and consent to participate: All
procedures related to the care and treatment of animals followed institutional
and NIH guidelines, and all animal use protocols were reviewed and approved by
the UNC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Parents of AS and NT
individuals provided informed consent, and the institutional review board
approved the research protocol. Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests.
