---
reference_id: "PMID:23185624"
title: Cerebrospinal fluid matrix metalloproteinases are elevated in cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy and correlate with MRI severity and neurologic dysfunction.
authors:
- Thibert KA
- Raymond GV
- Nascene DR
- Miller WP
- Tolar J
- Orchard PJ
- Lund TC
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050430
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily D, Member 1"
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, pathology"
- "Blood-Brain Barrier/metabolism, pathology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Gene Expression
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Matrix Metalloproteinase 10/cerebrospinal fluid, genetics"
- "Matrix Metalloproteinase 2/cerebrospinal fluid, genetics"
- "Matrix Metalloproteinase 9/cerebrospinal fluid, genetics"
- Mutation
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase-1/cerebrospinal fluid, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrospinal fluid matrix metalloproteinases are elevated in cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy and correlate with MRI severity and neurologic dysfunction.
**Authors:** Thibert KA, Raymond GV, Nascene DR, Miller WP, Tolar J, Orchard PJ, Lund TC
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0050430](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0050430)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050430. Epub 2012 Nov 
21.

Cerebrospinal fluid matrix metalloproteinases are elevated in cerebral 
adrenoleukodystrophy and correlate with MRI severity and neurologic dysfunction.

Thibert KA(1), Raymond GV, Nascene DR, Miller WP, Tolar J, Orchard PJ, Lund TC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplantation, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy results from mutations in the ABCD1 
gene disrupting the metabolism of very-long-chain fatty acids. The most serious 
form of ALD, cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy (cALD), causes neuroinflammation and 
demyelination. Neuroimaging in cALD shows inflammatory changes and indicates 
blood-brain-barrier (BBB) disruption. We hypothesize that disruption may occur 
through the degradation of the extracellular matrix defining the BBB by matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs). MMPs have not been evaluated in the setting of cALD.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used a multiplex assay to correlate the 
concentration of MMPs in cerebrospinal fluid and plasma to the severity of brain 
inflammation as determined by the ALD MRI (Loes) score and the neurologic 
function score. There were significant elevations of MMP2, MMP9, MMP10, TIMP1, 
and total protein in the CSF of boys with cALD compared to controls. Levels of 
MMP10, TIMP1, and total protein in CSF showed significant correlation [p<0.05 
for each with pre-transplant MRI Loes Loes scores (R(2) = 0.34, 0.20, 0.55 
respectively). Levels of TIMP1 and total protein in CSF significantly correlated 
with pre-transplant neurologic functional scores (R(2) = 0.22 and 0.48 
respectively), and levels of MMP10 and total protein in CSF significantly 
correlated with one-year post-transplant functional scores (R(2) = 0.38 and 
0.69). There was a significant elevation of MMP9 levels in plasma compared to 
control, but did not correlate with the MRI or neurologic function scores.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: MMPs were found to be elevated in the CSF of boys with 
cALD and may mechanistically contribute to the breakdown of the 
blood-brain-barrier. MMP concentrations directly correlate to radiographic and 
clinical neurologic severity. Interestingly, increased total protein levels 
showed superior correlation to MRI score and neurologic function score before 
and at one year after transplant.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050430
PMCID: PMC3503955
PMID: 23185624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.