---
reference_id: "PMID:9519033"
title: Bacterial meningitis in children and adults. Changes in community-acquired disease may affect patient care.
authors:
- Phillips EJ
- Simor AE
journal: Postgrad Med
year: '1998'
doi: 10.3810/pgm.1998.03.412
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial meningitis in children and adults. Changes in community-acquired disease may affect patient care.
**Authors:** Phillips EJ, Simor AE
**Journal:** Postgrad Med (1998)
**DOI:** [10.3810/pgm.1998.03.412](https://doi.org/10.3810/pgm.1998.03.412)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med. 1998 Mar;103(3):102-117. doi: 10.3810/pgm.1998.03.412.

Bacterial meningitis in children and adults. Changes in community-acquired 
disease may affect patient care.

Phillips EJ(1), Simor AE.

Author information:
(1)Sunnybrook Health Science Centre, Ontario, Canada. 
andrew.simor@sunnybrook.on.ca

Comment in
    Postgrad Med. 1998 Jul;104(1):31. doi: 10.1080/00325481.1998.11444688.
    Postgrad Med. 1998 Jul;104(1):31-2.

Despite improved understanding of how bacterial meningitis develops, the 
infection remains a potentially life-threatening emergency capable of causing 
significant morbidity and mortality. Since the introduction and widespread use 
of H influenzae type b vaccine in infancy and childhood in North America, the 
epidemiology of community-acquired bacterial meningitis has changed. S 
pneumoniae is now the most common cause in children and adults overall, although 
N meningitidis causes most disease in patients between ages 2 and 18 years. 
Broad-spectrum cephalosporins (eg, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime) are considered the 
agents of choice for empirical treatment of bacterial meningitis. However, use 
of these agents will have to be reconsidered if the incidence of invasive 
infection from drug-resistant S pneumoniae continues to increase. The role of 
adjunctive corticosteroid therapy needs to be better defined. Improved conjugate 
pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccines may soon make bacterial meningitis a 
preventable disease.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.1998.03.412
PMID: 9519033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]