---
reference_id: "PMID:33381870"
title: Activated KCNQ1 channel promotes fibrogenic response in hereditary gingival fibromatosis via clustering and activation of Ras.
authors:
- Gao Q
- Yang C
- Meng L
- Wang Z
- Chen D
- Peng Y
- Yang K
- Bian Z
journal: J Periodontal Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jre.12836
keywords:
- Cluster Analysis
- Fibroblasts
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/genetics"
- Gingiva
- Humans
- KCNQ1 Potassium Channel/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activated KCNQ1 channel promotes fibrogenic response in hereditary gingival fibromatosis via clustering and activation of Ras.
**Authors:** Gao Q, Yang C, Meng L, Wang Z, Chen D, Peng Y, Yang K, Bian Z
**Journal:** J Periodontal Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jre.12836](https://doi.org/10.1111/jre.12836)

## Content

1. J Periodontal Res. 2021 Jun;56(3):471-481. doi: 10.1111/jre.12836. Epub 2020
Dec  31.

Activated KCNQ1 channel promotes fibrogenic response in hereditary gingival 
fibromatosis via clustering and activation of Ras.

Gao Q(1), Yang C(1), Meng L(1), Wang Z(1), Chen D(1), Peng Y(1), Yang K(1), Bian 
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology 
(Hubei-MOST) & Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School 
& Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Activated potassium channels were found to be strongly 
correlated with gingival overgrowth (GO) phenotype as we reviewed syndromic 
hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF). Nevertheless, the functional roles of 
potassium channels in gingival fibrosis or gingival overgrowth remained 
uncovered. The aim of the present study was to explore the pathogenic role of 
aberrantly activated potassium channel in Hereditary Gingival Fibromatosis 
(HGF).
METHODS: Gingival tissues were collected from 9 HGF patients and 15 normal 
controls. Expression of KCNQ1 was detected by immunohistochemistry. Gingival 
fibroblasts were isolated, and outward K+ currents were detected by whole-cell 
patch-clamp analysis, transmembrane potential was determined by flow cytometry. 
Normal human gingival fibroblasts (NHGFs) were transfected with KCNQ1 adenovirus 
or treated with KCNQ1 selective agonist ML277 and antagonist chromanol 293B. 
Accumulation of Extracellular Matrix (ECM) was measured by Western blotting and 
Sircol Soluble Collagen Assay. Content of secreted TGF-β1 was measured by ELISA. 
Active RAS pull-down assay and cell immunofluorescence were utilized to verify 
RAS activation.
RESULTS: KCNQ1 was upregulated in gingival tissues derived from HGF patients and 
HGF gingival fibroblasts presented increased outward K+ currents than NHGFs. 
Overexpression of KCNQ1, or KCNQ1 agonist ML277, promoted fibrotic responses of 
NHGFs. TGF-β1 and KCNQ1 channels formed a positive feed-back loop. ML277 
generated lateral clustering and activation of Ras on plasma membrane, followed 
by augmented MAPK/AP-1 signaling pathway output. JNK or ERK1/2 inhibitors 
suppressed ML277-induced AP-1 and ECM upregulation.
CONCLUSION: Activation of KCNQ1 potassium channel promoted fibrogenic responses 
in NHGFs via Ras/MAPK/AP-1 signaling.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12836
PMID: 33381870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]