---
reference_id: "PMID:28089478"
title: "The Clinical Course of Minimal Change Nephrotic Syndrome With Onset in Adulthood or Late Adolescence: A Case Series."
authors:
- Maas RJ
- Deegens JK
- Beukhof JR
- Reichert LJ
- Ten Dam MA
- Beutler JJ
- van den Wall Bake AWL
- Rensma PL
- Konings CJ
- Geerse DA
- Feith GW
- Van Kuijk WH
- Wetzels JF
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2016.10.032
keywords:
- Acute Kidney Injury/epidemiology
- Adolescent
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/drug therapy, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Recovery of Function
- Recurrence
- Remission Induction
- "Remission, Spontaneous"
- Retrospective Studies
- Thrombosis/epidemiology
- Venous Thrombosis/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Clinical Course of Minimal Change Nephrotic Syndrome With Onset in Adulthood or Late Adolescence: A Case Series.
**Authors:** Maas RJ, Deegens JK, Beukhof JR, Reichert LJ, Ten Dam MA, Beutler JJ, van den Wall Bake AWL, Rensma PL, Konings CJ, Geerse DA, Feith GW, Van Kuijk WH, Wetzels JF
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2016.10.032](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2016.10.032)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2017 May;69(5):637-646. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2016.10.032. Epub
 2017 Jan 12.

The Clinical Course of Minimal Change Nephrotic Syndrome With Onset in Adulthood 
or Late Adolescence: A Case Series.

Maas RJ(1), Deegens JK(2), Beukhof JR(3), Reichert LJ(4), Ten Dam MA(5), Beutler 
JJ(6), van den Wall Bake AWL(7), Rensma PL(8), Konings CJ(9), Geerse DA(9), 
Feith GW(10), Van Kuijk WH(11), Wetzels JF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands. Electronic address: rutger.maas@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Isala Klinieken, Zwolle, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Rijnstate, Arnhem, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Canisius Wilhelmina Ziekenhuis, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Jeroen Bosch Ziekenhuis, 's Hertogenbosch, the 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Máxima Medisch Centrum, Veldhoven, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Nephrology, St. Elisabeth Ziekenhuis, Tilburg, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Nephrology, Catharina Ziekenhuis, Eindhoven, the Netherlands.
(10)Department of Nephrology, Gelderse Vallei, Ede, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Nephrology, Viecuri Medisch Centrum, Venlo, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Few studies have examined the treatment and outcome of adult-onset 
minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS). We retrospectively studied 125 
patients who had MCNS with onset in either adulthood or late adolescence. 
Presenting characteristics, duration of initial treatment and response to 
treatment, relapse patterns, complications, and long-term outcome were studied.
STUDY DESIGN: Case series.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: Patients with new-onset nephrotic syndrome 16 years or 
older and a histologic diagnosis of MCNS in 1985 to 2011 were identified from 
pathology records of 10 participating centers.
OUTCOMES: Partial and complete remission, treatment resistance, relapse, 
complications, renal survival.
RESULTS: Corticosteroids were given as initial treatment in 105 (84%) patients. 
After 16 weeks of corticosteroid treatment, 92 (88%) of these patients had 
reached remission. Median time to remission was 4 (IQR, 2-7) weeks. 7 (6%) 
patients initially received cyclophosphamide with or without corticosteroids, 
and all attained remission after a median of 4 (IQR, 3-11) weeks. 13 (10%) 
patients reached remission without immunosuppressive treatment. One or more 
relapses were observed in 57 (54%) patients who received initial corticosteroid 
treatment. Second-line cyclophosphamide resulted in stable remission in 57% of 
patients with relapsing MCNS. Acute kidney injury was observed in 50 (40%) 
patients. Recovery of kidney function occurred almost without exception. 
Arterial or venous thrombosis occurred in 11 (9%) patients. At the last 
follow-up, 113 (90%) patients were in remission and had preserved kidney 
function. 3 patients with steroid-resistant MCNS progressed to end-stage renal 
disease, which was associated with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis lesions on 
repeat biopsy.
LIMITATIONS: Retrospective design, variable treatment protocols.
CONCLUSIONS: The large majority of patients who had MCNS with onset in adulthood 
or late adolescence were treated with corticosteroids and reached remission, but 
many had relapses. Cyclophosphamide resulted in stable remission in many 
patients with relapses. Significant morbidity was observed due to acute kidney 
injury and other complications. Progression to end-stage renal disease occurred 
in a few patients and was explained by focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.

Copyright © 2016 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2016.10.032
PMID: 28089478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]