---
reference_id: "PMID:38696597"
title: "Neuroanatomy of autism: what is the role of the cerebellum?"
authors:
- Baizer JS
journal: Cereb Cortex
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhae050
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroanatomy of autism: what is the role of the cerebellum?
**Authors:** Baizer JS
**Journal:** Cereb Cortex (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cercor/bhae050](https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhae050)

## Content

1. Cereb Cortex. 2024 May 2;34(13):94-103. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhae050.

Neuroanatomy of autism: what is the role of the cerebellum?

Baizer JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, 123 Sherman Hall, Jacobs School of 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214, 
United States.

Autism (or autism spectrum disorder) was initially defined as a psychiatric 
disorder, with the likely cause maternal behavior (the very destructive 
"refrigerator mother" theory). It took several decades for research into brain 
mechanisms to become established. Both neuropathological and imaging studies 
found differences in the cerebellum in autism spectrum disorder, the most widely 
documented being a decreased density of Purkinje cells in the cerebellar cortex. 
The popular interpretation of these results is that cerebellar neuropathology is 
a critical cause of autism spectrum disorder. We challenge that view by arguing 
that if fewer Purkinje cells are critical for autism spectrum disorder, then any 
condition that causes the loss of Purkinje cells should also cause autism 
spectrum disorder. We will review data on damage to the cerebellum from 
cerebellar lesions, tumors, and several syndromes (Joubert syndrome, Fragile X, 
and tuberous sclerosis). Collectively, these studies raise the question of 
whether the cerebellum really has a role in autism spectrum disorder. Autism 
spectrum disorder is now recognized as a genetically caused developmental 
disorder. A better understanding of the genes that underlie the differences in 
brain development that result in autism spectrum disorder is likely to show that 
these genes affect the development of the cerebellum in parallel with the 
development of the structures that do underlie autism spectrum disorder.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhae050
PMCID: PMC11484497
PMID: 38696597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]