---
reference_id: "PMID:11731639"
title: "Childhood vaccinations, vaccination timing, and risk of type 1 diabetes mellitus."
authors:
- DeStefano F
- Mullooly JP
- Okoro CA
- Chen RT
- Marcy SM
- Ward JI
- Vadheim CM
- Black SB
- Shinefield HR
- Davis RL
- Bohlke K
- Vaccine Safety Datalink Team
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1542/peds.108.6.e112
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood vaccinations, vaccination timing, and risk of type 1 diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** DeStefano F, Mullooly JP, Okoro CA, Chen RT, Marcy SM, Ward JI, Vadheim CM, Black SB, Shinefield HR, Davis RL, Bohlke K, Vaccine Safety Datalink Team
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.108.6.e112](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.108.6.e112)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2001 Dec;108(6):E112. doi: 10.1542/peds.108.6.e112.

Childhood vaccinations, vaccination timing, and risk of type 1 diabetes 
mellitus.

DeStefano F(1), Mullooly JP, Okoro CA, Chen RT, Marcy SM, Ward JI, Vadheim CM, 
Black SB, Shinefield HR, Davis RL, Bohlke K; Vaccine Safety Datalink Team.

Author information:
(1)National Immunization Program, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, Georgia 30341-3724, USA. fdestefano@cdc.gov

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate suggested associations between childhood vaccinations, 
particularly against hepatitis B and Haemophilus influenzae type b, and risk of 
developing type 1 diabetes; and to determine whether timing of vaccination 
influences risk.
METHODS: We conducted a case-control study within 4 health maintenance 
organizations (HMOs) that participate in the Vaccine Safety Datalink project of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Study eligibility was restricted 
to children who met the following criteria: 1) born during 1988 through 1997; 2) 
HMO member since birth; 3) continuously enrolled for first 6 months of life; and 
4) at least 12 months of HMO membership before diabetes incidence date (or index 
date for controls) unless incidence date was before 12 months of age. All 4 HMOs 
maintain registries of their members who have diabetes, and we used the 
registries to identify potential cases of diabetes. We conducted chart reviews 
to verify that potential cases met the World Health Organization epidemiologic 
case definition for type 1 diabetes mellitus (ie, a physician's diagnosis of 
diabetes plus treatment with daily insulin injections). We defined the incidence 
date of diabetes as the first date that the child received a diagnosis of 
diabetes. We attempted to match 3 controls to each case. Controls had the same 
eligibility criteria as cases and were matched to individual cases on HMO, sex, 
date of birth (within 7 days), and length of health plan enrollment (up to the 
incidence or index date). The index date for controls was defined as the 
incidence date of the case to which the control was matched. Chart abstraction 
was performed by trained chart abstractors using standardized forms. In addition 
to complete vaccination histories, the chart abstraction forms for both cases 
and controls included information on sociodemographic characteristics, selected 
medical conditions, history of breastfeeding, and family medical history. We 
used conditional logistic regression to estimate the odds ratio (OR) of diabetes 
associated with vaccination, with vaccine exposure defined as before the 
diabetes incidence date (or index date for controls).
RESULTS: Two hundred fifty-two confirmed cases of diabetes and 768 matched 
controls met the study eligibility criteria. The OR (95% confidence interval) 
for the association with type 1 diabetes was 0.28 (0.07-1.06) for whole cell 
pertussis vaccine (predominantly in combination as diphtheria, tetanus toxoids 
and pertussis vaccine), 1.36 (0.70-2.63) for measles-mumps-rubella, 1.14 
(0.51-2.57) for Haemophilus influenzae type b, 0.81 (0.52-1.27) for hepatitis B 
vaccine, 1.16 (0.72-1.89) for varicella vaccine, and 0.92 (0.53-1.57) for 
acellular pertussis-containing vaccines. Compared with children who had not 
received hepatitis B vaccine, the OR of diabetes was 0.51 (0.23-1.15) for 
children vaccinated at birth and 0.86 (0.54-1.35) for those first vaccinated 
against hepatitis B at 2 months of age or later. Race and ethnicity and family 
history of diabetes were independently associated with risk of type 1 diabetes, 
but adjustment for these factors did not materially alter the ORs for any of the 
vaccines.
CONCLUSIONS: In this large, population-based, case-control study, we did not 
find an increased risk of type 1 diabetes associated with any of the routinely 
recommended childhood vaccines. Our study adds to previous research by providing 
data on newer vaccines, including hepatitis B, acellular pertussis, and 
varicella vaccines. For the older vaccines, our results are generally in 
agreement with previous studies in not finding any increased risks. Ours is the 
first epidemiologic study to evaluate the possibility that timing of vaccination 
is related to risk of clinical diabetes in children. Our results on hepatitis B 
vaccine do not support the hypothesis; risk of type 1 diabetes was not different 
between infants vaccinated at birth and those who received their first 
vaccination later in life. The results of our study and the preponderance of 
epidemiologic evidence do not support an association between any of the 
recommended childhood vaccines and an increased risk of type 1 diabetes. 
Suggestions that diabetes risk in humans may be altered by changes in the timing 
of vaccinations also are unfounded.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.108.6.e112
PMID: 11731639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]