---
reference_id: "PMID:34485306"
title: Allele-Specific Gene Editing Rescues Pathology in a Human Model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease Type 2E.
authors:
- Feliciano CM
- Wu K
- Watry HL
- Marley CBE
- Ramadoss GN
- Ghanim HY
- Liu AZ
- Zholudeva LV
- McDevitt TC
- Saporta MA
- Conklin BR
- Judge LM
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.723023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Allele-Specific Gene Editing Rescues Pathology in a Human Model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease Type 2E.
**Authors:** Feliciano CM, Wu K, Watry HL, Marley CBE, Ramadoss GN, Ghanim HY, Liu AZ, Zholudeva LV, McDevitt TC, Saporta MA, Conklin BR, Judge LM
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2021.723023](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2021.723023)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Aug 16;9:723023. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.723023. 
eCollection 2021.

Allele-Specific Gene Editing Rescues Pathology in a Human Model of 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease Type 2E.

Feliciano CM(1)(2), Wu K(2), Watry HL(2), Marley CBE(1)(2), Ramadoss GN(2)(3), 
Ghanim HY(2), Liu AZ(2)(4), Zholudeva LV(2), McDevitt TC(2)(5), Saporta MA(6), 
Conklin BR(2)(4)(7)(8), Judge LM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, United States.
(2)Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA, United States.
(3)Biomedical Sciences Ph.D. Program, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA, United States.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, United States.
(5)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States.
(6)Department of Neurology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 
Miami, FL, United States.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, United States.
(8)Innovative Genomics Institute, Berkeley, CA, United States.

Many neuromuscular disorders are caused by dominant missense mutations that lead 
to dominant-negative or gain-of-function pathology. This category of disease is 
challenging to address via drug treatment or gene augmentation therapy because 
these strategies may not eliminate the effects of the mutant protein or RNA. 
Thus, effective treatments are severely lacking for these dominant diseases, 
which often cause severe disability or death. The targeted inactivation of 
dominant disease alleles by gene editing is a promising approach with the 
potential to completely remove the cause of pathology with a single treatment. 
Here, we demonstrate that allele-specific CRISPR gene editing in a human model 
of axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease rescues pathology caused by a 
dominant missense mutation in the neurofilament light chain gene (NEFL, CMT type 
2E). We utilized a rapid and efficient method for generating spinal motor 
neurons from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from a patient 
with CMT2E. Diseased motor neurons recapitulated known pathologic phenotypes at 
early time points of differentiation, including aberrant accumulation of 
neurofilament light chain protein in neuronal cell bodies. We selectively 
inactivated the disease NEFL allele in patient iPSCs using Cas9 enzymes to 
introduce a frameshift at the pathogenic N98S mutation. Motor neurons carrying 
this allele-specific frameshift demonstrated an amelioration of the disease 
phenotype comparable to that seen in an isogenic control with precise correction 
of the mutation. Our results validate allele-specific gene editing as a 
therapeutic approach for CMT2E and as a promising strategy to silence dominant 
mutations in any gene for which heterozygous loss-of-function is well tolerated. 
This highlights the potential for gene editing as a therapy for currently 
untreatable dominant neurologic diseases.

Copyright © 2021 Feliciano, Wu, Watry, Marley, Ramadoss, Ghanim, Liu, Zholudeva, 
McDevitt, Saporta, Conklin and Judge.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.723023
PMCID: PMC8415563
PMID: 34485306

Conflict of interest statement: BC is a founder of Tenaya Therapeutics 
(https://www.tenayatherapeutics.com/), a company focused on finding treatments 
for heart failure, including genetic cardiomyopathies. BC holds equity in 
Tenaya, and Tenaya provides research support for heart failure related research. 
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of 
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.