---
reference_id: "PMID:22412863"
title: Deletion of Porcn in mice leads to multiple developmental defects and models human focal dermal hypoplasia (Goltz syndrome).
authors:
- Liu W
- Shaver TM
- Balasa A
- Ljungberg MC
- Wang X
- Wen S
- Nguyen H
- Van den Veyver IB
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032331
keywords:
- Acyltransferases
- Animals
- Breeding
- Cell Line
- Chimera
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Focal Dermal Hypoplasia/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Gene Silencing
- Gene Targeting
- "Genes, Lethal"
- Humans
- Introns
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Phenotype
- Wnt3A Protein/metabolism
- Zygote/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletion of Porcn in mice leads to multiple developmental defects and models human focal dermal hypoplasia (Goltz syndrome).
**Authors:** Liu W, Shaver TM, Balasa A, Ljungberg MC, Wang X, Wen S, Nguyen H, Van den Veyver IB
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0032331](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0032331)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32331. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032331. Epub 2012 Mar
6.

Deletion of Porcn in mice leads to multiple developmental defects and models 
human focal dermal hypoplasia (Goltz syndrome).

Liu W(1), Shaver TM, Balasa A, Ljungberg MC, Wang X, Wen S, Nguyen H, Van den 
Veyver IB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Focal Dermal Hypoplasia (FDH) is a genetic disorder characterized by 
developmental defects in skin, skeleton and ectodermal appendages. FDH is caused 
by dominant loss-of-function mutations in X-linked PORCN. PORCN orthologues in 
Drosophila and mice encode endoplasmic reticulum proteins required for secretion 
and function of Wnt proteins. Wnt proteins play important roles in embryo 
development, tissue homeostasis and stem cell maintenance. Since features of FDH 
overlap with those seen in mouse Wnt pathway mutants, FDH likely results from 
defective Wnt signaling but molecular mechanisms by which inactivation of PORCN 
affects Wnt signaling and manifestations of FDH remain to be elucidated.
RESULTS: We introduced intronic loxP sites and a neomycin gene in the mouse 
Porcn locus for conditional inactivation. Porcn-ex3-7flox mice have no apparent 
developmental defects, but chimeric mice retaining the neomycin gene 
(Porcn-ex3-7Neo-flox) have limb, skin, and urogenital abnormalities. Conditional 
Porcn inactivation by EIIa-driven or Hprt-driven Cre recombinase results in 
increased early embryonic lethality. Mesenchyme-specific Prx-Cre-driven 
inactivation of Porcn produces FDH-like limb defects, while ectodermal 
Krt14-Cre-driven inactivation produces thin skin, alopecia, and abnormal 
dentition. Furthermore, cell-based assays confirm that human PORCN mutations 
reduce WNT3A secretion.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that Porcn inactivation in the mouse produces a 
model for human FDH and that phenotypic features result from defective WNT 
signaling in ectodermal- and mesenchymal-derived structures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032331
PMCID: PMC3295752
PMID: 22412863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.