---
reference_id: "PMID:37543519"
title: Relationship between lifestyle habits and cardiovascular risk factors in familial hypercholesterolemia.
authors:
- Dessureault L
- Roy G
- Couture P
- Gangloff A
- Guasch-Ferré M
- Pérusse L
- Tremblay A
- Drouin-Chartier JP
journal: Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.numecd.2023.06.014
keywords:
- Adult
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Risk Factors
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Canada
- Life Style
- "Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Healthy Lifestyle
- "Cholesterol, LDL"
- Heart Disease Risk Factors
- Habits
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between lifestyle habits and cardiovascular risk factors in familial hypercholesterolemia.
**Authors:** Dessureault L, Roy G, Couture P, Gangloff A, Guasch-Ferré M, Pérusse L, Tremblay A, Drouin-Chartier JP
**Journal:** Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.numecd.2023.06.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.numecd.2023.06.014)

## Content

1. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2023 Oct;33(10):2044-2052. doi: 
10.1016/j.numecd.2023.06.014. Epub 2023 Jun 23.

Relationship between lifestyle habits and cardiovascular risk factors in 
familial hypercholesterolemia.

Dessureault L(1), Roy G(2), Couture P(2), Gangloff A(3), Guasch-Ferré M(4), 
Pérusse L(2), Tremblay A(2), Drouin-Chartier JP(5).

Author information:
(1)NUTRISS (Nutrition, Health and Society) Research Center, Institute on 
Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Laval University, Quebec City, QC, 
Canada; Faculty of Pharmacy, Laval University, Quebec City, QC, Canada.
(2)NUTRISS (Nutrition, Health and Society) Research Center, Institute on 
Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Laval University, Quebec City, QC, 
Canada; Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec City, QC, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec City, QC, Canada; CHU de Québec 
Research Centre, Laval University, Quebec City, QC, Canada.
(4)Department of Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, 
MA, USA; Department of Public Health and Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for 
Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)NUTRISS (Nutrition, Health and Society) Research Center, Institute on 
Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Laval University, Quebec City, QC, 
Canada; Faculty of Pharmacy, Laval University, Quebec City, QC, Canada. 
Electronic address: jean-philippe.drouin-chartier@pha.ulaval.ca.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Little is known about the cardioprotective potential of a 
healthy lifestyle in familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). The objective of this 
study was to evaluate the relationship between lifestyle and cardiovascular risk 
factors in adults with FH.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This cross-sectional study leveraged data from the 
CARTaGENE Quebec population-based cohort (Canada). Participants with FH were 
identified using the validated Simplified Canadian Definition for FH. A healthy 
lifestyle score (HLS), ranging from 0 to 5, was calculated per adherence to 5 
lifestyle habits: 1) not smoking; 2) being physically active (≥150 min/week of 
moderate or vigorous physical activity); 3) eating a healthy diet (Alternate 
Healthy Eating Index ≥50%); 4) having a light to moderate alcohol consumption 
(men: 1-30 g/day; women: 1-15 g/day); and 5) sleeping 7-8 h/day. Among the 122 
included individuals (women, n = 78; men, n = 44; mean age ± SD: 57.3 ± 6.7 
years), 92 (75.4%) had a HLS ≤3/5, while only 5 (4.1%) had a HLS of 5/5. After 
adjustments for sex, age, body mass index, and lipid-lowering medication use, we 
found no evidence of an association between the HLS and concentrations of 
LDL-cholesterol (β = 0.04, 95% CI = -0.08, 0.15 mmol/L; P = 0.54). However, the 
HLS was favorably associated with HbA1c levels (β = -0.07, 95% CI = -0.13, 
-0.01%; P = 0.02), and statistical trends suggested favorable associations with 
HDL-cholesterol (β = 0.06, 95% CI = -0.02, 0.14 mmol/L; P = 0.06) and waist 
circumference (β = -2.22, 95% CI = -4.62, 0.17 cm; P = 0.07).
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that a healthy lifestyle is favorably associated 
with CVD risk factors in adults with FH.

Copyright © 2023 The Italian Diabetes Society, the Italian Society for the Study 
of Atherosclerosis, the Italian Society of Human Nutrition and the Department of 
Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.numecd.2023.06.014
PMID: 37543519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Authors 
declare no conflict of interest.