---
reference_id: "PMID:25140400"
title: Elimination of pain and improvement of exercise capacity in Camurati-Engelmann disease with losartan.
authors:
- Ayyavoo A
- Derraik JG
- Cutfield WS
- Hofman PL
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elimination of pain and improvement of exercise capacity in Camurati-Engelmann disease with losartan.
**Authors:** Ayyavoo A, Derraik JG, Cutfield WS, Hofman PL
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2014-2025](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2014-2025)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Nov;99(11):3978-82. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2025. 
Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Elimination of pain and improvement of exercise capacity in Camurati-Engelmann 
disease with losartan.

Ayyavoo A(1), Derraik JG, Cutfield WS, Hofman PL.

Author information:
(1)Liggins Institute (A.A., J.G.B.D., W.S.C., P.L.H.), University of Auckland, 
Auckland 1142, New Zealand; and Department of Pediatric Endocrinology (W.S.C., 
P.L.H.), Greenlane Clinical Centre, Auckland District Health Board, Auckland 
1051, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED) is a rare disorder, with 
approximately 250 described cases in the literature. Treatment options are 
limited and have been suboptimal so far.
PATIENT AND METHODS: A prepubertal girl aged 9 years was diagnosed with CED. 
Treatment with losartan was initiated at a daily dose of 0.75 mg/kg. Over a 
period of 12 weeks, the dose was gradually increased to 1.0 mg/kg/d. The patient 
was reviewed in clinic regularly and underwent thorough clinical assessments 9, 
17, and 38 months after treatment initiation.
RESULTS: The patient experienced marked clinical improvements with losartan. In 
particular, losartan treatment led to the complete elimination of the previously 
severe and incapacitating pain, with an increased ability to walk and perform 
physical activities. There was also a considerable improvement in body 
composition with increased lean and adipose tissue. Notably, the improvement in 
fat deposition had not been previously observed with other treatments in CED. 
Hematology, liver, and renal function tests were within normal ranges at 
presentation and remained so over the course of treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: In light of our findings, losartan may be a useful option in CED 
management.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2014-2025
PMID: 25140400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]