---
reference_id: "PMID:18565953"
title: Wheezing rhinovirus illnesses in early life predict asthma development in high-risk children.
authors:
- Jackson DJ
- Gangnon RE
- Evans MD
- Roberg KA
- Anderson EL
- Pappas TE
- Printz MC
- Lee WM
- Shult PA
- Reisdorf E
- Carlson-Dakes KT
- Salazar LP
- DaSilva DF
- Tisler CJ
- Gern JE
- Lemanske RF Jr
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.200802-309OC
keywords:
- Asthma/virology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunization
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Odds Ratio
- Picornaviridae Infections/immunology
- Prospective Studies
- Respiratory Sounds/immunology
- Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections/immunology
- Risk Factors
- Skin Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wheezing rhinovirus illnesses in early life predict asthma development in high-risk children.
**Authors:** Jackson DJ, Gangnon RE, Evans MD, Roberg KA, Anderson EL, Pappas TE, Printz MC, Lee WM, Shult PA, Reisdorf E, Carlson-Dakes KT, Salazar LP, DaSilva DF, Tisler CJ, Gern JE, Lemanske RF Jr
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.200802-309OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.200802-309OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Oct 1;178(7):667-72. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.200802-309OC. Epub 2008 Jun 19.

Wheezing rhinovirus illnesses in early life predict asthma development in 
high-risk children.

Jackson DJ(1), Gangnon RE, Evans MD, Roberg KA, Anderson EL, Pappas TE, Printz 
MC, Lee WM, Shult PA, Reisdorf E, Carlson-Dakes KT, Salazar LP, DaSilva DF, 
Tisler CJ, Gern JE, Lemanske RF Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. 
djj@medicine.wisc.edu

RATIONALE: Virus-induced wheezing episodes in infancy often precede the 
development of asthma. Whether infections with specific viral pathogens confer 
differential future asthma risk is incompletely understood.
OBJECTIVES: To define the relationship between specific viral illnesses and 
early childhood asthma development.
METHODS: A total of 259 children were followed prospectively from birth to 6 
years of age. The etiology and timing of specific viral wheezing respiratory 
illnesses during early childhood were assessed using nasal lavage, culture, and 
multiplex reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The relationships of 
these virus-specific wheezing illnesses and other risk factors to the 
development of asthma were analyzed.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Viral etiologies were identified in 90% of 
wheezing illnesses. From birth to age 3 years, wheezing with respiratory 
syncytial virus (RSV) (odds ratio [OR], 2.6), rhinovirus (RV) (OR, 9.8), or both 
RV and RSV (OR , 10) was associated with increased asthma risk at age 6 years. 
In Year 1, both RV wheezing (OR, 2.8) and aeroallergen sensitization (OR, 3.6) 
independently increased asthma risk at age 6 years. By age 3 years, wheezing 
with RV (OR, 25.6) was more strongly associated with asthma at age 6 years than 
aeroallergen sensitization (OR, 3.4). Nearly 90% (26 of 30) of children who 
wheezed with RV in Year 3 had asthma at 6 years of age.
CONCLUSIONS: Among outpatient viral wheezing illnesses in infancy and early 
childhood, those caused by RV infections are the most significant predictors of 
the subsequent development of asthma at age 6 years in a high-risk birth cohort.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200802-309OC
PMCID: PMC2556448
PMID: 18565953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]