---
reference_id: "PMID:31831596"
title: "Long-term follow-up, quality of life, and survival of patients with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome."
authors:
- Lipka AF
- Boldingh MI
- van Zwet EW
- Schreurs MWJ
- Kuks JBM
- Tallaksen CM
- Titulaer MJ
- Verschuuren JJGM
journal: Neurology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008747
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents
- "Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome/complications, immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Lung Neoplasms/complications, mortality, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Netherlands
- Plasma Exchange
- Quality of Life
- "Small Cell Lung Carcinoma/complications, mortality, therapy"
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term follow-up, quality of life, and survival of patients with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome.
**Authors:** Lipka AF, Boldingh MI, van Zwet EW, Schreurs MWJ, Kuks JBM, Tallaksen CM, Titulaer MJ, Verschuuren JJGM
**Journal:** Neurology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000008747](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000008747)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2020 Feb 4;94(5):e511-e520. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008747. Epub
 2019 Dec 12.

Long-term follow-up, quality of life, and survival of patients with 
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome.

Lipka AF(1), Boldingh MI(2), van Zwet EW(2), Schreurs MWJ(2), Kuks JBM(2), 
Tallaksen CM(2), Titulaer MJ(2), Verschuuren JJGM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neurology (A.F.L., J.J.G.M.V.) and Biostatistics 
(E.W.v.Z.), Leiden University Medical Center; Department of Neurology (A.F.L.), 
Groene Hart Hospital, Gouda, the Netherlands; Department of Neurology (M.I.B., 
C.M.T.), Oslo University Hospital, Norway; Departments of Immunology (M.W.J.S.) 
and Neurology (M.J.T.), Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam; Department 
of Neurology (J.B.M.K.), University Medical Center Groningen, the Netherlands; 
and Faculty of Medicine (C.M.T.), University of Oslo, Norway. a.f.lipka@lumc.nl.
(2)From the Departments of Neurology (A.F.L., J.J.G.M.V.) and Biostatistics 
(E.W.v.Z.), Leiden University Medical Center; Department of Neurology (A.F.L.), 
Groene Hart Hospital, Gouda, the Netherlands; Department of Neurology (M.I.B., 
C.M.T.), Oslo University Hospital, Norway; Departments of Immunology (M.W.J.S.) 
and Neurology (M.J.T.), Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam; Department 
of Neurology (J.B.M.K.), University Medical Center Groningen, the Netherlands; 
and Faculty of Medicine (C.M.T.), University of Oslo, Norway.

Erratum in
    Neurology. 2021 Nov 30;97(22):1053. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000011775.

OBJECTIVE: To study survival and to characterize long-term functional 
impairments and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) of patients with 
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS).
METHODS: In this observational study, survival of patients with LEMS, separately 
for nontumor (NT) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC), was compared to that of the 
Dutch general population and patients with SCLC. Disease course in patients with 
LEMS was recorded retrospectively. Several scales for functional impairments and 
health-related quality of life were assessed.
RESULTS: We included 150 patients with LEMS. Survival was similar to that of the 
general population in 65 patients with NT-LEMS. Tumor survival was significantly 
longer in 81 patients with SCLC-LEMS compared to patients with non-LEMS SCLC 
(overall median survival 17 vs 7.0 months, p < 0.0001). At diagnosis, 39 (62%) 
of 63 patients with complete follow-up data were independent for activities of 
daily living, improving to 85% at the 1-year follow-up. The physical HRQOL 
composite score (55.9) was significantly lower than in the general population 
(76.3, p < 0.0001) and comparable to that of patients with myasthenia gravis 
(60.5). The mental HRQOL composite score was 71.8 in patients with LEMS, 
comparable to that of the general population (77.9, p = 0.19) and patients with 
myasthenia gravis (70.3).
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that patients with NT-LEMS have normal survival. 
Patients with SCLC-LEMS have an improved tumor survival, even after correction 
for tumor stage. A majority of patients with LEMS report a stable disease course 
and remain or become independent for self-care after treatment.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008747
PMCID: PMC7080283
PMID: 31831596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]