---
reference_id: "PMID:31855785"
title: "Long-term effects of pulmonary rehabilitation on daily life physical activity of patients with stage IV sarcoidosis: A randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- Wallaert B
- Kyheng M
- Labreuche J
- Stelianides S
- Wemeau L
- Grosbois JM
journal: Respir Med Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.resmer.2019.10.003
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Aged
- Behavior Therapy/methods
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Dyspnea/complications, pathology, physiopathology, rehabilitation"
- Exercise/physiology
- Exercise Therapy/methods
- Exercise Tolerance/physiology
- "Fatigue/complications, pathology, physiopathology, rehabilitation"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Patient Education as Topic
- Patient Reported Outcome Measures
- "Physical Conditioning, Human/methods"
- Psychosocial Support Systems
- Quality of Life
- Respiratory Therapy/methods
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/pathology, physiopathology, rehabilitation"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term effects of pulmonary rehabilitation on daily life physical activity of patients with stage IV sarcoidosis: A randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** Wallaert B, Kyheng M, Labreuche J, Stelianides S, Wemeau L, Grosbois JM
**Journal:** Respir Med Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.resmer.2019.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resmer.2019.10.003)

## Content

1. Respir Med Res. 2020 Mar;77:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.resmer.2019.10.003. Epub 2019
Oct 28.

Long-term effects of pulmonary rehabilitation on daily life physical activity of
patients with stage IV sarcoidosis: A randomized controlled trial.

Wallaert B(1), Kyheng M(2), Labreuche J(2), Stelianides S(3), Wemeau L(4),
Grosbois JM(5).

Author information:
(1)CHU Lille, Service de Pneumologie et ImmunoAllergologie, Centre de Référence
constitutif des Maladies Rares, Hôpital Calmette, 59037 Lille, France;
University of Lille, 59000 Lille, France. Electronic address:
bwallaert@gmail.com.
(2)University of Lille, CHU Lille, EA 2694-Santé publique: épidémiologie et
qualité des soins, Department of Biostatistics, 59000 Lille, France.
(3)Division of Pneumology, Bichat Hospital, Paris-Diderot University, 75877,
Paris, France.
(4)CHU Lille, Service de Pneumologie et ImmunoAllergologie, Centre de Référence
constitutif des Maladies Rares, Hôpital Calmette, 59037 Lille, France.
(5)FormactionSanté, 59840 Pérenchies, France.

INTRODUCTION: Pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) is known to improve exercise
tolerance, mood, and quality of life in patients with chronic respiratory
diseases. The aim of this work was to determine whether PR provides long-term
benefits in increasing daily life physical activity in patients with chronic
sarcoidosis.
METHODS: This randomized prospective study (registered ClinicalTrials.gov
NCT02044939) of 38 patients with stage IV chronic sarcoidosis was performed
between 2012 and 2016. Patients were assigned to participate in a 2-month PR
program (n=20) or receive counseling (n=18). Assessments were performed at
baseline, 2 months (end of the PR program), 6months, and 12months, and included
daily life physical activity parameters (measured for 5 consecutive days),
exercise tolerance, dyspnea, anxiety, depression, fatigue, and quality of life.
The primary outcome was the 12-month change in time spent in activities above an
estimated energy expenditure of 2.5metabolic equivalents (METs). Secondary daily
life physical activity outcomes included number of steps per day, total daily
energy expenditure, and total energy expenditure above 2.5METs.
RESULTS: The primary outcome did not differ between the two groups; mean
between-group differences were -13.2min (95% confidence interval [CI]: -76.3 to
49.8) at 6 months and -18.1min (95% CI: -55.7 to 19.4) at 12months. Although PR
had no effect on secondary daily life physical activity outcomes, it did
significantly increase exercise tolerance at 6 and 12 months and decrease the
dyspnea score at 6 months and the fatigue score at 12months.
CONCLUSION: This trial failed to demonstrate a beneficial effect of PR on daily
life physical activity in sarcoidosis patients, suggesting that long-term
behavioral programs may be necessary to complement PR.

Copyright © 2019 SPLF and Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resmer.2019.10.003
PMID: 31855785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
