---
reference_id: "PMID:39003309"
title: Role of serum complement C3 and C4 on kidney outcomes in IgA nephropathy.
authors:
- Tringali E
- Vetrano D
- Tondolo F
- Maritati F
- Fabbrizio B
- Pasquinelli G
- Provenzano M
- La Manna G
- Baraldi O
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-65857-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/blood"
- Male
- Female
- "Complement C3/metabolism, analysis"
- Adult
- "Complement C4/metabolism, analysis"
- Retrospective Studies
- Prognosis
- Middle Aged
- Disease Progression
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/blood"
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Kidney/pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of serum complement C3 and C4 on kidney outcomes in IgA nephropathy.
**Authors:** Tringali E, Vetrano D, Tondolo F, Maritati F, Fabbrizio B, Pasquinelli G, Provenzano M, La Manna G, Baraldi O
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-65857-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-65857-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 13;14(1):16224. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-65857-w.

Role of serum complement C3 and C4 on kidney outcomes in IgA nephropathy.

Tringali E(#)(1), Vetrano D(#)(1), Tondolo F(2), Maritati F(2), Fabbrizio B(3),
Pasquinelli G(1)(3), Provenzano M(4), La Manna G(5)(6), Baraldi O(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), Alma Mater Studiorum
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Nephrology, Dialysis and Kidney Transplant Unit, IRCCS Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Pathology Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna,
Italy.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of
Calabria, Rende, CS, Italy. michiprov@hotmail.it.
(5)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), Alma Mater Studiorum
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. gaetano.lamanna@unibo.it.
(6)Nephrology, Dialysis and Kidney Transplant Unit, IRCCS Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy. gaetano.lamanna@unibo.it.
(7)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Santa Maria delle Croci Hospital-Ravenna, AUSL
Della Romagna, Ravenna, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

IgA Nephropathy (IgAN) is the most prevalent glomerular disease worldwide.
Complement system activation is crucial in its pathogenesis. Few studies
correlated serum C3 and C4 with disease activity and prognosis. This
retrospective study investigated the prognostic value of serum complement at the
time of diagnosis in patients with IgAN. Specifically we evaluated whether
adding serum C3 and C4 levels to established predictive models-one based on
variables related to chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression and another
incorporating variables from the International IgA Prediction Tool
(IntIgAPT)-enhances the accuracy of outcome prediction. A composite renal
outcome was defined as 50% decline in eGFR or onset of kidney failure. 101
patients were stratified according to baseline C3 levels in three groups (Low,
Medium and High). During a median follow-up of 54 months, the Low group
exhibited higher incidence of primary outcome (16.3 events vs 2.9 and 1.7
events × 100 pts/year, p = 0.0026). Model-1 (M1), consisting of CKD progression
variables, and Model-3 (M3), comprising IntIgANPT variables, were implemented
with baseline C3 and C4 to create Model-2 (M2) and Model-4 (M4), respectively.
M2 demonstrated better predictive performance over M1, showing higher
discrimination (lower AIC and BIC, higher C-index and NR2). Similarly, M4
outperformed M3, showing enhanced outcome prediction when C3 and C4 levels were
added. Implementation of serum C3 and C4 can enhance prediction accuracy of
already-validated prognostic models in IgAN. Lower C3 and higher C4 levels were
associated with poorer prognosis, highlighting a more 'Complement-Pathic' subset
of patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-65857-w
PMCID: PMC11246413
PMID: 39003309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
