---
reference_id: "PMID:20619859"
title: "Etiology of Konzo, epidemic spastic paraparesis associated with cyanogenic glycosides in cassava: role of thiamine deficiency?"
authors:
- Adamolekun B
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.06.016
keywords:
- Africa
- "Amino Acids, Sulfur/deficiency"
- "Brain Damage, Chronic/etiology"
- Cerebellar Ataxia/etiology
- "Cyanides/adverse effects, analysis"
- Diet/adverse effects
- Epidemics
- Humans
- Manihot/chemistry
- Optic Nerve Diseases/etiology
- "Paraparesis, Spastic/etiology, pathology"
- Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/etiology
- Plant Roots/chemistry
- Syndrome
- "Thiamine Deficiency/etiology, pathology"
- "Thiocyanates/analysis, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etiology of Konzo, epidemic spastic paraparesis associated with cyanogenic glycosides in cassava: role of thiamine deficiency?
**Authors:** Adamolekun B
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2010.06.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2010.06.016)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Sep 15;296(1-2):30-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.06.016.

Etiology of Konzo, epidemic spastic paraparesis associated with cyanogenic 
glycosides in cassava: role of thiamine deficiency?

Adamolekun B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 855 
Monroe Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA. badamole@uthsc.edu

Comment in
    J Neurol Sci. 2011 Mar 15;302(1-2):129; author reply 130-1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jns.2010.12.003.

Konzo is a syndrome of symmetrical, non-progressive, non-remitting spastic 
paraparesis occurring in epidemic and endemic forms in several countries in 
Africa, invariably associated with monotonous consumption of inadequately 
processed bitter cassava roots (Manihot esculenta) with very minimal protein 
supplementation. Despite numerous epidemiological, clinical and biochemical 
studies by authors in several countries aimed at elucidating the etiological 
mechanisms of Konzo, the etiology remains unknown. High cyanide consumption with 
low dietary sulfur intake due to almost exclusive consumption of insufficiently 
processed bitter cassava roots was proposed as the cause of Konzo, but there has 
been no evidence of a causal association between cyanide consumption and Konzo. 
In this paper a new etiological mechanism of thiamine deficiency is presented, 
based on detailed review of the epidemiological, clinical and biochemical 
features of Konzo. It is postulated that in Konzo patients, a severe 
exacerbation of thiamine deficiency results from the inactivation of thiamine 
that occurs when, in the absence of dietary sulfur-containing amino acids; the 
sulfur in thiamine is utilized for the detoxification of cyanide consumed in 
improperly processed bitter cassava. Thiamine is known to be rendered inactive 
when the sulfur in its thiazole moiety is combined with hydrogen cyanide. This 
hypothesis may stimulate studies examining the role of thiamine in the etiology 
of Konzo, and may lead to the formulation of strategies for the prevention and 
treatment of this debilitating disease.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.06.016
PMID: 20619859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]