---
reference_id: "PMID:30631414"
title: "The Effect of Tobacco Smoking on Bone Mass: An Overview of Pathophysiologic Mechanisms."
authors:
- Al-Bashaireh AM
- Haddad LG
- Weaver M
- Chengguo X
- Kelly DL
- Yoon S
journal: J Osteoporos
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1155/2018/1206235
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Effect of Tobacco Smoking on Bone Mass: An Overview of Pathophysiologic Mechanisms.
**Authors:** Al-Bashaireh AM, Haddad LG, Weaver M, Chengguo X, Kelly DL, Yoon S
**Journal:** J Osteoporos (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2018/1206235](https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/1206235)

## Content

1. J Osteoporos. 2018 Dec 2;2018:1206235. doi: 10.1155/2018/1206235. eCollection 
2018.

The Effect of Tobacco Smoking on Bone Mass: An Overview of Pathophysiologic 
Mechanisms.

Al-Bashaireh AM(1), Haddad LG(2), Weaver M(3), Chengguo X(4), Kelly DL(5), Yoon 
S(6).

Author information:
(1)Ph.D., College of Nursing, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Professor, Associate Director for Graduate Program, College of Health and 
Human Services, University of North Carolina Wilmington, Wilmington, NC, USA.
(3)Professor, Associate Dean for Research and Scholarship, College of Nursing, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)Professor, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Assistant Professor, College of Nursing, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
FL, USA.
(6)Associate Professor, College of Nursing, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
FL, USA.

Recent evidence demonstrates that tobacco smoking causes an imbalance in bone 
turnover, leading to lower bone mass and making bone vulnerable to osteoporosis 
and fracture. Tobacco smoke influences bone mass indirectly through alteration 
of body weight, parathyroid hormone-vitamin D axis, adrenal hormones, sex 
hormones, and increased oxidative stress on bony tissues. Also, tobacco smoke 
influences bone mass through a direct effect on osteogenesis and angiogenesis of 
bone. A RANKL-RANK-OPG pathway is an essential regulatory pathway for bone 
metabolism and its importance lies in its interaction with most of the 
pathophysiologic mechanisms by which smoking influences bone mass. Both first- 
and secondhand smoke adversely affect bone mass; smoking cessation seems to 
reverse the effect of smoking and improve bone health. Recent advances in 
research on bone turnover markers could advance scientific knowledge regarding 
the mechanisms by which smoking may influence bone mass.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/1206235
PMCID: PMC6304634
PMID: 30631414