---
reference_id: "PMID:36474391"
title: A Delayed Presentation of Arginase Deficiency Presenting with Status Epilepticus.
authors:
- Olgac A
- Yildiz E
- Yilmaz A
- Kasapkara CS
- Ceylaner S
- Alioglu B
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2022'
doi: 10.29271/jcpsp.2022.12.1629
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hyperargininemia/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Status Epilepticus/diagnosis, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Delayed Presentation of Arginase Deficiency Presenting with Status Epilepticus.
**Authors:** Olgac A, Yildiz E, Yilmaz A, Kasapkara CS, Ceylaner S, Alioglu B
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2022)
**DOI:** [10.29271/jcpsp.2022.12.1629](https://doi.org/10.29271/jcpsp.2022.12.1629)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2022 Dec;32(12):1629-1631. doi:
10.29271/jcpsp.2022.12.1629.

A Delayed Presentation of Arginase Deficiency Presenting with Status
Epilepticus.

Olgac A(1), Yildiz E(2), Yilmaz A(3), Kasapkara CS(1), Ceylaner S(4), Alioglu
B(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Metabolism, University of Health Sciences, Dr. Sami
Ulus Maternity and Child Health Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Ankara Training and Research Hospital, Ankara,
Turkey.
(3)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Ankara Training and Research Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Genetics, Intergen Genetic Diagnosis Centre, Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Ankara Training and Research Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey.

Arginase 1(ARG1) deficiency is a rare disorder of the urea cycle. The
presentation is usually late, leading to loss of intellectual milestones,
spasticity and liver involvement. Hyperammonemic crises are rarely encountered.
We herein present a case of a 16-year immigrant girl of Syrian origin who was
evaluated for acute onset of fever, vomiting, and seizures. Laboratory analyses
showed slightly elevated lactate, creatine kinase, and coagulation parameters.
Ammonium levels were also moderately increased. On 5th day of admission, she
went into an encephalopathic state. Blood amino acid analysis showed highly
elevated arginine levels. An increased level of orotic acid was found in urine
organic acid analysis. Molecular genetic analysis of ARG1 gene showed a novel
homozygous mutation. Although the presentation of ARG1 deficiency is usually
chronic in the majority of patients, an acute crisis of encephalopathy due to
hyperammonemia may occur and delayed diagnosis may lead to irreversible
neurological damage. Key Words: Urea cycle disorder, Hyperammonemia,
Argininemia, Encephalopathy.

DOI: 10.29271/jcpsp.2022.12.1629
PMID: 36474391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
