---
reference_id: "PMID:38550975"
title: Insulin therapy in acute decompensation of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency with hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis.
authors:
- Demaret T
- Joyal JS
- Karalis A
- Parente F
- Delrue MA
- Mitchell GA
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101073
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insulin therapy in acute decompensation of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency with hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis.
**Authors:** Demaret T, Joyal JS, Karalis A, Parente F, Delrue MA, Mitchell GA
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101073](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101073)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2024 Mar 21;39:101073. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101073. 
eCollection 2024 Jun.

Insulin therapy in acute decompensation of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency 
with hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis.

Demaret T(1)(2), Joyal JS(3), Karalis A(1), Parente F(1), Delrue MA(1), Mitchell 
GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Génétique médicale, Department of Pediatrics, CHU Sainte-Justine 
and U Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et Génétique, Gosselies, 
Belgium.
(3)Service de Soins Intensifs Pédiatriques, Department of Pediatrics, CHU 
Sainte-Justine and U Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

An 11-month-old girl with severe acidosis, lethargy and vomiting, was diagnosed 
with holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency. She received biotin and was stable 
until age 8 years when vomiting, severe acidosis, hypoglycemia, and 
hyperammonemia developed. Management with intravenous glucose aiming to 
stimulate anabolism led to hyperglycemic ketoacidosis. Insulin therapy rapidly 
corrected biochemical parameters, and clinical status improved. We propose that 
secondary Krebs cycle disturbances affecting pancreatic beta cells impaired 
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, resulting in insulinopenia.

© 2024 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101073
PMCID: PMC10973194
PMID: 38550975

Conflict of interest statement: None.