---
reference_id: "PMID:31081826"
title: A Murine Model of Dengue Virus-induced Acute Viral Encephalitis-like Disease.
authors:
- Shen TJ
- Jhan MK
- Kao JC
- Ho MR
- Tsai TT
- Tseng PC
- Wang YT
- Lin CF
journal: J Vis Exp
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3791/59132
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Murine Model of Dengue Virus-induced Acute Viral Encephalitis-like Disease.
**Authors:** Shen TJ, Jhan MK, Kao JC, Ho MR, Tsai TT, Tseng PC, Wang YT, Lin CF
**Journal:** J Vis Exp (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3791/59132](https://doi.org/10.3791/59132)

## Content

1. J Vis Exp. 2019 Apr 28;(146). doi: 10.3791/59132.

A Murine Model of Dengue Virus-induced Acute Viral Encephalitis-like Disease.

Shen TJ(1), Jhan MK(1), Kao JC(1), Ho MR(1), Tsai TT(1), Tseng PC(1), Wang 
YT(1), Lin CF(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, 
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University.
(2)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, 
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University; Center of Infectious Disease and 
Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung University; cflin2014@tmu.edu.tw.

Dengue virus (DENV), an arthropod-borne virus transmitted by mosquitoes, may 
cause the severe disease known as dengue hemorrhagic fever, which is 
characterized by lethal complications due to plasma leakage, ascites, pleural 
effusion, respiratory distress, severe bleeding, and organ impairment. A few 
cases of DENV infection present neurological manifestations; however, studies 
have not explored DENV-induced neuropathogenesis further. In this study, we 
present a protocol to use an immunocompetent outbred ICR (Institute of Cancer 
Research) mouse for investigating the induction of central nervous system (CNS) 
infection with DENV, followed by the progression of acute viral 
encephalitis-like disease.

DOI: 10.3791/59132
PMID: 31081826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]