---
reference_id: "PMID:36824420"
title: "Case report: Novel compound heterozygosity for pathogenic variants in MED23 in a syndromic patient with postnatal microcephaly."
authors:
- Salzano E
- Niceta M
- Pizzi S
- Radio FC
- Busè M
- Mercadante F
- Barresi S
- Ferrara A
- Mancini C
- Tartaglia M
- Piccione M
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1090082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Novel compound heterozygosity for pathogenic variants in MED23 in a syndromic patient with postnatal microcephaly.
**Authors:** Salzano E, Niceta M, Pizzi S, Radio FC, Busè M, Mercadante F, Barresi S, Ferrara A, Mancini C, Tartaglia M, Piccione M
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1090082](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1090082)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Feb 7;14:1090082. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1090082. 
eCollection 2023.

Case report: Novel compound heterozygosity for pathogenic variants in MED23 in a 
syndromic patient with postnatal microcephaly.

Salzano E(1), Niceta M(2), Pizzi S(2), Radio FC(2), Busè M(1), Mercadante F(1), 
Barresi S(2), Ferrara A(1), Mancini C(2), Tartaglia M(2), Piccione M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, AOOR Villa Sofia-Cervello Hospitals, Palermo, Italy.
(2)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Health Promotion, Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine and 
Medical Specialties, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Biallelic loss-of-function variants in MED23 cause a recessive syndromic 
intellectual disability condition with or without epilepsy (MRT18). Due to the 
small number of reported individuals, the clinical phenotype of the disorder has 
not been fully delineated yet, and the spectrum and frequency of neurologic 
features have not been fully characterized. Here, we report a 5-year-old girl 
with compound heterozygous for two additional MED23 variants. Besides global 
developmental delay, axial hypotonia and peripheral increased muscular tone, 
absent speech, and generalized tonic seizures, which fit well MRT18, the 
occurrence of postnatal progressive microcephaly has been here documented. A 
retrospective assessment of the previously reported clinical data for these 
subjects confirms the occurrence of postnatal progressive microcephaly as a 
previously unappreciated feature of the phenotype of MED23-related disorder.

Copyright © 2023 Salzano, Niceta, Pizzi, Radio, Busè, Mercadante, Barresi, 
Ferrara, Mancini, Tartaglia and Piccione.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1090082
PMCID: PMC9941528
PMID: 36824420

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.