---
reference_id: "PMID:11294581"
title: "Laboratory diagnosis of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections in immunodepressed patients, mainly in patients with AIDS."
authors:
- Tendero DT
journal: Clin Lab
year: '2001'
keywords:
- "AIDS-Related Opportunistic Infections/diagnosis, immunology"
- Cytomegalovirus Infections/diagnosis
- Humans
- Immunoassay/methods
- Immunocompromised Host
- Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laboratory diagnosis of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections in immunodepressed patients, mainly in patients with AIDS.
**Authors:** Tendero DT
**Journal:** Clin Lab (2001)

## Content

1. Clin Lab. 2001;47(3-4):169-83.

Laboratory diagnosis of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections in immunodepressed 
patients, mainly in patients with AIDS.

Tendero DT(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, 
España. diemen@umh.infoville.net

There is a high prevalence of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection in the general 
population. An important proportion of immunodepressed patients are latent 
carriers of the virus, and under these conditions, the lack of cellular immunity 
predisposes the patient to an active infection in which the virus is 
replicating. Consequences for the immunodepressed patients are widely variable, 
ranging from completely asymptomatic infections to life-threatening situations. 
An important characteristic of these infections is that they have no specific 
clinical symptoms and are often indistinguishable from other types of infection. 
As such, clinical diagnosis should be supported by laboratory tests. There are 
many diagnostic tests available, the choice of which one to use being made on 
the basis of clinician-defined objectives. The CMV immunological state of the 
patient should be ascertained in order to indicate the possibility of 
reactivation or the risk of primary infection. To this end, serological tests 
have proven to be the most useful. Laboratory tests also allow the rapid 
diagnosis of active CMV infections, for which rapid culture techniques 
(shell-vial) or viral antigen tests (antigenemia pp65) are more appropriate. 
Given that not all active infections present with symptoms, the most typical 
problem in clinical practice is to distinguish between symptoms and illnesses 
caused by CMV (CMV disease: CMVD), and other infectious or non-infectious 
entities. To clarify this situation, diagnostic histopathology and methods able 
to quantify the viral load (pp65 antigenemia and quantitative PCR) are of great 
use. The identification of patients who, during active infection, are at high 
risk of contracting CMVD in the near future, is a more complex challenge for the 
laboratory. Once again, tests that are able to quantify the viral load are the 
most appropriate for identifying those patients who should receive preventive 
antiviral treatment. In HIV-positive patients, CMVD tends to manifest itself as 
retinitis and involvement of the gastrointestinal tract. The principal risk 
factor in the development of CMVD in these patients is the degree of 
immunodepression, which appears almost exclusively in patients with a CD4+ 
lymphocyte count lower than 50/mm3 and when other opportunistic infections have 
occurred. The advent of oral ganciclovir has raised the possibility of long-term 
prophylactic treatment of CMVD, making the search for virological and 
immunological markers that identify these high-risk patients a priority. 
Techniques allowing the quantification of CMV viremia, namely pp65 antigenemia 
and quantitative PCR, have been most useful to this end.

PMID: 11294581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]