---
reference_id: "PMID:10074736"
title: "Primary hepatic angiosarcoma: report of a case involving environmental arsenic exposure."
authors:
- Tsai MH
- Chien RN
- Hsieh SY
- Hung CF
- Chen TC
- Sheen IS
journal: Changgeng Yi Xue Za Zhi
year: '1998'
keywords:
- Agriculture
- Arsenic Poisoning
- Hemangiosarcoma/chemically induced
- "Hepatitis B, Chronic/complications"
- Herbicides/poisoning
- Humans
- Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Occupational Exposure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary hepatic angiosarcoma: report of a case involving environmental arsenic exposure.
**Authors:** Tsai MH, Chien RN, Hsieh SY, Hung CF, Chen TC, Sheen IS
**Journal:** Changgeng Yi Xue Za Zhi (1998)

## Content

1. Changgeng Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1998 Dec;21(4):469-74.

Primary hepatic angiosarcoma: report of a case involving environmental arsenic
exposure.

Tsai MH(1), Chien RN, Hsieh SY, Hung CF, Chen TC, Sheen IS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Hepatic angiosarcoma is a rare malignant tumor with a rapidly fatal course. It
has become a subject of interest because of its intimate relationship with
environmental carcinogens, such as thorium dioxide (Thorotrast), vinyl chloride
monomer, and arsenic. We describe a case of a chronic hepatitis B surface
antigen carrier, with a 20-year history of environmental exposure to
arsenical-containing agricultural herbicides and bactericides, who developed a
hepatic angiosarcoma. He died due to rupture of the hepatic angiosarcoma with
acute hemoperitoneum 9 weeks after initial diagnosis. This is a rare case of
primary hepatic sarcoma, especially in Taiwan where hepatocellular carcinoma is
endemic. This case not only serves to give more evidence of the relationship
between hepatic angiosarcoma and arsenical exposure, but also demonstrates the
key point in the differential diagnosis of liver tumors. Increased familiarity
with this disease will facilitate correct diagnosis and help to improve
management of the condition in the future.

PMID: 10074736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
