---
reference_id: "PMID:36557034"
title: Kawasaki Disease with Hepatobiliary Manifestations.
authors:
- Suhaini SA
- Azidin AH
- Cheah CS
- Lee Wei Li W
- Khoo MS
- Ismail NAS
- Ali A
journal: Medicina (Kaunas)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/medicina58121833
keywords:
- Humans
- Infant
- "Mucocutaneous Lymph Node Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Aspirin/therapeutic use
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Malaysia
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki Disease with Hepatobiliary Manifestations.
**Authors:** Suhaini SA, Azidin AH, Cheah CS, Lee Wei Li W, Khoo MS, Ismail NAS, Ali A
**Journal:** Medicina (Kaunas) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medicina58121833](https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina58121833)

## Content

1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2022 Dec 12;58(12):1833. doi: 10.3390/medicina58121833.

Kawasaki Disease with Hepatobiliary Manifestations.

Suhaini SA(1), Azidin AH(1), Cheah CS(1), Lee Wei Li W(1), Khoo MS(2), Ismail 
NAS(3), Ali A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia, Jalan Yaacob Latif, Kuala Lumpur 56000, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Paediatric, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Specialist 
Children's Hospital (HPKK), Jalan Yaacob Latif, Bandar Tun Razak, Cheras, Kuala 
Lumpur 56000, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia, Jalan Yaacob Latif, Kuala Lumpur 56000, Malaysia.

Background and Objectives: Kawasaki Disease (KD) incidence has been on the rise 
globally throughout the years, particularly in the Asia Pacific region. KD can 
be diagnosed based on several clinical criteria. Due to its systemic 
inflammatory nature, multi-organ involvement has been observed, making the 
diagnosis of KD more challenging. Notably, several studies have reported KD 
patients presenting with hepatobiliary abnormalities. Nonetheless, comprehensive 
data regarding the hepatobiliary manifestations of KD are limited in Malaysia, 
justifying a more in-depth study of the disease in this country. Thus, in this 
article, we aim to discuss KD patients in Malaysia with hepatobiliary 
manifestations. Materials and Methods: A total of six KD patients with 
hepatobiliary findings who presented at Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz (HCTM) 
from 2004 to 2021 were selected and included. Variables including the initial 
presenting signs and symptoms, clinical progress, laboratory investigations such 
as liver function test (LFT), and ultrasound findings of hepatobiliary system 
were reviewed and analyzed. Results: Out of these six KD patients, there were 
two patients complicated with hepatitis and one patient with gallbladder 
hydrops. Different clinical features including jaundice (n = 3) and hepatomegaly 
(n = 4) were also observed. All patients received both aspirin and intravenous 
immunoglobulin (IVIG) as their first-line treatment and all of them responded 
well to IVIG. The majority of them (n = 5) had a complete recovery and did not 
have any cardiovascular and hepatobiliary sequelae. Conclusions: Despite KD 
mostly being diagnosed with the classical clinical criteria, patients with 
atypical presentations should always alert physicians of KD as one of the 
possible differential diagnoses. This study discovered that hepatobiliary 
manifestations in KD patients were not uncommon. More awareness on the 
epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of KD patients with hepatobiliary 
manifestations are required to allow for the initiation of prompt treatment, 
thus preventing further complications.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina58121833
PMCID: PMC9781147
PMID: 36557034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interest in 
this manuscript.