---
reference_id: "PMID:18067674"
title: "Hypoxanthine-guanine phosophoribosyltransferase (HPRT) deficiency: Lesch-Nyhan syndrome."
authors:
- Torres RJ
- Puig JG
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-48
keywords:
- Genetic Counseling
- Humans
- "Hyperuricemia/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Hypoxanthine Phosphoribosyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, rehabilitation"
- Male
- Mutation
- Purines/metabolism
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypoxanthine-guanine phosophoribosyltransferase (HPRT) deficiency: Lesch-Nyhan syndrome.
**Authors:** Torres RJ, Puig JG
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-2-48](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-2-48)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 Dec 8;2:48. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-48.

Hypoxanthine-guanine phosophoribosyltransferase (HPRT) deficiency: Lesch-Nyhan 
syndrome.

Torres RJ(1), Puig JG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain. 
rtorres.hulp@salud.madrid.org

Deficiency of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) activity is 
an inborn error of purine metabolism associated with uric acid overproduction 
and a continuum spectrum of neurological manifestations depending on the degree 
of the enzymatic deficiency. The prevalence is estimated at 1/380,000 live 
births in Canada, and 1/235,000 live births in Spain. Uric acid overproduction 
is present inall HPRT-deficient patients and is associated with lithiasis and 
gout. Neurological manifestations include severe action dystonia, 
choreoathetosis, ballismus, cognitive and attention deficit, and self-injurious 
behaviour. The most severe forms are known as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (patients are 
normal at birth and diagnosis can be accomplished when psychomotor delay becomes 
apparent). Partial HPRT-deficient patients present these symptoms with a 
different intensity, and in the least severe forms symptoms may be unapparent. 
Megaloblastic anaemia is also associated with the disease. Inheritance of HPRT 
deficiency is X-linked recessive, thus males are generally affected and 
heterozygous female are carriers (usually asymptomatic). Human HPRT is encoded 
by a single structural gene on the long arm of the X chromosome at Xq26. To 
date, more than 300 disease-associated mutations in the HPRT1 gene have been 
identified. The diagnosis is based on clinical and biochemical findings 
(hyperuricemia and hyperuricosuria associated with psychomotor delay), and 
enzymatic (HPRT activity determination in haemolysate, intact erythrocytes or 
fibroblasts) and molecular tests. Molecular diagnosis allows faster and more 
accurate carrier and prenatal diagnosis. Prenatal diagnosis can be performed 
with amniotic cells obtained by amniocentesis at about 15-18 weeks' gestation, 
or chorionic villus cells obtained at about 10-12 weeks' gestation. Uric acid 
overproduction can be managed by allopurinol treatment. Doses must be carefully 
adjusted to avoid xanthine lithiasis. The lack of precise understanding of the 
neurological dysfunction has precluded development of useful therapies. 
Spasticity, when present, and dystonia can be managed with benzodiazepines and 
gamma-aminobutyric acid inhibitors such as baclofen. Physical rehabilitation, 
including management of dysarthria and dysphagia, special devices to enable hand 
control, appropriate walking aids, and a programme of posture management to 
prevent deformities are recommended. Self-injurious behaviour must be managed by 
a combination of physical restraints, behavioural and pharmaceutical treatments.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-48
PMCID: PMC2234399
PMID: 18067674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]