---
reference_id: "PMID:29188475"
title: Current Perspectives on Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.
authors:
- Lerch M
- Mainetti C
- Terziroli Beretta-Piccoli B
- Harr T
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-017-8654-z
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/adverse effects"
- Anticonvulsants/adverse effects
- Cyclosporine/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Hypersensitivity, Delayed/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Skin/pathology
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/drug therapy, etiology"
- Sulfonamides/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Perspectives on Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.
**Authors:** Lerch M, Mainetti C, Terziroli Beretta-Piccoli B, Harr T
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-017-8654-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-017-8654-z)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2018 Feb;54(1):147-176. doi: 
10.1007/s12016-017-8654-z.

Current Perspectives on Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.

Lerch M(1), Mainetti C(2), Terziroli Beretta-Piccoli B(3), Harr T(4).

Author information:
(1)Allergy/Dermatology Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Kantonsspital 
Winterthur, Winterthur, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Bellinzona Regional Hospital, Bellinzona, 
Switzerland.
(3)Epatocentro Ticino, Lugano, Switzerland.
(4)Unité d'allergologie, Service d'immunologie et d'allergologie, Hôpitaux 
Universitaires de Genève HUG, Genève, Switzerland. Thomas.Harr@hcuge.ch.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are 
considered a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction to drugs. They represent 
true medical emergencies and an early recognition and appropriate management is 
decisive for the survival. SJS/TEN manifest with an "influenza-like" prodromal 
phase (malaise, fever), followed by painful cutaneous and mucous membrane 
(ocular, oral, and genital) lesions, and other systemic symptoms. The difference 
between SJS, SJS/TEN overlap, and TEN is defined by the degree of skin 
detachment: SJS is defined as skin involvement of < 10%, TEN is defined as skin 
involvement of > 30%, and SJS/TEN overlap as 10-30% skin involvement. The 
diagnosis of different degrees of epidermal necrolysis is based on the clinical 
assessment in conjunction with the corresponding histopathology. The mortality 
rates for SJS and TEN have decreased in the last decades. Today, the 
severity-of-illness score for toxic epidermal necrolysis (SCORTEN) is available 
for SJS/TEN severity assessment. Drugs with a high risk of causing SJS/TEN are 
anti-infective sulfonamides, anti-epileptic drugs, non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs of the oxicam type, allopurinol, nevirapine, and 
chlormezanone. Besides conventional drugs, herbal remedies and new biologicals 
should be considered as causative agents. The increased risk of hypersensitivity 
reactions to certain drugs may be linked to specific HLA antigens. Our 
understanding of the pathogenesis of SJS/TEN has improved: drug-specific T 
cell-mediated cytotoxicity, genetic linkage with HLA- and non-HLA-genes, TCR 
restriction, and cytotoxicity mechanisms were clarified. However, many factors 
contributing to epidermal necrolysis still have to be identified, especially in 
virus-induced and autoimmune forms of epidermal necrolysis not related to drugs. 
In SJS/TEN, the most common complications are ocular, cutaneous, or renal. 
Nasopharyngeal, esophageal, and genital mucosal involvement with blisters, 
erosions as well as secondary development of strictures also play a role. 
However, in the acute phase, septicemia is a leading cause of morbidity and 
fatality. Pulmonary and hepatic involvement is frequent. The acute management of 
SJS/TEN requires a multidisciplinary approach. Immediate withdrawal of 
potentially causative drugs is mandatory. Prompt referral to an appropriate 
medical center for specific supportive treatment is of utmost importance. The 
most frequently used treatments for SJS/TEN are systemic corticosteroids, 
immunoglobulins, and cyclosporine A.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-017-8654-z
PMID: 29188475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]