---
reference_id: "PMID:36598534"
title: "Role of α-synuclein in microglia: autophagy and phagocytosis balance neuroinflammation in Parkinson's disease."
authors:
- Lv QK
- Tao KX
- Wang XB
- Yao XY
- Pang MZ
- Liu JY
- Wang F
- Liu CF
journal: Inflamm Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00011-022-01676-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of α-synuclein in microglia: autophagy and phagocytosis balance neuroinflammation in Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Lv QK, Tao KX, Wang XB, Yao XY, Pang MZ, Liu JY, Wang F, Liu CF
**Journal:** Inflamm Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00011-022-01676-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00011-022-01676-x)

## Content

1. Inflamm Res. 2023 Mar;72(3):443-462. doi: 10.1007/s00011-022-01676-x. Epub
2023  Jan 4.

Role of α-synuclein in microglia: autophagy and phagocytosis balance 
neuroinflammation in Parkinson's disease.

Lv QK(1)(2), Tao KX(2), Wang XB(2), Yao XY(1)(2), Pang MZ(2), Liu JY(3), Wang 
F(4)(5), Liu CF(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Clinical Research Center of Neurological Disease, 
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, 215004, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuropsychiatric Diseases and Institute of 
Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Dushu Lake Hospital Affiliated to Soochow 
University, Suzhou, China.
(4)Department of Neurology and Clinical Research Center of Neurological Disease, 
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, 215004, China. 
wangfen_1982@126.com.
(5)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuropsychiatric Diseases and Institute of 
Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, China. wangfen_1982@126.com.
(6)Department of Neurology and Clinical Research Center of Neurological Disease, 
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, 215004, China. 
liuchunfeng@suda.edu.cn.
(7)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuropsychiatric Diseases and Institute of 
Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, China. 
liuchunfeng@suda.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative 
disease, and is characterized by accumulation of α-synuclein (α-syn). 
Neuroinflammation driven by microglia is an important pathological manifestation 
of PD. α-Syn is a crucial marker of PD, and its accumulation leads to microglia 
M1-like phenotype polarization, activation of NLRP3 inflammasomes, and impaired 
autophagy and phagocytosis in microglia. Autophagy of microglia is related to 
degradation of α-syn and NLRP3 inflammasome blockage to relieve 
neuroinflammation. Microglial autophagy and phagocytosis of released α-syn or 
fragments from apoptotic neurons maintain homeostasis in the brain. A variety of 
PD-related genes such as LRRK2, GBA and DJ-1 also contribute to this stability 
process.
OBJECTIVES: Further studies are needed to determine how α-syn works in 
microglia.
METHODS: A keyword-based search was performed using the PubMed database for 
published articles.
CONCLUSION: In this review, we discuss the interaction between microglia and 
α-syn in PD pathogenesis and the possible mechanism of microglial autophagy and 
phagocytosis in α-syn clearance and inhibition of neuroinflammation. This may 
provide a novel insight into treatment of PD.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s00011-022-01676-x
PMID: 36598534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]