---
reference_id: "PMID:27070436"
title: "The 6p25 deletion syndrome: An update on a rare neurocristopathy."
authors:
- de Vos IJ
- Stegmann AP
- Webers CA
- Stumpel CT
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3109/13816810.2016.1164191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 6p25 deletion syndrome: An update on a rare neurocristopathy.
**Authors:** de Vos IJ, Stegmann AP, Webers CA, Stumpel CT
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3109/13816810.2016.1164191](https://doi.org/10.3109/13816810.2016.1164191)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2017 Mar-Apr;38(2):101-107. doi: 
10.3109/13816810.2016.1164191. Epub 2016 Apr 12.

The 6p25 deletion syndrome: An update on a rare neurocristopathy.

de Vos IJ(1), Stegmann AP(1), Webers CA(2), Stumpel CT(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Clinical Genetics and School for Oncology and Developmental 
Biology (GROW) , Maastricht University Medical Center+ , Maastricht , the 
Netherlands.
(2)b Department of Ophthalmology , Maastricht University Medical Center+ , 
Maastricht , the Netherlands.

Anterior segment dysgeneses are developmental anomalies of the anterior eye 
segment that can occur as isolated defects or as part of various syndromes. A 
subgroup is caused by abnormal embryonic neural crest development. The 
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is an umbrella term for a continuum of anterior segment 
dysgeneses of neural crest origin, characterized by the presence of the Axenfeld 
or Rieger eye malformation predisposing for glaucoma. Additionally, other 
structures of neural crest origin can be variably affected giving rise to a wide 
spectrum of associated extra-ocular malformations. Key clinical features 
comprise facial dysmorphism including mid-face and dental hypoplasia, hearing 
loss, cardiac anomalies, and involuted periumbilical skin. The Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome is genetically heterogeneous and about 16% of cases are caused by 
heterozygous mutations in FOXC1 at 6p25.3, a transcription factor gene 
regulating neural crest cell development. There is considerable clinical overlap 
between the Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and the 6p25 deletion syndrome, a 
microdeletion syndrome characterized by heterozygous loss of FOXC1. In both 
syndromes, FOXC1 haploinsufficiency seems to be pathogenic. Here, we review the 
clinical features and pathogenesis of the 6p25 deletion syndrome.

DOI: 10.3109/13816810.2016.1164191
PMID: 27070436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]