---
reference_id: "PMID:39152475"
title: Whole-genome sequencing analysis reveals new susceptibility loci and structural variants associated with progressive supranuclear palsy.
authors:
- Wang H
- Chang TS
- Dombroski BA
- Cheng PL
- Patil V
- Valiente-Banuet L
- Farrell K
- Mclean C
- Molina-Porcel L
- Rajput A
- De Deyn PP
- Le Bastard N
- Gearing M
- Kaat LD
- Van Swieten JC
- Dopper E
- Ghetti BF
- Newell KL
- Troakes C
- de Yébenes JG
- Rábano-Gutierrez A
- Meller T
- Oertel WH
- Respondek G
- Stamelou M
- Arzberger T
- Roeber S
- Müller U
- Hopfner F
- Pastor P
- Brice A
- Durr A
- Le Ber I
- Beach TG
- Serrano GE
- Hazrati LN
- Litvan I
- Rademakers R
- Ross OA
- Galasko D
- Boxer AL
- Miller BL
- Seeley WW
- Van Deerlin VM
- Lee EB
- White CL 3rd
- Morris H
- de Silva R
- Crary JF
- Goate AM
- Friedman JS
- Leung YY
- Coppola G
- Naj AC
- Wang LS
- P. S. P. genetics study group
- Dalgard C
- Dickson DW
- Höglinger GU
- Schellenberg GD
- Geschwind DH
- Lee WP
journal: Mol Neurodegener
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13024-024-00747-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Whole Genome Sequencing
- Male
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Female
- Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Middle Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-genome sequencing analysis reveals new susceptibility loci and structural variants associated with progressive supranuclear palsy.
**Authors:** Wang H, Chang TS, Dombroski BA, Cheng PL, Patil V, Valiente-Banuet L, Farrell K, Mclean C, Molina-Porcel L, Rajput A, De Deyn PP, Le Bastard N, Gearing M, Kaat LD, Van Swieten JC, Dopper E, Ghetti BF, Newell KL, Troakes C, de Yébenes JG, Rábano-Gutierrez A, Meller T, Oertel WH, Respondek G, Stamelou M, Arzberger T, Roeber S, Müller U, Hopfner F, Pastor P, Brice A, Durr A, Le Ber I, Beach TG, Serrano GE, Hazrati LN, Litvan I, Rademakers R, Ross OA, Galasko D, Boxer AL, Miller BL, Seeley WW, Van Deerlin VM, Lee EB, White CL 3rd, Morris H, de Silva R, Crary JF, Goate AM, Friedman JS, Leung YY, Coppola G, Naj AC, Wang LS, P. S. P. genetics study group, Dalgard C, Dickson DW, Höglinger GU, Schellenberg GD, Geschwind DH, Lee WP
**Journal:** Mol Neurodegener (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13024-024-00747-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13024-024-00747-3)

## Content

1. Mol Neurodegener. 2024 Aug 16;19(1):61. doi: 10.1186/s13024-024-00747-3.

Whole-genome sequencing analysis reveals new susceptibility loci and structural 
variants associated with progressive supranuclear palsy.

Wang H(#)(1)(2), Chang TS(#)(3), Dombroski BA(1)(2), Cheng PL(1)(2), Patil V(3), 
Valiente-Banuet L(3), Farrell K(4), Mclean C(5), Molina-Porcel L(6)(7), Rajput 
A(8), De Deyn PP(9)(10), Le Bastard N(11), Gearing M(12), Kaat LD(13), Van 
Swieten JC(13), Dopper E(13), Ghetti BF(14), Newell KL(14), Troakes C(15), de 
Yébenes JG(16), Rábano-Gutierrez A(17), Meller T(18), Oertel WH(18), Respondek 
G(19), Stamelou M(20)(21), Arzberger T(22)(23), Roeber S(24), Müller U(24), 
Hopfner F(25), Pastor P(26)(27), Brice A(28), Durr A(28), Le Ber I(28), Beach 
TG(29), Serrano GE(29), Hazrati LN(30), Litvan I(31), Rademakers R(32)(33), Ross 
OA(33), Galasko D(31), Boxer AL(34), Miller BL(34), Seeley WW(34), Van Deerlin 
VM(1), Lee EB(1)(35), White CL 3rd(36), Morris H(37), de Silva R(38), Crary 
JF(4), Goate AM(39), Friedman JS(40), Leung YY(1)(2), Coppola G(3)(41), Naj 
AC(1)(2)(42), Wang LS(1)(2); P. S. P. genetics study group; Dalgard C(43), 
Dickson DW(44), Höglinger GU(45), Schellenberg GD(46)(47), Geschwind 
DH(48)(49)(50), Lee WP(51)(52).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Penn Neurodegeneration Genomics Center, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Movement Disorders Programs, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Department of Artificial Intelligence & Human 
Health, Nash Family, Department of Neuroscience, Ronald M. Loeb Center for 
Alzheimer's Disease, Friedman Brain, Institute, Neuropathology Brain Bank & 
Research CoRE, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Victorian Brain Bank, The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(6)Alzheimer's Disease and Other Cognitive Disorders Unit. Neurology Service, 
Hospital Clínic, Fundació Recerca Clínic Barcelona (FRCB). Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomediques August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Neurological Tissue Bank of the Biobanc-Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(8)Movement Disorders Program, Division of Neurology, University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(9)Laboratory of Neurochemistry and Behavior, Experimental Neurobiology Unit, 
University of Antwerp, Wilrijk (Antwerp), Belgium.
(10)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, NL-9713 AV, 
Groningen, Netherlands.
(11)Fujirebio Europe NV, Technologiepark 6, 9052, Ghent, Belgium.
(12)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Department of Neurology, 
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(13)Netherlands Brain Bank and Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(14)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(15)London Neurodegenerative Diseases Brain Bank, King's College London, London, 
UK.
(16)Autonomous University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(17)Fundación CIEN (Centro de Investigación de Enfermedades Neurológicas) - 
Centro Alzheimer Fundación Reina Sofía, Madrid, Spain.
(18)Department of Neurology, Philipps-Universität, Marburg, Germany.
(19)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany.
(20)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Department, HYGEIA Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.
(21)European University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(22)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital Munich, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.
(23)Center for Neuropathology and Prion Research, Ludwig-Maximilians-University 
Munich, Munich, Germany.
(24)German Brain Bank, Neurobiobank Munich, Munich, Germany.
(25)Department of Neurology, LMU University Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU) München; German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany; and Munich Cluster for 
Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany.
(26)Unit of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of Neurology, University 
Hospital Germans Trias I Pujol, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain.
(27)Neurosciences, The Germans Trias I Pujol Research Institute (IGTP) Badalona, 
Badalona, Spain.
(28)Sorbonne Université, Paris Brain Institute - Institut du Cerveau - ICM, 
Inserm U1127, CNRS UMR 7225, APHP - Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(29)Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, USA.
(30)University McGill, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(31)Department of Neuroscience, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(32)VIB Center for Molecular Neurology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(33)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(34)Memory and Aging Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(35)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(36)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(37)Departmento of Clinical and Movement Neuroscience, University College of 
London, London, UK.
(38)Reta Lila Weston Institute, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.
(39)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, New York, NY, USA; Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(40)Friedman Bioventure, Inc., Del Mar, CA, USA.
(41)Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human 
Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(42)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(43)Department of Anatomy Physiology and Genetics, the American Genome Center, 
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(44)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, USA. 
Dickson.Dennis@mayo.edu.
(45)Department of Neurology, LMU University Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU) München; German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany; and Munich Cluster for 
Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany. 
guenter.hoeglinger@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(46)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
gerardsc@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(47)Penn Neurodegeneration Genomics Center, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
gerardsc@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(48)Movement Disorders Programs, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
dhg@mednet.ucla.edu.
(49)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. dhg@mednet.ucla.edu.
(50)Institute of Precision Health, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA. dhg@mednet.ucla.edu.
(51)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
wan-ping.lee@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(52)Penn Neurodegeneration Genomics Center, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
wan-ping.lee@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Mol Neurodegener. 2024 Oct 14;19(1):73. doi: 10.1186/s13024-024-00763-3.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 Jan 30:2023.12.28.23300612. doi: 10.1101/2023.12.28.23300612.

BACKGROUND: Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a rare neurodegenerative 
disease characterized by the accumulation of aggregated tau proteins in 
astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes. Previous genome-wide association 
studies for PSP were based on genotype array, therefore, were inadequate for the 
analysis of rare variants as well as larger mutations, such as small 
insertions/deletions (indels) and structural variants (SVs).
METHOD: In this study, we performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) and conducted 
association analysis for single nucleotide variants (SNVs), indels, and SVs, in 
a cohort of 1,718 cases and 2,944 controls of European ancestry. Of the 1,718 
PSP individuals, 1,441 were autopsy-confirmed and 277 were clinically diagnosed.
RESULTS: Our analysis of common SNVs and indels confirmed known genetic loci at 
MAPT, MOBP, STX6, SLCO1A2, DUSP10, and SP1, and further uncovered novel signals 
in APOE, FCHO1/MAP1S, KIF13A, TRIM24, TNXB, and ELOVL1. Notably, in contrast to 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), we observed the APOE ε2 allele to be the risk allele 
in PSP. Analysis of rare SNVs and indels identified significant association in 
ZNF592 and further gene network analysis identified a module of neuronal genes 
dysregulated in PSP. Moreover, seven common SVs associated with PSP were 
observed in the H1/H2 haplotype region (17q21.31) and other loci, including IGH, 
PCMT1, CYP2A13, and SMCP. In the H1/H2 haplotype region, there is a burden of 
rare deletions and duplications (P = 6.73 × 10-3) in PSP.
CONCLUSIONS: Through WGS, we significantly enhanced our understanding of the 
genetic basis of PSP, providing new targets for exploring disease mechanisms and 
therapeutic interventions.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13024-024-00747-3
PMCID: PMC11330058
PMID: 39152475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Laura Molina-Porcel received income from Biogen 
as a consultant in 2022. Gesine Respondek is now employed by Roche (Hoffmann-La 
Roche, Basel, Switzerland) since 2021. Her affiliation whilst completing her 
contribution to this manuscript was German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases 
(DZNE), Munich, Germany. Thomas G Beach is a consultant for Aprinoia 
Therapeutics and a Scientific Advisor and stock option holder for Vivid 
Genomics. Huw Morris is employed by UCL. In the last 12 months he reports paid 
consultancy from Roche, Aprinoia, AI Therapeutics and Amylyx; lecture 
fees/honoraria—BMJ, Kyowa Kirin, Movement Disorders Society. Huw Morris is a 
co-applicant on a patent application related to C9ORF72—Method for diagnosing a 
neurodegenerative disease (PCT/GB2012/052140). Giovanni Coppola is currently an 
employee of Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. Alison Goate serves on the SAB for 
Genentech and Muna Therapeutics.