---
reference_id: "PMID:35945593"
title: Therapeutic approach with commercial supplements for pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration with residual PANK2 expression levels.
authors:
- Álvarez-Córdoba M
- Reche-López D
- Cilleros-Holgado P
- Talaverón-Rey M
- Villalón-García I
- Povea-Cabello S
- Suárez-Rivero JM
- Suárez-Carrillo A
- Munuera-Cabeza M
- Piñero-Pérez R
- Sánchez-Alcázar JA
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02465-9
keywords:
- Carbon-Sulfur Lyases/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Iron/metabolism
- "Pantothenate Kinase-Associated Neurodegeneration/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/genetics, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Thiamine/therapeutic use
- Vitamin E
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic approach with commercial supplements for pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration with residual PANK2 expression levels.
**Authors:** Álvarez-Córdoba M, Reche-López D, Cilleros-Holgado P, Talaverón-Rey M, Villalón-García I, Povea-Cabello S, Suárez-Rivero JM, Suárez-Carrillo A, Munuera-Cabeza M, Piñero-Pérez R, Sánchez-Alcázar JA
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02465-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02465-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Aug 9;17(1):311. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02465-9.

Therapeutic approach with commercial supplements for pantothenate 
kinase-associated neurodegeneration with residual PANK2 expression levels.

Álvarez-Córdoba M(1), Reche-López D(1), Cilleros-Holgado P(1), Talaverón-Rey 
M(1), Villalón-García I(1), Povea-Cabello S(1), Suárez-Rivero JM(1), 
Suárez-Carrillo A(1), Munuera-Cabeza M(1), Piñero-Pérez R(1), Sánchez-Alcázar 
JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CABD-CSIC-Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide), and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red: Enfermedades Raras, 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 41013, Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CABD-CSIC-Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide), and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red: Enfermedades Raras, 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 41013, Sevilla, Spain. jasanalc@upo.es.

BACKGROUND: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a group of 
rare neurogenetic disorders frequently associated with iron accumulation in the 
basal nuclei of the brain characterized by progressive spasticity, dystonia, 
muscle rigidity, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and retinal degeneration or optic 
nerve atrophy. Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) is one of 
the most widespread NBIA subtypes. It is caused by mutations in the gene of 
pantothenate kinase 2 (PANK2) that result in dysfunction in PANK2 enzyme 
activity, with consequent deficiency of coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis, as well 
as low levels of essential metabolic intermediates such as 
4'-phosphopantetheine, a necessary cofactor for essential cytosolic and 
mitochondrial proteins.
METHODS: In this manuscript, we examined the therapeutic effectiveness of 
pantothenate, panthetine, antioxidants (vitamin E and omega 3) and mitochondrial 
function boosting supplements (L-carnitine and thiamine) in mutant PANK2 cells 
with residual expression levels.
RESULTS: Commercial supplements, pantothenate, pantethine, vitamin E, omega 3, 
carnitine and thiamine were able to eliminate iron accumulation, increase PANK2, 
mtACP, and NFS1 expression levels and improve pathological alterations in mutant 
cells with residual PANK2 expression levels.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that several commercial compounds are indeed 
able to significantly correct the mutant phenotype in cellular models of PKAN. 
These compounds alone or in combinations are of common use in clinical practice 
and may be useful for the treatment of PKAN patients with residual enzyme 
expression levels.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02465-9
PMCID: PMC9364590
PMID: 35945593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential competing interest.