---
reference_id: "PMID:35505316"
title: "Cystic fibrosis and alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: case report and review of literature."
authors:
- Jaspers E
- Van Dijck I
- Hoffman I
- Knops N
- Stéphenne X
- Witters P
- Proesmans M
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-022-03290-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystic fibrosis and alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: case report and review of literature.
**Authors:** Jaspers E, Van Dijck I, Hoffman I, Knops N, Stéphenne X, Witters P, Proesmans M
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-022-03290-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-022-03290-6)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2022 May 3;22(1):247. doi: 10.1186/s12887-022-03290-6.

Cystic fibrosis and alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: case report and review of 
literature.

Jaspers E(1), Van Dijck I(1), Hoffman I(1), Knops N(1), Stéphenne X(2), Witters 
P(1), Proesmans M(3).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3001, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)University Hospital Saint-Luc, Avenue Hippocrate 10, 1200, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)University Hospital Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3001, Leuven, Belgium. 
Marijke.proesmans@uzleuven.be.

BACKGROUND: This case report describes a child born with both cystic fibrosis 
(CF) and alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (A1ATD). Both are autosomal recessive 
inherited diseases, mainly affecting the lungs and the liver. The combination of 
both diseases together is rare and may lead to a fulminant disease with limited 
life span. To the best of our knowledge, no case has been reported of a patient 
born with both diseases.
CASE PRESENTATION: After an uneventful pregnancy, a male baby was born with 
meconium ileus. The suspected diagnosis of CF was confirmed based on the sweat 
test and genetic analysis. The child developed persisting cholestasis, too 
severe to be likely caused by CF alone and indicating an associated problem. The 
diagnosis of A1ATD was established based on clinical suspicion (persisting 
cholestasis), decreased serum alpha-1 antitrypsin and genetic analysis. 
Supportive therapy was started, however the boy evolved to rapidly progressive 
liver disease leading to liver failure which necessitated an infant liver 
transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: This case illustrates the complexity of care in case of two severe 
inherited diseases as well as post solid organ transplant care.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-022-03290-6
PMCID: PMC9063355
PMID: 35505316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests 
concerning this manuscript.