---
reference_id: "PMID:39568270"
title: "Dental and Craniofacial Anomalies in Fanconi Anemia: A Systematic Review and Additional 46 Reports."
authors:
- Rocha PADS
- Santana NCM
- de Arruda JAA
- Amaral TMP
- Drumond VZ
- Torres-Pereira CC
- Acevedo AC
- Berdal A
- Abreu LG
- Silva TA
- Fournier BPJ
journal: Oral Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/odi.15205
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dental and Craniofacial Anomalies in Fanconi Anemia: A Systematic Review and Additional 46 Reports.
**Authors:** Rocha PADS, Santana NCM, de Arruda JAA, Amaral TMP, Drumond VZ, Torres-Pereira CC, Acevedo AC, Berdal A, Abreu LG, Silva TA, Fournier BPJ
**Journal:** Oral Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/odi.15205](https://doi.org/10.1111/odi.15205)

## Content

1. Oral Dis. 2025 Apr;31(4):1342-1357. doi: 10.1111/odi.15205. Epub 2024 Nov 20.

Dental and Craniofacial Anomalies in Fanconi Anemia: A Systematic Review and 
Additional 46 Reports.

Rocha PADS(1), Santana NCM(1), de Arruda JAA(2), Amaral TMP(1), Drumond VZ(1), 
Torres-Pereira CC(3)(4), Acevedo AC(5)(6), Berdal A(7)(8)(9), Abreu LG(10), 
Silva TA(1)(11)(12)(13), Fournier BPJ(7)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Surgery, Pathology, and Clinical Dentistry, School of 
Dentistry, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(2)Department of Oral Diagnosis and Pathology, School of Dentistry, Universidade 
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Multiprofessional Residency Program in Oncology and Hematology, Complexo 
Hospital de Clínicas, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil.
(4)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, Universidade Federal do 
Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil.
(5)Oral Care Center for Inherited Diseases, Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, 
Brazil.
(6)Laboratory of Oral Histopathology, Faculty of Healthy Science, Universidade 
de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.
(7)Reference Center for Dental Rare Diseases (O-Rares), Rothschild Hospital, 
Paris, France.
(8)FHU DDS-Net, Dental School, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(9)Filière de Santé Maladies Rares TETECOU, Malformations Rares de la tête, du 
cou et des dents, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Child and Adolescent Oral Health, School of Dentistry, 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(11)Multiprofessional Integrated Residency in Health, Hospital das Clínicas, 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(12)Department of Oral Biology, Dental Faculty, Université de Paris, Paris, 
France.
(13)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Laboratory of Molecular Oral 
Pathophysiology, Université de Paris, Inserm, Sorbonne Université, Paris, 
France.

OBJECTIVE: Fanconi anemia (FA), a rare genetic disorder, has not been 
comprehensively studied regarding its dental and craniofacial phenotypes. This 
study aimed to systematically review the available evidence on dental, 
occlusion, and craniofacial anomalies in individuals with FA and to describe the 
occurrence of these anomalies in a cohort from two Brazilian referral centers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Electronic searches were conducted across six databases, 
supplemented by manual searches and gray literature. The Brazilian cohort 
included 46 patients diagnosed with FA.
RESULTS: A total of 19 articles describing 158 cases of FA were analyzed. The 
estimated prevalence of dental/craniofacial anomalies ranged from 13.3% to 
71.4%. In our cohort, 93.5% of patients exhibited anomalies, primarily root 
abnormalities (69.6%), tooth rotation (54.3%), and tooth agenesis (26%). Males 
(p = 0.031) and individuals with endocrine disorders (p = 0.047) were more 
likely to experience alterations in eruption and/or exfoliation. Anomalies in 
size and shape were significantly more prevalent among individuals who had 
undergone hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation at age 14 or older 
(p = 0.002).
CONCLUSION: The high occurrence of dental/craniofacial anomalies in individuals 
with FA suggests that these anomalies are part of the disease's phenotypic 
spectrum, emphasizing the need to expand and standardize the diagnostic criteria 
of the disease.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/odi.15205
PMID: 39568270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]