---
reference_id: "PMID:24503136"
title: "The Pex1-G844D mouse: a model for mild human Zellweger spectrum disorder."
authors:
- Hiebler S
- Masuda T
- Hacia JG
- Moser AB
- Faust PL
- Liu A
- Chowdhury N
- Huang N
- Lauer A
- Bennett J
- Watkins PA
- Zack DJ
- Braverman NE
- Raymond GV
- Steinberg SJ
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.01.008
keywords:
- ATPases Associated with Diverse Cellular Activities
- "Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Bile Acids and Salts/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Fatty Acids/blood
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Growth and Development
- Hearing
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Molecular Chaperones/metabolism
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Retina/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Sexual Behavior, Animal"
- Skin/pathology
- Survival Analysis
- "Vision, Ocular"
- "Zellweger Syndrome/blood, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Pex1-G844D mouse: a model for mild human Zellweger spectrum disorder.
**Authors:** Hiebler S, Masuda T, Hacia JG, Moser AB, Faust PL, Liu A, Chowdhury N, Huang N, Lauer A, Bennett J, Watkins PA, Zack DJ, Braverman NE, Raymond GV, Steinberg SJ
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.01.008)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Apr;111(4):522-532. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.01.008.
Epub  2014 Jan 23.

The Pex1-G844D mouse: a model for mild human Zellweger spectrum disorder.

Hiebler S(#)(1), Masuda T(#)(2), Hacia JG(3), Moser AB(1)(4), Faust PL(5), Liu
A(1), Chowdhury N(1), Huang N(3), Lauer A(6), Bennett J(7), Watkins PA(1)(4),
Zack DJ(2)(8)(9)(10), Braverman NE(11)(12), Raymond GV(1)(4), Steinberg
SJ(1)(4)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurogenetics, Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy
Krieger, 707 N. Broadway, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetic
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)F.M. Kirby Center for Molecular Ophthalmology, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(9)Departments of Molecular Biology and Genetics, and Neuroscience, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(10)Institut de la Vision, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.
(11)Department of Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Montreal Children's Hospital, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

Zellweger spectrum disorder (ZSD) is a disease continuum that results from
inherited defects in PEX genes essential for normal peroxisome assembly. These
autosomal recessive disorders impact brain development and also cause postnatal
liver, adrenal, and kidney dysfunction, as well as loss of vision and hearing.
The hypomorphic PEX1-G843D missense allele, observed in approximately 30% of ZSD
patients, is associated with milder clinical and biochemical phenotypes, with
some homozygous individuals surviving into early adulthood. Nonetheless,
affected children with the PEX1-G843D allele have intellectual disability,
failure to thrive, and significant sensory deficits. To enhance our ability to
test candidate therapies that improve human PEX1-G843D function, we created the
novel Pex1-G844D knock-in mouse model that represents the murine equivalent of
the common human mutation. We show that Pex1-G844D homozygous mice recapitulate
many classic features of mild ZSD cases, including growth retardation and fatty
livers with cholestasis. In addition, electrophysiology, histology, and gene
expression studies provide evidence that these animals develop a retinopathy
similar to that observed in human patients, with evidence of cone photoreceptor
cell death. Similar to skin fibroblasts obtained from ZSD patients with a
PEX1-G843D allele, we demonstrate that murine cells homozygous for the
Pex1-G844D allele respond to chaperone-like compounds, which normalizes
peroxisomal β-oxidation. Thus, the Pex1-G844D mouse provides a powerful model
system for testing candidate therapies that address the most common genetic
cause of ZSD. In addition, this murine model will enhance studies focused on
mechanisms of pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.01.008
PMCID: PMC4901203
PMID: 24503136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
