---
reference_id: "PMID:38221620"
title: "Clinical, biochemical, and genetic spectrum of MADD in a South African cohort: an ICGNMD study."
authors:
- Bisschoff M
- Smuts I
- Dercksen M
- Schoonen M
- Vorster BC
- van der Watt G
- Spencer C
- Naidu K
- Henning F
- Meldau S
- McFarland R
- Taylor RW
- Patel K
- Fassad MR
- Vandrovcova J
- ICGNMD Consortium
- Wanders RJA
- van der Westhuizen FH
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-03014-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, biochemical, and genetic spectrum of MADD in a South African cohort: an ICGNMD study.
**Authors:** Bisschoff M, Smuts I, Dercksen M, Schoonen M, Vorster BC, van der Watt G, Spencer C, Naidu K, Henning F, Meldau S, McFarland R, Taylor RW, Patel K, Fassad MR, Vandrovcova J, ICGNMD Consortium, Wanders RJA, van der Westhuizen FH
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-03014-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-03014-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Jan 14;19(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-03014-8.

Clinical, biochemical, and genetic spectrum of MADD in a South African cohort: 
an ICGNMD study.

Bisschoff M(1), Smuts I(2), Dercksen M(3), Schoonen M(1), Vorster BC(3), van der 
Watt G(4), Spencer C(5), Naidu K(6), Henning F(6), Meldau S(4), McFarland 
R(7)(8), Taylor RW(7)(8), Patel K(7), Fassad MR(7), Vandrovcova J(9); ICGNMD 
Consortium; Wanders RJA(10), van der Westhuizen FH(11).

Author information:
(1)Focus area for Human Metabolomics, North-West University, Potchefstroom, 
South Africa.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Steve Biko Academic Hospital, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(3)Centre for Human Metabolomics, North-West University, Potchefstroom, South 
Africa.
(4)Division of Chemical Pathology, National Health Laboratory Services, 
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town 
and Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
(6)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
(7)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Translational and Clinical 
Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.
(8)NHS Highly Specialised Service for Rare Mitochondrial Disorders, Newcastle 
Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 4LP, UK.
(9)Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 
London, UK.
(10)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, 
Amsterdam University Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(11)Focus area for Human Metabolomics, North-West University, Potchefstroom, 
South Africa. Francois.VanDerWesthuizen@nwu.ac.za.

BACKGROUND: Multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD) is an autosomal 
recessive disorder resulting from pathogenic variants in three distinct genes, 
with most of the variants occurring in the electron transfer 
flavoprotein-ubiquinone oxidoreductase gene (ETFDH). Recent evidence of 
potential founder variants for MADD in the South African (SA) population, 
initiated this extensive investigation. As part of the International Centre for 
Genomic Medicine in Neuromuscular Diseases study, we recruited a cohort of 
patients diagnosed with MADD from academic medical centres across SA over a 
three-year period. The aim was to extensively profile the clinical, biochemical, 
and genomic characteristics of MADD in this understudied population.
METHODS: Clinical evaluations and whole exome sequencing were conducted on each 
patient. Metabolic profiling was performed before and after treatment, where 
possible. The recessive inheritance and phase of the variants were established 
via segregation analyses using Sanger sequencing. Lastly, the haplotype and 
allele frequencies were determined for the two main variants in the four largest 
SA populations.
RESULTS: Twelve unrelated families (ten of White SA and two of mixed ethnicity) 
with clinically heterogeneous presentations in 14 affected individuals were 
observed, and five pathogenic ETFDH variants were identified. Based on disease 
severity and treatment response, three distinct groups emerged. The most severe 
and fatal presentations were associated with the homozygous 
c.[1067G > A];c.[1067G > A] and compound heterozygous c.[976G > C];c.[1067G > A] 
genotypes, causing MADD types I and I/II, respectively. These, along with three 
less severe compound heterozygous genotypes (c.[1067G > A];c.[1448C > T], 
c.[740G > T];c.[1448C > T], and c.[287dupA*];c.[1448C > T]), resulting in MADD 
types II/III, presented before the age of five years, depending on the time and 
maintenance of intervention. By contrast, the homozygous 
c.[1448C > T];c.[1448C > T] genotype, which causes MADD type III, presented 
later in life. Except for the type I, I/II and II cases, urinary metabolic 
markers for MADD improved/normalised following treatment with riboflavin and 
L-carnitine. Furthermore, genetic analyses of the most frequent variants 
(c.[1067G > A] and c.[1448C > T]) revealed a shared haplotype in the region of 
ETFDH, with SA population-specific allele frequencies of < 0.00067-0.00084%.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals the first extensive genotype-phenotype profile 
of a MADD patient cohort from the diverse and understudied SA population. The 
pathogenic variants and associated variable phenotypes were characterised, which 
will enable early screening, genetic counselling, and patient-specific treatment 
of MADD in this population.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-03014-8
PMCID: PMC10789041
PMID: 38221620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.