---
reference_id: "PMID:25589223"
title: "Danon disease: a phenotypic expression of LAMP-2 deficiency."
authors:
- Endo Y
- Furuta A
- Nishino I
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-015-1385-4
keywords:
- Autophagy/genetics
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Danon disease: a phenotypic expression of LAMP-2 deficiency.
**Authors:** Endo Y, Furuta A, Nishino I
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-015-1385-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-015-1385-4)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2015 Mar;129(3):391-8. doi: 10.1007/s00401-015-1385-4. Epub
2015 Jan 15.

Danon disease: a phenotypic expression of LAMP-2 deficiency.

Endo Y(1), Furuta A, Nishino I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Development, Translational Medical Center, National
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry (NCNP), 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi-cho, Kodaira,
Tokyo, 187-8551, Japan.

Danon disease is an X-linked disorder clinically characterized by the triad of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, myopathy, and intellectual disability.
Cardiomyopathy is a severe and life-threatening problem, for which cardiac
transplantation is the only therapeutic option. The most striking finding in
muscle biopsy samples is small basophilic granules scattered in myofibers, which
are in fact small autophagic vacuoles surrounded by membranes with sarcolemmal
features characterized by the recruitment of sarcolemmal proteins and
acetylcholine esterase and by the presence of basal lamina on its luminal side.
The mechanism underlying the formation of these autophagic vacuoles with unique
sarcolemmal features (AVSF) still remains a mystery and its origin is unknown.
In heart, cardiomyocytes show dramatically increased vacuolation and
degenerative features, including myofibrillar disruption and lipofuscin
accumulation. In brain, pale granular neurons and neurons with lipofuscin-like
granules may be seen. Danon disease is caused by loss-of-function mutations in
the LAMP2 gene, which encodes lysosome-associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP-2), a
single-spanned transmembrane protein localized in the limiting membranes of
lysosomes and late endosomes. Most mutations lead to splicing defects or protein
truncation, resulting in a loss of transmembrane and/or cytoplasmic domains,
leading to LAMP-2 protein deficiency. LAMP-2 is required for the maturation of
autophagosomes by fusion with lysosomes; therefore, LAMP-2 deficiency leads to a
failure in macroautophagy. There are three LAMP-2 isoforms, LAMP-2A, -2B, and
-2C. Clinical features of Danon disease are thought to be mediated by loss of
the LAMP-2B isoform which is the major isoform expressed in muscle. It is also
known that LAMP-2 plays a role in chaperone-mediated autophagy and RNA- and
DNA-targeting autophagy. However, the precise pathophysiological mechanism
through which LAMP-2 deficiency causes Danon disease is still not fully
understood and its elucidation would promote the development of new therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-015-1385-4
PMID: 25589223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
