---
reference_id: "PMID:31737040"
title: "Expanded Newborn Screening for Inborn Errors of Metabolism by Tandem Mass Spectrometry in Suzhou, China: Disease Spectrum, Prevalence, Genetic Characteristics in a Chinese Population."
authors:
- Wang T
- Ma J
- Zhang Q
- Gao A
- Wang Q
- Li H
- Xiang J
- Wang B
journal: Front Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01052
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanded Newborn Screening for Inborn Errors of Metabolism by Tandem Mass Spectrometry in Suzhou, China: Disease Spectrum, Prevalence, Genetic Characteristics in a Chinese Population.
**Authors:** Wang T, Ma J, Zhang Q, Gao A, Wang Q, Li H, Xiang J, Wang B
**Journal:** Front Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2019.01052](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2019.01052)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2019 Oct 29;10:1052. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01052. eCollection
2019.

Expanded Newborn Screening for Inborn Errors of Metabolism by Tandem Mass
Spectrometry in Suzhou, China: Disease Spectrum, Prevalence, Genetic
Characteristics in a Chinese Population.

Wang T(1), Ma J(1), Zhang Q(2), Gao A(2), Wang Q(1), Li H(3), Xiang J(4), Wang
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Newborn Screening Laboratory, Center for Reproduction and Genetics, the
Affiliated Suzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, China.
(2)Genetic Clinic, Center for Reproduction and Genetics, the Affiliated Suzhou
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, China.
(3)Infertility Clinic, Center for Reproduction and Genetics, the Affiliated
Suzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, China.
(4)Genetic Laboratory, Center for Reproduction and Genetics, the Affiliated
Suzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, China.

Expanded newborn screening for inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) by tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS) could simultaneously analyze more than 40 metabolites and
identify about 50 kinds of IEMs. Next generation sequencing (NGS) targeting
hundreds of IMEs-associated genes as a follow-up test in expanded newborn
screening has been used for genetic analysis of patients. The spectrum,
prevalence, and genetic characteristic of IEMs vary dramatically in different
populations. To determine the spectrum, prevalence, and gene mutations of IEMs
in newborns in Suzhou, China, 401,660 newborns were screened by MS/MS and 138
patients were referred to genetic analysis by NGS. The spectrum of 22 IEMs were
observed in Suzhou population of newborns, and the overall incidence (excluding
short chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SCADD) and 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA
carboxylase deficiency (3-MCCD)) was 1/3,163. The prevalence of each IEM ranged
from 1/401,660 to 1/19,128, while phenylketonuria (PKU) (1/19,128) and Mild
hyperphenylalaninemia (M-HPA) (1/19,128) were the most common IEMs, followed by
primary carnitine uptake defect (PCUD) (1/26,777), SCADD (1/28,690),
hypermethioninemia (H-MET) (1/30,893), 3-MCCD (1/33,412) and methylmalonic
acidemia (MMA) (1/40,166). Moreover, 89 reported mutations and 51 novel
mutations in 25 IMEs-associated genes were detected in 138 patients with one of
22 IEMs. Some hotspot mutations were observed for ten IEMs, including PAH gene
c.728G > A, c.611A > G, and c.721C > T for Phenylketonuria, PAH gene c.158G > A,
c.1238G > C, c.728G > A, and c.1315+6T > A for M-HPA, SLC22A5 gene c.1400C > G,
c.51C > G, and c.760C > T for PCUD, ACADS gene c.1031A > G, c.164C > T, and
c.1130C > T for SCAD deficiency, MAT1A gene c.791G > A for H-MET, MCCC1 gene
c.639+2T > A and c.863A > G for 3-MCCD, MMUT gene c.1663G > A for MMA, SLC25A13
gene c.IVS16ins3Kb and c.852_855delTATG for cittrullinemia II, PTS gene c.259C >
T and c.166G > A for Tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency, and ACAD8 gene c.1000C > T
and c.286C > A for Isobutyryl coa dehydrogenase deficiency. All these hotspot
mutations were reported to be pathogenic or likely pathogenic, except a novel
mutation of ACAD8 gene c.286C > A. These mutational hotspots could be potential
candidates for gene screening and these novel mutations expanded the mutational
spectrum of IEMs. Therefore, our findings could be of value for genetic
counseling and genetic diagnosis of IEMs.

Copyright © 2019 Wang, Ma, Zhang, Gao, Wang, Li, Xiang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01052
PMCID: PMC6828960
PMID: 31737040
