---
reference_id: "PMID:31507126"
title: "The Heart Matters: Contribution of Genetic Factors in Recurrent Pericarditis."
authors:
- Perricone C
- Katz D
- Ciccacci C
- Ceccarelli F
- Valesini G
- Shoenfeld Y
- Borgiani P
- Conti F
journal: Isr Med Assoc J
year: '2019'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Heart Matters: Contribution of Genetic Factors in Recurrent Pericarditis.
**Authors:** Perricone C, Katz D, Ciccacci C, Ceccarelli F, Valesini G, Shoenfeld Y, Borgiani P, Conti F
**Journal:** Isr Med Assoc J (2019)

## Content

1. Isr Med Assoc J. 2019 Jul;21(7):487-490.

The Heart Matters: Contribution of Genetic Factors in Recurrent Pericarditis.

Perricone C(1), Katz D(2)(3), Ciccacci C(4)(5), Ceccarelli F(1), Valesini G(1), 
Shoenfeld Y(2)(6), Borgiani P(5), Conti F(1).

Author information:
(1)Lupus Clinic, Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Zabludowicz Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical Center, Tel 
Hashomer, Israel.
(3)Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)UniCamillus, Saint Camillus International University of Health Sciences, 
Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Section of Genetics, School of 
Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(6)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Recurrent pericarditis is a state of repetitive inflammation of the pericardium 
with intervals of remission. The etiology of recurrent pericarditis is still 
largely unknown, yet most causes are presumed to be immune mediated. Genetic 
factors, including human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes, can be involved in 
dysregulation of the immune system and as a predisposition to several autoimmune 
conditions, including recurrent pericarditis. Several diseases are frequently 
associated with such manifestations. They include systemic lupus erythematosus, 
familial Mediterranean fever, and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated 
periodic syndrome. However, idiopathic recurrent pericarditis remains the most 
frequently observed clinical condition and the conundrum of this disease still 
needs to be solved.

PMID: 31507126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]