---
reference_id: "PMID:32256501"
title: Adaptive Immunity in Pulmonary Sarcoidosis and Chronic Beryllium Disease.
authors:
- Greaves SA
- Atif SM
- Fontenot AP
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00474
keywords:
- Adaptive Immunity
- Animals
- Berylliosis/immunology
- Chronic Disease
- HLA-DP beta-Chains/genetics
- Humans
- Lung/immunology
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/immunology"
- T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adaptive Immunity in Pulmonary Sarcoidosis and Chronic Beryllium Disease.
**Authors:** Greaves SA, Atif SM, Fontenot AP
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2020.00474](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.00474)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2020 Mar 18;11:474. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00474. eCollection
2020.

Adaptive Immunity in Pulmonary Sarcoidosis and Chronic Beryllium Disease.

Greaves SA(1), Atif SM(1), Fontenot AP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO, United States.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States.

Pulmonary sarcoidosis and chronic beryllium disease (CBD) are inflammatory
granulomatous lung diseases defined by the presence of non-caseating granulomas
in the lung. CBD results from beryllium exposure in the workplace, while the
cause of sarcoidosis remains unknown. CBD and sarcoidosis are both
immune-mediated diseases that involve Th1-polarized inflammation in the lung.
Beryllium exposure induces trafficking of dendritic cells to the lung in a
mechanism dependent on MyD88 and IL-1α. B cells are also recruited to the lung
in a MyD88 dependent manner after beryllium exposure in order to protect the
lung from beryllium-induced injury. Similar to most immune-mediated diseases,
disease susceptibility in CBD and sarcoidosis is driven by the expression of
certain MHCII molecules, primarily HLA-DPB1 in CBD and several HLA-DRB1 alleles
in sarcoidosis. One of the defining features of both CBD and sarcoidosis is an
infiltration of activated CD4+ T cells in the lung. CD4+ T cells in the
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) of CBD and sarcoidosis patients are highly Th1
polarized, and there is a significant increase in inflammatory Th1 cytokines
present in the BAL fluid. In sarcoidosis, there is also a significant population
of Th17 cells in the lungs that is not present in CBD. Due to persistent antigen
exposure and chronic inflammation in the lung, these activated CD4+ T cells
often display either an exhausted or anergic phenotype. Evidence suggests that
these T cells are responding to common antigens in the lung. In CBD there is an
expansion of beryllium-responsive TRBV5.1+ TCRs expressed on pathogenic CD4+ T
cells derived from the BAL of CBD patients that react with endogenous human
peptides derived from the plexin A protein. In an acute form of sarcoidosis,
there are expansions of specific TRAV12-1/TRBV2 T cell receptors expressed on
BAL CD4+ T cells, indicating that these T cells are trafficking to and expanding
in the lung in response to common antigens. The specificity of these pathogenic
CD4+T cells in sarcoidosis are currently unknown.

Copyright © 2020 Greaves, Atif and Fontenot.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00474
PMCID: PMC7093490
PMID: 32256501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
