---
reference_id: "PMID:31410582"
title: "Role of Anti-EGFR Targeted Therapies in Stage III Locally Advanced Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: Give or Not to Give?"
authors:
- Desai S
- Kim C
- Veytsman I
journal: Curr Oncol Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s11912-019-0835-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Anti-EGFR Targeted Therapies in Stage III Locally Advanced Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: Give or Not to Give?
**Authors:** Desai S, Kim C, Veytsman I
**Journal:** Curr Oncol Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11912-019-0835-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11912-019-0835-x)

## Content

1. Curr Oncol Rep. 2019 Aug 13;21(9):84. doi: 10.1007/s11912-019-0835-x.

Role of Anti-EGFR Targeted Therapies in Stage III Locally Advanced Non-small 
Cell Lung Cancer: Give or Not to Give?

Desai S(1), Kim C(1), Veytsman I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, MedStar 
Washington Hospital Center/Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, MedStar 
Washington Hospital Center/Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA. 
Irina.g.veytsman@medstar.net.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Identification of targetable mutations such as EGFR has 
allowed opportunity for Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor (TKI) therapy for lung cancer 
treatment. EGFR-TKIs have revolutionized treatment of advanced EGFR mutant 
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC), but there is little evidence that EGFR-TKI 
treatment is effective in stage III NSCLC. Here we discuss recent evidence 
supporting the use of EGFR-TKI therapy in combination with chemotherapy and 
radiation in stage III NSCLC.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent results of small trials testing EGFR-TKI therapy in 
combination with chemoradiation showed promising efficacy, improved outcomes, 
and a tolerable toxicity profile when administered to patients with EGFR mutant 
stage III NSCLC. However, strong supporting evidence regarding EGFR-TKI therapy 
in stage III NSCLC is lacking because previous trials involved a small patient 
population or were terminated due to slow participant accrual. Despite the lack 
of large randomized clinical trials, results from early-stage trials highlight 
promising future directions for investigating the use of EGFR-TKI therapy in 
stage III NSCLC treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s11912-019-0835-x
PMID: 31410582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]