---
reference_id: "PMID:36650797"
title: Dynamics of a dengue disease transmission model with two-stage structure in the human population.
authors:
- Li-Martín A
- Reyes-Carreto R
- Vargas-De-León C
journal: Math Biosci Eng
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3934/mbe.2023044
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dynamics of a dengue disease transmission model with two-stage structure in the human population.
**Authors:** Li-Martín A, Reyes-Carreto R, Vargas-De-León C
**Journal:** Math Biosci Eng (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3934/mbe.2023044](https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2023044)

## Content

1. Math Biosci Eng. 2023 Jan;20(1):955-974. doi: 10.3934/mbe.2023044. Epub 2022
Oct  20.

Dynamics of a dengue disease transmission model with two-stage structure in the 
human population.

Li-Martín A(1), Reyes-Carreto R(1), Vargas-De-León C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Matemáticas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Ciudad 
Universitaria s/n Chilpancingo, Guerrero, México.
(2)División de Investigación, Hospital Juárez de México, Ciudad de México, 
México.

Age as a risk factor is common in vector-borne infectious diseases. This is 
partly because children depend on adults to take preventative measures, and 
adults are less susceptible to mosquito bites because they generally spend less 
time outdoors than children. We propose a dengue disease model that considers 
the human population as divided into two subpopulations: children and adults. 
This is in order to take into consideration that children are more likely than 
adults to be bitten by mosquitoes. We calculated the basic reproductive number 
of dengue, using the next-generation operator method. We determined the local 
and global stability of the disease-free equilibrium. We obtained sufficient 
conditions for the global asymptotic stability of the endemic equilibrium using 
the Lyapunov functional method. When the infected periods in children and adults 
are the same, we that the endemic equilibrium is globally asymptotically stable 
in the interior of the feasible region when the threshold quantity $ R_0 > 1 $. 
Additionally, we performed a numerical simulation using parameter values 
obtained from the literature. Finally, a local sensitivity analysis was 
performed to identify the parameters that have the greatest influence on changes 
in $ (R_0) $, and thereby obtain a better biological interpretation of the 
results.

DOI: 10.3934/mbe.2023044
PMID: 36650797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]