---
reference_id: PMID:39669695
title: "Clinical Outcomes of Therapeutic Interventions for Autoimmune Retinopathy: A Meta-analysis and Systematic Review."
authors:
- Kapoor I
- Sarvepalli SM
- Grewal DS
- Hadziahmetovic M
journal: Ophthalmol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.xops.2024.100622
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Outcomes of Therapeutic Interventions for Autoimmune Retinopathy: A Meta-analysis and Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Kapoor I, Sarvepalli SM, Grewal DS, Hadziahmetovic M
**Journal:** Ophthalmol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xops.2024.100622](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xops.2024.100622)

## Content

1. Ophthalmol Sci. 2024 Sep 12;5(1):100622. doi: 10.1016/j.xops.2024.100622. 
eCollection 2025 Jan-Feb.

Clinical Outcomes of Therapeutic Interventions for Autoimmune Retinopathy: A 
Meta-analysis and Systematic Review.

Kapoor I(1), Sarvepalli SM(2), Grewal DS(3), Hadziahmetovic M(3).

Author information:
(1)Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.

TOPIC: Autoimmune retinopathy (AIR) is a group of rare inflammatory diseases 
treated with immunosuppression; however, there is no treatment consensus. This 
meta-analysis and review aims to investigate treatment effectiveness in slowing 
AIR progression.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Autoimmune retinopathy is a group of diseases characterized 
by progressive vision loss that is both difficult to diagnose and treat. While 
there is some consensus regarding diagnostic criteria, evidence-based treatment 
consensus remains poorly understood. Current first-line treatment is systemic 
steroids and conventional steroid-sparing agents. However, patients often 
experience treatment failure and systemic adverse effects with these 
medications. Understanding the effect of medications on slowing multiple visual 
outcomes in AIR can help to guide future treatment protocols.
METHODS: PubMed, Cochrane Library, Embase, and ClinicalTrials.gov were 
systematically searched from inception to November 2023. Included studies 
treated patients with AIR with systemic, local, and biologic therapy and 
reported visual acuity (VA), visual field (VF), cystoid macular edema (CME), 
electroretinogram, central retinal thickness (CRT), and/or ellipsoid zone (EZ) 
loss. Risk of bias was assessed using the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme 
checklist. Data for meta-analysis were pooled using a random-effects model.
RESULTS: Analysis of 40 case reports demonstrated that treatment type 
significantly affects the improvement of VA in patients with nonparaneoplastic 
retinopathy. Meta-analysis of 12 studies demonstrated that any treatment 
decreases the risk of progression of all 6 outcomes. Systemic therapy slows VA 
loss (risk ratio [RR] = 0.04, 95% confidence interval [0.00, 0.91], P = 0.04), 
VF loss (RR = 0.01, 95% confidence interval [0.00, 0.14], P = 0.0007), and CME 
(RR = 0.02, 95% confidence interval [0.00, 0.34], P = 0.007). Local therapy 
slows VA loss (RR = 0.02, 95% confidence interval [0.00, 0.12], P < 0.00001), 
CME (RR = 0.06, 95% confidence interval [0.01, 0.43], P = 0.005), CRT loss 
(RR = 0.02, 95% confidence interval [0.00, 0.36], P = 0.007), and EZ loss 
(RR = 0.31, 95% confidence interval [0.14, 0.70], P = 0.004). Biologics slow VA 
loss (RR = 0.28, 95% confidence interval [0.12, 0.65], P = 0.003), VF loss 
(RR = 0.25, 95% confidence interval [0.15, 0.42], P < 0.00001), and CRT loss 
(RR = 0.19, 95% confidence interval [0.04, 0.79], P = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: Systemic therapy significantly reduces the risk of progressive 
visual loss. Local therapy significantly decreases the risk of both progressive 
visual loss and retinal morphology loss, and therefore may offer precise 
targeting of the retina. Biologics significantly reduce both functional and 
morphological retinal changes. Immunosuppressive therapy may slow AIR 
progression; however, additional research is needed to assess long-term 
outcomes.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES: The author(s) have no proprietary or commercial interest 
in any materials discussed in this article.

© 2024 by the American Academy of Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xops.2024.100622
PMCID: PMC11635770
PMID: 39669695