---
reference_id: "PMID:18552903"
title: "[Whipple's disease]."
authors:
- Eriksen R
- Westre B
- Bergh K
- Qvigstad G
journal: Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Whipple's disease].
**Authors:** Eriksen R, Westre B, Bergh K, Qvigstad G
**Journal:** Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen (2008)

## Content

1. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2008 Jun 12;128(12):1406-9.

[Whipple's disease].

[Article in Norwegian]

Eriksen R(1), Westre B, Bergh K, Qvigstad G.

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterologisk seksjon Medisinsk avdeling. 
ragnar.eriksen@helse-sunnmore.no

BACKGROUND: Whipple's disease is a rare infectious disease. This review 
describes the clinical picture, diagnostic aspects and treatment options.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Based on a clinical case, a literature study was performed 
by searching PubMed (unlimited) with the words "whipples disease" combined with 
" TROPHERYMA WHIPPELII: " (118 hits) and " TROPHERYMA WHIPPLEI:" (65 hits). 
Titles and abstracts were used to identify other relevant articles.
RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION: Whipple's disease may affect several organ systems 
and thus causes a wide range of symptoms. The most common ones are weight loss, 
abdominal pain, diarrhoea and arthralgia. The diagnosis is based on PAS-POSITIVE 
MATERIAL: in duodenal biopsies and identification of gene fragments from the 
bacterium TROPHERYMA WHIPPLEI:. Presence of the bacterium may be confirmed by 
sensitive polymerase chain reaction assays. Left without treatment the disease 
may be lethal. Proper antibiotic treatment is imperative to heal the disease.

PMID: 18552903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]