---
reference_id: "PMID:8852666"
title: "Dopa-responsive dystonia in British patients: new mutations of the GTP-cyclohydrolase I gene and evidence for genetic heterogeneity."
authors:
- Bandmann O
- Nygaard TG
- Surtees R
- Marsden CD
- Wood NW
- Harding AE
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/5.3.403
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dopa-responsive dystonia in British patients: new mutations of the GTP-cyclohydrolase I gene and evidence for genetic heterogeneity.
**Authors:** Bandmann O, Nygaard TG, Surtees R, Marsden CD, Wood NW, Harding AE
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/5.3.403](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/5.3.403)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1996 Mar;5(3):403-6. doi: 10.1093/hmg/5.3.403.

Dopa-responsive dystonia in British patients: new mutations of the 
GTP-cyclohydrolase I gene and evidence for genetic heterogeneity.

Bandmann O(1), Nygaard TG, Surtees R, Marsden CD, Wood NW, Harding AE.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurology, Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.

Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) was originally described in a series of Japanese 
patients, but is now increasingly recognized in other countries. Recently the 
GTP cyclohydrolase I (GTPCH) gene was isolated as the first causative gene for 
dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD). Mutations were identified in three Japanese 
families with autosomal dominantly inherited DRD and in one sporadic Japanese 
patient. Characterisation of the exon-intron boundaries of this gene has now 
allowed the analysis of mutations at the level of genomic DNA. Amplifying all 
six exons, we analyzed the GTPCH gene in nine British families with 33 affected 
family members and in three sporadic cases and found six new mutations. Only 
point mutations were found, causing a stop codon in one family and an amino acid 
change in highly conserved regions of the gene in a further four families and in 
one sporadic case. None of these mutations were detected more than once and none 
of the mutations previously described were found in our patients. No mutations 
were identified in four families and in two sporadic cases.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/5.3.403
PMID: 8852666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]