---
reference_id: "PMID:12589180"
title: "Dopamine and the kidney: a role in hypertension?"
authors:
- Jose PA
- Eisner GM
- Felder RA
journal: Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1097/00041552-200303000-00010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dopamine and the kidney: a role in hypertension?
**Authors:** Jose PA, Eisner GM, Felder RA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00041552-200303000-00010](https://doi.org/10.1097/00041552-200303000-00010)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2003 Mar;12(2):189-94. doi: 
10.1097/00041552-200303000-00010.

Dopamine and the kidney: a role in hypertension?

Jose PA(1), Eisner GM, Felder RA.

Author information:
(1)Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA. 
pjose01@georgetown.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Defective transduction of the dopamine receptor signal in the 
kidney has been shown to be important in the pathogenesis of hypertension This 
review will discuss the genetic mechanism for the defective renal dopaminergic 
function and the interaction with other gene variant products in the 
pathogenesis of salt sensitivity and essential hypertension.
RECENT FINDINGS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms of G protein-coupled receptor 
kinase type 4 (GRK4) phosphorylate, desensitize, and diminish the inhibitory 
action of D receptors on sodium transport in the kidney. Inhibition of GRK4 
expression normalizes renal proximal tubule D receptor function in humans and 
rodents and ameliorates the hypertension in genetically hypertensive rats. 
Expression of the GRK4 variant, GRK4gammaA142V, produces hypertension and 
impairs the natriuretic effect of D receptor stimulation in mice. In humans, 
GRK4 single nucleotide polymorphisms are associated with essential hypertension, 
particularly salt sensitive hypertension. The prediction of the hypertensive 
phenotype is most accurate when elements of the renin-angiotensin system and 
GRK4 are included in the analysis.
SUMMARY: GRK4 single nucleotide polymorphisms, by preventing the natriuretic 
function of the dopaminergic system and by allowing the antinatriuretic function 
of angiotensin II type 1 receptors to predominate, may be responsible for salt 
sensitivity. Hypertension develops with additional perturbations caused by the 
variants of other genes (e.g., alpha-adducin, angiotensin converting enzyme, 
angiotensinogen, angiotensin II type 1 receptor, aldosterone synthase, 
11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2), the quantitative interaction of 
which may vary depending upon the genetic background.

DOI: 10.1097/00041552-200303000-00010
PMID: 12589180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]