---
reference_id: "PMID:38966500"
title: "Gastric Cancer: Clinical Features, Screening, Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prevention."
authors:
- Ramachandran R
- Grantham T
- Parvataneni S
- Budh D
- Gollapalli S
- Reddy M
- Gaduputi V
journal: J Community Hosp Intern Med Perspect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.55729/2000-9666.1304
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastric Cancer: Clinical Features, Screening, Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prevention.
**Authors:** Ramachandran R, Grantham T, Parvataneni S, Budh D, Gollapalli S, Reddy M, Gaduputi V
**Journal:** J Community Hosp Intern Med Perspect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.55729/2000-9666.1304](https://doi.org/10.55729/2000-9666.1304)

## Content

1. J Community Hosp Intern Med Perspect. 2024 Mar 4;14(2):49-57. doi: 
10.55729/2000-9666.1304. eCollection 2024.

Gastric Cancer: Clinical Features, Screening, Diagnosis, Treatment, and 
Prevention.

Ramachandran R(1), Grantham T(2), Parvataneni S(3), Budh D(4), Gollapalli S(4), 
Reddy M(1), Gaduputi V(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, 121 Dekalb 
Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Staten Island University Hospital, 475 
Seaview Avenue, Staten Island, NY 10305, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Geisinger Lewistown Hospital, 400 Highland 
Ave, Lewistown, PA 17044, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Barnabas Hospital, 4422 3rd Avenue, 
Bronx, NY 10457, USA.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Blanchard Valley Health System, 1900 S Main 
St, Findlay, OH 45840, USA.

The objective of this article is to highlight the clinical features, screening, 
diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of gastric cancer (GC). Early GC is often 
asymptomatic leading to frequent delays in diagnosis. Weight loss and persistent 
abdominal pain are the most common symptoms at initial diagnosis. The diagnosis 
of GC typically involves a combination of endoscopy, biopsy, and imaging 
studies. Endoscopic resection techniques are emerging as successful treatment 
options for early GC. Treatment options for advanced GC include surgery and 
chemotherapy. The first line chemotherapy for advanced GC consists of doublet 
therapy with a combination of platinum and fluoropyrimidines. Trastuzumab, a 
monoclonal antibody, is used in the treatment of human epidermal growth factor 2 
positive GCs. Antiangiogenic agents and immunotherapy are also useful in the 
treatment of GC. Currently there are no GC screening guidelines in the United 
States, but they exist in other regions where there is increased prevalence of 
GC. Prevention strategies for GC include Helicobacter pylori eradication and 
adoption of a healthy diet consisting of fruits and vegetables.

© 2024 Greater Baltimore Medical Center.

DOI: 10.55729/2000-9666.1304
PMCID: PMC11221451
PMID: 38966500

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declared no 
potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and 
publication of this article.