---
reference_id: "PMID:38714690"
title: "The genomic landscape of Vk*MYC myeloma highlights shared pathways of transformation between mice and humans."
authors:
- Maura F
- Coffey DG
- Stein CK
- Braggio E
- Ziccheddu B
- Sharik ME
- Du MT
- Tafoya Alvarado Y
- Shi CX
- Zhu YX
- Meermeier EW
- Morgan GJ
- Landgren O
- Bergsagel PL
- Chesi M
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-48091-w
keywords:
- Animals
- "Multiple Myeloma/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-myc/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "NF-kappa B/metabolism, genetics"
- "Mutagenesis, Insertional"
- DNA Copy Number Variations/genetics
- Genomics/methods
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genomic landscape of Vk*MYC myeloma highlights shared pathways of transformation between mice and humans.
**Authors:** Maura F, Coffey DG, Stein CK, Braggio E, Ziccheddu B, Sharik ME, Du MT, Tafoya Alvarado Y, Shi CX, Zhu YX, Meermeier EW, Morgan GJ, Landgren O, Bergsagel PL, Chesi M
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-48091-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48091-w)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 May 7;15(1):3844. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-48091-w.

The genomic landscape of Vk*MYC myeloma highlights shared pathways of 
transformation between mice and humans.

Maura F(#)(1), Coffey DG(#)(2), Stein CK(3), Braggio E(3), Ziccheddu B(2), 
Sharik ME(3), Du MT(3), Tafoya Alvarado Y(3), Shi CX(3), Zhu YX(3), Meermeier 
EW(3), Morgan GJ(4), Landgren O(2), Bergsagel PL(#)(3), Chesi M(#)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Myeloma, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA. 
fxm557@med.miami.edu.
(2)Division of Myeloma, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo 
Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(4)Myeloma Research Program, NYU Langone, Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo 
Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA. chesi.marta@mayo.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a heterogeneous disease characterized by frequent MYC 
translocations. Sporadic MYC activation in the germinal center of genetically 
engineered Vk*MYC mice is sufficient to induce plasma cell tumors in which a 
variety of secondary mutations are spontaneously acquired and selected over 
time. Analysis of 119 Vk*MYC myeloma reveals recurrent copy number alterations, 
structural variations, chromothripsis, driver mutations, apolipoprotein B 
mRNA-editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide (APOBEC) mutational activity, and a 
progressive decrease in immunoglobulin transcription that inversely correlates 
with proliferation. Moreover, we identify frequent insertional mutagenesis by 
endogenous retro-elements as a murine specific mechanism to activate NF-kB and 
IL6 signaling pathways shared with human MM. Despite the increased genomic 
complexity associated with progression, advanced tumors remain dependent on MYC. 
In summary, here we credential the Vk*MYC mouse as a unique resource to explore 
MM genomic evolution and describe a fully annotated collection of diverse and 
immortalized murine MM tumors.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-48091-w
PMCID: PMC11076575
PMID: 38714690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MC and PLB receive royalties from Vk*MYC, 
Vk*MYChCRBN mice and derivative transplantable lines. The remaining authors 
declare no competing interests.