---
reference_id: "PMID:38957191"
title: A Case Report on Senear-Usher Syndrome.
authors:
- Jangid SD
- Madke B
- Singh A
- Bhatt DM
- Khan A
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.49268
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case Report on Senear-Usher Syndrome.
**Authors:** Jangid SD, Madke B, Singh A, Bhatt DM, Khan A
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.49268](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.49268)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Nov 22;15(11):e49268. doi: 10.7759/cureus.49268. eCollection 2023
 Nov.

A Case Report on Senear-Usher Syndrome.

Jangid SD(1), Madke B(1), Singh A(1), Bhatt DM(1), Khan A(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology, Venereology, and Leprosy, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, 
Datta Meghe Institute of Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

Pemphigus erythematosus is an uncommon autoimmune bullous skin disorder with 
clinical, histological, and serological characteristics that overlap with lupus 
erythematosus and pemphigus foliaceus. The autoantigens are desmoglein 3, 
desmoglein 1, and desmosomal adhesion proteins in keratinocytes. When these 
bonds are disrupted, it causes acantholysis of keratinocytes, leading to the 
fluid collection between layers. Hence, the patient will present clinically with 
small flaccid bullae with crusting and scaling, mainly on the seborrheic areas. 
We report the case of a 21-year-old female presenting to us with multiple 
hyperkeratotic plaques, mainly on the seborrheic areas, including the face, 
chest, and elbows. The patient was evaluated further, and based on clinical and 
laboratory investigations, the diagnosis of pemphigus erythematosus associated 
with anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (anti-dSDNA) and anti-nuclear 
antibody (ANA) positivity was made. The patient was then managed using 
immunosuppressant therapy, and the entire course has been detailed in this case 
report.

Copyright © 2023, Jangid et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.49268
PMCID: PMC11218602
PMID: 38957191

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.