---
reference_id: "PMID:40237890"
title: Phenotype-genotype correlations in patients with Alport syndrome from the Polish population.
authors:
- Malarska M
- Moczulska H
- Pachniak P
- Gadzalska K
- Jakiel P
- Gorządek M
- Juścińska E
- Pietrusiński M
- Mazerant M
- Pukajło-Marczyk A
- Kiliś-Pstrusińska K
- Majos A
- Podgórski M
- Zmysłowska A
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-025-02251-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, diagnosis, complications"
- Female
- Male
- Poland/epidemiology
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Child
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Phenotype
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Pregnancy
- Young Adult
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype-genotype correlations in patients with Alport syndrome from the Polish population.
**Authors:** Malarska M, Moczulska H, Pachniak P, Gadzalska K, Jakiel P, Gorządek M, Juścińska E, Pietrusiński M, Mazerant M, Pukajło-Marczyk A, Kiliś-Pstrusińska K, Majos A, Podgórski M, Zmysłowska A
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-025-02251-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-025-02251-3)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2025 Sep;38(7):1831-1839. doi: 10.1007/s40620-025-02251-3. Epub
2025  Apr 16.

Phenotype-genotype correlations in patients with Alport syndrome from the Polish
population.

Malarska M(1), Moczulska H(1), Pachniak P(1), Gadzalska K(1), Jakiel P(1),
Gorządek M(1), Juścińska E(1), Pietrusiński M(1), Mazerant M(2), Pukajło-Marczyk
A(3), Kiliś-Pstrusińska K(3), Majos A(4), Podgórski M(5), Zmysłowska A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University of Lodz, Pomorska Str.
251, 92-213, Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, District Hospital in Radomsko, Radomsko,
Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw,
Poland.
(4)Department of General and Transplant Surgery, Medical University of Lodz,
Lodz, Poland.
(5)3rd Radiology and Imaging Diagnostics Department, Medical University of Lodz,
Lodz, Poland.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University of Lodz, Pomorska Str.
251, 92-213, Lodz, Poland. agnieszka.zmyslowska@umed.lodz.pl.

BACKGROUND: Alport syndrome (AS) is a rare inherited kidney disease associated
with progressive renal failure and visual and hearing disorders. The purpose of
this study was to find genetic variants in patients with suspected Alport
syndrome from Central and Southwestern Poland and their association with the
clinical course of the disease, and to evaluate the impact of Alport syndrome on
pregnancy.
METHODS: Initially, 90 patients with suspected Alport syndrome were evaluated by
molecular-based testing. Clinical analyses, including urinalysis, evaluation of
serum parameters, ultrasound, ophthalmologic, cardiovascular and audiology
examination, and genetic testing were performed using next-generation sequencing
and the Sanger method.
RESULTS: Seventy-seven patients (40.26% male; 59.74% female) with a median age
of 6 years were included in the study group, after receiving a diagnosis of
Alport syndrome. Twenty pathogenic/potentially pathogenic variants within the
COL4A3, COL4A4 and COL4A5 genes were identified in these patients. The
c.1871G > A variant in the COL4A5 gene was the most common (53.25%). Isolated
hematuria was the most common initial sign of Alport syndrome (70.8%). Genetic
testing confirmed Alport syndrome in 85% of symptomatic patients and in 15% of
asymptomatic patients. Sensorineural hearing loss (17%) and ocular abnormalities
(6%) were also detected in patients in the study group. Isolated hematuria
showed a significant association with COL4A5 gene variants (p < 0.001). Genetic
variants showed an association with initial clinical symptoms and age at Alport
syndrome manifestation.
CONCLUSIONS: Regular urinalysis and genetic testing should be considered in
suspected cases of Alport syndrome for rapid diagnosis and effective patient
management.

© 2025. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Italian Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-025-02251-3
PMID: 40237890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors
did not receive support from any organization for the submitted work. The
authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content
of this article. Ethical approval: This retrospective chart review study
involving human participants was in accordance with the ethical standards of the
institutional and national research committee and with the Helsinki Declaration
and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. The local ethics
committee of Medical University of Lodz (RNN/148/23/KE) approved this study.
Human and animal rights: The authors followed ethical requirements related to
human and animal rights. Informed consent to participate: All patients or their
legal guardians gave written informed consent to participate in the study.
