---
reference_id: "PMID:38042867"
title: Effectiveness and safety of everolimus treatment in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex in real-world clinical practice.
authors:
- Cockerell I
- Christensen J
- Hoei-Hansen CE
- Holst L
- Grenaa Frederiksen M
- Issa-Epe AI
- Nedregaard B
- Solhoff R
- Heimdal K
- Johannessen Landmark C
- Lund C
- Nærland T
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02982-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Infant
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- Angiomyolipoma/drug therapy
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- "Astrocytoma/chemically induced, complications, drug therapy"
- Epilepsy/drug therapy
- Everolimus/adverse effects
- Kidney Neoplasms/complications
- Seizures/drug therapy
- "Tuberous Sclerosis/drug therapy, complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness and safety of everolimus treatment in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex in real-world clinical practice.
**Authors:** Cockerell I, Christensen J, Hoei-Hansen CE, Holst L, Grenaa Frederiksen M, Issa-Epe AI, Nedregaard B, Solhoff R, Heimdal K, Johannessen Landmark C, Lund C, Nærland T
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02982-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02982-1)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Dec 2;18(1):377. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02982-1.

Effectiveness and safety of everolimus treatment in patients with tuberous
sclerosis complex in real-world clinical practice.

Cockerell I(1), Christensen J(2)(3), Hoei-Hansen CE(4)(5), Holst L(2), Grenaa
Frederiksen M(5), Issa-Epe AI(6), Nedregaard B(7), Solhoff R(8), Heimdal K(9),
Johannessen Landmark C(10)(11)(12), Lund C(13), Nærland T(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rare Disorders and Disabilities, National Centre for Rare
Epilepsy-Related Disorders, Oslo University Hospital, Pb 4950, 0424, Nydalen,
Oslo, Norway. inec@ous-hf.no.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Neurology, Aarhus University Hospital, Affiliated Member of the
European Reference Network EpiCARE, Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(6)Section of Abdominal Radiology, Department of Radiology, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Section of Neuroradiology, Department of Radiology, Oslo University Hospital,
Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Neurology, Sørlandet Hospital, Arendal, Norway.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(10)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo Metropolitan
University, Oslo, Norway.
(11)The National Center for Epilepsy (SSE), Member of the ERN EpiCare, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(12)Section for Clinical Pharmacology, SSE, Department of Pharmacology, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(13)Department of Rare Disorders and Disabilities, National Centre for Rare
Epilepsy-Related Disorders, Oslo University Hospital, Pb 4950, 0424, Nydalen,
Oslo, Norway.
(14)K.G. Jebsen Center for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(15)NevSom, Department of Rare Disorders and Disabilities, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: The randomised double-blinded placebo-controlled EXIST-1-3 studies
have showed everolimus effective with adverse effects reported as acceptable in
treatment of symptoms in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC),
although evidence of outcomes in clinical practice remains limited. This study
aimed to investigate, in clinical practice, the effectiveness and safety of
everolimus for epilepsy, renal angiomyolipoma (rAML), and subependymal giant
cell astrocytoma (SEGA) in patients with TSC.
RESULTS: The study included 64 patients with TSC (median age: 19, range
0.9-54 years) receiving everolimus treatment (Norway: n = 35; Denmark: n = 29).
Among 45 patients with epilepsy, 14 (31%) were responders experiencing ≥ 50%
reduction in seizure frequency in the last 3 months of treatment compared with
the last 3 months before treatment. Nineteen (42%) patients changed their
anti-seizure medications (ASMs). Responders were more common among patients
< 18 years (46%) than among patients ≥ 18 years (14%, p = 0.03). In 29 patients
with rAML, everolimus reduced (≥ 30% decrease) and stabilized (< 20% increase,
≤ 30% decrease) longest diameter of rAML in 38% and 59%, respectively, after a
mean treatment duration of 37 months. SEGA volume was reduced in three patients
by 71%, 43%, and 48% after 39, 34, and 82 months. Adverse effects were reported
in 61 of 64 patients (95%) after a median treatment duration of 31 months (range
0-106), with oral ulceration/stomatitis (63%) and upper respiratory tract
infections (38%) being the most common. The most common laboratory abnormalities
were increased cholesterol (41%), anaemia (30%), and leucopoenia (25%). Grade
3-4 adverse effects were reported in 36% of cases, and life-threatening
conditions were reported in two patients. Nine patients discontinued everolimus
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Seizure reduction in this study sample was consistent with results
from EXIST, but might be lower than expected, given that changes in concomitant
ASMs are part of clinical practice. Seizure reduction was associated with
younger age. As with EXIST, everolimus reduced or stabilised rAML size in most
patients. SEGA volume was reduced in all three patients. Close follow-up is
needed for this group, especially for children and patients who may not be able
to report adverse effects.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02982-1
PMCID: PMC10693167
PMID: 38042867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ine Cockerell gave an unpaid lecture to UCB
Nordic. Jakob Christensen has received honoraria from serving on the scientific
advisory board of UCB Nordic and Eisai AB, received honoraria for giving
lectures from UCB Nordic and Eisai AB, and received funding for a trip from UCB
Nordic. Cecilie Johannessen Landmark has received advisory board/speaker’s
honoraria from Angelini, Eisai, Jazz, and UCB Pharma. Christina E. Høi-Hansen
received speaker’s honoraria from Eisai. Caroline Lund received speaker’s
honoraria from Eisai, UCB, and Jazz.
