---
reference_id: "PMID:29237099"
title: "Calcium channel blockers for primary and secondary Raynaud's phenomenon."
authors:
- Rirash F
- Tingey PC
- Harding SE
- Maxwell LJ
- Tanjong Ghogomu E
- Wells GA
- Tugwell P
- Pope J
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000467.pub2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calcium channel blockers for primary and secondary Raynaud's phenomenon.
**Authors:** Rirash F, Tingey PC, Harding SE, Maxwell LJ, Tanjong Ghogomu E, Wells GA, Tugwell P, Pope J
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD000467.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000467.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Dec 13;12(12):CD000467. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD000467.pub2.

Calcium channel blockers for primary and secondary Raynaud's phenomenon.

Rirash F(1), Tingey PC, Harding SE, Maxwell LJ, Tanjong Ghogomu E, Wells GA, 
Tugwell P, Pope J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Western Ontario, 268 Grosvenor Street, 
London, ON, Canada, N6A 4V2.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000467.

BACKGROUND: Raynaud's phenomenon is a vasospastic disease characterized by 
digital pallor, cyanosis, and extremity pain. Primary Raynaud's phenomenon is 
not associated with underlying disease, but secondary Raynaud's phenomenon is 
associated with connective tissue disorders such as systemic sclerosis, systemic 
lupus erythematosus, and mixed connective tissue disease. Calcium channel 
blockers promote vasodilation and are commonly used when drug treatment for 
Raynaud's phenomenon is required.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the benefits and harms of calcium channel blockers (CCBs) 
versus placebo for treatment of individuals with Raynaud's phenomenon with 
respect to Raynaud's type (primary vs secondary) and type and dose of CCBs.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 
(May 19, 2017), MEDLINE (1946 to May 19, 2017), Embase (1947 to May 19, 2017), 
clinicaltrials.gov, and the World Health Organization (WHO) International 
Clinical Trials Registry Portal. We applied no language restrictions. We also 
searched bibliographies of retrieved articles and contacted key experts for 
additional and unpublished data.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing calcium 
channel blockers versus placebo.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently assessed search 
results and risk of bias and extracted trial data. We used the GRADE approach to 
assess the quality of evidence.
MAIN RESULTS: This review contains 38 RCTs (33 cross-over RCTs) with an average 
duration of 7.4 weeks and 982 participants; however, not all trials reported all 
outcomes of interest. Nine of the identified trials studied patients with 
primary Raynaud's phenomenon (N = 365), five studied patients with secondary 
Raynaud's phenomenon (N = 63), and the rest examined a mixture of patients with 
primary and secondary Raynaud's phenomenon (N = 554). The most frequently 
encountered risk of bias types were incomplete outcome data and poor reporting 
of randomization and allocation methods.When researchers considered both primary 
and secondary Raynaud's phenomenon, evidence of moderate quality (downgraded for 
inconsistency) from 23 trials with 528 participants indicates that calcium 
channel blockers (CCBs) were superior to placebo in reducing the frequency of 
attacks. CCBs reduced the average number of attacks per week by six ( weighted 
mean difference (WMD) -6.13, 95% confidence interval (CI) -6.60 to - 5.67; I² = 
98%) compared with 13.7 attacks per week with placebo. When review authors 
excluded Kahan 1985C, a trial showing a very large reduction in the frequency of 
attacks, data showed that CCBs reduced attack frequency by 2.93 per week (95% CI 
-3.44 to -2.43; I² = 77%).Low-quality evidence (downgraded for imprecision and 
inconsistency) from six trials with 69 participants suggests that the average 
duration of attacks did not differ in a statistically significant or clinically 
meaningful way between CCBs and placebo (WMD -1.67 minutes, 95% CI -3.29 to 0); 
this is equivalent to a -9% difference (95% CI -18% to 0%).Moderate-quality 
evidence (downgraded for inconsistency) based on 16 trials and 415 participants 
showed that CCBs reduced attack severity by 0.62 cm (95% CI -0.72 to - 0.51) on 
a 10-cm visual analogue scale (lower scores indicate less severity); this was 
equivalent to absolute and relative percent reductions of 6% (95% CI -11% to 
-8%) and 9% (95% CI -11% to -8%), respectively, which may not be clinically 
meaningful.Improvement in Raynaud's pain (low-quality evidence; downgraded for 
imprecision and inconsistency) and in disability as measured by a patient global 
assessment (moderate-quality evidence; downgraded for imprecision) favored CCBs 
(pain: WMD -1.47 cm, 95% CI -2.21 to -0.74; patient global: WMD -0.37 cm, 95% CI 
-0.73 to 0, when assessed on a 0 to 10 cm visual analogue scale, with lower 
scores indicating less pain and less disability). However, these effect 
estimates were likely underpowered, as they were based on limited numbers of 
participants, respectively, 62 and 92. For pain assessment, absolute and 
relative percent improvements were 15% (95% -22% to -7%) and 47% (95% CI -71% to 
-24%), respectively. For patient global assessment, absolute and relative 
percent improvements were 4% (95% CI -7% to 0%) and 9% (95% CI -19% to 0%), 
respectively.Subgroup analyses by Raynaud's type, CCB class, and CCB dose 
suggest that dihydropyridine CCBs in higher doses may be more effective for 
primary Raynaud's than for secondary Raynaud's, and CCBs likely have a greater 
effect in primary than in secondary Raynaud's. However, differences were small 
and were not found for all outcomes. Dihydropyridine CCBs were studied as they 
are the subgroup of CCBs that are not cardioselective and are traditionally used 
in RP treatment whereas other CCBs such as verapamil are not routinely used and 
diltiazem is not used as first line subtype of CCBs. Most trial data pertained 
to nifedipine.Withdrawals from studies due to adverse effects were inconclusive 
owing to a wide CI (risk ratio [RR] 1.30, 95% CI 0.51 to 3.33) from two parallel 
studies with 63 participants (low-quality evidence downgraded owing to 
imprecision and a high attrition rate); absolute and relative percent 
differences in withdrawals were 6% (95% CI -14% to 26%) and 30% (95% CI -49% to 
233%), respectively. In cross-over trials, although a meta-analysis was not 
performed, withdrawals were more common with CCBs than with placebo. The most 
common side effects were headache, dizziness, nausea, palpitations, and ankle 
edema. However, in all trials, no serious adverse events (death or 
hospitalization) were reported.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Randomized controlled trials with evidence of low to 
moderate quality showed that CCBs (especially the dihydropyridine class) may be 
useful in reducing the frequency, duration, severity of attacks, pain and 
disability associated with Raynaud's phenomenon. Higher doses may be more 
effective than lower doses and these CCBs may be more effective in primary RP. 
Although there were more withdrawals due to adverse events in the treatment 
groups, no serious adverse events were reported.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD000467.pub2
PMCID: PMC6486273
PMID: 29237099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JP: has consulted for Actelion, Mediquest, 
Pfizer, and United Therapeutics in the area of Raynaud's phenomenon and/or 
digital ulcers. PTu: grants/honoraria from Bristol Myers and UCB. FR: none 
known. PTi: none known. SH: none known. LM: none known. EG: none known. GW: none 
known.