---
reference_id: "PMID:17716938"
title: "Vibrio cholerae: cholera toxin."
authors:
- Vanden Broeck D
- Horvath C
- De Wolf MJ
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2007.07.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vibrio cholerae: cholera toxin.
**Authors:** Vanden Broeck D, Horvath C, De Wolf MJ
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2007.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2007.07.005)

## Content

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(10):1771-5. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2007.07.005.  Epub 2007 Jul 20.

Vibrio cholerae: cholera toxin.

Vanden Broeck D(1), Horvath C, De Wolf MJ.

Author information:
(1)UA-Laboratory of Human Biochemistry, University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 
171, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium. davy.vandenbroeck@ua.ac.be

The bacterial protein toxin of Vibrio cholerae, cholera toxin, is a major agent 
involved in severe diarrhoeal disease. Cholera toxin is a member of the AB toxin 
family and is composed of a catalytically active heterodimeric A-subunit linked 
with a homopentameric B-subunit. Upon binding to its receptor, GM0(1), cholera 
toxin is internalized and transported in a retrograde manner through the Golgi 
to the ER, where it is retrotranslocated to the cytosol. Here, cholera toxin 
reaches its intracellular target, the basolaterally located adenylate cyclase 
which becomes constitutively activated after toxin-induced mono-ADP-ribosylation 
of the regulating G(S)-protein. Elevated intracellular cAMP levels provoke loss 
of water and electrolytes which is manifested as the typical diarrhoea. The 
cholera toxin B-subunit displays the capacity to fortify immune responses to 
certain antigens, to act as a carrier and to be competent in inducing 
immunological tolerance. These unique features make cholera toxin a promising 
tool for immunologists.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2007.07.005
PMID: 17716938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]