---
reference_id: "PMID:26886015"
title: "Finding the needle in a haystack: identification of cases of Lynch syndrome with MLH1 epimutation."
authors:
- Hitchins MP
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s10689-016-9887-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Finding the needle in a haystack: identification of cases of Lynch syndrome with MLH1 epimutation.
**Authors:** Hitchins MP
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10689-016-9887-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10689-016-9887-3)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2016 Jul;15(3):413-22. doi: 10.1007/s10689-016-9887-3.

Finding the needle in a haystack: identification of cases of Lynch syndrome with 
MLH1 epimutation.

Hitchins MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Oncology), Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, 
USA. mhitchin@stanford.edu.

Constitutional epimutation of the DNA mismatch repair gene, MLH1, represents a 
minor cause of Lynch syndrome. MLH1 epimutations are characterized by the 
soma-wide distribution of methylation of a single allele of the MLH1 promoter 
accompanied by constitutive allelic loss of transcription. 'Primary' MLH1 
epimutations, considered pure epigenetic defects, tend to arise de novo in 
patients without a family history or any apparent genetic mutation. These 
demonstrate non-Mendelian inheritance. 'Secondary' MLH1 epimutations have a 
genetic basis and have been linked to non-coding genetic alterations in the 
vicinity of MLH1. These demonstrate autosomal dominant inheritance. Despite 
convincing evidence of their role in causing Lynch-type cancers, routine 
screening for MLH1 epimutations has not been widely adopted. Complicating 
factors may include: the need to perform additional methylation-based testing 
beyond the standard genetic screening for a germline mutation; the lack of a 
consensus algorithm for the selection of patients warranting MLH1 epimutation 
testing; overlapping molecular pathology features of MLH1 methylation and loss 
of MLH1 expression with more prevalent sporadic MSI cancers; the rarity of MLH1 
epimutation; the variable inter-generational inheritance patterns; and the 
cost-effectiveness of screening. Nevertheless, a positive molecular diagnosis of 
MLH1 epimutation is clinically important because carriers have a high personal 
risk of developing metachronous Lynch-type cancers, and their relatives may also 
be at risk of carriage. Extending existing universal and clinic-based screening 
algorithms for Lynch syndrome to include an additional arm of selection criteria 
for cases warranting MLH1 epimutation testing could provide a cost-effective 
means of diagnosing these cases.

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-016-9887-3
PMID: 26886015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]