---
reference_id: "PMID:36127333"
title: Single-cell transcriptome reveals cellular hierarchies and guides p-EMT-targeted trial in skull base chordoma.
authors:
- Zhang Q
- Fei L
- Han R
- Huang R
- Wang Y
- Chen H
- Yao B
- Qiao N
- Wang Z
- Ma Z
- Ye Z
- Zhang Y
- Wang W
- Wang Y
- Kong L
- Shou X
- Cao X
- Zhou X
- Shen M
- Cheng H
- Yao Z
- Zhang C
- Guo G
- Zhao Y
journal: Cell Discov
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41421-022-00459-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell transcriptome reveals cellular hierarchies and guides p-EMT-targeted trial in skull base chordoma.
**Authors:** Zhang Q, Fei L, Han R, Huang R, Wang Y, Chen H, Yao B, Qiao N, Wang Z, Ma Z, Ye Z, Zhang Y, Wang W, Wang Y, Kong L, Shou X, Cao X, Zhou X, Shen M, Cheng H, Yao Z, Zhang C, Guo G, Zhao Y
**Journal:** Cell Discov (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41421-022-00459-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41421-022-00459-2)

## Content

1. Cell Discov. 2022 Sep 20;8(1):94. doi: 10.1038/s41421-022-00459-2.

Single-cell transcriptome reveals cellular hierarchies and guides p-EMT-targeted 
trial in skull base chordoma.

Zhang Q(#)(1)(2), Fei L(#)(3), Han R(#)(1)(2), Huang R(#)(2)(4), Wang 
Y(#)(1)(2), Chen H(#)(2)(5), Yao B(1)(2), Qiao N(1)(2), Wang Z(6), Ma Z(1)(2), 
Ye Z(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Wang W(2)(7), Wang Y(1)(2), Kong L(8), Shou X(1)(2), 
Cao X(1)(2), Zhou X(1)(2), Shen M(1)(2), Cheng H(2)(5), Yao Z(2)(7), Zhang C(6), 
Guo G(9), Zhao Y(10)(11)(12)(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)National Center for Neurological Disorders, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai 
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Institute of 
Precision Medicine, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(7)Department of Radiology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, Shanghai Proton and Heavy Ion Center, Fudan 
University Cancer Center, Shanghai, China.
(9)Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. ggj@zju.edu.cn.
(10)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China. zhaoyaohs@vip.sina.com.
(11)National Center for Neurological Disorders, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai 
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. zhaoyaohs@vip.sina.com.
(12)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for 
Brain Science, Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 
zhaoyaohs@vip.sina.com.
(13)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Brain Function Restoration and Neural 
Regeneration, Shanghai, China. zhaoyaohs@vip.sina.com.
(14)Neurosurgical Institute of Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 
zhaoyaohs@vip.sina.com.
(15)National Clinical Research Center for Aging and Medicine, Huashan Hospital, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China. zhaoyaohs@vip.sina.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Skull base chordoma (SBC) is a bone cancer with a high recurrence rate, high 
radioresistance rate, and poorly understood mechanism. Here, we profiled the 
transcriptomes of 90,691 single cells, revealed the SBC cellular hierarchies, 
and explored novel treatment targets. We identified a cluster of stem-like SBC 
cells that tended to be distributed in the inferior part of the tumor. Combining 
radiated UM-Chor1 RNA-seq data and in vitro validation, we further found that 
this stem-like cell cluster is marked by cathepsin L (CTSL), a gene involved in 
the packaging of telomere ends, and may be responsible for radioresistance. 
Moreover, signatures related to partial epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
(p-EMT) were found to be significant in malignant cells and were related to the 
invasion and poor prognosis of SBC. Furthermore, YL-13027, a p-EMT inhibitor 
that acts through the TGF-β signaling pathway, demonstrated remarkable potency 
in inhibiting the invasiveness of SBC in preclinical models and was subsequently 
applied in a phase I clinical trial that enrolled three SBC patients. 
Encouragingly, YL-13027 attenuated the growth of SBC and achieved stable disease 
with no serious adverse events, underscoring the clinical potential for the 
precision treatment of SBC with this therapy. In summary, we conducted the first 
single-cell RNA sequencing of SBC and identified several targets that could be 
translated to the treatment of SBC.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41421-022-00459-2
PMCID: PMC9489773
PMID: 36127333

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.