---
reference_id: "PMID:28841117"
title: Transient resolution of venous sinus stenosis after high-volume lumbar puncture in a patient with idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
authors:
- Buell TJ
- Raper DMS
- Pomeraniec IJ
- Ding D
- Chen CJ
- Taylor DG
- Liu KC
journal: J Neurosurg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3171/2017.3.JNS163181
keywords:
- Adult
- "Constriction, Pathologic"
- Cranial Sinuses
- Female
- Humans
- "Intracranial Hypertension/complications, surgery"
- Remission Induction
- Spinal Puncture/methods
- Time Factors
- "Vascular Diseases/complications, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transient resolution of venous sinus stenosis after high-volume lumbar puncture in a patient with idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
**Authors:** Buell TJ, Raper DMS, Pomeraniec IJ, Ding D, Chen CJ, Taylor DG, Liu KC
**Journal:** J Neurosurg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3171/2017.3.JNS163181](https://doi.org/10.3171/2017.3.JNS163181)

## Content

1. J Neurosurg. 2018 Jul;129(1):153-156. doi: 10.3171/2017.3.JNS163181. Epub 2017
 Aug 25.

Transient resolution of venous sinus stenosis after high-volume lumbar puncture 
in a patient with idiopathic intracranial hypertension.

Buell TJ(1), Raper DMS(1), Pomeraniec IJ(1), Ding D(1), Chen CJ(1), Taylor 
DG(1), Liu KC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of1Neurosurgery and.
(2)2Radiology, University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia.

Comment in
    J Neurosurg. 2018 Jul;129(1):254-256. doi: 10.3171/2017.10.JNS172438.

Stenosis of the transverse sinus (TS) and sigmoid sinus (SS), with a 
trans-stenosis pressure gradient, has been implicated in the pathophysiology of 
idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH). MRI has shown improvement in TS and 
SS stenosis after high-volume lumbar puncture (HVLP) in a subset of patients 
with IIH. The authors present the first report of an IIH patient with immediate 
post-HVLP TS and SS trans-stenosis pressure gradient reduction and an attendant 
increase in TS and SS cross-sectional area confirmed using intravascular 
ultrasonography (IVUS). Recurrence of the patient's TS-SS stenosis coincided 
with elevated HVLP opening pressure, and venous sinus stent placement resulted 
in clinical improvement. This report suggests that TS and SS stenosis may be a 
downstream effect of elevated intracranial pressure in IIH, rather than its 
principal etiological mechanism. However, the authors hypothesize that 
endovascular stenting may obliterate a positive feedback loop involving 
trans-stenosis pressure gradients, and still benefit appropriately selected 
patients.

DOI: 10.3171/2017.3.JNS163181
PMID: 28841117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]