---
reference_id: "PMID:29355485"
title: COX16 is required for assembly of cytochrome c oxidase in human cells and is involved in copper delivery to COX2.
authors:
- Cerqua C
- Morbidoni V
- Desbats MA
- Doimo M
- Frasson C
- Sacconi S
- Baldoin MC
- Sartori G
- Basso G
- Salviati L
- Trevisson E
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Bioenerg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2018.01.004
keywords:
- Animals
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- "Caenorhabditis elegans/enzymology, genetics"
- "Cations, Divalent"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Coenzymes/metabolism
- Copper/metabolism
- Electron Transport/physiology
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- "Genetic Vectors/chemistry, metabolism"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Ion Transport
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/enzymology"
- Myocardium/enzymology
- "Protein Isoforms/genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Subunits/genetics, metabolism"
- "Recombinant Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics, metabolism"
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COX16 is required for assembly of cytochrome c oxidase in human cells and is involved in copper delivery to COX2.
**Authors:** Cerqua C, Morbidoni V, Desbats MA, Doimo M, Frasson C, Sacconi S, Baldoin MC, Sartori G, Basso G, Salviati L, Trevisson E
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Bioenerg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbabio.2018.01.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbabio.2018.01.004)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Bioenerg. 2018 Apr;1859(4):244-252. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbabio.2018.01.004. Epub 2018 Feb 3.

COX16 is required for assembly of cytochrome c oxidase in human cells and is 
involved in copper delivery to COX2.

Cerqua C(1), Morbidoni V(1), Desbats MA(1), Doimo M(2), Frasson C(3), Sacconi 
S(4), Baldoin MC(1), Sartori G(5), Basso G(3), Salviati L(6), Trevisson E(7).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women and Children's Health, University 
of Padova, Via Giustiniani 3 and IRP Città della Speranza, Corso Stati Uniti 4, 
Padova, Italy.
(2)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women and Children's Health, University 
of Padova, Via Giustiniani 3 and IRP Città della Speranza, Corso Stati Uniti 4, 
Padova, Italy; Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå 
University, SE-901 87, Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Hematology-Oncology Laboratory, Department of Women and Children's Health, 
University of Padova, Via Giustiniani 3, Padova, Italy.
(4)CNRS UMR7277, INSERM U1091, IBV - Institute of Biology Valrose, UNS 
Université Nice Sophia-Antipolis, Faculté de Médecine, Parc Valrose, Nice, 
CEDEX, France; Centre de référence des Maladies Neuromusculaires, Hôpital Archet 
1, 151, Route Saint-Antoine de Ginestière, Nice, France.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Via Ugo Bassi 58B, 
Padova, Italy.
(6)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women and Children's Health, University 
of Padova, Via Giustiniani 3 and IRP Città della Speranza, Corso Stati Uniti 4, 
Padova, Italy. Electronic address: leonardo.salviati@unipd.it.
(7)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women and Children's Health, University 
of Padova, Via Giustiniani 3 and IRP Città della Speranza, Corso Stati Uniti 4, 
Padova, Italy. Electronic address: eva.trevisson@unipd.it.

Cytochrome c oxidase (COX), complex IV of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, 
is comprised of 14 structural subunits, several prosthetic groups and metal 
cofactors, among which copper. Its biosynthesis involves a number of ancillary 
proteins, encoded by the COX-assembly genes that are required for the 
stabilization and membrane insertion of the nascent polypeptides, the synthesis 
of the prosthetic groups, and the delivery of the metal cofactors, in particular 
of copper. Recently, a modular model for COX assembly has been proposed, based 
on the sequential incorporation of different assembly modules formed by specific 
subunits. We have cloned and characterized the human homologue of yeast COX16. 
We show that human COX16 encodes a small mitochondrial transmembrane protein 
that faces the intermembrane space and is highly expressed in skeletal and 
cardiac muscle. Its knockdown in C. elegans produces COX deficiency, and its 
ablation in HEK293 cells impairs COX assembly. Interestingly, COX16 knockout 
cells retain significant COX activity, suggesting that the function of COX16 is 
partially redundant. Analysis of steady-state levels of COX subunits and of 
assembly intermediates by Blue-Native gels shows a pattern similar to that 
reported in cells lacking COX18, suggesting that COX16 is required for the 
formation of the COX2 subassembly module. Moreover, COX16 co-immunoprecipitates 
with COX2. Finally, we found that copper supplementation increases COX activity 
and restores normal steady state levels of COX subunits in COX16 knockout cells, 
indicating that, even in the absence of a canonical copper binding motif, COX16 
could be involved in copper delivery to COX2.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2018.01.004
PMID: 29355485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]