---
reference_id: "PMID:38881813"
title: "Insights into molecular aspects and targeted therapy of thymic carcinoma: a narrative review."
authors:
- Sakane T
- Haneda H
- Okuda K
journal: Mediastinum
year: '2024'
doi: 10.21037/med-23-48
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights into molecular aspects and targeted therapy of thymic carcinoma: a narrative review.
**Authors:** Sakane T, Haneda H, Okuda K
**Journal:** Mediastinum (2024)
**DOI:** [10.21037/med-23-48](https://doi.org/10.21037/med-23-48)

## Content

1. Mediastinum. 2024 Mar 21;8:36. doi: 10.21037/med-23-48. eCollection 2024.

Insights into molecular aspects and targeted therapy of thymic carcinoma: a 
narrative review.

Sakane T(1)(2), Haneda H(1), Okuda K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Nagoya City University West Medical Center, 
Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Thoracic and Pediatric Surgery, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Thymic carcinomas are rare tumors derived from thymic 
epithelial cells. Owing to their rarity, the search for molecular biology has 
been conducted in combination with thymoma as one histological subtype, and only 
a few studies have exclusively focused on thymic carcinoma. Currently, no 
therapy is more effective than complete surgical resection, and the development 
of novel therapies, including targeted therapies, is hampered. In this review, 
we summarize the knowledge regarding altered genes and pathways in thymic 
carcinoma with recent preclinical and clinical targeted therapies.
METHODS: We conducted a narrative review of the relevant English literature 
available in PubMed and Google Scholar on genomic characteristics and targeted 
therapies for thymic carcinoma.
KEY CONTENT AND FINDINGS: Although the literature consists of a relatively small 
series, it suggests that the frequently involved genes or pathways associated 
with thymic carcinoma are tumor suppressor genes, including TP53 and CDKN2A/B, 
and the receptor tyrosine kinase pathway. Targeted therapy demonstrated 
antitumor activity with encouraging results. However, potential predictive 
biomarkers have not been identified and the response to these therapies appears 
to be irrelevant to gene alterations.
CONCLUSIONS: Some studies have revealed the molecular characteristics of thymic 
carcinoma, although the results of these studies have shown a different pattern 
of gene alterations. The further accumulation of data would be helpful in 
revealing the genomic landscape and establishing molecular-targeted therapies.

2024 Mediastinum. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/med-23-48
PMCID: PMC11176997
PMID: 38881813

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://med.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/med-23-48/coif). The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to declare.