---
reference_id: "PMID:9521325"
title: Genetic basis and molecular mechanism for idiopathic ventricular fibrillation.
authors:
- Chen Q
- Kirsch GE
- Zhang D
- Brugada R
- Brugada J
- Brugada P
- Potenza D
- Moya A
- Borggrefe M
- Breithardt G
- Ortiz-Lopez R
- Wang Z
- Antzelevitch C
- "O'Brien RE"
- Schulze-Bahr E
- Keating MT
- Towbin JA
- Wang Q
journal: Nature
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/32675
keywords:
- Action Potentials
- Animals
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electrocardiography
- Electrophysiology
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Humans
- Ion Channel Gating/genetics
- Kinetics
- Male
- Mutation
- NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Recombinant Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sodium Channels/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Ventricular Fibrillation/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Xenopus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic basis and molecular mechanism for idiopathic ventricular fibrillation.
**Authors:** Chen Q, Kirsch GE, Zhang D, Brugada R, Brugada J, Brugada P, Potenza D, Moya A, Borggrefe M, Breithardt G, Ortiz-Lopez R, Wang Z, Antzelevitch C, O'Brien RE, Schulze-Bahr E, Keating MT, Towbin JA, Wang Q
**Journal:** Nature (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/32675](https://doi.org/10.1038/32675)

## Content

1. Nature. 1998 Mar 19;392(6673):293-6. doi: 10.1038/32675.

Genetic basis and molecular mechanism for idiopathic ventricular fibrillation.

Chen Q(1), Kirsch GE, Zhang D, Brugada R, Brugada J, Brugada P, Potenza D, Moya 
A, Borggrefe M, Breithardt G, Ortiz-Lopez R, Wang Z, Antzelevitch C, O'Brien RE, 
Schulze-Bahr E, Keating MT, Towbin JA, Wang Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA.

Ventricular fibrillation causes more than 300,000 sudden deaths each year in the 
USA alone. In approximately 5-12% of these cases, there are no demonstrable 
cardiac or non-cardiac causes to account for the episode, which is therefore 
classified as idiopathic ventricular fibrillation (IVF). A distinct group of IVF 
patients has been found to present with a characteristic electrocardiographic 
pattern. Because of the small size of most pedigrees and the high incidence of 
sudden death, however, molecular genetic studies of IVF have not yet been done. 
Because IVF causes cardiac rhythm disturbance, we investigated whether 
malfunction of ion channels could cause the disorder by studying mutations in 
the cardiac sodium channel gene SCN5A. We have now identified a missense 
mutation, a splice-donor mutation, and a frameshift mutation in the coding 
region of SCN5A in three IVF families. We show that sodium channels with the 
missense mutation recover from inactivation more rapidly than normal and that 
the frameshift mutation causes the sodium channel to be non-functional. Our 
results indicate that mutations in cardiac ion-channel genes contribute to the 
risk of developing IVF.

DOI: 10.1038/32675
PMID: 9521325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]