---
reference_id: "PMID:33119555"
title: "Progress Toward Global Eradication of Dracunculiasis, January 2019-June 2020."
authors:
- Hopkins DR
- Weiss AJ
- Roy SL
- Yerian S
- Sapp SGH
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6943a2
keywords:
- Animals
- Disease Eradication
- "Dog Diseases/epidemiology, parasitology"
- Dogs
- "Dracunculiasis/epidemiology, prevention & control, veterinary"
- "Global Health/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progress Toward Global Eradication of Dracunculiasis, January 2019-June 2020.
**Authors:** Hopkins DR, Weiss AJ, Roy SL, Yerian S, Sapp SGH
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.mm6943a2](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6943a2)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020 Oct 30;69(43):1563-1568. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm6943a2.

Progress Toward Global Eradication of Dracunculiasis, January 2019-June 2020.

Hopkins DR, Weiss AJ, Roy SL, Yerian S, Sapp SGH.

Dracunculiasis (Guinea worm disease) is caused by the parasite Dracunculus
medinensis and is acquired by drinking water containing copepods (water fleas)
infected with D. medinensis larvae. The worm typically emerges through the skin
on a lower limb approximately 1 year after infection, resulting in pain and
disability (1). There is no vaccine or medicine to treat the disease;
eradication efforts rely on case containment* to prevent water contamination.
Other interventions to prevent infection include health education, water
filtration, chemical treatment of unsafe water with temephos (an organophosphate
larvicide to kill copepods), and provision of safe drinking water (1,2). The
worldwide eradication campaign began in 1980 at CDC (1). In 1986, with an
estimated 3.5 million cases† occurring each year in 20 African and Asian
countries§ (3), the World Health Assembly (WHA) called for dracunculiasis
elimination (4). The global Guinea Worm Eradication Program (GWEP), led by the
Carter Center and supported by the World Health Organization (WHO), United
Nations Children's Fund, CDC, and other partners, began assisting ministries of
health in countries with dracunculiasis. This report, based on updated health
ministry data (4), describes progress made during January 2019-June 2020 and
updates previous reports (2,4,5). With only 54 human cases reported in 2019, 19
human cases reported during January 2019-June 2020, and only six countries
currently affected by dracunculiasis (Angola, Chad, Ethiopia, Mali, South Sudan,
and importations into Cameroon), the achievement of eradication is within reach,
but it is challenged by civil unrest, insecurity, and lingering epidemiologic
and zoologic concerns, including 2,000 reported animal cases in 2019 and 1,063
animal cases in 2020, mostly in dogs. All national GWEPs remain fully
operational, with precautions taken to ensure safety of program staff members
and community members in response to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6943a2
PMCID: PMC7641000
PMID: 33119555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts of interest were
disclosed.
