---
reference_id: PMID:21936020
title: "Kindler syndrome: extension of FERMT1 mutational spectrum and natural history."
authors:
- Has C
- Castiglia D
- del Rio M
- Diez MG
- Piccinni E
- Kiritsi D
- Kohlhase J
- Itin P
- Martin L
- Fischer J
- Zambruno G
- Bruckner-Tuderman L
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21576
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Blister/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Epidermolysis Bullosa/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Periodontal Diseases/genetics
- Phenotype
- Photosensitivity Disorders/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kindler syndrome: extension of FERMT1 mutational spectrum and natural history.
**Authors:** Has C, Castiglia D, del Rio M, Diez MG, Piccinni E, Kiritsi D, Kohlhase J, Itin P, Martin L, Fischer J, Zambruno G, Bruckner-Tuderman L
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21576](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21576)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2011 Nov;32(11):1204-12. doi: 10.1002/humu.21576. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Kindler syndrome: extension of FERMT1 mutational spectrum and natural history.

Has C(1), Castiglia D, del Rio M, Diez MG, Piccinni E, Kiritsi D, Kohlhase J, 
Itin P, Martin L, Fischer J, Zambruno G, Bruckner-Tuderman L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.

Mutations in the FERMT1 gene (also known as KIND1), encoding the focal adhesion 
protein kindlin-1, underlie the Kindler syndrome (KS), an autosomal recessive 
skin disorder with an intriguing progressive phenotype comprising skin 
blistering, photosensitivity, progressive poikiloderma with extensive skin 
atrophy, and propensity to skin cancer. Herein we review the clinical and 
genetic data of 62 patients, and delineate the natural history of the disorder, 
for example, age at onset of symptoms, or risk of malignancy. Although most 
mutations are predicted to lead to premature termination of translation, and to 
loss of kindlin-1 function, significant clinical variability is observed among 
patients. There is an association of FERMT1 missense and in-frame deletion 
mutations with milder disease phenotypes, and later onset of complications. 
Nevertheless, the clinical variability is not fully explained by 
genotype-phenotype correlations. Environmental factors and yet unidentified 
modifiers may play a role. Better understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of 
KS should enable the development of prevention strategies for disease 
complications.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21576
PMID: 21936020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]