---
reference_id: "PMID:38474196"
title: The Role of Glutathione in the Management of Cell-Mediated Immune Responses in Individuals with HIV.
authors:
- Lin N
- Erdos T
- Louie C
- Desai R
- Lin N
- Ayzenberg G
- Venketaraman V
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25052952
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Glutathione in the Management of Cell-Mediated Immune Responses in Individuals with HIV.
**Authors:** Lin N, Erdos T, Louie C, Desai R, Lin N, Ayzenberg G, Venketaraman V
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25052952](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25052952)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Mar 3;25(5):2952. doi: 10.3390/ijms25052952.

The Role of Glutathione in the Management of Cell-Mediated Immune Responses in 
Individuals with HIV.

Lin N(1), Erdos T(1), Louie C(1), Desai R(1), Lin N(2), Ayzenberg G(1), 
Venketaraman V(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific, Western University of Health 
Sciences, Pomona, CA 91766, USA.
(2)Creighton University School of Medicine, Creighton University, Omaha, NE 
68178, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a major cause of death worldwide. Without 
appropriate antiretroviral therapy, the infection can develop into acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). AIDS leads to the dysregulation of 
cell-mediated immunity resulting in increased susceptibility to opportunistic 
infections and excessive amounts of inflammatory cytokines. HIV-positive 
individuals also demonstrate diminished glutathione (GSH) levels which allows 
for increased viral replication and increased pro-inflammatory cytokine release, 
further contributing to the high rates of mortality seen in patients with HIV. 
Adequate GSH supplementation has reduced inflammation and slowed the decline of 
CD4+ T cell counts in HIV-positive individuals. We aim to review the current 
literature regarding the role of GSH in cell-mediated immune responses in 
individuals with HIV- and AIDS-defining illnesses.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25052952
PMCID: PMC10932396
PMID: 38474196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.