---
reference_id: "PMID:8640223"
title: A gene mutated in X-linked myotubular myopathy defines a new putative tyrosine phosphatase family conserved in yeast.
authors:
- Laporte J
- Hu LJ
- Kretz C
- Mandel JL
- Kioschis P
- Coy JF
- Klauck SM
- Poustka A
- Dahl N
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1038/ng0696-175
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Binding Sites
- Caenorhabditis elegans/genetics
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Conserved Sequence
- "Genes, Fungal"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
- Muscular Diseases/genetics
- Mutation
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases/chemistry, genetics, isolation & purification, metabolism"
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor"
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics
- Tissue Distribution
- X Chromosome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A gene mutated in X-linked myotubular myopathy defines a new putative tyrosine phosphatase family conserved in yeast.
**Authors:** Laporte J, Hu LJ, Kretz C, Mandel JL, Kioschis P, Coy JF, Klauck SM, Poustka A, Dahl N
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0696-175](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0696-175)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1996 Jun;13(2):175-82. doi: 10.1038/ng0696-175.

A gene mutated in X-linked myotubular myopathy defines a new putative tyrosine 
phosphatase family conserved in yeast.

Laporte J(1), Hu LJ, Kretz C, Mandel JL, Kioschis P, Coy JF, Klauck SM, Poustka 
A, Dahl N.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM/U 
LP, B.P. 163, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

X-linked recessive myotubular myopathy (MTM1) is characterized by severe 
hypotonia and generalized muscle weakness, with impaired maturation of muscle 
fibres. We have restricted the candidate region to 280 kb and characterized two 
candidate genes using positional cloning strategies. The presence of frameshift 
or missense mutations (of which two are new mutations) in seven patients proved 
that one of these genes is indeed implicated in MTM1. The protein encoded by the 
MTM1 gene is highly conserved in yeast, which is surprising for a muscle 
specific disease. The protein contains the consensus sequence for the active 
site of tyrosine phosphatases, a wide class of proteins involved in signal 
transduction. At least three other genes, one located within 100 kb distal from 
the MTM1 gene, encode proteins with very high sequence similarities and define, 
together with the MTM1 gene, a new family of putative tyrosine phosphatases in 
man.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0696-175
PMID: 8640223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]