---
reference_id: "PMID:24622327"
title: "HHV-8-negative, idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease: novel insights into biology, pathogenesis, and therapy."
authors:
- Fajgenbaum DC
- van Rhee F
- Nabel CS
journal: Blood
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-545087
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HHV-8-negative, idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease: novel insights into biology, pathogenesis, and therapy.
**Authors:** Fajgenbaum DC, van Rhee F, Nabel CS
**Journal:** Blood (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2013-12-545087](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2013-12-545087)

## Content

1. Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):2924-33. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-545087. Epub
2014  Mar 12.

HHV-8-negative, idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease: novel insights into 
biology, pathogenesis, and therapy.

Fajgenbaum DC(1), van Rhee F, Nabel CS.

Author information:
(1)Center for Orphan Disease Research and Therapy, Raymond and Ruth Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA;

Multicentric Castleman's disease (MCD) describes a heterogeneous group of 
disorders involving proliferation of morphologically benign lymphocytes due to 
excessive proinflammatory hypercytokinemia, most notably of interleukin-6. 
Patients demonstrate intense episodes of systemic inflammatory symptoms, 
polyclonal lymphocyte and plasma cell proliferation, autoimmune manifestations, 
and organ system impairment. Human herpes virus-8 (HHV-8) drives the 
hypercytokinemia in all HIV-positive patients and some HIV-negative patients. 
There is also a group of HIV-negative and HHV-8-negative patients with unknown 
etiology and pathophysiology, which we propose referring to as idiopathic MCD 
(iMCD). Here, we synthesize what is known about iMCD pathogenesis, present a new 
subclassification system, and propose a model of iMCD pathogenesis. MCD should 
be subdivided into HHV-8-associated MCD and HHV-8-negative MCD or iMCD. The 
lymphocyte proliferation, histopathology, and systemic features in iMCD are 
secondary to hypercytokinemia, which can occur with several other diseases. We 
propose that 1 or more of the following 3 candidate processes may drive iMCD 
hypercytokinemia: systemic inflammatory disease mechanisms via autoantibodies or 
inflammatory gene mutations, paraneoplastic syndrome mechanisms via ectopic 
cytokine secretion, and/or a non-HHV-8 virus. Urgent priorities include 
elucidating the process driving iMCD hypercytokinemia, identifying the 
hypercytokine-secreting cell, developing consensus criteria for diagnosis, and 
building a patient registry to track cases.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-545087
PMID: 24622327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]