---
reference_id: "PMID:28709694"
title: "Early clinical manifestations of Sézary syndrome: A multicenter retrospective cohort study."
authors:
- Mangold AR
- Thompson AK
- Davis MD
- Saulite I
- Cozzio A
- Guenova E
- Hodak E
- Amitay-Laish I
- Pujol RM
- Pittelkow MR
- Gniadecki R
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2017.05.036
keywords:
- Aged
- Biopsy
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Dermatitis/etiology
- "Dermatitis, Exfoliative/etiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Lymphadenopathy/etiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mycosis Fungoides/etiology
- Prognosis
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sezary Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- Skin/pathology
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early clinical manifestations of Sézary syndrome: A multicenter retrospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Mangold AR, Thompson AK, Davis MD, Saulite I, Cozzio A, Guenova E, Hodak E, Amitay-Laish I, Pujol RM, Pittelkow MR, Gniadecki R
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2017.05.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2017.05.036)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2017 Oct;77(4):719-727. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2017.05.036.
Epub 2017 Jul 11.

Early clinical manifestations of Sézary syndrome: A multicenter retrospective
cohort study.

Mangold AR(1), Thompson AK(2), Davis MD(3), Saulite I(4), Cozzio A(5), Guenova
E(5), Hodak E(6), Amitay-Laish I(6), Pujol RM(7), Pittelkow MR(8), Gniadecki
R(9).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona. Electronic address: mangold.aaron@mayo.edu.
(2)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; New York University, New York, New York.
(3)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland; Kantonspital St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Rabin Medical Center, University of Tel-Aviv,
Petah Tikva, Israel.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Hospital del Mar, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(9)University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada; Department of Dermatology,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Classic Sézary syndrome (SS) is defined by erythroderma, generalized
lymphadenopathy, and leukemic blood involvement. Clinical observations suggest
that SS begins as a nonerythrodermic disease.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the early clinical characteristics of patients with SS.
METHODS: A retrospective, multicenter chart review was performed for 263
confirmed cases of SS diagnosed during 1976-2015.
RESULTS: Erythroderma was the earliest recorded skin sign of SS in only 25.5% of
cases, although most patients (86.3%) eventually developed erythroderma. In
patients without erythroderma during their initial visit, the first cutaneous
signs of SS were nonspecific dermatitis (49%), atopic dermatitis-like eruption
(4.9%), or patches and plaques of mycosis fungoides (10.6%). The mean diagnostic
delay was 4.2 years overall, 2.2 years for cases involving erythroderma at the
initial presentation, and 5.0 years for cases not involving erythroderma at the
initial presentation.
LIMITATIONS: This study is retrospective.
CONCLUSION: Erythroderma is uncommon as an initial sign of SS. Early SS should
be considered in cases of nonerythrodermic dermatitis that is refractory to
conventional treatments. In these cases, examination of the blood by PCR for
monoclonal T-cell receptor rearrangement and by flow cytometry to identify an
expanded or aberrant T-cell population should be considered.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2017.05.036
PMID: 28709694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
