---
reference_id: "PMID:38095707"
title: "Comparison of the efficacy and adverse effects of unilateral or bilateral botulinum toxin injections for adductor spasmodic dysphonia: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Liu Y
- Chen F
- Liang F
- Wang C
- Chen D
- Zhou J
- Zhang L
- Xiao X
- He R
- Tang L
- Tian L
- Zhou L
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-023-08366-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Dysphonia/drug therapy
- "Botulinum Toxins, Type A/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Neuromuscular Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Voice Quality/drug effects
- "Injections, Intramuscular"
- Laryngeal Muscles/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of the efficacy and adverse effects of unilateral or bilateral botulinum toxin injections for adductor spasmodic dysphonia: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Chen F, Liang F, Wang C, Chen D, Zhou J, Zhang L, Xiao X, He R, Tang L, Tian L, Zhou L
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-023-08366-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-023-08366-2)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2024 Mar;281(3):1357-1369. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-023-08366-2. Epub 2023 Dec 14.

Comparison of the efficacy and adverse effects of unilateral or bilateral 
botulinum toxin injections for adductor spasmodic dysphonia: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis.

Liu Y(1), Chen F(1), Liang F(1), Wang C(1), Chen D(1), Zhou J(1), Zhang L(1), 
Xiao X(1), He R(1), Tang L(1), Tian L(1), Zhou L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hospital of Chengdu University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, No.39 Shi-Er-Qiao Road, Chengdu, 610072, Sichuan 
Province, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hospital of Chengdu University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, No.39 Shi-Er-Qiao Road, Chengdu, 610072, Sichuan 
Province, People's Republic of China. 20061063@cdutcm.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: This study aims to aggregate and analyze existing clinical evidence to 
compare the efficacy and adverse effects of unilateral or bilateral botulinum 
toxin injections for the treatment of adductor spasmodic dysphonia (ADSD).
METHODS: Reports from non-randomized controlled trials and cohort studies 
pertaining to the efficacy and adverse effects of unilateral and bilateral 
botulinum toxin injections for ADSD were identified and retrieved from four 
electronic databases from inception to July 2023. The meta-analysis employed 
fixed or random effects models to assess pooled relative risks (RR), mean 
differences (MDs), and standard mean differences (SMDs) with their corresponding 
95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: We included two non-randomized controlled trials and seven cohort 
studies comprising 854 total patients. Meta-analysis of the included studies 
showed that bilateral botulinum toxin injections associated with a longer 
duration of vocal improvement (MD =  - 2.89, 95% CI - 3.13 to - 2.65, I2 = 0%, 
P < 0.00001). However, bilateral botulinum toxin injections associated with an 
increase in adverse effects, including a longer duration of breathy voice 
quality (SMD =  - 0.51, 95% CI - 0.79 to - 0.22, I2 = 35%, P = 0.0005) and a 
higher occurrence of swallowing difficulties (RR = 0.46, 95% CI 0.35 to 0.11, 
I2 = 0%, P < 0.00001).
CONCLUSION: Bilateral botulinum toxin injections for ADSD showed a longer 
duration of vocal improvement, a longer breathy voice duration and a higher 
dysphagia occurrence and duration than unilateral injections.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-023-08366-2
PMCID: PMC10858140
PMID: 38095707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There is no declaration of any conflict of 
interests among the authors.