---
reference_id: "PMID:40372223"
title: "[Clinical analysis of a child with heterotopic ventricular gray matter Renpenning syndrome caused by PQBP1 gene mutation and a literature review]."
authors:
- Fan Y
- Zhao J
- Chen Q
- Huang X
- Li F
- Qiao J
journal: Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20240923-00502
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Child
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Clinical analysis of a child with heterotopic ventricular gray matter Renpenning syndrome caused by PQBP1 gene mutation and a literature review].
**Authors:** Fan Y, Zhao J, Chen Q, Huang X, Li F, Qiao J
**Journal:** Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20240923-00502](https://doi.org/10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20240923-00502)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2025 Mar 10;42(3):314-321. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20240923-00502.

[Clinical analysis of a child with heterotopic ventricular gray matter 
Renpenning syndrome caused by PQBP1 gene mutation and a literature review].

[Article in Chinese]

Fan Y(1), Zhao J, Chen Q, Huang X, Li F, Qiao J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Children's Intensive Care, The Third Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450052, China. junying.qiao@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the genetic etiology of a child with Renpenning syndrome 
(RS), and review the literature on the clinical characteristics and gene 
mutations of RS.
METHODS: A child with RS (patient 1) who was diagnosed and treated in the 
Pediatric Intensive Care Unit of the Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University in November 2023 was selected as the research object. The medical 
history, family history, physical examination, cerebrospinal fluid examination, 
echocardiography, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), brain magnetic 
resonance angiography, cardiac coronary CT angiography and intelligence quotient 
(IQ) score of child 1 were retrospectively collected. Peripheral venous blood 
samples were collected from patient 1, his parents, sister and brother, 
respectively. Genomic DNA was extracted from the child and his family members, 
and Trios-whole exome sequencing (Trios-WES) was performed. Sanger sequencing 
was used to verify the pedigree. Bioinformatics softwares (Mutation Taster, 
REVEL, SIFT, PolyPhen-2, GERP++, SWISS-MODEL) were applied. The pathogenicity of 
the detected variants was rated according to the American College of Medical 
Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) Standards and Guidelines for the Classification of 
Genetic Variants (hereinafter referred to as the ACMG Guidelines). "PQBP1 gene" 
"Renpenning syndrome" "PQBP1 gene" "Renpenning syndrome" were used as keywords 
in Chinese and English, respectively. Case reports of patients with RS caused by 
PQBP1 gene variants were retrieved from Wanfang Data Knowledge Service Platform, 
China National Knowledge Infrastructure and PubMed database. The clinical 
features and gene variants of RS caused by PQBP1 gene variants were summarized 
and analyzed. This study was reviewed by the Medical Ethics Committee of the 
Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University (Approval No. 2024-334-01).
RESULTS: The patient 1, a 12-year-old boy, was admitted to the hospital due to 
fever and disturbance of consciousness. Cerebrospinal fluid test showed viral 
encephalitis caused by human herpesvirus 7 infection. The main clinical 
manifestations were unusual facies (microcephaly, long narrow face, 
microphthalmos, superior oblique palpebral fissure, hypertelorism of inner 
canthus, bulbous nasal columella) and mental retardation. Auxiliary examination 
showed than patient 1 had atrial septal defect, nodular heterotopia in the 
posterior horn of the left ventricle, angiodysplasia, and low IQ. The disease 
began in infancy, and there was no family history of related diseases. A 
hemizygous deletion, c.459_462del (p.Arg153SerfsTer41), was identified in exon 5 
of the PQBP1 gene in patient 1, which was inherited from his mother by Sanger 
sequencing. The results of bioinformatics analysis showed that the mutation was 
harmful. This variant was rated as pathogenic (PVS1+PS4+PM2_Supporting+PP3) 
according to ACMG Guidelines. According to the literature search strategy set in 
this study, a total of 13 cases of RS were retrieved, involving 16 cases of RS 
patient caused by PQBP1 gene mutation (patients 2-17), including patient 1, a 
total of 17 cases of RS. Among the 17 patients, 16 male patients had hemizygous 
mutations in the X chromosome PQBP1 gene, and 1 female patient had heterozygous 
mutations, including 12 deletion frameshift nonsense mutations, 3 point missense 
mutations, and 2 duplication mutations. Except for two fetuses, all patients had 
special facial features and low IQ to varying degrees. Ten patients had abnormal 
development of one or more organs such as eyes, heart, brain, etc. CONCLUSION: 
The main clinical manifestations of RS are developmental delay, long narrow 
face, bulbous nose, microcephaly, and may be accompanied by heterotopia of gray 
matter of ventricle and congenital heart disease. The c.459_462del 
(p.Arg153SerfsTer41) variant of the PQBP1 gene is the genetic basis of patient 1 
in this study.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20240923-00502
PMID: 40372223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]