---
reference_id: "PMID:23087880"
title: "A rare cause for primary amenorrhea: Sporadic perrault syndrome."
authors:
- Ameen KH
- Pinninti R
journal: Indian J Endocrinol Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.4103/2230-8210.100677
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare cause for primary amenorrhea: Sporadic perrault syndrome.
**Authors:** Ameen KH, Pinninti R
**Journal:** Indian J Endocrinol Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.4103/2230-8210.100677](https://doi.org/10.4103/2230-8210.100677)

## Content

1. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Sep;16(5):843-5. doi:
10.4103/2230-8210.100677.

A rare cause for primary amenorrhea: Sporadic perrault syndrome.

Ameen KH(1), Pinninti R.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Medicine, Government Stanley Hospital, Chennai, India.

Gonadal (ovarian) dysgenesis with normal chromosomes (46, XX), XX female gonadal
dysgenesis (XX-GD) is a rare genetically heterogeneous disorder. In 1951,
Perrault reported the association of gonadal dysgenesis and deafness, now
referred to as Perrault syndrome. Perrault syndrome is a rare autosomal
recessive condition affecting both females and males, only females have gonadal
dysgenesis associated with sensorineural deafness which is present in both
sexes. We present a case of Sporadic Perrault syndrome in a 35-year-old female
with primary amenorrhea, sensorineural deafness, marfanoid features, and normal
karyotype. There are very few case reports describing the condition, even lesser
reports of association with marfanoid habitus. We report this case for its
rarity and add to the spectrum of the disease that remains undetermined.

DOI: 10.4103/2230-8210.100677
PMCID: PMC3475920
PMID: 23087880

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.
