---
reference_id: "PMID:12950083"
title: Ece1 and Tbx1 define distinct pathways to aortic arch morphogenesis.
authors:
- Morishima M
- Yanagisawa H
- Yanagisawa M
- Baldini A
journal: Dev Dyn
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/dvdy.10358
keywords:
- Animals
- "Aorta, Thoracic/abnormalities, embryology"
- "DiGeorge Syndrome/etiology, genetics"
- Gene Expression
- "Metalloendopeptidases/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Models, Biological"
- Morphogenesis
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ece1 and Tbx1 define distinct pathways to aortic arch morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Morishima M, Yanagisawa H, Yanagisawa M, Baldini A
**Journal:** Dev Dyn (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dvdy.10358](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.10358)

## Content

1. Dev Dyn. 2003 Sep;228(1):95-104. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.10358.

Ece1 and Tbx1 define distinct pathways to aortic arch morphogenesis.

Morishima M(1), Yanagisawa H, Yanagisawa M, Baldini A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

Pharyngeal arch artery (PAA) remodeling defects account for several cases of
congenital heart disease. Mutations in the Endothelin-1 genetic pathway or Tbx1,
a candidate gene for DiGeorge syndrome, cause similar aortic arch defects.
Previous research suggests that Tbx1 may trigger diffusible signals from the
pharyngeal arches to support the growth of the PAAs that contribute to the
mature aortic arch. The demonstration of genetic interaction between Tbx1 and
Fgf8 pointed to FGF signaling as a possible candidate. Because Fgf8 interacts
with Endothelin-1 signaling and because Endothelin-1 signaling interacts with
neural crest-derived cells in the pharyngeal apparatus, we hypothesized that
Tbx1 and Endothelin-1 signaling may contribute to the same pathway required for
aortic arch morphogenesis. Therefore, we have analyzed mice mutated for the
endothelin converting enzyme (Ece1) or Tbx1 genes and compound mutants. Results
show that the two genes have different roles in the remodeling of the PAAs and
do not interact. We propose that Tbx1 is required for the formation and early
growth and remodeling of the PAAs, whereas Ece1 is necessary for regression of
the cranial arch arteries and growth of the most caudal arch arteries. The
latter function is likely related to the known role of the Endothelin-1 pathway
in neural crest function.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.10358
PMID: 12950083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
