---
reference_id: "PMID:35315099"
title: "Review article: Lynch Syndrome-a mechanistic and clinical management update."
authors:
- Curtius K
- Gupta S
- Boland CR
journal: Aliment Pharmacol Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/apt.16826
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review article: Lynch Syndrome-a mechanistic and clinical management update.
**Authors:** Curtius K, Gupta S, Boland CR
**Journal:** Aliment Pharmacol Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/apt.16826](https://doi.org/10.1111/apt.16826)

## Content

1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2022 Apr;55(8):960-977. doi: 10.1111/apt.16826. Epub 
2022 Mar 21.

Review article: Lynch Syndrome-a mechanistic and clinical management update.

Curtius K(1), Gupta S(2)(3), Boland CR(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Department of Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)Section of Gastroenterology, San Diego Veterans Affairs Healthcare System, 
San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, School of Medicine, University of California 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Lynch syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant familial condition 
caused by a pathogenic variant (PV) in a DNA mismatch repair gene, which then 
predisposes carriers to various cancers.
AIM: To review the pathogenesis, clinical presentation, differential diagnosis 
and clinical strategies for detection and management of LS.
METHODS: A narrative review synthesising knowledge from published literature, as 
well as current National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines for management 
of LS was conducted.
RESULTS: LS tumours are characterised by unique pathogenesis, ultimately 
resulting in hypermutation, microsatellite instability and high immunogenicity 
that has significant implications for cancer risk, clinical presentation, 
treatment and surveillance. LS is one of the most common hereditary causes of 
cancer, and about 1 in 279 individuals carry a PV in an LS gene that predisposes 
to associated cancers. Individuals with LS have increased risks for colorectal, 
endometrial and other cancers, with significant variation in lifetime risk by 
LS-associated gene.
CONCLUSIONS: As genetic testing becomes more widespread, the number of 
individuals identified with LS is expected to increase in the population. 
Understanding the pathogenesis of LS informs current strategies for detection 
and clinical management, and also guides future areas for clinical innovation. 
Unravelling the mechanisms by which these tumours evolve may help to more 
precisely tailor management by the gene involved.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apt.16826
PMCID: PMC10936860
PMID: 35315099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]