---
reference_id: "PMID:28573635"
title: ELISA Methods for the Detection of Ebolavirus Infection.
authors:
- Cross RW
- Ksiazek TG
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7116-9_29
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ELISA Methods for the Detection of Ebolavirus Infection.
**Authors:** Cross RW, Ksiazek TG
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4939-7116-9_29](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7116-9_29)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1628:363-372. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7116-9_29.

ELISA Methods for the Detection of Ebolavirus Infection.

Cross RW(1)(2), Ksiazek TG(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. rwcross@utmb.edu.
(2)Galveston National Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch at 
Galveston, Galveston, TX, USA. rwcross@utmb.edu.
(3)Galveston National Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch at 
Galveston, Galveston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, 
Galveston, TX, USA.

Ebola viruses are high-priority pathogens first discovered in rural Africa 
associated with sporadic outbreaks of severe hemorrhagic disease in humans and 
nonhuman primates. Little is known about the disease ecology or the prevalence 
of past exposure of human populations to any of the five species of the genus 
Ebolavirus. The use of immunologic means of detection for either virus antigens 
or the host's immune response to antigen associated with prior infections offers 
a powerful approach at understanding the epidemiology and epizootiology of these 
agents. Here we describe methods for preparing antigen detection sandwich 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) as well as IgG and IgM ELISAs for 
the detection of ebolavirus antigens or antibodies in biological samples.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7116-9_29
PMID: 28573635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]