---
reference_id: "PMID:20456309"
title: "Systematic review: fatigue in inflammatory bowel disease."
authors:
- van Langenberg DR
- Gibson PR
journal: Aliment Pharmacol Ther
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2036.2010.04347.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic review: fatigue in inflammatory bowel disease.
**Authors:** van Langenberg DR, Gibson PR
**Journal:** Aliment Pharmacol Ther (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2036.2010.04347.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2036.2010.04347.x)

## Content

1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Jul;32(2):131-43. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2036.2010.04347.x. Epub 2010 May 6.

Systematic review: fatigue in inflammatory bowel disease.

van Langenberg DR(1), Gibson PR.

Author information:
(1)Monash University Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Medicine, Box 
Hill Hospital, Box Hill, Melbourne, Vic., Australia. 
Daniel.van-Langenberg@med.monash.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Fatigue is common, disabling yet underappreciated, in patients with 
chronic diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
AIMS: To examine the literature and determine the prevalence and patterns of 
fatigue in IBD patients, to identify opportunities and directions for future 
research in this area.
METHODS: A systematic review using PubMed and Ovid Medline databases was 
conducted using search terms 'fatigue', 'Crohn', 'colitis' and 'inflammatory 
bowel disease'. A review of fatigue in other similar chronic diseases was also 
performed.
RESULTS: Ten studies were found to include data on fatigue in IBD patients; all 
were conducted between 1999 and 2009. However, only one study (in children) 
measured fatigue in IBD patients as a primary outcome. In patients in remission, 
the prevalence of fatigue in IBD patients ranges from 41 to 48%. Data are sparse 
and conflicting on whether fatigue severity is proportional to disease 
severity/activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the clinical reality of fatigue, there are few published 
studies examining fatigue in IBD as a primary outcome. More data are needed on 
the prevalence, correlation between disease activity and fatigue severity, and 
putative pathogenic pathways involved in fatigue pathogenesis, before ultimately 
elucidating targeted therapies for fatigue in IBD patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2036.2010.04347.x
PMID: 20456309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]