---
reference_id: "PMID:34909512"
title: Health-related Quality of Life in Adult Patients with Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia and Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia.
authors:
- Matsushita M
- Mishima K
- Kamiya Y
- Haga N
- Fujiwara S
- Ozono K
- Kubota T
- Kitaoka T
- Imagama S
- Kitoh H
journal: Prog Rehabil Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2490/prm.20210048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Health-related Quality of Life in Adult Patients with Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia and Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Matsushita M, Mishima K, Kamiya Y, Haga N, Fujiwara S, Ozono K, Kubota T, Kitaoka T, Imagama S, Kitoh H
**Journal:** Prog Rehabil Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2490/prm.20210048](https://doi.org/10.2490/prm.20210048)

## Content

1. Prog Rehabil Med. 2021 Dec 7;6:20210048. doi: 10.2490/prm.20210048.
eCollection  2021.

Health-related Quality of Life in Adult Patients with Multiple Epiphyseal 
Dysplasia and Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia.

Matsushita M(1), Mishima K(1), Kamiya Y(1), Haga N(2), Fujiwara S(2), Ozono 
K(3), Kubota T(3), Kitaoka T(3), Imagama S(1), Kitoh H(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Aichi Children's Health and Medical 
Center, Obu, Japan.
(5)Department of Comprehensive Pediatric Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia 
(SED) are skeletal dysplasias associated with premature osteoarthritis and short 
stature. Patients with SED often have spinal and ocular problems. Few reports 
have focused on the health-related quality of life (HRQoL) of patients with 
skeletal dysplasias associated with premature osteoarthritis. The purpose of 
this study was to evaluate the HRQoL of adult patients with MED and SED.
METHODS: Questionnaires covering demographics, medical history (cataract, 
retinal detachment, and osteoarthritis), surgical history (osteotomy and 
arthroplasty), and the Short Form-36 (SF-36) health survey were sent to all 
patients with MED and SED with medical records at the investigators' 
institutions. Among the 27 patients who completed the questionnaire, patients 
aged 20 years or older were included in this cohort.
RESULTS: The subjects were 18 affected individuals. The physical component 
summary score (PCS) was significantly lower in the MED and SED groups than in 
the normal population and tended to deteriorate with age. Conversely, there was 
a positive correlation between the mental component summary score and age. The 
role/social component summary score was not correlated with age. MED patients 
with osteoarthritis had a low PCS. PCS was particularly low in two SED patients 
with a medical history of cataract, whereas there was no association with a 
history of retinal detachment or osteoarthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: The physical domain of HRQoL in MED and SED patients significantly 
deteriorated at a young age. Appropriate medical management of these skeletal 
dysplasias is required not only for orthopedic functions but also for ocular 
problems.

2021 The Japanese Association of Rehabilitation Medicine.

DOI: 10.2490/prm.20210048
PMCID: PMC8640375
PMID: 34909512

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: None of the authors have 
any conflicts of interest to disclose.