---
reference_id: "PMID:40049235"
title: Anti-chicken and anti-pigeon immunoglobulin G testing in patients with bird-related fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
authors:
- Okuda R
- Takemura T
- Misumi T
- Hagiwara E
- Ogura T
journal: J Immunol Methods
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2025.113846
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-chicken and anti-pigeon immunoglobulin G testing in patients with bird-related fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Okuda R, Takemura T, Misumi T, Hagiwara E, Ogura T
**Journal:** J Immunol Methods (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jim.2025.113846](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jim.2025.113846)

## Content

1. J Immunol Methods. 2025 Apr;539:113846. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2025.113846. Epub 
2025 Mar 4.

Anti-chicken and anti-pigeon immunoglobulin G testing in patients with 
bird-related fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Okuda R(1), Takemura T(2), Misumi T(3), Hagiwara E(4), Ogura T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory 
Center, Yokohama, Japan. Electronic address: b980013@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Pathology, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center, 
Yokohama, Japan.
(3)Department of Data Science, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Chiba, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory 
Center, Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: One of the inciting antigens for fibrotic hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis (HP) is avian. It is controversial whether chickens are the inciting 
antigen of bird-related fibrotic HP; the anti-chicken immunoglobulin (Ig) G 
testing for bird-related fibrotic HP patients was investigated.
METHODS: Anti-pigeon IgG and anti-chicken IgG antibodies by mainly enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were measured in patients with bird-related fibrotic 
HP. We included bird-related fibrotic HP patients who had undergone 
histopathological examination and who had a positive inhalation challenge test.
RESULTS: We included 44 patients with bird-related fibrotic HP and 48 with 
fibrotic interstitial lung diseases other than fibrotic HP. The mean titers of 
anti-pigeon IgG antibody by ELISA were 0.659 ± 0.381 and 0.494 ± 0.187 in the 
bird-related fibrotic HP and control groups, respectively (p = 0.012). Those of 
anti-chicken IgG antibody were 0.345 ± 0.189 and 0.376 ± 0.167, respectively 
(p = 0.457). No significant correlation was found between anti-pigeon IgG 
testing by ELISA and anti-chicken IgG testing (r = 0.45, p = 0.45). In patients 
with bird-related fibrotic HP, annual FVC changes were significantly different 
(p = 0.001), with the higher titer group improving by 0.4 % and the lower titer 
group decreasing by 4 %. Similarly, no significant differences in annual FVC 
changes were observed between the higher and lower anti-chicken IgG antibody 
titer groups among bird-related fibrotic HP patients.
CONCLUSION: Serum IgG testing for chicken serum was less effective in diagnosing 
or predicting the disease progression of bird-related fibrotic HP than that for 
pigeon serum.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2025.113846
PMID: 40049235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
have no conflicts of interest to declare.