---
reference_id: "PMID:36066176"
title: "Monkeypox: epidemiology, mode of transmission, clinical features, genetic clades and molecular properties."
authors:
- Kannan S
- Shaik Syed Ali P
- Sheeza A
journal: Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.26355/eurrev_202208_29540
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox: epidemiology, mode of transmission, clinical features, genetic clades and molecular properties.
**Authors:** Kannan S, Shaik Syed Ali P, Sheeza A
**Journal:** Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.26355/eurrev_202208_29540](https://doi.org/10.26355/eurrev_202208_29540)

## Content

1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2022 Aug;26(16):5983-5990. doi: 
10.26355/eurrev_202208_29540.

Monkeypox: epidemiology, mode of transmission, clinical features, genetic clades 
and molecular properties.

Kannan S(1), Shaik Syed Ali P, Sheeza A.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, The Maldives National University, Male', Maldives. 
Kannan.subbaram@mnu.edu.mv.

OBJECTIVE: Recently monkeypox cases have been reported from many non-endemic 
countries. The objective of this article is to bring out the epidemiology, mode 
of transmission, clinical features, genetic clades, and molecular properties of 
monkeypox virus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A detailed literature review was conducted on monkeypox, 
using databases PubMed/Medline, EMBASE, PMC and Cochrane Library, for the period 
between 1985 to 2022.
RESULTS: Genetically monkeypox virus can be classified into Central African 
clade and Western African clades. The sequence similarity between the two 
strains was found to be 99.5%. However, some significant differences were found 
in the virulent and nonvirulent genes of the strains, such as BR-203, BR-209, 
COP-C3L b and COP-H5R, COP-A9L, COP-A50R, and COP-A36R, respectively. Human to 
human transmission occurs after exposure to respiratory droplets, oral 
secretions, contact with lesions, fomites, and direct/sexual contact. Monkeypox 
can also be transmitted from the infected mother to the fetus through the 
placenta leading to congenital infection. In May 2022 several cases have been 
reported from Europe, North America, and Australia, particularly from homosexual 
men.
CONCLUSIONS: Monkeypox is a zoonotic disease which was prevalent in Central and 
Western African countries. Recently, human to human spread was noticed in 
developed countries of Europe, North America and Australia. Despite with a close 
genetic similarity between the two clades, the Central African strain is 
comparatively very virulent with high mortality. Monkeypox should be considered 
a re-emerging, neglected disease and proper measures like hand hygiene, wearing 
masks and vaccination to the high-risk groups are advised.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202208_29540
PMID: 36066176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]