---
reference_id: "PMID:31895885"
title: The metabolic signature of T cells in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Weyand CM
- Wu B
- Goronzy JJ
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000683
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The metabolic signature of T cells in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Weyand CM, Wu B, Goronzy JJ
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000683](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000683)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2020 Mar;32(2):159-167. doi:
10.1097/BOR.0000000000000683.

The metabolic signature of T cells in rheumatoid arthritis.

Weyand CM(1)(2), Wu B(1), Goronzy JJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford.
(2)Department of Medicine, Palo Alto Veterans Administration Healthcare System, 
Palo Alto, California, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a prototypic autoimmune disease 
manifesting as chronic inflammation of the synovium and leading to acceleration 
of cardiovascular disease and shortening of life expectancy. The basic defect 
causing autoimmunity has remained elusive, but recent insights have challenged 
the notion that autoantigen is the core driver.
RECENT FINDINGS: Emerging data have added metabolic cues involved in the proper 
maintenance and activation of immune cells as pathogenic regulators. 
Specifically, studies have unveiled metabolic pathways that enforce T cell fate 
decisions promoting tissue inflammation; including T cell tissue invasiveness, T 
cell cytokine release, T cell-dependent macrophage activation and inflammatory T 
cell death. At the center of the metabolic abnormalities lies the mitochondria, 
which is consistently underperforming in RA T cells. The mitochondrial defect 
results at least partially from insufficient DNA repair and leads to lipid 
droplet accumulation, formation of invasive membrane ruffles, inflammasome 
activation and pyroptotic T cell death.
SUMMARY: T cells in patients with RA, even naïve T cells never having been 
involved in inflammatory lesions, have a unique metabolic signature and the 
changes in intracellular metabolites drive pathogenic T cell behavior. 
Recognizing the role of metabolic signals in cell fate decisions opens the 
possibility for immunomodulation long before the end stage synovial inflammation 
encountered in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000683
PMCID: PMC9107323
PMID: 31895885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]