---
reference_id: "PMID:32791865"
title: "Ataxia-telangiectasia: epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical phenotype, diagnosis, prognosis and management."
authors:
- Amirifar P
- Ranjouri MR
- Lavin M
- Abolhassani H
- Yazdani R
- Aghamohammadi A
journal: Expert Rev Clin Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/1744666X.2020.1810570
keywords:
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Oxidative Stress
- Phenotype
- "Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Risk
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia-telangiectasia: epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical phenotype, diagnosis, prognosis and management.
**Authors:** Amirifar P, Ranjouri MR, Lavin M, Abolhassani H, Yazdani R, Aghamohammadi A
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1744666X.2020.1810570](https://doi.org/10.1080/1744666X.2020.1810570)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2020 Sep;16(9):859-871. doi: 
10.1080/1744666X.2020.1810570. Epub 2020 Oct 15.

Ataxia-telangiectasia: epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical phenotype, 
diagnosis, prognosis and management.

Amirifar P(1)(2), Ranjouri MR(2)(3), Lavin M(4), Abolhassani H(5)(6), Yazdani 
R(2), Aghamohammadi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Department, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences , Tehran, Iran.
(2)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, 
Children's Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Science , Tehran, Iran.
(3)Molecular Medicine and Genetics Department, School of Medicine, Zanjan 
University of Medical Sciences , Zanjan, Iran.
(4)University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research (UQCCR), University of 
Queensland , L, Australia.
(5)Research Center for Primary Immunodeficiencies, Iran University of Medical 
Science , Tehran, Iran.
(6)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Karolinska Institute at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge , Stockholm, 
Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome 
characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, 
variable immunodeficiency, radiosensitivity, and cancer predisposition. 
Mutations cause A-T in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene encoding a 
serine/threonine-protein kinase.
AREAS COVERED: The authors reviewed the literature on PubMed, Web of Science, 
and Scopus databases to collect comprehensive data related to A-T. This review 
aims to discuss various update aspects of A-T, including epidemiology, 
pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, prognosis, and management.
EXPERT OPINION: A-T as a congenital disorder has phenotypic heterogeneity, and 
the severity of symptoms in different patients depends on the severity of 
mutations. This review provides a comprehensive overview of A-T, although some 
relevant questions about pathogenesis remain unanswered, probably owing to the 
phenotypic heterogeneity of this monogenic disorder. The presence of various 
clinical and immunologic manifestations in A-T indicates that the identification 
of the role of defective ATM in phenotype can be helpful in the better 
management and treatment of patients in the future.

DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2020.1810570
PMID: 32791865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]