---
reference_id: "PMID:12954239"
title: "Influence of pro-inflammatory (IL-1 alpha, IL-6, TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma) and anti-inflammatory (IL-4) cytokines on chondrocyte function."
authors:
- Schuerwegh AJ
- Dombrecht EJ
- Stevens WJ
- Van Offel JF
- Bridts CH
- De Clerck LS
journal: Osteoarthritis Cartilage
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s1063-4584(03)00156-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Influence of pro-inflammatory (IL-1 alpha, IL-6, TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma) and anti-inflammatory (IL-4) cytokines on chondrocyte function.
**Authors:** Schuerwegh AJ, Dombrecht EJ, Stevens WJ, Van Offel JF, Bridts CH, De Clerck LS
**Journal:** Osteoarthritis Cartilage (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1063-4584(03)00156-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1063-4584(03)00156-0)

## Content

1. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2003 Sep;11(9):681-7. doi: 
10.1016/s1063-4584(03)00156-0.

Influence of pro-inflammatory (IL-1 alpha, IL-6, TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma) and 
anti-inflammatory (IL-4) cytokines on chondrocyte function.

Schuerwegh AJ(1), Dombrecht EJ, Stevens WJ, Van Offel JF, Bridts CH, De Clerck 
LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Allergology and Rheumatology, University of 
Antwerp, Belgium

OBJECTIVE: Cytokines produced by inflammatory cells play a pivotal role in 
synovial inflammation and joint destruction in rheumatoid arthritis. To 
investigate the influence of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1 alpha, IL-6, 
TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma) and subsequently the possible beneficial role of an 
anti-inflammatory cytokine (IL-4) on chondrocyte viability (necrosis/apoptosis), 
proliferation and nitric oxide (NO) production.
METHODS: Primary bovine chondrocytes were cultured until monolayers were 
obtained. Cells were incubated with cytokines (IL-1 alpha, IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, 
IL-4, IL-6) at 0.1, 1, 10 and 100 ng/mL. After 48 h, the viability of the 
chondrocytes was measured flow cytometrically with propidium iodide. 
Proliferation was determined by the incorporation of tritiated thymidine. The 
morphology of the chondrocytes, including presence of apoptotic nuclei, was 
evaluated by a May-Grünwald-Giemsa staining. In addition, the number of 
apoptotic chondrocytes was detected flow cytometrically with a TUNEL technique 
and annexin-V/propidium iodide staining. NO production was evaluated using a 
spectrophotometric assay, based upon the Griess reaction.
RESULTS: The viability and proliferation of bovine chondrocytes decreased after 
incubation with 100 ng/mL IL-1 alpha, TNF-alpha or IFN-gamma. In contrast, 
incubation of chondrocytes with IL-4 or IL-6 had no influence on the viability 
or the proliferation of cells. IL-1 alpha was able to enhance NO production in a 
dose dependent manner. IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha induced NO production only at the 
highest concentration (100 ng/mL), whereas IL-4 and IL-6 did not. There was a 
dose dependent increase in apoptosis of bovine chondrocytes cultured in the 
presence of IL-1 alpha and TNF-alpha. This effect could not be prevented by 
preincubation with IL-4. Preincubation with IL-4 diminished IL-1 alpha and 
TNF-alpha induced NO production and increased proliferation of chondrocytes. In 
an additional experiment, incubation of human chondrocytes with anti-Fas did not 
induce apoptosis as measured by annexin-V/propidium iodide staining.
CONCLUSIONS: Pro-inflammatory cytokines are able to induce apoptosis, whereas 
IL-4 as an anti-inflammatory cytokine can inhibit the effect of IL-1 alpha and 
TNF-alpha on NO production and proliferation of bovine chondrocytes.

DOI: 10.1016/s1063-4584(03)00156-0
PMID: 12954239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]