---
reference_id: "PMID:25415177"
title: "Five new cases of 46,XX aromatase deficiency: clinical follow-up from birth to puberty, a novel mutation, and a founder effect."
authors:
- Marino R
- Perez Garrido N
- Costanzo M
- Guercio G
- Juanes M
- Rocco C
- Ramirez P
- Warman DM
- Ciaccio M
- Pena G
- Feyling JG
- Miras M
- Rivarola MA
- Belgorosky A
- Saraco N
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2967
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Five new cases of 46,XX aromatase deficiency: clinical follow-up from birth to puberty, a novel mutation, and a founder effect.
**Authors:** Marino R, Perez Garrido N, Costanzo M, Guercio G, Juanes M, Rocco C, Ramirez P, Warman DM, Ciaccio M, Pena G, Feyling JG, Miras M, Rivarola MA, Belgorosky A, Saraco N
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2014-2967](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2014-2967)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Feb;100(2):E301-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2967.
Epub  2014 Nov 21.

Five new cases of 46,XX aromatase deficiency: clinical follow-up from birth to 
puberty, a novel mutation, and a founder effect.

Marino R(1), Perez Garrido N, Costanzo M, Guercio G, Juanes M, Rocco C, Ramirez 
P, Warman DM, Ciaccio M, Pena G, Feyling JG, Miras M, Rivarola MA, Belgorosky A, 
Saraco N.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Service (R.M., N.P.G., M.Co., G.G., M.J., P.R., D.M.W., M.Ci., 
M.A.R., A.B., N.S.), Laboratory of Cellular Biology and Retrovirus (C.R.), 
Hospital de Pediatria Garrahan, C1245AAM Buenos Aires, Argentina; Endocrine 
Service (G.P.), Hospital Infantil Municipal de Córdoba, 5000 Córdoba, Argentina; 
Endocrine Service (J.G.F.), Hospital Regional de Concepcion, CPT4146GXD Tucuman, 
Argentina; and Endocrine Service (M.M.), Hospital de Niños de la Santísima 
Trinidad de Córdoba, 5000 Córdoba, Argentina.

CONTEXT: Aromatase is the key enzyme for estrogen biosynthesis and is encoded by 
the CYP19A1 gene. Since 1991, several molecular CYP19A1 gene alterations 
associated with aromatase deficiency have been described in both sexes.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to detect CYP19A1 mutations in five 
aromatase-deficient 46,XX patients, to describe the clinical follow-up from 
birth to puberty and to perform haplotype analysis associated with the 
high-frequency c.628G>A splice mutation in Argentinean patients.
DESIGN: The design of the study was the sequencing of the coding and flanking 
intronic regions of the CYP19A1 gene in all patients and parents. Haplotype 
analysis of patients carrying the c.628G>A mutation was also performed.
PATIENTS: Clinical and biochemical findings in five new cases and one previously 
reported female aromatase-deficient patient (46,XX) are described. All patients 
presented with ambiguous genitalia at birth. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due 
to 21-hydroxylase deficiency as well as other steroidogenic defects were ruled 
out.
RESULTS: Phenotypic variability among the affected patients was found during 
follow-up. Direct sequencing of the CYP19A1 gene from genomic DNA revealed one 
novel mutation (c.574C>T) in two patients. In silico analysis predicted the 
c.574C>T mutation to be probably damaging. Four of six nonrelated patients 
presented with the c.628G>A splice mutation. Haplotype analysis showed that the 
c.628G>A splice mutation is associated with the same haplotype in our 
population.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased knowledge on phenotypical variability found in female 
aromatase-deficient patients is useful to improve the detection rate in this 
disorder. In our population, a genetic founder defect has probably contributed 
to an increase in the incidence of the c.628G>A splice mutation.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2014-2967
PMID: 25415177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]