---
reference_id: "PMID:33516373"
title: Label-free metabolic clustering through unsupervised pixel classification of multiparametric fluorescent images.
authors:
- Bianchetti G
- Ciccarone F
- Ciriolo MR
- De Spirito M
- Pani G
- Maulucci G
journal: Anal Chim Acta
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2020.12.048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Label-free metabolic clustering through unsupervised pixel classification of multiparametric fluorescent images.
**Authors:** Bianchetti G, Ciccarone F, Ciriolo MR, De Spirito M, Pani G, Maulucci G
**Journal:** Anal Chim Acta (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.aca.2020.12.048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2020.12.048)

## Content

1. Anal Chim Acta. 2021 Mar 1;1148:238173. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2020.12.048. Epub 
2020 Dec 31.

Label-free metabolic clustering through unsupervised pixel classification of 
multiparametric fluorescent images.

Bianchetti G(1), Ciccarone F(2), Ciriolo MR(3), De Spirito M(4), Pani G(5), 
Maulucci G(6).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione Policlinico Gemelli IRCSS, Rome, Italy; Department of 
Neuroscience, Section of Biophysics, Università Cattolica Del Sacro Cuore, Rome, 
Italy.
(2)IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Department of Human Sciences and Promotion of the 
Quality of Life, San Raffaele Roma Open University, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(4)Fondazione Policlinico Gemelli IRCSS, Rome, Italy; Department of 
Neuroscience, Section of Biophysics, Università Cattolica Del Sacro Cuore, Rome, 
Italy. Electronic address: marco.despirito@unicatt.it.
(5)Fondazione Policlinico Gemelli IRCSS, Rome, Italy; Department of 
Translational Medicine and Surgery, Section of General Pathology, Università 
Cattolica Del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(6)Fondazione Policlinico Gemelli IRCSS, Rome, Italy; Department of 
Neuroscience, Section of Biophysics, Università Cattolica Del Sacro Cuore, Rome, 
Italy. Electronic address: giuseppe.maulucci@unicatt.it.

Autofluorescence microscopy is a promising label-free approach to characterize 
NADH and FAD metabolites in live cells, with potential applications in clinical 
practice. Although spectrally resolved lifetime imaging techniques can acquire 
multiparametric information about the biophysical and biochemical state of the 
metabolites, these data are evaluated at the whole-cell level, thus providing 
only limited insights in the activation of metabolic networks at the microscale. 
To overcome this issue, here we introduce an artificial intelligence-based 
analysis that, leveraging the multiparametric content of spectrally resolved 
lifetime images, allows to detect and classify, through an unsupervised learning 
approach, metabolic clusters, which are regions having almost uniform metabolic 
properties. This method contextually detects the cellular mitochondrial turnover 
and the metabolic activation state of intracellular compartments at the pixel 
level, described by two functions: the cytosolic activation state (CAF) and the 
mitochondrial activation state (MAF). This method was applied to investigate 
metabolic changes elicited in the breast cancer cell line MCF-7 by specific 
inhibitors of glycolysis and electron transport chain, and by the deregulation 
of a specific mitochondrial enzyme (ACO2) leading to defective aerobic 
metabolism associated with tumor growth. In this model, mitochondrial fraction 
undergoes to a 13% increase upon ACO2 overexpression and the MAF function 
changes abruptly by altering the metabolic state of about the 25% of the 
mitochondrial pixels.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aca.2020.12.048
PMID: 33516373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.