---
reference_id: PMID:29427225
title: Autophagy Strengthens Intestinal Mucosal Barrier by Attenuating Oxidative Stress in Severe Acute Pancreatitis.
authors:
- Huang L
- Jiang Y
- Sun Z
- Gao Z
- Wang J
- Zhang D
journal: Dig Dis Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10620-018-4962-2
keywords:
- Animals
- Autophagy/physiology
- Bacterial Translocation/physiology
- Beclin-1/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Epithelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Intestinal Mucosa/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/metabolism
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- "Pancreatitis/complications, metabolism, pathology"
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
- Tight Junction Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autophagy Strengthens Intestinal Mucosal Barrier by Attenuating Oxidative Stress in Severe Acute Pancreatitis.
**Authors:** Huang L, Jiang Y, Sun Z, Gao Z, Wang J, Zhang D
**Journal:** Dig Dis Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10620-018-4962-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620-018-4962-2)

## Content

1. Dig Dis Sci. 2018 Apr;63(4):910-919. doi: 10.1007/s10620-018-4962-2. Epub 2018
 Feb 9.

Autophagy Strengthens Intestinal Mucosal Barrier by Attenuating Oxidative Stress 
in Severe Acute Pancreatitis.

Huang L(1), Jiang Y(1), Sun Z(2), Gao Z(3), Wang J(1), Zhang D(4).

Author information:
(1)Center of Colon and Rectum, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
No. 1 Jiaozhou Road, Qingdao, 266011, Shandong Province, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, 266003, Shandong Province, China.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao 
University, Qingdao, 266003, Shandong Province, China.
(4)Center of Colon and Rectum, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
No. 1 Jiaozhou Road, Qingdao, 266011, Shandong Province, China. 
phdzdl@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Intestinal mucosal barrier dysfunction can be caused by severe acute 
pancreatitis (SAP). It is normally associated with changes to mucosal autophagy 
and oxidative stress.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the correlation between 
autophagy and oxidative stress on the intestinal mucosal barrier of SAP rat 
model.
METHODS: SAP was induced by retrograde injection of sodium taurocholate (5%) 
into the biliopancreatic duct. Bacterial translocation (BT) was detected by 16S 
rDNA sequencing analysis. Morphological alterations in the pancreas and gut were 
determined by hematoxylin-eosin staining. Oxidative stress status was determined 
by measuring the level of intestinal malondialdehyde (MDA), superoxide dismutase 
(SOD) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx). Western blot, RT-PCR, and 
immunofluorescent staining were preformed to analyze the expression of tight 
junction and autophagy proteins.
RESULTS: According to the sequencing analysis, rats in SAP group were divided 
into BT (+) group (n = 9) and BT (-) group (n = 8). Pancreatic and intestinal 
injuries in SAP group were significantly higher than sham operation group. The 
content of MDA was clearly elevated, and SOD as well as GPx activities were 
decreased in BT (+) group as compared with BT (-) group. The expression of LC3II 
and Beclin1 in BT (-) group was higher than that observed in BT (+). In 
contrast, BT (+) group had a higher level of claudin-2 and a lower level of 
zonula occluden-1, occludin, and claudin-1.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that activated autophagy may attenuate 
intestinal mucosal barrier dysfunction by preventing and reducing the oxidative 
stress in SAP.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-018-4962-2
PMID: 29427225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]