---
reference_id: "PMID:28952662"
title: Cholera - the new strike of an old foe.
authors:
- Kuna A
- Gajewski M
journal: Int Marit Health
year: '2017'
doi: 10.5603/IMH.2017.0029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera - the new strike of an old foe.
**Authors:** Kuna A, Gajewski M
**Journal:** Int Marit Health (2017)
**DOI:** [10.5603/IMH.2017.0029](https://doi.org/10.5603/IMH.2017.0029)

## Content

1. Int Marit Health. 2017;68(3):163-167. doi: 10.5603/IMH.2017.0029.

Cholera - the new strike of an old foe.

Kuna A(1), Gajewski M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tropical and Parasitic Diseases, Chair of Tropical Medicine and 
Parasitology - National Centre for Tropical Medicine, Institute of Maritime and 
Tropical Medicine in Gdynia, Medical University of Gdansk, Poland. 
anna.kuna@gumed.edu.pl.

Cholera is an acute bacterial gastrointestinal infection caused by ingestion of 
water or food containing the pathogen Vibrio cholerae. The incubation period can 
be very short and it takes between several hours and 5 days. During the 19th 
century, cholera was spreading from India across the world. Its original 
reservoir was located in the Ganges delta. So far, there have been six epidemics 
of cholera; the current outbreak is the seventh. It started in Asia, attacked 
Africa and then the Americas. Cholera causes thousands of illnesses and deaths 
annually, mostly in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. The current outbreak 
began in Yemen in October 2016, it peaked in December with subsequent decline, 
then the epidemic has re-erupted in April 2017 and it still continues. It is 
currently the largest outbreak in the world, with 5000 new infections a day (as 
of August 19th, 2017 the number of cholera cases stands at 527,000 with 1997 
deaths). The most common symptoms of the illness are diarrhoea, dehydration, 
vomiting, and abdominal cramps. Case-fatality rate is lower than 1%, if 
rehydration treatment is prescribed rapidly, but it can exceed 70% in patients 
not treated properly. Aggressive and rapid fluid repletion is the basis of 
treatment for cholera. In many cases, rehydration therapy, given orally or 
parenterally, is enough to rescue infected patients. Antibiotics, mainly 
fluoroquinolones, tetracyclines, and macrolides are an adjunctive therapy for 
patients with moderate to severe fluid loss.

DOI: 10.5603/IMH.2017.0029
PMID: 28952662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]