---
reference_id: "PMID:12794700"
title: "Fetus with an unusual form of nonrhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata: case report and review."
authors:
- Wessels MW
- Den Hollander NJ
- De Krijger RR
- Nikkels PG
- Brandenburg H
- Hennekam R
- Willems PJ
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20202
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Cartilage/pathology
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Female
- Fetal Death
- Fetus/metabolism
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/genetics"
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Radiography
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fetus with an unusual form of nonrhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata: case report and review.
**Authors:** Wessels MW, Den Hollander NJ, De Krijger RR, Nikkels PG, Brandenburg H, Hennekam R, Willems PJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.20202](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.20202)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Jul 1;120A(1):97-104. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20202.

Fetus with an unusual form of nonrhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata: case 
report and review.

Wessels MW(1), Den Hollander NJ, De Krijger RR, Nikkels PG, Brandenburg H, 
Hennekam R, Willems PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University and University Hospital, 
Westzeedijk 112, 3016 AH Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.w.wessels@erasmusmc.nl

Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP) is a heterogeneous condition mainly 
characterized by premature and ectopic calcification of cartilage. Many genetic 
and nongenetic causes have been described leading to a preliminar etiological 
classification into defects of peroxisomal metabolism, defects in cholesterol 
metabolism, and vitamin K (vit K) metabolism. However, numerous cases of CDP 
still remain unclassified. The difficulties in reaching a causal diagnosis are 
illustrated here by a 23-week-old fetus with nonrhizomelic CDP characterized by 
extensive cartilage stippling, brachyphalangy, and nasal hypoplasia.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20202
PMID: 12794700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]