---
reference_id: "PMID:37890889"
title: "Advances in molecular pathology, diagnosis, and treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis."
authors:
- Ilieva H
- Vullaganti M
- Kwan J
journal: BMJ
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-075037
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in molecular pathology, diagnosis, and treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Ilieva H, Vullaganti M, Kwan J
**Journal:** BMJ (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmj-2023-075037](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj-2023-075037)

## Content

1. BMJ. 2023 Oct 27;383:e075037. doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-075037.

Advances in molecular pathology, diagnosis, and treatment of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

Ilieva H(1), Vullaganti M(2), Kwan J(3).

Author information:
(1)Jefferson Weinberg ALS Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(2)Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, MA, USA.
(3)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institute 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA justin.kwan@nih.gov.

Although the past two decades have produced exciting discoveries in the genetics 
and pathology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), progress in developing an 
effective therapy remains slow. This review summarizes the critical discoveries 
and outlines the advances in disease characterization, diagnosis, imaging, and 
biomarkers, along with the current status of approaches to ALS care and 
treatment. Additional knowledge of the factors driving disease progression and 
heterogeneity will hopefully soon transform the care for patients with ALS into 
an individualized, multi-prong approach able to prevent disease progression 
sufficiently to allow for a dignified life with limited disability.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj-2023-075037
PMCID: PMC10603569
PMID: 37890889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: We have read and understood 
the BMJ policy on declaration of interests and declare the following interests: 
none.