---
reference_id: "PMID:38956451"
title: The genomic trajectory of ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma can be observed in STIC lesions.
authors:
- Cheng Z
- Ennis DP
- Lu B
- Mirza HB
- Sokota C
- Kaur B
- Singh N
- Le Saux O
- Russo G
- Giannone G
- Tookman LA
- Krell J
- Barnes C
- McDermott J
- McNeish IA
journal: J Pathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/path.6322
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Cystadenocarcinoma, Serous/genetics, pathology"
- "Fallopian Tube Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- "Carcinoma in Situ/genetics, pathology"
- Neoplasm Grading
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Mutation
- Genomics/methods
- Whole Genome Sequencing
- Ploidies
- Middle Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Disease Progression
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genomic trajectory of ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma can be observed in STIC lesions.
**Authors:** Cheng Z, Ennis DP, Lu B, Mirza HB, Sokota C, Kaur B, Singh N, Le Saux O, Russo G, Giannone G, Tookman LA, Krell J, Barnes C, McDermott J, McNeish IA
**Journal:** J Pathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/path.6322](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.6322)

## Content

1. J Pathol. 2024 Sep;264(1):42-54. doi: 10.1002/path.6322. Epub 2024 Jul 2.

The genomic trajectory of ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma can be observed in 
STIC lesions.

Cheng Z(1)(2), Ennis DP(1), Lu B(3), Mirza HB(1), Sokota C(4), Kaur B(4), Singh 
N(5), Le Saux O(1), Russo G(1), Giannone G(1), Tookman LA(1), Krell J(1), Barnes 
C(3), McDermott J(4), McNeish IA(1).

Author information:
(1)Ovarian Cancer Action Research Centre, Department of Surgery and Cancer, 
Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing 
Centre, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, 
London, UK.
(4)Department of Cellular Pathology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, 
London, UK.
(5)Department of Pathology, Barts Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.

Ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) originates in the fallopian tube, 
with secretory cells carrying a TP53 mutation, known as p53 signatures, 
identified as potential precursors. p53 signatures evolve into serous tubal 
intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC) lesions, which in turn progress into invasive 
HGSC, which readily spreads to the ovary and disseminates around the peritoneal 
cavity. We recently investigated the genomic landscape of early- and late-stage 
HGSC and found higher ploidy in late-stage (median 3.1) than early-stage (median 
2.0) samples. Here, to explore whether the high ploidy and possible whole-genome 
duplication (WGD) observed in late-stage disease were determined early in the 
evolution of HGSC, we analysed archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) 
samples from five HGSC patients. p53 signatures and STIC lesions were 
laser-capture microdissected and sequenced using shallow whole-genome sequencing 
(sWGS), while invasive ovarian/fallopian tube and metastatic carcinoma samples 
underwent macrodissection and were profiled using both sWGS and targeted 
next-generation sequencing. Results showed highly similar patterns of global 
copy number change between STIC lesions and invasive carcinoma samples within 
each patient. Ploidy changes were evident in STIC lesions, but not p53 
signatures, and there was a strong correlation between ploidy in STIC lesions 
and invasive ovarian/fallopian tube and metastatic samples in each patient. The 
reconstruction of sample phylogeny for each patient from relative copy number 
indicated that high ploidy, when present, occurred early in the evolution of 
HGSC, which was further validated by copy number signatures in ovarian and 
metastatic tumours. These findings suggest that aberrant ploidy, suggestive of 
WGD, arises early in HGSC and is detected in STIC lesions, implying that the 
trajectory of HGSC may be determined at the earliest stages of tumour 
development. © 2024 The Author(s). The Journal of Pathology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of The Pathological Society of Great Britain and 
Ireland.

© 2024 The Author(s). The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.6322
PMID: 38956451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]