---
reference_id: "PMID:35854334"
title: Genetic etiology and clinical challenges of phenylketonuria.
authors:
- Elhawary NA
- AlJahdali IA
- Abumansour IS
- Elhawary EN
- Gaboon N
- Dandini M
- Madkhali A
- Alosaimi W
- Alzahrani A
- Aljohani F
- Melibary EM
- Kensara OA
journal: Hum Genomics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s40246-022-00398-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic etiology and clinical challenges of phenylketonuria.
**Authors:** Elhawary NA, AlJahdali IA, Abumansour IS, Elhawary EN, Gaboon N, Dandini M, Madkhali A, Alosaimi W, Alzahrani A, Aljohani F, Melibary EM, Kensara OA
**Journal:** Hum Genomics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40246-022-00398-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40246-022-00398-9)

## Content

1. Hum Genomics. 2022 Jul 19;16(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s40246-022-00398-9.

Genetic etiology and clinical challenges of phenylketonuria.

Elhawary NA(1), AlJahdali IA(2), Abumansour IS(3), Elhawary EN(4), Gaboon N(5), 
Dandini M(6), Madkhali A(7), Alosaimi W(8), Alzahrani A(9), Aljohani F(10), 
Melibary EM(3), Kensara OA(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, College of Medicine, Umm Al-Qura University, 
P.O. Box 57543, Mecca, 21955, Saudi Arabia. naelhawary@uqu.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Community Medicine, College of Medicine, Umm Al-Qura 
University, P.O. Box 57543, Mecca, 21955, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, College of Medicine, Umm Al-Qura University, 
P.O. Box 57543, Mecca, 21955, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, MS Genomic Medicine Program, University of Southampton, 
Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, UK.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, 
Cairo, Egypt.
(6)Department of Laboratory and Blood Bank, Maternity and Children Hospital, 
Mecca, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, King Abdulaziz Medical City, 
Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Hematology, Maternity and Children Hospital, Mecca, Saudi 
Arabia.
(9)Department of Laboratory and Blood Bank at Maternity and Children Hospital, 
Mecca, Saudi Arabia.
(10)Department of Pediatric Clinics, Maternity and Children Hospital, King 
Salman Medical City, Madinah, Saudi Arabia.
(11)Department of Clinical Nutrition, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Umm 
Al-Qura University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(12)Department of Biochemistry, Batterjee Medical College, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

This review discusses the epidemiology, pathophysiology, genetic etiology, and 
management of phenylketonuria (PKU). PKU, an autosomal recessive disease, is an 
inborn error of phenylalanine (Phe) metabolism caused by pathogenic variants in 
the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. The prevalence of PKU varies widely 
among ethnicities and geographic regions, affecting approximately 1 in 24,000 
individuals worldwide. Deficiency in the PAH enzyme or, in rare cases, the 
cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin results in high blood Phe concentrations, causing 
brain dysfunction. Untreated PKU, also known as PAH deficiency, results in 
severe and irreversible intellectual disability, epilepsy, behavioral disorders, 
and clinical features such as acquired microcephaly, seizures, psychological 
signs, and generalized hypopigmentation of skin (including hair and eyes). 
Severe phenotypes are classic PKU, and less severe forms of PAH deficiency are 
moderate PKU, mild PKU, mild hyperphenylalaninaemia (HPA), or benign HPA. Early 
diagnosis and intervention must start shortly after birth to prevent major 
cognitive and neurological effects. Dietary treatment, including natural protein 
restriction and Phe-free supplements, must be used to maintain blood Phe 
concentrations of 120-360 μmol/L throughout the life span. Additional treatments 
include the casein glycomacropeptide (GMP), which contains very limited aromatic 
amino acids and may improve immunological function, and large neutral amino acid 
(LNAA) supplementation to prevent plasma Phe transport into the brain. The 
synthetic BH4 analog, sapropterin hydrochloride (i.e., Kuvan®, BioMarin), is 
another potential treatment that activates residual PAH, thus decreasing Phe 
concentrations in the blood of PKU patients. Moreover, daily subcutaneous 
injection of pegylated Phe ammonia-lyase (i.e., pegvaliase; PALYNZIQ®, BioMarin) 
has promised gene therapy in recent clinical trials, and mRNA approaches are 
also being studied.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40246-022-00398-9
PMCID: PMC9295449
PMID: 35854334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.