---
reference_id: "PMID:25375929"
title: "Whole genome sequence of the Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum strain Bosnia A: the genome is related to yaws treponemes but contains few loci similar to syphilis treponemes."
authors:
- Staudová B
- Strouhal M
- Zobaníková M
- Cejková D
- Fulton LL
- Chen L
- Giacani L
- Centurion-Lara A
- Bruisten SM
- Sodergren E
- Weinstock GM
- Smajs D
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003261
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Bosnia and Herzegovina
- Cluster Analysis
- "Gene Transfer, Horizontal"
- "Genome, Bacterial/genetics"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Species Specificity
- Synteny
- Syphilis/microbiology
- "Treponema pallidum/classification, genetics"
- Yaws/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole genome sequence of the Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum strain Bosnia A: the genome is related to yaws treponemes but contains few loci similar to syphilis treponemes.
**Authors:** Staudová B, Strouhal M, Zobaníková M, Cejková D, Fulton LL, Chen L, Giacani L, Centurion-Lara A, Bruisten SM, Sodergren E, Weinstock GM, Smajs D
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0003261](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0003261)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Nov 6;8(11):e3261. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003261.
 eCollection 2014.

Whole genome sequence of the Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum strain Bosnia
A: the genome is related to yaws treponemes but contains few loci similar to
syphilis treponemes.

Staudová B(1), Strouhal M(2), Zobaníková M(1), Cejková D(2), Fulton LL(3), Chen
L(3), Giacani L(4), Centurion-Lara A(4), Bruisten SM(5), Sodergren E(3),
Weinstock GM(3), Smajs D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech
Republic.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech
Republic; The Genome Institute, Department of Genetics, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(3)The Genome Institute, Department of Genetics, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America.
(5)Public Health Service GGD Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: T. pallidum subsp. endemicum (TEN) is the causative agent of bejel
(also known as endemic syphilis). Clinical symptoms of syphilis and bejel are
overlapping and the epidemiological context is important for correct diagnosis
of both diseases. In contrast to syphilis, caused by T. pallidum subsp. pallidum
(TPA), TEN infections are usually spread by direct contact or contaminated
utensils rather than by sexual contact. Bejel is most often seen in western
Africa and in the Middle East. The strain Bosnia A was isolated in 1950 in
Bosnia, southern Europe.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The complete genome of the Bosnia A strain was
amplified and sequenced using the pooled segment genome sequencing (PSGS) method
and a combination of three next-generation sequencing techniques (SOLiD, Roche
454, and Illumina). Using this approach, a total combined average genome
coverage of 513× was achieved. The size of the Bosnia A genome was found to be
1,137,653 bp, i.e. 1.6-2.8 kbp shorter than any previously published genomes of
uncultivable pathogenic treponemes. Conserved gene synteny was found in the
Bosnia A genome compared to other sequenced syphilis and yaws treponemes. The
TEN Bosnia A genome was distinct but very similar to the genome of yaws-causing
T. pallidum subsp. pertenue (TPE) strains. Interestingly, the TEN Bosnia A
genome was found to contain several sequences, which so far, have been uniquely
identified only in syphilis treponemes.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The genome of TEN Bosnia A contains several sequences
thought to be unique to TPA strains; these sequences very likely represent
remnants of recombination events during the evolution of TEN treponemes. This
finding emphasizes a possible role of repeated horizontal gene transfer between
treponemal subspecies in shaping the Bosnia A genome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003261
PMCID: PMC4222731
PMID: 25375929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
