---
reference_id: "PMID:21163446"
title: "Huntington's disease: from molecular pathogenesis to clinical treatment."
authors:
- Ross CA
- Tabrizi SJ
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70245-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/pathology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- "History, 20th Century"
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein
- "Huntington Disease/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- "Models, Biological"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/chemistry, genetics, history"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Nuclear Proteins/chemistry, genetics, history"
- Peptides/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington's disease: from molecular pathogenesis to clinical treatment.
**Authors:** Ross CA, Tabrizi SJ
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70245-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70245-3)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2011 Jan;10(1):83-98. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70245-3.

Huntington's disease: from molecular pathogenesis to clinical treatment.

Ross CA(1), Tabrizi SJ.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychiatry, Neurology, Pharmacology, and Neuroscience, and 
Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. ca.ross@jhu.edu

Huntington's disease is a progressive, fatal, neurodegenerative disorder caused 
by an expanded CAG repeat in the huntingtin gene, which encodes an abnormally 
long polyglutamine repeat in the huntingtin protein. Huntington's disease has 
served as a model for the study of other more common neurodegenerative 
disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. These disorders 
all share features including: delayed onset; selective neuronal vulnerability, 
despite widespread expression of disease-related proteins during the whole 
lifetime; abnormal protein processing and aggregation; and cellular toxic 
effects involving both cell autonomous and cell-cell interaction mechanisms. 
Pathogenic pathways of Huntington's disease are beginning to be unravelled, 
offering targets for treatments. Additionally, predictive genetic testing and 
findings of neuroimaging studies show that, as in some other neurodegenerative 
disorders, neurodegeneration in affected individuals begins many years before 
onset of diagnosable signs and symptoms of Huntington's disease, and it is 
accompanied by subtle cognitive, motor, and psychiatric changes (so-called 
prodromal disease). Thus, Huntington's disease is also emerging as a model for 
strategies to develop therapeutic interventions, not only to slow progression of 
manifest disease but also to delay, or ideally prevent, its onset.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70245-3
PMID: 21163446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]