---
reference_id: "PMID:21414669"
title: Prevention of auricular deformity in children with diastrophic dysplasia.
authors:
- Cushing SL
- Swanson RL
- Sie KC
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2011.02.003
keywords:
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Drainage/methods
- "Dwarfism/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Ear Auricle/abnormalities
- "Ear Deformities, Acquired/etiology, prevention & control"
- "Edema/diagnosis, therapy"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Prostheses and Implants
- Risk Assessment
- Siblings
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of auricular deformity in children with diastrophic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Cushing SL, Swanson RL, Sie KC
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2011.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2011.02.003)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2011 May;75(5):713-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2011.02.003. Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Prevention of auricular deformity in children with diastrophic dysplasia.

Cushing SL(1), Swanson RL, Sie KC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Seattle 
Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, United States; Department of Otolaryngology, 
Head and Neck Surgery, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.

In diastrophic dysplasia, auricular swelling commonly occurs in early infancy, 
inevitably leading to deformity. Till date, no description exists in the 
literature for the initial treatment of auricular swelling in this population. 
We present two siblings with diastrophic dysplasia on whom auricular swelling 
was treated with incision and drainage or conforming auricular molds. The ear 
treated with incision and drainage had worse outcome than those treated with 
pressure alone. This paper presents a novel but simple approach to the 
compression of auricular swelling in the setting of diastrophic dysplasia, using 
conforming molds with the goal of preventing permanent deformity.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2011.02.003
PMID: 21414669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]