---
reference_id: "PMID:22375524"
title: Hepatitis B-associated fibrosis and fibrosis/cirrhosis regression with nucleoside and nucleotide analogs.
authors:
- Brown A
- Goodman Z
journal: Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1586/egh.12.4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B-associated fibrosis and fibrosis/cirrhosis regression with nucleoside and nucleotide analogs.
**Authors:** Brown A, Goodman Z
**Journal:** Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1586/egh.12.4](https://doi.org/10.1586/egh.12.4)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012 Apr;6(2):187-98. doi: 10.1586/egh.12.4.

Hepatitis B-associated fibrosis and fibrosis/cirrhosis regression with 
nucleoside and nucleotide analogs.

Brown A(1), Goodman Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK. 
ashley.brown@imperial.nhs.uk

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection currently accounts for approximately 600,000 
deaths per year resulting from progression of liver fibrosis to cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Treatment of chronic hepatitis B with antiviral agents 
aims to improve survival through the reduction of HBV DNA to undetectable levels 
and the resultant prevention of disease progression. In recent years, 
observations in various disease areas have shown that liver fibrosis can be 
reversed if the underlying cause of the liver damage is effectively addressed. 
In line with these observations, there is now considerable evidence to suggest 
that effective sustained suppression of HBV replication with long-term anti-HBV 
treatment can result in measurable improvements in liver fibrosis over time, 
even in patients with advanced cirrhosis. This review article provides an 
overview of currently available data on regression of fibrosis and cirrhosis in 
patients with chronic hepatitis B treated with nucleoside and nucleotide analog 
inhibitors of HBV.

DOI: 10.1586/egh.12.4
PMID: 22375524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]