---
reference_id: "PMID:21102416"
title: Methylation of the 3p22 region encompassing MLH1 is representative of the CpG island methylator phenotype in colorectal cancer.
authors:
- Wong JJ
- Hawkins NJ
- Ward RL
- Hitchins MP
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.212
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- "Adenocarcinoma/genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3"
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, surgery"
- CpG Islands/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- Female
- Gene Silencing
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- MutL Protein Homolog 1
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Methylation of the 3p22 region encompassing MLH1 is representative of the CpG island methylator phenotype in colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Wong JJ, Hawkins NJ, Ward RL, Hitchins MP
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/modpathol.2010.212](https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.2010.212)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2011 Mar;24(3):396-411. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.212. Epub 2010
 Nov 19.

Methylation of the 3p22 region encompassing MLH1 is representative of the CpG
island methylator phenotype in colorectal cancer.

Wong JJ(1), Hawkins NJ, Ward RL, Hitchins MP.

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW,
Australia.

Epigenetic silencing of cancer-related genes by promoter methylation is a
frequent event in sporadic colorectal cancer. The CpG island methylator
phenotype (CIMP+), in which discrete genes throughout the genome are
simultaneously methylated, and long-range epigenetic silencing, whereby multiple
genes within contiguous chromosomal regions are methylated, have been described
in subsets of colorectal cancer. We previously reported the concurrent
methylation of the mismatch repair gene MLH1 with a cluster of flanking genes in
chromosome region 3p22 in sporadic colorectal carcinoma exhibiting
microsatellite instability and the BRAF V600E mutation. Herein, we aimed to
determine whether methylation of MLH1 and neighbouring 3p22 genes, singly or
concomitantly, correlate with the germline c.-93G>A SNP within the MLH1
promoter, CIMP+ and other clinicopathological and molecular features of the
tumours. By studying a cohort of 946 sporadic colorectal cancer cases, we show a
strong association between concordant methylation of ≥ 3 of five 3p22 genes with
CIMP+ and the BRAF V600E mutation (P<0.001). These associations were independent
of microsatellite instability, as concomitant methylation of 3p22 genes other
than MLH1 was found in microsatellite stable cancers. These findings show that
long-range epigenetic silencing across 3p22 occurs in the context of CIMP+ and
the BRAF V600E mutation, and only gives rise to microsatellite instability when
this process encompasses MLH1. Furthermore, the strong relationship between
long-range epigenetic silencing of 3p22 and CIMP+ provides further evidence that
these two purportedly distinct epigenetic phenotypes represent a single entity
with a common aetiology. Low-level methylation of MLH1 and flanking 3p22 genes,
as well as the BRAF V600E mutation, were detected in the apparently normal
colonic mucosa of a small number of cases whose tumours showed a similar
molecular profile, suggesting that these concurring genetic and epigenetic
events can occur as a field defect in neoplastic development.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.212
PMID: 21102416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
