---
reference_id: "PMID:37969279"
title: "Cough in chronic lung disease: a state of the art review."
authors:
- Hirons B
- Rhatigan K
- Kesavan H
- Turner RD
- Birring SS
- Cho PSP
journal: J Thorac Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.21037/jtd-22-1776
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cough in chronic lung disease: a state of the art review.
**Authors:** Hirons B, Rhatigan K, Kesavan H, Turner RD, Birring SS, Cho PSP
**Journal:** J Thorac Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.21037/jtd-22-1776](https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd-22-1776)

## Content

1. J Thorac Dis. 2023 Oct 31;15(10):5823-5843. doi: 10.21037/jtd-22-1776. Epub
2023  Sep 21.

Cough in chronic lung disease: a state of the art review.

Hirons B(1)(2), Rhatigan K(1)(2), Kesavan H(1), Turner RD(3)(4), Birring 
SS(1)(2), Cho PSP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, King's College Hospital, London, UK.
(2)Centre for Human and Applied Physiological Sciences, School of Basic and 
Medical Biosciences, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College 
London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Gold Coast University Hospital, 
Queensland, Australia.
(4)School of Medicine and Dentistry, Griffith University, Queensland, Australia.

Chronic cough (CC; ≥8 weeks in duration) is a common and burdensome feature of 
respiratory diseases. The understanding of cough has progressed significantly in 
recent years, albeit largely in refractory (unexplained) chronic cough (RCC) in 
the absence of other respiratory conditions. The prevalence of CC in respiratory 
diseases is poorly described, but estimates have been reported: asthma (8-58%), 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; 10-74%), bronchiectasis (82-98%), 
interstitial lung disease (ILD; 50-89%) and sarcoidosis (3-64%). CC in 
respiratory conditions generally predicts impaired health status and more severe 
disease. It is associated with increased symptom burden and disease severity in 
asthma, COPD, bronchiectasis and ILD, higher exacerbation frequency in asthma 
and bronchiectasis, and increased mortality and lung transplantation in 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Physiologically, heightened cough reflex 
sensitivity (CRS) has been reported and postulated to be mechanistic in isolated 
RCC. Cough reflex hypersensitivity (CRH) has also been reported in asthma, COPD, 
bronchiectasis, ILD and sarcoidosis. Unlike recent advances in isolated RCC, 
there are limited studies and understanding of central cough neuropathways in 
other respiratory conditions. Of note, dysfunctional central voluntary cough 
suppression neuropathways and physiology were observed in isolation in RCC; 
cough suppression is preserved in COPD. Understanding in the mechanism of RCC 
cannot be simply extrapolated to other respiratory conditions. The restricted 
understanding of cough mechanisms in these conditions has limited cough-specific 
therapeutic options in this context. There is currently an unmet need to expand 
our understanding of cough in chronic respiratory conditions, both in order to 
improve the quality of life of patients, and to improve knowledge of cough in 
general. This review aims to describe the prevalence, impact, pathophysiology 
and management of CC in asthma, COPD, bronchiectasis, ILD and sarcoidosis.

2023 Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd-22-1776
PMCID: PMC10636467
PMID: 37969279

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://jtd.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/jtd-22-1776/coif). The series 
“Novel Insights into Chronic Cough” was commissioned by the editorial office 
without any funding or sponsorship. SSB has received personal fees for 
consultancy from Merck, Bellus, Trevi, Genentech, Nerre, Kinevant, Boehringer 
Ingelheim and Bayer. PSPC reports two ongoing grants: EPSRC and MERCK, outside 
of the submitted work. The authors have no other conflicts of interest to 
declare.