---
reference_id: "PMID:33977029"
title: "Tetrahydrobiopterin deficiencies: Lesson from clinical experience."
authors:
- Bozaci AE
- Er E
- Yazici H
- Canda E
- Kalkan Uçar S
- Güvenc Saka M
- Eraslan C
- Onay H
- Habif S
- Thöny B
- Coker M
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12199
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tetrahydrobiopterin deficiencies: Lesson from clinical experience.
**Authors:** Bozaci AE, Er E, Yazici H, Canda E, Kalkan Uçar S, Güvenc Saka M, Eraslan C, Onay H, Habif S, Thöny B, Coker M
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.12199](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.12199)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2021 Feb 1;59(1):42-51. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12199. eCollection 2021
May.

Tetrahydrobiopterin deficiencies: Lesson from clinical experience.

Bozaci AE(1), Er E(2), Yazici H(1), Canda E(1), Kalkan Uçar S(1), Güvenc Saka 
M(2), Eraslan C(3), Onay H(4), Habif S(5), Thöny B(6), Coker M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Metabolism Ege University 
Faculty of Medicine Izmir Turkey.
(2)Tepecik Research and Training Hospital, Department of Genetics Izmir Turkey.
(3)Department of Radiology Ege University Faculty of Medicine Izmir Turkey.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics Ege University Faculty of Medicine Izmir 
Turkey.
(5)Department of Medical Biochemistry Ege University Faculty of Medicine Izmir 
Turkey.
(6)Division of Metabolism University Children's Hospital Zurich and Children's 
Research Center Zurich Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES: The present study describes clinical, biochemical, molecular genetic 
data, current treatment strategies and follow-up in nine patients with 
tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficiency due to various inherited genetic defects.
METHODS: We analyzed clinical, biochemical, and molecular data of nine patients 
with suspected BH4 deficiency. All patients were diagnosed at Ege University 
Faculty of Medicine in Izmir, Turkey and comprised data collected from 2006 to 
2019. The diagnostic laboratory examinations included blood phenylalanine and 
urinary or plasma pterins, dihydropteridine reductase (DHPR) enzyme activity 
measurement in dried blood spots, folic acid and monoamine neurotransmitter 
metabolites in cerebrospinal fluid, as well as DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Among the nine patients, we identified one with autosomal recessive GTP 
cyclohydrolase I (ar GTPCH) deficiency, two with 6-pyruvoyl-tetrahydropterin 
synthase (PTPS) deficiency, three with sepiapterin reductase (SR) deficiency, 
and three with DHPR deficiency. Similar to previous observations, the most 
common clinical symptoms are developmental delay, intellectual disability, and 
movement disorders. All patients received treatment with l-dopa and 
5-hydroxytryptophan, while only the ar GTPCH, the PTPS, and one DHPR deficient 
patients were supplemented in addition with BH4. The recommended dose range 
varies among patients and depends on the type of disease. The consequences of 
BH4 deficiencies are quite variable; however, early diagnosis and treatment will 
improve outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: As BH4 deficiencies are rare group of treatable neurometabolic 
disorders, it is essential to diagnose the underlying (genetic) defect in 
newborns with hyperphenylalaninemia. Irreversible brain damage and progressive 
neurological deterioration may occur in untreated or late diagnosed patients. 
Prognosis could be satisfying in the cases with early diagnose and treatment.

© 2021 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12199
PMCID: PMC8100404
PMID: 33977029

Conflict of interest statement: Ayse Ergul Bozaci, Esra Er, Havva Yazici, Ebru 
Canda, Sema Ucar Kalkan, Merve Saka Guvenc, Cenk Eraslan, Huseyin Onay, Sara 
Habif, Beat Thony, Mahmut Coker declare that they have no conflict of interest.