---
reference_id: "PMID:38808101"
title: "Case Report: A neonatal case of cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome with severe funisitis and neonatal asphyxia."
authors:
- Hayashida Y
- Hatano M
- Ito K
- Sugie M
- Kunieda J
- Shimizu M
- Morio T
- Morioka C
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1397412
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: A neonatal case of cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome with severe funisitis and neonatal asphyxia.
**Authors:** Hayashida Y, Hatano M, Ito K, Sugie M, Kunieda J, Shimizu M, Morio T, Morioka C
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1397412](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1397412)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 May 14;12:1397412. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1397412. 
eCollection 2024.

Case Report: A neonatal case of cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome with 
severe funisitis and neonatal asphyxia.

Hayashida Y(1), Hatano M(1), Ito K(1), Sugie M(1), Kunieda J(2), Shimizu M(1), 
Morio T(1), Morioka C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Comprehensive Pathology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS) is a genetic disorder and 
autoinflammatory disease characterized by chronic inflammation throughout the 
body. The most severe form of CAPS, Chronic Infantile Neurologic Cutaneous, and 
Articular (CINCA) syndrome, also known as Neonatal Onset Multisystem 
Inflammatory Disease (NOMID), has three main features: skin rash, CNS 
involvement, and joint symptoms. Although these symptoms are typically reported 
shortly after birth, there have been a few reports of prenatal inflammation. 
Here, we report our experience managing a case of a CAPS infant born in severe 
neonatal asphyxia due to a ruptured cord associated with severe funisitis. The 
baby was born at 38 weeks and 6 days of gestation, weighing 2,898 g, through an 
ultra-emergency Caesarian section prompted by variable deceleration. The Apgar 
score was 1 point at 1 min and 4 points at 5 min, necessitating intensive care 
due to hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. Upon delivery, it was observed that the 
umbilical cord had partially ruptured at the site of attachment to the baby, 
accompanied by arterial hemorrhage. Umbilical cord rupture was considered to be 
the cause of the sudden decrease in fetal heart rate. Pathological examination 
also showed that the inflammation of the cord was more severe on the side 
attached to the fetus and on the arterial side, suggesting that the inflammation 
had extended from the fetus. The father carried a genetic mutation associated 
with CINCA syndrome/NOMID (NLRP3 c.2068G>A p.Glu690Lys Hetero), which was also 
found in the child. Histopathologic examination of the placenta and umbilical 
cord can provide crucial insights into the intrauterine onset of inflammation, 
which is the first manifestation of CINCA syndrome/NOMID in newborns. It should 
be noted that births with a genetic predisposition to CAPS may have 
complications related to the placenta and umbilical cord.

© 2024 Hayashida, Hatano, Ito, Sugie, Kunieda, Shimizu, Morio and Morioka.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1397412
PMCID: PMC11130403
PMID: 38808101

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.