---
reference_id: "PMID:17552940"
title: Developmental biology and genetics of dental malformations.
authors:
- Hu JC
- Simmer JP
journal: Orthod Craniofac Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1601-6343.2007.00384.x
keywords:
- Animals
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Humans
- Hypophosphatasia/genetics
- Mutation
- Odontogenesis/genetics
- Tooth Abnormalities/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developmental biology and genetics of dental malformations.
**Authors:** Hu JC, Simmer JP
**Journal:** Orthod Craniofac Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1601-6343.2007.00384.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1601-6343.2007.00384.x)

## Content

1. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2007 May;10(2):45-52. doi: 
10.1111/j.1601-6343.2007.00384.x.

Developmental biology and genetics of dental malformations.

Hu JC(1), Simmer JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry, University of Michigan 
School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The synthesis of tooth development biology with human studies focusing on 
inherited conditions that specifically interfere with tooth development is 
improving our understanding of normal and pathological tooth formation. The type 
of inherited dental malformations observed in a given kindred relate to when, 
during odontogenesis, the defective gene is critically expressed. Information 
about the protein encoded by the defective gene and the resulting dental 
phenotype helps us understand the major processes underway at different stages 
during tooth development. Genes affecting early tooth development (PAX9, MSX1, 
and AXIN2) are associated with familial tooth agenesis or oligodontia. Genes 
expressed by odontoblasts (COL1A1, COL1A2, and DSPP), and ameloblasts (AMELX, 
ENAM, MMP20, and KLK4) during the crown formation stage, are associated with 
dentinogenesis imperfecta, dentin dysplasia, and amelogenesis imperfecta. Late 
genes expressed during root formation (ALPL and DLX3) are associated with 
cementum agenesis (hypophosphatasia) and taurodontism. Understanding the 
relationships between normal tooth development and the dental pathologies 
associated with inherited diseases improves our ability to diagnose and treat 
patients suffering the manifestations of inherited dental disorders.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-6343.2007.00384.x
PMID: 17552940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]