---
reference_id: "PMID:38282294"
title: "Medulloblastoma and other neoplasms in patients with heterozygous germline SUFU variants: A scoping review."
authors:
- Lee SG
- Evans G
- Stephen M
- Goren R
- Bondy M
- Goodman S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63496
keywords:
- Humans
- "Medulloblastoma/genetics, pathology"
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- Child
- Repressor Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medulloblastoma and other neoplasms in patients with heterozygous germline SUFU variants: A scoping review.
**Authors:** Lee SG, Evans G, Stephen M, Goren R, Bondy M, Goodman S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63496](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63496)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2024 Jun;194(6):e63496. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63496. Epub 2024
 Jan 28.

Medulloblastoma and other neoplasms in patients with heterozygous germline SUFU 
variants: A scoping review.

Lee SG(1)(2), Evans G(3), Stephen M(1), Goren R(4), Bondy M(5), Goodman S(5).

Author information:
(1)Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Division of Evolution, Infection and Genomic Science, Manchester Centre for 
Genomic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of 
Manchester, Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(4)Queen's School of Medicine, Queens University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Palo Alto, California, USA.

In 2002, heterozygous suppressor of fused variants (SUFU+/-) in the germline 
were described to have a tumor suppressor role in the development of pediatric 
medulloblastoma (MB). Other neoplasms associated with pathologic germline 
SUFU+/- variants have also been described among patients with basal cell nevus 
syndrome (BCNS; BCNS is also known as Gorlin syndrome, nevoid basal cell 
carcinoma [BCC] syndrome or Gorlin-Goltz syndrome; OMIM 109400), an 
autosomal-dominant cancer predisposition syndrome. The phenotype of patients 
with germline SUFU+/- variants is very poorly characterized due to a paucity of 
large studies with long-term follow-up. As such, there is a clinical need to 
better characterize the spectrum of neoplasms among patients with germline 
SUFU+/- variants so that clinicians can provide accurate counseling and optimize 
tumor surveillance strategies. The objective of this study is to perform a 
scoping review to map the evidence on the rate of medulloblastoma and to 
describe the spectrum of other neoplasms among patients with germline SUFU+/- 
variants. A review of all published literature in PubMed (MEDLINE), EMBASE, 
Cochrane, and Web of Science were searched from the beginning of each respective 
database until October 9, 2021. Studies of pediatric and adult patients with a 
confirmed germline SUFU+/- variant who were evaluated for the presence of any 
neoplasm (benign or malignant) were included. There were 176 patients (N = 30 
studies) identified with a confirmed germline SUFU+/- variant who met inclusion 
criteria. Data were extracted from two cohort studies, two case-control studies, 
18 case series, and eight case reports. The median age at diagnosis of a 
germline SUFU+/- variant was 4.5 years where 44.4% identified as female and 
13.4% of variants were de novo. There were 34 different neoplasms (benign and 
malignant) documented among patients with confirmed germline SUFU+/- variants, 
and the most common were medulloblastoma (N = 59 patients), BCC (N = 21 
patients), and meningioma (N = 19 patients). The median age at medulloblastoma 
diagnosis was 1.42 years (range 0.083-3; interquartile range 1.2). When data 
were available for these three most frequent neoplasms (N = 95 patients), 31 
patients (32.6%) had neither MB, BCC nor meningioma; 51 patients (53.7%) had one 
of medulloblastoma or BCC or meningioma; eight patients (8.4%) had two of 
medulloblastoma or BCC or meningioma, and five patients (5.3%) had 
medulloblastoma and BCC and meningioma. This is the first study to synthesize 
the data on the frequency and spectrum of neoplasms specifically among patients 
with a confirmed germline SUFU+/- variant. This scoping review is a necessary 
step forward in optimizing evidence-based tumor surveillance strategies for 
medulloblastoma and estimating the risk of other neoplasms that could impact 
patient outcomes.

© 2024 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63496
PMID: 38282294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]