---
reference_id: PMID:31303482
title: The Molecular Architecture of Native BBSome Obtained by an Integrated Structural Approach.
authors:
- Chou HT
- Apelt L
- Farrell DP
- White SR
- Woodsmith J
- Svetlov V
- Goldstein JS
- Nager AR
- Li Z
- Muller J
- Dollfus H
- Nudler E
- Stelzl U
- DiMaio F
- Nachury MV
- Walz T
journal: Structure
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2019.06.006
keywords:
- ADP-Ribosylation Factors/metabolism
- Animals
- Cattle
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Mass Spectrometry
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Multimerization
- Retina/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Molecular Architecture of Native BBSome Obtained by an Integrated Structural Approach.
**Authors:** Chou HT, Apelt L, Farrell DP, White SR, Woodsmith J, Svetlov V, Goldstein JS, Nager AR, Li Z, Muller J, Dollfus H, Nudler E, Stelzl U, DiMaio F, Nachury MV, Walz T
**Journal:** Structure (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2019.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2019.06.006)

## Content

1. Structure. 2019 Sep 3;27(9):1384-1394.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2019.06.006. Epub
 2019 Jul 11.

The Molecular Architecture of Native BBSome Obtained by an Integrated Structural 
Approach.

Chou HT(1), Apelt L(2), Farrell DP(3), White SR(2), Woodsmith J(4), Svetlov 
V(5), Goldstein JS(2), Nager AR(2), Li Z(5), Muller J(6), Dollfus H(7), Nudler 
E(5), Stelzl U(4), DiMaio F(8), Nachury MV(9), Walz T(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, CA 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Institute for Protein Design, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Graz and BioTechMed-Graz, Graz, Austria.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University 
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(6)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, UMR_S INSERM U1112, IGMA, Faculté de 
Médecine FMTS, Université de Strasbourg, 67091 Strasbourg, France; Laboratoires 
de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 67091 
Strasbourg, France.
(7)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, UMR_S INSERM U1112, IGMA, Faculté de 
Médecine FMTS, Université de Strasbourg, 67091 Strasbourg, France; Centre de 
Référence pour les Affections Rares en Génétique Ophtalmologique, CARGO, Filière 
SENSGENE, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 67091 Strasbourg, France.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Institute for Protein Design, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. 
Electronic address: dimaio@u.washington.edu.
(9)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, CA 94305, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic address: 
maxence.nachury@ucsf.edu.
(10)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
Laboratory of Molecular Electron Microscopy, The Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: twalz@rockefeller.edu.

The unique membrane composition of cilia is maintained by a diffusion barrier at 
the transition zone that is breached when the BBSome escorts signaling receptors 
out of cilia. Understanding how the BBSome removes proteins from cilia has been 
hampered by a lack of structural information. Here, we present a nearly complete 
Cα model of BBSome purified from cow retina. The model is based on a 
single-particle cryo-electron microscopy density map at 4.9-Å resolution that 
was interpreted with the help of comprehensive Rosetta-based structural modeling 
constrained by crosslinking mass spectrometry data. We find that BBSome subunits 
have a very high degree of interconnectivity, explaining the obligate nature of 
the complex. Furthermore, like other coat adaptors, the BBSome exists in an 
autoinhibited state in solution and must thus undergo a conformational change 
upon recruitment to membranes by the small GTPase ARL6/BBS3. Our model provides 
the first detailed view of the machinery enabling ciliary exit.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2019.06.006
PMCID: PMC6726506
PMID: 31303482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.