---
reference_id: "PMID:41818601"
title: WAGR Spectrum Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- George AM
- Katz Z
- Hathaway ER
- Adams SA
- Berlant Z
- Duki BT
- Viswanathan A
- Trout KL
- MacFarland SP
- Kalish JM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WAGR Spectrum Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, George AM, Katz Z, Hathaway ER, Adams SA, Berlant Z, Duki BT, Viswanathan A, Trout KL, MacFarland SP, Kalish JM

## Content

1. WAGR Spectrum Disorder.

George AM(1), Katz Z(1), Hathaway ER(1), Adams SA(1), Berlant Z(2), Duki BT(1), 
Viswanathan A(1), Trout KL(3), MacFarland SP(4), Kalish JM(5).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2026 Mar 12.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(2)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania
(3)International WAGR Syndrome Association, Montgomery Village, Maryland
(4)Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia;, Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(5)Division of Human Genetics and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia;, Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: WAGR spectrum disorder was initially named for its 
classic features of Wilms tumor (WT), aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and a 
range of neurodevelopmental delays. However, in recent years the phenotypic 
spectrum has expanded to include additional common findings (such as 
neurobehavioral/psychiatric issues, obesity, respiratory and gastrointestinal 
issues, hypotonia and scoliosis, and recurrent infections).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of WAGR spectrum disorder is established in a 
proband with suggestive findings and a deletion of chromosome 11p13 that 
includes the genes WT1 and PAX6 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Multidisciplinary care by pediatric 
specialists in oncology (Wilms tumor risk assessment and management), 
ophthalmology (complications of aniridia), early childhood development 
(developmental delay / intellectual disability, neurobehavioral issues), urology 
(genital anomalies and congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract), 
and nephrology (kidney function), as well as other specialists to manage less 
common findings (e.g., obesity, respiratory issues, gastrointestinal 
involvement, and recurrent infections). Surveillance: Recommendations have been 
published regarding routinely scheduled follow up to monitor existing 
manifestations, the individual's response to supportive care, and the emergence 
of new manifestations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: WAGR spectrum disorder is an autosomal dominant disorder 
typically caused by a de novo 11p13 deletion. Rarely, an unaffected parent of a 
proband with WAGR spectrum disorder has a predisposing chromosome rearrangement. 
Recommended evaluations of the parents to confirm their genetic status and to 
allow reliable recurrence risk counseling include genomic testing (to detect the 
11p13 deletion present in the proband) and chromosome testing (to detect a 
predisposing chromosome rearrangement). If neither parent has the 11p13 deletion 
identified in the proband or a predisposing chromosome rearrangement, and if 
parental identity testing has confirmed biological maternity and paternity, the 
two possibilities to be considered are the proband has a de novo deletion or the 
proband inherited the deletion from a parent with gonadal (or somatic and 
gonadal) mosaicism. Note: Testing of parental leukocyte DNA may not detect all 
instances of somatic mosaicism and will not detect a deletion that is present in 
the germ (gonadal) cells only.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 41818601