---
reference_id: "PMID:29081423"
title: "Muscular Dystrophy with Ribitol-Phosphate Deficiency: A Novel Post-Translational Mechanism in Dystroglycanopathy."
authors:
- Kanagawa M
- Toda T
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3233/JND-170255
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Muscular Dystrophy with Ribitol-Phosphate Deficiency: A Novel Post-Translational Mechanism in Dystroglycanopathy.
**Authors:** Kanagawa M, Toda T
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-170255](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-170255)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2017;4(4):259-267. doi: 10.3233/JND-170255.

Muscular Dystrophy with Ribitol-Phosphate Deficiency: A Novel Post-Translational 
Mechanism in Dystroglycanopathy.

Kanagawa M(1), Toda T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology/Molecular Brain Science, Kobe University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Division of Neuroscience, Graduate School of 
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Muscular dystrophy is a group of genetic disorders characterized by progressive 
muscle weakness. In the early 2000s, a new classification of muscular dystrophy, 
dystroglycanopathy, was established. Dystroglycanopathy often associates with 
abnormalities in the central nervous system. Currently, at least eighteen genes 
have been identified that are responsible for dystroglycanopathy, and despite 
its genetic heterogeneity, its common biochemical feature is abnormal 
glycosylation of alpha-dystroglycan. Abnormal glycosylation of 
alpha-dystroglycan reduces its binding activities to ligand proteins, including 
laminins. In just the last few years, remarkable progress has been made in 
determining the sugar chain structures and gene functions associated with 
dystroglycanopathy. The normal sugar chain contains tandem structures of 
ribitol-phosphate, a pentose alcohol that was previously unknown in humans. The 
dystroglycanopathy genes fukutin, fukutin-related protein (FKRP), and isoprenoid 
synthase domain-containing protein (ISPD) encode essential enzymes for the 
synthesis of this structure: fukutin and FKRP transfer ribitol-phosphate onto 
sugar chains of alpha-dystroglycan, and ISPD synthesizes CDP-ribitol, a donor 
substrate for fukutin and FKRP. These findings resolved long-standing questions 
and established a disease subgroup that is ribitol-phosphate deficient, which 
describes a large population of dystroglycanopathy patients. Here, we review the 
history of dystroglycanopathy, the properties of the sugar chain structure of 
alpha-dystroglycan, dystroglycanopathy gene functions, and therapeutic 
strategies.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-170255
PMCID: PMC5701763
PMID: 29081423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]