---
reference_id: "PMID:40098097"
title: "Safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of a condensed, multi-dose prime regimen of PfSPZ Vaccine for the prevention of Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection."
authors:
- Berry AA
- Richie TL
- Church LWP
- Laurens MB
- Boyce C
- Kc N
- Joshi S
- Koudjra AR
- Butler L
- Chen MC
- Abebe Y
- Murshedkar T
- James ER
- Billingsley PF
- Sim BKL
- Hoffman SL
- Lyke KE
journal: Malar J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12936-025-05299-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of a condensed, multi-dose prime regimen of PfSPZ Vaccine for the prevention of Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection.
**Authors:** Berry AA, Richie TL, Church LWP, Laurens MB, Boyce C, Kc N, Joshi S, Koudjra AR, Butler L, Chen MC, Abebe Y, Murshedkar T, James ER, Billingsley PF, Sim BKL, Hoffman SL, Lyke KE
**Journal:** Malar J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12936-025-05299-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936-025-05299-5)

## Content

1. Malar J. 2025 Mar 17;24(1):88. doi: 10.1186/s12936-025-05299-5.

Safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of a condensed, multi-dose prime regimen 
of PfSPZ Vaccine for the prevention of Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection.

Berry AA(#)(1), Richie TL(#)(2), Church LWP(3)(4), Laurens MB(1), Boyce C(1), Kc 
N(3), Joshi S(1), Koudjra AR(1), Butler L(1), Chen MC(3), Abebe Y(3), Murshedkar 
T(3), James ER(3), Billingsley PF(3)(5), Sim BKL(3), Hoffman SL(#)(3), Lyke 
KE(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.
(2)Sanaria Inc, Rockville, MD, 20850, USA. trichie@sanaria.com.
(3)Sanaria Inc, Rockville, MD, 20850, USA.
(4)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
(5)The Vital Narrative, Frederick, MD, 21701, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The World Health Organization (WHO) has called for new malaria 
vaccines with > 90% efficacy against Plasmodium falciparum infection to expand 
the anti-disease benefit provided by the RTS,S/AS01 and R21/Matrix M subunit 
vaccines currently administered to infants and young children in sub-Saharan 
Africa. Attenuated P. falciparum sporozoites (PfSPZ) are being developed as a 
traveller's vaccine and to fulfill WHO's call for high-level efficacy in endemic 
countries to support malaria elimination.
METHODS: PfSPZ Vaccine, comprised of radiation-attenuated PfSPZ, was compared 
with normal saline placebo in a randomized, double-blind trial targeting 60 
malaria-naive US adults to assess safety, tolerability, immunogenicity, and 
efficacy against heterologous controlled human malaria infection three and 
twelve weeks after immunization. Pharmacists provided syringes to blinded 
clinicians using 3:1 (vaccine:placebo) blocked randomization, for administration 
by direct venous inoculation on days 1 and 8 (multidose prime) and day 29 
(boost), a condensed regimen with superior efficacy. Primary outcomes included 
adverse events and antibody responses to the P. falciparum circumsporozoite 
protein (PfCSP).
RESULTS: 31 participants were screened, randomized and immunized twice (V1, V2) 
5-7 days apart, with one withdrawal after an intercurrent adverse event. A vial 
issue, later traced to the vial manufacturer, halted further immunizations. 
Solicited local and systemic adverse events recorded for 2 and 7 days after 
immunizations, respectively, occurred with equal frequency and severity in the 
23 vaccinees and 7 controls receiving two immunizations, as did unsolicited 
adverse events recorded for 28 days and laboratory abnormalities 1 and 5 weeks 
after V2. Four of 23 vaccinees and one of 7 controls (p = 1.00) developed grade 
2 adverse events including subjective fever, headache, malaise, fatigue, rigors, 
arthralgia and myalgia after V2 but not V1, these symptoms generally resolving 
within 24 h. Twenty-two of 23 (96%) vaccinees developed IgG (median 99-fold 
increase over baseline) and IgM (median 1,110-fold increase) antibodies to PfCSP 
one week after V2. Antibody responses were not associated with reactogenicity.
CONCLUSIONS: The two-dose priming immunization regimen was safe, well tolerated 
and highly immunogenic. Larger studies may better define the adverse event 
profile of condensed regimens of PfSPZ Vaccine in malaria-naive adults.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: clinicaltrial.gov NCT05604521.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-025-05299-5
PMCID: PMC11916963
PMID: 40098097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The clinical protocol was reviewed and approved by the WCG 
investigational review board. Competing interests: T.L.R., L.W.P.C., N.K.C., 
M.C.C., Y.A., T.M., E.R.J. P.F.B., B.K.L.S., and S.L.H were salaried, full-time 
employees of Sanaria Inc at the time of this study. B.K.L.S. and S.L.H. own 
stock in Sanaria.