---
reference_id: "PMID:28074887"
title: Association analysis of dyslexia candidate genes in a Dutch longitudinal sample.
authors:
- Carrion-Castillo A
- Maassen B
- Franke B
- Heister A
- Naber M
- van der Leij A
- Francks C
- Fisher SE
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2016.194
keywords:
- Child
- Child Development
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- Dyslexia/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Netherlands
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Receptors, Immunologic/genetics"
- Roundabout Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association analysis of dyslexia candidate genes in a Dutch longitudinal sample.
**Authors:** Carrion-Castillo A, Maassen B, Franke B, Heister A, Naber M, van der Leij A, Francks C, Fisher SE
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2016.194](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2016.194)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2017 Apr;25(4):452-460. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2016.194. Epub 2017
 Jan 11.

Association analysis of dyslexia candidate genes in a Dutch longitudinal sample.

Carrion-Castillo A(1), Maassen B(2)(3), Franke B(4)(5), Heister A(4)(5), Naber 
M(4)(5), van der Leij A(6), Francks C(1)(5), Fisher SE(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Centre for Language and Cognition Groningen, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)School of Behavioral and Cognitive Neurosciences, University Medical Centre 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Research Institute of Child Development and Education, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Dyslexia is a common specific learning disability with a substantive genetic 
component. Several candidate genes have been proposed to be implicated in 
dyslexia susceptibility, such as DYX1C1, ROBO1, KIAA0319, and DCDC2. 
Associations with variants in these genes have also been reported with a variety 
of psychometric measures tapping into the underlying processes that might be 
impaired in dyslexic people. In this study, we first conducted a literature 
review to select single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in dyslexia candidate 
genes that had been repeatedly implicated across studies. We then assessed the 
SNPs for association in the richly phenotyped longitudinal data set from the 
Dutch Dyslexia Program. We tested for association with several quantitative 
traits, including word and nonword reading fluency, rapid naming, phoneme 
deletion, and nonword repetition. In this, we took advantage of the longitudinal 
nature of the sample to examine if associations were stable across four 
educational time-points (from 7 to 12 years). Two SNPs in the KIAA0319 gene were 
nominally associated with rapid naming, and these associations were stable 
across different ages. Genetic association analysis with complex cognitive 
traits can be enriched through the use of longitudinal information on trait 
development.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2016.194
PMCID: PMC5386414
PMID: 28074887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Barbara Franke received an educational speaking 
fee from Merz.