---
reference_id: "PMID:37526143"
title: "The curious case of IDH mutant acute myeloid leukaemia: biochemistry and therapeutic approaches."
authors:
- Gruber E
- Kats LM
journal: Biochem Soc Trans
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1042/BST20230017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The curious case of IDH mutant acute myeloid leukaemia: biochemistry and therapeutic approaches.
**Authors:** Gruber E, Kats LM
**Journal:** Biochem Soc Trans (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BST20230017](https://doi.org/10.1042/BST20230017)

## Content

1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2023 Aug 31;51(4):1675-1686. doi: 10.1042/BST20230017.

The curious case of IDH mutant acute myeloid leukaemia: biochemistry and 
therapeutic approaches.

Gruber E(1), Kats LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre and the Sir Peter MacCallum Department of 
Oncology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia.

Of the many genetic alterations that occur in cancer, relatively few have proven 
to be suitable for the development of targeted therapies. Mutations in 
isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) 1 and -2 increase the capacity of cancer cells to 
produce a normally scarce metabolite, D-2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), by several 
orders of magnitude. The discovery of the unusual biochemistry of IDH mutations 
spurred a flurry of activity that revealed 2-HG as an 'oncometabolite' with 
pleiotropic effects in malignant cells and consequences for anti-tumour 
immunity. Over the next decade, we learned that 2-HG dysregulates a wide array 
of molecular pathways, among them a large family of dioxygenases that utilise 
the closely related metabolite α-ketoglutarate (α-KG) as an essential 
co-substrate. 2-HG not only contributes to malignant transformation, but some 
cancer cells become addicted to it and sensitive to inhibitors that block its 
synthesis. Moreover, high 2-HG levels and loss of wild-type IDH1 or IDH2 
activity gives rise to synthetic lethal vulnerabilities. Herein, we review the 
biology of IDH mutations with a particular focus on acute myeloid leukaemia 
(AML), an aggressive disease where selective targeting of IDH-mutant cells is 
showing significant promise.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BST20230017
PMCID: PMC10586776
PMID: 37526143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.M.K. has received research funding and 
consultancy payments from Agios Pharmaceuticals and Servier.