---
reference_id: "PMID:10408779"
title: Genomic structure and identification of 11 novel mutations of the PEX6 (peroxisome assembly factor-2) gene in patients with peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
authors:
- Zhang Z
- Suzuki Y
- Shimozawa N
- Fukuda S
- Imamura A
- Tsukamoto T
- Osumi T
- Fujiki Y
- Orii T
- Wanders RJ
- Barth PG
- Moser HW
- Paton BC
- Besley GT
- Kondo N
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '1999'
doi: "10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1999)13:6<487::AID-HUMU9>3.0.CO;2-T"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic structure and identification of 11 novel mutations of the PEX6 (peroxisome assembly factor-2) gene in patients with peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
**Authors:** Zhang Z, Suzuki Y, Shimozawa N, Fukuda S, Imamura A, Tsukamoto T, Osumi T, Fujiki Y, Orii T, Wanders RJ, Barth PG, Moser HW, Paton BC, Besley GT, Kondo N
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1999)13:6<487::AID-HUMU9>3.0.CO;2-T](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1999)13:6<487::AID-HUMU9>3.0.CO;2-T)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 1999;13(6):487-96. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1999)13:6<487::AID-HUMU9>3.0.CO;2-T.

Genomic structure and identification of 11 novel mutations of the PEX6 
(peroxisome assembly factor-2) gene in patients with peroxisome biogenesis 
disorders.

Zhang Z(1), Suzuki Y, Shimozawa N, Fukuda S, Imamura A, Tsukamoto T, Osumi T, 
Fujiki Y, Orii T, Wanders RJ, Barth PG, Moser HW, Paton BC, Besley GT, Kondo N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gifu University School of Medicine, Japan.

The PEX6 (peroxisome assembly factor-2, PAF-2) gene encodes a member of the AAA 
protein (ATPases associated with diverse cellular activities) family and 
restores peroxisome assembly in fibroblasts from peroxisome biogenesis disorder 
patients belonging to complementation group C (group 4 in the United States). We 
have now clarified the genomic DNA structure of human PEX6 and identified 
mutations in patients from various ethnic groups. The human PEX6 gene consists 
of 17 exons and 16 introns, spanning about 14kb. The largest exon, exon 1, has 
at least 952 bp nucleotides. Eleven novel mutations (18 alleles) were identified 
by direct sequencing of the PEX6 cDNA from 10 patients. All these mutations have 
been confirmed in the corresponding genomic DNA. There was no common mutation, 
but an exon skip was identified in two unrelated Japanese patients. Most of the 
mutations led to premature termination or large deletions of the PEX6 protein 
and resulted in the most severe peroxisome biogenesis disorder phenotype of 
Zellweger syndrome. A patient with an atypical Zellweger syndrome had a missense 
mutation that was shown to disrupt the cell's ability to form peroxisomes. This 
mutation analysis will aid in understanding the functions of the PEX6 protein in 
peroxisomal biogenesis. Hum Mutat 13:487-496, 1999.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1999)13:6<487::AID-HUMU9>3.0.CO;2-T
PMID: 10408779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]