---
reference_id: "PMID:21514177"
title: Molecular basis of the obesity associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Guo DF
- Rahmouni K
journal: Trends Endocrinol Metab
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2011.02.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular basis of the obesity associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Guo DF, Rahmouni K
**Journal:** Trends Endocrinol Metab (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tem.2011.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2011.02.009)

## Content

1. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Jul;22(7):286-93. doi:
10.1016/j.tem.2011.02.009.  Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Molecular basis of the obesity associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Guo DF(1), Rahmouni K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Carver College of 
Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS) is a rare human hereditary disorder associated with 
several features including obesity, retinopathy, renal defects, polydactyly, 
learning disabilities and hypogenitalism. This article discusses the 
abnormalities accounting for energy imbalance leading to obesity in BBS, with 
emphasis on the recent evidence pointing to aberrations in hypothalamic action 
of leptin. Indeed, BBS proteins have emerged as important mediators of leptin 
receptor trafficking, and loss of BBS genes results in leptin resistance that 
could be due to abnormal leptin receptor handling in a subset of 
leptin-responsive neurons. These recent discoveries hold promise for improved 
clinical management of BBS patients. The relevance of these findings to 
non-syndromic common obesity is also discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tem.2011.02.009
PMCID: PMC3130119
PMID: 21514177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no financial conflict of interest.