---
reference_id: "PMID:26362741"
title: Vasculitis related to viral and other microbial agents.
authors:
- Teng GG
- Chatham WW
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2015.05.007
keywords:
- "Bacterial Infections/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Cryoglobulinemia/diagnosis, therapy, virology"
- "Hepatitis B/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Hepatitis C/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- "Polyarteritis Nodosa/diagnosis, therapy, virology"
- "Vasculitis/diagnosis, microbiology, therapy, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vasculitis related to viral and other microbial agents.
**Authors:** Teng GG, Chatham WW
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.berh.2015.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2015.05.007)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2015 Apr;29(2):226-43. doi: 
10.1016/j.berh.2015.05.007. Epub 2015 Jun 11.

Vasculitis related to viral and other microbial agents.

Teng GG(1), Chatham WW(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University Medicine Cluster, National University 
Health System, Singapore; Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of 
Medicine, National University of Singapore and National University Health 
System, Singapore.
(2)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. Electronic address: wchatham@uab.edu.

Vasculitis due to infection may occur as a consequence of the inflammation of 
vessel walls due to direct or contiguous infection, type II or immune 
complex-mediated reaction, cell-mediated hypersensitivity, or inflammation due 
to immune dysregulation triggered by bacterial toxin and/or superantigen 
production. As immunosuppressive therapy administered in the absence of 
antimicrobial therapy may increase morbidity and fail to effect the resolution 
of infection-associated vascular inflammation, it is important to consider 
infectious entities as potential inciting factors in vasculitis syndromes. The 
causality between infection and vasculitis has been established in hepatitis 
B-associated polyarteritis nodosa (HBV-PAN) and hepatitis C-associated 
(cryoglobulinemic) vasculitis (HCV-CV). The review summarizes the recent 
literature on the pathophysiological mechanisms and the approaches to the 
management of HBV-PAN and HCV-CV. Roles of other viral and microbial infections, 
which either manifest as vasculitic syndromes or are implicated in the 
pathogenesis of primary vasculitides, are also discussed.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.berh.2015.05.007
PMID: 26362741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]