---
reference_id: "PMID:37043648"
title: "Neuropsychiatric manifestations of monkeypox: A clinically oriented comprehensive review."
authors:
- Sethi Y
- Agarwal P
- Murli H
- Waheed S
- Matar SG
- Baklola M
- Chopra H
- Emran TB
- Hasabo EA
journal: Brain Behav
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/brb3.2934
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychiatric manifestations of monkeypox: A clinically oriented comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Sethi Y, Agarwal P, Murli H, Waheed S, Matar SG, Baklola M, Chopra H, Emran TB, Hasabo EA
**Journal:** Brain Behav (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/brb3.2934](https://doi.org/10.1002/brb3.2934)

## Content

1. Brain Behav. 2023 Apr;13(4):e2934. doi: 10.1002/brb3.2934. Epub 2023 Feb 27.

Neuropsychiatric manifestations of monkeypox: A clinically oriented 
comprehensive review.

Sethi Y(1), Agarwal P(2), Murli H(2), Waheed S(3), Matar SG(4), Baklola M(5), 
Chopra H(6), Emran TB(7)(8), Hasabo EA(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Government Doon Medical College, Dehradun, India.
(2)Department of Medicine, Lokmanya Tilak Municipal Medical College, Mumbai, 
India.
(3)Department of Medicine, Dow Medical College, Dow University Of Health 
Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy, Applied Science Private University, Amman, Jordan.
(5)Faculty of medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt.
(6)Chitkara College of Pharmacy, Chitkara University, Punjab, India.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, BGC Trust University Bangladesh, Chittagong, 
Bangladesh.
(8)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Daffodil 
International University, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(9)Faculty of Medicine, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan.

Monkeypox (MPX) has emerged as a threatening outbreak in recent months. The 
understanding of disease pathogenesis and its systemic involvement has evolved 
with time. Both the virus and its vaccine, like other members of the 
Orthopoxvirus family, were always expected to have neuropsychiatric 
consequences. Several neurological complications have been reported with MPX and 
its vaccines that include but not limited to headaches, myalgia, encephalitis, 
and coma. Psychiatric complications like anxiety and depression have also been 
reported; however, we lack evidence to present a direct causality. We conducted 
a literature review to compile recent evidence on neuropsychiatric 
manifestations and underline the importance of evolving aspects and 
complications of MPX. We advocate for better reporting of cases and adverse 
events, to enhance our understanding of the disease, aiding physicians to make 
more informed decisions, thus facilitating timely diagnosis and treatment.

© 2023 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.2934
PMCID: PMC10097072
PMID: 37043648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.