---
reference_id: "PMID:25078763"
title: "Clinical characterization, genetic mapping and whole-genome sequence analysis of a novel autosomal recessive intellectual disability syndrome."
authors:
- Kaasinen E
- Rahikkala E
- Koivunen P
- Miettinen S
- Wamelink MM
- Aavikko M
- Palin K
- Myllyharju J
- Moilanen JS
- Pajunen L
- Karhu A
- Aaltonen LA
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.07.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characterization, genetic mapping and whole-genome sequence analysis of a novel autosomal recessive intellectual disability syndrome.
**Authors:** Kaasinen E, Rahikkala E, Koivunen P, Miettinen S, Wamelink MM, Aavikko M, Palin K, Myllyharju J, Moilanen JS, Pajunen L, Karhu A, Aaltonen LA
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.07.002)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2014 Oct;57(10):543-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.07.002. Epub
 2014 Jul 29.

Clinical characterization, genetic mapping and whole-genome sequence analysis of 
a novel autosomal recessive intellectual disability syndrome.

Kaasinen E(1), Rahikkala E(2), Koivunen P(3), Miettinen S(2), Wamelink MM(4), 
Aavikko M(1), Palin K(1), Myllyharju J(3), Moilanen JS(2), Pajunen L(2), Karhu 
A(1), Aaltonen LA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, 
University of Helsinki and Haartman Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu 
University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(3)Biocenter Oulu, Oulu Center for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Finland.
(4)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU 
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program, 
University of Helsinki and Haartman Institute, Helsinki, Finland. Electronic 
address: lauri.aaltonen@helsinki.fi.

We identified six patients presenting with a strikingly similar clinical 
phenotype of profound syndromic intellectual disability of unknown etiology. All 
patients lived in the same village. Extensive genealogical work revealed that 
the healthy parents of the patients were all distantly related to a common 
ancestor from the 17th century, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. In 
addition to intellectual disability, the clinical features included hypotonia, 
strabismus, difficulty to fix the eyes to an object, planovalgus in the feet, 
mild contractures in elbow joints, interphalangeal joint hypermobility and 
coarse facial features that develop gradually during childhood. The clinical 
phenotype did not fit any known syndrome. Genome-wide SNP genotyping of the 
patients and genetic mapping revealed the longest shared homozygosity at 
3p22.1-3p21.1 encompassing 11.5 Mb, with no other credible candidate loci 
emerging. Single point parametric linkage analysis showed logarithm of the odds 
score of 11 for the homozygous region, thus identifying a novel intellectual 
disability predisposition locus. Whole-genome sequencing of one affected 
individual pinpointed three genes with potentially protein damaging homozygous 
sequence changes within the predisposition locus: transketolase (TKT), prolyl 
4-hydroxylase transmembrane (P4HTM), and ubiquitin specific peptidase 4 (USP4). 
The changes were found in heterozygous form with 0.3-0.7% allele frequencies in 
402 whole-genome sequenced controls from the north-east of Finland. No 
homozygotes were found in this nor additional control data sets. Our study 
facilitates clinical and molecular diagnosis of patients with this novel 
autosomal recessive intellectual disability syndrome. However, further studies 
are needed to unambiguously identify the underlying genetic defect.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.07.002
PMID: 25078763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]