---
reference_id: "PMID:33026080"
title: "Familial Mediterranean fever: the molecular pathways from stress exposure to attacks."
authors:
- Korkmaz C
- Cansu DU
- Cansu GB
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keaa450
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean fever: the molecular pathways from stress exposure to attacks.
**Authors:** Korkmaz C, Cansu DU, Cansu GB
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keaa450](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keaa450)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2020 Dec 1;59(12):3611-3621. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keaa450.

Familial Mediterranean fever: the molecular pathways from stress exposure to 
attacks.

Korkmaz C(1), Cansu DU(1), Cansu GB(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Eskisehir 
Osmangazi University, School of Medicine, Eskisehir.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Kütahya Health Science University, School of 
Medicine, Kütahya, 43100, Turkey.

FMF is an autoinflammatory disease characterized by recurrent attacks and 
increased IL-1 synthesis owing to activation of the pyrin inflammasome. Although 
knowledge of the mechanisms leading to the activation of pyrin inflammasome is 
increasing, it is still unknown why the disease is characterized by attack. The 
emergence of FMF attacks after emotional stress and the induction of attacks 
with metaraminol in previous decades suggested that stress-induced 
sympathoadrenal system activation might play a role in inflammasome activation 
and triggering attacks. In this review, we will review the possible molecular 
mechanism of stress mediators on the inflammation pathway and inflammasome 
activation. Studies on stress mediators and their impact on inflammation 
pathways will provide a better understanding of stress-related exacerbation 
mechanisms in both autoinflammatory and autoimmune diseases. This review 
provides a new perspective on this subject and will contribute to new studies.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keaa450
PMID: 33026080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]