---
reference_id: "PMID:32399188"
title: New developments in chondrocyte ER stress and related diseases.
authors:
- Briggs MD
- Dennis EP
- Dietmar HF
- Pirog KA
journal: F1000Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.12688/f1000research.22275.1
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chondrocytes/pathology
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- Growth Plate/pathology
- Osteoarthritis/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New developments in chondrocyte ER stress and related diseases.
**Authors:** Briggs MD, Dennis EP, Dietmar HF, Pirog KA
**Journal:** F1000Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.12688/f1000research.22275.1](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.22275.1)

## Content

1. F1000Res. 2020 Apr 24;9:F1000 Faculty Rev-290. doi: 
10.12688/f1000research.22275.1. eCollection 2020.

New developments in chondrocyte ER stress and related diseases.

Briggs MD(1), Dennis EP(1), Dietmar HF(1), Pirog KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, 
International Centre for Life, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 3BZ, 
UK.

Cartilage comprises a single cell type, the chondrocyte, embedded in a highly 
complex extracellular matrix. Disruption to the cartilage growth plate leads to 
reduced bone growth and results in a clinically diverse group of conditions 
known as genetic skeletal diseases (GSDs). Similarly, long-term degradation of 
articular cartilage can lead to osteoarthritis (OA), a disease characterised by 
joint pain and stiffness. As professionally secreting cells, chondrocytes are 
particularly susceptible to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and this has been 
identified as a core disease mechanism in a group of clinically and 
pathologically related GSDs. If unresolved, ER stress can lead to chondrocyte 
cell death. Recent interest has focused on ER stress as a druggable target for 
GSDs and this has led to the first clinical trial for a GSD by repurposing an 
antiepileptic drug. Interestingly, ER stress markers have also been associated 
with OA in multiple cell and animal models and there is increasing interest in 
it as a possible therapeutic target for treatment. In summary, chondrocyte ER 
stress has been identified as a core disease mechanism in GSDs and as a 
contributory factor in OA. Thus, chondrocyte ER stress is a unifying factor for 
both common and rare cartilage-related diseases and holds promise as a novel 
therapeutic target.

Copyright: © 2020 Briggs MD et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.22275.1
PMCID: PMC7194456
PMID: 32399188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.No 
competing interests were disclosed.No competing interests were disclosed.