---
reference_id: "PMID:22208756"
title: "What is the best biomarker to assess arsenic exposure via drinking water?"
authors:
- Marchiset-Ferlay N
- Savanovitch C
- Sauvant-Rochat MP
journal: Environ Int
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2011.07.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What is the best biomarker to assess arsenic exposure via drinking water?
**Authors:** Marchiset-Ferlay N, Savanovitch C, Sauvant-Rochat MP
**Journal:** Environ Int (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envint.2011.07.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2011.07.015)

## Content

1. Environ Int. 2012 Feb;39(1):150-71. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2011.07.015. Epub
2011  Dec 3.

What is the best biomarker to assess arsenic exposure via drinking water?

Marchiset-Ferlay N(1), Savanovitch C, Sauvant-Rochat MP.

Author information:
(1)Université d'Auvergne, Faculté de Pharmacie, Laboratoire Santé Publique et 
Environnement, 28 Place Henri Dunant, BP 38, F-63001 Clermont-Ferrand Cedex, 
France. nathalie.marchiset@u-clermont1.fr

Arsenic (As) is a ubiquitous element. The current WHO guideline for As in 
drinking water is 10 μg/L. Furthermore, about 130 million people have only 
access to drinking water containing more than 10 g As/L. Although numerous 
studies have shown the related adverse effects of As, sensitive appropriate 
biomarkers are still required for studies of environmental epidemiology. A 
review of the literature has shown that various biomarkers are used for such 
research. Their limits and advantages are highlighted in this paper: (i) the 
detection of As or its derivatives in the blood is an indication of the dose 
ingested but it is not evidence of chronic intoxication. (ii) The detection of 
As in urine is an indispensible procedure because it is a good marker for 
internal dose. It has been demonstrated to correlate well for a number of 
chronic effects related to As levels in drinking water. However confounding 
factors must be taken into account to avoid misinterpretation and this may 
require As speciation. (iii) As in the hair and nails reflects the level of long 
term exposure but it is difficult to relate the level with the dose ingested. 
(iv) Some studies showed a correlation between urinary As and urinary and blood 
porphyrins. However, it is difficult to use only porphyrins as a biomarker in a 
population survey carried out without doing further studies. (v) Genotoxic 
effects are based on the characterization of these potential effects. Most 
studies have detected increases in DNA damage, sister chromatid exchange, 
micronuclei or chromosomal aberrations in populations exposed to As in drinking 
water. Micronuclei assay is the technique of choice to follow these populations, 
because it is sensitive and easy to use. To conclude, whatever epidemiological 
studies are, the urinary and toenail biomarkers are useful to provide 
indications of internal dose. Moreover, micronuclei assay can be complementary 
use as biomarker of early effects.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2011.07.015
PMID: 22208756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]