---
reference_id: "PMID:29752304"
title: "Eteplirsen treatment for Duchenne muscular dystrophy: Exon skipping and dystrophin production."
authors:
- Charleston JS
- Schnell FJ
- Dworzak J
- Donoghue C
- Lewis S
- Chen L
- Young GD
- Milici AJ
- Voss J
- DeAlwis U
- Wentworth B
- Rodino-Klapac LR
- Sahenk Z
- Frank D
- Mendell JR
journal: Neurology
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000005680
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eteplirsen treatment for Duchenne muscular dystrophy: Exon skipping and dystrophin production.
**Authors:** Charleston JS, Schnell FJ, Dworzak J, Donoghue C, Lewis S, Chen L, Young GD, Milici AJ, Voss J, DeAlwis U, Wentworth B, Rodino-Klapac LR, Sahenk Z, Frank D, Mendell JR
**Journal:** Neurology (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000005680](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000005680)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2018 Jun 12;90(24):e2146-e2154. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000005680. 
Epub 2018 May 11.

Eteplirsen treatment for Duchenne muscular dystrophy: Exon skipping and 
dystrophin production.

Charleston JS(1), Schnell FJ(2), Dworzak J(2), Donoghue C(2), Lewis S(2), Chen 
L(2), Young GD(2), Milici AJ(2), Voss J(2), DeAlwis U(2), Wentworth B(2), 
Rodino-Klapac LR(2), Sahenk Z(2), Frank D(2), Mendell JR(2).

Author information:
(1)From Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc (J.S.C., F.J.S., J.D., C.D., J.V., U.D., B.W., 
D.F.), Cambridge, MA; Nationwide Children's Hospital (S.L., L.C., L.R.R.-K., 
Z.S., J.R.M.), Columbus, OH; and Flagship Biosciences (G.D.Y., A.J.M.), 
Westminster, CO. jcharleston@sarepta.com.
(2)From Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc (J.S.C., F.J.S., J.D., C.D., J.V., U.D., B.W., 
D.F.), Cambridge, MA; Nationwide Children's Hospital (S.L., L.C., L.R.R.-K., 
Z.S., J.R.M.), Columbus, OH; and Flagship Biosciences (G.D.Y., A.J.M.), 
Westminster, CO.

Erratum in
    Neurology. 2018 Sep 25;91(13):637. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000005979.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2018 Jun 12;90(24):1091-1092. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000005669.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the quantification of novel dystrophin production in 
patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) after long-term treatment with 
eteplirsen.
METHODS: Clinical study 202 was an observational, open-label extension of the 
randomized, controlled study 201 assessing the safety and efficacy of eteplirsen 
in patients with DMD with a confirmed mutation in the DMD gene amenable to 
correction by skipping of exon 51. Patients received once-weekly IV doses of 
eteplirsen 30 or 50 mg/kg. Upper extremity muscle biopsy samples were collected 
at combined study week 180, blinded, and assessed for dystrophin-related content 
by Western blot, Bioquant software measurement of dystrophin-associated 
immunofluorescence intensity, and percent dystrophin-positive fibers (PDPF). 
Results were contrasted with matched untreated biopsies from patients with DMD. 
Reverse transcription PCR followed by Sanger sequencing of newly formed slice 
junctions was used to confirm the mechanism of action of eteplirsen.
RESULTS: Reverse transcription PCR analysis and sequencing of the newly formed 
splice junction confirmed that 100% of treated patients displayed the expected 
skipped exon 51 sequence. In treated patients vs untreated controls, Western 
blot analysis of dystrophin content demonstrated an 11.6-fold increase (p = 
0.007), and PDPF analysis demonstrated a 7.4-fold increase (p < 0.001). The PDPF 
findings were confirmed in a re-examination of the sample (15.5-fold increase, p 
< 0.001). Dystrophin immunofluorescence intensity was 2.4-fold greater in 
treated patients than in untreated controls (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Taken together, the 4 assays, each based on unique evaluation 
mechanisms, provided evidence of eteplirsen muscle cell penetration, exon 
skipping, and induction of novel dystrophin expression.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class II evidence of the muscle 
cell penetration, exon skipping, and induction of novel dystrophin expression by 
eteplirsen, as confirmed by 4 assays.

© 2018 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000005680
PMID: 29752304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]