---
reference_id: "PMID:15454078"
title: Ca(V)1.2 calcium channel dysfunction causes a multisystem disorder including arrhythmia and autism.
authors:
- Splawski I
- Timothy KW
- Sharpe LM
- Decher N
- Kumar P
- Bloise R
- Napolitano C
- Schwartz PJ
- Joseph RM
- Condouris K
- Tager-Flusberg H
- Priori SG
- Sanguinetti MC
- Keating MT
journal: Cell
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.09.011
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, physiopathology"
- Action Potentials/genetics
- Animals
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Autistic Disorder/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Brain/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Brain Chemistry/genetics
- CHO Cells
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/genetics, metabolism"
- Calcium Signaling/genetics
- "Cell Membrane/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- Cricetinae
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Heart/physiopathology
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/complications, genetics"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Oocytes
- Pedigree
- Syndrome
- Xenopus laevis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ca(V)1.2 calcium channel dysfunction causes a multisystem disorder including arrhythmia and autism.
**Authors:** Splawski I, Timothy KW, Sharpe LM, Decher N, Kumar P, Bloise R, Napolitano C, Schwartz PJ, Joseph RM, Condouris K, Tager-Flusberg H, Priori SG, Sanguinetti MC, Keating MT
**Journal:** Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2004.09.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2004.09.011)

## Content

1. Cell. 2004 Oct 1;119(1):19-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.09.011.

Ca(V)1.2 calcium channel dysfunction causes a multisystem disorder including
arrhythmia and autism.

Splawski I(1), Timothy KW, Sharpe LM, Decher N, Kumar P, Bloise R, Napolitano C,
Schwartz PJ, Joseph RM, Condouris K, Tager-Flusberg H, Priori SG, Sanguinetti
MC, Keating MT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
igor@enders.tch.harvard.edu

Ca(V)1.2, the cardiac L-type calcium channel, is important for excitation and
contraction of the heart. Its role in other tissues is unclear. Here we present
Timothy syndrome, a novel disorder characterized by multiorgan dysfunction
including lethal arrhythmias, webbing of fingers and toes, congenital heart
disease, immune deficiency, intermittent hypoglycemia, cognitive abnormalities,
and autism. In every case, Timothy syndrome results from the identical, de novo
Ca(V)1.2 missense mutation G406R. Ca(V)1.2 is expressed in all affected tissues.
Functional expression reveals that G406R produces maintained inward Ca(2+)
currents by causing nearly complete loss of voltage-dependent channel
inactivation. This likely induces intracellular Ca(2+) overload in multiple cell
types. In the heart, prolonged Ca(2+) current delays cardiomyocyte
repolarization and increases risk of arrhythmia, the ultimate cause of death in
this disorder. These discoveries establish the importance of Ca(V)1.2 in human
physiology and development and implicate Ca(2+) signaling in autism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.09.011
PMID: 15454078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
