---
reference_id: "PMID:31124964"
title: "Increased risk of Bell palsy in patient with migraine: A longitudinal follow-up study."
authors:
- Kim SY
- Lee CH
- Lim JS
- Kong IG
- Sim S
- Choi HG
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000015764
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Bell Palsy/epidemiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Diabetes Mellitus/epidemiology
- Dyslipidemias/epidemiology
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Hypertension/epidemiology
- Infant
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Migraine Disorders/epidemiology
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Republic of Korea/epidemiology
- Residence Characteristics
- Risk Factors
- Sex Factors
- Socioeconomic Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased risk of Bell palsy in patient with migraine: A longitudinal follow-up study.
**Authors:** Kim SY, Lee CH, Lim JS, Kong IG, Sim S, Choi HG
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000015764](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000015764)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 May;98(21):e15764. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000015764.

Increased risk of Bell palsy in patient with migraine: A longitudinal follow-up 
study.

Kim SY(1), Lee CH(1), Lim JS(2), Kong IG(3), Sim S(4), Choi HG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, CHA Bundang Medical 
Center, CHA University, Seongnam.
(2)Department of Neurology, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Anyang.
(3)Department of Statistics, Hallym University, Chuncheon.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Hallym University 
College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea.

Migraine is thought to be associated with Bell palsy. This study aimed to 
investigate the risk of Bell palsy in migraine patients.The Korean National 
Health Insurance Service-National Sample Cohort was collected from 2002 to 2013. 
A total of 45,164 migraine patients were matched for age, sex, income, region of 
residence, hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia and compared with 180,656 
controls. The migraine group included participants diagnosed with migraine 
[International Classification of Disease (ICD)-10: G43] who underwent treatment 
more than once. Participants with Bell palsy were included on the basis of the 
ICD-10 (G510) and treatment with steroids. A history of hypertension, diabetes, 
and dyslipidemia was determined using ICD-10 codes. Crude (simple) and adjusted 
hazard ratios (HRs) of Bell palsy in migraine patients were analyzed using the 
Cox proportional hazards model. Subgroup analyses were conducted based on age 
and sex.Bell palsy occurred in 0.6% (262/44,902) of the migraine group and 0.5% 
(903/179,753) of the control group. The adjusted HR of Bell palsy was 1.16 in 
the migraine group compared with the control group [95% confidence interval (95% 
CI) = 1.01-1.33, P = .34]. Among age-related subgroups, participants ≥30 and <60 
years old in the migraine subgroup demonstrated a 1.28-times higher risk of Bell 
palsy than the control group (95% CI = 1.05-1.57, P = .014).Migraine increased 
the risk of Bell palsy in the total population. Among age subgroups, migraine 
patients ≥30 and <60 years old had an increased risk of Bell palsy.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000015764
PMCID: PMC6571209
PMID: 31124964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.