---
reference_id: "PMID:25498144"
title: Mitochondrial ADCK3 employs an atypical protein kinase-like fold to enable coenzyme Q biosynthesis.
authors:
- Stefely JA
- Reidenbach AG
- Ulbrich A
- Oruganty K
- Floyd BJ
- Jochem A
- Saunders JM
- Johnson IE
- Minogue CE
- Wrobel RL
- Barber GE
- Lee D
- Li S
- Kannan N
- Coon JJ
- Bingman CA
- Pagliarini DJ
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.002
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- "Escherichia coli/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- "Mitochondria/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Folding
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Recombinant Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/growth & development, metabolism"
- Sequence Alignment
- "Ubiquinone/biosynthesis, chemistry"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial ADCK3 employs an atypical protein kinase-like fold to enable coenzyme Q biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Stefely JA, Reidenbach AG, Ulbrich A, Oruganty K, Floyd BJ, Jochem A, Saunders JM, Johnson IE, Minogue CE, Wrobel RL, Barber GE, Lee D, Li S, Kannan N, Coon JJ, Bingman CA, Pagliarini DJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.002)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2015 Jan 8;57(1):83-94. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.002. Epub 2014
 Dec 11.

Mitochondrial ADCK3 employs an atypical protein kinase-like fold to enable
coenzyme Q biosynthesis.

Stefely JA(1), Reidenbach AG(1), Ulbrich A(2), Oruganty K(3), Floyd BJ(1),
Jochem A(1), Saunders JM(4), Johnson IE(1), Minogue CE(2), Wrobel RL(4), Barber
GE(1), Lee D(5), Li S(5), Kannan N(3), Coon JJ(6), Bingman CA(7), Pagliarini
DJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(4)Mitochondrial Protein Partnership, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53706, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine and UCSD DXMS Proteomics Resource, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92023, USA.
(6)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA; Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA; Mitochondrial Protein Partnership, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA; Mitochondrial Protein Partnership, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address: pagliarini@wisc.edu.

The ancient UbiB protein kinase-like family is involved in isoprenoid lipid
biosynthesis and is implicated in human diseases, but demonstration of UbiB
kinase activity has remained elusive for unknown reasons. Here, we
quantitatively define UbiB-specific sequence motifs and reveal their positions
within the crystal structure of a UbiB protein, ADCK3. We find that multiple
UbiB-specific features are poised to inhibit protein kinase activity, including
an N-terminal domain that occupies the typical substrate binding pocket and a
unique A-rich loop that limits ATP binding by establishing an unusual
selectivity for ADP. A single alanine-to-glycine mutation of this loop flips
this coenzyme selectivity and enables autophosphorylation but inhibits coenzyme
Q biosynthesis in vivo, demonstrating functional relevance for this unique
feature. Our work provides mechanistic insight into UbiB enzyme activity and
establishes a molecular foundation for further investigation of how UbiB family
proteins affect diseases and diverse biological pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.002
PMCID: PMC4289473
PMID: 25498144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
