---
reference_id: "PMID:31099171"
title: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of osteogenesis imperfecta type V including heterotopic ossification of muscle origins and attachments.
authors:
- Clewemar P
- Hailer NP
- Hailer Y
- Klar J
- Kindmark A
- Ljunggren Ö
- Stattin EL
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.723
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- "Fractures, Bone/etiology"
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Muscles/physiology
- "Ossification, Heterotopic/pathology"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of osteogenesis imperfecta type V including heterotopic ossification of muscle origins and attachments.
**Authors:** Clewemar P, Hailer NP, Hailer Y, Klar J, Kindmark A, Ljunggren Ö, Stattin EL
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.723](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.723)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2019 Jul;7(7):e00723. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.723. Epub 2019
May 16.

Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of osteogenesis imperfecta type V including
heterotopic ossification of muscle origins and attachments.

Clewemar P(1), Hailer NP(2), Hailer Y(2), Klar J(3), Kindmark A(1), Ljunggren
Ö(1), Stattin EL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Surgical Sciences, Section of Orthopaedics, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a clinical and genetic heterogeneous
group of connective tissue disorders, characterized by bone fragility and a
propensity to fracture.
METHODS: In this report we describe the clinical phenotype of two patients, a
28-year-old woman and her mother (54 years old), both with a history of short
stature and multiple fractures.
RESULTS: Exome sequencing revealed the recurring IFITM5:c.-14 C>T variant
causing OI type V. Both patients had several fractures during childhood. CT-scan
and scintigraphy showed ossification of the origin and attachment of muscles and
hypertrophic callus formation.
CONCLUSION: Ossification of the origin and attachment of muscles seems to be
part of the phenotype in patients with OI type V.

© 2019 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.723
PMCID: PMC6625150
PMID: 31099171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest.
