---
reference_id: "PMID:37227206"
title: "[The fact about e-cigarettes and cardiovascular risk]."
authors:
- Spoladore R
- Daus F
- Pezzini S
- Napoli F
- Cante L
- Savonitto S
journal: G Ital Cardiol (Rome)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1714/4041.40206
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [The fact about e-cigarettes and cardiovascular risk].
**Authors:** Spoladore R, Daus F, Pezzini S, Napoli F, Cante L, Savonitto S
**Journal:** G Ital Cardiol (Rome) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1714/4041.40206](https://doi.org/10.1714/4041.40206)

## Content

1. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2023 Jun;24(6):466-474. doi: 10.1714/4041.40206.

[The fact about e-cigarettes and cardiovascular risk].

[Article in Italian]

Spoladore R(1), Daus F(2), Pezzini S(2), Napoli F(2), Cante L(3), Savonitto 
S(4).

Author information:
(1)Divisione di Cardiologia, Ospedale Alessandro Manzoni, Lecco.
(2)Scuola di Specializzazione in Malattie dell'Apparato Cardiovascolare, 
Università degli Studi Milano-Bicocca, Milano.
(3)Unità di Cardiologia, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche Traslazionali, 
Università della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Napoli.
(4)Clinica San Martino, Malgrate (LC).

Electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) are battery-powered devices containing a 
liquid based on propylene glycol or vegetable glycerin. These compounds, when 
vaporized, act as a vehicle for nicotine, flavors, and other chemical 
components. These devices have been marketed without clear evidence of risks, 
long-term safety, and efficacy. Toxicological data show lower plasma 
concentrations of carbon monoxide and other cancer-inducing substances as 
compared to traditional smoking. However, several studies have highlighted an 
increase in sympathetic tone, vascular stiffness, and endothelial dysfunction, 
all factors associated with cardiovascular risk that, however, is largely 
inferior to the cardiovascular risk related to traditional smoking. Recent 
clinical studies have shown how the use of e-cigarettes, combined with adequate 
psychological support, can be effective in reducing traditional smoking but not 
nicotine addiction. New policy directives are focusing on the possibility to ban 
some deleterious products in favor of the use of low-nicotine devices able to 
promote smoking cessation and reducing the risk of addiction, especially in 
young people. The use of e-cigarettes among smokers might be promoted with the 
specific aim of facilitating smoke cessation, but non-smokers and adolescents 
should be warned against using such devices. Finally, particular attention 
should be paid to smokers so that the combined use of electronic and traditional 
cigarettes can be limited as much as possible.

DOI: 10.1714/4041.40206
PMID: 37227206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]