---
reference_id: "PMID:15631686"
title: Inherited cardiomyopathies as a troponin disease.
authors:
- Harada K
- Morimoto S
journal: Jpn J Physiol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.2170/jjphysiol.54.307
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited cardiomyopathies as a troponin disease.
**Authors:** Harada K, Morimoto S
**Journal:** Jpn J Physiol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.2170/jjphysiol.54.307](https://doi.org/10.2170/jjphysiol.54.307)

## Content

1. Jpn J Physiol. 2004 Aug;54(4):307-18. doi: 10.2170/jjphysiol.54.307.

Inherited cardiomyopathies as a troponin disease.

Harada K(1), Morimoto S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Kyushu University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Troponin, one of the sarcomeric proteins, plays a central role in the Ca(2+) 
regulation of contraction in vertebrate skeletal and cardiac muscles. It 
consists of three subunits with distinct structure and function, troponin T, 
troponin I, and troponin C, and their accurate and complex intermolecular 
interaction in response to the rapid rise and fall of Ca(2+) in cardiomyocytes 
plays a key role in maintaining the normal cardiac pump function. More than 200 
mutations in the cardiac sarcomeric proteins, including myosin heavy and light 
chains, actin, troponin, tropomyosin, myosin-binding protein-C, and 
titin/connectin, have been found to cause various types of cardiomyopathy in 
human since 1990, and more than 60 mutations in human cardiac troponin subunits 
have been identified in dilated, hypertrophic, and restrictive forms of 
cardiomyopathy. In this review, we have focused on the mutations in the genes 
for human cardiac troponin subunits and discussed their functional consequences 
that might be involved in the primary mechanisms for the pathogenesis of these 
different types of cardiomyopathy.

DOI: 10.2170/jjphysiol.54.307
PMID: 15631686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]