---
reference_id: "PMID:30441934"
title: Lung cancer.
authors:
- Skřičková J
- Kadlec B
- Venclíček O
- Merta Z
journal: Cas Lek Cesk
year: '2018'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung cancer.
**Authors:** Skřičková J, Kadlec B, Venclíček O, Merta Z
**Journal:** Cas Lek Cesk (2018)

## Content

1. Cas Lek Cesk. 2018 Fall;157(5):226-236.

Lung cancer.

[Article in English]

Skřičková J, Kadlec B, Venclíček O, Merta Z.

Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide. Approximately 85 % of 
lung cancers are non-small cell lung cancers while 15 % are small cell lung 
cancers. Histologically, following subtypes of non-small cell cancer are 
distinguished: adenocarcinoma (38.5 % of all lung cancers), squamous cell 
carcinoma (20 %) and large cell carcinoma (3 %). Over recent years, the 
incidence of adenocarcinoma has been increasing. Squamous cell carcinoma is more 
commonly associated with smoking while adenocarcinoma is the most common 
histological type in non-smokers. The treatment of non-small cell lung cancer is 
decided according to clinical stage, morphological diagnosis, and the 
performance status of the patient. Early-stage patients are typically indicated 
for surgery. In some cases, adjuvant therapy is indicated. In locally advanced 
and metastatic stages, chemotherapy, biological treatment, and, recently, 
immunotherapy is indicated. Radiotherapy should also be considered for locally 
advanced disease. In small-cell lung cancer, the combination of etoposide and 
cisplatin or etoposide and carboplatin is still considered standard 
chemotherapy. Radiotherapy is an integral part of treatment of either type of 
lung cancer. Keywords: lung cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, small cell lung 
cancer, chemotherapy, biological therapy, radiotherapy, immunotherapy.

PMID: 30441934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]