---
reference_id: PMID:33105312
title: Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis of Axial Spondyloarthritis.
authors:
- Walsh JA
- Magrey M
journal: J Clin Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001575
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Quality of Life
- Rheumatologists
- Sacroiliac Joint/diagnostic imaging
- Spine
- "Spondylarthritis/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Spondylitis, Ankylosing"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis of Axial Spondyloarthritis.
**Authors:** Walsh JA, Magrey M
**Journal:** J Clin Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RHU.0000000000001575](https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000001575)

## Content

1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2021 Dec 1;27(8):e547-e560. doi:
10.1097/RHU.0000000000001575.

Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis of Axial Spondyloarthritis.

Walsh JA(1), Magrey M(2).

Author information:
(1)From the University of Utah School of Medicine and Salt Lake City Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT.
(2)The MetroHealth System and School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH.

BACKGROUND: Axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA) is a chronic, rheumatic disease 
characterized by inflammation of the sacroiliac joint, spine, and entheses. 
Axial spondyloarthritis affects up to 1.4% of adults in the United States and is 
associated with decreased quality of life, increased mortality, and substantial 
health care-related costs, imposing a high burden on patients, their caregivers, 
and society.
SUMMARY OF WORK: Diagnosing axSpA can be difficult. In this review, we seek to 
help rheumatologists in recognizing and diagnosing axSpA.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: A discussion of challenges associated with diagnosis is 
presented, including use and interpretation of imaging, reasons for diagnostic 
delays, differences in disease presentation by sex, and differential diagnoses 
of axSpA.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS: The early diagnosis of axSpA and advances in 
available therapeutic options have improved patient care and disease management, 
but delays in diagnosis and treatment remain common. Additional research and 
education are critical for recognizing diverse axSpA presentations and 
optimizing management early in the course of disease.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001575
PMCID: PMC8612900
PMID: 33105312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]