---
reference_id: "PMID:38790635"
title: "Efficacy and Safety of Coenzyme Q10 Supplementation in Neonates, Infants and Children: An Overview."
authors:
- Mantle D
- Hargreaves IP
journal: Antioxidants (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/antiox13050530
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Coenzyme Q10 Supplementation in Neonates, Infants and Children: An Overview.
**Authors:** Mantle D, Hargreaves IP
**Journal:** Antioxidants (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/antiox13050530](https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox13050530)

## Content

1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2024 Apr 26;13(5):530. doi: 10.3390/antiox13050530.

Efficacy and Safety of Coenzyme Q10 Supplementation in Neonates, Infants and 
Children: An Overview.

Mantle D(1), Hargreaves IP(2).

Author information:
(1)Pharma Nord (UK) Ltd., Morpeth, Northumberland NE61 2DB, UK.
(2)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Merseyside L3 5UX, UK.

To date, there have been no review articles specifically relating to the general 
efficacy and safety of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) supplementation in younger subjects. 
In this article, we therefore reviewed the efficacy and safety of CoQ10 
supplementation in neonates (less than 1 month of age), infants (up to 1 year of 
age) and children (up to 12 years of age). As there is no rationale for the 
supplementation of CoQ10 in normal younger subjects (as there is in otherwise 
healthy older subjects), all of the articles in the medical literature reviewed 
in the present article therefore refer to the supplementation of CoQ10 in 
younger subjects with a variety of clinical disorders; these include primary 
CoQ10 deficiency, acyl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy, migraine, Down syndrome, ADHD, idiopathic cardiomyopathy and 
Friedreich's ataxia.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox13050530
PMCID: PMC11117623
PMID: 38790635

Conflict of interest statement: Mantle is a medical adviser to Pharma Nord (UK) 
Ltd.