---
reference_id: "PMID:31960900"
title: "Imaging Findings of Ileal Inflammation at Computed Tomography and Magnetic Resonance Enterography: What do They Mean When Ileoscopy and Biopsy are Negative?"
authors:
- Nehra AK
- Sheedy SP
- Wells ML
- VanBuren WM
- Hansel SL
- Deepak P
- Lee YS
- Bruining DH
- Fletcher JG
journal: J Crohns Colitis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjz122
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging Findings of Ileal Inflammation at Computed Tomography and Magnetic Resonance Enterography: What do They Mean When Ileoscopy and Biopsy are Negative?
**Authors:** Nehra AK, Sheedy SP, Wells ML, VanBuren WM, Hansel SL, Deepak P, Lee YS, Bruining DH, Fletcher JG
**Journal:** J Crohns Colitis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjz122](https://doi.org/10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjz122)

## Content

1. J Crohns Colitis. 2020 May 21;14(4):455-464. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjz122.

Imaging Findings of Ileal Inflammation at Computed Tomography and Magnetic 
Resonance Enterography: What do They Mean When Ileoscopy and Biopsy are 
Negative?

Nehra AK(1), Sheedy SP(1), Wells ML(1), VanBuren WM(1), Hansel SL(2), Deepak 
P(2)(3), Lee YS(1), Bruining DH(2), Fletcher JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Abdominal Imaging, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Our goal was to determine the importance of ileal 
inflammation at computed tomography or magnetic resonance enterography in 
Crohn's disease patients with normal ileoscopy.
METHODS: Patients with negative ileoscopy and biopsy within 30 days of CT or MR 
enterography showing ileal inflammation were included. The severity [0-3 scale] 
and length of inflammation within the distal 20 cm of the terminal ileum were 
assessed on enterography. Subsequent medical records were reviewed for ensuing 
surgery, ulceration at ileoscopy, histological inflammation, or new or worsening 
ileal inflammation or stricture on enterography. Imaging findings were 
classified as: Confirmed Progression [subsequent surgery or radiological 
worsening, new ulcers at ileoscopy or positive histology]; Radiologic Response 
[decreased inflammation with medical therapy]; or Unlikely/Unconfirmed 
Inflammation.
RESULTS: Of 1471 patients undergoing enterography and ileoscopy, 112 [8%] had 
imaging findings of inflammation with negative ileoscopy, and 88 [6%] had 
negative ileoscopy and ileal biopsy. Half [50%; 44/88] with negative biopsy had 
moderate/severe inflammation at enterography, with 45%, 32% and 11% having 
proximal small bowel inflammation, stricture or fistulas, respectively. 
Two-thirds with negative biopsy [67%; 59/88] had Confirmed Progression, with 
68%, 70% and 61% having subsequent surgical resection, radiological worsening or 
ulcers at subsequent ileoscopy, respectively. Mean length and severity of ileal 
inflammation in these patients was 10 cm and 1.6. Thirteen [15%] patients had 
Radiologic Response, and 16 [18%] had Unlikely/Unconfirmed Inflammation.
CONCLUSION: Crohn's disease patients with unequivocal imaging findings of ileal 
inflammation at enterography despite negative ileoscopy and biopsy are likely to 
have active inflammatory Crohn's disease. Disease detected by imaging may worsen 
over time or respond to medical therapy.

Copyright © 2020 European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation (ECCO). Published by 
Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjz122
PMID: 31960900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]