---
reference_id: "PMID:22983590"
title: Pulmonary hypertension in POEMS syndrome.
authors:
- Li J
- Tian Z
- Zheng HY
- Zhang W
- Duan MH
- Liu YT
- Cao XX
- Zhou DB
journal: Haematologica
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.073031
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "POEMS Syndrome/diagnosis, mortality, physiopathology, therapy"
- Respiratory Function Tests
- Treatment Outcome
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary hypertension in POEMS syndrome.
**Authors:** Li J, Tian Z, Zheng HY, Zhang W, Duan MH, Liu YT, Cao XX, Zhou DB
**Journal:** Haematologica (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2012.073031](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2012.073031)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2013 Mar;98(3):393-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.073031. Epub 
2012 Sep 14.

Pulmonary hypertension in POEMS syndrome.

Li J(1), Tian Z, Zheng HY, Zhang W, Duan MH, Liu YT, Cao XX, Zhou DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China.

POEMS syndrome is a rare clonal plasma cell disease. Patients with POEMS 
syndrome are at risk of developing pulmonary hypertension, but the data on its 
incidence and impact on outcome are limited. We reviewed records of 154 POEMS 
syndrome patients with complete duplex echocardiography data for estimation of 
pulmonary artery systolic pressure (sPAP) at the time of diagnosis. Forty-two 
(27%) of 154 patients with pulmonary hypertension (estimated sPAP ≥50 mmHg) were 
identified. Median age was 46 years (range 31-71 years). Patients with pulmonary 
hypertension were more likely to have peripheral edema (P=0.04), ascites 
(P=0.02), pleural effusion (P=0.005), and have longer time from onset to 
diagnosis (P=0.004) when compared with those without pulmonary hypertension. 
Restrictive abnormalities and decreased diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide 
were observed in 83% and 96% patients with pulmonary hypertension, compared with 
50% and 72% in patients without pulmonary hypertension, respectively. 
Reversibility of pulmonary hypertension was observed after treatment of POEMS 
syndrome. After median follow of 32 months, survival of patients with pulmonary 
hypertension was worse than those without (median overall survival 54 months vs. 
median not reached, P=0.021). In conclusion, pulmonary hypertension is a common 
feature of POEMS syndrome, and is associated with signs of extravascular volume 
overload. Although active treatment of POEMS syndrome can reverse pulmonary 
hypertension, survival of these patients is worse than those without pulmonary 
hypertension.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2012.073031
PMCID: PMC3659947
PMID: 22983590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]