---
reference_id: "PMID:38646743"
title: "Mechanisms of ischaemia-induced arrhythmias in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a large-scale computational study."
authors:
- Coleman JA
- Doste R
- Ashkir Z
- Coppini R
- Sachetto R
- Watkins H
- Raman B
- Bueno-Orovio A
journal: Cardiovasc Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvae086
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of ischaemia-induced arrhythmias in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a large-scale computational study.
**Authors:** Coleman JA, Doste R, Ashkir Z, Coppini R, Sachetto R, Watkins H, Raman B, Bueno-Orovio A
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cvr/cvae086](https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvae086)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Res. 2024 Jul 2;120(8):914-926. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvae086.

Mechanisms of ischaemia-induced arrhythmias in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a 
large-scale computational study.

Coleman JA(1), Doste R(1), Ashkir Z(2), Coppini R(3), Sachetto R(4), Watkins 
H(5), Raman B(2), Bueno-Orovio A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Oxford Centre for Clinical Magnetic Resonance Research (OCMR), Radcliffe 
Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Department of NeuroFarBa, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Federal University of São João del-Rei, São 
João del-Rei, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(5)Radcliffe Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

AIMS: Lethal arrhythmias in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) are widely 
attributed to myocardial ischaemia and fibrosis. How these factors modulate 
arrhythmic risk remains largely unknown, especially as invasive mapping 
protocols are not routinely used in these patients. By leveraging multiscale 
digital twin technologies, we aim to investigate ischaemic mechanisms of 
increased arrhythmic risk in HCM.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Computational models of human HCM cardiomyocytes, tissue, 
and ventricles were used to simulate outcomes of Phase 1A acute myocardial 
ischaemia. Cellular response predictions were validated with patch-clamp studies 
of human HCM cardiomyocytes (n = 12 cells, N = 5 patients). Ventricular 
simulations were informed by typical distributions of subendocardial/transmural 
ischaemia as analysed in perfusion scans (N = 28 patients). S1-S2 pacing 
protocols were used to quantify arrhythmic risk for scenarios in which regions 
of septal obstructive hypertrophy were affected by (i) ischaemia, (ii) ischaemia 
and impaired repolarization, and (iii) ischaemia, impaired repolarization, and 
diffuse fibrosis. HCM cardiomyocytes exhibited enhanced action potential and 
abnormal effective refractory period shortening to ischaemic insults. Analysis 
of ∼75 000 re-entry induction cases revealed that the abnormal HCM cellular 
response enabled establishment of arrhythmia at milder ischaemia than otherwise 
possible in healthy myocardium, due to larger refractoriness gradients that 
promoted conduction block. Arrhythmias were more easily sustained in transmural 
than subendocardial ischaemia. Mechanisms of ischaemia-fibrosis interaction were 
strongly electrophysiology dependent. Fibrosis enabled asymmetric re-entry 
patterns and break-up into sustained ventricular tachycardia.
CONCLUSION: HCM ventricles exhibited an increased risk to non-sustained and 
sustained re-entry, largely dominated by an impaired cellular response and 
deleterious interactions with the diffuse fibrotic substrate.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvae086
PMCID: PMC11218689
PMID: 38646743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none declared.