---
reference_id: "PMID:30082241"
title: "Jeavons Syndrome: Clinical Features and Response to Treatment."
authors:
- Smith KM
- Youssef PE
- Wirrell EC
- Nickels KC
- Payne ET
- Britton JW
- Shin C
- Cascino GD
- Patterson MC
- Wong-Kisiel LC
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2018.06.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Jeavons Syndrome: Clinical Features and Response to Treatment.
**Authors:** Smith KM, Youssef PE, Wirrell EC, Nickels KC, Payne ET, Britton JW, Shin C, Cascino GD, Patterson MC, Wong-Kisiel LC
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2018.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2018.06.001)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2018 Sep;86:46-51. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2018.06.001. 
Epub 2018 Jul 10.

Jeavons Syndrome: Clinical Features and Response to Treatment.

Smith KM(1), Youssef PE(1), Wirrell EC(1), Nickels KC(1), Payne ET(1), Britton 
JW(1), Shin C(1), Cascino GD(1), Patterson MC(1), Wong-Kisiel LC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. Electronic 
address: wongkisiel.lily@mayo.edu.

Comment in
    Pediatr Neurol. 2019 Apr;93:63. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2018.12.016.

BACKGROUND: Jeavons syndrome is an underreported epileptic syndrome 
characterized by eyelid myoclonia, eyelid closure-induced seizures or 
electroencephalography paroxysms, and photosensitivity. Drug-resistant epilepsy 
is common, but the prognostic factors and clinical course leading to drug 
resistance have not been well characterized.
METHODS: We identified 30 patients who met the diagnostic criteria of Jeavons 
syndrome at a single institution between January 1, 2000 and December 15, 2016. 
Criteria for Jeavons syndrome included all of the following: (1) eyelid 
myoclonia with or without absences, (2) eye-closure-induced seizures or 
electroencephalography paroxysms, and (3) seizure onset after 12 months of age. 
We reviewed and described the epilepsy history, antiepileptic drug trials, and 
response to treatments.
RESULTS: Mean age at seizure onset was 7.3 years, and 80% were female. Absence 
seizures (63%) and generalized tonic-clonic seizures (23%) were most common at 
onset. Diagnosis was delayed by an average of 9.6 years. After a median 
follow-up of two years, 80% of patients had drug resistant epilepsy and 70% 
experienced generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures 
and seizure types other than absence seizures increased the risk of 
drug-resistant epilepsy (P values 0.049 and 0.03, respectively). Valproic acid, 
lamotrigine, ethosuximide, and levetiracetam were the most effective in reducing 
seizures by more than 50%.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of Jeavons syndrome is often delayed. Generalized 
tonic-clonic seizures and seizure types other than absence seizures may be 
predictors of drug-resistant epilepsy among patients with Jeavons syndrome.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2018.06.001
PMID: 30082241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]