---
reference_id: "PMID:36660027"
title: "SLC26A2/DTDST Spectrum: A Cohort of 12 Patients Associated with a Comprehensive Review of the Genotype-Phenotype Correlation."
authors:
- Silveira C
- da Costa Silveira K
- Lacarrubba-Flores MD
- Sakata MT
- Carbognani SN
- Llerena J Jr
- Moreno CA
- Cavalcanti DP
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000525020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLC26A2/DTDST Spectrum: A Cohort of 12 Patients Associated with a Comprehensive Review of the Genotype-Phenotype Correlation.
**Authors:** Silveira C, da Costa Silveira K, Lacarrubba-Flores MD, Sakata MT, Carbognani SN, Llerena J Jr, Moreno CA, Cavalcanti DP
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000525020](https://doi.org/10.1159/000525020)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2023 Jan;13(6):485-495. doi: 10.1159/000525020. Epub 2022 Jun
15.

SLC26A2/DTDST Spectrum: A Cohort of 12 Patients Associated with a Comprehensive 
Review of the Genotype-Phenotype Correlation.

Silveira C(1), da Costa Silveira K(1), Lacarrubba-Flores MD(1), Sakata MT(1), 
Carbognani SN(2), Llerena J Jr(3)(4), Moreno CA(5), Cavalcanti DP(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Skeletal Dysplasia Group, Department of Translational Medicine, Faculty of 
Medical Sciences, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil.
(2)Maternidad Oroño, Rosario, Argentina.
(3)Centro de Genética Médica & Centro de Referência para Doenças Raras, 
IFF/Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)INAGEMP, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(5)Perinatal Genetic Program, Department of Translational Medicine, University 
of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Pathogenic variants in the SLC26A2/DTDST gene cause the following 
spectrum of phenotypes: achondrogenesis 1B (ACG1B), atelosteogenesis 2 (AO2), 
diastrophic dysplasia (DTD), and recessive-multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (rMED), 
the first 2 being lethal. Here, we report a cohort and a comprehensive 
literature review on a genotype-phenotype correlation of SLC26A2/DTDST-related 
disorders.
METHODS: The local patients were genotyped by Sanger sequencing or 
next-generation sequencing (NGS). We reviewed data from the literature regarding 
phenotype, zygosity, and genotype in parallel.
RESULTS: The local cohort enrolled 12 patients, including one with a 
Desbuquois-like phenotype. All but one showed biallelic mutations, however, only 
one allele mutated in a fetus presenting ACG1B was identified. The literature 
review identified 42 articles and the analyses of genotype and zygosity included 
the 12 local patients.
DISCUSSION: The R279W variant was the most prevalent among the local patients. 
It was in homozygosity (hmz) in 2 patients with rMED and in compound 
heterozygosity (chtz) in 9 patients. The genotype and zygosity review of all 
patients led to the following conclusions: DTD is the most common phenotype in 
Finland due to a Finnish mutation (c.727-1G>C). Outside of Finland, rMED is the 
most prevalent phenotype, usually associated with R279W in hmz. In contrast, 
DTD's genotype is usually in chtz. Despite a large number of variants (38), just 
8 are recurrent (R279W, C653S, c.-26+2T>C, R178*, K575Sfs*10, V340del, G663R, 
T512K). The last 3 in hmz lead to lethal phenotypes. The Finnish mutation is 
found only in chtz outside of Finland, being associated with all 4 classical 
phenotypes. The p.R178* and p.K575Sfs*10 variants should be viewed as lethal 
mutations since both were mainly described with lethal phenotypes and were never 
reported in hmz. The existence of 9 patients with only one mutated allele 
suggests that other mutations in the other allele of these patients still need 
to be unveiled.

Copyright © 2022 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000525020
PMCID: PMC9843583
PMID: 36660027

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.