---
reference_id: "PMID:37703595"
title: Genomic characterization of thymic epithelial tumors in a real-world dataset.
authors:
- Kurokawa K
- Shukuya T
- Greenstein RA
- Kaplan BG
- Wakelee H
- Ross JS
- Miura K
- Furuta K
- Kato S
- Suh J
- Sivakumar S
- Sokol ES
- Carbone DP
- Takahashi K
journal: ESMO Open
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101627
keywords:
- Humans
- "Thymoma/genetics, pathology"
- "Thymus Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Neoplasms, Glandular and Epithelial/genetics"
- Genomics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic characterization of thymic epithelial tumors in a real-world dataset.
**Authors:** Kurokawa K, Shukuya T, Greenstein RA, Kaplan BG, Wakelee H, Ross JS, Miura K, Furuta K, Kato S, Suh J, Sivakumar S, Sokol ES, Carbone DP, Takahashi K
**Journal:** ESMO Open (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101627](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101627)

## Content

1. ESMO Open. 2023 Oct;8(5):101627. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101627. Epub 2023 
Sep 12.

Genomic characterization of thymic epithelial tumors in a real-world dataset.

Kurokawa K(1), Shukuya T(2), Greenstein RA(3), Kaplan BG(3), Wakelee H(4), Ross 
JS(5), Miura K(1), Furuta K(6), Kato S(7), Suh J(8), Sivakumar S(3), Sokol 
ES(3), Carbone DP(9), Takahashi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine 
and Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine 
and Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: 
tshukuya@juntendo.ac.jp.
(3)Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Oncology, Stanford University, Stanford, 
USA.
(5)Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, USA; Departments of Pathology and 
Urology, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, USA.
(6)Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine and 
Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Genentech, South San Francisco, USA.
(9)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Medical Oncology, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, USA.

BACKGROUND: Thymic epithelial tumors (TETs) are rare neoplasms arising in the 
mediastinum, including thymic carcinomas and thymomas. Due to their rarity, 
little is known about the genomic profiles of TETs. Herein, we investigated the 
genomic characteristics of TETs evaluated in a large comprehensive genomic 
profiling database in a real-world setting.
METHODS: We included data from two different cohorts: Foundation Medicine Inc. 
(FMI) in the United States and the Center for Cancer Genomics and Advanced 
Therapeutics (C-CAT) in Japan. Samples profiled were examined for all classes of 
alterations in 253 genes targeted across all assays. Tumor mutational burden 
(TMB) and microsatellite instability (MSI) were also evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 794 patients were collected in our study, including 722 
cases from FMI and 72 cases from C-CAT. In the FMI data, CDKN2A (39.9%), TP53 
(30.2%) and CDKN2B (24.6%) were frequently altered in thymic carcinoma, versus 
TP53 (7.8%), DNMT3A (6.8%), and CDKN2A (5.8%) in thymoma. TMB-high (≥10 
mutations/Mb) and MSI were present in 7.0% and 2.3% of thymic carcinomas, and 
1.6% and 0.3% of thymomas, respectively. Within C-CAT data, CDKN2A (38.5%), TP53 
(36.5%) and CDKN2B (30.8%) were also frequently altered in thymic carcinoma, 
while alterations of TSC1, SETD2 and LTK (20.0% each) were found in thymoma.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest cohort in which 
genomic alterations, TMB and MSI status of TETs were investigated. Potential 
targets for treatment previously unbeknownst in TETs are identified in this 
study, entailing newfound opportunities to advance therapeutic development.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.101627
PMCID: PMC10594028
PMID: 37703595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]