---
reference_id: "PMID:33577706"
title: "Speech and language difficulties in Huntington's disease: A qualitative study of patients' and professional caregivers' experiences."
authors:
- Grimstvedt TN
- Miller JU
- van Walsem MR
- Feragen KJB
journal: Int J Lang Commun Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/1460-6984.12604
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Speech and language difficulties in Huntington's disease: A qualitative study of patients' and professional caregivers' experiences.
**Authors:** Grimstvedt TN, Miller JU, van Walsem MR, Feragen KJB
**Journal:** Int J Lang Commun Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1460-6984.12604](https://doi.org/10.1111/1460-6984.12604)

## Content

1. Int J Lang Commun Disord. 2021 Mar;56(2):330-345. doi:
10.1111/1460-6984.12604.  Epub 2021 Feb 12.

Speech and language difficulties in Huntington's disease: A qualitative study of 
patients' and professional caregivers' experiences.

Grimstvedt TN(1), Miller JU(2), van Walsem MR(3)(4)(5), Feragen KJB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Special Needs Education, Faculty of Educational Sciences, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Centre for Rare Disorders, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Neurohabilitation, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Centre for Habilitation and Rehabilitation Models and Services, Institute for 
Health and Society, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disease 
characterized by a triad of motor, cognitive and psychological symptoms, leading 
to a gradual breakdown of communication skills. Few studies have investigated 
how people affected by HD and their professional caregivers, for example, 
medical doctors, physiotherapists and nurses, experience the patients' gradual 
loss of speech and language.
AIMS: To examine communication-related experiences of patients and professional 
caregivers. Experiences with speech therapy and the use of augmentative and 
alternative communication aids (AAC) were also investigated.
METHODS & PROCEDURES: Seven individuals with HD and seven professional 
caregivers were interviewed individually, using a semi-structured interview 
guide. Transcripts were analysed using a conventional content analysis, and the 
results presented in three main categories.
OUTCOMES & RESULTS: Most individuals with HD were aware of having communication 
difficulties, struggling with understanding others as well as being understood. 
This was confirmed by professional caregivers, who also raised ethical issues 
encountered when patients struggled with communication. Both groups talked about 
external factors (such as noise or crowded social settings) as disrupting 
communication, and shared recommendations on how people in general, and speech 
and language therapists (SLTs) in particular, could optimize communication. Very 
few patients had received information about communication aids, and none was 
using AACs. Professional caregivers underlined the importance of 
interdisciplinary collaborations, including SLTs, in order to optimize care.
CONCLUSIONS & IMPLICATIONS: Findings shed a light on everyday communication 
challenges faced by people with HD and their professional caregivers, and the 
lack of implementation of communication aids in this group. The dramatic impact 
of HD on patients' communication skills underscores the need to include SLTs in 
the follow-up of this patient group, ideally from the early stages of the 
disease, while the patient is still capable of voicing his/her own wishes and 
thoughts. Future research that explores how to optimize communication and 
implement the use of AACs for individuals with HD is needed. What this paper 
adds What is already known on this subject Although the ability to communicate 
gradually deteriorates in individuals affected by Huntington's disease (HD), 
there is little knowledge about how affected individuals experience the loss of 
speech and language skills. Interdisciplinary care is recognised as essential 
for this patient group. However, professional caregivers' thoughts and 
experiences of communicating with their patients have not been fully explored. 
Recent years have seen a rapid growth of available communication supporting 
technologies that could potentially be helpful for individuals with HD, but 
limited attention has been given to this subject. What this paper adds to 
existing knowledge What do we now know as a result of this study that we did not 
know before the results highlight that patients are aware of problems with 
speech and language even in early phases of the disease, and include patients' 
personal outlook on problems with communication. Professional caregivers raised 
ethical issues encountered when patients struggled with communication. Both 
groups described specific strategies that could facilitate communication. There 
was a significant lack of experience and knowledge about augmentative and 
alternative communication aids (AACs). What are the potential or actual clinical 
implications of this work? Clinical implications of this study. The introduction 
of communication aids in the follow-up of patients with HD needs to be discussed 
with the patients in the early phases of the disease, and implemented while the 
individual still has the capacity to learn and take advantage of alternative 
communication support. Results underline the importance of including speech and 
language therapists (SLTs) into multidisciplinary care of patients with HD. SLTs 
should be available also for professional caregivers who need advice on how to 
facilitate conversations and social interactions, in order to optimise care of 
patients with HD.

© 2021 The Authors. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders 
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Royal College of Speech and 
Language Therapists.

DOI: 10.1111/1460-6984.12604
PMID: 33577706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]