---
reference_id: "PMID:36577167"
title: A SERS based clinical study on HIV-1 viral load quantification and determination of disease prognosis.
authors:
- Yadav S
- Senapati S
- Kulkarni SS
- Singh JP
journal: J Photochem Photobiol B
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2022.112629
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A SERS based clinical study on HIV-1 viral load quantification and determination of disease prognosis.
**Authors:** Yadav S, Senapati S, Kulkarni SS, Singh JP
**Journal:** J Photochem Photobiol B (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2022.112629](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2022.112629)

## Content

1. J Photochem Photobiol B. 2023 Feb;239:112629. doi: 
10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2022.112629. Epub 2022 Dec 15.

A SERS based clinical study on HIV-1 viral load quantification and determination 
of disease prognosis.

Yadav S(1), Senapati S(2), Kulkarni SS(3), Singh JP(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New 
Delhi 110016, India.
(2)School of Interdisciplinary Research (SIRe), Indian Institute of Technology 
Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016, India. Electronic address: 
Sneha.Senapati@sire.iitd.ac.in.
(3)Division of Virology, ICMR-National AIDS Research Institute, Bhosari, Pune 
413404, India. Electronic address: skulkarni@nariindia.org.
(4)Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New 
Delhi 110016, India. Electronic address: jpsingh@physics.iitd.ac.in.

In resource limited settings, a cost-effective point-of-care diagnostic testing 
possessing the characteristics of detecting the minimum viral load of a malady 
like human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) acquired immune deficiency syndrome 
(AIDS) is a pressing priority. The present work describes a novel, rapid and 
field-deployable method using surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) for 
detection and prognosis of HIV positive clinical samples, in seven different 
viral load ranges varying between 200 and 1 million copies/ml. A relationship 
between the increasing and decreasing intensity peaks of HIV-1 was also 
established for quantitation efficacy of the handheld tool. Three different 
types of SERS substrates: single arm Ag nanorods, double arm Ag nanorods and Au 
sputtered single arm Ag nanorods were used and the obtained data was compared 
for the three substrates. It was demonstrated that maximum enhancement was 
obtained for Au sputtered Ag nanorods. Rigorous coupled wave analysis (RCWA) 
simulations were performed to study the 'hotspots' in three different SERS 
substrates. Further, to explore the utility of our platform and to differentiate 
between the clade specific X4 and R5 tropism, their corresponding SERS spectra 
were studied using HIV-1 strains belonging to four different HIV-1 subtypes (A, 
B, C and D) which showed a clear distinction, implying the usefulness of the 
platform in understanding the disease prognosis. Statistical analysis of the 
obtained SERS spectra using principal component analysis (PCA) showed good 
agreement with the experimental results, confirming the ability of SERS platform 
to quantitate HIV-1 viral load and distinguish HIV-1 strains on the basis of 
their SERS spectra.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2022.112629
PMID: 36577167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interests. The funders had no role in the design of the 
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of 
the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results