---
reference_id: "PMID:30612145"
title: Incidence and timing of recurrence of optic neuritis.
authors:
- Park KA
- Oh SY
- Min JH
- Kim BJ
journal: Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00417-018-04217-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Incidence
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Optic Disk/pathology
- "Optic Neuritis/epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Recurrence
- Republic of Korea/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Slit Lamp Microscopy
- Time Factors
- Visual Acuity
- Visual Field Tests
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and timing of recurrence of optic neuritis.
**Authors:** Park KA, Oh SY, Min JH, Kim BJ
**Journal:** Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00417-018-04217-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00417-018-04217-7)

## Content

1. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2019 Mar;257(3):651-655. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-018-04217-7. Epub 2019 Jan 5.

Incidence and timing of recurrence of optic neuritis.

Park KA(1), Oh SY(2), Min JH(3), Kim BJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Ilwon-dong, Kangnam-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Ilwon-dong, Kangnam-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
syoh@skku.edu.
(3)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: To describe the incidence and timing of recurrence in patients with 
optic neuritis (ON).
METHODS: Medical documents of adult patients with ON were retrospectively 
reviewed. The incidence and timing of recurrence of an ON episode were analyzed.
RESULTS: One hundred eleven patients with ON were included in this study. Their 
mean follow-up duration was 4.1 ± 3.1 years. Seven relapses occurred after 
intravenous methylprednisolone treatment. The estimated cumulative incidence of 
recurrence in either eye was 26% at 1 year, 33% at 3 years, 37% at 5 years, and 
50% at 10 years after the first episode of ON. If there was no recurrence until 
6 months after the first episode of ON, the next 5-year recurrence-free survival 
probability was 67%. If there was no recurrence until 1 year, the next 5-year 
survival probability was 72%. If there was no recurrence until 2 years, the next 
5-year survival probability was 81%. Relapse within 1 month and the presence of 
neuromyelitis optica-immunoglobulin G were factors that increased the recurrence 
rate over time.
CONCLUSIONS: We evaluated the incidence and timing of the recurrence in patients 
with ON after the first episode. Lower probability of recurrence was observed in 
patients with longer recurrence-free follow-up period. However, monitoring for 
recurrence is needed even in patients with a single episode of ON due to the 
increasing tendency of the estimated cumulative incidence of recurrence over 
many years.

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-018-04217-7
PMID: 30612145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]