---
reference_id: "PMID:39123144"
title: "Repeated complete atrioventricular block during remifentanil administration in a pediatric patient with brain tumor and acute hydrocephalus: a case report."
authors:
- Ura A
- Fujii K
- Tanioku T
- Kawamata T
journal: BMC Anesthesiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12871-024-02593-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Remifentanil/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Child
- Atrioventricular Block/chemically induced
- Hydrocephalus/surgery
- Brain Neoplasms/surgery
- "Anesthesia, General/methods, adverse effects"
- "Piperidines/adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- "Analgesics, Opioid/adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- "Anesthetics, Intravenous/adverse effects, administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repeated complete atrioventricular block during remifentanil administration in a pediatric patient with brain tumor and acute hydrocephalus: a case report.
**Authors:** Ura A, Fujii K, Tanioku T, Kawamata T
**Journal:** BMC Anesthesiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12871-024-02593-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12871-024-02593-8)

## Content

1. BMC Anesthesiol. 2024 Aug 9;24(1):279. doi: 10.1186/s12871-024-02593-8.

Repeated complete atrioventricular block during remifentanil administration in a 
pediatric patient with brain tumor and acute hydrocephalus: a case report.

Ura A(1), Fujii K(2), Tanioku T(2), Kawamata T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1, Kimiidera, 
Wakayama-shi, Wakayama, 641-0012, Japan. ura-waka@wakayama-med.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1, Kimiidera, 
Wakayama-shi, Wakayama, 641-0012, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Remifentanil, an ultra-short-acting µ-opioid receptor agonist, is 
commonly used for anesthetic management due to excellent adjustability. 
Remifentanil is known to cause sinus bradycardia, however, because it has a 
direct negative chronotropic effect on the cardiac conduction system and there 
is an indirect negative chronotropic effect via the parasympathetic nervous 
system.
CASE PRESENTATION: An 8-year-old Japanese boy was diagnosed with acute 
hydrocephalus due to a brain tumor in the fourth ventricle and underwent 
emergency surgery. Imaging examination showed brainstem compression. Endoscopic 
third ventriculostomy and ventriculoperitoneal shunt surgery were scheduled. 
Remifentanil was started during induction of general anesthesia, but 
electrocardiogram showed sinus bradycardia, then Wenckebach-type 
atrioventricular block, and then complete atrioventricular block. Remifentanil 
was immediately discontinued, and we administered atropine sulfate. Complete 
atrioventricular block was restored to sinus rhythm. When remifentanil was 
restarted, however, the electrocardiogram again showed sinus bradycardia, 
Wenckebach-type atrioventricular block, and then complete atrioventricular 
block. Remifentanil was again immediately discontinued, we administered 
adrenaline, and then complete atrioventricular block was restored to sinus 
rhythm. Fentanyl was used instead of remifentanil with continuous infusion of 
dopamine. There has since been no further occurrence of complete 
atrioventricular block.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first known case of complete atrioventricular block in 
a pediatric patient with increased intracranial pressure seemingly caused by 
administration of remifentanil.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12871-024-02593-8
PMCID: PMC11311887
PMID: 39123144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors declare no 
competing interests.