---
reference_id: "PMID:33085290"
title: Rectal Bleeding.
authors:
- Sabry AO
- Goosenberg E
- Dsouza R
- Sood T
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rectal Bleeding.
**Authors:** Sabry AO, Goosenberg E, Dsouza R, Sood T

## Content

1. Rectal Bleeding.

Sabry AO(1), Goosenberg E(2), Dsouza R(3), Sood T(4).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2026 Apr 12.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University
(2)Temple University School of Medicine
(3)ASHWINI, Gudalur Adivasi Hospital
(4)Washington Hospital Center

Rectal bleeding is a frequently encountered problem in outpatient and emergency 
medical settings. In the United States, the incidence of lower gastrointestinal 
(GI) bleeding ranges from 20.5 to 27 per 100,000 persons per year, with more 
than a 200-fold increase from the third to the ninth decade of life. Rectal 
bleeding most commonly results from anorectal causes that are benign and often 
self-limiting. However, rectal bleeding can also be due to pathology in the 
colon or, rarely, from the proximal gastrointestinal tract. Due to its 
nonspecific nature, results from reports indicated that less than half of 
patients with rectal bleeding will ever seek medical help for their symptoms.  
Hematochezia is the passage of frank blood per rectum, with or without stools. 
Although benign anorectal causes such as hemorrhoids and anal fissures qualify 
as hematochezia, clinicians often reserve the term for bleeding from more 
concerning etiologies such as colorectal cancers, diverticular or inflammatory 
disorders, or vascular ectasias. Anorectal causes may appear as red blood 
separate from the stool, streaking the stool, or appearing on the toilet paper 
after wiping. More proximal causes of lower GI bleeding present as bright red or 
maroon blood mixed with stools. Severe upper GI bleeds may present with brisk 
passage of a large volume of fresh or altered blood per rectum. Although most 
episodes reflect benign anorectal disorders, clinicians must be vigilant to 
exclude serious causes.  Rectal bleeding has a low positive predictive value for 
diagnosing colorectal cancers since only about 7% of patients have rectal 
bleeding as the only symptom. However, when rectal bleeding is associated with 
other high-risk features such as older age, weight loss, altered bowel habits, 
and severe anemia, its diagnostic accuracy improves significantly. Therefore, 
colorectal cancer must always be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
hematochezia in patients with risk factors and red flag symptoms. Due to the 
rise in incidence of colorectal cancers in younger patients, which is often 
associated with aggressive biology and a substantial increase in mortality, it 
must be ruled out in younger age groups as well. The following review will 
discuss rectal bleeding, with a greater focus on anorectal causes, as these 
are the most common causes.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 33085290

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Ahmed Sabry declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Eric Goosenberg 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Royson Dsouza declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies. Disclosure: Tanuj Sood declares no relevant financial 
relationships with ineligible companies.