---
reference_id: "PMID:39497173"
title: Evolution of treatment strategies for solid tumors with RET rearrangement in China and real-world treatment status of Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC).
authors:
- Wang A
- Li T
- Mao YY
- Gao M
- Shu S
- Xia CH
- Dong Y
- Liu M
- Wang JL
- Ma JX
- Hu Y
journal: BMC Pulm Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12890-024-03371-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, drug therapy"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy"
- China
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Gene Rearrangement
- Aged
- Adult
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Pyrazoles
- Pyridines
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolution of treatment strategies for solid tumors with RET rearrangement in China and real-world treatment status of Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC).
**Authors:** Wang A, Li T, Mao YY, Gao M, Shu S, Xia CH, Dong Y, Liu M, Wang JL, Ma JX, Hu Y
**Journal:** BMC Pulm Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12890-024-03371-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12890-024-03371-5)

## Content

1. BMC Pulm Med. 2024 Nov 4;24(1):552. doi: 10.1186/s12890-024-03371-5.

Evolution of treatment strategies for solid tumors with RET rearrangement in
China and real-world treatment status of Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC).

Wang A(#)(1)(2), Li T(#)(1)(2)(3), Mao YY(#)(1)(2), Gao M(1)(2), Shu S(1)(2),
Xia CH(2)(4), Dong Y(1)(2), Liu M(2)(5), Wang JL(6)(7), Ma JX(8)(9), Hu
Y(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, the First Medical Center of PLA General Hospital,
(Chinese PLA Key Laboratory of Oncology, Key Laboratory for Tumor Targeting
Therapy and Antibody Drugs (Ministry of Education, China)), Beijing, 100853,
China.
(2)Graduate School, Chinese PLA General Hospital/Medical School of Chinese PLA,
Beijing, 100853, China.
(3)Department of Stomatology, The First Medical Center of PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, 100853, China.
(4)Department of Medical Ultrasonics, The Second Medical Center of PLA General
Hospital, Beijing, 100853, China.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Medical Supplies Center, the First Medical Center of
PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 100853, China.
(6)Graduate School, Chinese PLA General Hospital/Medical School of Chinese PLA,
Beijing, 100853, China. wangjinliang301@163.com.
(7)Department of Oncology, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, 100853, China. wangjinliang301@163.com.
(8)Graduate School, Chinese PLA General Hospital/Medical School of Chinese PLA,
Beijing, 100853, China. majunxun74@126.com.
(9)Department of Oncology, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, 100853, China. majunxun74@126.com.
(10)Department of Oncology, the First Medical Center of PLA General Hospital,
(Chinese PLA Key Laboratory of Oncology, Key Laboratory for Tumor Targeting
Therapy and Antibody Drugs (Ministry of Education, China)), Beijing, 100853,
China. huyi301zlxb@sina.com.
(11)Graduate School, Chinese PLA General Hospital/Medical School of Chinese PLA,
Beijing, 100853, China. huyi301zlxb@sina.com.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: The present study endeavors to furnish an exhaustive review of the
research advancements on solid tumors harboring RET rearrangement within the
Chinese context, particularly emphasizing the examination of real-world
therapeutic strategies and clinical outcomes observed in individuals diagnosed
with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The review delves into a
critical assessment of the therapeutic efficacy of targeted RET inhibitors,
while also scrutinizing the diverse array of treatment modalities employed in
the Chinese patient population.
METHODS: The study conducted a comprehensive review of the advancements made by
Chinese scholars in the realm of RET driver genes. It delved into the analysis
of the incidence of RET rearrangements in solid tumors, alongside an examination
of the varied treatment paradigms and their current status within China.
Utilizing the RECIST 1.1 criteria, the study evaluated the therapeutic efficacy
achieved in RET-positive NSCLC patients undergoing diverse treatment modalities.
Furthermore, treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs) were meticulously graded
following the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE).
RESULTS: A retrospective, multi-center, real-world analysis was conducted,
encompassing 64 patients diagnosed with pathologically confirmed RET
rearrangement advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) between December 2015
and November 2023. Notably, KIF5B-RET emerged as the most prevalent RET fusion
partner, accounting for 59.4% of cases. Therapeutic interventions among these
patients included specific targeted inhibitors such as Pralsetinib (48.4%),
chemotherapy (34.3%), multi-target inhibitors (15.6%), and one case (1.6%)
involving immunotherapy combined with anti-angiogenic therapy. In terms of
progression-free survival (PFS), Pralsetinib monotherapy demonstrated a median
PFS of 16.03 months, outperforming chemotherapy (2.87 months; p < 0.0001),
chemotherapy combined with anti-angiogenic therapy (6.90 months; p = 0.048), and
multi-target inhibitors (2.50 months; p < 0.0001). Furthermore, the one-year and
two-year overall survival (OS) rates for Pralsetinib monotherapy were 64.3% and
46.4%, respectively. Regarding safety, 71.0% of patients receiving Pralsetinib
experienced at least one adverse event, with 45.2% classified as grade 3-4 in
severity. Notably, no fatalities were attributed to adverse events. Common
adverse events included hemoglobin reduction (35.5%) and neutropenia (32.3%),
indicative of an overall favorable safety profile for Pralsetinib in this
patient population.
CONCLUSION: This study encapsulates the research endeavors and treatment
advancements of RET rearrangement solid tumors within the Chinese healthcare
landscape, specifically highlighting the diverse real-world therapeutic
approaches and their effectiveness in managing advanced RET rearrangement NSCLC
among Chinese patients. Notably, targeted RET inhibitors like Pralsetinib have
emerged as potent therapeutic agents, exhibiting remarkable efficacy and a
manageable safety profile in this patient cohort. These findings underscore the
potential of Pralsetinib and similar targeted therapies as novel treatment
options for individuals with RET fusion-positive NSCLC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-024-03371-5
PMCID: PMC11533424
PMID: 39497173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.s.
