---
reference_id: "PMID:39456205"
title: History and Perspective of LAMP-2 Deficiency (Danon Disease).
authors:
- Sugie K
- Nishino I
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14101272
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Autophagy/genetics
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/genetics, history, pathology, therapy"
- "Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "History, 20th Century"
- "History, 21st Century"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# History and Perspective of LAMP-2 Deficiency (Danon Disease).
**Authors:** Sugie K, Nishino I
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14101272](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14101272)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 Oct 9;14(10):1272. doi: 10.3390/biom14101272.

History and Perspective of LAMP-2 Deficiency (Danon Disease).

Sugie K(1), Nishino I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Nara Medical University, Nara
634-8521, Japan.
(2)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience,
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry (NCNP), Tokyo 187-8551, Japan.

Danon disease, an X-linked dominant vacuolar cardiomyopathy and skeletal
myopathy, is caused by a primary deficiency of lysosome-associated membrane
protein-2 (LAMP-2). This disease is one of the autophagy-related muscle
diseases. Male patients present with the triad of cardiomyopathy, myopathy, and
intellectual disability, while female patients present with cardiomyopathy. The
disease's leading cause of death is heart failure, and its prognostic factor is
cardiomyopathy. Pathologically, the disease is characterized by the appearance
of unique autophagic vacuoles with sarcolemmal features (AVSFs). Twenty-six
families have been found to have this disease in Japan. It has been over 40
years since the first report of this disease by Danon et al. and over 20 years
since the identification of the causative gene, LAMP2, by Nishino et al.
Although the pathogenetic mechanism of Danon disease remains unestablished, the
first clinical trials using AAV vectors have finally begun in recent years. The
development of novel therapies is expected in the future.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14101272
PMCID: PMC11506487
PMID: 39456205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
