---
reference_id: "PMID:40721059"
title: "The Impact of Targeted Endometriosis Treatment On Patients With Central Sensitization: Systematic Review and Meta Analysis."
authors:
- Gomez-Llerena A
- Shekawat P
- Pradeep A
- Clifton VL
- El Nashar SA
- Carrubba AR
journal: J Minim Invasive Gynecol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.jmig.2025.07.020
keywords:
- Humans
- "Endometriosis/complications, therapy, surgery, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Female
- Central Nervous System Sensitization
- Pelvic Pain/etiology
- Dysmenorrhea/etiology
- Chronic Pain/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Impact of Targeted Endometriosis Treatment On Patients With Central Sensitization: Systematic Review and Meta Analysis.
**Authors:** Gomez-Llerena A, Shekawat P, Pradeep A, Clifton VL, El Nashar SA, Carrubba AR
**Journal:** J Minim Invasive Gynecol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmig.2025.07.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmig.2025.07.020)

## Content

1. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2026 Mar;33(3):258-265. doi:
10.1016/j.jmig.2025.07.020. Epub 2025 Jul 26.

The Impact of Targeted Endometriosis Treatment On Patients With Central
Sensitization: Systematic Review and Meta Analysis.

Gomez-Llerena A(1), Shekawat P(2), Pradeep A(3), Clifton VL(4), El Nashar SA(5),
Carrubba AR(6).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Anahuac Mexico, Estado de
Mexico (Gomez-Llerena), Mexico.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences and Research (PGIMSR) and Employees' State Insurance (ESI) Model
Hospital (Shekawat), Delhi, India.
(3)Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine, Mayo Clinic (Pradeep), Jacksonville,
Florida.
(4)Department of Libraries, Nemours Children's Health System (Clifton),
Jacksonville, Florida; Mayo Clinic Libraries, Mayo Clinic (Clifton),
Jacksonville, Florida.
(5)Department of Medical and Surgical Gynecology, Mayo Clinic Florida (Nashar
and Carrubba), Jacksonville, Florida.
(6)Department of Medical and Surgical Gynecology, Mayo Clinic Florida (Nashar
and Carrubba), Jacksonville, Florida. Electronic address:
carrubba.aakriti@mayo.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Central sensitization (CSS), a condition where the central nervous
system amplifies pain signals, may impact response to treatment of chronic pain
conditions. The objective of this study is to determine if CSS affects outcomes
after medical or surgical treatment for women with endometriosis via a
systematic review and meta-analysis.
DATA SOURCES: A systematic literature search using MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane
Central Register of Controlled Trials, Cochrane Database of Systematic Review,
Science Citation Index Expanded, and Emerging Sources Citation Index was
conducted without language or date restrictions. The search strategy utilized
MeSH and EMTREE terms to capture concepts related to central sensitization,
endometriosis, and associated symptoms like dysmenorrhea. Interventions in the
reviewed studies included medical treatment or surgery.
METHODS OF STUDY SELECTION: Studies reporting on endometriosis outcomes in women
with and wihout CSS were included in the review. We excluded studies which
primarily focused on non-endometriosis pelvic pain syndromes. A total of 1821
abstracts were identified, and 259 full texts were reviewed for eligibility.
Five studies met inclusion criteria encompassing a total of 1271 patients. Data
for meta-analysis was not available for one study and another study was excluded
as it was the only one describing medical treatment. The Newcastle-Ottawa scale
was used to assess quality and risk of bias. Results were sythesized using
random effect meta-anlayses to estimate the pooled risk ratio (RR) and 95%
confience using the DerSimmonian and Laird methods.
TABULATION, INTEGRATION, AND RESULTS: The percentage of patients with CSS ranged
from 28.3% to 80.2%. Patients with CSS have smaller changes in pain scores after
endometriosis surgery (RR 0.79, confidence interval 0.73-0.86) and significantly
higher persistent pain (RR 2.27, confidence interval 1.40-3.68).
CONCLUSION: Higher baseline catastrophization is associated with worse outcomes
in women undergoing treatment for endometriosis. This is important to consider
during counseling and decision-making.

Copyright © 2025 AAGL. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2025.07.020
PMID: 40721059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.
