---
reference_id: "PMID:40209709"
title: "Cell expansion for notochord mechanics and endochondral bone lengthening in zebrafish depends on the 5'-inositol phosphatase Inppl1a."
authors:
- Voigt B
- Frazier K
- Yazdi D
- Klein J
- Gontarz P
- Zhang B
- Sepich DS
- Mo J
- Smeeton J
- Solnica-Krezel L
- Gray RS
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2025.03.022
keywords:
- Animals
- "Zebrafish/embryology, genetics, growth & development"
- "Notochord/cytology, embryology, growth & development"
- "Zebrafish Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/metabolism, genetics"
- Bone Development
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell expansion for notochord mechanics and endochondral bone lengthening in zebrafish depends on the 5'-inositol phosphatase Inppl1a.
**Authors:** Voigt B, Frazier K, Yazdi D, Klein J, Gontarz P, Zhang B, Sepich DS, Mo J, Smeeton J, Solnica-Krezel L, Gray RS
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2025.03.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2025.03.022)

## Content

1. Curr Biol. 2025 May 5;35(9):1949-1962.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2025.03.022. Epub
 2025 Apr 9.

Cell expansion for notochord mechanics and endochondral bone lengthening in 
zebrafish depends on the 5'-inositol phosphatase Inppl1a.

Voigt B(1), Frazier K(1), Yazdi D(1), Klein J(1), Gontarz P(2), Zhang B(2), 
Sepich DS(2), Mo J(3), Smeeton J(3), Solnica-Krezel L(2), Gray RS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, W 24(th) 
Street, Austin, TX 78712, USA; Department of Pediatrics Dell Pediatric Research 
Institute, University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School, 1400 Barbara 
Jordan Boulevard, Austin, TX 78723, USA.
(2)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, S Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation and Regenerative Medicine, Columbia Stem Cell 
Initiative, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, Columbia University, W 
168(th) Street, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Genetics and Development, 
Columbia Stem Cell Initiative, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, 
Columbia University, W 168(th) Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(4)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, W 24(th) 
Street, Austin, TX 78712, USA; Department of Pediatrics Dell Pediatric Research 
Institute, University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School, 1400 Barbara 
Jordan Boulevard, Austin, TX 78723, USA. Electronic address: 
ryan.gray@austin.utexas.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Aug 13:2024.08.12.607640. doi: 10.1101/2024.08.12.607640.

Cell size is a key contributor to tissue morphogenesis. As a notable example, 
growth plate hypertrophic chondrocytes use cellular biogenesis and 
disproportionate fluid uptake to expand 10 to 20 times in size to drive 
lengthening of endochondral bone. Similarly, notochord vacuolated cells expand 
to one of the largest cell types in the developing embryo to drive axial 
extension. In zebrafish, the notochord vacuolated cells undergo vacuole fusion 
to form a single large, fluid-filled vacuole that fills the cytoplasmic space 
and contributes to vacuolated cell expansion. When this process goes awry, the 
notochord lacks sufficient hydrostatic pressure to support vertebral bone 
deposition, resulting in adult spines with misshapen vertebral bones and 
scoliosis. However, it remains unclear whether endochondral bone and the 
notochord share common genetic and cellular mechanisms for regulating cell and 
tissue expansion. Here, we demonstrate that the 5'-inositol phosphatase gene, 
inppl1a, regulates notochord expansion independent of vacuole fusion, thereby 
genetically decoupling these processes. We demonstrate that inppl1a-dependent 
vacuolated cell expansion is essential to establish normal mechanical properties 
of the notochord and to facilitate the development of a straight spine. Finally, 
we find that inppl1a is also important for hypertrophic chondrocyte 
differentiation and endochondral bone lengthening in fish, as has been shown in 
the human INPPL1-related endochondral bone disorder, opsismodysplasia. Overall, 
this work reveals a shared mechanism of cell size regulation that influences 
disparate tissues critical for skeletal development and short-stature disorders.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2025.03.022
PMCID: PMC12056573
PMID: 40209709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.