---
reference_id: "PMID:29050397"
title: "The antimyotonic effect of lamotrigine in non-dystrophic myotonias: a double-blind randomized study."
authors:
- Andersen G
- Hedermann G
- Witting N
- Duno M
- Andersen H
- Vissing J
journal: Brain
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awx192
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Cross-Over Studies
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Lamotrigine
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myotonia Congenita/drug therapy
- Myotonic Disorders/drug therapy
- Treatment Outcome
- "Triazines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Blockers/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The antimyotonic effect of lamotrigine in non-dystrophic myotonias: a double-blind randomized study.
**Authors:** Andersen G, Hedermann G, Witting N, Duno M, Andersen H, Vissing J
**Journal:** Brain (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awx192](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awx192)

## Content

1. Brain. 2017 Sep 1;140(9):2295-2305. doi: 10.1093/brain/awx192.

The antimyotonic effect of lamotrigine in non-dystrophic myotonias: a
double-blind randomized study.

Andersen G(1), Hedermann G(1), Witting N(1), Duno M(2), Andersen H(3), Vissing
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Copenhagen Neuromuscular Center, University of
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Aarhus, Denmark.

Mexiletine is the only drug with proven effect for treatment of non-dystrophic
myotonia, but mexiletine is expensive, has limited availability and several side
effects. There is therefore a need to identify other pharmacological compounds
that can alleviate myotonia in non-dystrophic myotonias. Like mexiletine,
lamotrigine is a sodium channel blocker, but unlike mexiletine, lamotrigine is
available, inexpensive, and well tolerated. We investigated the potential of
using lamotrigine for treatment of myotonia in patients with non-dystrophic
myotonias. In this, randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled, two-period
cross-over study, we included adult outpatients recruited from all of Denmark
with clinical myotonia and genetically confirmed myotonia congenita and
paramyotonia congenita for investigation at the Copenhagen Neuromuscular Center.
A pharmacy produced the medication and placebo, and randomized patients in
blocks of 10. Participants and investigators were all blinded to treatment until
the end of the trial. In two 8-week periods, oral lamotrigine or placebo
capsules were provided once daily, with increasing doses (from 25 mg, 50 mg, 150
mg to 300 mg) every second week. The primary outcome was a severity score of
myotonia, the Myotonic Behaviour Scale ranging from asymptomatic (score 1) to
invalidating myotonia (score 6), reported by the participants during Weeks 0 and
8 in each treatment period. Clinical myotonia was also measured and side effects
were monitored. The study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02159963) and
EudraCT (2013-003309-24). We included 26 patients (10 females, 16 males, age:
19-74 years) from 13 November 2013 to 6 July 2015. Twenty-two completed the
entire study. One patient withdrew due to an allergic reaction to lamotrigine.
Three patients withdrew for reasons not related to the trial intervention. The
Myotonic Behaviour Scale at baseline was 3.2 ± 1.1, which changed after
treatment with lamotrigine by 1.3 ± 0.2 scores (P < 0.001), but not with placebo
(0.2 ± 0.1 scores, P = 0.4). The estimated effect size was 1.0 ± 0.2 (95%
confidence interval = 0.5-1.5, P < 0.001, n = 22). The standardized effect size
of lamotrigine was 1.5 (confidence interval: 1.2-1.8). Number needed to treat
was 2.6 (P = 0.006, n = 26). No adverse or unsuspected event occurred. Common
side effects occurred in both treatment groups; number needed to harm was 5.2 (P
= 0.11, n = 26). Lamotrigine effectively reduced myotonia, emphasized by
consistency between effects on patient-related outcomes and objective outcomes.
The frequency of side effects was acceptable. Considering this and the high
availability and low cost of the drug, we suggest that lamotrigine should be
used as the first line of treatment for myotonia in treatment-naive patients
with non-dystrophic myotonias.

© The Author (2017). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awx192
PMID: 29050397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
