---
reference_id: "PMID:29575617"
title: "Novel RSPO1 mutation causing 46,XX testicular disorder of sex development with palmoplantar keratoderma: A review of literature and expansion of clinical phenotype."
authors:
- Tallapaka K
- Venugopal V
- Dalal A
- Aggarwal S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38646
keywords:
- Adult
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Disorders of Sex Development/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Karyotype
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Testicular Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Thrombospondins/genetics
- R-Spondins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel RSPO1 mutation causing 46,XX testicular disorder of sex development with palmoplantar keratoderma: A review of literature and expansion of clinical phenotype.
**Authors:** Tallapaka K, Venugopal V, Dalal A, Aggarwal S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38646](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38646)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Apr;176(4):1006-1010. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38646.

Novel RSPO1 mutation causing 46,XX testicular disorder of sex development with 
palmoplantar keratoderma: A review of literature and expansion of clinical 
phenotype.

Tallapaka K(1)(2), Venugopal V(2), Dalal A(2), Aggarwal S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Nizam's Institute of Medical Genetics, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)Diagnostics Division, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis with squamous cell carcinoma of skin and sex 
reversal (MIM # 610644) is a clinically distinctive form of SRY-negative 46,XX 
disorder of sex development. It is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused 
due to biallelic loss of function mutations in RSPO1 gene. RSPO1 acts by 
activating the canonical β-catenin pathway and is one of the most important 
genes controlling female gonadal differentiation. RSPO1-associated disorders of 
sex development have been described only in three instances in the past. We 
report fourth such case with additional findings and perform a comparative 
review of previous phenotypic descriptions, thereby expanding the clinical 
phenotype of this syndrome.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38646
PMID: 29575617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]