---
reference_id: "PMID:37414794"
title: Shared hotspot mutations in oncogenes position dogs as an unparalleled comparative model for precision therapeutics.
authors:
- Rodrigues L
- Watson J
- Feng Y
- Lewis B
- Harvey G
- Post G
- Megquier K
- White ME
- Lambert L
- Miller A
- Lopes C
- Zhao S
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-37505-2
keywords:
- Animals
- Dogs
- Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shared hotspot mutations in oncogenes position dogs as an unparalleled comparative model for precision therapeutics.
**Authors:** Rodrigues L, Watson J, Feng Y, Lewis B, Harvey G, Post G, Megquier K, White ME, Lambert L, Miller A, Lopes C, Zhao S
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-37505-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-37505-2)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Jul 6;13(1):10935. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-37505-2.

Shared hotspot mutations in oncogenes position dogs as an unparalleled
comparative model for precision therapeutics.

Rodrigues L(1), Watson J(2), Feng Y(2), Lewis B(3), Harvey G(3), Post G(3),
Megquier K(3)(4), White ME(3), Lambert L(3), Miller A(3), Lopes C(3), Zhao S(5).

Author information:
(1)One Health Company, Inc, 530 Lytton Ave, 2nd Floor, Palo Alto, CA, 94301,
USA. lucas@fidocure.com.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of
Bioinformatics, University of Georgia, B304B Life Sciences Building, 120 Green
Street, Athens, GA, 30602-7229, USA.
(3)One Health Company, Inc, 530 Lytton Ave, 2nd Floor, Palo Alto, CA, 94301,
USA.
(4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of
Bioinformatics, University of Georgia, B304B Life Sciences Building, 120 Green
Street, Athens, GA, 30602-7229, USA. szhao@uga.edu.

Naturally occurring canine cancers have remarkable similarities to their human
counterparts. To better understand these similarities, we investigated 671
client-owned dogs from 96 breeds with 23 common tumor types, including those
whose mutation profile are unknown (anal sac carcinoma and neuroendocrine
carcinoma) or understudied (thyroid carcinoma, soft tissue sarcoma and
hepatocellular carcinoma). We discovered mutations in 50 well-established
oncogenes and tumor suppressors, and compared them to those reported in human
cancers. As in human cancer, TP53 is the most commonly mutated gene, detected in
22.5% of canine tumors overall. Canine tumors share mutational hotspots with
human tumors in oncogenes including PIK3CA, KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, KIT and EGFR.
Hotspot mutations with significant association to tumor type include NRAS G61R
and PIK3CA H1047R in hemangiosarcoma, ERBB2 V659E in pulmonary carcinoma, and
BRAF V588E (equivalent of V600E in humans) in urothelial carcinoma. Our findings
better position canines as a translational model of human cancer to investigate
a wide spectrum of targeted therapies.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-37505-2
PMCID: PMC10325973
PMID: 37414794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was conducted by The One Health
Company and its FidoCure® Partners, University of Georgia, and Broad Institute
of MIT and Havard. LR, BL, GH, GP, MW, LL, AM and CL are full employees or
consultants of the company. The authors declare no Competing Non-Financial
Interests but the following Competing Financial Interests: employment and
compensation. All other authors declare that they do not have any competing
interest.
