---
reference_id: "PMID:31811531"
title: "Adapted physical activity and therapeutic exercise in late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD): a two-step rehabilitative approach."
authors:
- Iolascon G
- Vitacca M
- Carraro E
- Chisari C
- Fiore P
- Messina S
- Mongini T
- Moretti A
- Sansone VA
- Toscano A
- Siciliano G
- "AIM (Italian Association of Myology), AIPO (Italian Association of Hospital Pulmonologists), SIRN (Italian Society of Neurorehabilitation), and SIMFER (Italian Society of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation)"
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-019-04178-7
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Bicycling
- Breathing Exercises/methods
- Child
- Clinical Protocols
- Exercise/physiology
- Exercise Therapy/methods
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/complications, rehabilitation"
- Humans
- Muscle Stretching Exercises
- "Muscular Diseases/etiology, rehabilitation"
- Resistance Training/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adapted physical activity and therapeutic exercise in late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD): a two-step rehabilitative approach.
**Authors:** Iolascon G, Vitacca M, Carraro E, Chisari C, Fiore P, Messina S, Mongini T, Moretti A, Sansone VA, Toscano A, Siciliano G, AIM (Italian Association of Myology), AIPO (Italian Association of Hospital Pulmonologists), SIRN (Italian Society of Neurorehabilitation), and SIMFER (Italian Society of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation)
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-019-04178-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-019-04178-7)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2020 Apr;41(4):859-868. doi: 10.1007/s10072-019-04178-7. Epub 2019
 Dec 7.

Adapted physical activity and therapeutic exercise in late-onset Pompe disease 
(LOPD): a two-step rehabilitative approach.

Iolascon G(1), Vitacca M(2), Carraro E(3), Chisari C(4), Fiore P(5), Messina 
S(6), Mongini T(7), Moretti A(8), Sansone VA(3), Toscano A(6), Siciliano G(9); 
AIM (Italian Association of Myology), AIPO (Italian Association of Hospital 
Pulmonologists), SIRN (Italian Society of Neurorehabilitation), and SIMFER 
(Italian Society of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Specialties and Dentistry, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Via De Crecchio 4, 80138, Naples, Italy. 
giovanni.iolascon@gmail.com.
(2)FERS Respiratory Rehabilitation Unit, ICS S. Maugeri IRCCS, Lumezzane, BS, 
Italy.
(3)NeuroMuscular Omnicentre, Fondazione Serena Onlus, Neurorehabilitation Unit, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(4)Unit of Neurorehabilitation, Department of Medical Specialties, University 
Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Department of Basic Sciences, Neuroscience and Sense Organs, University of 
Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(6)Neurology and Neuromuscular Unit, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(7)Neuromuscular Unit, Department of Neurosciences, University of Turin, Turin, 
Italy.
(8)Department of Medical and Surgical Specialties and Dentistry, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Via De Crecchio 4, 80138, Naples, Italy.
(9)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy.

Aerobic exercise, training to sustain motor ability, and respiratory 
rehabilitation may improve general functioning and quality of life (QoL) in 
neuromuscular disorders. Patients with late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) typically 
show progressive muscle weakness, respiratory dysfunction and minor cardiac 
involvement. Characteristics and modalities of motor and respiratory 
rehabilitation in LOPD are not well defined and specific guidelines are lacking. 
Therefore, we evaluated the role of physical activity, therapeutic exercise, and 
pulmonary rehabilitation programs in order to promote an appropriate management 
of motor and respiratory dysfunctions and improve QoL in patients with LOPD. We 
propose two operational protocols: one for an adapted physical activity (APA) 
plan and the other for an individual rehabilitation plan, particularly focused 
on therapeutic exercise (TE) and respiratory rehabilitation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-019-04178-7
PMID: 31811531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]