---
reference_id: "PMID:26853494"
title: Genome-wide analysis of abdominal and pleural malignant mesothelioma with DNA arrays reveals both common and distinct regions of copy number alteration.
authors:
- Borczuk AC
- Pei J
- Taub RN
- Levy B
- Nahum O
- Chen J
- Chen K
- Testa JR
journal: Cancer Biol Ther
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1080/15384047.2016.1145850
keywords:
- "Abdominal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Mesothelioma/genetics, pathology"
- "Mesothelioma, Malignant"
- Mutation
- "Peritoneal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Pleural Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide analysis of abdominal and pleural malignant mesothelioma with DNA arrays reveals both common and distinct regions of copy number alteration.
**Authors:** Borczuk AC, Pei J, Taub RN, Levy B, Nahum O, Chen J, Chen K, Testa JR
**Journal:** Cancer Biol Ther (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15384047.2016.1145850](https://doi.org/10.1080/15384047.2016.1145850)

## Content

1. Cancer Biol Ther. 2016;17(3):328-35. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2016.1145850. Epub
2016 Feb 6.

Genome-wide analysis of abdominal and pleural malignant mesothelioma with DNA
arrays reveals both common and distinct regions of copy number alteration.

Borczuk AC(1), Pei J(2), Taub RN(3), Levy B(4), Nahum O(4), Chen J(4), Chen
K(1), Testa JR(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pathology and Medicine , Weill Cornell Medicine , New York ,
USA.
(2)b Cancer Biology Program and Genomics Facility, Fox Chase Cancer Center ,
Philadelphia , USA.
(3)c Department of Medicine , Division of Hematology and Oncology.
(4)d Department of Pathology and Cell Biology , Columbia University Medical
Center , New York , USA.

Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive tumor arising from mesothelial
linings of the serosal cavities. Pleural space is the most common site,
accounting for about 80% of cases, while peritoneum makes up the majority of the
remaining 20%. While histologically similar, tumors from these sites are
epidemiologically and clinically distinct and their attribution to asbestos
exposure differs. We compared DNA array-based findings from 48 epithelioid
peritoneal MMs and 41 epithelioid pleural MMs to identify similarities and
differences in copy number alterations (CNAs). Losses in 3p (BAP1 gene), 9p
(CDKN2A) and 22q (NF2) were seen in tumors from both tumor sites, although
CDKN2A and NF2 losses were seen at a higher rate in pleural disease (p<0.01).
Overall, regions of copy number gain were more common in peritoneal MM, whereas
losses were more common in pleural MM, with regions of loss containing known
tumor suppressor genes and regions of gain encompassing genes encoding receptor
tyrosine kinase pathway members. Cases with known asbestos causation (n = 32 )
were compared with those linked to radiation exposure (n = 9 ). Deletions in 6q,
14q, 17p and 22q, and gain of 17q were seen in asbestos-associated but not
radiation-related cases. As reported in post-radiation sarcoma, gains
outnumbered losses in radiation-associated MM. The patterns of genomic
imbalances suggest overlapping and distinct molecular pathways in MM of the
pleura and peritoneum, and that differences in causation (i.e., asbestos vs.
radiation) may account for some of these site-dependent differences.

DOI: 10.1080/15384047.2016.1145850
PMCID: PMC4847993
PMID: 26853494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
