---
reference_id: "PMID:37947776"
title: Novel Approaches for Elongation of Fish Oils into Very-Long-Chain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Their Enzymatic Interesterification into Glycerolipids.
authors:
- Honzíková T
- Agbaga MP
- Anderson RE
- Brush R
- Ahmad M
- Musílková L
- Šejstalová K
- Alishevich K
- Beneš R
- Šimicová P
- Berčíková M
- Filip V
- Kyselka J
journal: J Agric Food Chem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.3c05355
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Approaches for Elongation of Fish Oils into Very-Long-Chain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Their Enzymatic Interesterification into Glycerolipids.
**Authors:** Honzíková T, Agbaga MP, Anderson RE, Brush R, Ahmad M, Musílková L, Šejstalová K, Alishevich K, Beneš R, Šimicová P, Berčíková M, Filip V, Kyselka J
**Journal:** J Agric Food Chem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.jafc.3c05355](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.3c05355)

## Content

1. J Agric Food Chem. 2023 Nov 22;71(46):17909-17923. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jafc.3c05355. Epub 2023 Nov 10.

Novel Approaches for Elongation of Fish Oils into Very-Long-Chain 
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Their Enzymatic Interesterification into 
Glycerolipids.

Honzíková T(1), Agbaga MP, Anderson RE, Brush R, Ahmad M, Musílková L(2), 
Šejstalová K(2), Alishevich K(1), Beneš R(1), Šimicová P(1), Berčíková M(1), 
Filip V(1), Kyselka J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dairy, Fat and Cosmetics, Faculty of Food and Biochemical 
Technology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Technická 3, 166 28 Prague, 
Czechia.
(2)The Department of Chemistry of Natural Compounds, Faculty of Food and 
Biochemical Technology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Technická 5, 166 
28 Prague, Czechia.

Elongation of the Very-Long-Chain Fatty Acids-4 (ELOVL4) enzyme that is 
expressed in neuronal tissues, sperm, and testes mediates biosynthesis of 
very-long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (VLC-PUFAs) from dietary long chain 
PUFAs (LC-PUFAs). The VLC-PUFAs are critical for neuronal and reproductive 
function. Therefore, mutations in ELOVL4 that affect VLC-PUFA biosynthesis 
contribute to retinal degenerative diseases including Autosomal Dominant 
Stargardt-like Macular Dystrophy (STGD3). Recent studies have also shown not 
only a depletion of retinal VLC-PUFAs with normal aging but also a more 
significant loss of VLC-PUFAs in donor eyes of patients with age-related macular 
degeneration (AMD). However, currently, there are no natural sources of 
VLC-PUFAs to be evaluated as dietary supplements for the attenuation of retinal 
degeneration in animal models of STGD3. Here, we report the development of a 
novel chemical approach for elongation of eicosapentaenoic (C20:5 n-3) and 
docosahexaenoic (C22:6 n-3) acids from fish oils by 6 carbon atoms to make a 
unique group of VLC-PUFAs, namely all-cis-hexacosa-11,14,17,20,23-pentaenoic 
acids (C26:5 n-3) and all-cis-octacosa-10,13,16,19,22,25-hexaenoic acids (C28:6 
n-3). The three-step elongation approach that we report herein resulted in a 
good overall yield of up to 20.2%. This more sustainable approach also resulted 
in improved functional group compatibility and minimal impact on the geometrical 
integrity of the all-cis double bond system of the VLC-PUFAs. In addition, we 
also successfully used commercial deep-sea fish oil concentrate as an 
inexpensive material for the C6 elongation of fish oil LC-PUFAs into VLC-PUFAs, 
which resulted in the making of gram scales of VLC-PUFAs with an even higher 
isolation yield of 31.0%. The quality of fish oils and the content of oxidized 
lipids were key since both strongly affected the activity of the PEPPSI-IPr 
catalyst and ultimately the yield of coupling reactions. Downstream enzymatic 
interesterification was used for the first time to prepare structured 
glycerolipids enriched with VLC-PUFAs that could be evaluated in vivo to 
determine absorption and transport to target tissues relative to those of the 
free fatty acid forms. It turned out that in the synthesis of structured 
triacylglycerols and glycerophospholipids with VLC-PUFAs, the polarity of the 
immobilized lipase carrier and its humidity were essential.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.3c05355
PMCID: PMC10682991
PMID: 37947776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.