---
reference_id: "PMID:8702490"
title: Undersulfation of proteoglycans synthesized by chondrocytes from a patient with achondrogenesis type 1B homozygous for an L483P substitution in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter.
authors:
- Rossi A
- Bonaventure J
- Delezoide AL
- Cetta G
- Superti-Furga A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.31.18456
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Anion Transport Proteins
- Base Sequence
- "Biological Transport, Active"
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Cartilage/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Consanguinity
- DNA/genetics
- Female
- "Fetal Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Membrane Transport Proteins
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Molecular Structure
- Point Mutation
- Pregnancy
- "Proteoglycans/biosynthesis, chemistry"
- Sulfate Transporters
- "Sulfates/chemistry, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Undersulfation of proteoglycans synthesized by chondrocytes from a patient with achondrogenesis type 1B homozygous for an L483P substitution in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter.
**Authors:** Rossi A, Bonaventure J, Delezoide AL, Cetta G, Superti-Furga A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.31.18456](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.31.18456)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 2;271(31):18456-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.31.18456.

Undersulfation of proteoglycans synthesized by chondrocytes from a patient with 
achondrogenesis type 1B homozygous for an L483P substitution in the diastrophic 
dysplasia sulfate transporter.

Rossi A(1), Bonaventure J, Delezoide AL, Cetta G, Superti-Furga A.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica "Alessandro Castellani," Università di Pavia, 
27100 Pavia, Italy.

Achondrogenesis type 1B is an autosomal recessive, lethal chondrodysplasia 
caused by mutations in the gene encoding a sulfate/chloride antiporter of the 
cell membrane (Superti-Furga, A., Hästbacka, J., Wilcox, W. R., Cohn, D. H., van 
der Harten, J. J., Rossi, A., Blau, N., Rimoin, D. L., Steinmann, B., Lander, E. 
S., and Gitzelmann, R.(1996) Nat. Genet. 12, 100-102). To ascertain the 
consequences of the sulfate transport defect on proteoglycan synthesis, we 
studied the structure and sulfation of proteoglycans in cartilage tissue and in 
fibroblast and chondrocyte cultures from a fetus with achondrogenesis 1B. 
Proteoglycans extracted from epiphyseal cartilage and separated on agarose gels 
migrated more slowly than controls and stained poorly with alcian blue. The 
patient's cultured cells showed reduced incorporation of [35S]sulfate relative 
to [3H]glucosamine, impaired uptake of sulfate, and higher resistance to 
chromate toxicity compared to control cells. Epiphyseal chondrocytes cultured in 
alginate beads synthesized proteoglycans of normal molecular size as judged by 
gel filtration chromatography, but undersulfated as judged by ion exchange 
chromatography and by the amount of nonsulfated disaccharide. High performance 
liquid chromatography analysis of chondroitinase-digested proteoglycans showed 
that sulfated disaccharides were present, although in reduced amounts, 
indicating that at least in vitro, other sources of sulfate can partially 
compensate for sulfate deficiency. A t1475c transition causing a L483P 
substitution in the eleventh transmembrane domain of the sulfate/chloride 
antiporter was present on both alleles in the patient who was the product of a 
consanguineous marriage. The results indicate that the defect of sulfate 
transport is expressed in both chondrocytes and fibroblasts and results in the 
synthesis of proteoglycans bearing glycosaminoglycan chains which are poorly 
sulfated but of normal length.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.31.18456
PMID: 8702490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]