---
reference_id: PMID:32301896
title: "CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND NATURAL HISTORY OF RHO-ASSOCIATED RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA: A Long-Term Follow-Up Study."
authors:
- Nguyen XT
- Talib M
- van Cauwenbergh C
- van Schooneveld MJ
- Fiocco M
- Wijnholds J
- Ten Brink JB
- Florijn RJ
- Schalij-Delfos NE
- Dagnelie G
- van Genderen MM
- de Baere E
- Meester-Smoor MA
- De Zaeytijd J
- Balikova I
- Thiadens AA
- Hoyng CB
- Klaver CC
- van den Born LI
- Bergen AA
- Leroy BP
- Boon CJF
journal: Retina
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002808
keywords:
- "Acute-Phase Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Aged
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Forecasting
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/pathology
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Visual Acuity
- Visual Fields/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND NATURAL HISTORY OF RHO-ASSOCIATED RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA: A Long-Term Follow-Up Study.
**Authors:** Nguyen XT, Talib M, van Cauwenbergh C, van Schooneveld MJ, Fiocco M, Wijnholds J, Ten Brink JB, Florijn RJ, Schalij-Delfos NE, Dagnelie G, van Genderen MM, de Baere E, Meester-Smoor MA, De Zaeytijd J, Balikova I, Thiadens AA, Hoyng CB, Klaver CC, van den Born LI, Bergen AA, Leroy BP, Boon CJF
**Journal:** Retina (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IAE.0000000000002808](https://doi.org/10.1097/IAE.0000000000002808)

## Content

1. Retina. 2021 Jan 1;41(1):213-223. doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002808.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND NATURAL HISTORY OF RHO-ASSOCIATED RETINITIS 
PIGMENTOSA: A Long-Term Follow-Up Study.

Nguyen XT(1), Talib M(1), van Cauwenbergh C(2), van Schooneveld MJ(3), Fiocco 
M(4)(5), Wijnholds J(1), Ten Brink JB(6), Florijn RJ(6), Schalij-Delfos NE(1), 
Dagnelie G(7), van Genderen MM(8)(9), de Baere E(2), Meester-Smoor MA(10), De 
Zaeytijd J(2), Balikova I(2), Thiadens AA(10), Hoyng CB(11), Klaver 
CC(10)(11)(12), van den Born LI(13), Bergen AA(6)(14), Leroy BP(2)(15), Boon 
CJF(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam UMC, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Institute of Mathematic Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Biomedical Data Sciences, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(8)Bartiméus, Diagnostic Centre for Complex Visual Disorders, Zeist, The 
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(12)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(13)The Rotterdam Eye Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(14)The Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience (NIN-KNAW), Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands; and.
(15)Ophthalmic Genetics & Visual Electrophysiology, Division of Ophthalmology, 
the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

PURPOSE: To investigate the natural history of RHO-associated retinitis 
pigmentosa (RP).
METHODS: A multicenter, medical chart review of 100 patients with autosomal 
dominant RHO-associated RP.
RESULTS: Based on visual fields, time-to-event analysis revealed median ages of 
52 and 79 years to reach low vision (central visual field <20°) and blindness 
(central visual field <10°), respectively. For the best-corrected visual acuity 
(BCVA), the median age to reach mild impairment (20/67 ≤ BCVA < 20/40) was 72 
years, whereas this could not be computed for lower acuities. Disease 
progression was significantly faster in patients with a generalized RP phenotype 
(n = 75; 75%) than that in patients with a sector RP phenotype (n = 25; 25%), in 
terms of decline rates of the BCVA (P < 0.001) and V4e retinal seeing areas (P < 
0.005). The foveal thickness of the photoreceptor-retinal pigment epithelium (PR 
+ RPE) complex correlated significantly with BCVA (Spearman's ρ = 0.733; P < 
0.001).
CONCLUSION: Based on central visual fields, the optimal window of intervention 
for RHO-associated RP is before the 5th decade of life. Significant differences 
in disease progression are present between generalized and sector RP phenotypes. 
Our findings suggest that the PR + RPE complex is a potential surrogate endpoint 
for the BCVA in future studies.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the Opthalmic Communications Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000002808
PMID: 32301896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]