---
reference_id: "PMID:12033746"
title: The Australian Childhood Dementia Study.
authors:
- Nunn K
- Williams K
- Ouvrier R
journal: Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/s007870200012
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Australia/epidemiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dementia/classification, diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Prevalence
- "Psychology, Child"
- Research Design/standards
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Australian Childhood Dementia Study.
**Authors:** Nunn K, Williams K, Ouvrier R
**Journal:** Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s007870200012](https://doi.org/10.1007/s007870200012)

## Content

1. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2002 Apr;11(2):63-70. doi:
10.1007/s007870200012.

The Australian Childhood Dementia Study.

Nunn K(1), Williams K, Ouvrier R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, The Children's Hospital, Westmead, 
Parramatta NSW, Australia. Kennethn@nch.edu.au

OBJECTIVES: To estimate the prevalence of childhood dementia, identify 
aetiological factors, and provide a brief survey of the psychosocial impact of 
childhood dementia.
METHOD: The Australian Paediatric Surveillance Unit (APSU) was used to identify 
children with dementia. A total of 224 cases were notified about the dementia 
study and 141 (63%) questionnaires were completed and returned. Ascertainment 
was restricted to those most likely to have progressive neurocognitive decline 
because of practitioner bias against reporting non-progressive cases as 
dementia.
RESULTS: Eighty children with dementia were identified. The estimated prevalence 
for dementia in childhood in Australian was 5.6/100,000. Thirteen cases (16%) 
were notified before the age of two years. Seventeen (21%) children were 
reported to have uncertain or unknown aetiology. Impact upon day to day family 
functioning was reported by clinicians to be 'marked' or 'extreme' in 50 (63%) 
families. Only four (6%) clinicians judged present services to be 'very 
adequate', while 16 (20%) clinicians judged current psychological support for 
the needs of the family to be 'very' or 'moderately inadequate'. Dementia as an 
overarching diagnostic concept offers integrative possibilities for research, 
management and service planning and provision. Childhood disintegrative disorder 
as a concept is criticised.

DOI: 10.1007/s007870200012
PMID: 12033746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]