---
reference_id: "PMID:33205991"
title: "Effectiveness of Adding a Mask Recommendation to Other Public Health Measures to Prevent SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Danish Mask Wearers : A Randomized Controlled Trial."
authors:
- Bundgaard H
- Bundgaard JS
- Raaschou-Pedersen DET
- von Buchwald C
- Todsen T
- Norsk JB
- Pries-Heje MM
- Vissing CR
- Nielsen PB
- Winsløw UC
- Fogh K
- Hasselbalch R
- Kristensen JH
- Ringgaard A
- Porsborg Andersen M
- Goecke NB
- Trebbien R
- Skovgaard K
- Benfield T
- Ullum H
- Torp-Pedersen C
- Iversen K
journal: Ann Intern Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7326/M20-6817
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness of Adding a Mask Recommendation to Other Public Health Measures to Prevent SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Danish Mask Wearers : A Randomized Controlled Trial.
**Authors:** Bundgaard H, Bundgaard JS, Raaschou-Pedersen DET, von Buchwald C, Todsen T, Norsk JB, Pries-Heje MM, Vissing CR, Nielsen PB, Winsløw UC, Fogh K, Hasselbalch R, Kristensen JH, Ringgaard A, Porsborg Andersen M, Goecke NB, Trebbien R, Skovgaard K, Benfield T, Ullum H, Torp-Pedersen C, Iversen K
**Journal:** Ann Intern Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7326/M20-6817](https://doi.org/10.7326/M20-6817)

## Content

1. Ann Intern Med. 2021 Mar;174(3):335-343. doi: 10.7326/M20-6817. Epub 2020 Nov 
18.

Effectiveness of Adding a Mask Recommendation to Other Public Health Measures to 
Prevent SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Danish Mask Wearers : A Randomized Controlled 
Trial.

Bundgaard H(1), Bundgaard JS(1), Raaschou-Pedersen DET(1), von Buchwald C(2), 
Todsen T(2), Norsk JB(3), Pries-Heje MM(1), Vissing CR(1), Nielsen PB(3), 
Winsløw UC(1), Fogh K(3), Hasselbalch R(3), Kristensen JH(3), Ringgaard A(1), 
Porsborg Andersen M(4), Goecke NB(5), Trebbien R(6), Skovgaard K(7), Benfield 
T(8), Ullum H(2), Torp-Pedersen C(4), Iversen K(3).

Author information:
(1)The Heart Center, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, 
Denmark (H.B., J.S.B., D.E.T., M.M.P., C.R.V., U.C.W., A.R.).
(2)Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark (C.V., 
T.T., H.U.).
(3)Herlev & Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark 
(J.B.N., P.B.N., K.F., R.H., J.H.K., K.I.).
(4)Nordsjaellands Hospital, Hillerød, and Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, 
Denmark (M.P.A., C.T.).
(5)Centre for Diagnostics, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, 
Denmark (N.B.G.).
(6)National Influenza Center, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark 
(R.T.).
(7)Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark (K.S.).
(8)Center of Research & Disruption of Infectious Diseases, Amager and Hvidovre 
Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, Hvidovre, Denmark (T.B.).

Comment in
    Respirology. 2021 Feb;26(2):143-144. doi: 10.1111/resp.13990.
    BMJ. 2020 Dec 23;371:m4919. doi: 10.1136/bmj.m4919.
    Trials. 2021 Mar 29;22(1):234. doi: 10.1186/s13063-021-05209-5.
    Ann Intern Med. 2021 Aug;174(8):1194. doi: 10.7326/L21-0400.
    Ann Intern Med. 2021 Aug;174(8):1194-1195. doi: 10.7326/L21-0401.
    Ann Intern Med. 2021 Aug;174(8):1193. doi: 10.7326/L21-0398.
    Ann Intern Med. 2021 Aug;174(8):1194. doi: 10.7326/L21-0399.
    Ann Intern Med. 2021 Aug;174(8):1192-1193. doi: 10.7326/L21-0396.
    Ann Intern Med. 2021 Aug;174(8):1193. doi: 10.7326/L21-0397.

BACKGROUND: Observational evidence suggests that mask wearing mitigates 
transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). It 
is uncertain if this observed association arises through protection of 
uninfected wearers (protective effect), via reduced transmission from infected 
mask wearers (source control), or both.
OBJECTIVE: To assess whether recommending surgical mask use outside the home 
reduces wearers' risk for SARS-CoV-2 infection in a setting where masks were 
uncommon and not among recommended public health measures.
DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial (DANMASK-19 [Danish Study to Assess Face 
Masks for the Protection Against COVID-19 Infection]). (ClinicalTrials.gov: 
NCT04337541).
SETTING: Denmark, April and May 2020.
PARTICIPANTS: Adults spending more than 3 hours per day outside the home without 
occupational mask use.
INTERVENTION: Encouragement to follow social distancing measures for coronavirus 
disease 2019, plus either no mask recommendation or a recommendation to wear a 
mask when outside the home among other persons together with a supply of 50 
surgical masks and instructions for proper use.
MEASUREMENTS: The primary outcome was SARS-CoV-2 infection in the mask wearer at 
1 month by antibody testing, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), or hospital 
diagnosis. The secondary outcome was PCR positivity for other respiratory 
viruses.
RESULTS: A total of 3030 participants were randomly assigned to the 
recommendation to wear masks, and 2994 were assigned to control; 4862 completed 
the study. Infection with SARS-CoV-2 occurred in 42 participants recommended 
masks (1.8%) and 53 control participants (2.1%). The between-group difference 
was -0.3 percentage point (95% CI, -1.2 to 0.4 percentage point; P = 0.38) (odds 
ratio, 0.82 [CI, 0.54 to 1.23]; P = 0.33). Multiple imputation accounting for 
loss to follow-up yielded similar results. Although the difference observed was 
not statistically significant, the 95% CIs are compatible with a 46% reduction 
to a 23% increase in infection.
LIMITATION: Inconclusive results, missing data, variable adherence, 
patient-reported findings on home tests, no blinding, and no assessment of 
whether masks could decrease disease transmission from mask wearers to others.
CONCLUSION: The recommendation to wear surgical masks to supplement other public 
health measures did not reduce the SARS-CoV-2 infection rate among wearers by 
more than 50% in a community with modest infection rates, some degree of social 
distancing, and uncommon general mask use. The data were compatible with lesser 
degrees of self-protection.
PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: The Salling Foundations.

DOI: 10.7326/M20-6817
PMCID: PMC7707213
PMID: 33205991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: Disclosures can be viewed at 
www.acponline.org/authors/icmje/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M20-6817.