---
reference_id: "PMID:39601013"
title: "Clinical Features, Biochemistry, Imaging, and Treatment Response in a Single-Center Cohort With Coenzyme Q(10) Biosynthesis Disorders."
authors:
- Wahedi A
- Sudhakar S
- Lam A
- Ciancio JIR
- Mills P
- Gissen P
- Gardham A
- Kapadia J
- Hassell J
- Heales S
- Rahman S
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200209
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Features, Biochemistry, Imaging, and Treatment Response in a Single-Center Cohort With Coenzyme Q(10) Biosynthesis Disorders.
**Authors:** Wahedi A, Sudhakar S, Lam A, Ciancio JIR, Mills P, Gissen P, Gardham A, Kapadia J, Hassell J, Heales S, Rahman S
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200209](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200209)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2024 Nov 25;10(6):e200209. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200209. 
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Clinical Features, Biochemistry, Imaging, and Treatment Response in a 
Single-Center Cohort With Coenzyme Q(10) Biosynthesis Disorders.

Wahedi A(1), Sudhakar S(1), Lam A(1), Ciancio JIR(1), Mills P(1), Gissen P(1), 
Gardham A(1), Kapadia J(1), Hassell J(1), Heales S(1), Rahman S(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Mitochondrial Research Group (A.W., S.R.), Genetics and Genomic 
Medicine Department, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London; 
Medical Sciences Division (A.W.), University of Oxford; Department of Radiology 
(S.S.), Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children; Neurometabolic Unit (A.L., 
S.H.), National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery; Department of Chemical 
Pathology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children; Neuromuscular Diseases 
(A.L.), Queen Square, UCL Institute of Neurology; Inborn Errors of Metabolism 
Section (J.I.R.C., P.M., S.H.), Genetics and Genomic Medicine Programme, UCL 
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health; National Institute for Health 
Research Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre (P.G.), 
University College London; Metabolic Department (P.G., S.R.), Great Ormond 
Street Hospital for Children; North West Thames Regional Genetic Service (A.G.), 
North West London Hospitals; Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (J.K.), Luton and 
Dunstable University Hospital; and Department of Paediatric Neurology (J.H.), 
Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, United 
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Disorders of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) biosynthesis 
comprise a group of 11 clinically and genetically heterogeneous rare primary 
mitochondrial diseases. We sought to delineate clinical, biochemical, and 
neuroimaging features of these disorders, together with outcomes after oral 
CoQ10 supplementation and the utility of peripheral blood mononuclear cell 
(PBMNC) CoQ10 levels in monitoring therapy.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study, registered as an audit at a 
specialist pediatric hospital (Registration Number: 3318) of 14 patients with 
genetically confirmed CoQ10 biosynthesis deficiency, including 13 previously 
unreported cases.
RESULTS: We show that oral doses of CoQ10 up to 70 mg/kg/d were needed to 
ameliorate neurologic features. Additional idebenone was required to control 
seizures in some cases, and 3 children with neonatal-onset neurologic disease 
died in early childhood despite receiving high-dose oral CoQ10 from birth. We 
also demonstrate that early diagnosis and treatment of CoQ10 deficiency with 
oral supplementation (30 mg/kg/d) can reverse renal manifestations and can 
completely prevent kidney disease over 10 years of follow-up. PBMNC CoQ10 levels 
increased after oral CoQ10 supplementation, demonstrating absorption of 
exogenous CoQ10 into the bloodstream.
DISCUSSION: An early genome-wide diagnostic approach is needed for expeditious 
diagnosis of CoQ10 biosynthesis disorder because our study demonstrates that 
there are no pathognomonic blood, muscle, or imaging biomarkers of these 
diseases. Our findings indicate that earlier diagnosis and treatment with 
high-dose CoQ10 is key in halting progression of kidney disease or preventing it 
altogether. This study uses serial PBMNC CoQ10 levels to monitor therapy. 
Patients with genetically confirmed CoQ10 biosynthesis disorder should receive 
high-dose oral CoQ10 as soon as possible after presentation, regardless of 
genetic cause, to prevent disease progression, but parents of children with 
neonatal or infantile neurologic presentations should be counseled about the 
poor prognosis.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200209
PMCID: PMC11595325
PMID: 39601013

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/NG for full disclosures.