---
reference_id: "PMID:9708481"
title: Frequency of 22q11 deletions in patients with conotruncal defects.
authors:
- Goldmuntz E
- Clark BJ
- Mitchell LE
- Jawad AF
- Cuneo BF
- Reed L
- McDonald-McGinn D
- Chien P
- Feuer J
- Zackai EH
- Emanuel BS
- Driscoll DA
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(98)00259-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of 22q11 deletions in patients with conotruncal defects.
**Authors:** Goldmuntz E, Clark BJ, Mitchell LE, Jawad AF, Cuneo BF, Reed L, McDonald-McGinn D, Chien P, Feuer J, Zackai EH, Emanuel BS, Driscoll DA
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0735-1097(98)00259-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0735-1097(98)00259-9)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998 Aug;32(2):492-8. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(98)00259-9.

Frequency of 22q11 deletions in patients with conotruncal defects.

Goldmuntz E(1), Clark BJ, Mitchell LE, Jawad AF, Cuneo BF, Reed L, 
McDonald-McGinn D, Chien P, Feuer J, Zackai EH, Emanuel BS, Driscoll DA.

Author information:
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Pennsylvania Medical Center, 19104, USA. goldmuntz@email.chop.edu

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998 Aug;32(2):499-501. doi: 
10.1016/s0735-1097(98)00273-3.
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999 May;33(6):1746-8. doi: 
10.1016/s0735-1097(99)00084-4.

OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to determine the frequency of 22q11 
deletions in a large, prospectively ascertained sample of patients with 
conotruncal defects and to evaluate the deletion frequency when additional 
cardiac findings are also considered.
BACKGROUND: Chromosome 22q11 deletions are present in the majority of patients 
with DiGeorge, velocardiofacial and conotruncal anomaly face syndromes in which 
conotruncal defects are a cardinal feature. Previous studies suggest that a 
substantial number of patients with congenital heart disease have a 22q11 
deletion.
METHODS: Two hundred fifty-one patients with conotruncal defects were 
prospectively enrolled into the study and screened for the presence of a 22q11 
deletion.
RESULTS: Deletions were found in 50.0% with interrupted aortic arch (IAA), 34.5% 
of patients with truncus arteriosus (TA), and 15.9% with tetralogy of Fallot 
(TOF). Two of 6 patients with a posterior malalignment type ventricular septal 
defect (PMVSD) and only 1 of 20 patients with double outlet right ventricle were 
found to have a 22q11 deletion. None of the 45 patients with transposition of 
the great arteries had a deletion. The frequency of 22q11 deletions was higher 
in patients with anomalies of the pulmonary arteries, aortic arch or its major 
branches as compared to patients with a normal left aortic arch regardless of 
intracardiac anatomy.
CONCLUSIONS: A substantial proportion of patients with IAA, TA, TOF and PMVSD 
have a deletion of chromosome 22q11. Deletions are more common in patients with 
aortic arch or vessel anomalies. These results begin to define guidelines for 
deletion screening of patients with conotruncal defects.

DOI: 10.1016/s0735-1097(98)00259-9
PMID: 9708481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]