---
reference_id: "PMID:38317562"
title: Development of specific growth charts for children with Fanconi anemia.
authors:
- Barbus C
- Rayannavar A
- Miller BS
- Jenkins MJ
- Addo OY
- Rayes A
- Ahrweiler N
- Olson A
- Pohlkamp Z
- Wagner JE
- MacMillan ML
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63554
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Fanconi Anemia/diagnosis, pathology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- Growth Charts
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Body Weight
- Body Height
- Body Mass Index
- Young Adult
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of specific growth charts for children with Fanconi anemia.
**Authors:** Barbus C, Rayannavar A, Miller BS, Jenkins MJ, Addo OY, Rayes A, Ahrweiler N, Olson A, Pohlkamp Z, Wagner JE, MacMillan ML
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63554](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63554)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2024 Jul;194(7):e63554. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63554. Epub 2024
 Feb 5.

Development of specific growth charts for children with Fanconi anemia.

Barbus C(1), Rayannavar A(1), Miller BS(1), Jenkins MJ(2)(3), Addo OY(2)(3), 
Rayes A(3), Ahrweiler N(1), Olson A(1), Pohlkamp Z(1), Wagner JE(4), MacMillan 
ML(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota 
Medical School and M Health Fairview Masonic Children's Hospital, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, USA.
(2)Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Nutrition and Health Sciences Doctoral Program, Laney Graduate School of 
Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation & Cellular Therapy, Department 
of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

Patients with Fanconi anemia (FA) are often perceived to have poor growth when 
general population growth curves are utilized. We hypothesize that FA patients 
have unique growth and aimed to create FA-specific growth charts. Height and 
weight data from ages 0 to 20 years were extracted from medical records of 
patients treated at the Fanconi Anemia Comprehensive Care Clinic at the 
University of Minnesota. Height, weight, and BMI growth curves were generated 
and fitted to reference percentiles using the Lambda-Mu-Sigma method. 
FA-specific percentiles were compared to WHO standards for ages 0-2 and CDC 
references for ages 2-20. In FA males, the 50th height- and weight-for-age 
percentiles overlap with the 3rd reference percentile. In FA females, only the 
50th height-for-age percentile overlaps with the 3rd reference percentile. For 
weight, FA females show progressive growth failure between 6 and 24 months 
followed by stabilization around the 50th percentile. The FA BMI-for-age 
percentiles show similar patterns to the weight-for-age percentiles but have 
different timing of onset of adiposity rebound and broader variability in 
females. Growth in FA patients follows a different trajectory than available 
normative curves. FA-specific growth charts may be useful to better guide 
accurate growth expectations, evaluations, and treatment.

© 2024 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63554
PMID: 38317562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]