---
reference_id: "PMID:38927880"
title: "Anti-MAPK Targeted Therapy for Ameloblastoma: Case Report with a Systematic Review."
authors:
- Raemy A
- May L
- Sala N
- Diezi M
- Beck-Popovic M
- Broome M
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16122174
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-MAPK Targeted Therapy for Ameloblastoma: Case Report with a Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Raemy A, May L, Sala N, Diezi M, Beck-Popovic M, Broome M
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16122174](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16122174)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Jun 7;16(12):2174. doi: 10.3390/cancers16122174.

Anti-MAPK Targeted Therapy for Ameloblastoma: Case Report with a Systematic 
Review.

Raemy A(1), May L(1), Sala N(2), Diezi M(3), Beck-Popovic M(3), Broome M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Lausanne University Hospital, 1011 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Lausanne University Hospital, 1011 Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Paediatric Oncology, Lausanne University Hospital, 1011 
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Ameloblastoma, a benign yet aggressive odontogenic tumor known for its 
recurrence and the severe morbidity from radical surgeries, may benefit from 
advancements in targeted therapy. We present a case of a 15-year-old girl with 
ameloblastoma successfully treated with targeted therapy and review the 
literature with this question: Is anti-MAPK targeted therapy safe and effective 
for treating ameloblastoma? This systematic review was registered in PROSPERO, 
adhered to PRISMA guidelines, and searched multiple databases up to December 
2023, identifying 13 relevant studies out of 647 records, covering 23 patients 
treated with MAPK inhibitor therapies. The results were promising as nearly all 
patients showed a positive treatment response, with four achieving complete 
radiological remission and others showing substantial reductions in primary, 
recurrent, and metastatic ameloblastoma sizes. Side effects were mostly mild to 
moderate. This study presents anti-MAPK therapy as a significant shift from 
invasive surgical treatments, potentially enhancing life quality and clinical 
outcomes by offering a less invasive yet effective treatment alternative. This 
approach could signify a breakthrough in managing this challenging tumor, 
emphasizing the need for further research into molecular-targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16122174
PMCID: PMC11201667
PMID: 38927880

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.