---
reference_id: "PMID:29244957"
title: Hypercementosis Associated with ENPP1 Mutations and GACI.
authors:
- Thumbigere-Math V
- Alqadi A
- Chalmers NI
- Chavez MB
- Chu EY
- Collins MT
- Ferreira CR
- FitzGerald K
- Gafni RI
- Gahl WA
- Hsu KS
- Ramnitz MS
- Somerman MJ
- Ziegler SG
- Foster BL
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1177/0022034517744773
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Child
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hypercementosis/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Loss of Function Mutation
- Male
- Mice
- Pedigree
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- "Radiography, Panoramic"
- "Tooth, Deciduous"
- Vascular Calcification/genetics
- X-Ray Microtomography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypercementosis Associated with ENPP1 Mutations and GACI.
**Authors:** Thumbigere-Math V, Alqadi A, Chalmers NI, Chavez MB, Chu EY, Collins MT, Ferreira CR, FitzGerald K, Gafni RI, Gahl WA, Hsu KS, Ramnitz MS, Somerman MJ, Ziegler SG, Foster BL
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0022034517744773](https://doi.org/10.1177/0022034517744773)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2018 Apr;97(4):432-441. doi: 10.1177/0022034517744773. Epub 2017
Dec  15.

Hypercementosis Associated with ENPP1 Mutations and GACI.

Thumbigere-Math V(1)(2), Alqadi A(3), Chalmers NI(4), Chavez MB(5), Chu EY(1),
Collins MT(6), Ferreira CR(7)(8), FitzGerald K(3)(9), Gafni RI(6), Gahl WA(7),
Hsu KS(7), Ramnitz MS(6), Somerman MJ(1), Ziegler SG(10), Foster BL(5).

Author information:
(1)1 National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
(NIAMS), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)2 Division of Periodontics, School of Dentistry, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)3 Division of Public and Child Dental Health, Dublin Dental University
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)4 Analytics and Publication, DentaQuest Institute, Westborough, MA, USA.
(5)5 Division of Biosciences, College of Dentistry, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA.
(6)6 Section on Skeletal Disorders and Mineral Homeostasis, National Institute
of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR), National Institutes of Health
(NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)7 National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), National Institutes of
Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)8 Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's National Health System,
Washington, DC, USA.
(9)9 Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland.
(10)10 Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Mineralization of bones and teeth is tightly regulated by levels of
extracellular inorganic phosphate (Pi) and pyrophosphate (PPi). Three regulators
that control pericellular concentrations of Pi and PPi include
tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), progressive ankylosis protein
(ANK), and ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1).
Inactivation of these factors results in mineralization disorders affecting
teeth and their supporting structures. This study for the first time analyzed
the effect of decreased PPi on dental development in individuals with
generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) due to loss-of-function
mutations in the ENPP1 gene. Four of the 5 subjects reported a history of
infraocclusion, overretained primary teeth, ankylosis, and/or slow orthodontic
tooth movement, suggesting altered mineral metabolism contributing to disrupted
tooth movement and exfoliation. All subjects had radiographic evidence of
unusually protruding cervical root morphology in primary and/or secondary
dentitions. High-resolution micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) analyses of
extracted primary teeth from 3 GACI subjects revealed 4-fold increased cervical
cementum thickness ( P = 0.00007) and a 23% increase in cementum density ( P =
0.009) compared to age-matched healthy control teeth. There were no differences
in enamel and dentin densities between GACI and control teeth. Histology
revealed dramatically expanded cervical cementum in GACI teeth, including
cementocyte-like cells and unusual patterns of cementum resorption and repair.
Micro-CT analysis of Enpp1 mutant mouse molars revealed 4-fold increased
acellular cementum thickness ( P = 0.002) and 5-fold increased cementum volume (
P = 0.002), with no changes in enamel or dentin. Immunohistochemistry identified
elevated ENPP1 expression in cementoblasts of human and mouse control teeth.
Collectively, these findings reveal a novel dental phenotype in GACI and
identify ENPP1 genetic mutations associated with hypercementosis. The
sensitivity of cementum to reduced PPi levels in both human and mouse teeth
establishes this as a well-conserved and fundamental biological process
directing cementogenesis across species (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00369421).

DOI: 10.1177/0022034517744773
PMCID: PMC5863873
PMID: 29244957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of
interest with respect to the authorship and/or publication of this article.
