---
reference_id: "PMID:28554312"
title: "Calcium Signaling, PKC Gamma, IP3R1 and CAR8 Link Spinocerebellar Ataxias and Purkinje Cell Dendritic Development."
authors:
- Shimobayashi E
- Kapfhammer JP
journal: Curr Neuropharmacol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2174/1570159X15666170529104000
keywords:
- Animals
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Calcium Signaling/genetics
- Dendrites/physiology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- "Protein Kinase C/genetics, metabolism"
- Purkinje Cells/cytology
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Carbonic Anhydrases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calcium Signaling, PKC Gamma, IP3R1 and CAR8 Link Spinocerebellar Ataxias and Purkinje Cell Dendritic Development.
**Authors:** Shimobayashi E, Kapfhammer JP
**Journal:** Curr Neuropharmacol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1570159X15666170529104000](https://doi.org/10.2174/1570159X15666170529104000)

## Content

1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2018 Jan 30;16(2):151-159. doi: 
10.2174/1570159X15666170529104000.

Calcium Signaling, PKC Gamma, IP3R1 and CAR8 Link Spinocerebellar Ataxias and 
Purkinje Cell Dendritic Development.

Shimobayashi E(1), Kapfhammer JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Anatomical Institute, Department of Biomedicine Basel, University of Basel, 
Pestalozzistrasse 20, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of cerebellar diseases 
characterized by progressive ataxia and cerebellar atrophy. Several forms of 
SCAs are caused by missense mutations or deletions in genes related to calcium 
signaling in Purkinje cells. Among them, spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14) 
is caused by missense mutations in PRKCG gene which encodes protein kinase C 
gamma (PKCγ). It is remarkable that in several cases in which SCA is caused by 
point mutations in an individual gene, the affected genes are involved in the 
PKCγ signaling pathway and calcium signaling which is not only crucial for 
proper Purkinje cell function but is also involved in the control of Purkinje 
cell dendritic development. In this review, we will focus on the PKCγ signaling 
related genes and calcium signaling related genes then discuss their role for 
both Purkinje cell dendritic development and cerebellar ataxia.
METHODS: Research related to SCAs and Purkinje cell dendritic development is 
reviewed.
RESULTS: PKCγ dysregulation causes abnormal Purkinje cell dendritic development 
and SCA14. Carbonic anhydrase related protein 8 (Car8) encoding CAR8 and Itpr1 
encoding IP3R1were identified as upregulated genes in one of SCA14 mouse model. 
IP3R1, CAR8 and PKCγ proteins are strongly and specifically expressed in 
Purkinje cells. The common function among them is that they are involved in the 
regulation of calcium homeostasis in Purkinje cells and their dysfunction causes 
ataxia in mouse and human. Furthermore, disruption of intracellular calcium 
homeostasis caused by mutations in some calcium channels in Purkinje cells links 
to abnormal Purkinje cell dendritic development and the pathogenesis of several 
SCAs.
CONCLUSION: Once PKCγ signaling related genes and calcium signaling related 
genes are disturbed, the normal dendritic development of Purkinje cells is 
impaired as well as the integration of signals from other neurons, resulting in 
abnormal development, cerebellar dysfunction and eventually Purkinje cell loss.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1570159X15666170529104000
PMCID: PMC5883377
PMID: 28554312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]