---
reference_id: "PMID:39238098"
title: "Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: Updates in pathophysiology and management."
authors:
- Hasegawa A
- Abe R
journal: Chin Med J (Engl)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000003250
keywords:
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/therapy, diagnosis"
- Humans
- Fas Ligand Protein/metabolism
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Allopurinol/therapeutic use
- Carbamazepine/therapeutic use
- Apoptosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: Updates in pathophysiology and management.
**Authors:** Hasegawa A, Abe R
**Journal:** Chin Med J (Engl) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CM9.0000000000003250](https://doi.org/10.1097/CM9.0000000000003250)

## Content

1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2024 Oct 5;137(19):2294-2307. doi: 
10.1097/CM9.0000000000003250. Epub 2024 Sep 5.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: Updates in 
pathophysiology and management.

Hasegawa A(1), Abe R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are 
life-threatening conditions characterized by extensive detachment of the 
epidermis and mucous membranes. These severe disorders carry a high mortality 
rate, and their pathogenesis remains largely unclear. Furthermore, optimal 
therapeutic strategies for SJS/TEN remain a subject of ongoing debate. Early 
diagnosis of SJS/TEN is challenging, and reliable biomarkers for diagnosis or 
severity prediction have not been firmly established. Certain drugs, such as 
carbamazepine and allopurinol, have shown a strong association with specific 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) types. Recently, the potential benefits of HLA 
screening prior to administering these drugs to reduce the incidence of SJS/TEN 
have been explored. Epidermal cell death in SJS/TEN lesions is caused by 
extensive apoptosis, primarily through the Fas-Fas ligand (FasL) and 
perforin/granzyme pathways. Our findings suggest that necroptosis, a form of 
programmed necrosis, also contributes to epidermal cell death. Annexin A1, 
released from monocytes, interacts with the formyl peptide receptor 1 to induce 
necroptosis. Several biomarkers, such as CC chemokine ligand (CCL)-27, 
interleukin-15, galectin-7, receptor-interacting protein kinases 3 (RIP3), and 
lipocalin-2, have been identified for diagnostic and prognostic purposes in 
SJS/TEN. Supportive care is recommended for treating SJS/TEN, but the efficacy 
of various therapeutic options-including systemic corticosteroids, intravenous 
immunoglobulin, cyclosporine, and tumor necrosis factor-α antagonists-remains 
controversial. Recent studies have investigated the potential benefits of tumor 
necrosis factor-α antagonists. In this review, we discuss recent advances in the 
understanding and management of SJS/TEN.

Copyright © 2024 The Chinese Medical Association, produced by Wolters Kluwer, 
Inc. under the CC-BY-NC-ND license.

DOI: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000003250
PMCID: PMC11441865
PMID: 39238098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.