---
reference_id: "PMID:25533656"
title: "Latanoprost for open-angle glaucoma (UKGTS): a randomised, multicentre, placebo-controlled trial"
authors:
- Garway-Heath DF
- Crabb DP
- Bunce C
- Lascaratos G
- Amalfitano F
- Anand N
- Azuara-Blanco A
- Bourne RR
- Broadway DC
- Cunliffe IA
- Diamond JP
- Fraser SG
- Ho TA
- Martin KR
- McNaught AI
- Negi A
- Patel K
- Russell RA
- Shah A
- Spry PG
- Suzuki K
- White ET
- Wormald RP
- Xing W
- Zeyen T
journal: Lancet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)62111-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Latanoprost for open-angle glaucoma (UKGTS): a randomised, multicentre, placebo-controlled trial
**Authors:** Garway-Heath DF, Crabb DP, Bunce C, Lascaratos G, Amalfitano F, Anand N, Azuara-Blanco A, Bourne RR, Broadway DC, Cunliffe IA, Diamond JP, Fraser SG, Ho TA, Martin KR, McNaught AI, Negi A, Patel K, Russell RA, Shah A, Spry PG, Suzuki K, White ET, Wormald RP, Xing W, Zeyen T
**Journal:** Lancet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(14)62111-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)62111-5)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2015 Apr 4;385(9975):1295-304. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)62111-5.
Epub 2014 Dec 19.

Latanoprost for open-angle glaucoma (UKGTS): a randomised, multicentre,
placebo-controlled trial.

Garway-Heath DF, Crabb DP, Bunce C, Lascaratos G, Amalfitano F, Anand N,
Azuara-Blanco A, Bourne RR, Broadway DC, Cunliffe IA, Diamond JP, Fraser SG, Ho
TA, Martin KR, McNaught AI, Negi A, Patel K, Russell RA, Shah A, Spry PG,
Suzuki K, White ET, Wormald RP, Xing W, Zeyen T.

Background: Treatments for open-angle glaucoma aim to prevent vision loss
through lowering of intraocular pressure, but to our knowledge no
placebo-controlled trials have assessed visual function preservation, and the
observation periods of previous (unmasked) trials have typically been at least
5 years. We assessed vision preservation in patients given latanoprost compared
with those given placebo. Methods: In this randomised, triple-masked,
placebo-controlled trial, we enrolled patients with newly diagnosed open-angle
glaucoma at ten UK centres (tertiary referral centres, teaching hospitals, and
district general hospitals). Eligible patients were randomly allocated (1:1)
with a website-generated randomisation schedule, stratified by centre and with
a permuted block design, to receive either latanoprost 0·005% (intervention
group) or placebo (control group) eye drops. Drops were administered from
identical bottles, once a day, to both eyes. The primary outcome was time to
visual field deterioration within 24 months. Analyses were done in all
individuals with follow-up data. The Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC)
recommended stopping the trial on Jan 6, 2011 (last patient visit July, 2011),
after an interim analysis, and suggested a change in primary outcome from the
difference in proportions of patients with incident progression between groups
to time to visual field deterioration within 24 months. This trial is
registered, number ISRCTN96423140. Findings: We enrolled 516 individuals between
Dec 1, 2006, and March 16, 2010. Baseline mean intraocular pressure was 19·6 mm
Hg (SD 4·6) in 258 patients in the latanoprost group and 20·1 mm Hg (4·8) in
258 controls. At 24 months, mean reduction in intraocular pressure was 3·8 mm
Hg (4·0) in 231 patients assessed in the latanoprost group and 0·9 mm Hg (3·8)
in 230 patients assessed in the placebo group. Visual field preservation was
significantly longer in the latanoprost group than in the placebo group:
adjusted hazard ratio (HR) 0·44 (95% CI 0·28-0·69; p=0·0003). We noted 18
serious adverse events, none attributable to the study drug. Interpretation:
This is the first randomised placebo-controlled trial to show preservation of
the visual field with an intraocular-pressure-lowering drug in patients with
open-angle glaucoma. The study design enabled significant differences in vision
to be assessed in a relatively short observation period.

PMID: 25533656
