---
reference_id: "PMID:41499635"
title: cGAS-STING dependent type I IFN reduces Leptospira interrogans renal colonization in mice.
authors:
- Gupta S
- Matsunaga J
- Ratitong B
- Manion A
- Ismaeel S
- Valadares DG
- West AP
- Kerur N
- Stehlik C
- Dorfleutner A
- Dagvadorj J
- Coburn J
- Wolf AJ
- Morrissey MA
- Cassel SL
- Haake DA
- Sutterwala FS
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013250
keywords:
- Animals
- "Nucleotidyltransferases/immunology, metabolism, genetics"
- Leptospira interrogans/immunology
- "Interferon Type I/immunology, metabolism"
- "Leptospirosis/immunology, microbiology, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Membrane Proteins/immunology, metabolism, genetics"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Humans
- "Kidney/microbiology, immunology"
- Signal Transduction/immunology
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Immunity, Innate"
- "Macrophages/immunology, microbiology"
- "Receptor, Interferon alpha-beta/genetics, immunology"
- STING Protein
- Cyclic Guanosine Monophosphate-Adenosine Monophosphate Synthase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# cGAS-STING dependent type I IFN reduces Leptospira interrogans renal colonization in mice.
**Authors:** Gupta S, Matsunaga J, Ratitong B, Manion A, Ismaeel S, Valadares DG, West AP, Kerur N, Stehlik C, Dorfleutner A, Dagvadorj J, Coburn J, Wolf AJ, Morrissey MA, Cassel SL, Haake DA, Sutterwala FS
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1013250](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1013250)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2026 Jan 7;22(1):e1013250. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013250. 
eCollection 2026 Jan.

cGAS-STING dependent type I IFN reduces Leptospira interrogans renal 
colonization in mice.

Gupta S(1)(2), Matsunaga J(3)(4), Ratitong B(1)(2), Manion A(5), Ismaeel S(6), 
Valadares DG(1)(2), West AP(7), Kerur N(8), Stehlik C(6)(9), Dorfleutner 
A(6)(9), Dagvadorj J(1)(2), Coburn J(10)(11), Wolf AJ(9)(12), Morrissey MA(13), 
Cassel SL(1)(2)(9), Haake DA(4)(14), Sutterwala FS(1)(2)(4)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, 
United States of America.
(2)Women's Guild Lung Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(3)Research Service, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(4)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(5)Interdisciplinary Program in Quantitative Biosciences, University of 
California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California, United States of America.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(7)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, United States of America.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, The Ohio State University 
Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
(9)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(10)Department of Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 
United States of America.
(11)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(12)F. Widjaja Inflammatory Bowel Disease Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(13)Molecular Cellular and Developmental Biology Department, University of 
California, Santa Barbara, California, United States of America.
(14)Division of Infectious Diseases, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, 
Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2025 Jun 04:2025.06.02.657349. doi: 10.1101/2025.06.02.657349.

Leptospira interrogans is the major causative agent of leptospirosis. Humans, 
canines and agricultural animals are susceptible to Leptospira species and can 
develop fulminant disease. Rodents serve as reservoir hosts in which the 
bacteria colonize the renal tubules and are excreted in the urine. The host 
immune response to Leptospira spp. remains poorly defined. We show that L. 
interrogans induces a robust type I interferon (IFN) response in human and 
murine macrophages that is dependent on the cytosolic dsDNA sensor Cyclic 
GMP-AMP Synthase (cGAS) and the Stimulator of IFN Genes (STING) signaling 
pathway. Further, we show that mice deficient in the IFNα/β receptor subunit 1 
(IFNAR1) or STING had higher bacterial burdens and increased renal colonization 
following infection in vivo suggesting that cGAS-STING-driven type I IFN is 
required for the host defense against L. interrogans. These findings demonstrate 
the significance of cGAS-STING- dependent type I IFN signaling in mammalian 
innate immune responses to L. interrogans.

Copyright: © 2026 Gupta et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013250
PMCID: PMC12795460
PMID: 41499635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.