---
reference_id: "PMID:21150046"
title: "Teratomas in central nervous system: a clinico-morphological study with review of literature."
authors:
- Agrawal M
- Uppin MS
- Patibandla MR
- Bhattacharjee S
- Panigrahi MK
- Saradhi V
- Rani JY
- Purohit AK
- Challa S
journal: Neurol India
year: '2010'
doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.73740
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/classification, diagnosis, surgery"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neurosurgery
- "Teratoma/classification, diagnosis, surgery"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Teratomas in central nervous system: a clinico-morphological study with review of literature.
**Authors:** Agrawal M, Uppin MS, Patibandla MR, Bhattacharjee S, Panigrahi MK, Saradhi V, Rani JY, Purohit AK, Challa S
**Journal:** Neurol India (2010)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0028-3886.73740](https://doi.org/10.4103/0028-3886.73740)

## Content

1. Neurol India. 2010 Nov-Dec;58(6):841-6. doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.73740.

Teratomas in central nervous system: a clinico-morphological study with review 
of literature.

Agrawal M(1), Uppin MS, Patibandla MR, Bhattacharjee S, Panigrahi MK, Saradhi V, 
Rani JY, Purohit AK, Challa S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Punjagutta, 
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: Cranio-spinal axis teratomas are rare. This subset is interesting 
because symptoms can be varied, depending on the location. Histopathology is 
diagnostic; most of the lesions are benign. Rarely, malignancy develops in any 
of the somatic components.
AIMS: To study the demographic, clinico-morphological and follow-up data of 
central nervous system (CNS) teratomas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cases diagnosed as mature or immature teratomas in the 
CNS over a 20-year period were included in the study. Clinico-radiological, 
demographic and follow-up data of these cases were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 14 tumors were diagnosed as teratomas. Of these, 11 were 
mature cystic teratomas; and 1 case each, of teratoma with malignant 
transformation, terato-carcinoma and mixed germ cell tumor (immature teratoma 
with germinoma). Six of the 14 cases were intracranial and 8 were spinal. 
Presenting features varied according to the location. Radiologically, contrast 
enhancement with predominantly solid component was suggestive of malignancy or 
an aggressive tumor. Morphologically, a variety of tissue derivatives were seen 
in the cases. Excision was curative or provided symptomatic relief in most 
cases; terato-carcinoma and mixed germ cell tumor patients needed adjuvant 
radiotherapy.
CONCLUSION: CNS teratomas are rare. Morphology and location decide outcome.

DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.73740
PMID: 21150046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]