---
reference_id: "PMID:30155579"
title: Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis Function in Children and Adults with Severe Antisocial Behavior and the Impact of Early Adversity.
authors:
- Fairchild G
- Baker E
- Eaton S
journal: Curr Psychiatry Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s11920-018-0952-5
keywords:
- Adult
- Adult Survivors of Child Adverse Events/psychology
- Antisocial Personality Disorder/physiopathology
- Attention Deficit and Disruptive Behavior Disorders/physiopathology
- Child
- Circadian Rhythm
- Humans
- Hydrocortisone/metabolism
- Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System/physiopathology
- Pituitary-Adrenal System/physiopathology
- Sex Characteristics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis Function in Children and Adults with Severe Antisocial Behavior and the Impact of Early Adversity.
**Authors:** Fairchild G, Baker E, Eaton S
**Journal:** Curr Psychiatry Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11920-018-0952-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-018-0952-5)

## Content

1. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2018 Aug 28;20(10):84. doi: 10.1007/s11920-018-0952-5.

Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis Function in Children and Adults with Severe
Antisocial Behavior and the Impact of Early Adversity.

Fairchild G(1), Baker E(2), Eaton S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Bath, Bath, Somerset, BA2 7AY, UK.
G.Fairchild@bath.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Bath, Bath, Somerset, BA2 7AY, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review recent studies investigating
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function in children and adolescents with
disruptive behavior disorders (DBDs) and adults with antisocial personality
disorder. We consider key concepts and methodological issues in cortisol
assessment and review studies investigating basal cortisol secretion and stress
reactivity in antisocial populations. Lastly, we consider whether cortisol
abnormalities predict prognosis or treatment outcomes and the impact of exposure
to adversity on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrena (HPA) axis activity.
RECENT FINDINGS: Studies tracking cortisol levels across the day and assessing
cortisol awakening responses (CARs) have reported broadly intact, but flatter,
diurnal rhythms and lower CARs in children and adolescents with DBDs, whereas
findings in antisocial adults have been mixed. Cortisol hyporeactivity to stress
is consistently reported in male antisocial populations, whereas no comparable
data exist in females. Severe antisocial behavior is associated with cortisol
hyporeactivity to stress, and such hyporeactivity predicts poor treatment
outcomes. Further research investigating sex differences and the impact of
adversity is needed. Harmonization of methods for assessing
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function and antisocial behavior would
enhance progress in this area.

DOI: 10.1007/s11920-018-0952-5
PMCID: PMC6132769
PMID: 30155579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest. HUMAN AND ANIMAL RIGHTS AND INFORMED CONSENT:
This article does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects
performed by any of the authors.
