---
reference_id: "PMID:30657613"
title: Bacterial biofilm is associated with higher levels of regulatory T cells in unaffected hidradenitis suppurativa skin.
authors:
- Kjaersgaard Andersen R
- Ring HC
- Kallenbach K
- Eriksen JO
- Jemec GBE
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/exd.13885
keywords:
- Bacteria/metabolism
- Biofilms
- Biopsy
- CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/cytology
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/cytology
- Case-Control Studies
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Hair Follicle/pathology
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/immunology, microbiology"
- Humans
- Interleukin-17/metabolism
- Interleukin-1beta/metabolism
- Interleukin-2 Receptor alpha Subunit/metabolism
- "Skin/immunology, microbiology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/immunology, microbiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial biofilm is associated with higher levels of regulatory T cells in unaffected hidradenitis suppurativa skin.
**Authors:** Kjaersgaard Andersen R, Ring HC, Kallenbach K, Eriksen JO, Jemec GBE
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/exd.13885](https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.13885)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2019 Mar;28(3):312-316. doi: 10.1111/exd.13885.

Bacterial biofilm is associated with higher levels of regulatory T cells in
unaffected hidradenitis suppurativa skin.

Kjaersgaard Andersen R(1)(2), Ring HC(1), Kallenbach K(2)(3), Eriksen JO(4),
Jemec GBE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zealand, Roskilde, Denmark.
(2)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(3)Department of Pathology, University Hospital Zealand, Roskilde, Denmark.
(4)Department of Pathology, University Hospital Zealand, Naestved, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: The role of bacterial biofilm in hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is
highly debated. Less biofilm is found in clinically unaffected axillary
perilesional skin of HS patients compared with healthy controls.
OBJECTIVE: To study the correlation between biofilm and the phenotypical
characterization of the preclinical inflammatory infiltrate.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: An exploratory comparative study of punch biopsies from
unaffected axillary HS skin compared to similarly biopsies from healthy controls
underwent standard staining procedures for CD4, CD8, CD25, FoxP3 and IL17.
Standard-sized inflammatory histological hotspots were identified manually.
Slides were scanned into Leica Biosystems' Digital Image Hub. Number of stained
cells per slide and hotspot was found using an algorithm.
RESULTS: 12.5% of HS had biofilm compared to 85% of controls. For full slides,
HS patients had more CD4+ cells than controls; HS patients with biofilm had
higher CD4+ cell number than controls with or without biofilm and HS patients
without biofilm. For hotspots, HS patients with biofilm had higher number of
CD4+FoxP3+ cells than HS patients without biofilm and controls with biofilm.
CONCLUSION: The association between biofilm and the number of regulatory T cells
in HS patients supports the concept of dysbiosis as a factor in the preclinical
HS lesions.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.13885
PMID: 30657613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
