---
reference_id: "PMID:25872787"
title: "Tafamidis in transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy: effects on transthyretin stabilization and clinical outcomes."
authors:
- Maurer MS
- Grogan DR
- Judge DP
- Mundayat R
- Packman J
- Lombardo I
- Quyyumi AA
- Aarts J
- Falk RH
journal: Circ Heart Fail
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.000890
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tafamidis in transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy: effects on transthyretin stabilization and clinical outcomes.
**Authors:** Maurer MS, Grogan DR, Judge DP, Mundayat R, Packman J, Lombardo I, Quyyumi AA, Aarts J, Falk RH
**Journal:** Circ Heart Fail (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.000890](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.000890)

## Content

1. Circ Heart Fail. 2015 May;8(3):519-26. doi:
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.000890.  Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Tafamidis in transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy: effects on transthyretin 
stabilization and clinical outcomes.

Maurer MS(1), Grogan DR(2), Judge DP(2), Mundayat R(2), Packman J(2), Lombardo 
I(2), Quyyumi AA(2), Aarts J(2), Falk RH(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Clinical Cardiovascular Research Laboratory for the Elderly (CCRLE), 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York Presbyterian Hospital (M.S.M.); 
Drug Development Department, FoldRx Pharmaceuticals/Pfizer Inc, Cambridge, MA 
(D.R.G., J.P.); Department of Medicine/Cardiology, Center for Inherited Heart 
Disease, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD (D.P.J.); Global Medicines 
Development (GMD) (J.A., I.L.) and Global Innovative Pharma - Statistics (R.M.), 
Pfizer Inc, New York, NY; Department of Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA (A.A.Q.); and Department of Cardiology, Harvard Vanguard 
Medical Associates, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (R.H.F.). 
msm10@columbia.edu.
(2)From the Clinical Cardiovascular Research Laboratory for the Elderly (CCRLE), 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York Presbyterian Hospital (M.S.M.); 
Drug Development Department, FoldRx Pharmaceuticals/Pfizer Inc, Cambridge, MA 
(D.R.G., J.P.); Department of Medicine/Cardiology, Center for Inherited Heart 
Disease, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD (D.P.J.); Global Medicines 
Development (GMD) (J.A., I.L.) and Global Innovative Pharma - Statistics (R.M.), 
Pfizer Inc, New York, NY; Department of Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA (A.A.Q.); and Department of Cardiology, Harvard Vanguard 
Medical Associates, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (R.H.F.).

BACKGROUND: Transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis is a progressive systemic disorder 
caused by misfolded TTR monomers that cumulatively deposit in the heart and 
systemically as amyloid.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This phase 2 open-label trial evaluated the stabilization 
of TTR tetramers using 20 mg of tafamidis daily at week 6 (primary end point), 
month 6, and month 12, as well as safety of tafamidis treatment and efficacy 
with respect to progression of TTR amyloid cardiomyopathy. Thirty-one wild-type 
patients (median age, 76.7 years; 93.5% men) with a median disease duration of 
55.6 months and mild to moderate heart failure (96.8%; New York Heart 
Association, classes I-II) were enrolled. Thirty of 31 patients (96.8%) achieved 
TTR stabilization after 6 weeks and 25 of 28 patients (89.3%) after 12 months. 
After 12 months of treatment, 3 patients discontinued prematurely, 2 patients 
died, 7 patients were hospitalized because of cardiovascular events, 20 of 28 
patients demonstrated preserved New York Heart Association classification 
status, but 15 of 31 (48.4%) patients had clinical progression (eg, admission 
for cardiac failure, atrial fibrillation, and syncope). N-terminal prohormone 
brain natriuretic peptide levels did not increase significantly over time, 
troponin I and troponin T increased moderately, and no consistent clinically 
relevant changes were seen in echocardiographic cardiac assessments. Tafamidis 
treatment was generally well tolerated although 7 of 31 patients had bouts of 
diarrhea.
CONCLUSIONS: Tafamidis treatment effectively achieved and maintained TTR 
stabilization and was well tolerated. The absence of significant changes in most 
biochemical and echocardiographic parameters suggests that further evaluation of 
tafamidis in TTR amyloid cardiomyopathy is warranted.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: URL: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique 
identifier: NCT00694161.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.000890
PMID: 25872787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]