---
reference_id: "PMID:21674519"
title: "Anti-MuSK antibody myasthenia gravis: clinical findings and response to treatment in two large cohorts."
authors:
- Guptill JT
- Sanders DB
- Evoli A
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/mus.22006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-MuSK antibody myasthenia gravis: clinical findings and response to treatment in two large cohorts.
**Authors:** Guptill JT, Sanders DB, Evoli A
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.22006](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.22006)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2011 Jul;44(1):36-40. doi: 10.1002/mus.22006.

Anti-MuSK antibody myasthenia gravis: clinical findings and response to 
treatment in two large cohorts.

Guptill JT(1), Sanders DB, Evoli A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Myasthenia gravis (MG) patients with autoantibodies to 
muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK) represent a distinct subset of those with 
this disease. Treatment and outcomes data in these patients are limited and 
conflicting.
METHODS: We reviewed 110 MuSK-MG patients from two large clinics in Italy and 
the USA.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine to 49% of patients with generalized, acetylcholine receptor 
antibody (AChR-Ab)-negative MG had MuSK-MG. Eighty-five percent were female, 
with disease onset typically in the fourth decade. Ocular and/or bulbar symptoms 
were present at onset in 79% of those studied. Eighty-five percent were MGFA 
class III or greater, and crisis occurred in 28%. Plasma exchange (PLEX) 
produced improvement in 93%, whereas only 61% improved after intravenous 
immunoglobulin. Long-term outcomes were comparable to those of patients with 
AChR-Ab-positive MG.
CONCLUSIONS: MuSK-MG has a marked female predominance with frequent oculobulbar 
weakness and crises. Many patients deteriorate rapidly early in the disease, and 
PLEX is usually the preferred treatment. Long-term outcomes are similar to those 
of patients with AChR-Ab(+) MG.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.22006
PMID: 21674519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]