---
reference_id: "PMID:28938470"
title: Genetic Disruption of 21-Hydroxylase in Zebrafish Causes Interrenal Hyperplasia.
authors:
- Eachus H
- Zaucker A
- Oakes JA
- Griffin A
- Weger M
- Güran T
- Taylor A
- Harris A
- Greenfield A
- Quanson JL
- Storbeck KH
- Cunliffe VT
- Müller F
- Krone N
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1210/en.2017-00549
keywords:
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/embryology, enzymology, genetics"
- Animals
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian/embryology, enzymology, metabolism"
- "Fish Diseases/embryology, enzymology, genetics"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Glucocorticoids/biosynthesis
- "Hyperplasia/enzymology, genetics"
- In Situ Hybridization
- "Interrenal Gland/embryology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Larva/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Steroid 21-Hydroxylase/genetics, metabolism"
- Zebrafish
- "Zebrafish Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Disruption of 21-Hydroxylase in Zebrafish Causes Interrenal Hyperplasia.
**Authors:** Eachus H, Zaucker A, Oakes JA, Griffin A, Weger M, Güran T, Taylor A, Harris A, Greenfield A, Quanson JL, Storbeck KH, Cunliffe VT, Müller F, Krone N
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1210/en.2017-00549](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2017-00549)

## Content

1. Endocrinology. 2017 Dec 1;158(12):4165-4173. doi: 10.1210/en.2017-00549.

Genetic Disruption of 21-Hydroxylase in Zebrafish Causes Interrenal Hyperplasia.

Eachus H(1), Zaucker A(2), Oakes JA(1)(3), Griffin A(2), Weger M(2), Güran T(2), 
Taylor A(2), Harris A(4), Greenfield A(4), Quanson JL(5), Storbeck KH(5), 
Cunliffe VT(1), Müller F(6), Krone N(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, The Bateson Centre, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, College of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(3)Academic Unit of Child Health, Department of Oncology and Metabolism, 
University of Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(4)Mammalian Genetics Unit, Medical Research Council, Harwell Institute, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South 
Africa.
(6)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, College 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, United Kingdom.

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is a group of common inherited disorders leading 
to glucocorticoid deficiency. Most cases are caused by 21-hydroxylase deficiency 
(21OHD). The systemic consequences of imbalanced steroid hormone biosynthesis 
due to severe 21OHD remains poorly understood. Therefore, we developed a 
zebrafish model for 21OHD, which focuses on the impairment of glucocorticoid 
biosynthesis. A single 21-hydroxylase gene (cyp21a2) is annotated in the 
zebrafish genome based on sequence homology. Our in silico analysis of the 
21-hydroxylase (Cyp21a2) protein sequence suggests a sufficient degree of 
similarity for the usage of zebrafish cyp21a2 to model aspects of human 21OHD in 
vivo. We determined the spatiotemporal expression patterns of cyp21a2 by 
whole-mount in situ hybridization and reverse transcription polymerase chain 
reaction throughout early development. Early cyp21a2 expression is restricted to 
the interrenal gland (zebrafish adrenal counterpart) and the brain. To further 
explore the in vivo consequences of 21OHD we created several cyp21a2 null-allele 
zebrafish lines by using a transcription activator-like effector nuclease 
genomic engineering strategy. Homozygous mutant zebrafish larvae showed an 
upregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-interrenal (HPI) axis and interrenal 
hyperplasia. Furthermore, Cyp21a2-deficient larvae had a typical steroid 
profile, with reduced concentrations of cortisol and increased concentrations of 
17-hydroxyprogesterone and 21-deoxycortisol. Affected larvae showed an 
upregulation of the HPI axis and interrenal hyperplasia. Downregulation of the 
glucocorticoid-responsive genes pck1 and fkbp5 indicated systemic glucocorticoid 
deficiency. Our work demonstrates the crucial role of Cyp21a2 in glucocorticoid 
biosynthesis in zebrafish larvae and establishes an in vivo model allowing 
studies of systemic consequences of altered steroid hormone synthesis.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2017-00549
PMCID: PMC5711382
PMID: 28938470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]