---
reference_id: "PMID:26937169"
title: "Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy: current perspectives."
authors:
- Vedana G
- Villarreal G Jr
- Jun AS
journal: Clin Ophthalmol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S83467
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy: current perspectives.
**Authors:** Vedana G, Villarreal G Jr, Jun AS
**Journal:** Clin Ophthalmol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.2147/OPTH.S83467](https://doi.org/10.2147/OPTH.S83467)

## Content

1. Clin Ophthalmol. 2016 Feb 18;10:321-30. doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S83467. eCollection
2016.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy: current perspectives.

Vedana G(1), Villarreal G Jr(1), Jun AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is the most common corneal dystrophy
and frequently results in vision loss. Hallmarks of the disease include loss of
corneal endothelial cells and formation of excrescences of Descemet's membrane.
Later stages involve all layers of the cornea. Impairment of endothelial barrier
and pump function and cell death from oxidative and unfolded protein stress
contribute to disease progression. The genetic basis of FECD includes numerous
genes and chromosomal loci, although alterations in the transcription factor 4
gene are associated with the majority of cases. Definitive treatment of FECD is
corneal transplantation. In this paper, we highlight advances that have been
made in understanding FECD's clinical features, pathophysiology, and genetics.
We also discuss recent advances in endothelial keratoplasty and potential future
treatments.

DOI: 10.2147/OPTH.S83467
PMCID: PMC4762439
PMID: 26937169
