---
reference_id: "PMID:37115331"
title: "BRAF inhibitors in BRAF V600E-mutated ameloblastoma: systematic review of rare cases in the literature."
authors:
- Ebeling M
- Scheurer M
- Sakkas A
- Pietzka S
- Schramm A
- Wilde F
journal: Med Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12032-023-01993-z
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Child
- Vemurafenib
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Ameloblastoma/drug therapy, genetics, chemically induced"
- "Imidazoles/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Mutation
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Oximes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF inhibitors in BRAF V600E-mutated ameloblastoma: systematic review of rare cases in the literature.
**Authors:** Ebeling M, Scheurer M, Sakkas A, Pietzka S, Schramm A, Wilde F
**Journal:** Med Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12032-023-01993-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12032-023-01993-z)

## Content

1. Med Oncol. 2023 Apr 28;40(6):163. doi: 10.1007/s12032-023-01993-z.

BRAF inhibitors in BRAF V600E-mutated ameloblastoma: systematic review of rare 
cases in the literature.

Ebeling M(1), Scheurer M(2), Sakkas A(3)(4), Pietzka S(3)(4), Schramm A(3)(4), 
Wilde F(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Plastic Maxillofacial Surgery, Military Hospital Ulm, 
Academic Hospital of the University of Ulm, Oberer Eselsberg 40, 89081, Ulm, 
Germany. Marcelebeling@bundeswehr.org.
(2)Department of Oral and Plastic Maxillofacial Surgery, Military Hospital Ulm, 
Academic Hospital of the University of Ulm, Oberer Eselsberg 40, 89081, Ulm, 
Germany. Marioscheurer@bundeswehr.org.
(3)Department of Oral and Plastic Maxillofacial Surgery, Military Hospital Ulm, 
Academic Hospital of the University of Ulm, Oberer Eselsberg 40, 89081, Ulm, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Oral and Plastic Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital 
Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 10, 89081, Ulm, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Ameloblastoma in 66% of the cases harbor a somatic mutation of the 
"mitogen-activated protein kinase" signaling pathway (BRAF V600E). In V600E 
mutations, BRAF is in the permanent "on" state and relays the growth-promoting 
signals independently of the EGFR pathway. Therefore, mutant BRAF represents a 
target for handful of new drugs.
METHODS: We conducted a literature search, with the search terms "Vemurafenib, 
Dabrafenib, Ameloblastoma, and BRAF." These included seven case reports with 
nine patients who underwent monotherapy with Dabrafenib or Vemurafenib or 
combination therapy with Dabrafenib and Trametinib.
RESULTS: The patients age ranges from 10 years up to 86 years. The distribution 
of women and men is 4:5. Patients with an initial diagnosis of ameloblastoma, as 
well as recurrences or metastasized ameloblastoma were treated. Indications 
cover neoadjuvant therapy up to the use in metastasized patients in an 
irresectable state. Results ranging from "only" tumor size reduction to 
restitutio ad integrum.
CONCLUSION: We see the use of BRAF Inhibitors to reduce tumor size with 
consecutive surgical treatment as a reasonable option for therapy. However, we 
are aware that at present the data are based only on case reports with the 
longest follow-up of just 38 months. We encourage further clinical trials in the 
use of BRAF Inhibitors for selecting ameloblastoma patients in a multi-center 
setting.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-023-01993-z
PMCID: PMC10147738
PMID: 37115331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they no conflict of 
interest.