---
reference_id: "PMID:34210367"
title: The frequency and efficacy of genetic testing in individuals with scimitar syndrome.
authors:
- Fick TA
- Scott DA
- Lupo PJ
- Weigand J
- Morris SA
journal: Cardiol Young
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1017/S1047951121002535
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The frequency and efficacy of genetic testing in individuals with scimitar syndrome.
**Authors:** Fick TA, Scott DA, Lupo PJ, Weigand J, Morris SA
**Journal:** Cardiol Young (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1047951121002535](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1047951121002535)

## Content

1. Cardiol Young. 2022 Apr;32(4):550-557. doi: 10.1017/S1047951121002535. Epub
2021  Jul 2.

The frequency and efficacy of genetic testing in individuals with scimitar 
syndrome.

Fick TA(1), Scott DA(2)(3), Lupo PJ(4), Weigand J(1), Morris SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Cardiology, Texas Children's 
Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Hematology-Oncology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Scimitar syndrome is a rare CHD composed of partial anomalous 
pulmonary venous connection from the right lung, via a scimitar vein, to the 
inferior vena cava rather than the left atrium. Genetic conditions associated 
with scimitar syndrome have not been well investigated at present.
METHODS: Our study included patients with scimitar syndrome diagnosed at Texas 
Children's Hospital from January 1987 to July 2020. Medical records were 
evaluated to determine if genetic testing was performed, including chromosomal 
microarray analysis or whole-exome sequencing. Copy number variants identified 
as pathogenic/likely pathogenic and variants of unknown significance were 
collected. Analyses of cardiac and extracardiac findings were performed via 
chart review.
RESULTS: Ninety-eight patients were identified with scimitar syndrome, 89 of 
which met inclusion criteria. A chromosome analysis or chromosomal microarray 
analysis was performed in 18 patients (20%). Whole-exome sequencing was 
performed in six patients following negative chromosomal microarray analysis 
testing. A molecular genetic diagnosis was made in 7 of 18 cases (39% of those 
tested). Ninety-six per cent of the cohort had some type of extracardiac 
finding, with 43% having asthma and 20% having a gastrointestinal pathology. Of 
the seven patients with positive genetic testing, all had extracardiac anomalies 
with all but one having gastrointestinal findings and 30% having congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic testing revealed an underlying diagnosis in roughly 40% of 
those tested. Given the relatively high prevalence of pathogenic variants, we 
recommend chromosomal microarray analysis and whole-exome sequencing for 
patients with scimitar syndrome and extracardiac defects.

DOI: 10.1017/S1047951121002535
PMCID: PMC8988429
PMID: 34210367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The Frequency and Efficacy 
of Genetic Testing in Individuals with Scimitar Syndrome – none