---
reference_id: "PMID:37723136"
title: Bisphosphonate conjugation enhances the bone-specificity of NELL-1-based systemic therapy for spaceflight-induced bone loss in mice.
authors:
- Ha P
- Kwak JH
- Zhang Y
- Shi J
- Tran L
- Liu TP
- Pan HC
- Lee S
- Kim JK
- Chen E
- Shirazi-Fard Y
- Stodieck LS
- Lin A
- Zheng Z
- Dong SN
- Zhang X
- Wu BM
- Ting K
- Soo C
journal: NPJ Microgravity
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41526-023-00319-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bisphosphonate conjugation enhances the bone-specificity of NELL-1-based systemic therapy for spaceflight-induced bone loss in mice.
**Authors:** Ha P, Kwak JH, Zhang Y, Shi J, Tran L, Liu TP, Pan HC, Lee S, Kim JK, Chen E, Shirazi-Fard Y, Stodieck LS, Lin A, Zheng Z, Dong SN, Zhang X, Wu BM, Ting K, Soo C
**Journal:** NPJ Microgravity (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41526-023-00319-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-023-00319-7)

## Content

1. NPJ Microgravity. 2023 Sep 18;9(1):75. doi: 10.1038/s41526-023-00319-7.

Bisphosphonate conjugation enhances the bone-specificity of NELL-1-based 
systemic therapy for spaceflight-induced bone loss in mice.

Ha P(#)(1)(2), Kwak JH(#)(3), Zhang Y(#)(4)(5), Shi J(6), Tran L(1)(2)(6), Liu 
TP(1)(2), Pan HC(6), Lee S(1)(2), Kim JK(1), Chen E(6), Shirazi-Fard Y(7), 
Stodieck LS(8), Lin A(9), Zheng Z(1)(2), Dong SN(6), Zhang X(6), Wu 
BM(10)(11)(12)(13), Ting K(14), Soo C(15)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Surgery, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, 90095, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and the Orthopaedic Hospital Research 
Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(3)Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, 90089, USA.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied 
Science, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(5)Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
(6)School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 
90095, USA.
(7)Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, 
94035, USA.
(8)BioServe Space Technologies and Aerospace Engineering Sciences, University of 
Colorado, Boulder, CO, 80303, USA.
(9)Office of Advanced Research Computing, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(10)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and the Orthopaedic Hospital Research 
Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. bwu@forsyth.org.
(11)Department of Bioengineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering and 
Applied Science, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, 
USA. bwu@forsyth.org.
(12)Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA. bwu@forsyth.org.
(13)School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 
90095, USA. bwu@forsyth.org.
(14)Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA. erickangting@gmail.com.
(15)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Surgery, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, 90095, USA. bsoo@ucla.edu.
(16)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and the Orthopaedic Hospital Research 
Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. bsoo@ucla.edu.
(17)Department of Bioengineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering and 
Applied Science, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, 
USA. bsoo@ucla.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Microgravity-induced bone loss results in a 1% bone mineral density loss monthly 
and can be a mission critical factor in long-duration spaceflight. Biomolecular 
therapies with dual osteogenic and anti-resorptive functions are promising for 
treating extreme osteoporosis. We previously confirmed that NELL-like molecule-1 
(NELL-1) is crucial for bone density maintenance. We further PEGylated NELL-1 
(NELL-polyethylene glycol, or NELL-PEG) to increase systemic delivery half-life 
from 5.5 to 15.5 h. In this study, we used a bio-inert bisphosphonate (BP) 
moiety to chemically engineer NELL-PEG into BP-NELL-PEG and specifically target 
bone tissues. We found conjugation with BP improved hydroxyapatite (HA) binding 
and protein stability of NELL-PEG while preserving NELL-1's osteogenicity in 
vitro. Furthermore, BP-NELL-PEG showed superior in vivo bone specificity without 
observable pathology in liver, spleen, lungs, brain, heart, muscles, or ovaries 
of mice. Finally, we tested BP-NELL-PEG through spaceflight exposure onboard the 
International Space Station (ISS) at maximal animal capacity (n = 40) in a 
long-term (9 week) osteoporosis therapeutic study and found that BP-NELL-PEG 
significantly increased bone formation in flight and ground control mice without 
obvious adverse health effects. Our results highlight BP-NELL-PEG as a promising 
therapeutic to mitigate extreme bone loss from long-duration microgravity 
exposure and musculoskeletal degeneration on Earth, especially when resistance 
training is not possible due to incapacity (e.g., bone fracture, stroke).

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41526-023-00319-7
PMCID: PMC10507033
PMID: 37723136

Conflict of interest statement: C.S., K.T., B.W., X.Z., and/or Z.Z. are 
inventors on Nell-1 related patents assigned to UCLA. C.S., K.T., B.W., and X.Z. 
are founders and/or past board members of Bone Biologics Inc./Bone Biologic 
Corp., which sublicenses NELL-1 patents from the UC Regents, which also hold 
equity in the company. The other authors declare no competing interests.