---
reference_id: "PMID:31230583"
title: "Clinical factors associated with the development of nonuse learned after stroke: a prospective study."
authors:
- Molle Da Costa RD
- Luvizutto GJ
- Martins LG
- Thomaz De Souza J
- Regina Da Silva T
- Alvarez Sartor LC
- Winckler FC
- Modolo GP
- Molle ERDSD
- Dos Anjos SM
- Bazan SGZ
- Cuadrado LM
- Bazan R
journal: Top Stroke Rehabil
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/10749357.2019.1631605
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Aged
- Anxiety/psychology
- Cohort Studies
- Depression/psychology
- Disability Evaluation
- Female
- Hand Strength
- Humans
- Linear Models
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mobility Limitation
- "Models, Statistical"
- Motor Activity
- Muscle Strength
- Patient Discharge
- Personal Autonomy
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prospective Studies
- Quality of Life
- "Stroke/physiopathology, psychology"
- Upper Extremity/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical factors associated with the development of nonuse learned after stroke: a prospective study.
**Authors:** Molle Da Costa RD, Luvizutto GJ, Martins LG, Thomaz De Souza J, Regina Da Silva T, Alvarez Sartor LC, Winckler FC, Modolo GP, Molle ERDSD, Dos Anjos SM, Bazan SGZ, Cuadrado LM, Bazan R
**Journal:** Top Stroke Rehabil (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10749357.2019.1631605](https://doi.org/10.1080/10749357.2019.1631605)

## Content

1. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2019 Oct;26(7):511-517. doi:
10.1080/10749357.2019.1631605.  Epub 2019 Jun 22.

Clinical factors associated with the development of nonuse learned after stroke: 
a prospective study.

Molle Da Costa RD(1), Luvizutto GJ(2), Martins LG(1), Thomaz De Souza J(3), 
Regina Da Silva T(1), Alvarez Sartor LC(3), Winckler FC(3), Modolo GP(4), Molle 
ERDSD(1), Dos Anjos SM(5), Bazan SGZ(3), Cuadrado LM(3), Bazan R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of rehabilitation Center, Botucatu Medical School , Botucatu , 
Brazil.
(2)Department of Applied Physical Therapy, Federal University of Triângulo 
Mineiro , Uberaba , Brazil.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Botucatu Medical School , Botucatu , Brazil.
(4)Department of Neurology, Psychology and Psychiatry, Botucatu Medical School , 
Botucatu , Brazil.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama , Birmingham , AL , USA.

Background: Upper extremity impairment is present in most of people with stroke. 
The use of the affected upper extremity can be impacted not only by physical 
impairment but also by abehavioral phenomenon called learned nonuse. Objective: 
The aim of this study was to evaluate which clinical factors in the acute phase 
are associated with the development of learned nonuse in the upper extremity 
after stroke. Methods: This cohort study included 38 patients with ischemic 
stroke. Hospital discharge data were collected for clinical aspects, scales of 
severity, incapacity and autonomy, as well as for neuromuscular and sensory 
evaluations. At 90 days after hospital discharge, the score on the Motor 
Activity Log scale for detecting learned nonuse was obtained, and life quality 
was evaluated by the EuroQol. The individuals with and without learned nonuse 
were compared by attest for univariate analysis, and ageneralized linear model 
was employed to find possible predictors, which were considered significant p 
<0.05. Results: In the statistical model, age (p= .006), severity at discharge 
(p= .036), handgrip strength (p= .000), altered sensitivity (p= .011), 
incapacity at discharge (p= .009) and autonomy at discharge (p= .011) were found 
to be associated with learned nonuse. In relation to quality of life, mobility, 
personal care, usual activities, anxiety, depression and perception had lower 
mean values in the learned nonuse group. Conclusion: Age, severity of stroke, 
incapacity and neuromuscular and sensory compromises are associated with upper 
extremity learned nonuse in stroke patients.

DOI: 10.1080/10749357.2019.1631605
PMID: 31230583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]