---
reference_id: "PMID:38135926"
title: Early Clinical Evaluation of Coronary Artery Lesions in Kawasaki Disease.
authors:
- Shu Z
- Deng F
- Yang S
journal: Clin Pediatr (Phila)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/00099228231219501
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Clinical Evaluation of Coronary Artery Lesions in Kawasaki Disease.
**Authors:** Shu Z, Deng F, Yang S
**Journal:** Clin Pediatr (Phila) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00099228231219501](https://doi.org/10.1177/00099228231219501)

## Content

1. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2024 Oct;63(9):1287-1291. doi:
10.1177/00099228231219501.  Epub 2023 Dec 22.

Early Clinical Evaluation of Coronary Artery Lesions in Kawasaki Disease.

Shu Z(1)(2), Deng F(1), Yang S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Provincial Children's Hospital, Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei, China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei, China.
(3)The Southern District Laboratory Department, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.

The purpose of this study is to analyze the early clinical features of coronary 
artery lesion (CAL) in Kawasaki disease (KD), evaluate systemic inflammation 
indicators, and enhance early recognition of CAL in the acute phase of KD. A 
total of 314 children with KD were divided into those with CAL (CAL group) and 
without CAL (NCAL group) using echocardiographic results, and their clinical 
data were retrospectively analyzed. For KD patients, male, children aged 3 to 9 
years, and those with fever longer than 6 days before intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIG) use were more likely to have CAL. There were significant differences in 
sex, age, and fever time (P < .05). Moreover, some laboratory indicator test 
results revealed there was a significant difference between N-terminal pro-brain 
natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), and the CAL (P < 
.05). This study has certain guiding significance for early clinical evaluation.

DOI: 10.1177/00099228231219501
PMID: 38135926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.