---
reference_id: "PMID:18503727"
title: Mechanisms in allergic airway inflammation - lessons from studies in the mouse.
authors:
- Shum BO
- Rolph MS
- Sewell WA
journal: Expert Rev Mol Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1017/S1462399408000707
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms in allergic airway inflammation - lessons from studies in the mouse.
**Authors:** Shum BO, Rolph MS, Sewell WA
**Journal:** Expert Rev Mol Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1462399408000707](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1462399408000707)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2008 May 27;10:e15. doi: 10.1017/S1462399408000707.

Mechanisms in allergic airway inflammation - lessons from studies in the mouse.

Shum BO(1), Rolph MS, Sewell WA.

Author information:
(1)Immunology and Inflammation Research Program, Garvan Institute for Medical 
Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia.

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airways, involving recurrent 
episodes of airway obstruction and wheezing. A common pathological feature in 
asthma is the presence of a characteristic allergic airway inflammatory response 
involving extensive leukocyte infiltration, mucus overproduction and airway 
hyper-reactivity. The pathogenesis of allergic airway inflammation is complex, 
involving multiple cell types such as T helper 2 cells, regulatory T cells, 
eosinophils, dendritic cells, mast cells, and parenchymal cells of the lung. The 
cellular response in allergic airway inflammation is controlled by a broad range 
of bioactive mediators, including IgE, cytokines and chemokines. The asthmatic 
allergic inflammatory response has been a particular focus of efforts to develop 
novel therapeutic agents. Animal models are widely used to investigate 
inflammatory mechanisms. Although these models are not perfect replicas of 
clinical asthma, such studies have led to the development of numerous novel 
therapeutic agents, of which some have already been successful in clinical 
trials.

DOI: 10.1017/S1462399408000707
PMID: 18503727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]