---
reference_id: "PMID:11120765"
title: "JM2, encoding a fork head-related protein, is mutated in X-linked autoimmunity-allergic disregulation syndrome."
authors:
- Chatila TA
- Blaeser F
- Ho N
- Lederman HM
- Voulgaropoulos C
- Helms C
- Bowcock AM
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1172/JCI11679
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Autoimmune Diseases/genetics, immunology"
- Base Sequence
- Cell Differentiation
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1/genetics, immunology"
- Female
- "Food Hypersensitivity/genetics, immunology"
- Forkhead Transcription Factors
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Leucine Zippers
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Nuclear Proteins/chemistry, genetics, immunology"
- Pedigree
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Syndrome
- "Th2 Cells/cytology, immunology"
- "Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics, immunology"
- "X Chromosome/genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# JM2, encoding a fork head-related protein, is mutated in X-linked autoimmunity-allergic disregulation syndrome.
**Authors:** Chatila TA, Blaeser F, Ho N, Lederman HM, Voulgaropoulos C, Helms C, Bowcock AM
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI11679](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI11679)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2000 Dec;106(12):R75-81. doi: 10.1172/JCI11679.

JM2, encoding a fork head-related protein, is mutated in X-linked 
autoimmunity-allergic disregulation syndrome.

Chatila TA(1), Blaeser F, Ho N, Lederman HM, Voulgaropoulos C, Helms C, Bowcock 
AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, and. Department of Pathology and Immunology and the 
Center for Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA. chatila@kids.wustl.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2001 Jan;107(2):155-7. doi: 10.1172/JCI11966.

X-linked autoimmunity-allergic disregulation syndrome (XLAAD) is an X-linked 
recessive immunological disorder characterized by multisystem autoimmunity, 
particularly early-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus, associated with 
manifestations of severe atopy including eczema, food allergy, and eosinophilic 
inflammation. Consistent with the allergic phenotype, analysis of two kindreds 
with XLAAD revealed marked skewing of patient T lymphocytes toward the Th2 
phenotype. Using a positional-candidate approach, we have identified in both 
kindreds mutations in JM2, a gene on Xp11.23 that encodes a fork head 
domain-containing protein. One point mutation at a splice junction site results 
in transcripts that encode a truncated protein lacking the fork head homology 
domain. The other mutation involves an in-frame, 3-bp deletion that is predicted 
to impair the function of a leucine zipper dimerization domain. Our results 
point to a critical role for JM2 in self tolerance and Th cell differentiation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI11679
PMCID: PMC387260
PMID: 11120765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]