---
reference_id: "PMID:37520433"
title: Whole-genome sequencing reveals changes in genomic diversity and distinctive repertoires of T3SS and T6SS effector candidates in Chilean clinical Campylobacter strains.
authors:
- Katz A
- Porte L
- Weitzel T
- Varela C
- Muñoz-Rehbein C
- Ugalde JA
- Grim C
- González-Escalona N
- Blondel CJ
- Bravo V
journal: Front Cell Infect Microbiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1208825
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-genome sequencing reveals changes in genomic diversity and distinctive repertoires of T3SS and T6SS effector candidates in Chilean clinical Campylobacter strains.
**Authors:** Katz A, Porte L, Weitzel T, Varela C, Muñoz-Rehbein C, Ugalde JA, Grim C, González-Escalona N, Blondel CJ, Bravo V
**Journal:** Front Cell Infect Microbiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcimb.2023.1208825](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2023.1208825)

## Content

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2023 Jul 13;13:1208825. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1208825. eCollection 2023.

Whole-genome sequencing reveals changes in genomic diversity and distinctive 
repertoires of T3SS and T6SS effector candidates in Chilean clinical 
Campylobacter strains.

Katz A(1), Porte L(2), Weitzel T(2)(3), Varela C(2), Muñoz-Rehbein C(4), Ugalde 
JA(4), Grim C(5), González-Escalona N(5), Blondel CJ(6), Bravo V(7).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Biología Celular y Molecular, ICBM, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Laboratorio Clínico, Clínica Alemana de Santiago, Facultad de Medicina, 
Clínica Alemana, Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Instituto de Ciencias e Innovación en Medicina (ICIM), Facultad de Medicina 
Clínica Alemana, Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Center for Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, Facultad de Ciencias de la 
Vida, Universidad Andrés Bello, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food and Drug Administration, 
College Park, MD, United States.
(6)Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de Medicina y Facultad de Ciencias 
de la Vida, Universidad Andrés Bello, Santiago, Chile.
(7)Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas y Aplicadas (CIBAP), Escuela de 
Medicina, Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Universidad de Santiago de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.

Campylobacter is the leading cause of bacterial gastroenteritis worldwide and an 
emerging and neglected pathogen in South America. This zoonotic pathogen 
colonizes the gastrointestinal tract of a wide range of mammals and birds, with 
poultry as the most important reservoir for human infections. Apart from its 
high morbidity rates, the emergence of resistant strains is of global concern. 
The aims of this work were to determine genetic diversity, presence of 
antimicrobial resistance determinants and virulence potential of Campylobacter 
spp. isolated from patients with acute gastrointestinal disease at 'Clinica 
Alemana', Santiago de Chile. The study considered the isolation of Campylobacter 
spp., from stool samples during a 20-month period (January 2020 to September 
2021). We sequenced (NextSeq, Illumina) and performed an in-depth analysis of 
the genome sequences of 88 Campylobacter jejuni and 2 Campylobacter coli strains 
isolated from clinical samples in Chile. We identified a high genetic diversity 
among C. jejuni strains and the emergence of prevalent clonal complexes, which 
were not identified in our previous reports. While ~40% of strains harbored a 
mutation in the gyrA gene associated with fluoroquinolone resistance, no 
macrolide-resistance determinants were detected. Interestingly, gene clusters 
encoding virulence factors such as the T6SS or genes associated with long-term 
sequelae such as Guillain-Barré syndrome showed lineage-relatedness. In 
addition, our analysis revealed a high degree of variability regarding the 
presence of fT3SS and T6SS effector proteins in comparison to type strains 
81-176, F38011, and NCTC 11168 and 488. Our study provides important insights 
into the molecular epidemiology of this emerging foodborne pathogen. In 
addition, the differences observed regarding the repertoire of fT3SS and T6SS 
effector proteins could have an impact on the pathogenic potential and 
transmissibility of these Latin American isolates, posing another challenge in 
characterizing the infection dynamics of this emergent and neglected bacterial 
pathogen.

Copyright © 2023 Katz, Porte, Weitzel, Varela, Muñoz-Rehbein, Ugalde, Grim, 
González-Escalona, Blondel and Bravo.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1208825
PMCID: PMC10374022
PMID: 37520433

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.