---
reference_id: "PMID:31558729"
title: Gout.
authors:
- Dalbeth N
- Choi HK
- Joosten LAB
- Khanna PP
- Matsuo H
- Perez-Ruiz F
- Stamp LK
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0115-y
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- "Gout/blood, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Gout Suppressants/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Risk Factors
- "Uric Acid/analysis, blood"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gout.
**Authors:** Dalbeth N, Choi HK, Joosten LAB, Khanna PP, Matsuo H, Perez-Ruiz F, Stamp LK
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-019-0115-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-019-0115-y)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2019 Sep 26;5(1):69. doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0115-y.

Gout.

Dalbeth N(1), Choi HK(2), Joosten LAB(3), Khanna PP(4), Matsuo H(5), Perez-Ruiz 
F(6), Stamp LK(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. 
n.dalbeth@auckland.ac.nz.
(2)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
Netherlands.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Integrative Physiology and Bio-Nano Medicine, National Defense 
Medical College, Tokorozawa, Japan.
(6)Rheumatology Division, Hospital Universitario Cruces, Baracaldo, Vizcaya, 
Spain.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.

Gout is a chronic disease caused by monosodium urate (MSU) crystal deposition. 
Gout typically presents as an acute, self-limiting inflammatory monoarthritis 
that affects the joints of the lower limb. Elevated serum urate level 
(hyperuricaemia) is the major risk factor for MSU crystal deposition and 
development of gout. Although traditionally considered a disorder of purine 
metabolism, altered urate transport, both in the gut and the kidneys, has a key 
role in the pathogenesis of hyperuricaemia. Anti-inflammatory agents, such 
corticosteroids, NSAIDs and colchicine, are widely used for the treatment of 
gout flare; recognition of the importance of NLRP3 inflammasome activation and 
bioactive IL-1β release in initiation of the gout flare has led to the 
development of anti-IL-1β biological therapy for gout flares. Sustained 
reduction in serum urate levels using urate-lowering therapy is vital in the 
long-term management of gout, which aims to dissolve MSU crystals, suppress gout 
flares and resolve tophi. Allopurinol is the first-line urate-lowering therapy 
and should be started at a low dose, with gradual dose escalation. Low-dose 
anti-inflammatory therapies can reduce gout flares during initiation of 
urate-lowering therapy. Models of care, such as nurse-led strategies that focus 
on patient engagement and education, substantially improve clinical outcomes and 
now represent best practice for gout management.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-019-0115-y
PMID: 31558729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]