---
reference_id: "PMID:8971907"
title: Hereditary disorders of the glomerular basement membrane.
authors:
- Smeets HJ
- Knoers VV
- van de Heuvel LP
- Lemmink HH
- Schröder CH
- Monnens LA
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1007/s004670050217
keywords:
- "Basement Membrane/physiopathology, ultrastructure"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Kidney Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Kidney Glomerulus/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary disorders of the glomerular basement membrane.
**Authors:** Smeets HJ, Knoers VV, van de Heuvel LP, Lemmink HH, Schröder CH, Monnens LA
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004670050217](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004670050217)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 1996 Dec;10(6):779-88. doi: 10.1007/s004670050217.

Hereditary disorders of the glomerular basement membrane.

Smeets HJ(1), Knoers VV, van de Heuvel LP, Lemmink HH, Schröder CH, Monnens LA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, University of Limburg, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Increased knowledge of the biochemical composition of the glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) and the introduction of molecular genetics has shed new light on
the hereditary disorders of the GBM. In this review three disorders are
highlighted. About 85% of the cases reported as Alport syndrome are transmitted
as the X-linked form and are due to mutations of the COl4A5 chain localized at
Xq22. The autosomal recessive form can be explained by mutations in the COl4A3
and COl4A4 gene. Anti-GBM nephritis leading to loss of the renal allograft in
about 1%-5% of transplanted Alport patients can be the tragic consequence of
this disorder. Some patients with familial benign hematuria have an abnormality
of COl4A4. The nail-patella syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder
defined by the association of nail dysplasia, bone abnormalities, and frequently
renal disease. The gene is localized in region 9q34.1, COl5A1 is not involved.
The Finnish type is the best known of the different forms of congenital
nephrotic syndrome. The gene has been mapped to the long arm of chromosome 19.
Diffuse mesangial sclerosis occurs in the isolated form and as part of the Denys
Drash syndrome. Disturbances of the WT1 function in the epithelial cells can
have a role in the renal abnormalities of the Denys Drash syndrome.

DOI: 10.1007/s004670050217
PMID: 8971907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
