---
reference_id: "PMID:37425531"
title: "Dieulafoy's Lesion of the Duodenum: A Rare and Fatal Cause of Gastrointestinal Bleed."
authors:
- Qasim A
- Schmidt P
- Bhatt T
- Itare V
- Ihimoyan A
- Khaja M
- Kandhi S
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.40050
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dieulafoy's Lesion of the Duodenum: A Rare and Fatal Cause of Gastrointestinal Bleed.
**Authors:** Qasim A, Schmidt P, Bhatt T, Itare V, Ihimoyan A, Khaja M, Kandhi S
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.40050](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.40050)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Jun 6;15(6):e40050. doi: 10.7759/cureus.40050. eCollection 2023 
Jun.

Dieulafoy's Lesion of the Duodenum: A Rare and Fatal Cause of Gastrointestinal 
Bleed.

Qasim A(1), Schmidt P(1), Bhatt T(1), Itare V(1), Ihimoyan A(2), Khaja M(1), 
Kandhi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, BronxCare Health System, Bronx, USA.
(2)Gastroenterology, BronxCare Health System, Bronx, USA.

Dieulafoy's lesion (DL) is an unusual cause of recurrent gastrointestinal 
bleeding that can be fatal. It can occur in various parts of the 
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, most commonly located in the stomach, especially at 
the level of lesser curvature; however, it can occur in other parts, including 
the colon, esophagus, and duodenum. A duodenal Dieulafoy lesion is characterized 
by the presence of a larger-caliber artery that protrudes through the GI mucosa 
and can lead to massive hemorrhage. The exact cause of DL is yet to be 
determined. Clinical presentation includes painless upper GI bleeding, 
including melena, hematochezia, and hematemesis, or rarely iron deficiency 
anemia (IDA); however, most of the patients are asymptomatic. Some patients also 
have non-gastrointestinal comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, and 
chronic kidney disease (CKD). The diagnosis is established by 
esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which includes the presence of micro pulsatile 
streaming from a mucosal defect, the appearance of a fresh, densely adherent 
clot with a narrow point of attachment to a minute mucosal defect, and the 
visualization of a protruding vessel with or without bleeding. Initial EGD can 
be non-diagnostic due to the relatively small size of the lesion. Other 
diagnostic modalities include endoscopic ultrasound and mesenteric angiography. 
The treatment of duodenal DL includes thermal electrocoagulation, local 
epinephrine injection, sclerotherapy, banding, and hemoclipping. We present here 
a case of a 71-year-old female who had a history of severe IDA requiring 
multiple blood transfusions and intravenous iron in the past and was found to 
have duodenal DL.

Copyright © 2023, Qasim et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.40050
PMCID: PMC10324985
PMID: 37425531

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.