---
reference_id: "PMID:20301791"
title: POLG-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Cohen BH
- Chinnery PF
- Copeland WC
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# POLG-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Cohen BH, Chinnery PF, Copeland WC

## Content

1. POLG-Related Disorders.

Cohen BH(1), Chinnery PF(2), Copeland WC(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2010 Mar 16 [updated 2024 Feb 29].

Author information:
(1)NeuroDevelopmental Science Center and the Rebecca D Considine Research 
Institute, Akron Children's Hospital, Northeast Ohio Medical University, Akron, 
Ohio
(2)Department of Clinical Neurosciences & MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
(3)Mitochondrial DNA Replication Group, Genome Integrity and Structural Biology 
Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences / NIH, Research 
Triangle Park, North Carolina

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: POLG-related disorders comprise a continuum of 
overlapping phenotypes that were clinically defined before the molecular basis 
was known. POLG-related disorders can therefore be considered an overlapping 
spectrum of disease presenting from early childhood to late adulthood. The age 
of onset broadly correlates with the clinical phenotype. Early-onset disease 
(prior to age 12 years): Liver involvement, feeding difficulties, seizures, 
hypotonia, and muscle weakness are the most common clinical features. This group 
has the worst prognosis. Juvenile/adult-onset form (age 12-40 years: Disease is 
typically characterized by peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, seizures, stroke-like 
episodes, and, in individuals with longer survival, progressive external 
ophthalmoplegia (PEO). This group generally has a better prognosis than the 
early-onset group. Late-onset disease (after age 40 years): Characterized by 
ptosis and PEO, with additional features such as peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, 
and muscle weakness. This group overall has the best prognosis.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Establishing the diagnosis of a POLG-related disorder relies 
on clinical findings and the identification of biallelic POLG pathogenic 
variants on molecular genetic testing for all phenotypes except autosomal 
dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia (adPEO), for which identification 
of a heterozygous POLG pathogenic variant on molecular genetic testing is 
diagnostic.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Clinical management is largely 
supportive and involves standard approaches for associated complications 
including occupational, physical, and speech therapy; nutritional support; 
respiratory support; and standard treatment of liver failure, epilepsy, movement 
abnormalities, sleep disorders, vision, and hearing issues. Surveillance: 
Evaluations by a multidisciplinary team of health care providers based on 
clinical findings; routine evaluation of growth, nutrition, oral intake, and 
respiratory status; monitoring of liver enzymes every three months or as 
clinically indicated; monitoring of epilepsy with repeat liver function tests 
after introduction of any new anti-seizure medication. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Valproic acid (Depakene®) and sodium divalproate (divalproex) (Depakote®) 
because of the risk of precipitating and/or accelerating liver disease.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Early-onset and juvenile/adult-onset POLG-related disorders 
are typically caused by biallelic pathogenic variants and inherited in an 
autosomal recessive manner. Late-onset PEO may be caused by a heterozygous POLG 
pathogenic variant and inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Autosomal 
recessive inheritance: If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a POLG 
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% 
chance of inheriting biallelic pathogenic variants and being affected, a 50% 
chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the 
familial POLG pathogenic variants. Heterozygous sibs of a proband with an 
autosomal recessive POLG-related disorder are typically asymptomatic. Once the 
POLG pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, 
testing for at-risk family members is possible. Autosomal dominant inheritance: 
Most individuals with PEO caused by a heterozygous POLG pathogenic variant 
(i.e., adPEO) have an affected parent, although age of onset and severity of 
presentation can vary greatly from generation to generation. Each child of an 
individual with POLG-related adPEO has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic 
variant. Once the POLG pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for POLG-related 
disorders is possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301791