---
reference_id: "PMID:37725590"
title: "Fracture Incidence in Graves' Disease: A Population-Based Study."
authors:
- Khamisi S
- Udumyan R
- Sjölin G
- Calissendorff J
- Filipsson Nyström H
- Holmberg M
- Hallengren B
- Lantz M
- Planck T
- Wallin G
- Ljunggren Ö
journal: Thyroid
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1089/thy.2023.0162
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fracture Incidence in Graves' Disease: A Population-Based Study.
**Authors:** Khamisi S, Udumyan R, Sjölin G, Calissendorff J, Filipsson Nyström H, Holmberg M, Hallengren B, Lantz M, Planck T, Wallin G, Ljunggren Ö
**Journal:** Thyroid (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.2023.0162](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.2023.0162)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2023 Nov;33(11):1349-1357. doi: 10.1089/thy.2023.0162. Epub 2023 Oct 
19.

Fracture Incidence in Graves' Disease: A Population-Based Study.

Khamisi S(1)(2), Udumyan R(3), Sjölin G(4)(5), Calissendorff J(6)(7), Filipsson 
Nyström H(8)(9)(10), Holmberg M(8)(11), Hallengren B(12)(13), Lantz M(12)(13), 
Planck T(12)(13), Wallin G(4)(5)(6), Ljunggren Ö(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Uppsala University Hospital, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro University Hospital, Örebro, Sweden.
(5)Department of Surgery, Örebro University and University Hospital, Örebro, 
Sweden.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes; Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 
Göteborg, Sweden.
(9)Department of Endocrinology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, 
Sweden.
(10)Wallenberg Center for Molecular and Translational Medicine, Göteborg, 
Sweden.
(11)ANOVA; Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(12)Department of Endocrinology, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(13)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Background: Population-based studies have indicated an increase in bone turnover 
in hyperthyroidism with a subsequent decrease in bone mineral density and an 
increased risk of fractures, especially in postmenopausal women. However, 
heterogeneity between studies prevents a definitive conclusion. Graves' disease 
(GD) is an autoimmune disease, and it is the most common cause of 
hyperthyroidism. The aim of this study was to investigate fracture risk in 
patients with GD. Methods: A total of 2134 patients with incident GD and 21,261 
age, sex- and county-matched controls were included 16-18 years after diagnosis 
in a retrospective cohort study. Drug and patient national registries in Sweden 
were used to assess the risk of developing skeletal complications. Up to 10 
years of age, sex- and county-matched controls per patient were selected from 
databases from the National Board of Health and Welfare and Statistics Sweden. 
Cox proportional hazards models were fitted to estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 
confidence intervals [CI]. Results: There were no significant differences in 
fracture rates between GD and controls but after adjustment for comorbidities, 
the data showed higher vertebral fracture rates in male GD patients aged >52 
years compared to male controls, HR = 2.83 [CI 1.05-7.64]. The rates of 
osteoporosis treatments as well as treatment with corticosteroids were higher in 
patients with GD. However, HR for the association between GD and fractures 
remained largely unchanged after adjustment for osteoporosis treatments and 
treatments with corticosteroids. Conclusions: There were no significant 
differences in total fracture rate between GD and the general population. 
However, men older than 52 years had a higher vertebral fracture rate. This 
study also shows that patients with treated GD receive more osteoporosis 
treatments compared to the general population.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2023.0162
PMID: 37725590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]