---
reference_id: "PMID:34343128"
title: "Neonatal multidrug-resistant bacterial meningitis: a 29-year study from a tertiary hospital in Thailand."
authors:
- Thatrimontrichai A
- Janjindamai W
- Dissaneevate S
- Maneenil G
journal: J Infect Dev Ctries
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3855/jidc.12808
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal multidrug-resistant bacterial meningitis: a 29-year study from a tertiary hospital in Thailand.
**Authors:** Thatrimontrichai A, Janjindamai W, Dissaneevate S, Maneenil G
**Journal:** J Infect Dev Ctries (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3855/jidc.12808](https://doi.org/10.3855/jidc.12808)

## Content

1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2021 Jul 31;15(7):1021-1026. doi: 10.3855/jidc.12808.

Neonatal multidrug-resistant bacterial meningitis: a 29-year study from a 
tertiary hospital in Thailand.

Thatrimontrichai A(1), Janjindamai W(2), Dissaneevate S(2), Maneenil G(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, 
Prince of Songkla University, Songkhla, Thailand. tanucha@medicine.psu.ac.th.
(2)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, 
Prince of Songkla University, Songkhla, Thailand.

INTRODUCTION: This study aimed to compare the risks and case fatality rate (CFR) 
between neonatal multidrug-resistant (MDR) and non-MDR meningitis.
METHODOLOGY: a secondary analysis of a case-control studies in a Thai neonatal 
intensive care unit between 1990 and 2018 was performed. The pathogenic 
organisms causing neonatal meningitis were Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus 
spp., Enterobacteriaceae, Acinetobacter spp., and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. A MDR 
organism was defined as an isolate that was non-susceptible to at least 1 agent 
in at least 3 antimicrobial categories. The multivariate regression was analyzed 
for MDR and non-MDR samples of neonatal meningitis.
RESULTS: Over a period of 29 years, the number of neonatal MDR and non-MDR 
meningitis cases were 17 and 21, respectively. The medians (interquartile 
ranges) of gestational age, birthweight and onset of meningitis were 35 
(29.5-38) weeks, 1,945 (1,218-2,859) grams and 6.5 (2.8-17.9) days, 
respectively. The most common organism was Acinetobacter baumannii (32%). By 
multivariate analysis, neonates who had MDR meningitis were more likely to have 
a lower Apgar score at 5 minutes (adjusted odds ratio: 95% confidence intervals 
= 0.66 [0.44-0.99], p = 0.04). The crude CFR of neonatal meningitis was 32%. 
Non-survivors in MDR meningitis (58.8%) were significantly higher than non-MDR 
meningitis (9.5%, p = 0.004). The most common pathogen in non-survivors was 
carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii.
CONCLUSIONS: Neonatal MDR meningitis has an association with lower APGAR scores, 
and higher CFR as well as Acinetobacter baumannii. Multifaceted infection 
prevention, and control programs for MDR organisms are crucial, and must be 
strictly implemented in high MDR areas.

Copyright (c) 2021 Anucha Thatrimontrichai, Waricha Janjindamai, Supaporn 
Dissaneevate, Gunlawadee Maneenil.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.12808
PMID: 34343128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No Conflict of Interest is declared