---
reference_id: "PMID:25356808"
title: "Acromegaly: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline."
authors:
- Katznelson L
- Laws ER Jr
- Melmed S
- Molitch ME
- Murad MH
- Utz A
- Wass JA
- Endocrine Society
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2700
keywords:
- "Acromegaly/diagnosis, drug therapy, surgery, therapy"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Endocrinology/standards
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acromegaly: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline.
**Authors:** Katznelson L, Laws ER Jr, Melmed S, Molitch ME, Murad MH, Utz A, Wass JA, Endocrine Society
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2014-2700](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2014-2700)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Nov;99(11):3933-51. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2700.
Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Acromegaly: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline.

Katznelson L(1), Laws ER Jr, Melmed S, Molitch ME, Murad MH, Utz A, Wass JA;
Endocrine Society.

Author information:
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine (L.K.), Stanford, California 94305;
Brigham and Women's Hospital (E.R.L), Boston, Massachusetts 02115; Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center (S.M.), Los Angeles, California 90048; Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine (M.E.M), Chicago, Illinois 60611; Mayo Clinic
(M.H.M.), Rochester, Minnesota 55905; Vanderbilt University (A.U.), Nashville,
Tennessee 37232; and Oxford Centre Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism
(J.A.H.W.), Churchill Hospital, Oxfordshire OX3 7RP, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to formulate clinical practice guidelines for acromegaly.
PARTICIPANTS: The Task Force included a chair selected by the Endocrine Society
Clinical Guidelines Subcommittee (CGS), five experts in the field, and a
methodologist. The authors received no corporate funding or remuneration. This
guideline is cosponsored by the European Society of Endocrinology.
EVIDENCE: This evidence-based guideline was developed using the Grading of
Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system to
describe both the strength of recommendations and the quality of evidence. The
Task Force reviewed primary evidence and commissioned two additional systematic
reviews.
CONSENSUS PROCESS: One group meeting, several conference calls, and e-mail
communications enabled consensus. Committees and members of the Endocrine
Society and the European Society of Endocrinology reviewed drafts of the
guidelines.
CONCLUSIONS: Using an evidence-based approach, this acromegaly guideline
addresses important clinical issues regarding the evaluation and management of
acromegaly, including the appropriate biochemical assessment, a therapeutic
algorithm, including use of medical monotherapy or combination therapy, and
management during pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2014-2700
PMID: 25356808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
