---
reference_id: "PMID:35989807"
title: "Management of Craniocervical Instability in Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Congenita: Assessment of Literature and Presentation of Two Cases."
authors:
- Falls CJ
- Page PS
- Greeneway GP
- Stadler JA
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.27020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Craniocervical Instability in Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Congenita: Assessment of Literature and Presentation of Two Cases.
**Authors:** Falls CJ, Page PS, Greeneway GP, Stadler JA
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.27020](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.27020)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Jul 19;14(7):e27020. doi: 10.7759/cureus.27020. eCollection 2022 
Jul.

Management of Craniocervical Instability in Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia 
Congenita: Assessment of Literature and Presentation of Two Cases.

Falls CJ(1), Page PS(2), Greeneway GP(3), Stadler JA(4).

Author information:
(1)Orthopedic Surgery, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, USA.
(2)Neurological Surgery, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA.
(3)Neurosurgery, University of Wisconsin Hospitals and Clinics, Madison, USA.
(4)Neurological Surgery, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public 
Health, Madison, USA.

Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC) is a rare autosomal dominant 
skeletal dysplasia resulting in impairment of type II collagen function. 
Phenotypically, this results in various skeletal, ligamentous, ocular, and 
otologic abnormalities. Platyspondyly, scoliosis, ligamental laxity, and 
odontoid hypoplasia are common, resulting in myelopathy in a high number of 
patients due to atlantoaxial instability. Despite patients undergoing surgical 
fixation, complication rates such as nonunion have been reported to be high. 
Here within, we present two patients treated with occipitocervical fusion for 
atlantoaxial instability and early symptoms of progressive myelopathy. We 
additionally provide a detailed review of the literature to inform practitioners 
of the spinal manifestations and clinical considerations in SEDC.

Copyright © 2022, Falls et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.27020
PMCID: PMC9386322
PMID: 35989807

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.