---
reference_id: "PMID:15542396"
title: Expression and functional characterization of human mutant sulfamidase in insect cells.
authors:
- Montfort M
- Garrido E
- Hopwood JJ
- Grinberg D
- Chabás A
- Vilageliu L
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.07.001
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA Primers
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- "Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel"
- Gene Expression
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis III/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Mutation/genetics
- Spain
- Spodoptera
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression and functional characterization of human mutant sulfamidase in insect cells.
**Authors:** Montfort M, Garrido E, Hopwood JJ, Grinberg D, Chabás A, Vilageliu L
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.07.001)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2004 Nov;83(3):246-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.07.001.

Expression and functional characterization of human mutant sulfamidase in insect
cells.

Montfort M(1), Garrido E, Hopwood JJ, Grinberg D, Chabás A, Vilageliu L.

Author information:
(1)Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Spain.

Mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA (MPS IIIA; Sanfilippo syndrome) is an autosomal
recessive lysosomal disorder caused by the deficiency of sulfamidase (EC
3.10.1.1), required for the degradation of the mucopolysaccharide heparan
sulfate. The molecular defects of 26 unrelated Spanish MPS IIIA patients were
recently reported by our group. Here we describe the heterologous expression,
using a baculovirus system, of the cDNAs corresponding to eight out of the 14
mutant alleles present in this patient group and the characterization of the
corresponding mutant enzymes. In particular, we expressed the following alleles:
p.S66W, p.R74H, p.Q85R, p.R206P, p.L386R, p.R433W, p.R433Q, and c.1079delC
(previously named as c.1091delC), and the two variants of the polymorphism
p.R456H. The expression of the mutant alleles and the characterization of the
corresponding enzymes revealed that their activity was severely compromised.
Only mutations p.S66W and p.R206P retained low levels of residual activity.
However, Western blot analysis showed in all cases the presence of the expected
two forms of the sulfamidase, the precursor and the mature proteins, indicating
a normal processing of the mutant enzyme.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.07.001
PMID: 15542396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
