---
reference_id: "PMID:21456963"
title: "Amyloid precursor protein processing and Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- "O'Brien RJ"
- Wong PC
journal: Annu Rev Neurosci
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113613
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyloid precursor protein processing and Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** O'Brien RJ, Wong PC
**Journal:** Annu Rev Neurosci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113613](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113613)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2011;34:185-204. doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113613.

Amyloid precursor protein processing and Alzheimer's disease.

O'Brien RJ(1), Wong PC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, USA. 
robrien@jhmi.edu

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the leading cause of dementia worldwide, is 
characterized by the accumulation of the β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) within the brain 
along with hyperphosphorylated and cleaved forms of the microtubule-associated 
protein tau. Genetic, biochemical, and behavioral research suggest that 
physiologic generation of the neurotoxic Aβ peptide from sequential amyloid 
precursor protein (APP) proteolysis is the crucial step in the development of 
AD. APP is a single-pass transmembrane protein expressed at high levels in the 
brain and metabolized in a rapid and highly complex fashion by a series of 
sequential proteases, including the intramembranous γ-secretase complex, which 
also process other key regulatory molecules. Why Aβ accumulates in the brains of 
elderly individuals is unclear but could relate to changes in APP metabolism or 
Aβ elimination. Lessons learned from biochemical and genetic studies of APP 
processing will be crucial to the development of therapeutic targets to treat 
AD.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113613
PMCID: PMC3174086
PMID: 21456963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]