---
reference_id: "PMID:36581455"
title: The Dominant Anterior Thoracic Artery of the Spinal Cord.
authors:
- Small JE
- Pérez Pérez VH
journal: AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A7737
keywords:
- Humans
- "Spinal Cord/diagnostic imaging, blood supply"
- Vertebral Artery
- Thoracic Arteries
- Dissection
- Cadaver
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Dominant Anterior Thoracic Artery of the Spinal Cord.
**Authors:** Small JE, Pérez Pérez VH
**Journal:** AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3174/ajnr.A7737](https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A7737)

## Content

1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2023 Jan;44(1):111-114. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A7737. Epub
2022 Dec 29.

The Dominant Anterior Thoracic Artery of the Spinal Cord.

Small JE(1), Pérez Pérez VH(2).

Author information:
(1)From Lahey Hospital and Medical Center (J.E.S.), Burlington, Massachusetts.
(2)Instituto de Ciencias Forenses (V.H.P.P), TSJ Ciudad de México, Centro Medico
Siglo XXI, Mexico City, Mexico victorhugo2perez@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Dominant radiculomedullary arteries such as the artery
of lumbar enlargement and the artery of cervical enlargement are
well-documented. However, variability exists as to the size, number, and
location of other radiculomedullary arteries contributing supply to the anterior
spinal artery. The aim of this anatomic study was to document the prevalence and
characteristics of the dominant anterior thoracic artery in cadaveric specimens.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Microsurgical dissection of cadaveric human spinal cord
specimens (n = 50) was conducted. The artery of lumbar enlargement was injected
with colored latex until the small-caliber arterial vessels were filled. The
dominant anterior thoracic artery was identified, injected, and filled with
diluted industrial paint. The course, diameter, and location of the dominant
anterior thoracic artery, artery of lumbar enlargement, and artery of cervical
enlargement were documented.
RESULTS: The artery of lumbar enlargement was identified between T3 and L2 in
all 50 specimens (100%), and the artery of cervical enlargement was identified
in 84% of specimens (42/50). At least 1 dominant anterior thoracic artery
distinct from the artery of lumbar enlargement and the artery of cervical
enlargement was identified between T1 and T11 in 47 of the 50 specimens (94%).
The most frequent origin of the dominant anterior thoracic artery was at the
level of T4 on the left. The average size of the dominant anterior thoracic
artery was 0.446 mm (range, 0.300-0.759 mm on the left and 0.270-0.569 mm on the
right).
CONCLUSIONS: A dominant anterior thoracic artery is present in 94% of
individuals. Variations of the arterial supply to the anterior thoracic cord are
of great importance due to their implications for ischemic events as well as
surgical and endovascular procedures.

© 2023 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A7737
PMCID: PMC9835921
PMID: 36581455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
