---
reference_id: "PMID:11786689"
title: Multiple endocrine neoplasia.
authors:
- Thakker RV
journal: Horm Res
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1159/000048138
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple endocrine neoplasia.
**Authors:** Thakker RV
**Journal:** Horm Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000048138](https://doi.org/10.1159/000048138)

## Content

1. Horm Res. 2001;56 Suppl 1:67-72. doi: 10.1159/000048138.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia.

Thakker RV(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Group, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. 
rakesh.thakker@ndm.ox.ac.uk

Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) is characterized by the occurrence of tumours 
involving two or more endocrine glands; two major forms, referred to as MEN1 and 
MEN2, are recognized. MEN1 is characterized by parathyroid, pancreatic islet and 
anterior pituitary tumours, whilst MEN2 is characterized by medullary thyroid 
carcinoma (MTC) in association with phaeochromocytoma. There are three clinical 
variants, referred to as MEN2A, MEN2B and MTC-only. All these forms of MEN may 
be inherited as autosomal dominant syndromes. The MEN1 gene is on chromosome 
11q13 and about 300 MEN1 mutations have been identified. These are of diverse 
types and are scattered throughout the coding region. There is also a lack of 
genotype-phenotype correlation. All these findings make it difficult to 
implement MEN1 mutational analysis in the clinical setting. The situation in 
MEN2 is more straightforward. The gene causing all three MEN2 variants is 
located on chromosome 10cen-10q11.2, and is the c-ret proto-oncogene which 
encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor with cadherin-like and cysteine-rich 
extracellular domains, and a tyrosine kinase intracellular domain. Specific 
mutations of c-ret have been identified for each of the three MEN2 variants and 
mutational analysis has been used in the diagnosis and management of patients 
and families with the MEN2 variants.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000048138
PMID: 11786689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]