---
reference_id: "PMID:36609679"
title: "Hereditary Angioedema: Diagnosis, Clinical Implications, and Pathophysiology."
authors:
- Sinnathamby ES
- Issa PP
- Roberts L
- Norwood H
- Malone K
- Vemulapalli H
- Ahmadzadeh S
- Cornett EM
- Shekoohi S
- Kaye AD
journal: Adv Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12325-022-02401-0
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein/genetics
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Angioedema: Diagnosis, Clinical Implications, and Pathophysiology.
**Authors:** Sinnathamby ES, Issa PP, Roberts L, Norwood H, Malone K, Vemulapalli H, Ahmadzadeh S, Cornett EM, Shekoohi S, Kaye AD
**Journal:** Adv Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12325-022-02401-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-022-02401-0)

## Content

1. Adv Ther. 2023 Mar;40(3):814-827. doi: 10.1007/s12325-022-02401-0. Epub 2023
Jan  7.

Hereditary Angioedema: Diagnosis, Clinical Implications, and Pathophysiology.

Sinnathamby ES(1), Issa PP(2), Roberts L(2), Norwood H(3), Malone K(3),
Vemulapalli H(2), Ahmadzadeh S(4), Cornett EM(4), Shekoohi S(4), Kaye AD(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Science Center at New
Orleans, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. esinna@lsuhsc.edu.
(2)School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Science Center at New
Orleans, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
(3)School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Science Center at
Shreveport, 1501 Kings Highway, Shreveport, LA, 71103, USA.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Louisiana State University Health Science
Center at Shreveport, 1501 Kings Highway, Shreveport, LA, 71103, USA.

Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by a
mutation in the C1 esterase inhibitor gene. HAE affects 1/50,000 people
worldwide. Three main types of HAE exist: type I, type II, and type III. Type I
is characterized by a deficiency in C1-INH. C1-INH is important in the
coagulation complement, contact systems, and fibrinolysis. Most HAE cases are
type I. Type I and II HAE result from a mutation in the SERPING1 gene, which
encodes C1-INH. Formally known as type III HAE is typically an
estrogen-dependent or hereditary angioedema with normal C1-INH activity. Current
guidelines now recommend subdividing hereditary angioedema with normal C1
esterase inhibitor gene (HAE-nl-C1-INH formerly known as HAE type III) based on
underlying mutations such as in kininogen-1 (HAE-KNG1), plasminogen gene
(PLG-HAE), myoferlin gene mutation (MYOF-HAE), heparan sulfate-glucosamine
3-sulfotransferase 6 (HS3ST6), mutation in Hageman factor (factor XII), and in
angiopoietin-1 (HAE-ANGPT-1). The clinical presentation of HAE varies between
patients, but it usually presents with nonpitting angioedema and occasionally
abdominal pain. Young children are typically asymptomatic. Those affected by HAE
usually present with symptoms in their early 20s. Symptoms can arise as a result
of stress, infection, or trauma. Laboratory testing shows abnormal levels of
C1-INH and high levels of bradykinin. C4 and D-dimer levels can also be
monitored if an acute HAE attack is suspected. Acute treatment of HAE can
include IV infusions of C1-INH, receptor antagonists, and kallikrein inhibitors.
Short- and long-term prophylaxis can also be administered to patients with HAE.
First-line therapies for long-term prophylaxis also include IV infusion of
C1-INH. This review aims to thoroughly understand HAE, its clinical
presentation, and how to treat it.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-022-02401-0
PMCID: PMC9988798
PMID: 36609679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
