---
reference_id: "PMID:30717703"
title: "The frequency, clinical course, and health related quality of life in adults with Gilbert's syndrome: a longitudinal study."
authors:
- Kamal S
- Abdelhakam S
- Ghoraba D
- Massoud Y
- Aziz KA
- Hassan H
- Hafez T
- Abdel Sallam A
journal: BMC Gastroenterol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12876-019-0931-2
keywords:
- Abdominal Pain/etiology
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Dyspepsia/etiology
- Egypt/epidemiology
- Feeding and Eating Disorders/etiology
- Female
- Genotype
- "Gilbert Disease/complications, epidemiology, genetics, psychology"
- Glucuronosyltransferase/genetics
- Humans
- Jaundice/etiology
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Prevalence
- Quality of Life
- Recurrence
- Risk Factors
- Young Adult
- UGT1A1 Enzyme
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The frequency, clinical course, and health related quality of life in adults with Gilbert's syndrome: a longitudinal study.
**Authors:** Kamal S, Abdelhakam S, Ghoraba D, Massoud Y, Aziz KA, Hassan H, Hafez T, Abdel Sallam A
**Journal:** BMC Gastroenterol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12876-019-0931-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12876-019-0931-2)

## Content

1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2019 Feb 4;19(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s12876-019-0931-2.

The frequency, clinical course, and health related quality of life in adults
with Gilbert's syndrome: a longitudinal study.

Kamal S(1), Abdelhakam S(2), Ghoraba D(2), Massoud Y(2), Aziz KA(2), Hassan
H(3), Hafez T(4), Abdel Sallam A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine and Gastroenterology, Ain Shams Faculty of
Medicine, Ain Shams University, Abbassia, Cairo, 11341, Egypt.
sanaakamal@ainshamsmedicine.net.
(2)Department of Tropical Medicine and Gastroenterology, Ain Shams Faculty of
Medicine, Ain Shams University, Abbassia, Cairo, 11341, Egypt.
(3)Department of Clinical Pathology, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, The American University, Cairo,
Egypt.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Misr University for Science and Technology, Cairo,
Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Gilbert syndrome (GS) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder
of bilirubin glucuronidation which has not been investigated in Egypt. This
longitudinal study investigated the frequency, clinical course, genetic profile
and health related quality of life in Egyptian adults.
METHODS: An initial cross-sectional study was conducted to assess the frequency
of Gilbert syndrome among Egyptian adults. Subjects fulfilling the criteria of
GS were enrolled into the study and prospectively followed for the clinical
features, risk factors for hyperbilirubinemia, health related quality of life
[Short form-36 Health Survey version 2 (SF-36v2) and Chronic Liver Disease
Questionnaire (CLDQ)], vitamins assessment and UGT1A1 polymorphisms.
RESULTS: One hundred and one subjects fulfilled the criteria of GS with a
prevalence of 8.016%. Recurrent jaundice was the only presentation in 47
(56.627%) GS subjects and jaundice was associated with abdominal pain, dyspepsia
or loss of appetite in 54 (53.465%) subjects. A significant difference in
25-Hydroxyvitamin D3 levels was detected between GS patients and control
subjects (P <  00001). Twelve subjects with GS developed significant
unconjugated bilirubinemia during direct antiviral therapy (DAAs) therapy for
HCV despite achieving sustained virologic response. Pregnancy was associated
with significant exacerbation of unconjugated bilirubin which persisted through
pregnancy. Risk factors for clinical jaundice included general anesthesia,
pregnancy, fasting > 12 h, pregnancy, and low calorie weight losing plans,
systemic infections, and intensive physical effort. During jaundice attacks,
subjects with GS had significant differences in vitality, role emotional, social
functioning, worry and general health domains of the SF-36v2 and CLDQ compared
to controls. The homozygous polymorphism A(TA)7TAA was the most frequent
polymorphism in Egyptians with GS.
CONCLUSION: Gilbert syndrome is a frequent inherited disorder in Egypt. In a
substantial percentage of subjects with GS, episodes of jaundice are associated
with other symptoms and nutritional deficiencies which result in impairment of
HRQOL. Screening, counseling, monitoring and individualized health care are
recommended for subjects with GS in the setting of anesthesia, pregnancy,
treatment with DAAs, deliveries, surgery and weight loss plans.

DOI: 10.1186/s12876-019-0931-2
PMCID: PMC6360704
PMID: 30717703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All
aspects of this study were approved by University of AIn Shams University and
Misr University of Science and Technology Institutional Review Board for human
subject research. All patients participating gave written informed consent and
authorization for use of data. No children under the age of 16 were enrolled in
the study. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE:
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
