---
reference_id: "PMID:25183233"
title: "Neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus and cognitive dysfunction: the MRL-lpr mouse strain as a model."
authors:
- Jeltsch-David H
- Muller S
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus and cognitive dysfunction: the MRL-lpr mouse strain as a model.
**Authors:** Jeltsch-David H, Muller S
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.015)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2014 Sep;13(9):963-73. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.015. Epub 
2014 Aug 23.

Neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus and cognitive dysfunction: the 
MRL-lpr mouse strain as a model.

Jeltsch-David H(1), Muller S(2).

Author information:
(1)CNRS, Immunopathologie et chimie thérapeutique/Laboratory of excellence 
Medalis, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 67000 Strasbourg, 
France. Electronic address: H.David@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr.
(2)CNRS, Immunopathologie et chimie thérapeutique/Laboratory of excellence 
Medalis, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 67000 Strasbourg, 
France. Electronic address: S.Muller@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr.

Mouse models of autoimmunity, such as (NZB×NZW)F1, MRL/MpJ-Fas(lpr) (MRL-lpr) 
and BXSB mice, spontaneously develop systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)-like 
syndromes with heterogeneity and complexity that characterize human SLE. Despite 
their inherent limitations, such models have highly contributed to our current 
understanding of the pathogenesis of SLE as they provide powerful tools to 
approach the human disease at the genetic, cellular, molecular and environmental 
levels. They also allow novel treatment strategies to be evaluated in a complex 
integrated system, a favorable context knowing that very few murine models that 
adequately mimic human autoimmune diseases exist. As we move forward with more 
efficient medications to treat lupus patients, certain forms of the disease that 
requires to be better understood at the mechanistic level emerge. This is the 
case of neuropsychiatric (NP) events that affect 50-60% at SLE onset or within 
the first year after SLE diagnosis. Intense research performed at deciphering NP 
features in lupus mouse models has been undertaken. It is central to develop the 
first lead molecules aimed at specifically treating NPSLE. Here we discuss how 
mouse models, and most particularly MRL-lpr female mice, can be used for 
studying the pathogenesis of NPSLE in an animal setting, what are the NP 
symptoms that develop, and how they compare with human SLE, and, with a critical 
view, what are the neurobehavioral tests that are pertinent for evaluating the 
degree of altered functions and the progresses resulting from potentially active 
therapeutics.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.015
PMID: 25183233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]