---
reference_id: "PMID:40723898"
title: "Transcription-Coupled Nucleotide Excision Repair: A Faster Solution or the Only Option?"
authors:
- Khobta A
- Sarmini L
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/biom15071026
keywords:
- DNA Repair
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Humans
- DNA Damage
- "DNA/genetics, metabolism, chemistry"
- Animals
- Kinetics
- Excision Repair
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcription-Coupled Nucleotide Excision Repair: A Faster Solution or the Only Option?
**Authors:** Khobta A, Sarmini L
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom15071026](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom15071026)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2025 Jul 16;15(7):1026. doi: 10.3390/biom15071026.

Transcription-Coupled Nucleotide Excision Repair: A Faster Solution or the Only 
Option?

Khobta A(1), Sarmini L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Nutritional Sciences, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 07743 
Jena, Germany.

A branch of the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway, transcription-coupled 
repair (TCR or TC-NER) specifically operates on the template DNA strand of 
actively transcribed genes. Initiated by stalling of elongating RNA polymerase 
complexes at damaged sites, TC-NER has historically been viewed as "accelerated 
repair", arguably necessary for the maintenance of vital transcription function. 
Conversely, the conventional "global genome" (GG-NER) mechanism, operating 
throughout the genome, is usually regarded as a much slower process, even though 
it has long been found that differences in repair kinetics between transcribed 
DNA and the rest of the genome are not manifested for all structural types of 
DNA damage. Considering that damage detection is the rate-limiting step of 
overall repair reactions in most cases and that the mechanisms of the initial 
recognition of modified DNA structure are fundamentally different between TC-NER 
and GG-NER, it is suggestive to attribute the observed kinetic differences to 
different damage spectra recognized by the two pathways. This review summarizes 
current knowledge on the differential requirements of TC-NER and GG-NER towards 
specific damage types, based on their structural rather than spatial 
characteristics, and highlights some common features of DNA modifications 
repaired preferentially or exclusively by TC-NER, while evading other repair 
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3390/biom15071026
PMCID: PMC12293044
PMID: 40723898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.