---
reference_id: "PMID:39599813"
title: "Congenital and Perinatal Viral Infections: Consequences for the Mother and Fetus."
authors:
- Al Beloushi M
- Saleh H
- Ahmed B
- Konje JC
journal: Viruses
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/v16111698
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital and Perinatal Viral Infections: Consequences for the Mother and Fetus.
**Authors:** Al Beloushi M, Saleh H, Ahmed B, Konje JC
**Journal:** Viruses (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v16111698](https://doi.org/10.3390/v16111698)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2024 Oct 30;16(11):1698. doi: 10.3390/v16111698.

Congenital and Perinatal Viral Infections: Consequences for the Mother and 
Fetus.

Al Beloushi M(1)(2), Saleh H(1)(2), Ahmed B(2)(3)(4), Konje JC(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Women's Wellness and Research Centre Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha P.O. Box 
3050, Qatar.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Qatar University, Doha P.O. Box 
2713, Qatar.
(3)Feto Maternal Centre, Al Markhiya Doha, Doha P.O. Box 34181, Qatar.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Weill Cornell Medicine, Doha P.O. 
Box 24144, Qatar.
(5)Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, P.O. Box 7717, 
Leicester LE2 7LX, UK.

Viruses are the most common congenital infections in humans and an important 
cause of foetal malformations, neonatal morbidity, and mortality. The effects of 
these infections, which are transmitted in utero (transplacentally), during 
childbirth or in the puerperium depend on the timing of the infections. These 
vary from miscarriages (usually with infections in very early pregnancy), 
congenital malformations (when the infections occur during organogenesis) and 
morbidity (with infections occurring late in pregnancy, during childbirth or 
after delivery). The most common of these viruses are cytomegalovirus, 
hepatitis, herpes simplex type-2, parvovirus B19, rubella, varicella zoster and 
zika viruses. There are currently very few efficacious antiviral agents licensed 
for use in pregnancy. For most of these infections, therefore, prevention is 
mainly by vaccination (where there is a vaccine). The administration of 
immunoglobulins to those exposed to the virus to offer passive immunity or 
appropriate measures to avoid being infected would be options to minimise the 
infections and their consequences. In this review, we discuss some of the 
congenital and perinatal infections and their consequences on both the mother 
and fetus and their management focusing mainly on prevention.

DOI: 10.3390/v16111698
PMCID: PMC11599085
PMID: 39599813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors Mariam Al Beloushi and Huda Saleh were 
employed by the company Hamad Medical Corporation. The remaining authors declare 
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.