---
reference_id: "PMID:17380820"
title: Hyperthyroidism.
authors:
- Maji D
journal: J Indian Med Assoc
year: '2006'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperthyroidism.
**Authors:** Maji D
**Journal:** J Indian Med Assoc (2006)

## Content

1. J Indian Med Assoc. 2006 Oct;104(10):563-4, 566-7.

Hyperthyroidism.

Maji D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Vivekananda Institute of Medical Sciences, Kolkata.

Hyperthyroidism is a clinical situation where there is excess thyroid hormones 
in the circulation due to increased synthesis of hormone from a hyperactive 
thyroid gland. Common causes are Graves' disease, toxic multinodular goitre and 
toxic solitary nodule. Excess thyroid hormones in the circulation are also found 
in thyroiditis (hormone leakage) and excess exogenous thyroxine intake. 
Thyrotoxicosis is the term applied when there is excess thyroid hormone in the 
circulation due to any cause. Thyrotoxicosis can be easily diagnosed by high 
serum level of thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) and low serum level of 
thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). Hyperthyroidism is confirmed by high isotope 
(I 131 or Tc99) uptake by the thyroid gland, while in thyroiditis it will be 
low. Treatment of hyperthyroidism depends on the underlying cause. Antithyroid 
drugs, 1131 therapy and surgery are the options of treatment of hyperthyroidism. 
Surgery is the preferred treatment for toxic adenoma and toxic multinodular 
goitre, while 1131 therapy may be suitable in some cases. Antithyroid drugs and 
1131 therapy are mostly preferred for Graves' disease. Beta-adrenergic blockers 
are used for symptomatic relief in most patients of thyrotoxicosis due to any 
cause. Other rare causes of hyperthyroidism like, amiodarone induced 
thyrotoxicosis, choriocarcinoma, thyrotropin secreting pituitary tumour are 
difficult to diagnose as well as to treat.

PMID: 17380820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]