---
reference_id: "PMID:22596155"
title: Cardiac angiogenic imbalance leads to peripartum cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Patten IS
- Rana S
- Shahul S
- Rowe GC
- Jang C
- Liu L
- Hacker MR
- Rhee JS
- Mitchell J
- Mahmood F
- Hess P
- Farrell C
- Koulisis N
- Khankin EV
- Burke SD
- Tudorache I
- Bauersachs J
- del Monte F
- Hilfiker-Kleiner D
- Karumanchi SA
- Arany Z
journal: Nature
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/nature11040
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bromocriptine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Cardiomyopathies/blood, drug therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Heart/drug effects, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/complications, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Neovascularization, Physiologic/drug effects, physiology"
- Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor Gamma Coactivator 1-alpha
- Pre-Eclampsia/physiopathology
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications, Cardiovascular/blood, drug therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Trans-Activators/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Transcription Factors
- "Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-1/blood, genetics, metabolism, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac angiogenic imbalance leads to peripartum cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Patten IS, Rana S, Shahul S, Rowe GC, Jang C, Liu L, Hacker MR, Rhee JS, Mitchell J, Mahmood F, Hess P, Farrell C, Koulisis N, Khankin EV, Burke SD, Tudorache I, Bauersachs J, del Monte F, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Karumanchi SA, Arany Z
**Journal:** Nature (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature11040](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11040)

## Content

1. Nature. 2012 May 9;485(7398):333-8. doi: 10.1038/nature11040.

Cardiac angiogenic imbalance leads to peripartum cardiomyopathy.

Patten IS(1), Rana S, Shahul S, Rowe GC, Jang C, Liu L, Hacker MR, Rhee JS, 
Mitchell J, Mahmood F, Hess P, Farrell C, Koulisis N, Khankin EV, Burke SD, 
Tudorache I, Bauersachs J, del Monte F, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Karumanchi SA, Arany 
Z.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) is an often fatal disease that affects pregnant 
women who are near delivery, and it occurs more frequently in women with 
pre-eclampsia and/or multiple gestation. The aetiology of PPCM, and why it is 
associated with pre-eclampsia, remain unknown. Here we show that PPCM is 
associated with a systemic angiogenic imbalance, accentuated by pre-eclampsia. 
Mice that lack cardiac PGC-1α, a powerful regulator of angiogenesis, develop 
profound PPCM. Importantly, the PPCM is entirely rescued by pro-angiogenic 
therapies. In humans, the placenta in late gestation secretes VEGF inhibitors 
like soluble FLT1 (sFLT1), and this is accentuated by multiple gestation and 
pre-eclampsia. This anti-angiogenic environment is accompanied by subclinical 
cardiac dysfunction, the extent of which correlates with circulating levels of 
sFLT1. Exogenous sFLT1 alone caused diastolic dysfunction in wild-type mice, and 
profound systolic dysfunction in mice lacking cardiac PGC-1α. Finally, plasma 
samples from women with PPCM contained abnormally high levels of sFLT1. These 
data indicate that PPCM is mainly a vascular disease, caused by excess 
anti-angiogenic signalling in the peripartum period. The data also explain how 
late pregnancy poses a threat to cardiac homeostasis, and why pre-eclampsia and 
multiple gestation are important risk factors for the development of PPCM.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11040
PMCID: PMC3356917
PMID: 22596155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS S.A.K is a 
co-inventor on multiple patents held by the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 
that is related to the use of angiogenic proteins for diagnosis and treatment of 
pre-eclampsia. S.A.K. has financial interest in Aggamin Therapeutics. All other 
authors report no competing financial interests.