---
reference_id: "PMID:25874378"
title: The hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome.
authors:
- Martinelli D
- Diodato D
- Ponzi E
- Monné M
- Boenzi S
- Bertini E
- Fiermonte G
- Dionisi-Vici C
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0242-9
keywords:
- Aging
- Humans
- "Hyperammonemia/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Origin Recognition Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ornithine/deficiency, genetics"
- Protein Conformation
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome.
**Authors:** Martinelli D, Diodato D, Ponzi E, Monné M, Boenzi S, Bertini E, Fiermonte G, Dionisi-Vici C
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-015-0242-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-015-0242-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Mar 11;10:29. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0242-9.

The hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome.

Martinelli D, Diodato D, Ponzi E, Monné M, Boenzi S, Bertini E, Fiermonte G,
Dionisi-Vici C.

BACKGROUND: Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome is
a rare autosomal recessive disorder of the urea cycle. HHH has a panethnic
distribution, with a major prevalence in Canada, Italy and Japan. Acute clinical
signs include intermittent episodes of vomiting, confusion or coma and
hepatitis-like attacks. Alternatively, patients show a chronic course with
aversion for protein rich foods, developmental delay/intellectual disability,
myoclonic seizures, ataxia and pyramidal dysfunction. HHH syndrome is caused by
impaired ornithine transport across the inner mitochondrial membrane due to
mutations in SLC25A15 gene, which encodes for the mitochondrial ornithine
carrier ORC1. The diagnosis relies on clinical signs and the peculiar metabolic
triad of hyperammonemia, hyperornithinemia, and urinary excretion of
homocitrulline. HHH syndrome enters in the differential diagnosis with other
inherited or acquired conditions presenting with hyperammonemia.
METHODS: A systematic review of publications reporting patients with HHH
syndrome was performed.
RESULTS: We retrospectively evaluated the clinical, biochemical and genetic
profile of 111 HHH syndrome patients, 109 reported in 61 published articles, and
two unpublished cases. Lethargy and coma are frequent at disease onset, whereas
pyramidal dysfunction and cognitive/behavioural abnormalities represent the most
common clinical features in late-onset cases or during the disease course. Two
common mutations, F188del and R179* account respectively for about 30% and 15%
of patients with the HHH syndrome. Interestingly, the majority of mutations are
located in residues that have side chains protruding into the internal pore of
ORC1, suggesting their possible interference with substrate translocation. Acute
and chronic management consists in the control of hyperammonemia with
protein-restricted diet supplemented with citrulline/arginine and ammonia
scavengers. Prognosis of HHH syndrome is variable, ranging from a severe course
with disabling manifestations to milder variants compatible with an almost
normal life.
CONCLUSIONS: This paper provides detailed information on the clinical, metabolic
and genetic profiles of all HHH syndrome patients published to date. The
clinical phenotype is extremely variable and its severity does not correlate
with the genotype or with recorded ammonium/ornithine plasma levels. Early
intervention allows almost normal life span but the prognosis is variable,
suggesting the need for a better understanding of the still unsolved
pathophysiology of the disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-015-0242-9
PMCID: PMC4358699
PMID: 25874378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
