---
reference_id: "PMID:35830843"
title: A Study of Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy Induced by the TTR Val30Leu Mutation in China.
authors:
- He S
- Gou D
- Yuan M
- Guo J
- Lv X
- Liu Z
- Ma X
- Han Y
journal: Eur Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000525444
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Study of Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy Induced by the TTR Val30Leu Mutation in China.
**Authors:** He S, Gou D, Yuan M, Guo J, Lv X, Liu Z, Ma X, Han Y
**Journal:** Eur Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000525444](https://doi.org/10.1159/000525444)

## Content

1. Eur Neurol. 2022;85(6):486-491. doi: 10.1159/000525444. Epub 2022 Jul 13.

A Study of Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy Induced by the TTR Val30Leu Mutation 
in China.

He S(1), Gou D(1), Yuan M(1), Guo J(2), Lv X(1), Liu Z(1), Ma X(1)(3), Han Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang, China.
(2)Department of Neuroelectrophysiology, The First Hospital of Hebei Medical 
University, Shijiazhuang, China.
(3)Brain Aging and Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory of Hebei Province, The 
First Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, The First Hospital of Hebei Medical 
University, Shijiazhuang, China.

INTRODUCTION: Familial amyloid polyneuropathy is currently prevalent worldwide 
as the transthyretin (TTR) Val30Met mutation, and there are other types of 
mutations. The purpose of this study was to understand the clinical 
manifestations, electrophysiological characteristics, and outcomes of 
hormone-related therapy in patients with the TTR Val30Leu mutation in China.
METHODS: Clinical data were collected from 9 members of a family with the TTR 
Val30Leu mutation in China, and blood samples of 7 members of the family were 
sequenced. The electrophysiological examinations of 4 of them were collected and 
analysed.
RESULTS: A total of 7 people had the TTR gene c.148G>T missense mutation and the 
TTR protein Val30Leu mutation in this family, and the positive members all had 
similar symptoms, such as limb paraesthesia and gastrointestinal symptoms. In 
addition, electrophysiological examination showed abnormal nerve conduction 
velocity in all 4 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical manifestations of this mutation involve mainly limb 
sensory or motor disorders or gastrointestinal symptoms or both, and the 
electrophysiological examination shows neurogenic damage.

© 2022 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000525444
PMID: 35830843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]