---
reference_id: "PMID:38669408"
title: "Clinical implications of septic cardiomyopathy: A narrative review."
authors:
- Hiraiwa H
- Kasugai D
- Okumura T
- Murohara T
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000037940
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnosis, therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Sepsis/diagnosis, complications, physiopathology, therapy"
- Electrocardiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical implications of septic cardiomyopathy: A narrative review.
**Authors:** Hiraiwa H, Kasugai D, Okumura T, Murohara T
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000037940](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000037940)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2024 Apr 26;103(17):e37940. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000037940.

Clinical implications of septic cardiomyopathy: A narrative review.

Hiraiwa H(1), Kasugai D(2), Okumura T(1), Murohara T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Sepsis is caused by the body's dysregulated response to infection, which can
lead to multiorgan injury and death. Patients with sepsis may develop acute
cardiac dysfunction, termed septic cardiomyopathy, which is a global but
reversible dysfunction of both sides of the heart. This narrative review
discusses the mechanistic changes in the heart during septic cardiomyopathy, its
diagnosis, existing treatment options regarding severity and course, and
emerging treatment approaches. Although no standardized definition for septic
cardiomyopathy exists, it is described as a reversible myocardial dysfunction
that typically resolves within 7 to 10 days. Septic cardiomyopathy is often
diagnosed based on electrocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging,
biomarkers, and direct invasive and noninvasive measures of cardiac output.
Presently, the treatment of septic cardiomyopathy is similar to that of sepsis,
primarily focusing on acute interventions. Treatments for cardiomyopathy often
include angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers,
and diuretics. However, because of profound hypotension in sepsis, many
cardiomyopathy treatments are contraindicated in patients with septic
cardiomyopathy. Substantial efforts have been made to study the
pathophysiological mechanisms and diagnostic options; however, the lack of a
uniform definition for septic cardiomyopathy is challenging for physicians when
considering treatments. Another challenge for physicians is that the treatment
for septic cardiomyopathy has only focused on acute intervention, whereas the
treatment for other cardiomyopathies has been provided on a long-term basis. A
better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of septic cardiomyopathy may
contribute to the development of a unified definition of the condition and novel
treatment options.

Copyright © 2024 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000037940
PMCID: PMC11049701
PMID: 38669408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
