---
reference_id: "PMID:33064078"
title: Evolution of multicellularity by collective integration of spatial information.
authors:
- Colizzi ES
- Vroomans RM
- Merks RM
journal: Elife
year: '2020'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.56349
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolution of multicellularity by collective integration of spatial information.
**Authors:** Colizzi ES, Vroomans RM, Merks RM
**Journal:** Elife (2020)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.56349](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.56349)

## Content

1. Elife. 2020 Oct 16;9:e56349. doi: 10.7554/eLife.56349.

Evolution of multicellularity by collective integration of spatial information.

Colizzi ES(1), Vroomans RM(2), Merks RM(3).

Author information:
(1)Mathematical Institute, Leiden University; Origins Center, Leiden, 
Netherlands.
(2)Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam; Origins Center, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(3)Mathematical Institute, Leiden University; Institute of Biology, Leiden 
University; Origins Center, Leiden, Netherlands.

At the origin of multicellularity, cells may have evolved aggregation in 
response to predation, for functional specialisation or to allow large-scale 
integration of environmental cues. These group-level properties emerged from the 
interactions between cells in a group, and determined the selection pressures 
experienced by these cells. We investigate the evolution of multicellularity 
with an evolutionary model where cells search for resources by chemotaxis in a 
shallow, noisy gradient. Cells can evolve their adhesion to others in a 
periodically changing environment, where a cell's fitness solely depends on its 
distance from the gradient source. We show that multicellular aggregates evolve 
because they perform chemotaxis more efficiently than single cells. Only when 
the environment changes too frequently, a unicellular state evolves which relies 
on cell dispersal. Both strategies prevent the invasion of the other through 
interference competition, creating evolutionary bi-stability. Therefore, 
collective behaviour can be an emergent selective driver for undifferentiated 
multicellularity.

Plain Language Summary: All multicellular organisms, from fungi to humans, 
started out life as single cell organisms. These cells were able to survive on 
their own for billions of years before aggregating together to form 
multicellular groups. Although there are trade-offs for being in a group, such 
as sharing resources, there are also benefits: in a group, single cells can 
divide tasks amongst themselves to become more efficient, and can develop 
sophisticated mechanisms to protect each other from harm. But what compelled 
single cells to make the first move and aggregate into a group? One way to 
answer this question is to study the behaviour of slime moulds. These organisms 
exist as single cells but form colonies when their resources run low. 
Researchers have observed that slime mould colonies can navigate their 
environment much better than single cells alone. This property suggests that the 
benefits of moving together as a collective could be the driving factor 
propelling single cells to form groups. To test this theory, Colizzi et al. 
developed a computer model to examine how well groups of cells and lone 
individuals responded to nearby chemical cues. Unlike previous simulations, the 
model created by Colizzi et al. did not specify that being in a group was 
necessarily more favourable than existing as a single cell. Instead, it was left 
for evolution to decide which was the best option in response to the changing 
environmental conditions of the simulation. The mathematical model showed that 
groups of cells were generally better at sensing and moving towards a resource 
than single cells acting alone. Single cells moved at the same speed as groups, 
but they often sensed their environment poorly and got disorientated. Only when 
the environment changed frequently, did cells revert back to the single life. 
This was because it was no longer beneficial to band together as a group, as the 
cells were unable to sense the environmental cues fast enough to communicate to 
each other and coordinate a response. This work provides insights into what 
drove the early evolution of complex life and explains why, under certain 
conditions, single cells evolved to form colonies. Additionally, if this model 
were to be adopted by cancer biologists, it could help researchers better 
understand how cancer cells form groups to move and spread around the body.

© 2020, Colizzi et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.56349
PMCID: PMC7652420
PMID: 33064078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EC, RV, RM No competing interests declared