---
reference_id: "PMID:10894096"
title: Ciliary assessment in bronchiectasis.
authors:
- Tsang KW
- Zheng L
- Tipoe G
journal: Respirology
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1046/j.1440-1843.2000.00233.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ciliary assessment in bronchiectasis.
**Authors:** Tsang KW, Zheng L, Tipoe G
**Journal:** Respirology (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1440-1843.2000.00233.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-1843.2000.00233.x)

## Content

1. Respirology. 2000 Jun;5(2):91-8. doi: 10.1046/j.1440-1843.2000.00233.x.

Ciliary assessment in bronchiectasis.

Tsang KW(1), Zheng L, Tipoe G.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary 
Hospital, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China. kwttsang@hkucc.hku.hk

Bronchiectasis is a common condition among the Oriental population and affected 
patients suffer from chronic sputum production punctuated by recurrent infective 
exacerbations. Cilia are minute structures present on the surface of respiratory 
and other epithelial cells that beat continuously to maintain a sterile mucosal 
surface in the respiratory tract. Patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia could 
potentially develop recurrent sinotrachrobronchitis, bronchiectasis, serous 
otitis media, hydrocephalus, and male infertility. The assessment of cilia has, 
however, received little attention until recently and generally involves 
elaborate methods that require complex and expensive technology. This brief 
article discusses application of the saccharine test, light microscopy 
assessment of ciliary beat, and transmission electron microscopy assessment of 
the ultrastructure of cilia. The rationale and indications for ciliary 
assessment are also listed along with illustrations showing ciliary structure, 
equipment required for sampling and assessment of cilia, and transmission 
electron micrographs of ciliary ultrastructural abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1843.2000.00233.x
PMID: 10894096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]