---
reference_id: "PMID:16245637"
title: "[Crohn's disease--standards of treatment 2004]."
authors:
- Kruis W
journal: Praxis (Bern 1994)
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1024/0369-8394.94.41.1595
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Crohn's disease--standards of treatment 2004].
**Authors:** Kruis W
**Journal:** Praxis (Bern 1994) (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1024/0369-8394.94.41.1595](https://doi.org/10.1024/0369-8394.94.41.1595)

## Content

1. Praxis (Bern 1994). 2005 Oct 12;94(41):1595-8. doi: 
10.1024/0369-8394.94.41.1595.

[Crohn's disease--standards of treatment 2004].

[Article in German]

Kruis W(1).

Author information:
(1)Evangelisches Krankenhaus Kalk, Akademisches Lehrkrankenhaus für die 
Universität zu Köln. Ansorg@evkk.de

In Crohn's disease therapeutic concepts are according to distinct conditions. 
Course of the disease, the individual disease pattern and the aim of treatment 
are of particular significance. Care of patients with Crohn's disease requires 
interdisciplinary cooperation between gastroenterologists and surgeons. Primary 
therapy in mild to moderate disease comprises aminosalicylates and budesonide. 
Treatment of refractory or severe cases are corticosteroids. Immunosuppressive 
therapy is indicated in all kinds of complicated disease. First line 
immunosuppressants are Azathioprine and 6-Mercaptopurine while Methotrexate, 
Infliximab, Mycophenolatmofetil and other compounds represent alternative or 
rescue medications. Maintenance of remission should not be done on a regular 
basis but rather regarding the individual patients' situation. Risks have to be 
carefully balanced with possible benefits. The most important aim of treatment 
is quality of life.

DOI: 10.1024/0369-8394.94.41.1595
PMID: 16245637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]