---
reference_id: "PMID:32107168"
title: "Graves' disease: Epidemiology, genetic and environmental risk factors and viruses."
authors:
- Antonelli A
- Ferrari SM
- Ragusa F
- Elia G
- Paparo SR
- Ruffilli I
- Patrizio A
- Giusti C
- Gonnella D
- Cristaudo A
- Foddis R
- Shoenfeld Y
- Fallahi P
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2020.101387
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Graves' disease: Epidemiology, genetic and environmental risk factors and viruses.
**Authors:** Antonelli A, Ferrari SM, Ragusa F, Elia G, Paparo SR, Ruffilli I, Patrizio A, Giusti C, Gonnella D, Cristaudo A, Foddis R, Shoenfeld Y, Fallahi P
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2020.101387](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2020.101387)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Jan;34(1):101387. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2020.101387. Epub 2020 Feb 4.

Graves' disease: Epidemiology, genetic and environmental risk factors and 
viruses.

Antonelli A(1), Ferrari SM(2), Ragusa F(3), Elia G(4), Paparo SR(5), Ruffilli 
I(6), Patrizio A(7), Giusti C(8), Gonnella D(9), Cristaudo A(10), Foddis R(11), 
Shoenfeld Y(12), Fallahi P(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy. Electronic address: alessandro.antonelli@med.unipi.it.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy. Electronic address: sm.ferrari@int.med.unipi.it.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy. Electronic address: francescaragusa86@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy. Electronic address: e.giusy_87@hotmail.it.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy. Electronic address: sabrinapaparo@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy. Electronic address: ilaria.ruffilli@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy. Electronic address: armandopatrizio125@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy. Electronic address: claudiagiusti94@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy. Electronic address: debora.gonnella@icloud.com.
(10)Department of Translational Research of New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: 
alfonso.cristaudo@unipi.it.
(11)Department of Translational Research of New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: 
rudy.foddis@unipi.it.
(12)Zabludowicz Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical Center, 
Tel-Hashomer, Israel; Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, 
Tel-Aviv, Israel; I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University of the 
Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation (Sechenov University), Russia. 
Electronic address: Yehuda.Shoenfeld@sheba.health.gov.il.
(13)Department of Translational Research of New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: 
poupak.fallahi@unipi.it.

Graves' disease (GD) is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism in developed 
Countries. It is more common between 30 and 60 years; 5-10 times more frequent 
in women. The genetic predisposition accounts for 79% of the risk for GD, while 
environmental factors for 21%. About 70% of genes associated with autoimmune 
thyroid disorders (AITD) are implicated in T-cell function. Among GD endogenous 
factors, estrogens, X-inactivation and microchimerism are important. Among 
environmental risk factors, smoking, iodine excess, selenium and vitamin D 
deficiency, and the occupational exposure to Agent Orange have been associated 
with GD. Many studies showed that HCV is associated with thyroid autoimmunity 
and hypothyroidism, in patients with chronic HCV hepatitis (CHC); a significant 
link has been shown also between HCV-related mixed cryoglobulinemia and risk for 
GD. Moreover, IFN-α-treated CHC patients develop GD more frequently. Novel 
studies are needed about possible risk factors to reduce the occurence of GD in 
West Countries.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2020.101387
PMID: 32107168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The Authors 
have nothing to declare.