---
reference_id: "PMID:27426476"
title: "CLOVES syndrome: review of a PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum (PROS)."
authors:
- Martinez-Lopez A
- Blasco-Morente G
- Perez-Lopez I
- Herrera-Garcia JD
- Luque-Valenzuela M
- Sanchez-Cano D
- Lopez-Gutierrez JC
- Ruiz-Villaverde R
- Tercedor-Sanchez J
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12832
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CLOVES syndrome: review of a PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum (PROS).
**Authors:** Martinez-Lopez A, Blasco-Morente G, Perez-Lopez I, Herrera-Garcia JD, Luque-Valenzuela M, Sanchez-Cano D, Lopez-Gutierrez JC, Ruiz-Villaverde R, Tercedor-Sanchez J
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12832](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12832)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2017 Jan;91(1):14-21. doi: 10.1111/cge.12832. Epub 2016 Aug 3.

CLOVES syndrome: review of a PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum (PROS).

Martinez-Lopez A(1), Blasco-Morente G(1), Perez-Lopez I(1), Herrera-Garcia 
JD(2), Luque-Valenzuela M(3), Sanchez-Cano D(4), Lopez-Gutierrez JC(5), 
Ruiz-Villaverde R(1), Tercedor-Sanchez J(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Unit, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario, Granada, Spain.
(2)Neurological Unit, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario, Granada, Spain.
(3)Orthopedical Unit, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario, Granada, Spain.
(4)Internal Medicine Unit, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario, Granada, Spain.
(5)Vascular Malformations Unit, Hospital Infantil La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

Overgrowth syndromes are characterized by global or localized disproportionate 
growth associated with other anomalies, including vascular malformations and 
neurological and/or visceral disorders. CLOVES (Congenital Lipomatous asymmetric 
Overgrowth of the trunk with lymphatic, capillary, venous, and combined-type 
Vascular malformations, Epidermal naevi, Scoliosis/Skeletal and spinal 
anomalies) is an overgrowth syndrome caused by mosaic activating mutation in 
gene PIK3CA, which gives rise to abnormal PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway activation. 
These mutations are responsible for the clinical manifestations of the syndrome, 
which include low- and high-flow vascular malformations, thoracic lipomatous 
hyperplasia, asymmetric growth, and visceral and neurological disorders. These 
common anomalies are illustrated with figures from two personal cases. 
Identification of the clinical and genetic characteristics of CLOVES syndrome is 
crucial for the differential diagnosis with other overgrowth syndromes, such as 
Proteus or Klippel-Trenaunay (K-T) syndromes, and for the therapeutic management 
of the different anomalies. In this context, a new entity comprising different 
syndromes with phenotypic mutations in PIK3CA has been proposed, designated 
PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum (PROS), with the aim of facilitating clinical 
management and establishing appropriate genetic study criteria.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12832
PMID: 27426476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]