---
reference_id: "PMID:37224080"
title: The relationship between mental fatigue, depression, and cognition in Graves' disease.
authors:
- Johansson B
- Holmberg M
- Skau S
- Malmgren H
- Filipsson Nyström H
journal: Eur Thyroid J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1530/ETJ-23-0040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The relationship between mental fatigue, depression, and cognition in Graves' disease.
**Authors:** Johansson B, Holmberg M, Skau S, Malmgren H, Filipsson Nyström H
**Journal:** Eur Thyroid J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ETJ-23-0040](https://doi.org/10.1530/ETJ-23-0040)

## Content

1. Eur Thyroid J. 2023 Jul 12;12(4):e230040. doi: 10.1530/ETJ-23-0040.

The relationship between mental fatigue, depression, and cognition in Graves' 
disease.

Johansson B(1)(2), Holmberg M(3)(4)(5), Skau S(1)(6), Malmgren H(4), Filipsson 
Nyström H(4)(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Sahlgrenska Academy, Institute of 
Neuroscience and Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neurology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)ANOVA, Karolinska University Hospital, Norra Stationsgatan 69, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Wallenberg's Centre of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Region Västra 
Götaland, Sweden.
(6)Department of Pedagogical, Curricular and Professional Studies, Faculty of 
Education, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Mental fatigue, depression, anxiety, and cognitive complaints are 
common in Graves' disease (GD). Our aims were to assess the relationship between 
these variables in patients with GD during both hyperthyroidism and a long 
stable euthyroidism.
METHODS: A prospective longitudinal case-control study where 65 premenopausal 
women diagnosed with GD and 65 matched controls were assessed twice with 15 
months in between. The first visit for patients was in overt hyperthyroidism and 
the second after treatment.
RESULTS: During the hyperthyroid phase, mental fatigue, depression, and anxiety 
were significantly increased for GD patients compared to controls (all P < 
0.001). Among GD patients, 89% reported mental fatigue and among controls 14%. 
No difference in cognitive tests was found. After 15 months, significant 
improvements for GD patients after treatment were found for the items of mental 
fatigue, depression, and anxiety (all P < 0.001), but these were unchanged in 
controls. GD patients reported residual mental fatigue (38%), 23% without 
depression, and 15% mental fatigue combined with depression. Self-reported 
cognitive complaints were pronounced while cognitive tests did not reveal any 
deficiencies.
CONCLUSION: Mental fatigue and emotional distress are common in the hyperthyroid 
phase. These improve with treatment but are still more common in GD patients 
after 15 months of therapy than in controls. The residual mental fatigue is 
shown to be a phenomenon distinct from depression in this study. This indicates 
the importance of assessing mental fatigue in GD patients and underlines the 
need for rehabilitation and healthcare support as fatigue will have consequences 
for work ability.

DOI: 10.1530/ETJ-23-0040
PMCID: PMC10388675
PMID: 37224080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declares that they have no relevant 
or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this 
paper.