---
reference_id: "PMID:37866679"
title: "Prevalence and risk factors for persistent symptoms after COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Luo D
- Mei B
- Wang P
- Li X
- Chen X
- Wei G
- Kuang F
- Li B
- Su S
journal: Clin Microbiol Infect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2023.10.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and risk factors for persistent symptoms after COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Luo D, Mei B, Wang P, Li X, Chen X, Wei G, Kuang F, Li B, Su S
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Infect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmi.2023.10.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2023.10.016)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2024 Mar;30(3):328-335. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2023.10.016.
 Epub 2023 Oct 20.

Prevalence and risk factors for persistent symptoms after COVID-19: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Luo D(1), Mei B(2), Wang P(1), Li X(1), Chen X(3), Wei G(4), Kuang F(5), Li 
B(1), Su S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery (Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery), Affiliated 
Hospital of Southwest Medical University, Sichuan, China; Academician (Expert) 
Workstation of Sichuan Province, Metabolic Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Diseases 
Key Laboratory of Luzhou City, Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical 
University, Sichuan, China.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Sichuan Cancer Hospital, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, People's Hospital of Deyang City, 
Deyang, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical 
University, Sichuan, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Gastrointestinal 
Cancer, Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of General Surgery (Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery), Affiliated 
Hospital of Southwest Medical University, Sichuan, China; Academician (Expert) 
Workstation of Sichuan Province, Metabolic Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Diseases 
Key Laboratory of Luzhou City, Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical 
University, Sichuan, China. Electronic address: susong1978@swmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Long-term physical and mental persistent symptoms after COVID-19 
represent a growing global public health concern. However, there remains a 
substantial knowledge gap regarding their prevalence and risk factors.
OBJECTIVES: To estimate the prevalence and risk factors for persistent symptoms 
after COVID-19.
METHODS OF DATA SYNTHESIS: We used a random-effects model to pool persistent 
symptom prevalence and risk ratios comparing COVID-19 patients with non-COVID-19 
individuals.
DATA SOURCES: Electronic databases were searched for studies published from 
December 2019 to January 2023.
STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Eligible studies that reported the prevalence and 
risk factors for persistent symptoms after COVID-19 were included.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients who recovered from COVID-19.
ASSESSMENT OF RISK OF BIAS: The Joanna Briggs Institute critical appraisal tool 
was used to assess the risk of bias in prevalence studies, whereas the risk of 
bias in cohort studies was evaluated with the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale.
RESULTS: After screening 4359 studies, a total of 211 eligible studies were 
included, covering a population of 13 368 074 individuals. Fatigue, dyspnoea, 
post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, and depression were the most frequently 
reported persistent symptoms after COVID-19. Subgroup analyses revealed that 
individuals with more severe illness in the acute phase or from Europe exhibited 
a higher prevalence of certain symptoms, whereas children demonstrated a lower 
prevalence. Furthermore, COVID-19 patients had a significantly higher prevalence 
of most persistent symptoms compared with non-COVID-19 individuals. Factors 
frequently associated with a higher prevalence of persistent symptoms included 
female gender, advanced age, severe illness during the acute phase of COVID-19, 
multiple comorbidities, an extended duration of hospital stay, and a high body 
mass index.
CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis provides a thorough review of the prevalence and 
risk factors for persistent symptoms following COVID-19. The findings underscore 
the importance of long-term monitoring and support for individuals recovering 
from COVID-19.

Copyright © 2023 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious 
Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2023.10.016
PMID: 37866679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]