---
reference_id: "PMID:37387119"
title: "Plasma exchange for acute optic neuritis in neuromyelitis optica or neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder: a systematic review."
authors:
- Naphattalung Y
- Chuenkongkaew WL
- Chirapapaisan N
- Laowanapiban P
- Sawangkul S
journal: Ann Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/07853890.2023.2227422
keywords:
- Humans
- Plasma Exchange
- Neuromyelitis Optica/therapy
- Optic Neuritis/therapy
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plasma exchange for acute optic neuritis in neuromyelitis optica or neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Naphattalung Y, Chuenkongkaew WL, Chirapapaisan N, Laowanapiban P, Sawangkul S
**Journal:** Ann Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/07853890.2023.2227422](https://doi.org/10.1080/07853890.2023.2227422)

## Content

1. Ann Med. 2023 Dec;55(1):2227422. doi: 10.1080/07853890.2023.2227422.

Plasma exchange for acute optic neuritis in neuromyelitis optica or 
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder: a systematic review.

Naphattalung Y(1), Chuenkongkaew WL(1), Chirapapaisan N(1), Laowanapiban P(2), 
Sawangkul S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Mettapracharak (Wat Rai Khing) Hospital, Nakhon 
Pathom, Thailand.

OBJECTIVES: To appraise whether plasma exchange (PLEX) effectively improves 
visual function for acute optic neuritis (ON) in neuromyelitis optica (NMO) or 
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD).
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We searched Medline, Embase, Cochrane Library, ProQuest 
Central, and Web of Science to identify relevant articles published between 2006 
and 2020.Eligible studies were in English and evaluated visual outcomes for 
people with acute ON in NMO or NMOSD treated with PLEX. They also had adequate 
pre- and posttreatment data. Excluded were studies with 1 or 2 case reports, or 
incomplete data.
RESULTS: Twelve studies were qualitatively synthesized (1 RCT; 1 controlled 
NRSI; 10 observational studies). Five before-and-after observational studies 
were used for quantitative synthesis. The PLEX in the 5 studies (3 to 7 cycles 
over 2 to 3 weeks) was performed as second-line or adjunctive therapy for acute 
ON in NMO/NMOSD.The qualitative synthesis revealed that visual-acuity recovery 
occurred between one day and 6 months after the first PLEX cycle completion. 
Thirty-two of 48 participants in the 5 quantitative-synthesis studies received 
PLEX. Relative to pre-PLEX values, visual-acuity improvements were 
nonsignificant at these post-PLEX time points: 1 day (SMD 0.611; 95% CI -0.620 
to 1.842); 2 weeks (SMD 0.0214; 95% CI -1.250 to 1.293); 3 months (SMD 1.014; 
95% CI -0.954 to 2.982); and 6 months (SMD 0.450; 95% CI -2.643 to 3.543).
CONCLUSIONS: There were inadequate data to determine whether PLEX effectively 
treats acute ON in NMO/NMOSD.

Plain Language Summary: Aggregate current data of this systematic review is 
insufficient to definitively conclude whether therapeutic PLEX is effective in 
improving VA in cases of NMO or NMOSD.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890.2023.2227422
PMCID: PMC10316725
PMID: 37387119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).