---
reference_id: "PMID:18343383"
title: "Gilbert syndrome, UGT1A1*28 allele, and cardiovascular disease risk: possible protective effects and therapeutic applications of bilirubin."
authors:
- Schwertner HA
- Vítek L
journal: Atherosclerosis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.01.001
keywords:
- Alleles
- Bilirubin/blood
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/blood, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Gilbert Disease/blood, epidemiology, genetics"
- Glucuronosyltransferase/genetics
- Humans
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gilbert syndrome, UGT1A1*28 allele, and cardiovascular disease risk: possible protective effects and therapeutic applications of bilirubin.
**Authors:** Schwertner HA, Vítek L
**Journal:** Atherosclerosis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.01.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.01.001)

## Content

1. Atherosclerosis. 2008 May;198(1):1-11. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.01.001. Epub 2008 Mar 17.

Gilbert syndrome, UGT1A1*28 allele, and cardiovascular disease risk: possible 
protective effects and therapeutic applications of bilirubin.

Schwertner HA(1), Vítek L.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research, Wilford Hall Medical Center, San Antonio, TX 78236, USA. 
Harvey.Schwertner@LACKLAND.AF.MIL

Serum bilirubin has been shown to be inversely related to cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) in both retrospective and prospective studies. Meta-analysis of existing 
studies has also confirmed that serum bilirubin concentrations are inversely 
related to CVD. Less information is known about the protective effects of 
slightly elevated serum bilirubin concentrations. In this review, we will focus 
primarily on the association of serum bilirubin and CVD and the possible 
protective roles of bilirubin, heme oxygenase (HO), and bilirubin 
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1). HO and biliverdin reductase control the 
formation of bilirubin, whereas UGT1A1 controls bilirubin conjugation and 
clearance. Because of the health and therapeutic implications of slightly 
elevated serum bilirubin concentrations, we will discuss the recent prospective 
studies on cardiovascular risk in individuals with Gilbert syndrome (GS) as well 
as those with the UGT1A1*28 allele. Such individuals have decreased hepatic 
bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltransferase activity, decreased bilirubin clearance, 
and increased serum bilirubin concentrations. Lastly, we will discuss some of 
the therapeutic approaches that could be used to increase serum bilirubin 
concentrations to prevent CVD and other oxidative and inflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.01.001
PMID: 18343383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]