---
reference_id: "PMID:24855271"
title: "Recurrent somatic mutations underlie corticotropin-independent Cushing's syndrome."
authors:
- Sato Y
- Maekawa S
- Ishii R
- Sanada M
- Morikawa T
- Shiraishi Y
- Yoshida K
- Nagata Y
- Sato-Otsubo A
- Yoshizato T
- Suzuki H
- Shiozawa Y
- Kataoka K
- Kon A
- Aoki K
- Chiba K
- Tanaka H
- Kume H
- Miyano S
- Fukayama M
- Nureki O
- Homma Y
- Ogawa S
journal: Science
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1126/science.1252328
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms/genetics
- Adrenocortical Adenoma/genetics
- Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/metabolism
- Animals
- Catalytic Domain/genetics
- "Cushing Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinase Catalytic Subunits/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits/genetics
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- PC12 Cells
- Rats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent somatic mutations underlie corticotropin-independent Cushing's syndrome.
**Authors:** Sato Y, Maekawa S, Ishii R, Sanada M, Morikawa T, Shiraishi Y, Yoshida K, Nagata Y, Sato-Otsubo A, Yoshizato T, Suzuki H, Shiozawa Y, Kataoka K, Kon A, Aoki K, Chiba K, Tanaka H, Kume H, Miyano S, Fukayama M, Nureki O, Homma Y, Ogawa S
**Journal:** Science (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1252328](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1252328)

## Content

1. Science. 2014 May 23;344(6186):917-20. doi: 10.1126/science.1252328.

Recurrent somatic mutations underlie corticotropin-independent Cushing's
syndrome.

Sato Y(1), Maekawa S(2), Ishii R(3), Sanada M(4), Morikawa T(5), Shiraishi Y(6),
Yoshida K(4), Nagata Y(4), Sato-Otsubo A(4), Yoshizato T(4), Suzuki H(4),
Shiozawa Y(4), Kataoka K(4), Kon A(4), Aoki K(4), Chiba K(6), Tanaka H(7), Kume
H(2), Miyano S(8), Fukayama M(5), Nureki O(3), Homma Y(9), Ogawa S(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan. Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Laboratory of Sequence Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Laboratory of Sequence
Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan. sogawa-tky@umin.ac.jp homma-uro@umin.ac.jp.
(10)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. sogawa-tky@umin.ac.jp homma-uro@umin.ac.jp.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 May 23;344(6186):804-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1254901.

Cushing's syndrome is caused by excess cortisol production from the
adrenocortical gland. In corticotropin-independent Cushing's syndrome, the
excess cortisol production is primarily attributed to an adrenocortical adenoma,
in which the underlying molecular pathogenesis has been poorly understood. We
report a hotspot mutation (L206R) in PRKACA, which encodes the catalytic subunit
of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKA), in more
than 50% of cases with adrenocortical adenomas associated with
corticotropin-independent Cushing's syndrome. The L206R PRKACA mutant abolished
its binding to the regulatory subunit of PKA (PRKAR1A) that inhibits catalytic
activity of PRKACA, leading to constitutive, cAMP-independent PKA activation.
These results highlight the major role of cAMP-independent activation of
cAMP/PKA signaling by somatic mutations in corticotropin-independent Cushing's
syndrome, providing insights into the diagnosis and therapeutics of this
syndrome.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1252328
PMID: 24855271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
