---
reference_id: "PMID:10890982"
title: Forkhead Foxe3 maps to the dysgenetic lens locus and is critical in lens development and differentiation.
authors:
- Brownell I
- Dirksen M
- Jamrich M
journal: Genesis
year: '2000'
doi: "10.1002/1526-968x(200006)27:2<81::aid-gene50>3.0.co;2-n"
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Mapping
- Embryonic and Fetal Development/genetics
- Forkhead Transcription Factors
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Lens, Crystalline/embryology, physiology"
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Forkhead Foxe3 maps to the dysgenetic lens locus and is critical in lens development and differentiation.
**Authors:** Brownell I, Dirksen M, Jamrich M
**Journal:** Genesis (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1526-968x(200006)27:2<81::aid-gene50>3.0.co;2-n](https://doi.org/10.1002/1526-968x(200006)27:2<81::aid-gene50>3.0.co;2-n)

## Content

1. Genesis. 2000 Jun;27(2):81-93. doi: 
10.1002/1526-968x(200006)27:2<81::aid-gene50>3.0.co;2-n.

Forkhead Foxe3 maps to the dysgenetic lens locus and is critical in lens 
development and differentiation.

Brownell I(1), Dirksen M, Jamrich M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Here we report the isolation of a novel forkhead gene, Foxe3, that plays an 
important role in lens formation. During development Foxe3 is expressed in all 
undifferentiated lens tissues, and is turned off upon fiber cell 
differentiation. Foxe3 maps to a chromosomal region containing the dysgenetic 
lens (dyl) mutation. Mice homozygous for dyl display several defects in lens 
development. dyl mice also show altered patterns of crystallin expression 
suggesting a dysregulation of lens differentiation. We have identified mutations 
in Foxe3 that cosegregate with the dyl phenotype and are a likely cause of the 
mutant phenotype. Head ectoderm expression of Foxe3 is absent in Rx-/- and Small 
eye embryos indicating that Rx and Pax6 activity are necessary for Foxe3 
expression.

DOI: 10.1002/1526-968x(200006)27:2<81::aid-gene50>3.0.co;2-n
PMID: 10890982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]