---
reference_id: "PMID:14621114"
title: Respiratory failure in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Calverley PM
journal: Eur Respir J Suppl
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1183/09031936.03.00030103
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory failure in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Calverley PM
**Journal:** Eur Respir J Suppl (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1183/09031936.03.00030103](https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.03.00030103)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J Suppl. 2003 Nov;47:26s-30s. doi: 10.1183/09031936.03.00030103.

Respiratory failure in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Calverley PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Medicine, Clinical Sciences Centre, University Hospital Aintree, 
Longmoor Lane, Liverpool L9 7AL, UK. pmacal@liv.ac.uk

Respiratory failure is still an important complication of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and hospitalisation with an acute episode being a poor 
prognostic marker. However, other comorbid conditions, especially cardiovascular 
disease, are equally powerful predictors of mortality. The physiological basis 
of acute respiratory failure in COPD is now clear. Significant 
ventilation/perfusion mismatching with a relative increase in the physiological 
dead space leads to hypercapnia and hence acidosis. This is largely the result 
of a shift to a rapid shallow breathing pattern and a rise in the dead 
space/tidal volume ratio of each breath. This breathing pattern results from 
adaptive physiological responses which lessen the risk of respiratory muscle 
fatigue and minimise breathlessness. Treatment is directed at reducing the 
mechanical load applied to each breath, correcting specific precipitating 
factors, e.g. bacterial infection, and maintaining gas exchange. Both 
bronchodilators and oral corticosteroids can improve spirometric results in 
exacerbations of COPD and should be routinely offered to patients with 
respiratory failure. Controlled oxygen is still not always prescribed 
appropriately and high inspired oxygen concentrations can lead to severe 
acidosis by either worsening ventilation/perfusion mismatching and/or inducing a 
degree of hypoventilation. Ventilatory support using noninvasive ventilation has 
revolutionised the approach to these patients. Acute respiratory failure due to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease remains a common medical emergency that 
can be effectively managed. More attention should be focused on the prevention 
of these episodes and identifying the factors which cause early relapse.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.03.00030103
PMID: 14621114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]