---
reference_id: "PMID:32750333"
title: Complex Autoinflammatory Syndrome Unveils Fundamental Principles of JAK1 Kinase Transcriptional and Biochemical Function.
authors:
- Gruber CN
- Calis JJA
- Buta S
- Evrony G
- Martin JC
- Uhl SA
- Caron R
- Jarchin L
- Dunkin D
- Phelps R
- Webb BD
- Saland JM
- Merad M
- Orange JS
- Mace EM
- Rosenberg BR
- Gelb BD
- Bogunovic D
journal: Immunity
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2020.07.006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- COVID-19/mortality
- Catalytic Domain/genetics
- Cell Line
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Female
- Gain of Function Mutation/genetics
- Genotype
- HEK293 Cells
- "Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Janus Kinase 1/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Mosaicism
- Piperidines/therapeutic use
- Precision Medicine/methods
- Pyrimidines/therapeutic use
- Signal Transduction/immunology
- "Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complex Autoinflammatory Syndrome Unveils Fundamental Principles of JAK1 Kinase Transcriptional and Biochemical Function.
**Authors:** Gruber CN, Calis JJA, Buta S, Evrony G, Martin JC, Uhl SA, Caron R, Jarchin L, Dunkin D, Phelps R, Webb BD, Saland JM, Merad M, Orange JS, Mace EM, Rosenberg BR, Gelb BD, Bogunovic D
**Journal:** Immunity (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.immuni.2020.07.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2020.07.006)

## Content

1. Immunity. 2020 Sep 15;53(3):672-684.e11. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2020.07.006.
Epub  2020 Aug 3.

Complex Autoinflammatory Syndrome Unveils Fundamental Principles of JAK1 Kinase 
Transcriptional and Biochemical Function.

Gruber CN(1), Calis JJA(2), Buta S(1), Evrony G(3), Martin JC(4), Uhl SA(1), 
Caron R(1), Jarchin L(5), Dunkin D(6), Phelps R(7), Webb BD(8), Saland JM(9), 
Merad M(10), Orange JS(11), Mace EM(11), Rosenberg BR(1), Gelb BD(8), Bogunovic 
D(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)Program in Immunogenomics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, 
USA; Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065, USA; Center for Translational Immunology, Department of 
Pediatric Immunology & Rheumatology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
University of Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)Center for Genetics and Genomics, New York University Grossman School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Université de Nantes, Inserm, 
CHU Nantes, Centre de Recherche en Transplantation et Immunologie, UMR 1064, 
ITUN, 44000 Nantes, France; CHU Nantes, Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Center for 
Immuno Monitoring Nantes-Atlantique (CIMNA), 44000 Nantes, France.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029, USA; Department of Gastroenterology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029, USA; Department of Gastroenterology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029, USA; Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY 10029, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029, USA; Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Mindich Child Health and 
Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029, USA.
(10)Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(12)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY 10029, USA; Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Mindich Child Health and 
Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA. Electronic address: dusan.bogunovic@mssm.edu.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2020 Sep 15;53(3):481-484. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2020.08.010.

Autoinflammatory disease can result from monogenic errors of immunity. We 
describe a patient with early-onset multi-organ immune dysregulation resulting 
from a mosaic, gain-of-function mutation (S703I) in JAK1, encoding a kinase 
essential for signaling downstream of >25 cytokines. By custom single-cell RNA 
sequencing, we examine mosaicism with single-cell resolution. We find that JAK1 
transcription was predominantly restricted to a single allele across different 
cells, introducing the concept of a mutational "transcriptotype" that differs 
from the genotype. Functionally, the mutation increases JAK1 activity and 
transactivates partnering JAKs, independent of its catalytic domain. S703I JAK1 
is not only hypermorphic for cytokine signaling but also neomorphic, as it 
enables signaling cascades not canonically mediated by JAK1. Given these 
results, the patient was treated with tofacitinib, a JAK inhibitor, leading to 
the rapid resolution of clinical disease. These findings offer a platform for 
personalized medicine with the concurrent discovery of fundamental biological 
principles.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2020.07.006
PMCID: PMC7398039
PMID: 32750333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.