---
reference_id: "PMID:37027963"
title: "Biotinidase deficiency: What have we learned in forty years?"
authors:
- Tankeu AT
- Van Winckel G
- Elmers J
- Jaccard E
- Superti-Furga A
- Wolf B
- Tran C
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107560
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biotinidase deficiency: What have we learned in forty years?
**Authors:** Tankeu AT, Van Winckel G, Elmers J, Jaccard E, Superti-Furga A, Wolf B, Tran C
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107560](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107560)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2023 Apr;138(4):107560. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107560.
Epub  2023 Mar 24.

Biotinidase deficiency: What have we learned in forty years?

Tankeu AT(1), Van Winckel G(2), Elmers J(3), Jaccard E(4), Superti-Furga A(1), 
Wolf B(5), Tran C(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Lausanne and University Hospital 
of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Genetic Medicine Division, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Medical Library, University of Lausanne and University Hospital of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Lausanne and University Hospital of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(5)Division of Genetics, Birth Defects and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United 
States of America; Department of Medical Genetics, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, 
MI, United States of America.
(6)Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Lausanne and University Hospital 
of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Electronic address: christel.tran@chuv.ch.

BACKGROUND: Biotinidase deficiency (BD) is an autosomal recessively inherited 
disorder that was first described in 1982. Forty years after its first 
description, we compiled available clinical data on BD with the aim of 
generating a more comprehensive picture of this condition.
METHODS: A systematic search strategy was performed in relevant databases 
without limits for publication date or languages. We screened 3966 records and 
included 144 articles reporting individuals with BD and their clinical 
presentation as well as the outcomes, when available.
RESULTS: This study included 1113 individuals with BD. More than half (51.5%) of 
these individuals were diagnosed by newborn screening, 43.3% in presence of 
clinical symptoms and 5.2% due to family screening. We grouped symptomatic 
individuals into four main clinical presentations: neonatal-onset (<1 month; 
7.9%), early childhood-onset (<2 years; 59.2%), juvenile-onset (2-16 years; 
25.1%) and adult-onset (>16 years; 7.7%). BD affected five main organ systems: 
nervous system (67.2%), skin (53.7%), eye (34.4%), auditory (26.9%) and 
respiratory system (17.8%). Involvement was mainly multisystemic (82.2%) of 
individuals, whereas isolated system presentation was seen in only 17.2% of 
individuals. When reported, metabolic acidosis was present in 42.4% of 
symptomatic individuals and characteristic abnormal organic acid metabolites 
were found in 57.1%. Biotin treatment led to clinical stability or improvement 
in 89.2% of individuals. 1.6% of reported individuals with BD died due to 
non-availability of treatment or late diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Newborn screening has had a major positive impact on the outcome of 
many individuals with BD. However, undiagnosed and non-treated BD remains a 
health concern. Given the risk of mortality or complications associated with 
late or missed diagnosis if newborn screening is not available, a trial of 
biotin should be considered in undiagnosed infants and adults exhibiting 
suspected clinical signs. Enzymatic activity and/or analysis of genetic variants 
can readily confirm the diagnosis of BD.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107560
PMID: 37027963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.