---
reference_id: "PMID:26549780"
title: "Comorbidities of epilepsy: current concepts and future perspectives."
authors:
- Keezer MR
- Sisodiya SM
- Sander JW
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00225-2
keywords:
- Comorbidity
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Forecasting
- Humans
- "Mental Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Migraine Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comorbidities of epilepsy: current concepts and future perspectives.
**Authors:** Keezer MR, Sisodiya SM, Sander JW
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00225-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00225-2)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2016 Jan;15(1):106-15. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00225-2. Epub
 2015 Nov 6.

Comorbidities of epilepsy: current concepts and future perspectives.

Keezer MR(1), Sisodiya SM(1), Sander JW(2).

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Health Research University College London Hospitals
Biomedical Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK; Epilepsy
Society, Chalfont St Peter, UK.
(2)National Institute for Health Research University College London Hospitals
Biomedical Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK; Epilepsy
Society, Chalfont St Peter, UK; Stichting Epilepsie Instellingen Nederland,
Heemstede, Netherlands. Electronic address: l.sander@ucl.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2016 Jan;15(1):28.

The burden of comorbidity in people with epilepsy is high. Several diseases,
including depression, anxiety, dementia, migraine, heart disease, peptic ulcers,
and arthritis are up to eight times more common in people with epilepsy than in
the general population. Several mechanisms explain how epilepsy and
comorbidities are associated, including shared risk factors and bidirectional
relations. There is a pressing need for new and validated screening instruments
and guidelines to help with the early detection and treatment of comorbid
conditions. Preliminary evidence suggests that some conditions, such as
depression and migraine, negatively affect seizure outcome and quality of life.
Further investigation is needed to explore these relations and the effects of
targeted interventions. Future advances in the investigation of the
comorbidities of epilepsy will strengthen our understanding of epilepsy and
could play an important part in stratification for genetic studies.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00225-2
PMID: 26549780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
