---
reference_id: "PMID:39386881"
title: "Mechanism of macrophages in gout: Recent progress and perspective."
authors:
- Tan H
- Zhang S
- Liao J
- Qiu X
- Zhang Z
- Wang Z
- Geng H
- Zhang J
- Jia E
journal: Heliyon
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e38288
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of macrophages in gout: Recent progress and perspective.
**Authors:** Tan H, Zhang S, Liao J, Qiu X, Zhang Z, Wang Z, Geng H, Zhang J, Jia E
**Journal:** Heliyon (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e38288](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e38288)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2024 Sep 21;10(19):e38288. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e38288. 
eCollection 2024 Oct 15.

Mechanism of macrophages in gout: Recent progress and perspective.

Tan H(1), Zhang S(1), Liao J(1), Qiu X(2)(3), Zhang Z(2), Wang Z(2), Geng H(4), 
Zhang J(2)(3), Jia E(5).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing 
University of Chinese Medicine, Shenzhen, 518033, Guangdong, PR China.
(2)The Fourth Clinical Medical College of Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, Shenzhen, 518033, Guangdong, PR China.
(3)The Department of Rheumatology, Shenzhen Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Hospital, Shenzhen, 518033, Guangdong, PR China.
(4)The Department of Gynecology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Chinese 
Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, 510000, Guangdong, PR China.
(5)The Department of Rheumatism, The Fifth Clinical College of Guangzhou 
University of Chinese Medicine, Guangdong Second Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, 510000, PR China.

Gout represents an autoinflammatory disorder instigated by monosodium urate 
crystals. Its primary manifestation involves the recruitment of diverse immune 
cell populations, including neutrophils and macrophages. Macrophages assume a 
pivotal role in the initiation of acute gouty inflammation and subsequent 
inflammatory cascades. However, recent investigations have revealed that the 
impact of macrophages on gout is nuanced, extending beyond a solely detrimental 
influence. Macrophages, characterized by different subtypes, exhibit distinct 
functionalities that either contribute to the progression or regression of gout. 
A strategy aimed at modulating macrophage polarization, rather than merely 
inhibiting inflammation, holds promise for enhancing the efficacy of acute gout 
treatment. This review centres on elucidating potential mechanisms underlying 
macrophage polarization in the onset and resolution of gouty inflammation, 
offering novel insights into the immune equilibrium of macrophages in the 
context of gout.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e38288
PMCID: PMC11462003
PMID: 39386881

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.