---
reference_id: "PMID:23103883"
title: "Concurrent deletion of BMP4 and OTX2 genes, two master genes in ophthalmogenesis."
authors:
- Takenouchi T
- Nishina S
- Kosaki R
- Torii C
- Furukawa R
- Takahashi T
- Kosaki K
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.10.007
keywords:
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4/genetics
- Brain/pathology
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Eye/pathology
- "Eye Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- Facies
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Otx Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concurrent deletion of BMP4 and OTX2 genes, two master genes in ophthalmogenesis.
**Authors:** Takenouchi T, Nishina S, Kosaki R, Torii C, Furukawa R, Takahashi T, Kosaki K
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.10.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.10.007)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2013 Jan;56(1):50-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.10.007. Epub
2012  Oct 26.

Concurrent deletion of BMP4 and OTX2 genes, two master genes 
in ophthalmogenesis.

Takenouchi T(1), Nishina S, Kosaki R, Torii C, Furukawa R, Takahashi T, Kosaki 
K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BMP4 and OTX2 are master genes in ophthalmogenesis. Mutations of BMP4 and OTX2 
often lead to eye defects, including anophthalmia-microphthalmia. A significant 
degree of variable expressivity has been reported in heterozygous individuals 
with BMP4 or OTX2 mutation. Interestingly, both BMP4 and OTX2 reside on 14q22, 
being only 2.8 Mb apart. Previous studies reported that among three patients 
with 14q22 deletion involving BMP4 and OTX2, all had severe eye defects. The 
minimal degree of variable expressivity among these individuals who were doubly 
deleted for BMP4 and OTX2 could be attributed to the combinatorial relationship 
of the two genes observed in animal models. We herein report a patient with a 
concurrent deletion of BMP4 and OTX2 who exhibited bilateral microphthalmia, 
more specifically, anterior segment dysgenesis with microcornea. Evolutionarily 
conserved physical linkage of Bmp4 and Otx2 loci may suggest an advantage of the 
proximal alignment of the two genes. Another striking feature in the propositus 
was the progressive white matter loss observed by serial neuroimaging. A review 
of twelve previously reported patients with 14q22 microdeletion revealed 
decreased white matter volume in half of the patients. It remains to be 
elucidated whether the white matter lesion is age-dependent and progressive. In 
conclusion, anterior segment defects of the eyes, especially when accompanied by 
decreased white matter volume on neuroimaging, should raise the clinical 
suspicion of 14q22 microdeletion.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.10.007
PMID: 23103883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]