---
reference_id: "PMID:39858554"
title: "Utilization of RT-PCR and Optical Genome Mapping in Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia with Cryptic PML::RARA Rearrangement: A Case Discussion and Systemic Literature Review."
authors:
- George GV
- Elsadawi M
- Evans AG
- Ali S
- Zhang B
- Iqbal MA
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes16010007
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/genetics, drug therapy, diagnosis, pathology"
- Male
- Adult
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Retinoic Acid Receptor alpha/genetics
- Promyelocytic Leukemia Protein/genetics
- Gene Rearrangement
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- Chromosome Mapping/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Utilization of RT-PCR and Optical Genome Mapping in Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia with Cryptic PML::RARA Rearrangement: A Case Discussion and Systemic Literature Review.
**Authors:** George GV, Elsadawi M, Evans AG, Ali S, Zhang B, Iqbal MA
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes16010007](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes16010007)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Dec 25;16(1):7. doi: 10.3390/genes16010007.

Utilization of RT-PCR and Optical Genome Mapping in Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia
with Cryptic PML::RARA Rearrangement: A Case Discussion and Systemic Literature
Review.

George GV(1), Elsadawi M(2), Evans AG(1), Ali S(1), Zhang B(1), Iqbal MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
PA 15213, USA.

BACKGROUND: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by abnormal
promyelocytes and t(15;17)(q24;q21) PML::RARA. Rarely, patients may have cryptic
or variant rearrangements. All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)/arsenic trioxide (ATO)
is largely curative provided that the diagnosis is established early.
METHODS: We present the case of a 36-year-old male who presented with features
concerning for disseminated intravascular coagulation. Although the initial
diagnostic work-up, including pathology and flow cytometry evaluation, suggested
a diagnosis of APL, karyotype and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH),
using the PML/RARA dual fusion and RARA breakapart probes, were negative. We
performed real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and optical genome
mapping (OGM) to further confirm the clinicopathological findings.
RESULTS: RT-PCR revealed a cryptic PML::RARA fusion transcript. OGM further
confirmed the nature and orientation of a cryptic rearrangement with an
insertion of RARA into PML at intron 3 (bcr3). In light of these findings, we
performed a systematic literature review to understand the prevalence,
diagnosis, and prognosis of APL with cryptic PML::RARA rearrangements.
CONCLUSIONS: This case, in conjunction with the results of our systematic
literature review, highlights the importance of performing confirmatory testing
in FISH-negative cases of suspected APL to enable prompt diagnosis and
appropriate treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/genes16010007
PMCID: PMC11765422
PMID: 39858554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
