---
reference_id: "PMID:24297434"
title: Consistency of nonparametric classification in cognitive diagnosis.
authors:
- Wang S
- Douglas J
journal: Psychometrika
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s11336-013-9372-y
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Cognition/classification
- Humans
- "Models, Statistical"
- Psychometrics/methods
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consistency of nonparametric classification in cognitive diagnosis.
**Authors:** Wang S, Douglas J
**Journal:** Psychometrika (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11336-013-9372-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11336-013-9372-y)

## Content

1. Psychometrika. 2015 Mar;80(1):85-100. doi: 10.1007/s11336-013-9372-y. Epub
2013  Dec 3.

Consistency of nonparametric classification in cognitive diagnosis.

Wang S(1), Douglas J.

Author information:
(1)University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA,
swang86@illinois.edu.

Latent class models for cognitive diagnosis have been developed to classify
examinees into one of the 2 (K) attribute profiles arising from a K-dimensional
vector of binary skill indicators. These models recognize that response patterns
tend to deviate from the ideal responses that would arise if skills and items
generated item responses through a purely deterministic conjunctive process. An
alternative to employing these latent class models is to minimize the distance
between observed item response patterns and ideal response patterns, in a
nonparametric fashion that utilizes no stochastic terms for these deviations.
Theorems are presented that show the consistency of this approach, when the true
model is one of several common latent class models for cognitive diagnosis.
Consistency of classification is independent of sample size, because no model
parameters need to be estimated. Simultaneous consistency for a large group of
subjects can also be shown given some conditions on how sample size and test
length grow with one another.

DOI: 10.1007/s11336-013-9372-y
PMID: 24297434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
