---
reference_id: "PMID:33325393"
title: "Targeted Therapies for Skeletal Muscle Ion Channelopathies: Systematic Review and Steps Towards Precision Medicine."
authors:
- Desaphy JF
- Altamura C
- Vicart S
- Fontaine B
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3233/JND-200582
keywords:
- Channelopathies/drug therapy
- Humans
- Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis/drug therapy
- Lamotrigine/therapeutic use
- Mexiletine/therapeutic use
- "Muscle, Skeletal/drug effects"
- Mutation
- "Myasthenic Syndromes, Congenital/drug therapy"
- Myotonic Disorders/drug therapy
- Precision Medicine/methods
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Sodium Channel Blockers/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted Therapies for Skeletal Muscle Ion Channelopathies: Systematic Review and Steps Towards Precision Medicine.
**Authors:** Desaphy JF, Altamura C, Vicart S, Fontaine B
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-200582](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-200582)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2021;8(3):357-381. doi: 10.3233/JND-200582.

Targeted Therapies for Skeletal Muscle Ion Channelopathies: Systematic Review
and Steps Towards Precision Medicine.

Desaphy JF(1), Altamura C(1), Vicart S(2), Fontaine B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, School of Medicine,
University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy.
(2)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre de
Recherche en Myologie-UMR 974, Reference center in neuro-muscular
channelopathies, Institute of Myology, Hôpital Universitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière,
Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Skeletal muscle ion channelopathies include non-dystrophic myotonias
(NDM), periodic paralyses (PP), congenital myasthenic syndrome, and recently
identified congenital myopathies. The treatment of these diseases is mainly
symptomatic, aimed at reducing muscle excitability in NDM or modifying triggers
of attacks in PP.
OBJECTIVE: This systematic review collected the evidences regarding effects of
pharmacological treatment on muscle ion channelopathies, focusing on the
possible link between treatments and genetic background.
METHODS: We searched databases for randomized clinical trials (RCT) and other
human studies reporting pharmacological treatments. Preclinical studies were
considered to gain further information regarding mutation-dependent drug
effects. All steps were performed by two independent investigators, while two
others critically reviewed the entire process.
RESULTS: For NMD, RCT showed therapeutic benefits of mexiletine and lamotrigine,
while other human studies suggest some efficacy of various sodium channel
blockers and of the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (CAI) acetazolamide.
Preclinical studies suggest that mutations may alter sensitivity of the channel
to sodium channel blockers in vitro, which has been translated to humans in some
cases. For hyperkalemic and hypokalemic PP, RCT showed efficacy of the CAI
dichlorphenamide in preventing paralysis. However, hypokalemic PP patients
carrying sodium channel mutations may have fewer benefits from CAI compared to
those carrying calcium channel mutations. Few data are available for treatment
of congenital myopathies.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provided limited information about the response to
treatments of individual mutations or groups of mutations. A major effort is
needed to perform human studies for designing a mutation-driven precision
medicine in muscle ion channelopathies.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-200582
PMCID: PMC8203248
PMID: 33325393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JFD is co-inventor of the international patent
“safinamide for treating myotonia” (number WO 2019/22902S A1).
