---
reference_id: "PMID:39827235"
title: "A multifactorial, evidence-based analysis of pathophysiology in Spaceflight Associated Neuro-Ocular Syndrome (SANS)."
authors:
- Galdamez LA
- Mader TH
- Ong J
- Kadipasaoglu CM
- Lee AG
journal: Eye (Lond)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41433-025-03618-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Space Flight
- Weightlessness/adverse effects
- Intracranial Pressure/physiology
- Syndrome
- Intracranial Hypertension/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A multifactorial, evidence-based analysis of pathophysiology in Spaceflight Associated Neuro-Ocular Syndrome (SANS).
**Authors:** Galdamez LA, Mader TH, Ong J, Kadipasaoglu CM, Lee AG
**Journal:** Eye (Lond) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41433-025-03618-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-025-03618-3)

## Content

1. Eye (Lond). 2025 Mar;39(4):700-709. doi: 10.1038/s41433-025-03618-3. Epub 2025
 Jan 18.

A multifactorial, evidence-based analysis of pathophysiology in Spaceflight 
Associated Neuro-Ocular Syndrome (SANS).

Galdamez LA(1), Mader TH(2), Ong J(3), Kadipasaoglu CM(4), Lee 
AG(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Memorial Hermann The Woodlands, The 
Woodlands, TX, USA.
(2)NASA Ophthalmology Consultant, Moab, UT, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan 
Kellogg Eye Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX, USA. 
aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(6)Baylor College of Medicine and the Baylor Center for Space Medicine, Houston, 
TX, USA. aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(7)Departments of Ophthalmology, Neurology, and Neurosurgery, Weill Cornell 
Medicine New York, New York, NY, USA. aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), 
Galveston, TX, USA. aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, 
Iowa City, IA, USA. aglee@houstonmethodist.org.
(10)The UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. 
aglee@houstonmethodist.org.

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in the United States 
has been studying a fascinating and unique constellation of neuro-ophthalmic 
findings collectively known as Spaceflight Associated Neuro-Ocular Syndrome 
(SANS). SANS is unique to the space environment of microgravity and produces 
novel physiological and pathological findings that have no direct terrestrial 
equivalent. The neuro-ophthalmic phenomenon is a major physiologic barrier to 
future planetary spaceflight. The underlying pathophysiology of SANS remains 
ill-defined, but since its initial report in 2011, several hypotheses have been 
proposed including increased intracranial pressure, cerebral venous congestion 
and glymphatic stasis, compartmentalization of CSF within the orbital nerve 
sheath sub-arachnoid space (SAS), upward brain shift, inflammation, disrupted 
axoplasmic transport, and radiation exposure. These aetiologies may not be 
mutually exclusive and may be interconnected, leading to an integrative, 
multifactorial aetiology of SANS. This paper critically analyses the various 
hypotheses of this neuro-ophthalmic phenomenon and the connections between the 
physiologic and anatomical evidence-based changes observed in spaceflight and 
terrestrial analogues. Continued prospective, longitudinal study and development 
of practical countermeasures for SANS will be necessary for future human 
spaceflight missions including the mission to Mars.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Royal College of 
Ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.1038/s41433-025-03618-3
PMCID: PMC11885454
PMID: 39827235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AGL is a consultant for the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and serves on the editorial 
board of Eye.