---
reference_id: "PMID:40571639"
title: "[Molecular genetics of benign adult familial myoclonus epilepsy]."
authors:
- Ishiura H
journal: Rinsho Shinkeigaku
year: '2025'
doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-002111
keywords:
- Humans
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
- Introns/genetics
- DNA Repeat Expansion/genetics
- RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Molecular genetics of benign adult familial myoclonus epilepsy].
**Authors:** Ishiura H
**Journal:** Rinsho Shinkeigaku (2025)
**DOI:** [10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-002111](https://doi.org/10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-002111)

## Content

1. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2025 Jul 25;65(7):495-502. doi: 
10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-002111. Epub 2025 Jun 26.

[Molecular genetics of benign adult familial myoclonus epilepsy].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishiura H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences.

Benign adult familial myoclonus epilepsy (BAFME) is an autosomal dominantly 
inherited disease characterized by infrequent seizures and tremorous myoclonus. 
The disease is also called familial adult myoclonic epilepsy (FAME) or familial 
cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy (FCMTE). Although the causes of BAFME 
had been unknown for a long, we identified TTTCA and TTTTA repeat expansions in 
intron 4 of SAMD12 as a cause of BAFME type 1. We also found TTTCA and TTTTA 
repeat expansions in TNRC6A and RAPGEF2 also cause the disease (BAFME types 6 
and 7, respectively), thus proposing a concept of repeat motif-phenotype 
correlation. After that, TTTCA and TTTTA repeat expansions in STARD7, MARCHF6, 
YEATS2, and RAI1 have been identified as causes of BAFME types 2, 3, 4, and 8. 
The findings further supported the concept. The involvement of RNA-mediated 
toxicity, particularly of UUUCA repeats, is assumed to be the pathomechanism of 
this disease. The next step will be understanding the molecular pathomechanism 
of BAFME and identifying molecular targets of more efficient therapeutic 
approaches.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-002111
PMID: 40571639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]