---
reference_id: "PMID:21633166"
title: Identification of human triple-negative breast cancer subtypes and preclinical models for selection of targeted therapies.
authors:
- Lehmann BD
- Bauer JA
- Chen X
- Sanders ME
- Chakravarthy AB
- Shyr Y
- Pietenpol JA
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1172/JCI45014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of human triple-negative breast cancer subtypes and preclinical models for selection of targeted therapies.
**Authors:** Lehmann BD, Bauer JA, Chen X, Sanders ME, Chakravarthy AB, Shyr Y, Pietenpol JA
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI45014](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI45014)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2011 Jul;121(7):2750-67. doi: 10.1172/JCI45014.

Identification of human triple-negative breast cancer subtypes and preclinical 
models for selection of targeted therapies.

Lehmann BD(1), Bauer JA, Chen X, Sanders ME, Chakravarthy AB, Shyr Y, Pietenpol 
JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly diverse group of cancers, and 
subtyping is necessary to better identify molecular-based therapies. In this 
study, we analyzed gene expression (GE) profiles from 21 breast cancer data sets 
and identified 587 TNBC cases. Cluster analysis identified 6 TNBC subtypes 
displaying unique GE and ontologies, including 2 basal-like (BL1 and BL2), an 
immunomodulatory (IM), a mesenchymal (M), a mesenchymal stem-like (MSL), and a 
luminal androgen receptor (LAR) subtype. Further, GE analysis allowed us to 
identify TNBC cell line models representative of these subtypes. Predicted 
"driver" signaling pathways were pharmacologically targeted in these cell line 
models as proof of concept that analysis of distinct GE signatures can inform 
therapy selection. BL1 and BL2 subtypes had higher expression of cell cycle and 
DNA damage response genes, and representative cell lines preferentially 
responded to cisplatin. M and MSL subtypes were enriched in GE for 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and growth factor pathways and cell models 
responded to NVP-BEZ235 (a PI3K/mTOR inhibitor) and dasatinib (an abl/src 
inhibitor). The LAR subtype includes patients with decreased relapse-free 
survival and was characterized by androgen receptor (AR) signaling. LAR cell 
lines were uniquely sensitive to bicalutamide (an AR antagonist). These data may 
be useful in biomarker selection, drug discovery, and clinical trial design that 
will enable alignment of TNBC patients to appropriate targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI45014
PMCID: PMC3127435
PMID: 21633166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]