---
reference_id: PMID:32765211
title: Aberrant Cerebellar Circuitry in the Spinocerebellar Ataxias.
authors:
- Robinson KJ
- Watchon M
- Laird AS
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00707
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aberrant Cerebellar Circuitry in the Spinocerebellar Ataxias.
**Authors:** Robinson KJ, Watchon M, Laird AS
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2020.00707](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2020.00707)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2020 Jul 16;14:707. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00707. eCollection
 2020.

Aberrant Cerebellar Circuitry in the Spinocerebellar Ataxias.

Robinson KJ(1), Watchon M(1), Laird AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Motor Neuron Disease Research, Department of Biomedical Science, 
Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.

The spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a heterogeneous group of 
neurodegenerative diseases that share convergent disease features. A common 
symptom of these diseases is development of ataxia, involving impaired balance 
and motor coordination, usually stemming from cerebellar dysfunction and 
neurodegeneration. For most spinocerebellar ataxias, pathology can be attributed 
to an underlying gene mutation and the impaired function of the encoded protein 
through loss or gain-of-function effects. Strikingly, despite vast heterogeneity 
in the structure and function of disease-causing genes across the SCAs and the 
cellular processes affected, the downstream effects have considerable overlap, 
including alterations in cerebellar circuitry. Interestingly, aberrant function 
and degeneration of Purkinje cells, the major output neuronal population present 
within the cerebellum, precedes abnormalities in other neuronal populations 
within many SCAs, suggesting that Purkinje cells have increased vulnerability to 
cellular perturbations. Factors that are known to contribute to perturbed 
Purkinje cell function in spinocerebellar ataxias include altered gene 
expression resulting in altered expression or functionality of proteins and 
channels that modulate membrane potential, downstream impairments in 
intracellular calcium homeostasis and changes in glutamatergic input received 
from synapsing climbing or parallel fibers. This review will explore this 
enhanced vulnerability and the aberrant cerebellar circuitry linked with it in 
many forms of SCA. It is critical to understand why Purkinje cells are 
vulnerable to such insults and what overlapping pathogenic mechanisms are 
occurring across multiple SCAs, despite different underlying genetic mutations. 
Enhanced understanding of disease mechanisms will facilitate the development of 
treatments to prevent or slow progression of the underlying neurodegenerative 
processes, cerebellar atrophy and ataxic symptoms.

Copyright © 2020 Robinson, Watchon and Laird.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00707
PMCID: PMC7378801
PMID: 32765211