---
reference_id: "PMID:26170228"
title: "Leukopenia, lymphopenia, and neutropenia in systemic lupus erythematosus: Prevalence and clinical impact--A systematic literature review."
authors:
- Carli L
- Tani C
- Vagnani S
- Signorini V
- Mosca M
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2015.05.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leukopenia, lymphopenia, and neutropenia in systemic lupus erythematosus: Prevalence and clinical impact--A systematic literature review.
**Authors:** Carli L, Tani C, Vagnani S, Signorini V, Mosca M
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2015.05.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2015.05.009)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2015 Oct;45(2):190-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2015.05.009. Epub 2015 May 21.

Leukopenia, lymphopenia, and neutropenia in systemic lupus erythematosus: 
Prevalence and clinical impact--A systematic literature review.

Carli L(1), Tani C(2), Vagnani S(2), Signorini V(2), Mosca M(3).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Pisa, Via Roma 67, Pisa 56100, Italy; GenOMeC PhD, University of 
Siena, Italy.
(2)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Pisa, Via Roma 67, Pisa 56100, Italy.
(3)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Pisa, Via Roma 67, Pisa 56100, Italy. Electronic address: 
marta.mosca@med.unipi.it.

OBJECTIVE: To systematically review the available evidence to evaluate (1) the 
prevalence and degree of leukopenia, lymphopenia, and neutropenia in patients 
with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), (2) whether these conditions carry a 
major infection risk for patients, and (3) whether a treatment with colony 
stimulating factors (CSF) can be an effective and safe option in SLE patients 
with leukopenia.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: MedLine and Embase were searched by including MeSH terms, 
text words, and subheadings "systemic lupus erythematosus," "leukopenia" (first 
search), and "colony stimulating factor" (second search). Inclusion and 
exclusion criteria were a priori defined and two reviewers screened the 
retrieved articles for selection criteria; data from the included studies were 
recorded in ad hoc standard forms; the results were synthesized and transported 
to evidence tables.
RESULTS: A total of 17 articles were included in the systematic literature 
review: nine articles were retrieved for the first research question and 11 for 
the second while no articles satisfied the inclusion criteria for the third 
research question. The prevalence of leukopenia is reported in 22-41.8% of cases 
and lymphopenia is reported cumulatively from 15% to 82% of the patients while 
neutropenia is described in 20-40% of the patients. There is no evidence of a 
significant association between overall reduction of white blood cells and 
infection occurrence while some studies found a strong association between low 
lymphocytes/neutrophils count and the risk of major infections. Only case 
reports and case series have been found to investigate the safety of CSF in SLE 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this systematic literature review are inconclusive 
for many aspects related to the original research questions and highlight the 
need for further studies. Indeed, the strength of the evidence is not 
sufficiently robust to draw specific recommendations on how to balance between 
the need to treat the patient with SLE with immunosuppressive drugs and the risk 
of severe infections.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2015.05.009
PMID: 26170228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]