---
reference_id: "PMID:36896371"
title: Durvalumab for Extensive-Stage of Small-Cell Lung Cancer With Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome.
authors:
- Machiyama H
- Minami S
journal: J Med Cases
year: '2023'
doi: 10.14740/jmc4043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Durvalumab for Extensive-Stage of Small-Cell Lung Cancer With Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome.
**Authors:** Machiyama H, Minami S
**Journal:** J Med Cases (2023)
**DOI:** [10.14740/jmc4043](https://doi.org/10.14740/jmc4043)

## Content

1. J Med Cases. 2023 Feb;14(2):71-75. doi: 10.14740/jmc4043. Epub 2023 Feb 25.

Durvalumab for Extensive-Stage of Small-Cell Lung Cancer With Lambert-Eaton 
Myasthenic Syndrome.

Machiyama H(1), Minami S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Osaka Police Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

Durvalumab is an immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) of anti-programmed cell death 
protein 1 ligand antibody. ICI-combined chemotherapy has recently become a 
standard regimen for extensive-stage of small-cell lung cancer (ES-SCLC). SCLC 
is well known to be the most likely tumor associated with Lambert-Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), a rare autoimmune disease of a neuromuscular 
junction disorder. Although LEMS has been reported to be induced by ICI as 
immune-mediated adverse events, it remains unknown whether ICI can deteriorate 
preexisting paraneoplastic syndrome (PNS) of LEMS. Our rare case was 
successfully treated by durvalumab plus chemotherapy without exacerbation of 
preexisting PNS of LEMS. We report a 62-year-old female with ES-SCLC and 
preexisting PNS of LEMS. She started carboplatin-etoposide in combination with 
durvalumab. This immunotherapy achieved nearly complete response. However, 
multiple brain metastases were found after two courses of maintenance 
durvalumab. Her symptoms and physical examinations of LEMS improved despite of 
no significant change in compound muscle action potential amplitude in the nerve 
conduction study. The titer of anti-P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium channel 
(VGCC) antibody decreased from 1,419.2 to 263.5 pmol/L during the immunotherapy. 
In conclusion, ICI in combination with platinum doublet chemotherapy is still 
challenging but may be a treatment option for ES-SCLC patients complicated with 
PNS of LEMS.

Copyright 2023, Machiyama et al.

DOI: 10.14740/jmc4043
PMCID: PMC9990708
PMID: 36896371

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.