---
reference_id: "PMID:32777673"
title: "Frequent expression of conventional endothelial markers in pleural mesothelioma: usefulness of claudin-5 as well as combined traditional markers to distinguish mesothelioma from angiosarcoma."
authors:
- Nakashima Y
- Inamura K
- Ninomiya H
- Okumura S
- Mun M
- Kirimura S
- Kobayashi M
- Okubo K
- Ishikawa Y
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2020.07.029
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Claudin-5
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Hemangiosarcoma/diagnosis
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Mesothelioma/diagnosis
- Pleural Neoplasms/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequent expression of conventional endothelial markers in pleural mesothelioma: usefulness of claudin-5 as well as combined traditional markers to distinguish mesothelioma from angiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Nakashima Y, Inamura K, Ninomiya H, Okumura S, Mun M, Kirimura S, Kobayashi M, Okubo K, Ishikawa Y
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2020.07.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2020.07.029)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2020 Oct;148:20-27. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2020.07.029. Epub 2020
 Jul 30.

Frequent expression of conventional endothelial markers in pleural mesothelioma:
usefulness of claudin-5 as well as combined traditional markers to distinguish
mesothelioma from angiosarcoma.

Nakashima Y(1), Inamura K(2), Ninomiya H(3), Okumura S(4), Mun M(5), Kirimura
S(6), Kobayashi M(7), Okubo K(8), Ishikawa Y(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pathology, The Cancer Institute, Departments of Pathology, The
Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research (JFCR), Tokyo
135-8550, Japan; Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan. Electronic address: midysland@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Pathology, The Cancer Institute, Departments of Pathology, The
Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research (JFCR), Tokyo
135-8550, Japan. Electronic address: kentaro.inamura@jfcr.or.jp.
(3)Division of Pathology, The Cancer Institute, Departments of Pathology, The
Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research (JFCR), Tokyo
135-8550, Japan. Electronic address: hironori.ninomiya@jfcr.or.jp.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Cancer Institute Hospital, JFCR, Tokyo
135-8550, Japan. Electronic address: sokumura@jfcr.or.jp.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Cancer Institute Hospital, JFCR, Tokyo
135-8550, Japan. Electronic address: mingyon.mun@jfcr.or.jp.
(6)Department of Comprehensive Pathology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan. Electronic
address: kiripth2@tmd.ac.jp.
(7)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo
113-8519, Japan. Electronic address: mkobthsr@tmd.ac.jp.
(8)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo
113-8519, Japan. Electronic address: okubo.thsr@tmd.ac.jp.
(9)Division of Pathology, The Cancer Institute, Departments of Pathology, The
Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research (JFCR), Tokyo
135-8550, Japan; Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, International
University of Health and Welfare, Tokyo 108-8329, Japan. Electronic address:
ishikawa@jfcr.or.jp.

OBJECTIVES: Distinguishing pleural sarcomatoid mesotheliomas from true sarcomas
is challenging because the former does not always express the mesothelial
markers, and diagnosis is often made on the basis of keratin expression.
Consequently, sarcomas such as angiosarcomas that express keratin complicate the
differential diagnosis. Furthermore, some mesotheliomas have been reported to
express endothelial markers. The aim of this study is to identify useful markers
for distinguishing pleural sarcomatoid mesothelioma from angiosarcoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study enrolled 147 patients with pleural
mesothelioma-93 with epithelioid, 25 with biphasic, and 29 with sarcomatoid
subtypes-and 41 patients with angiosarcomas in various organs. The expression
levels of cytokeratin, mesothelial, and endothelial markers were assayed in both
groups to identify the markers that could assist in distinguishing mesothelioma
from angiosarcoma. Cytokeratin (AE1/AE3, CAM 5.2), endothelial (CD31, CD34, ERG,
factor VIII, and claudin-5), and mesothelial (calretinin, WT-1, podoplanin
(D2-40), EMA, and CK5/6) markers were immunohistochemically assayed using tissue
blocks.
RESULTS: More than 90% of the mesotheliomas and less than 20% of the
angiosarcomas expressed cytokeratin. Calretinin was expressed in 82% of all
types of mesotheliomas but in only 48% of sarcomatoid mesotheliomas. Endothelial
markers were expressed in mesothelioma tissues-CD31 in 10.3%, CD34 in 3.5%, ERG
in 29%, and factor VIII in 3.4%-and the positivity was higher in sarcomatoid
than in epithelioid and biphasic mesotheliomas. Claudin-5 was expressed in all
the angiosarcomas, but not in any of the mesotheliomas.
CONCLUSION: We found overlapping immunophenotypes in pleural mesotheliomas and
angiosarcomas, but the sensitivity and specificity of claudin-5 expression were
sufficient to distinguish between them. The differential diagnosis of
mesothelioma should therefore include claudin-5 in a panel of
immunohistochemical markers to distinguish mesothelioma from angiosarcoma.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2020.07.029
PMID: 32777673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
