---
reference_id: "PMID:41488792"
title: "Development and validation of the NEOS2 score for prediction of long-term outcomes and improvement after first-line immunotherapy in patients with anti-NMDAR encephalitis: an international cohort study."
authors:
- Brenner J
- Bastiaansen AEM
- Guasp M
- Muñiz-Castrillo S
- Iizuka T
- de Bruijn MAAM
- Muñoz-Lopetegi A
- Martínez-Hernández E
- Picard G
- Vogrig A
- Millot M
- Finke C
- Geis C
- Lewerenz J
- Melzer N
- Prüss H
- Räuber S
- Ringelstein M
- Rostàsy K
- Sühs KW
- Thaler FS
- Wandinger KP
- Wurdack K
- Crijnen YS
- Kerstens J
- van Steenhoven RW
- Veenbergen S
- Schreurs MWJ
- van den Berg R
- Volovici V
- Neuteboom RF
- de Vries JM
- Sillevis Smitt PAE
- Nagtzaam MMP
- Franken SC
- GENERATE Study Group
- Dalmau J
- Leypoldt F
- Honnorat J
- Titulaer MJ
journal: Lancet Reg Health Eur
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.lanepe.2025.101562
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development and validation of the NEOS2 score for prediction of long-term outcomes and improvement after first-line immunotherapy in patients with anti-NMDAR encephalitis: an international cohort study.
**Authors:** Brenner J, Bastiaansen AEM, Guasp M, Muñiz-Castrillo S, Iizuka T, de Bruijn MAAM, Muñoz-Lopetegi A, Martínez-Hernández E, Picard G, Vogrig A, Millot M, Finke C, Geis C, Lewerenz J, Melzer N, Prüss H, Räuber S, Ringelstein M, Rostàsy K, Sühs KW, Thaler FS, Wandinger KP, Wurdack K, Crijnen YS, Kerstens J, van Steenhoven RW, Veenbergen S, Schreurs MWJ, van den Berg R, Volovici V, Neuteboom RF, de Vries JM, Sillevis Smitt PAE, Nagtzaam MMP, Franken SC, GENERATE Study Group, Dalmau J, Leypoldt F, Honnorat J, Titulaer MJ
**Journal:** Lancet Reg Health Eur (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lanepe.2025.101562](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanepe.2025.101562)

## Content

1. Lancet Reg Health Eur. 2025 Dec 11;62:101562. doi:
10.1016/j.lanepe.2025.101562.  eCollection 2026 Mar.

Development and validation of the NEOS2 score for prediction of long-term 
outcomes and improvement after first-line immunotherapy in patients with 
anti-NMDAR encephalitis: an international cohort study.

Brenner J(1), Bastiaansen AEM(1), Guasp M(2), Muñiz-Castrillo S(3)(4), Iizuka 
T(5), de Bruijn MAAM(1)(6), Muñoz-Lopetegi A(2), Martínez-Hernández E(2), Picard 
G(3), Vogrig A(3)(7)(8), Millot M(3), Finke C(9), Geis C(10), Lewerenz J(11), 
Melzer N(12), Prüss H(9)(13), Räuber S(12), Ringelstein M(12)(14), Rostàsy 
K(15), Sühs KW(16), Thaler FS(17), Wandinger KP(18), Wurdack K(9), Crijnen 
YS(1), Kerstens J(1), van Steenhoven RW(1), Veenbergen S(19), Schreurs 
MWJ(19)(20), van den Berg R(1), Volovici V(21), Neuteboom RF(1), de Vries JM(1), 
Sillevis Smitt PAE(1), Nagtzaam MMP(1), Franken SC(1); GENERATE Study Group; 
Dalmau J(2)(22)(23), Leypoldt F(18)(24), Honnorat J(3), Titulaer MJ(1).

Collaborators: Ratuszny D, Menge T, Bertolini A, Bien C, Berger R, Tauber S, 
Angstwurm K, Seifert-Held T, Kraft A, Klausewitz J, Ayzenberg I, Eisenhut K, 
Rößling R, Heiden M, Kümpfel T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Hospital Clínic Barcelona - IDIBAPS, Spain.
(3)French Reference Centre on Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndromes and 
Autoimmune Encephalitis, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 
1, Lyon, France.
(4)Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Neurology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, St. Elisabeth-Tweesteden Hospital, Tilburg, the 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Medicine (DMED), University of Udine, Italy.
(8)Clinical Neurology, Department of Head-Neck and Neuroscience, Azienda 
Sanitaria Universitaria Friuli Centrale (ASUFC), Udine, Italy.
(9)Department of Neurology, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
(10)Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital, Germany.
(11)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Ulm, Germany.
(12)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty and University Hospital Düsseldorf, 
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(13)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Berlin, Germany.
(14)Center for Neurology and Neuropsychiatry, LVR-Klinikum, 
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(15)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Children's Hospital Witten/Herdecke 
University, Datteln, Germany.
(16)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.
(17)Institute of Clinical Neuroimmunology, University Hospital and Biomedical 
Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(18)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein 
Kiel/Lübeck, Germany.
(19)Department of Immunology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(20)Laboratory of Medical Microbiology and Immunology Microvida, Tilburg, the 
Netherlands.
(21)Department of Neurosurgery, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(22)CaixaResearch Institute, Barcelona, 08022, Spain.
(23)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red, Enfermedades raras (CIBERER), 
Madrid 28029, Spain.
(24)Department of Neurology, University Kiel, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (anti-NMDAR) encephalitis is a 
severe disease that primarily affects young people and can improve with adequate 
treatment. We aimed to refine the anti-NMDAR Encephalitis One-year functional 
Status (NEOS) score by developing NEOS2, an updated model using readily 
available data at the time of diagnosis. We assessed the predictive value of the 
NEOS2-score for (1) improvement following first-line treatment, (2) functional 
outcome at one-year follow-up, and (3) resumption of school or work within three 
years.
METHODS: In this international (France, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands and 
Spain) cohort study in patients with a definite anti-NMDAR encephalitis 
diagnosis (according to the clinical criteria plus antibody testing in CSF), we 
performed logistic regression analyses to develop and validate multivariable 
models to predict -based upon variables available at diagnosis- short (ΔmRS two 
weeks after first-line treatment), middle (modified Rankin Scale [mRS] at one 
year), and long-term (return to school or work within three years) outcomes. We 
included clinical variables and biomarkers available at diagnosis.
FINDINGS: We included 702 patients (mean age 23 years, 95%-CI 2-69; 79% female, 
21% male) diagnosed between the discovery of the disease in 2007 and 2022. Most 
patients (96%; 672/702) had received first-line immunotherapy, and 38% (233/615) 
showed improvement within two weeks. One year after diagnosis, 80% (517/644) had 
a favourable functional outcome (mRS≤2). At three years, 73% (203/278) had 
resumed work/school. In multivariable analysis, higher age (odds ratio [OR] 
0·35, 95%-CI 0·29-0·43, p < 0·0001), treatment delay (OR 0·49, 95%-CI 0·41-0·58, 
p < 0·0001), movement disorders (OR 0·32, 95%-CI 0·24-0·41, p < 0·0001), 
ICU-requirement (OR 0·34, 95%-CI 0·26-0·44, p < 0·0001) and increased CSF 
leucocyte count (OR 0·65, 95%-CI 0·60-0·71, p < 0·0001) independently predicted 
poorer outcomes (NEOS2, accuracy AUC 80%, 95%-CI 75-86%). The same variables, 
excluding age, were relevant in predicting improvement following first-line 
immunotherapy (NEOS2-T AUC 81-84%, 95%-CI 77-86%). Return-to-work or -school 
served as a useful measure of longer-term outcomes, predicted with equal 
accuracy as one-year functional outcome (NEOS2-W AUC 80%, 95%-CI 75-85%). The 
NEOS2-score, applied as an ordinal measure, enabled nuanced predictions of 
outcome probabilities across the score spectrum, ranging from a high (80%; n = 
20/25) likelihood of improving after first-line immunotherapy and achieving a 
good outcome (100%; n = 32/32) to a high risk of first-line treatment failure 
(97%; n = 77/79) and no return to school/work (94%; n = 15/16).
INTERPRETATION: The NEOS2-score, readily available at diagnosis and easy to 
apply, can identify patients with either a favourable or poor prognosis, and 
those who may benefit from early intensified treatment. The value of the 
NEOS2-score for guiding treatment decisions and as a stratification tool in 
studies on optimal treatment regimens, should be confirmed in further 
prospective studies.
FUNDING: This study was funded by Dioraphte (charity; project 2001 0403).

© 2025 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.lanepe.2025.101562
PMCID: PMC12757447
PMID: 41488792

Conflict of interest statement: J. Brenner and M. J. Titulaer hold a copyright, 
on behalf of Erasmus MC, for the patient-reported outcome measure PROSE. J. 
Brenner is supported by the AEA Seed Grant 2024. E. Martínez-Hernández is 
supported by grants from the Instituto de Salud Carolos III (PI20-00820) and 
Obra Social Fundación la Caixa (CI24-20499). E. Martínez-Hernández has received 
honoraria for lectures and travel expenses for attending meetings from UCB 
Pharma, Terumo, Janssen, CSL Behring and Alexion Pharmaceuticals, and is on the 
Advisory board of Argenx, Alexion and UCB Pharma; none related to this study. C. 
Finke is supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 
(Heisenberg Program, FI 2309/1-1, FI 2309/2-1; SFB 1315, 327654276; Clinical 
Research Unit KFO 5023 ‘BecauseY’, 504745852). C. Geis has received royalties 
for consulting from Soby and Kyowa, honoraria for lectures and travel expenses 
for attending meetings from Roche, Argenx, Alexion and AstraZeneka, and is on 
the Advisory board of Roche, Alexion, and Argenx; none related to this study. N. 
Melzer is supported by grants from Euroimmun, Fresenius Medical Care, Diamed, 
Alexion Pharmaceuticals, and Novartis Pharma. N. Melzer has received honoraria 
for lectures and travel expenses for attending meetings from Biogen Idec, 
GlaxoSmith Kline, Teva, Novartis Pharma, Bayer Healthcare, Genzyme, Alexion 
Pharmaceuticals, Fresenius Medical Care, Diamed, UCB Pharma, AngeliniPharma, 
BIAL and Sanofi-Aventis, and has received royalties for consulting from UCB 
Pharma, Alexion Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi-Aventis; none related to this study. 
S. Räuber received travel grants from Merck Healthcare Germany GmbH, Alexion 
Pharmaceuticals, and Bristol Myers Squibb, and served on a scientific advisory 
board from Merck Healthcare Germany GmbH and received honoraria for lecturing 
from Roche and Merck Healthcare Germany GmbH. Her research was supported by 
Novartis Pharma GmbH, Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland GmbH, ‘Stiftung zur Förderung 
junger Neurowissenschaftler‘, and ‘Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung‘; none related 
to this study. M. Ringelstein received speaker honoraria and travel 
reimbursement from Roche, Alexion, and Horizon/Amgen, and is on the Advisory 
Board of Roche, Alexion, and Horizon/Amgen; none related to this study. K. 
Rostàsy has received consulting fees from Roche (Operetta2study) and Merck; none 
related to this study. K.W. Sühs has received honoraria for lectures and travel 
reimbursements for attending meetings from Bavarian Nordic, Biogen, 
Bristol-Myers, Merck, Mylan, Novartis, Roche, Viatris and Bristol-Myers Squibb; 
none related to this study. F.S. Thaler has received speaker honoraria from 
Alexion. R.W. van Steenhoven is supported by ZonMW (VIMP program), Alzheimer 
Nederland (Interact Grant 2023), an AEA Seed Grant (2023), Erasmus University 
Medical Center Innovation Grant (2024), a van Leersum Travel Grant from the 
Royal Academy of Science (2024) and the ItsME foundation. J.M. de Vries is the 
local investigator at the Erasmus MC for the Cielo study; a phase III trial by 
F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd/Chugai Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. P.A.E. Sillevis Smitt 
has a patent for the detection of anti-DNER and receives royalties from 
Euroimmun for diagnostic use of the anti-DNER patent. P.A.E. Sillevis Smitt has 
an unrestricted grant from Euroimmun. None related to this study. J. Dalmau is 
supported by grants from Fundació Clinic per a la Recerca Biomedica, Caixa 
Research Institute and Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI23/00858 and 
PI20/00197). J. Dalmau has royalties for the use of NMDAR as an antibody test. 
None related to this study. F. Leypoldt is supported by the German Ministry of 
Education and Research BMBF for the GENERATE registry (01GM1908A & 01GM2208). F. 
Leypoldt is supported by E-Rare Joint Transnational research support (ERA-Net, 
LE3064/2-1), Stiftung Pathobiochemie of the German Society for Laboratory 
Medicine, European Joint Program for Neurodegenerative Diseases (EJPRD) 
IGNITEMIND (01ED2506B), ERA-Net MICE-AE (01EW2507B) and HORIZON MSCA 2022 
Doctoral Network 101119457 - IgG4-TREAT. F. Leypoldt discloses speaker honoraria 
from Grifols, Teva, Argenx, Biogen, Bayer, Roche, Novartis, Fresenius, travel 
funding from Grifols and serving on advisory boards for Roche, Biogen, Argenx 
and Alexion; none related to this study. M.J. Titulaer is supported by grants 
from Dioraphte (2001 0403), EpilepsieNL (19-08), the Dutch Research Council 
(ZonMW, PARADE-VIMP, JPND, IgniteMIND, ActMD), E-RARE JTC 2018 (UltraAIE 
90030376505), ItsME, the Erasmus Trust foundation, the Erasmus MC foundation, 
and the Interlaken Leadership award. M.J. Titulaer has royalties from UpToDate 
inc. and a patent for the detection of KTCD16 antibodies. He is on the 
scientific advisory boards of Encephalitis International, the Autoimmune 
Encephalitis Alliance and ItsME. He is on the editorial boards of Neurology: 
Neuroimmunology & Neuroinflammation and the Dutch Journal for Neurology & 
Neurosurgery (TNN). He has received funds for serving on scientific advisory 
boards of AmGen, UCB, Arialys and ArgenX. A.E.M. Bastiaansen, M. Guasp, M.A.A.M. 
de Bruijn, S. Muñiz-Castrillo, T. Iizuka, A. Muñoz-Lopetegi, G. Picard, A. 
Vogrig, M. Millot, J. Lewerenz, H. Prüss, F. Thaler, K.P. Wandinger, K. Wurdack, 
Y.S. Crijnen, J. Kerstens, S. Veenbergen, M.W.J. Schreurs, R. van den Berg, V. 
Volovici, R.F. Neuteboom, M.M.P. Nagtzaam, S.C. Franken J. Dalmau, and J. 
Honnorat report no disclosures related to this work.