---
reference_id: "PMID:28134038"
title: Outcomes of 847 childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus patients in three age groups.
authors:
- Lopes SRM
- Gormezano NWS
- Gomes RC
- Aikawa NE
- Pereira RMR
- Terreri MT
- Magalhães CS
- Ferreira JC
- Okuda EM
- Sakamoto AP
- Sallum AME
- Appenzeller S
- Ferriani VPL
- Barbosa CM
- Lotufo S
- Jesus AA
- Andrade LEC
- Campos LMA
- Bonfá E
- Silva CA
- Brazilian Childhood-onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Group
journal: Lupus
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1177/0961203317690616
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age of Onset
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- Brazil/epidemiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Infant
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, drug therapy, epidemiology, mortality"
- Mortality
- "Nephritis/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Pregnancy
- Retrospective Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Thrombocytopenia/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of 847 childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus patients in three age groups.
**Authors:** Lopes SRM, Gormezano NWS, Gomes RC, Aikawa NE, Pereira RMR, Terreri MT, Magalhães CS, Ferreira JC, Okuda EM, Sakamoto AP, Sallum AME, Appenzeller S, Ferriani VPL, Barbosa CM, Lotufo S, Jesus AA, Andrade LEC, Campos LMA, Bonfá E, Silva CA, Brazilian Childhood-onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Group
**Journal:** Lupus (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0961203317690616](https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203317690616)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2017 Aug;26(9):996-1001. doi: 10.1177/0961203317690616. Epub 2017 Jan
29.

Outcomes of 847 childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus patients in three
age groups.

Lopes SRM(1), Gormezano NWS(1), Gomes RC(2), Aikawa NE(1)(2), Pereira RMR(1),
Terreri MT(3), Magalhães CS(4), Ferreira JC(2), Okuda EM(5), Sakamoto AP(3),
Sallum AME(2), Appenzeller S(6), Ferriani VPL(7), Barbosa CM(8), Lotufo S(9),
Jesus AA(2), Andrade LEC(3), Campos LMA(2), Bonfá E(1), Silva CA(1)(2);
Brazilian Childhood-onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Group.

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Rheumatology, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São
Paulo, Brazil.
(2)2 Pediatric Rheumatology Unit, Children's Institute, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)3 Pediatric Rheumatology Unit, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)4 Pediatric Rheumatology Division, São Paulo State University (UNESP) -
Faculdade de Medicina de Botucatu, Brazil.
(5)5 Pediatric Rheumatology Unit, Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São
Paulo, Brazil.
(6)6 Pediatric Rheumatology Unit, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP),
Brazil.
(7)7 Pediatric Rheumatology Unit, Ribeirão Preto Medical School - University of
São Paulo, Brazil.
(8)8 Pediatric Rheumatology Unit, Hospital Infantil Darcy Vargas, Brazil.
(9)9 Pediatric Rheumatology Unit, Hospital Menino Jesus, Brazil.

Objective The objective of this study was to assess outcomes of childhood
systemic lupus erythematosus (cSLE) in three different age groups evaluated at
last visit: group A early-onset disease (<6 years), group B school age (≥6 and
<12 years) and group C adolescent (≥12 and <18 years). Methods An observational
cohort study was performed in ten pediatric rheumatology centers, including 847
cSLE patients. Results Group A had 39 (4%), B 395 (47%) and C 413 (49%). Median
disease duration was significantly higher in group A compared to groups B and C
(8.3 (0.1-23.4) vs 6.2 (0-17) vs 3.3 (0-14.6) years, p < 0.0001). The median
Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics/American College of
Rheumatology Damage Index (SLICC/ACR-DI) (0 (0-9) vs 0 (0-6) vs 0 (0-7),
p = 0.065) was comparable in the three groups. Further analysis of organ/system
damage revealed that frequencies of neuropsychiatric (21% vs 10% vs 7%,
p = 0.007), skin (10% vs 1% vs 3%, p = 0.002) and peripheral vascular
involvements (5% vs 3% vs 0.3%, p = 0.008) were more often observed in group A
compared to groups B and C. Frequencies of severe cumulative lupus
manifestations such as nephritis, thrombocytopenia, and autoimmune hemolytic
anemia were similar in all groups ( p > 0.05). Mortality rate was significantly
higher in group A compared to groups B and C (15% vs 10% vs 6%, p = 0.028). Out
of 69 deaths, 33/69 (48%) occurred within the first two years after diagnosis.
Infections accounted for 54/69 (78%) of the deaths and 38/54 (70%) had
concomitant disease activity. Conclusions This large multicenter study provided
evidence that early-onset cSLE group had distinct outcomes. This group was
characterized by higher mortality rate and neuropsychiatric/vascular/skin organ
damage in spite of comparable frequencies of severe cumulative lupus
manifestations. We also identified that overall death in cSLE patients was an
early event mainly attributed to infection associated with disease activity.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203317690616
PMID: 28134038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
