---
reference_id: "PMID:28816003"
title: Prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms in Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Glassman LW
- Grocott OR
- Kunz PA
- Larson AM
- Zella G
- Ganguli K
- Thibert RL
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38401
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms in Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Glassman LW, Grocott OR, Kunz PA, Larson AM, Zella G, Ganguli K, Thibert RL
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38401](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38401)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Oct;173(10):2703-2709. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38401. Epub 
2017 Aug 16.

Prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms in Angelman syndrome.

Glassman LW(1), Grocott OR(2), Kunz PA(3), Larson AM(2)(4), Zella G(1)(5), 
Ganguli K(4)(6), Thibert RL(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Neurology, Angelman Syndrome Clinic, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Neuroscience Center, and Carolina 
Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina.
(4)Harvard Medical School,, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurogenetic disorder characterized by intellectual 
disability, expressive speech impairment, movement disorder, epilepsy, and a 
happy demeanor. Children with AS are frequently reported to be poor feeders 
during infancy and as having gastrointestinal issues such as constipation, 
reflux, and abnormal food related behaviors throughout their lifetime. To assess 
the prevalence of gastrointestinal disorders in individuals with AS, we 
retrospectively analyzed medical records of 120 individuals seen at the Angelman 
Syndrome Clinic at Massachusetts General Hospital and 43 individuals seen at the 
University of North Carolina Comprehensive Angelman Clinic. The majority of 
patients' medical records indicated at least one symptom of gastrointestinal 
dysfunction, with constipation and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) the 
most common. Other gastrointestinal issues reported were cyclic vomiting 
episodes, difficulty swallowing, excessive swallowing, and eosinophilic 
esophagitis. Upper gastrointestinal symptoms such as GERD, swallowing 
difficulties, cyclic vomiting, and eosinophilic esophagitis were more common in 
those with deletions and uniparental disomy, likely related to the involvement 
of multiple genes and subsequent hypotonia. The frequency of constipation is 
consistent among all genetic subtypes while early feeding issues appear to 
mainly affect those with deletions. Caregivers and healthcare providers should 
be aware of the high prevalence of these issues, as proper treatment may improve 
not only gastrointestinal dysfunction but also sleep and behavioral issues.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38401
PMID: 28816003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]