---
reference_id: "PMID:38957156"
title: "Schmidt's Syndrome: An Uncommon Cause of Spontaneous Hypoglycemia."
authors:
- Zacharia GS
- Jacob A
- Bose BM
journal: Avicenna J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/s-0044-1779745
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schmidt's Syndrome: An Uncommon Cause of Spontaneous Hypoglycemia.
**Authors:** Zacharia GS, Jacob A, Bose BM
**Journal:** Avicenna J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0044-1779745](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0044-1779745)

## Content

1. Avicenna J Med. 2024 Feb 27;14(2):130-133. doi: 10.1055/s-0044-1779745. 
eCollection 2024 Apr.

Schmidt's Syndrome: An Uncommon Cause of Spontaneous Hypoglycemia.

Zacharia GS(1), Jacob A(2), Bose BM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine & Gastroenterology, Ahalia Hospital, 
Mussafah, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Department of Anaesthesiology, Ahalia Hospital, Mussafah, Abu Dhabi, United 
Arab Emirates.
(3)Department of Pathology, Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church Medical College, 
Ernakulum, Kerala, India.

Schmidt's syndrome, or autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 2 (APS-2), is an 
uncommon disorder characterized by the co-occurrence of autoimmune thyroiditis 
and adrenalitis. APS-2 is defined as a combination of Addison's disease, 
autoimmune thyroid disease, and/or type 1 diabetes mellitus. It is an autosomal 
dominantly inherited polygenic disorder with incomplete penetrance; the 
candidate genes include but are not limited to HLA-DR3, HLA-DR4, CTLA-4, PTPN22, 
and CD25-IL-2. Autoimmune thyroiditis, often Hashimoto's disease, results in 
hypothyroidism. Primary adrenal failure results in enhanced secretion of 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone melanocyte and co-secretion of 
melanocyte-stimulating hormone, contributing to hyperpigmentation. 
Mineralocorticoid deficiency results in salt wasting, fatigue and cramps, 
postural hypotension, and hyperkalemia. Cortisol, an insulin counter-regulatory 
hormone, plays a pivotal role in maintaining euglycemia; deficiency predisposes 
to the development of hypoglycemia. We here report a rare presentation of 
Schmidt's syndrome as hypoinsulinemic hypoglycemia in a middle-aged male 
patient. Management includes treatment of acute hypoglycemic episodes with 
glucose or glucagon, long-term glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids for 
adrenal insufficiency, and thyroid hormone supplements for hypothyroidism. This 
case report and brief overview aim to contribute to the scientific understanding 
of Schmidt's syndrome/APS-2. Additionally, here we briefly outline the 
diagnostic challenges in hypoglycemia evaluation, including the utilization of 
Whipple's triad and the gold standard supervised 72-hour fast and evaluation for 
primary adrenal and thyroid insufficiencies.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, permitting unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction so long as the original work is properly cited. ( 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0044-1779745
PMCID: PMC11216804
PMID: 38957156

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.