---
reference_id: "PMID:23685039"
title: "Isolated paediatric neurosarcoidosis presenting as epilepsia partialis continua: a case report and review of literature."
authors:
- Anand G
- Sin FE
- Soilleux E
- Chandra J
- Piddington K
- Quaghebeur G
- Wilkinson N
- Zaiwalla Z
- Kennett R
- McShane T
journal: Eur J Paediatr Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2013.03.005
keywords:
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Encephalomyelitis, Acute Disseminated/complications, diagnosis"
- "Epilepsia Partialis Continua/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Immunomodulation/immunology
- Male
- "Sarcoidosis/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Seizures/complications, diagnosis"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolated paediatric neurosarcoidosis presenting as epilepsia partialis continua: a case report and review of literature.
**Authors:** Anand G, Sin FE, Soilleux E, Chandra J, Piddington K, Quaghebeur G, Wilkinson N, Zaiwalla Z, Kennett R, McShane T
**Journal:** Eur J Paediatr Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpn.2013.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2013.03.005)

## Content

1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2013 Sep;17(5):429-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2013.03.005.
 Epub 2013 May 16.

Isolated paediatric neurosarcoidosis presenting as epilepsia partialis continua:
a case report and review of literature.

Anand G(1), Sin FE, Soilleux E, Chandra J, Piddington K, Quaghebeur G, Wilkinson
N, Zaiwalla Z, Kennett R, McShane T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Neurology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headley Way,
Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. anandgeetha97@gmail.com

Isolated paediatric neurosarcoidosis (IPN) is exceptionally rare and only seven
cases have been reported so far in the literature. We report the clinical and
radiological profile of a 7 year-old boy with epilepsia partialis continua (EPC)
who was initially thought to have Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM),
but was subsequently found to have isolated neurosarcoidosis. Additionally, we
performed a literature search on Medline and Embase and secondary sources of
data such as reference list of articles reviewed. Whilst cranial neuropathy is
the commonest presenting feature in adults with neurosarcoidosis, paediatric
patients are more likely to present with seizures. Diagnosis presents a clinical
challenge as a result of its protean manifestations. Due to its rarity, there
remains a lack of evidence base to inform the best choice of treatment for these
children. Our patient was successfully treated with a combination of various
immunomodulants.

Copyright © 2013 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2013.03.005
PMID: 23685039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
