---
reference_id: "PMID:17357080"
title: Filamin A is mutated in X-linked chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction with central nervous system involvement.
authors:
- Gargiulo A
- Auricchio R
- Barone MV
- Cotugno G
- Reardon W
- Milla PJ
- Ballabio A
- Ciccodicola A
- Auricchio A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/513321
keywords:
- Actins/physiology
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Central Nervous System Diseases/genetics
- Contractile Proteins/genetics
- Filamins
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Intestinal Pseudo-Obstruction/genetics
- Male
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Protein Biosynthesis/genetics
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Filamin A is mutated in X-linked chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction with central nervous system involvement.
**Authors:** Gargiulo A, Auricchio R, Barone MV, Cotugno G, Reardon W, Milla PJ, Ballabio A, Ciccodicola A, Auricchio A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/513321](https://doi.org/10.1086/513321)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Apr;80(4):751-8. doi: 10.1086/513321. Epub 2007 Feb 26.

Filamin A is mutated in X-linked chronic idiopathic intestinal 
pseudo-obstruction with central nervous system involvement.

Gargiulo A(1), Auricchio R, Barone MV, Cotugno G, Reardon W, Milla PJ, Ballabio 
A, Ciccodicola A, Auricchio A.

Author information:
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy.

We have previously reported that an X-linked recessive form of chronic 
idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIIPX) maps to Xq28. To select 
candidate genes for the disease, we analyzed the expression in murine fetal 
brain and intestine of 56 genes from the critical region. We selected and 
sequenced seven genes and found that one affected male from a large 
CIIPX-affected kindred bears a 2-bp deletion in exon 2 of the FLNA gene that is 
present at the heterozygous state in the carrier females of the family. The 
frameshift mutation is located between two close methionines at the filamin N 
terminus and is predicted to produce a protein truncated shortly after the first 
predicted methionine. Loss-of-function FLNA mutations have been associated with 
X-linked dominant nodular ventricular heterotopia (PVNH), a central nervous 
system (CNS) migration defect that presents with seizures in females and 
lethality in males. Notably, the affected male bearing the FLNA deletion had 
signs of CNS involvement and potentially has PVNH. To understand how the severe 
frameshift mutation we found can explain the CIIPX phenotype and its X-linked 
recessive inheritance, we transiently expressed both the wild- type and mutant 
filamin in cell culture and found that filamin translation can start from either 
of the two initial methionines in these conditions. Therefore, translation of a 
normal shorter filamin can occur in vitro from the second methionine downstream 
of the 2-bp insertion we found. We confirmed this, demonstrating that the 
filamin protein is present in the patient's lymphoblastoid cell line that shows 
abnormal cytoskeletal actin organization compared with normal lymphoblasts. We 
conclude that the filamin N terminal region between the initial two methionines 
is crucial for proper enteric neuron development.

DOI: 10.1086/513321
PMCID: PMC1852717
PMID: 17357080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]