---
reference_id: "PMID:38050259"
title: "Pathophysiology, diagnosis and management of cerebral venous thrombosis: A comprehensive review."
authors:
- Ranjan R
- Ken-Dror G
- Sharma P
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000036366
keywords:
- Male
- Adult
- Humans
- Female
- "Intracranial Thrombosis/therapy, drug therapy"
- "Heparin, Low-Molecular-Weight/therapeutic use"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Cranial Sinuses
- "Venous Thrombosis/diagnosis, therapy, pathology"
- "Sinus Thrombosis, Intracranial/therapy, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology, diagnosis and management of cerebral venous thrombosis: A comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Ranjan R, Ken-Dror G, Sharma P
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000036366](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000036366)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Dec 1;102(48):e36366. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000036366.

Pathophysiology, diagnosis and management of cerebral venous thrombosis: A 
comprehensive review.

Ranjan R(1)(2), Ken-Dror G(2), Sharma P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular Research, Royal Holloway University of London 
(ICR2UL), Egham Hill, Greater London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Clinical Neurology, Imperial College London Healthcare NHS 
Trust, London, United Kingdom.

Cerebral venous thrombosis is a rare cause of stroke in young mostly female 
adults which is frequently overlooked due to its variable clinical and 
radiological presentation. This review summarizes current knowledge on it risk 
factors, management and outcome in adults and highlights areas for future 
research. Females are 3 times more commonly affected and are significantly 
younger than males. The presenting symptoms can range from headache to loss of 
consciousness. However, the often-nebulous nature of symptoms can make the 
diagnosis challenging. Magnetic resonance imaging with venography is often the 
diagnostic imaging of choice. While unfractionated or low molecular-weight 
heparin is the mainstay of treatment, endovascular intervention with 
thrombolysis or thrombectomy and decompressive craniectomy may be required 
depending on clinical status. Nevertheless, approximately 80% of patients have a 
good recovery but mortality rates of -5% to 10% are not uncommon. Diagnosing 
cerebral venous thrombosis can be challenging but with vigilance and expert care 
patients have the best chance of a good clinical outcome.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000036366
PMCID: PMC10695550
PMID: 38050259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.