---
reference_id: "PMID:38784957"
title: Cochlear Implantation in Primrose Syndrome with a Novel ZBTB20 Gene Variant.
authors:
- Tuğci BA
- Gezdirici A
- Aşaroğlu CB
- Atasoy E
- Sayın İ
- Yazıcı ZM
journal: Turk Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4274/tao.2023.2023-4-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cochlear Implantation in Primrose Syndrome with a Novel ZBTB20 Gene Variant.
**Authors:** Tuğci BA, Gezdirici A, Aşaroğlu CB, Atasoy E, Sayın İ, Yazıcı ZM
**Journal:** Turk Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4274/tao.2023.2023-4-5](https://doi.org/10.4274/tao.2023.2023-4-5)

## Content

1. Turk Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2023 Dec;61(4):192-200. doi: 
10.4274/tao.2023.2023-4-5. Epub 2024 May 21.

Cochlear Implantation in Primrose Syndrome with a Novel ZBTB20 Gene Variant.

Tuğci BA(1), Gezdirici A(2), Aşaroğlu CB(1), Atasoy E(1), Sayın İ(1), Yazıcı 
ZM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Health Sciences Turkey, 
Bakırköy Dr. Sadi Konuk Training and Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Health Sciences Turkey, 
Başakşehir Çam and Sakura Training and Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey.

In this article, we aim to present details of the cochlear implantation 
procedure performed in a patient with Primrose syndrome, which is a rare genetic 
condition characterized by physical deformities, sensorineural hearing loss, and 
metabolic disorders. While its long-term prognosis is still under investigation, 
the absence of intraoperative and postoperative complications indicates 
promising findings. This designates cochlear implantation as a viable 
therapeutic approach for sensorineural hearing loss linked to Primrose syndrome. 
As cochlear implantation in cases with Primrose syndrome has not been discussed 
previously in the literature and our patient has recently been operated on, 
additional investigation is imperative to broaden the understanding of cochlear 
implant outcomes in this patient population.

©Copyright 2023 by Turkish Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery Society / 
Turkish Archives of Otorhinolaryngology is published by Galenos Publishing 
House.

DOI: 10.4274/tao.2023.2023-4-5
PMCID: PMC11110087
PMID: 38784957

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: There is no conflict of 
interest to disclose.