---
reference_id: "PMID:23933818"
title: GRIN2A mutations cause epilepsy-aphasia spectrum disorders.
authors:
- Carvill GL
- Regan BM
- Yendle SC
- "O'Roak BJ"
- Lozovaya N
- Bruneau N
- Burnashev N
- Khan A
- Cook J
- Geraghty E
- Sadleir LG
- Turner SJ
- Tsai MH
- Webster R
- Ouvrier R
- Damiano JA
- Berkovic SF
- Shendure J
- Hildebrand MS
- Szepetowski P
- Scheffer IE
- Mefford HC
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2727
keywords:
- Electroencephalography
- Female
- Humans
- "Landau-Kleffner Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GRIN2A mutations cause epilepsy-aphasia spectrum disorders.
**Authors:** Carvill GL, Regan BM, Yendle SC, O'Roak BJ, Lozovaya N, Bruneau N, Burnashev N, Khan A, Cook J, Geraghty E, Sadleir LG, Turner SJ, Tsai MH, Webster R, Ouvrier R, Damiano JA, Berkovic SF, Shendure J, Hildebrand MS, Szepetowski P, Scheffer IE, Mefford HC
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2727](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2727)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2013 Sep;45(9):1073-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.2727. Epub 2013 Aug 11.

GRIN2A mutations cause epilepsy-aphasia spectrum disorders.

Carvill GL(1), Regan BM, Yendle SC, O'Roak BJ, Lozovaya N, Bruneau N, Burnashev 
N, Khan A, Cook J, Geraghty E, Sadleir LG, Turner SJ, Tsai MH, Webster R, 
Ouvrier R, Damiano JA, Berkovic SF, Shendure J, Hildebrand MS, Szepetowski P, 
Scheffer IE, Mefford HC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetic Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2013 Oct;9(10):541. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2013.181.

Epilepsy-aphasia syndromes (EAS) are a group of rare, severe epileptic 
encephalopathies of unknown etiology with a characteristic electroencephalogram 
(EEG) pattern and developmental regression particularly affecting language. Rare 
pathogenic deletions that include GRIN2A have been implicated in 
neurodevelopmental disorders. We sought to delineate the pathogenic role of 
GRIN2A in 519 probands with epileptic encephalopathies with diverse epilepsy 
syndromes. We identified four probands with GRIN2A variants that segregated with 
the disorder in their families. Notably, all four families presented with EAS, 
accounting for 9% of epilepsy-aphasia cases. We did not detect pathogenic 
variants in GRIN2A in other epileptic encephalopathies (n = 475) nor in probands 
with benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (n = 81). We report 
the first monogenic cause, to our knowledge, for EAS. GRIN2A mutations are 
restricted to this group of cases, which has important ramifications for 
diagnostic testing and treatment and provides new insights into the pathogenesis 
of this debilitating group of conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2727
PMCID: PMC3868952
PMID: 23933818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]