---
reference_id: "PMID:20486734"
title: Levetiracetam in childhood epilepsy.
authors:
- Verrotti A
- D'Adamo E
- Parisi P
- Chiarelli F
- Curatolo P
journal: Paediatr Drugs
year: '2010'
doi: 10.2165/11316250-000000000-00000
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Levetiracetam in childhood epilepsy.
**Authors:** Verrotti A, D'Adamo E, Parisi P, Chiarelli F, Curatolo P
**Journal:** Paediatr Drugs (2010)
**DOI:** [10.2165/11316250-000000000-00000](https://doi.org/10.2165/11316250-000000000-00000)

## Content

1. Paediatr Drugs. 2010 Jun;12(3):177-86. doi: 10.2165/11316250-000000000-00000.

Levetiracetam in childhood epilepsy.

Verrotti A(1), D'Adamo E, Parisi P, Chiarelli F, Curatolo P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Chieti, Chieti, Italy. 
averrott@unich.it

Levetiracetam is an antiepileptic drug that has been shown to be effective in 
various types of seizures, both partial and generalized. Although it is not yet 
well established because of the small number of studies, levetiracetam as both 
add-on therapy and monotherapy can be considered as an alternative to valproic 
acid in some pediatric patients. We have reviewed the available data on the 
efficacy, tolerability, and safety of levetiracetam in children with epilepsy. 
The efficacy of levetiracetam as an adjunctive therapy and as monotherapy for 
generalized and partial childhood epilepsies and for some types of specific 
epileptic syndromes of infancy and childhood (such as juvenile myoclonic 
epilepsy, benign rolandic epilepsy, and Jeavon syndrome) has been demonstrated 
in some studies. Moreover, levetiracetam may be a valuable option for children 
with refractory epilepsy. The reported tolerability of levetiracetam and its 
safety profile are favorable. Among the side effects reported, behavioral 
changes and even psychotic reactions seem to occur more frequently in younger 
patients (under 4 years of age). The onset of signs/symptoms usually occurs 
early, even during the titration phase, and, in many cases, at a low dosage (<20 
mg/kg/day). These side effects were always observed to be reversible after 
discontinuation of levetiracetam. In conclusion, results from clinical trials to 
date suggest that levetiracetam has a full spectrum of efficacy as well as a 
favorable safety profile, and this drug can be considered a valuable option in 
the treatment of epilepsy in pediatric patients.

DOI: 10.2165/11316250-000000000-00000
PMID: 20486734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]