---
reference_id: "PMID:37881591"
title: Effects of Dietary Intake of Arsenosugars and Other Organic Arsenic Species on Studies of Arsenic Methylation Efficiency in Humans.
authors:
- Davydiuk T
- Tao J
- Lu X
- Le XC
journal: Environ Health (Wash)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1021/envhealth.3c00090
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of Dietary Intake of Arsenosugars and Other Organic Arsenic Species on Studies of Arsenic Methylation Efficiency in Humans.
**Authors:** Davydiuk T, Tao J, Lu X, Le XC
**Journal:** Environ Health (Wash) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1021/envhealth.3c00090](https://doi.org/10.1021/envhealth.3c00090)

## Content

1. Environ Health (Wash). 2023 Sep 21;1(4):236-248. doi:
10.1021/envhealth.3c00090.  eCollection 2023 Oct 20.

Effects of Dietary Intake of Arsenosugars and Other Organic Arsenic Species on
Studies of Arsenic Methylation Efficiency in Humans.

Davydiuk T(1), Tao J(2), Lu X(2), Le XC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G
2G2.
(2)Division of Analytical and Environmental Toxicology, Department of Laboratory
Medicine and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2G3.

Extensive research has used dimethylarsinic acid (DMA) in urine as a marker of
arsenic methylation. The premise is that humans methylate inorganic arsenicals
to monomethylarsonic acid (MMA) and DMA and excrete these arsenic species into
the urine. However, DMA in urine not only comes from the methylation of
inorganic arsenic but also could be a result of metabolism of other arsenic
species, such as arsenosugars and arsenolipids. Most environmental health and
epidemiological studies of arsenic methylation might have overlooked confounding
factors that contribute to DMA in urine. Here we critically evaluate reported
studies that used methylation indexes, concentration ratios of methylated
arsenicals, or the percentage of DMA in urine as markers of arsenic methylation
efficiency. Dietary intake of arsenosugars potentially confounds the calculation
and interpretation of the arsenic methylation efficiencies. Many studies have
not considered incidental dietary intake of arsenosugars, arsenolipids, and
other organic arsenic species. Future studies should consider the dietary intake
of diverse arsenic species and their potential effect on the urinary
concentrations of DMA.

© 2023 The Authors. Co-published by Research Center for Eco-Environmental
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/envhealth.3c00090
PMCID: PMC10594586
PMID: 37881591

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.
