---
reference_id: "PMID:24125755"
title: FGF2 stimulates osteogenic differentiation through ERK induced TAZ expression.
authors:
- Byun MR
- Kim AR
- Hwang JH
- Kim KM
- Hwang ES
- Hong JH
journal: Bone
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.09.024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FGF2 stimulates osteogenic differentiation through ERK induced TAZ expression.
**Authors:** Byun MR, Kim AR, Hwang JH, Kim KM, Hwang ES, Hong JH
**Journal:** Bone (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2013.09.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2013.09.024)

## Content

1. Bone. 2014 Jan;58:72-80. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.09.024. Epub 2013 Oct 11.

FGF2 stimulates osteogenic differentiation through ERK induced TAZ expression.

Byun MR(1), Kim AR, Hwang JH, Kim KM, Hwang ES, Hong JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 136-701, Republic of 
Korea.

TAZ (transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif) is a transcriptional 
modulator that regulates mesenchymal stem cell differentiation. It stimulates 
osteogenic differentiation while inhibiting adipocyte differentiation. FGFs 
(fibroblast growth factors) stimulate several signaling proteins to regulate 
their target genes, which are involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, 
and cell survival. Within this family, FGF2 stimulates osteoblast 
differentiation though a mechanism that is largely unknown. In this report, we 
show that TAZ mediates FGF2 signaling in osteogenesis. We observed that FGF2 
increases TAZ expression by stimulating its mRNA expression. Depletion of TAZ 
using small hairpin RNA blocked FGF2-mediated osteogenic differentiation. FGF2 
induced TAZ expression was stimulated by ERK (extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase) activation and the inhibition of ERK blocked TAZ expression. FGF2 
increased nuclear localization of TAZ and, thus, facilitated the interaction of 
TAZ and Runx2, activating Runx2-mediated gene transcription. Taken together, 
these results suggest that TAZ is an important mediator of FGF2 signaling in 
osteoblast differentiation.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.09.024
PMID: 24125755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]