---
reference_id: "PMID:32561029"
title: "The trabecular meshwork: Structure, function and clinical implications. A review of the literature."
authors:
- Buffault J
- Labbé A
- Hamard P
- Brignole-Baudouin F
- Baudouin C
journal: J Fr Ophtalmol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jfo.2020.05.002
keywords:
- "Aqueous Humor/chemistry, physiology"
- "Glaucoma/classification, etiology, physiopathology, surgery"
- Humans
- Intraocular Pressure/physiology
- "Optic Nerve Diseases/pathology, physiopathology, surgery"
- "Trabecular Meshwork/chemistry, pathology, physiology, surgery"
- Trabeculectomy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The trabecular meshwork: Structure, function and clinical implications. A review of the literature.
**Authors:** Buffault J, Labbé A, Hamard P, Brignole-Baudouin F, Baudouin C
**Journal:** J Fr Ophtalmol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jfo.2020.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfo.2020.05.002)

## Content

1. J Fr Ophtalmol. 2020 Sep;43(7):e217-e230. doi: 10.1016/j.jfo.2020.05.002. Epub
 2020 Jun 16.

The trabecular meshwork: Structure, function and clinical implications. A review 
of the literature.

Buffault J(1), Labbé A(2), Hamard P(3), Brignole-Baudouin F(4), Baudouin C(2).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Department, Centre Hospitalier National d'Ophtalmologie des 
Quinze-Vingts, IHU FOReSIGHT, 28, rue de Charenton, 75012 Paris, France. 
Electronic address: juliettebuffault@hotmail.fr.
(2)Ophthalmology Department, Centre Hospitalier National d'Ophtalmologie des 
Quinze-Vingts, IHU FOReSIGHT, 28, rue de Charenton, 75012 Paris, France; 
Ophthalmology Department, hôpital Ambroise-Paré, IHU FOReSIGHT, AP-HP, 9, avenue 
Charles-De-Gaulle, 92100 Boulogne-Billancourt, France; Université de Versailles 
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, 78000 Versailles, France; Inserm, CNRS, Institut de 
la Vision, Sorbonne University, 17, rue Moreau, 75012 Paris, France.
(3)Ophthalmology Department, Centre Hospitalier National d'Ophtalmologie des 
Quinze-Vingts, IHU FOReSIGHT, 28, rue de Charenton, 75012 Paris, France.
(4)Inserm, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, Sorbonne University, 17, rue Moreau, 
75012 Paris, France; Laboratory Department, Centre Hospitalier National 
d'Ophtalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, IHU FOReSIGHT, 28, rue de Charenton, 75012 
Paris, France.

Glaucoma is a blinding optic neuropathy, the main risk factor for which is 
increased intraocular pressure (IOP). The trabecular meshwork, located within 
the iridocorneal angle, is the main pathway for drainage of aqueous humor (AH) 
out of the eye, and its dysfunction is responsible for the IOP elevation. The 
trabecular meshwork is a complex, fenestrated, three-dimensional structure 
composed of trabecular meshwork cells (TMC) interdigitated into a multilayered 
organization within the extracellular matrix (ECM). The purpose of this 
literature review is to provide an overview of current understanding of the 
trabecular meshwork and its pathophysiology in glaucoma. Thus, we will present 
the main anatomical and cellular bases for the regulation of aqueous humor 
outflow resistance, the pathophysiological mechanisms involved in trabecular 
dysfunction in the various types of glaucoma, as well as current and future 
therapeutic strategies targeting the trabecular meshwork.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfo.2020.05.002
PMID: 32561029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]