---
reference_id: "PMID:19232556"
title: "Mutations in the gene encoding the calcium-permeable ion channel TRPV4 produce spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, Kozlowski type and metatropic dysplasia."
authors:
- Krakow D
- Vriens J
- Camacho N
- Luong P
- Deixler H
- Funari TL
- Bacino CA
- Irons MB
- Holm IA
- Sadler L
- Okenfuss EB
- Janssens A
- Voets T
- Rimoin DL
- Lachman RS
- Nilius B
- Cohn DH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.01.021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding the calcium-permeable ion channel TRPV4 produce spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, Kozlowski type and metatropic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Krakow D, Vriens J, Camacho N, Luong P, Deixler H, Funari TL, Bacino CA, Irons MB, Holm IA, Sadler L, Okenfuss EB, Janssens A, Voets T, Rimoin DL, Lachman RS, Nilius B, Cohn DH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.01.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.01.021)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Mar;84(3):307-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.01.021. Epub 
2009 Feb 19.

Mutations in the gene encoding the calcium-permeable ion channel TRPV4 produce 
spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, Kozlowski type and metatropic dysplasia.

Krakow D(1), Vriens J, Camacho N, Luong P, Deixler H, Funari TL, Bacino CA, 
Irons MB, Holm IA, Sadler L, Okenfuss EB, Janssens A, Voets T, Rimoin DL, 
Lachman RS, Nilius B, Cohn DH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University 
of California, Los Angeles, CA 90024, USA.

The spondylometaphyseal dysplasias (SMDs) are a group of short-stature disorders 
distinguished by abnormalities in the vertebrae and the metaphyses of the 
tubular bones. SMD Kozlowski type (SMDK) is a well-defined autosomal-dominant 
SMD characterized by significant scoliosis and mild metaphyseal abnormalities in 
the pelvis. The vertebrae exhibit platyspondyly and overfaced pedicles similar 
to autosomal-dominant brachyolmia, which can result from heterozygosity for 
activating mutations in the gene encoding TRPV4, a calcium-permeable ion 
channel. Mutation analysis in six out of six patients with SMDK demonstrated 
heterozygosity for missense mutations in TRPV4, and one mutation, predicting a 
R594H substitution, was recurrent in four patients. Similar to 
autosomal-dominant brachyolmia, the mutations altered basal calcium channel 
activity in vitro. Metatropic dysplasia is another SMD that has been proposed to 
have both clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Patients with the nonlethal form 
of metatropic dysplasia present with a progressive scoliosis, widespread 
metaphyseal involvement of the appendicular skeleton, and carpal ossification 
delay. Because of some similar radiographic features between SMDK and metatropic 
dysplasia, TRPV4 was tested as a disease gene for nonlethal metatropic 
dysplasia. In two sporadic cases, heterozygosity for de novo missense mutations 
in TRPV4 was found. The findings demonstrate that mutations in TRPV4 produce a 
phenotypic spectrum of skeletal dysplasias from the mild autosomal-dominant 
brachyolmia to SMDK to autosomal-dominant metatropic dysplasia, suggesting that 
these disorders should be grouped into a new bone dysplasia family.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.01.021
PMCID: PMC2667978
PMID: 19232556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]