---
reference_id: "PMID:39622612"
title: Ataxia telangiectasia.
authors:
- Collyer J
- Rajan DS
journal: Semin Pediatr Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2024.101169
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Collyer J, Rajan DS
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.spen.2024.101169](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spen.2024.101169)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2024 Dec;52:101169. doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2024.101169.
Epub  2024 Nov 19.

Ataxia telangiectasia.

Collyer J(1), Rajan DS(2).

Author information:
(1)UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh, 4401 Penn 
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA, 15224, USA. Electronic address: john.collyer@chp.edu.
(2)UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh, 4401 Penn 
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA, 15224, USA. Electronic address: rajands@upmc.edu.

Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare neurocutaneous syndrome that results from 
biallelic pathogenic variants in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, 
named for its characteristic cerebellar ataxia in the early toddler years and 
variable oculocutaneous telangiectasias in the school age years. While its name 
only hints at neurologic and cutaneous manifestations, this multisystemic 
disorder also has important immunologic, oncologic, respiratory, and 
endocrinologic implications. This article will review the function of the ATM 
gene, the neurologic manifestations of AT, non-neurologic complications, 
mimickers of AT (including other disorders of defective DNA repair), and the 
realm of therapeutic research for AT.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.spen.2024.101169
PMID: 39622612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Deepa S Rajan reports a 
relationship with National Scleroderma Foundation that includes: funding grants. 
Deepa S Rajan reports a relationship with Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited 
that includes: consulting or advisory. Deepa S Rajan reports a relationship with 
Sanofi-Aventis US LLC that includes: consulting or advisory. Deepa S Rajan 
reports a relationship with Takeda Pharmaceuticals USA Inc that includes: 
funding grants. Deepa S Rajan reports a relationship with Denali Therapeutics 
Inc that includes: funding grants. Deepa S Rajan reports a relationship with 
Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc that includes: funding grants. Deepa S Rajan 
reports a relationship with Prevail Therapeutics that includes: funding grants. 
Deepa S Rajan reports a relationship with REGENXBIO Inc that includes: funding 
grants. Associate Editor, Medlink Neurology If there are other authors, they 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.