---
reference_id: "PMID:24744586"
title: Clinical significance of lymph node metastasis in gastric cancer.
authors:
- Deng JY
- Liang H
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i14.3967
keywords:
- Dissection
- Europe
- Humans
- Lymph Node Excision
- Lymphatic Metastasis/pathology
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/pathology"
- Prognosis
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Stomach Neoplasms/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical significance of lymph node metastasis in gastric cancer.
**Authors:** Deng JY, Liang H
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v20.i14.3967](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i14.3967)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Apr 14;20(14):3967-75. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v20.i14.3967.

Clinical significance of lymph node metastasis in gastric cancer.

Deng JY(1), Liang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Jing-Yu Deng, Han Liang, Gastric Oncology Division, Tianjin Medical 
University Cancer Hospital and City Key Laboratory of Tianjin Cancer Center, 
National Clinical Center of Cancer, Tianjin 300060, China.

Gastric cancer, one of the most common malignancies in the world, frequently 
reveals lymph node, peritoneum, and liver metastases. Most of gastric cancer 
patients present with lymph node metastasis when they were initially diagnosed 
or underwent surgical resection, which results in poor prognosis. Both the depth 
of tumor invasion and lymph node involvement are considered as the most 
important prognostic predictors of gastric cancer. Although extended 
lymphadenectomy was not considered a survival benefit procedure and was reported 
to be associated with high mortality and morbidity in two randomized controlled 
European trials, it showed significant superiority in terms of lower 
locoregional recurrence and disease related deaths compared to limited 
lymphadenectomy in a 15-year follow-up study. Almost all clinical investigators 
have reached a consensus that the predictive efficiency of the number of 
metastatic lymph nodes is far better than the extent of lymph node metastasis 
for the prognosis of gastric cancer worldwide, but other nodal metastatic 
classifications of gastric cancer have been proposed as alternatives to the 
number of metastatic lymph nodes for improving the predictive efficiency for 
patient prognosis. It is still controversial over whether the ratio between 
metastatic and examined lymph nodes is superior to the number of metastatic 
lymph nodes in prognostic evaluation of gastric cancer. Besides, the negative 
lymph node count has been increasingly recognized to be an important factor 
significantly associated with prognosis of gastric cancer.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i14.3967
PMCID: PMC3983452
PMID: 24744586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]