---
reference_id: "PMID:28873429"
title: CD18 deficiency improves liver injury in the MCD model of steatohepatitis.
authors:
- Pierce AA
- Duwaerts CC
- Siao K
- Mattis AN
- Goodsell A
- Baron JL
- Maher JJ
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183912
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD18 deficiency improves liver injury in the MCD model of steatohepatitis.
**Authors:** Pierce AA, Duwaerts CC, Siao K, Mattis AN, Goodsell A, Baron JL, Maher JJ
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0183912](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0183912)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 5;12(9):e0183912. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183912. 
eCollection 2017.

CD18 deficiency improves liver injury in the MCD model of steatohepatitis.

Pierce AA(1)(2), Duwaerts CC(1)(2), Siao K(1)(2), Mattis AN(2)(3), Goodsell 
A(1)(2), Baron JL(1)(2), Maher JJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, United States of America.
(2)Liver Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, United States of America.

Neutrophils and macrophages are important constituents of the hepatic 
inflammatory infiltrate in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. These innate immune 
cells express CD18, an adhesion molecule that facilitates leukocyte activation. 
In the context of fatty liver, activation of infiltrated leukocytes is believed 
to enhance hepatocellular injury. The objective of this study was to determine 
the degree to which activated innate immune cells promote steatohepatitis by 
comparing hepatic outcomes in wild-type and CD18-mutant mice fed a 
methionine-choline-deficient (MCD) diet. After 3 weeks of MCD feeding, 
hepatocyte injury, based on serum ALT elevation, was 40% lower in CD18-mutant 
than wild-type mice. Leukocyte infiltration into the liver was not impaired in 
CD18-mutant mice, but leukocyte activation was markedly reduced, as shown by the 
lack of evidence of oxidant production. Despite having reduced hepatocellular 
injury, CD18-mutant mice developed significantly more hepatic steatosis than 
wild-type mice after MCD feeding. This coincided with greater hepatic induction 
of pro-inflammatory and lipogenic genes as well as a modest reduction in hepatic 
expression of adipose triglyceride lipase. Overall, the data indicate that CD18 
deficiency curbs MCD-mediated liver injury by limiting the activation of innate 
immune cells in the liver without compromising intrahepatic cytokine activation. 
Reduced liver injury occurs at the expense of increased hepatic steatosis, which 
suggests that in addition to damaging hepatocytes, infiltrating leukocytes may 
influence lipid homeostasis in the liver.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183912
PMCID: PMC5584926
PMID: 28873429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.