---
reference_id: "PMID:24093767"
title: Genotype- and phenotype-guided management of congenital long QT syndrome.
authors:
- Giudicessi JR
- Ackerman MJ
journal: Curr Probl Cardiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2013.08.001
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Electrocardiography
- Evidence-Based Medicine/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Risk Assessment/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype- and phenotype-guided management of congenital long QT syndrome.
**Authors:** Giudicessi JR, Ackerman MJ
**Journal:** Curr Probl Cardiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2013.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2013.08.001)

## Content

1. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2013 Oct;38(10):417-55. doi:
10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2013.08.001.

Genotype- and phenotype-guided management of congenital long QT syndrome.

Giudicessi JR, Ackerman MJ.

Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a genetically heterogeneous group of
heritable disorders of myocardial repolarization linked by the shared clinical
phenotype of QT prolongation on electrocardiogram and an increased risk of
potentially life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias. At the molecular level,
mutations in 15 distinct LQTS-susceptibility genes that encode ion channel
pore-forming α-subunits and accessory β-subunits central to the
electromechanical function of the heart have been implicated in its
pathogenesis. Over the past 2 decades, our evolving understanding of the
electrophysiological mechanisms by which specific genetic substrates perturb the
cardiac action potential has translated into vastly improved approaches to the
diagnosis, risk stratification, and treatment of patients with LQTS. In this
review, we describe how our understanding of the molecular underpinnings of LQTS
has yielded numerous clinically meaningful genotype-phenotype correlations and
how these insights have translated into genotype- and phenotype-guided
approaches to the clinical management of LQTS.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2013.08.001
PMCID: PMC3940076
PMID: 24093767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
