---
reference_id: "PMID:23014338"
title: "Global epidemiology of psoriasis: a systematic review of incidence and prevalence."
authors:
- Parisi R
- Symmons DP
- Griffiths CE
- Ashcroft DM
- Identification and Management of Psoriasis and Associated ComorbidiTy (IMPACT) project team
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.339
keywords:
- "Global Health/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Prevalence
- Psoriasis/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global epidemiology of psoriasis: a systematic review of incidence and prevalence.
**Authors:** Parisi R, Symmons DP, Griffiths CE, Ashcroft DM, Identification and Management of Psoriasis and Associated ComorbidiTy (IMPACT) project team
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jid.2012.339](https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2012.339)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2013 Feb;133(2):377-85. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.339. Epub
2012  Sep 27.

Global epidemiology of psoriasis: a systematic review of incidence and 
prevalence.

Parisi R(1), Symmons DP, Griffiths CE, Ashcroft DM; Identification and 
Management of Psoriasis and Associated ComorbidiTy (IMPACT) project team.

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2013 Feb;133(2):287-9. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.434.

The worldwide incidence and prevalence of psoriasis is poorly understood. To 
better understand this, we performed a systematic review of published 
population-based studies on the incidence and prevalence of psoriasis. Three 
electronic databases were searched from their inception dates to July 2011. A 
total of 385 papers were critically appraised; 53 studies reported on the 
prevalence and incidence of psoriasis in the general population. The prevalence 
in children ranged from 0% (Taiwan) to 2.1% (Italy), and in adults it varied 
from 0.91% (United States) to 8.5% (Norway). In children, the incidence estimate 
reported (United States) was 40.8/100,000 person-years. In adults, it varied 
from 78.9/100,000 person-years (United States) to 230/100,000 person-years 
(Italy). The data indicated that the occurrence of psoriasis varied according to 
age and geographic region, being more frequent in countries more distant from 
the equator. Prevalence estimates also varied in relation to demographic 
characteristics in that studies confined to adults reported higher estimates of 
psoriasis compared with those involving all age groups. Studies on the 
prevalence and incidence of psoriasis have contributed to a better understanding 
of the burden of the disease. However, further research is required to fill 
existing gaps in understanding the epidemiology of psoriasis and trends in 
incidence over time.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2012.339
PMID: 23014338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]