---
reference_id: "PMID:20301523"
title: TFR2-Related Hemochromatosis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- De Gobbi M
- Roetto A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TFR2-Related Hemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, De Gobbi M, Roetto A

## Content

1. TFR2-Related Hemochromatosis.

De Gobbi M(1), Roetto A(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2005 Aug 29 [updated 2023 Dec 7].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Internal Medicine, Department of Clinical and Biological
Sciences, University of Torino;, Azienda Ospedaliera San Luigi, Orbassano,
Turin, Italy
(2)Assistant Professor in Medical Genetics, Department of Clinical and
Biological Sciences, University of Torino;, Azienda Ospedaliera San Luigi,
Orbassano. Turin, Italy

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: TFR2-related hemochromatosis (TFR2-HC) is
characterized by increased intestinal iron absorption resulting in iron
accumulation in the liver, heart, pancreas, and endocrine organs. Age of onset
is earlier than in HFE-related hemochromatosis. The majority of individuals
present with signs and symptoms of iron overload in the third decade (e.g.,
weakness, fatigue, abdominal pain, hepatomegaly, arthritis, arthralgia, and
progressive increase in skin pigmentation). Others present as young adults with
nonspecific symptoms and abnormal serum iron studies or as adults with abnormal
serum iron studies and signs of organ involvement including cirrhosis, diabetes
mellitus, arthropathy, hypogonadism, cardiomyopathy, and increase in skin
pigmentation.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of TFR2-HC is established in a proband with
biallelic pathogenic variants in TFR2 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: In order to prevent iron overload-related
complications, removal of excess iron by routine phlebotomy to maintain serum
ferritin concentration at 50 ng/mL or lower and transferrin-iron saturation
below 50%; iron chelation therapy as needed in those with anemia. Supportive
care: Vaccination for hepatitis A and B; therapy to prevent cirrhosis
complications and liver decompensation including endoscopic surveillance of
varices and prophylaxis with nonselective beta-blockers; salt restriction and
diuretics for ascites with paracentesis and shunts as needed; antibiotics for
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis; low protein diet for hepatic encephalopathy
with lactulose and rifaximin as needed; hormone replacement therapy for
hypogonadism; gonadotropins for fertility/pregnancy; routine treatment for
diabetes mellitus and cardiac failure; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and
joint replacement for arthropathy. Surveillance: Serum iron, transferrin,
transferrin saturation, and ferritin concentration every six to 12 months once
serum ferritin concentration is lower than 50 ng/mL. Serum AFP and liver
ultrasound in individuals with cirrhosis every six months to assess for hepatic
complications and for early detection of hepatocarcinoma. Individuals with
hypogonadism, diabetes mellitus, and cardiac failure should have surveillance
for complications related to the specific organ failure. Agents/circumstances to
avoid: Medicinal iron and nutritional supplements containing iron, excessive
alcohol intake, vitamin C supplements, uncooked seafood, and lifestyle-related
behaviors that increase the risk of viral hepatitis infection. Evaluation of
relatives at risk: It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older
and younger sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the
TFR2 pathogenic variants found in the family in order to identify as early as
possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and
preventive measures. Pregnancy management: Phlebotomy can be paused in pregnant
women with mild-to-moderate iron overload due to fetal utilization of maternal
iron.
GENETIC COUNSELING: TFR2-HC is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If
both parents are known to be heterozygous for a TFR2 pathogenic variant, each
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected,
a 50% chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not
a carrier. Once the TFR2 pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected
family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal and
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301523
