---
reference_id: "PMID:19177544"
title: "Incidence and clinical predictors of psoriatic arthritis in patients with psoriasis: a population-based study."
authors:
- Wilson FC
- Icen M
- Crowson CS
- McEvoy MT
- Gabriel SE
- Kremers HM
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/art.24172
keywords:
- Adult
- "Arthritis, Psoriatic/complications, epidemiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Minnesota/epidemiology
- Nail Diseases
- Proportional Hazards Models
- "Psoriasis/complications, epidemiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Scalp Dermatoses
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and clinical predictors of psoriatic arthritis in patients with psoriasis: a population-based study.
**Authors:** Wilson FC, Icen M, Crowson CS, McEvoy MT, Gabriel SE, Kremers HM
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.24172](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.24172)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Feb 15;61(2):233-9. doi: 10.1002/art.24172.

Incidence and clinical predictors of psoriatic arthritis in patients with 
psoriasis: a population-based study.

Wilson FC(1), Icen M, Crowson CS, McEvoy MT, Gabriel SE, Kremers HM.

Author information:
(1)The Mayo Clinic, College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Erratum in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Apr;62(4):574.

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2009 Dec;14(6):185. doi: 10.1136/ebm.14.6.185.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence and disease-specific predictors of 
clinically recognized psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in patients with psoriasis.
METHODS: We identified an incidence cohort of psoriasis subjects age >/=18 years 
diagnosed between January 1, 1970 and December 31, 1999 in a population-based 
setting. Psoriasis diagnoses were validated by confirmatory diagnosis in the 
medical record. Incident and clinically recognized PsA subjects were classified 
according to the Classification of Psoriatic Arthritis (CASPAR) criteria. Cox 
proportional hazards models were used to identify predictors of PsA within the 
psoriasis cohort.
RESULTS: The psoriasis incidence cohort comprised 1,633 subjects. Of these, 40 
were diagnosed with PsA concurrently with psoriasis and were excluded from 
analysis. The remaining 1,593 psoriasis subjects had a mean age of 43 years and 
50% were men. Over 20,936 person-years of followup, 57 subjects were clinically 
recognized with new-onset PsA, with a cumulative incidence of 1.7% (95% 
confidence interval [95% CI] 1.0-2.3%), 3.1% (95% CI 2.2-4.1%), and 5.1% (95% CI 
3.7-6.6%) at 5, 10, and 20 years following psoriasis incidence, respectively. 
Psoriasis features associated with higher risk of PsA were scalp lesions (hazard 
ratio [HR] 3.89, 95% CI 2.18-6.94), nail dystrophy (HR 2.93, 95% CI 1.68-5.12), 
and intergluteal/perianal lesions (HR 2.35, 95% CI 1.32-4.19). Calendar year was 
not associated with risk of PsA (P = 0.15), indicating that the likelihood of 
PsA in psoriasis subjects did not change over time.
CONCLUSION: In this population-based study, <10% of patients with psoriasis 
developed clinically recognized PsA during a 30-year period. Psoriasis features 
associated with a higher likelihood of PsA were nail dystrophy, scalp lesions, 
and intergluteal/perianal psoriasis.

DOI: 10.1002/art.24172
PMCID: PMC3061343
PMID: 19177544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]