---
reference_id: "PMID:37593443"
title: "Dyskeratosis congenita: natural history of the disease through the study of a cohort of patients diagnosed in childhood."
authors:
- Uria-Oficialdegui ML
- Navarro S
- Murillo-Sanjuan L
- Rodriguez-Vigil C
- Benitez-Carbante MI
- Blazquez-Goñi C
- Salinas JA
- Diaz-de-Heredia C
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1182476
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dyskeratosis congenita: natural history of the disease through the study of a cohort of patients diagnosed in childhood.
**Authors:** Uria-Oficialdegui ML, Navarro S, Murillo-Sanjuan L, Rodriguez-Vigil C, Benitez-Carbante MI, Blazquez-Goñi C, Salinas JA, Diaz-de-Heredia C
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2023.1182476](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.1182476)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Aug 1;11:1182476. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1182476. 
eCollection 2023.

Dyskeratosis congenita: natural history of the disease through the study of a 
cohort of patients diagnosed in childhood.

Uria-Oficialdegui ML(1), Navarro S(2), Murillo-Sanjuan L(1), Rodriguez-Vigil 
C(3), Benitez-Carbante MI(1), Blazquez-Goñi C(4), Salinas JA(2), Diaz-de-Heredia 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Division, Hospital Universitari Vall 
d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Pediatric Division, Hospital Universitario SonEspases, Palma de Mallorca, 
Spain.
(3)Pediatric Oncohaematology Unit, Paediatric Division, Hospital Universitario 
Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain.
(4)Hematology Division, Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is a multisystem and ultra-rare 
hereditary disease characterized by somatic involvement, bone marrow failure, 
and predisposition to cancer. The main objective of this study is to describe 
the natural history of DC through a cohort of patients diagnosed in childhood 
and followed up for a long period of time.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Multicenter, retrospective, longitudinal study conducted 
in patients followed up to 24 years since being diagnosed in childhood (between 
1998 and 2020).
RESULTS: Fourteen patients were diagnosed with DC between the ages of 3 and 17 
years (median, 8.5 years). They all had hematologic manifestations at diagnosis, 
and nine developed mucocutaneous manifestations during the first decade of life. 
Seven presented severe DC variants. All developed non-hematologic manifestations 
during follow-up. Mutations were identified in 12 patients. Thirteen progressed 
to bone marrow failure at a median age of 8 years [range, 3-18 years], and eight 
received a hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Median follow-up time was 9 years 
[range, 2-24 years]. Six patients died, the median age was 13 years [range, 6-24 
years]. As of November 2022, eight patients were still alive, with a median age 
of 18 years [range, 6-32 years]. None of them have developed myeloblastic 
syndrome or cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: DC was associated with high morbidity and mortality in our series. 
Hematologic manifestations appeared early and consistently. Non-hematologic 
manifestations developed progressively. No patient developed cancer possibly due 
to their young age. Due to the complexity of the disease multidisciplinary 
follow-up and adequate transition to adult care are essential.

© 2023 Uria-Oficialdegui, Navarro, Murillo-Sanjuan, Rodriguez-Vigil, 
Benitez-Carbante, Blazquez-Goñi, Salinas and Diaz-de-Heredia.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.1182476
PMCID: PMC10427857
PMID: 37593443

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.