---
reference_id: "PMID:22042945"
title: Use of zidovudine and interferon alfa with chemotherapy improves survival in both acute and lymphoma subtypes of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.
authors:
- Hodson A
- Crichton S
- Montoto S
- Mir N
- Matutes E
- Cwynarski K
- Kumaran T
- Ardeshna KM
- Pagliuca A
- Taylor GP
- Fields PA
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.35.5578
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of zidovudine and interferon alfa with chemotherapy improves survival in both acute and lymphoma subtypes of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.
**Authors:** Hodson A, Crichton S, Montoto S, Mir N, Matutes E, Cwynarski K, Kumaran T, Ardeshna KM, Pagliuca A, Taylor GP, Fields PA
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2011.35.5578](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2011.35.5578)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Dec 10;29(35):4696-701. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.35.5578. Epub
 2011 Oct 31.

Use of zidovudine and interferon alfa with chemotherapy improves survival in 
both acute and lymphoma subtypes of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.

Hodson A(1), Crichton S, Montoto S, Mir N, Matutes E, Cwynarski K, Kumaran T, 
Ardeshna KM, Pagliuca A, Taylor GP, Fields PA.

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Human Retrovirology, St Mary’s Hospital, Imperial College 
Healthcare National Health Service Trust, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) is a mature (post-thymic) T-cell 
lymphoma associated with human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 infection. Survival 
in aggressive subtypes remains poor, and treatment resistance is frequent. Use 
of zidovudine (ZDV) and interferon alfa (IFN-α) has been associated with 
improved response rates in small studies and prolonged overall survival in 
leukemic ATLL subtypes in a recent meta-analysis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We report the clinicopathologic characteristics, 
treatment, and outcome of 73 patients with aggressive ATLL (acute ATLL, 29; 
lymphoma ATLL, 44) diagnosed and treated in England between 1999 and 2009. The 
impact of ZDV/IFN-α on treatment response and survival was assessed.
RESULTS: The overall response rate ranged from 49% with chemotherapy alone to 
81% with combined first-line therapy (chemotherapy with concurrent/sequential 
ZDV/IFN-α). Median overall survival (OS) was 9 months: 7.5 months for acute ATLL 
and 10 months for lymphoma ATLL. Use of ZDV/IFN-α at any time prolonged survival 
in acute (P < .001) and lymphoma ATLL (P < .001) and was the sole factor 
associated with reduction in risk of death in aggressive ATLL (hazard ratio, 
0.23; 95% CI, 0.09 to 0.60; P = .002). Combined first-line therapy prolonged 
median OS in acute (P = .0081) and lymphoma ATLL (P = .001) compared with 
chemotherapy alone.
CONCLUSION: These data support the use of low-dose ZDV/IFN-α with chemotherapy 
in first-line treatment of acute and lymphoma ATLL.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2011.35.5578
PMID: 22042945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]