---
reference_id: "PMID:11013136"
title: Mutations of the SCO1 gene in mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase deficiency with neonatal-onset hepatic failure and encephalopathy.
authors:
- Valnot I
- Osmond S
- Gigarel N
- Mehaye B
- Amiel J
- Cormier-Daire V
- Munnich A
- Bonnefont JP
- Rustin P
- Rötig A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62940-1
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/genetics"
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electron Transport
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Liver/enzymology, metabolism"
- "Liver Failure/complications, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscles/enzymology, metabolism"
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Sequence Alignment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of the SCO1 gene in mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase deficiency with neonatal-onset hepatic failure and encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Valnot I, Osmond S, Gigarel N, Mehaye B, Amiel J, Cormier-Daire V, Munnich A, Bonnefont JP, Rustin P, Rötig A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62940-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62940-1)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;67(5):1104-9. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62940-1.
Epub  2000 Sep 28.

Mutations of the SCO1 gene in mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase deficiency with 
neonatal-onset hepatic failure and encephalopathy.

Valnot I(1), Osmond S, Gigarel N, Mehaye B, Amiel J, Cormier-Daire V, Munnich A, 
Bonnefont JP, Rustin P, Rötig A.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherches sur les Handicaps Génétiques de l'Enfant, INSERM U-393, 
Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 75743 Paris, France.

Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) catalyzes both electron transfer from cytochrome c to 
molecular oxygen and the concomitant vectorial proton pumping across the inner 
mitochondrial membrane. Studying a large family with multiple cases of neonatal 
ketoacidotic comas and isolated COX deficiency, we have mapped the disease locus 
to chromosome 17p13.1, in a region encompassing two candidate genes involved in 
COX assembly-namely, SCO1 and COX10. Mutation screening revealed compound 
heterozygosity for SCO1 gene mutations in the patients. The mutated allele, 
inherited from the father, harbored a 2-bp frameshift deletion (DeltaGA; nt 
363-364) resulting in both a premature stop codon and a highly unstable mRNA. 
The maternally inherited mutation (C520T) changed a highly conserved proline 
into a leucine in the protein (P174L). This proline, adjacent to the CxxxC 
copper-binding domain of SCO1, is likely to play a crucial role in the 
tridimentional structure of the domain. Interestingly, the clinical presentation 
of SCO1-deficient patients markedly differs from that of patients harboring 
mutations in other COX assembly and/or maturation genes.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62940-1
PMCID: PMC1288552
PMID: 11013136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]