---
reference_id: "PMID:37073597"
title: "Repair of posterior laryngeal cleft: a 10-year experience in a tertiary referral hospital."
authors:
- El-Sobki A
- Baz H
- Ibrahim RA
- El Deeb ME
- El-Kholy NA
- Ashraf B
- Hashish MI
- Negm A
journal: J Laryngol Otol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1017/S0022215123000658
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repair of posterior laryngeal cleft: a 10-year experience in a tertiary referral hospital.
**Authors:** El-Sobki A, Baz H, Ibrahim RA, El Deeb ME, El-Kholy NA, Ashraf B, Hashish MI, Negm A
**Journal:** J Laryngol Otol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0022215123000658](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022215123000658)

## Content

1. J Laryngol Otol. 2024 Feb;138(2):188-195. doi: 10.1017/S0022215123000658. Epub
 2023 Apr 19.

Repair of posterior laryngeal cleft: a 10-year experience in a tertiary referral 
hospital.

El-Sobki A(1), Baz H(2), Ibrahim RA(3), El Deeb ME(4), El-Kholy NA(1), Ashraf 
B(1), Hashish MI(5), Negm A(6).

Author information:
(1)Otorhinolaryngology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, 
Mansoura, Egypt.
(2)Phoniatrics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura, 
Egypt.
(3)Phoniatrics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut University, Assiut, 
Egypt.
(4)Otorhinolaryngology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Kafrelsheikh University, 
Kafrelsheikh, Egypt.
(5)Pediatrics, Pediatrics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, 
Mansoura, Egypt.
(6)Otorhinolaryngology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Misr University for 
Science and Technology, Cairo, Egypt.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to present experience with surgical treatment of 
laryngeal cleft cases through both open and endoscopic approaches.
METHOD: A retrospective evaluation of all patients diagnosed as having a 
laryngeal cleft in a tertiary hospital over 10 years was performed. 
Pre-operative data, conservative and surgical management of cases, and outcomes 
were collected, tabulated and analysed.
RESULTS: This study included 43 patients aged from 2 to 44 months with a median 
of 9.19 months. Concerning management technique, 12 patients had conservative 
treatment and the remaining 31 underwent a surgical procedure (of them, 20 
patients underwent endoscopic intervention and 11 had the open surgical 
technique). In the open group, we used either tibial periosteum (six cases) or 
harvested costal cartilage (five cases).
CONCLUSION: Surgical management in the form of endoscopic Coblation-assisted or 
an open approach is indicated in severe cases or mild cases not responding to 
conservative management.

DOI: 10.1017/S0022215123000658
PMID: 37073597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]