---
reference_id: "PMID:27349894"
title: Intratumoral heterogeneity as a source of discordance in breast cancer biomarker classification.
authors:
- Allott EH
- Geradts J
- Sun X
- Cohen SM
- Zirpoli GR
- Khoury T
- Bshara W
- Chen M
- Sherman ME
- Palmer JR
- Ambrosone CB
- Olshan AF
- Troester MA
journal: Breast Cancer Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13058-016-0725-1
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Biopsy
- "Breast Neoplasms/diagnosis, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Prognosis
- "Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Estrogen/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Progesterone/genetics, metabolism"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Tissue Array Analysis/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intratumoral heterogeneity as a source of discordance in breast cancer biomarker classification.
**Authors:** Allott EH, Geradts J, Sun X, Cohen SM, Zirpoli GR, Khoury T, Bshara W, Chen M, Sherman ME, Palmer JR, Ambrosone CB, Olshan AF, Troester MA
**Journal:** Breast Cancer Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13058-016-0725-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13058-016-0725-1)

## Content

1. Breast Cancer Res. 2016 Jun 28;18(1):68. doi: 10.1186/s13058-016-0725-1.

Intratumoral heterogeneity as a source of discordance in breast cancer biomarker 
classification.

Allott EH(1)(2), Geradts J(3), Sun X(2), Cohen SM(1), Zirpoli GR(4), Khoury 
T(5), Bshara W(5), Chen M(6)(7), Sherman ME(8), Palmer JR(9), Ambrosone CB(4), 
Olshan AF(1)(2), Troester MA(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 135 
Dauer Drive, CB 7435, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Cancer Prevention and Control, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, 
Buffalo, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.
(8)Division of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(9)Slone Epidemiology Center, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
(10)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. troester@unc.edu.
(11)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 135 
Dauer Drive, CB 7435, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. troester@unc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Spatial heterogeneity in biomarker expression may impact breast 
cancer classification. The aims of this study were to estimate the frequency of 
spatial heterogeneity in biomarker expression within tumors, to identify 
technical and biological factors contributing to spatial heterogeneity, and to 
examine the impact of discordant biomarker status within tumors on clinical 
record agreement.
METHODS: Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were constructed using two to four cores 
(1.0 mm) for each of 1085 invasive breast cancers from the Carolina Breast 
Cancer Study, which is part of the AMBER Consortium. Immunohistochemical 
staining for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human 
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) was quantified using automated digital 
imaging analysis. The biomarker status for each core and for each case was 
assigned using clinical thresholds. Cases with core-to-core biomarker 
discordance were manually reviewed to distinguish intratumoral biomarker 
heterogeneity from misclassification of biomarker status by the automated 
algorithm. The impact of core-to-core biomarker discordance on case-level 
agreement between TMAs and the clinical record was evaluated.
RESULTS: On the basis of automated analysis, discordant biomarker status between 
TMA cores occurred in 9 %, 16 %, and 18 % of cases for ER, PR, and HER2, 
respectively. Misclassification of benign epithelium and/or ductal carcinoma in 
situ as invasive carcinoma by the automated algorithm was implicated in 
discordance among cores. However, manual review of discordant cases confirmed 
spatial heterogeneity as a source of discordant biomarker status between cores 
in 2 %, 7 %, and 8 % of cases for ER, PR, and HER2, respectively. Overall, 
agreement between TMA and clinical record was high for ER (94 %), PR (89 %), and 
HER2 (88 %), but it was reduced in cases with core-to-core discordance 
(agreement 70 % for ER, 61 % for PR, and 57 % for HER2).
CONCLUSIONS: Intratumoral biomarker heterogeneity may impact breast cancer 
classification accuracy, with implications for clinical management. Both 
manually confirmed biomarker heterogeneity and misclassification of biomarker 
status by automated image analysis contribute to discordant biomarker status 
between TMA cores. Given that manually confirmed heterogeneity is uncommon 
(<10 % of cases), large studies are needed to study the impact of heterogeneous 
biomarker expression on breast cancer classification and outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-016-0725-1
PMCID: PMC4924300
PMID: 27349894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]