---
reference_id: "PMID:35331403"
title: Cell therapy in congenital inherited hepatic disorders.
authors:
- Anand H
- Nulty J
- Dhawan A
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.bpg.2021.101772
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell therapy in congenital inherited hepatic disorders.
**Authors:** Anand H, Nulty J, Dhawan A
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bpg.2021.101772](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpg.2021.101772)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2022 Feb-Mar;56-57:101772. doi: 
10.1016/j.bpg.2021.101772. Epub 2021 Nov 5.

Cell therapy in congenital inherited hepatic disorders.

Anand H(1), Nulty J(1), Dhawan A(2).

Author information:
(1)King's College Hospital NHS Trust: King's College Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, United Kingdom; DhawanLab, Paediatric Liver GI and Nutrition Center and 
MowatLabs, Institute of Liver Studies, King's College London, Faculty of Life 
Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, King's College Hospital, London, 
UK.
(2)King's College Hospital NHS Trust: King's College Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, United Kingdom; DhawanLab, Paediatric Liver GI and Nutrition Center and 
MowatLabs, Institute of Liver Studies, King's College London, Faculty of Life 
Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, King's College Hospital, London, 
UK. Electronic address: anil.dhawan@nhs.net.

Congenital inherited hepatic disorders (CIHDs) are a set of diverse and 
heterogeneous group of genetic disorders leading to a defect in an enzyme or 
transporter. Most of these disorders are currently treated by liver 
transplantation as standard of care. Improved surgical techniques and 
post-operative care has led to a wider availability and success of liver 
transplantation program worldwide. However liver transplantation has its own 
limitations due to invasive surgery and lifelong use of immunosuppressive 
agents. Our experience from auxiliary liver transplantation (where right or the 
left lobe of the patient liver is replaced with a healthy liver donor) 
demonstrated successful treatment of the underlying defect of noncirrhotic 
metabolic disorder suggesting that whole liver replacement may not be necessary 
to achieve a change in phenotype. Large number of animal studies in human models 
of CIHD have shown success of hepatocyte transplantation leading to its human 
use. This review addresses the current state of human hepatocyte transplantation 
in the management of CIHDs with bottlenecks to its wider application and future 
perspectives.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpg.2021.101772
PMID: 35331403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]