---
reference_id: "PMID:32151731"
title: Reversion of arterial calcification by elastin-targeted DTPA-HSA nanoparticles.
authors:
- Keuth J
- Nitschke Y
- Mulac D
- Riehemann K
- Rutsch F
- Langer K
journal: Eur J Pharm Biopharm
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.03.007
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies/chemistry, immunology"
- "Aorta/drug effects, immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Calcium Chelating Agents/chemistry, pharmacology"
- Cell Line
- Drug Carriers
- Drug Compounding
- Elastin/immunology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Nanoparticles
- "Pentetic Acid/chemistry, pharmacology"
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/drug therapy, immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Serum Albumin, Human/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Vascular Calcification/drug therapy, immunology, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reversion of arterial calcification by elastin-targeted DTPA-HSA nanoparticles.
**Authors:** Keuth J, Nitschke Y, Mulac D, Riehemann K, Rutsch F, Langer K
**Journal:** Eur J Pharm Biopharm (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.03.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.03.007)

## Content

1. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2020 May;150:108-119. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.03.007.
Epub 2020 Mar 6.

Reversion of arterial calcification by elastin-targeted DTPA-HSA nanoparticles.

Keuth J(1), Nitschke Y(2), Mulac D(3), Riehemann K(4), Rutsch F(5), Langer K(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmacy, University of
Muenster, Corrensstraße 48, 48149 Muenster, Germany. Electronic address:
j.keuth@uni-muenster.de.
(2)Department of General Pediatrics, Muenster University Children's Hospital,
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, Gbde. A1, 48149 Muenster, Germany. Electronic
address: yvonne.nitschke@ukmuenster.de.
(3)Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmacy, University of
Muenster, Corrensstraße 48, 48149 Muenster, Germany. Electronic address:
mulac.dennis@uni-muenster.de.
(4)Center for Nanotechnology (CeNTech) and Institute of Physics, University of
Muenster, Heisenbergstraße 11, 48149 Muenster, Germany. Electronic address:
k.riehemann@uni-muenster.de.
(5)Department of General Pediatrics, Muenster University Children's Hospital,
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, Gbde. A1, 48149 Muenster, Germany. Electronic
address: frank.rutsch@ukmuenster.de.
(6)Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmacy, University of
Muenster, Corrensstraße 48, 48149 Muenster, Germany. Electronic address:
k.langer@uni-muenster.de.

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) and pseudoxanthoma
elasticum (PXE) are characterized by pathologic calcifications in the media of
large- and medium sized arteries. GACI is associated with biallelic mutations in
ENPP1 in the majority of cases, whereas mutations in ABCC6 are known to cause
PXE. Different treatment approaches including bisphosphonates and orally
administered pyrophosphate (PPi) were investigated in recent years, but
reversion of calcification could not be achieved. With this study, we pursued
the idea of a combination of controlled drug delivery through nanoparticles and
active targeting via antibody conjugation to develop a treatment for GACI and
PXE. To establish a suitable drug delivery system, the chelating drug
diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) was conjugated to nanoparticles
composed of human serum albumin (HSA) as biodegradable and non-toxic particle
matrix. To accomplish an active targeting of the elastic fibers exposed through
calcification of the affected areas, the nanoparticle surface was functionalized
with an anti-elastin antibody. Cytotoxicity and cell interaction studies
revealed favorable preconditions for the intended i.v. application. The
chelating ability was evaluated in vitro and ex vivo on aortic ring culture
isolated from two mouse models of GACI and PXE. The positive results led to the
conclusion that the produced nanoparticles might be a promising therapy in the
treatment of GACI and PXE.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.03.007
PMID: 32151731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
