---
reference_id: "PMID:20074356"
title: Local population and regional environmental drivers of cholera in Bangladesh.
authors:
- Emch M
- Yunus M
- Escamilla V
- Feldacker C
- Ali M
journal: Environ Health
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-9-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Local population and regional environmental drivers of cholera in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Emch M, Yunus M, Escamilla V, Feldacker C, Ali M
**Journal:** Environ Health (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1476-069X-9-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-9-2)

## Content

1. Environ Health. 2010 Jan 14;9:2. doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-9-2.

Local population and regional environmental drivers of cholera in Bangladesh.

Emch M(1), Yunus M, Escamilla V, Feldacker C, Ali M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geography, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, USA. 
emch@email.unc.edu

BACKGROUND: Regional environmental factors have been shown to be related to 
cholera. Previous work in Bangladesh found that temporal patterns of cholera are 
positively related to satellite-derived environmental variables including ocean 
chlorophyll concentration (OCC).
METHODS: This paper investigates whether local socio-economic status (SES) 
modifies the effect of regional environmental forces. The study area is Matlab, 
Bangladesh, an area of approximately 200,000 people with an active health and 
demographic surveillance system. Study data include (1) spatially-referenced 
demographic and socio-economic characteristics of the population; (2) 
satellite-derived variables for sea surface temperature (SST), sea surface 
height (SSH), and OCC; and (3) laboratory confirmed cholera case data for the 
entire population. Relationships between cholera, the environmental variables, 
and SES are measured using generalized estimating equations with a logit link 
function. Additionally two separate seasonal models are built because there are 
two annual cholera epidemics, one pre-monsoon, and one post-monsoon.
RESULTS: SES has a significant impact on cholera occurrence: the higher the SES 
score, the lower the occurrence of cholera. There is a significant negative 
association between cholera incidence and SSH during the pre-monsoon period but 
not for the post-monsoon period. OCC is positively associated with cholera 
during the pre-monsoon period but not for the post-monsoon period. SST is not 
related to cholera incidence.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, it appears cholera is influenced by regional environmental 
variables during the pre-monsoon period and by local-level variables (e.g., 
water and sanitation) during the post-monsoon period. In both pre- and 
post-monsoon seasons, SES significantly influences these patterns, likely 
because it is a proxy for poor water quality and sanitation in poorer 
households.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-069X-9-2
PMCID: PMC2819239
PMID: 20074356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]