---
reference_id: "PMID:39018589"
title: "Phase II study of brigatinib in patients with ROS1 fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer: the Barossa study."
authors:
- Niho S
- Goto Y
- Toyozawa R
- Daga H
- Ohashi K
- Takahashi T
- Tanaka H
- Sakakibara-Konishi J
- Hattori Y
- Morise M
- Kodani M
- Ikeda T
- Izumi H
- Matsumoto S
- Yoh K
- Nomura S
- Goto K
journal: ESMO Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2024.103642
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- Gene Rearrangement
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Organophosphorus Compounds/administration & dosage"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage"
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- "Pyrimidines/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase II study of brigatinib in patients with ROS1 fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer: the Barossa study.
**Authors:** Niho S, Goto Y, Toyozawa R, Daga H, Ohashi K, Takahashi T, Tanaka H, Sakakibara-Konishi J, Hattori Y, Morise M, Kodani M, Ikeda T, Izumi H, Matsumoto S, Yoh K, Nomura S, Goto K
**Journal:** ESMO Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.esmoop.2024.103642](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2024.103642)

## Content

1. ESMO Open. 2024 Aug;9(8):103642. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2024.103642. Epub 2024
Jul 16.

Phase II study of brigatinib in patients with ROS1 fusion-positive
non-small-cell lung cancer: the Barossa study.

Niho S(1), Goto Y(2), Toyozawa R(3), Daga H(4), Ohashi K(5), Takahashi T(6),
Tanaka H(7), Sakakibara-Konishi J(8), Hattori Y(9), Morise M(10), Kodani M(11),
Ikeda T(12), Izumi H(12), Matsumoto S(12), Yoh K(12), Nomura S(13), Goto K(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East,
Kashiwa; Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Dokkyo
Medical University, Mibu. Electronic address: siniho@dokkyomed.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo.
(3)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Hospital Organization Kyushu Cancer
Center, Fukuoka.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Osaka City General Hospital, Osaka.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama.
(6)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, Nagaizumi-cho
Sunto-gun.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Niigata Cancer Center Hospital, Niigata.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hokkaido University Hospital, Sapporo.
(9)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Hyogo Cancer Center, Akashi.
(10)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya.
(11)Division of Medical Oncology and Molecular Respirology, Tottori University,
Tottori.
(12)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East,
Kashiwa.
(13)Department of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Brigatinib is a next-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
targeting ALK and ROS1. The Barossa study is a multicenter, phase II basket
study of brigatinib in patients with ROS1-rearranged solid tumors. ROS1
TKI-naive patients with ROS1-rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) were
enrolled in cohort 1, and ROS1-rearranged NSCLC patients treated previously with
crizotinib were enrolled in cohort 2. Patients with ROS1-rearranged solid tumors
other than NSCLC were enrolled in cohort 3.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eligible patients received brigatinib at the dose of 180
mg once daily with a 7-day lead-in period at 90 mg. The primary endpoint was the
objective response rate (RECIST 1.1) assessed by independent central review in
cohorts 1 and 2.
RESULTS: Between July 2019 and June 2021, 51 patients were enrolled into the
study. Of the 51, 47 patients had ROS1-rearranged NSCLC; 28 and 19 of these
patients were enrolled in cohort 1 and cohort 2, respectively. The remaining
four patients had other ROS1-rearranged solid tumors, including rectal, brain,
and pancreas tumor in one patient each, and primary unknown tumor in one
patient. The confirmed objective response rate was 71.4% [95% confidence
interval (CI) 51.3% to 86.8%] in cohort 1 (TKI-naive NSCLC patients) and 31.6%
(95% CI 12.6% to 56.6%) in cohort 2 (NSCLC patients treated previously with
crizotinib). The median progression-free survival was 12.0 months (95% CI
5.5-22.9 months) in cohort 1 and 7.3 months (95% CI 1.3-17.5 months) in cohort
2. None of the patients in cohort 3 showed any treatment response. Pneumonitis
was observed in 9.8% of all the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Brigatinib was effective in TKI-naive patients with ROS1-rearranged
NSCLC. The safety profile of brigatinib was consistent with that reported from
previous studies.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2024.103642
PMCID: PMC11305258
PMID: 39018589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
