---
reference_id: "PMID:31894386"
title: Unique molecular features and clinical outcomes in young patients with non-small cell lung cancer harboring ALK fusion genes.
authors:
- Tian P
- Liu Y
- Zeng H
- Tang Y
- Lizaso A
- Ye J
- Shao L
- Li Y
journal: J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00432-019-03116-6
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Crizotinib/therapeutic use
- "DNA, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Female
- Gene Fusion
- Gene Rearrangement
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Progression-Free Survival
- Transcriptome
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unique molecular features and clinical outcomes in young patients with non-small cell lung cancer harboring ALK fusion genes.
**Authors:** Tian P, Liu Y, Zeng H, Tang Y, Lizaso A, Ye J, Shao L, Li Y
**Journal:** J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00432-019-03116-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00432-019-03116-6)

## Content

1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2020 Apr;146(4):935-944. doi:
10.1007/s00432-019-03116-6. Epub 2020 Jan 1.

Unique molecular features and clinical outcomes in young patients with non-small
cell lung cancer harboring ALK fusion genes.

Tian P(1)(2), Liu Y(1), Zeng H(1), Tang Y(3), Lizaso A(4), Ye J(4), Shao L(4),
Li Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, No. 37 Guo Xue Alley, Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan, China.
(2)Lung Cancer Treatment Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
Sichuan, China.
(4)Burning Rock Biotech, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(5)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, No. 37 Guo Xue Alley, Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan, China.
lunlunhx@qq.com.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to determine the molecular features and clinical
outcomes of young patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring ALK
fusion genes.
METHODS: We interrogated the genomic profile of 1652 patients with lung cancer
who underwent targeted next-generation sequencing to screen for candidate
oncogenic drivers using histological specimens acquired from January 2016 to
December 2018.
RESULTS: ALK fusions were identified in 101 NSCLC patients, and 52 of them were
diagnosed before the age of 50 years (52/367, 14.2%). Of the 52 patients with
early-onset disease, 22 (42.3%) were male and 43 (82.7%) never smoked; the
median patient age was 44 years (range 28-50 years). The most frequently
occurring ALK fusion partner was EML4, which was identified in 80.8% (42/52) of
young patients. Compared to the older patients, patients with early-onset
disease were more likely to harbor EML4-ALK variant 1 (38.5% vs. 14.3%;
P = 0.007). We also identified rare ALK fusions, including CHRNA7-ALK,
TACR1-ALK, HIP1-ALK, DYSF-ALK and ITGAV-ALK, in patients with early-onset
disease, and patients with these fusions responded well to crizotinib treatment.
A statistically significant difference was observed in progression-free survival
(PFS) between the young patients and older patients who received crizotinib as
the first-line therapy (17.5 months vs 9.0 months, P = 0.048). However, the
median PFS of young patients harboring concurrent TP53 mutations was only
6.2 months.
CONCLUSION: Unique genetic characteristics were found in ALK-rearranged NSCLC
patients with early disease onset, and these patients responded better to
crizotinib and had longer PFS compared to patients with later disease onset.
However, patients with concomitant TP53 mutations may not have a significant
response to treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-019-03116-6
PMCID: PMC11804450
PMID: 31894386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared that they have no conflict
of interest.
