---
reference_id: "PMID:29482894"
title: Review of immune tolerance induction in hemophilia A.
authors:
- Schep SJ
- Schutgens REG
- Fischer K
- Boes ML
journal: Blood Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2018.02.003
keywords:
- Adaptive Immunity
- Animals
- "B-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Blood Coagulation Factor Inhibitors
- "Factor VIII/chemistry, immunology, therapeutic use"
- "Hemophilia A/blood, drug therapy, immunology"
- Humans
- Immune Tolerance
- Isoantibodies/immunology
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of immune tolerance induction in hemophilia A.
**Authors:** Schep SJ, Schutgens REG, Fischer K, Boes ML
**Journal:** Blood Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.blre.2018.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.blre.2018.02.003)

## Content

1. Blood Rev. 2018 Jul;32(4):326-338. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2018.02.003. Epub 2018
Feb 15.

Review of immune tolerance induction in hemophilia A.

Schep SJ(1), Schutgens REG(2), Fischer K(3), Boes ML(4).

Author information:
(1)Van Creveldkliniek/Laboratory of Translational Immunology, University Medical
Center Utrecht, University Utrecht, Lundlaan 6, 3584 EA Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: s.j.schep-2@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Van Creveldkliniek, University Medical Center Utrecht, University Utrecht,
Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
R.Schutgens@umcutrecht.nl.
(3)Van Creveldkliniek, University Medical Center Utrecht, University Utrecht,
Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
K.Fischer@umcutrecht.nl.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Laboratory of Translational Immunology, University
Medical Center Utrecht, University Utrecht, Lundlaan 6, 3584 EA Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: M.L.Boes@umcutrecht.nl.

At first sight the bleeding disorder hemophilia A seems to have little in common
with immune disorders, but immunology research intersects with other disciplines
including hematology. Nowadays, the most important complication in the treatment
of hemophilia A is the development of neutralizing antibodies (inhibitors)
against exogenous administered factor VIII (FVIII), which occurs in
approximately 30% of all patients with severe hemophilia A. This antibody
response renders FVIII replacement therapy ineffective, thereby increasing the
risk for uncontrollable bleeding and morbidity, decreasing quality of life and
increasing healthcare costs. The only proven effective therapy to eradicate
these inhibitors is immune-based. Using a protocol called "immune tolerance
induction" (ITI), the repeated and frequent administration of FVIII under
non-inflammatory conditions downregulates the established antibody response and
induces immune tolerance. There has been progress in research clarifying the
mechanisms that mediate tolerance induction using ITI, both from patient studies
and from research in cell culture and animal-based models. Peripheral tolerance
induction to FVIII involves the apoptosis of antigen-specific B-memory cells,
anergy induction in antigen-specific effector T-cells (Teff), induction of
regulatory T-cells (Treg) and the formation of anti-idiotypic antibodies. In
this review hemophilia A will be used as an example to discuss current concepts
of tolerance induction as they are applied in patient care. Where possible, we
will extrapolate tolerance findings in hemophilia A to related pathways known to
affect auto-immune disorders or allergy.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2018.02.003
PMID: 29482894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
