---
reference_id: "PMID:38862727"
title: Both Enantiomers of 2-Hydroxyglutarate Modulate the Metabolism of Cultured Human Neuroblastoma Cells.
authors:
- Gondáš E
- Baranovičová E
- Bystrický P
- Šofranko J
- Evinová A
- Dohál M
- Hatoková Z
- Murín R
journal: Neurochem Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11064-024-04188-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Both Enantiomers of 2-Hydroxyglutarate Modulate the Metabolism of Cultured Human Neuroblastoma Cells.
**Authors:** Gondáš E, Baranovičová E, Bystrický P, Šofranko J, Evinová A, Dohál M, Hatoková Z, Murín R
**Journal:** Neurochem Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11064-024-04188-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-024-04188-8)

## Content

1. Neurochem Res. 2024 Sep;49(9):2480-2490. doi: 10.1007/s11064-024-04188-8. Epub
 2024 Jun 12.

Both Enantiomers of 2-Hydroxyglutarate Modulate the Metabolism of Cultured Human 
Neuroblastoma Cells.

Gondáš E(1)(2), Baranovičová E(3), Bystrický P(4), Šofranko J(1), Evinová A(3), 
Dohál M(3), Hatoková Z(3), Murín R(5)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, 
Comenius University in Bratislava, Malá hora 4D, 036 01, Martin, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Comenius 
University in Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(3)Biomedical Centre Martin, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Comenius 
University in Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Analysis and Nuclear Pharmacy, Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Comenius University in Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(5)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, 
Comenius University in Bratislava, Malá hora 4D, 036 01, Martin, Slovakia. 
murin@jfmed.uniba.sk.

Elevated levels of D-2-hydroxyglutarate (D-2HG) and L-2-hydroxyglutarate (L-2HG) 
in the brain are associated with various pathological conditions, potentially 
contributing to neurological symptoms and neurodegeneration. Previous studies on 
animal models have revealed their capability to interfere with several cellular 
processes, including mitochondrial metabolism. Both enantiomers competitively 
inhibit the enzymatic activity of 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases. These 
enzymes also execute several signaling cascades and regulate the level of 
covalent modifications on nucleic acids or proteins, e.g., methylation, 
hydroxylation, or ubiquitination, with an effect on epigenetic regulation of 
gene expression, protein stability, and intracellular signaling. To investigate 
the potential impact of 2HG enantiomers on human neuronal cells, we utilized the 
SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cell line as a model. We employed proton nuclear 
magnetic resonance (1H-NMR) spectroscopy of culture media that provided 
high-resolution insights into the changes in the content of metabolites. 
Concurrently, we performed biochemical assays to complement the 1H-NMR findings 
and to estimate the activities of lactate and 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases. 
Our results reveal that both 2HG enantiomers can influence the cellular 
metabolism of human neuroblastoma cells on multiple levels. Specifically, both 
enantiomers of 2HG comparably stimulate anaerobic metabolism of glucose and 
inhibit the uptake of several essential amino acids from the culture media. In 
this respect, both 2HG enantiomers decreased the catabolism capability of cells 
to incorporate the leucine-derived carbon atoms into their metabolism and to 
generate the ketone bodies. These results provide evidence that both enantiomers 
of 2HG have the potential to influence the metabolic and molecular aspects of 
human cells. Furthermore, we may propose that increased levels of 2HG 
enantiomers in the brain parenchyma may alter brain metabolism features, 
potentially contributing to the etiology of neurological symptoms in patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-024-04188-8
PMCID: PMC11310259
PMID: 38862727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.