---
reference_id: "PMID:37022340"
title: Recent insights into the networking of CLN genes and proteins in mammalian cells.
authors:
- Huber RJ
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jnc.15822
keywords:
- Animals
- Child
- Humans
- Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/metabolism
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Mutation
- Neurons/metabolism
- Phosphoproteins/genetics
- Mammals/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent insights into the networking of CLN genes and proteins in mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Huber RJ
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jnc.15822](https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.15822)

## Content

1. J Neurochem. 2023 Jun;165(5):643-659. doi: 10.1111/jnc.15822. Epub 2023 Apr
28.

Recent insights into the networking of CLN genes and proteins in mammalian 
cells.

Huber RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Trent University, Peterborough, Ontario, Canada.

Ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal (CLN) genes encode 13 proteins that localize 
throughout the endomembrane system to regulate a variety of cellular processes. 
In humans, mutations in CLN genes cause a devastating form of neurodegeneration 
called neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL), commonly known as Batten disease. 
Each CLN gene is associated with a specific subtype of the disease that differ 
from each other in severity and age of onset. The NCLs affect all ages and 
ethnicities worldwide but primarily affect children. The pathology underlying 
the NCLs is poorly understood, which has prevented the development of a cure or 
effective therapy for most subtypes of the disease. A growing body of literature 
supports the networking of CLN genes and proteins within cells, which aligns 
with the broadly similar cellular and clinical manifestations among the 
different subtypes of NCL. Here, all relevant literature is reviewed to provide 
a comprehensive overview of our current understanding of how CLN genes and 
proteins are networked in mammalian cells with an aim toward revealing new 
molecular targets for therapy development. Intriguingly, CLN gene and protein 
networking extends beyond the NCLs as recent work has linked several CLN genes 
and proteins to other forms of neurodegeneration such as Alzheimer's disease and 
Parkinson's disease. Thus, a deeper understanding of the pathways and cellular 
processes impacted by mutations in CLN genes will not only strengthen our 
knowledge of the pathological mechanisms underlying the NCLs but may also 
provide new insight into related forms of neurodegeneration.

© 2023 The Author. Journal of Neurochemistry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.15822
PMID: 37022340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]