---
reference_id: "PMID:38897209"
title: Therapeutic potential of human microglia transplantation in a chimeric model of CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy.
authors:
- Chadarevian JP
- Hasselmann J
- Lahian A
- Capocchi JK
- Escobar A
- Lim TE
- Le L
- Tu C
- Nguyen J
- Kiani Shabestari S
- Carlen-Jones W
- Gandhi S
- Bu G
- Hume DA
- Pridans C
- Wszolek ZK
- Spitale RC
- Davtyan H
- Blurton-Jones M
journal: Neuron
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.05.023
keywords:
- Animals
- Microglia/metabolism
- Leukoencephalopathies/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/transplantation
- "Receptors, Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/genetics"
- Gliosis
- "Receptor, Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic potential of human microglia transplantation in a chimeric model of CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy.
**Authors:** Chadarevian JP, Hasselmann J, Lahian A, Capocchi JK, Escobar A, Lim TE, Le L, Tu C, Nguyen J, Kiani Shabestari S, Carlen-Jones W, Gandhi S, Bu G, Hume DA, Pridans C, Wszolek ZK, Spitale RC, Davtyan H, Blurton-Jones M
**Journal:** Neuron (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2024.05.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2024.05.023)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2024 Aug 21;112(16):2686-2707.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.05.023. 
Epub 2024 Jun 18.

Therapeutic potential of human microglia transplantation in a chimeric model of 
CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy.

Chadarevian JP(1), Hasselmann J(2), Lahian A(1), Capocchi JK(3), Escobar A(4), 
Lim TE(2), Le L(3), Tu C(2), Nguyen J(3), Kiani Shabestari S(5), Carlen-Jones 
W(3), Gandhi S(6), Bu G(7), Hume DA(8), Pridans C(9), Wszolek ZK(10), Spitale 
RC(11), Davtyan H(12), Blurton-Jones M(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology & Behavior, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, CA, USA; Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, 
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell 
Research Center, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(2)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell Research 
Center, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(3)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(4)Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell Research Center, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurobiology & Behavior, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, CA, USA; Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell Research Center, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurobiology & Behavior, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, CA, USA.
(7)Division of Life Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 
Hong Kong, China.
(8)Mater Research Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(9)University of Edinburgh, University of Edinburgh Center for Inflammation 
Research, Edinburgh, UK.
(10)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(11)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, CA, USA.
(12)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell Research 
Center, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
hdavtyan@uci.edu.
(13)Department of Neurobiology & Behavior, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, CA, USA; Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, 
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell 
Research Center, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA. Electronic 
address: mblurton@uci.edu.

Microglia replacement strategies are increasingly being considered for the 
treatment of primary microgliopathies like adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with 
axonal spheroids and pigmented glia (ALSP). However, available mouse models fail 
to recapitulate the diverse neuropathologies and reduced microglia numbers 
observed in patients. In this study, we generated a xenotolerant mouse model 
lacking the fms-intronic regulatory element (FIRE) enhancer within Csf1r, which 
develops nearly all the hallmark pathologies associated with ALSP. Remarkably, 
transplantation of human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived microglial 
(iMG) progenitors restores a homeostatic microglial signature and prevents the 
development of axonal spheroids, white matter abnormalities, reactive 
astrocytosis, and brain calcifications. Furthermore, transplantation of 
CRISPR-corrected ALSP-patient-derived iMG reverses pre-existing spheroids, 
astrogliosis, and calcification pathologies. Together with the accompanying 
study by Munro and colleagues, our results demonstrate the utility of FIRE mice 
to model ALSP and provide compelling evidence that iMG transplantation could 
offer a promising new therapeutic strategy for ALSP and perhaps other 
microglia-associated neurological disorders.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.05.023
PMCID: PMC12357648
PMID: 38897209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests J.P.C., J.H., R.C.S., 
S.G. H.D., and M.B.-J. are co-inventors on patent applications filed by the 
University of California Regents (US 63/169,578) related to genetic modification 
of cells to confer resistance to CSF1R antagonists and (US 63/388,766) related 
to transplantation of stem-cell-derived microglia to treat leukodystrophies. 
M.B.-J. is a co-inventor of patent application WO/2018/160496, related to the 
differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into microglia. M.B.-J., S.G., 
and R.C.S. are co-founders of NovoGlia Inc. Z.K.W. serves as principal 
investigator (PI) or co-PI on Biohaven Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (BHV4157-206) and 
Vigil Neuroscience, Inc. (VGL101-01.002, VGL101-01.201, PET tracer development 
protocol, Csf1r biomarker and repository project, and ultra-high-field MRI in 
the diagnosis and management of CSF1R-related adult-onset leukoencephalopathy 
with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia) projects/grants. He serves as co-PI of 
the Mayo Clinic APDA Center for Advanced Research; as an external advisory board 
member for Vigil Neuroscience, Inc.; and as a consultant on neurodegenerative 
medical research for Eli Lilli & Company.