---
reference_id: "PMID:24372186"
title: "G6PD deficiency: a classic example of pharmacogenetics with on-going clinical implications."
authors:
- Luzzatto L
- Seneca E
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/bjh.12665
content_type: abstract_only
---

# G6PD deficiency: a classic example of pharmacogenetics with on-going clinical implications.
**Authors:** Luzzatto L, Seneca E
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjh.12665](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjh.12665)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2014 Feb;164(4):469-80. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12665. Epub 2013 Dec
28.

G6PD deficiency: a classic example of pharmacogenetics with on-going clinical 
implications.

Luzzatto L(1), Seneca E.

Author information:
(1)Istituto Toscano Tumori and Department of Haematology, University of 
Florence, Firenze, Italy.

That primaquine and other drugs can trigger acute haemolytic anaemia in subjects 
who have an inherited mutation of the glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
gene has been known for over half a century: however, these events still occur, 
because when giving the drug either the G6PD status of a person is not known, or 
the risk of this potentially life-threatening complication is under-estimated. 
Here we review briefly the genetic basis of G6PD deficiency, and then the 
pathophysiology and the clinical features of drug-induced haemolysis; we also 
update the list of potentially haemolytic drugs (which includes rasburicase). It 
is now clear that it is not good practice to give one of these drugs before 
testing a person for his/her G6PD status, especially in populations in whom G6PD 
deficiency is common. We discuss therefore how G6PD testing can be done 
reconciling safety with cost; this is once again becoming of public health 
importance, as more countries are moving along the pathway of malaria 
elimination, that might require mass administration of primaquine. Finally, we 
sketch the triangular relationship between malaria, antimalarials such as 
primaquine, and G6PD deficiency: which is to some extent protective against 
malaria, but also a genetically determined hazard when taking primaquine.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.12665
PMCID: PMC4153881
PMID: 24372186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]