---
reference_id: "PMID:33821796"
title: An NKX2-1/ERK/WNT feedback loop modulates gastric identity and response to targeted therapy in lung adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Zewdu R
- Mehrabad EM
- Ingram K
- Fang P
- Gillis KL
- Camolotto SA
- Orstad G
- Jones A
- Mendoza MC
- Spike BT
- Snyder EL
journal: Elife
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.66788
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma of Lung/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Cell Differentiation/drug effects
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Lineage
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases/metabolism
- "Feedback, Physiological"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "Mice, 129 Strain"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Mutation
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Thyroid Nuclear Factor 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Wnt Proteins/metabolism
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An NKX2-1/ERK/WNT feedback loop modulates gastric identity and response to targeted therapy in lung adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Zewdu R, Mehrabad EM, Ingram K, Fang P, Gillis KL, Camolotto SA, Orstad G, Jones A, Mendoza MC, Spike BT, Snyder EL
**Journal:** Elife (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.66788](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.66788)

## Content

1. Elife. 2021 Apr 6;10:e66788. doi: 10.7554/eLife.66788.

An NKX2-1/ERK/WNT feedback loop modulates gastric identity and response to
targeted therapy in lung adenocarcinoma.

Zewdu R(1)(2), Mehrabad EM(1)(3), Ingram K(1)(4), Fang P(1)(4), Gillis KL(1)(4),
Camolotto SA(1)(2), Orstad G(1)(4), Jones A(1)(2), Mendoza MC(1)(4), Spike
BT(1)(4), Snyder EL(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United States.
(3)School of Computing, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United States.
(4)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
United States.

Cancer cells undergo lineage switching during natural progression and in
response to therapy. NKX2-1 loss in human and murine lung adenocarcinoma leads
to invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (IMA), a lung cancer subtype that exhibits
gastric differentiation and harbors a distinct spectrum of driver oncogenes. In
murine BRAFV600E-driven lung adenocarcinoma, NKX2-1 is required for early
tumorigenesis, but dispensable for established tumor growth. NKX2-1-deficient,
BRAFV600E-driven tumors resemble human IMA and exhibit a distinct response to
BRAF/MEK inhibitors. Whereas BRAF/MEK inhibitors drive NKX2-1-positive tumor
cells into quiescence, NKX2-1-negative cells fail to exit the cell cycle after
the same therapy. BRAF/MEK inhibitors induce cell identity switching in
NKX2-1-negative lung tumors within the gastric lineage, which is driven in part
by WNT signaling and FoxA1/2. These data elucidate a complex, reciprocal
relationship between lineage specifiers and oncogenic signaling pathways in the
regulation of lung adenocarcinoma identity that is likely to impact
lineage-specific therapeutic strategies.

Plain Language Summary: When cells become cancerous they grow uncontrollably and
spread into surrounding healthy tissue. As the cancer progresses different genes
are switched on and off which can cause tumor cells to change their identity and
transition into other types of cell. How closely tumor cells resemble the
healthy tissue they came from can influence how well the cancer responds to
treatment. Many lung cancers have an identity similar to normal lung cells.
However, some turn off a gene that codes for a protein called NKX2-1, which
leads to a type of cancer called invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (or IMA for
short). Cells from this type of cancer develop an identity similar to mucous
cells that line the surface of the stomach. But it was unclear how IMA tumor
cells that developed from a mutation in the BRAF gene are affected by this loss
in NKX2-1, and how transitioning to a different cell type impacts their response
to treatment. To investigate this, Zewdu et al. studied lung cells from patients
with IMA tumors driven by a mutation in BRAF and cells from mice that have been
genetically engineered to have a similar form of cancer. This revealed that the
NKX2-1 protein is needed to initiate the formation of cancer cells but is not
required for the growth of already established BRAF-driven tumors. Further
experiments showed that removing the gene for NKX2-1 made these cancer cells
less responsive to drugs known as BRAF/MEK inhibitors that are commonly used to
treat cancer. These drugs caused the IMA cancer cells to change their identity
and become another type of stomach cell. This identity change was found to
depend on two signaling pathways which cells use to communicate. This study
provides some explanation of how IMA lung cancers that lack the gene for NKX2-1
resist treatment with BRAF/MEK inhibitors. It also shows new relationships
between key genes in these cancers and systems for cell communication. These
findings could lead to better therapies for lung cancer, particularly for
patients whose tumor cells are deficient in NKX2-1 and therefore require
specialized treatment.

© 2021, Zewdu et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.66788
PMCID: PMC8102067
PMID: 33821796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RZ, EM, KI, PF, KG, SC, GO, AJ, MM, BS, ES No
competing interests declared
