---
reference_id: "PMID:2041443"
title: Double-blind controlled study of botulinum toxin in adductor spasmodic dysphonia.
authors:
- Troung DD
- Rontal M
- Rolnick M
- Aronson AE
- Mistura K
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1288/00005537-199106000-00010
keywords:
- "Botulinum Toxins/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Double-Blind Method
- Humans
- "Injections, Intramuscular"
- Laryngeal Muscles
- Sound Spectrography
- Spasm/drug therapy
- Speech/physiology
- "Voice Disorders/drug therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Double-blind controlled study of botulinum toxin in adductor spasmodic dysphonia.
**Authors:** Troung DD, Rontal M, Rolnick M, Aronson AE, Mistura K
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1288/00005537-199106000-00010](https://doi.org/10.1288/00005537-199106000-00010)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 1991 Jun;101(6 Pt 1):630-4. doi:
10.1288/00005537-199106000-00010.

Double-blind controlled study of botulinum toxin in adductor spasmodic 
dysphonia.

Troung DD(1), Rontal M, Rolnick M, Aronson AE, Mistura K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine Medical Center, 
Orange 92668.

The treatment of adductor spasmodic dysphonia using botulinum toxin A was 
conducted in 13 patients as a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Patients 
were diagnosed independently by an interdisciplinary team consisting of speech 
pathologists, an otolaryngologist, and a neurologist. The toxin or saline was 
injected into each thyroarytenoid muscle under electromyographic and 
laryngoscopic guidance. Botulinum toxin A markedly reduced perturbation, 
decreased fundamental frequency range, and improved the spectrographic 
characteristics of the voice. Fundamental frequency and phonation time remained 
unchanged. Patients injected with botulinum toxin A noticed significant 
improvement in their voices in comparison with the placebo-treated group. 
Excessive breathiness of the voice occurred in two patients, and mild bleeding 
in one patient in the botulinum toxin A-treated group. Injection with saline 
resulted in edema of the vocal cord in one patient. Botulinum toxin A proved to 
be an effective and safe treatment of adductor spasmodic dysphonia.

DOI: 10.1288/00005537-199106000-00010
PMID: 2041443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]