---
reference_id: "PMID:37516429"
title: Mediator complex in neurological disease.
authors:
- Schiano C
- Luongo L
- Maione S
- Napoli C
journal: Life Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2023.121986
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 8/genetics, metabolism"
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Mutation
- Mediator Complex/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mediator complex in neurological disease.
**Authors:** Schiano C, Luongo L, Maione S, Napoli C
**Journal:** Life Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lfs.2023.121986](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2023.121986)

## Content

1. Life Sci. 2023 Sep 15;329:121986. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2023.121986. Epub 2023
Jul  28.

Mediator complex in neurological disease.

Schiano C(1), Luongo L(2), Maione S(2), Napoli C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences (DAMSS), University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Italy. Electronic address: 
concetta.schiano@unicampania.it.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Campania "Luigi 
Vanvitelli", Italy; IRCSS, Neuromed, Pozzilli, Italy.
(3)Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences (DAMSS), University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Italy; Clinical Department of Internal Medicine and 
Specialistic Units, Division of Clinical Immunology and Immunohematology, 
Transfusion Medicine, and Transplant Immunology (SIMT), Regional Reference 
Laboratory of Transplant Immunology (LIT), Azienda Universitaria Policlinico 
(AOU), Italy.

Neurological diseases, including traumatic brain injuries, stroke (haemorrhagic 
and ischemic), and inherent neurodegenerative diseases cause acquired disability 
in humans, representing a leading cause of death worldwide. The Mediator complex 
(MED) is a large, evolutionarily conserved multiprotein that facilities the 
interaction between transcription factors and RNA Polymerase II in eukaryotes. 
Some MED subunits have been found altered in the brain, although their specific 
functions in neurodegenerative diseases are not fully understood. Mutations in 
MED subunits were associated with a wide range of genetic diseases for MED12, 
MED13, MED13L, MED20, MED23, MED25, and CDK8 genes. In addition, MED12 and MED23 
were deregulated in the Alzheimer's Disease. Interestingly, most of the genomic 
mutations have been found in the subunits of the kinase module. To date, there 
is only one evidence on MED1 involvement in post-stroke cognitive deficits. 
Although the underlying neurodegenerative disorders may be different, we are 
confident that the signal cascades of the biological-cognitive mechanisms of 
brain adaptation, which begin after brain deterioration, may also differ. Here, 
we analysed relevant studies in English published up to June 2023. They were 
identified through a search of electronic databases including PubMed, Medline, 
EMBASE and Scopus, including search terms such as "Mediator complex", 
"neurological disease", "brains". Thematic content analysis was conducted to 
collect and summarize all studies demonstrating MED alteration to understand the 
role of this central transcriptional regulatory complex in the brain. Improved 
and deeper knowledge of the regulatory mechanisms in neurological diseases can 
increase the ability of physicians to predict onset and progression, thereby 
improving diagnostic care and providing appropriate treatment decisions.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2023.121986
PMID: 37516429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.