---
reference_id: "PMID:17133502"
title: Progression of tremor and ataxia in male carriers of the FMR1 premutation.
authors:
- Leehey MA
- Berry-Kravis E
- Min SJ
- Hall DA
- Rice CD
- Zhang L
- Grigsby J
- Greco CM
- Reynolds A
- Lara R
- Cogswell J
- Jacquemont S
- Hessl DR
- Tassone F
- Hagerman R
- Hagerman PJ
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/mds.21252
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Ataxia/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- Disease Progression
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1/genetics, physiology"
- Gene Silencing/physiology
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Point Mutation/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
- Time Factors
- "Tremor/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progression of tremor and ataxia in male carriers of the FMR1 premutation.
**Authors:** Leehey MA, Berry-Kravis E, Min SJ, Hall DA, Rice CD, Zhang L, Grigsby J, Greco CM, Reynolds A, Lara R, Cogswell J, Jacquemont S, Hessl DR, Tassone F, Hagerman R, Hagerman PJ
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.21252](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.21252)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2007 Jan 15;22(2):203-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.21252.

Progression of tremor and ataxia in male carriers of the FMR1 premutation.

Leehey MA(1), Berry-Kravis E, Min SJ, Hall DA, Rice CD, Zhang L, Grigsby J, 
Greco CM, Reynolds A, Lara R, Cogswell J, Jacquemont S, Hessl DR, Tassone F, 
Hagerman R, Hagerman PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences 
Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA. maureen.leehey@uchsc.edu

Premutation alleles of the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene give rise 
to a late-onset movement disorder, fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome 
(FXTAS), characterized by progressive intention tremor and gait ataxia, with 
associated dementia and global brain atrophy. The natural history of FXTAS is 
largely unknown. To address this issue, a family-based, retrospective, 
longitudinal study was conducted with a cohort of 55 male premutation carriers. 
Analysis of the progression of the major motor signs of FXTAS, tremor and 
ataxia, shows that tremor usually occurs first, with median onset at 
approximately 60 years of age. From the onset of the initial motor sign, median 
delay of onset of ataxia was 2 years; onset of falls, 6 years; dependence on a 
walking aid, 15 years; and death, 21 years. Preliminary data on life expectancy 
are variable, with a range from 5 to 25 years.

(c) 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21252
PMID: 17133502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]