---
reference_id: "PMID:29383837"
title: Further delineation of Temtamy syndrome of corpus callosum and ocular abnormalities.
authors:
- Alrakaf L
- Al-Owain MA
- Busehail M
- Alotaibi MA
- Monies D
- Aldhalaan HM
- Alhashem A
- Al-Hassnan ZN
- Rahbeeni ZA
- Murshedi FA
- Ani NA
- Al-Maawali A
- Ibrahim NA
- Abdulwahab FM
- Alsagob M
- Hashem MO
- Ramadan W
- Abouelhoda M
- Meyer BF
- Kaya N
- Maddirevula S
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38615
keywords:
- "Agenesis of Corpus Callosum/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Alleles
- "Coloboma/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Eye Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- Facies
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Further delineation of Temtamy syndrome of corpus callosum and ocular abnormalities.
**Authors:** Alrakaf L, Al-Owain MA, Busehail M, Alotaibi MA, Monies D, Aldhalaan HM, Alhashem A, Al-Hassnan ZN, Rahbeeni ZA, Murshedi FA, Ani NA, Al-Maawali A, Ibrahim NA, Abdulwahab FM, Alsagob M, Hashem MO, Ramadan W, Abouelhoda M, Meyer BF, Kaya N, Maddirevula S, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38615](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38615)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Mar;176(3):715-721. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38615. Epub
2018  Jan 31.

Further delineation of Temtamy syndrome of corpus callosum and ocular 
abnormalities.

Alrakaf L(1), Al-Owain MA(2), Busehail M(2), Alotaibi MA(3), Monies D(1)(4), 
Aldhalaan HM(5), Alhashem A(6), Al-Hassnan ZN(2)(7), Rahbeeni ZA(2), Murshedi 
FA(8), Ani NA(8)(9), Al-Maawali A(8)(9), Ibrahim NA(1), Abdulwahab FM(1), 
Alsagob M(1), Hashem MO(1), Ramadan W(1), Abouelhoda M(1)(4), Meyer BF(1)(4), 
Kaya N(1), Maddirevula S(1), Alkuraya FS(1)(4)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Clinical Genetic and Metabolic Department, King Saud Medical city, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(4)Saudi Human Genome Program, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(7)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Genetic and Developmental Medicine Clinic, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, 
Muscat, Oman.
(9)Department of Genetics, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sultan 
Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman.

Temtamy syndrome is a syndromic form of intellectual disability characterized by 
ocular involvement, epilepsy and dysgenesis of the corpus callosum. After we 
initially mapped the disease to C12orf57, we noted a high carrier frequency of 
an ancient startloss founder mutation [c.1A>G; p.M1?] in our population, and 
variable phenotypic expressivity in newly identified cases. This study aims to 
combine 33 previously published patients with 23 who are described here for the 
first time to further delineate the phenotype of this syndrome. In addition to 
the known p.M1? founder, we describe four novel homozygous variants, thus 
increasing the number of Temtamy syndrome-related C12orf57 variants to seven, 
all but one predicted to be loss of function. While all patients presented with 
intellectual disability/developmental delay, the frequency of other phenotypic 
features was variable: 73.2% (41/56) had epilepsy, 63% (34/54) had corpus 
callosal abnormalities, 14.5% (8/55) had coloboma, and 16.4% (9/55) had 
microphthalmia. Our analysis also revealed a high frequency of less recognized 
features such as congenital heart disease (51.4%), and brain white matter 
abnormalities (38%, 19/50). We conclude that C12orf57 variants should be 
considered in the etiology of developmental delay/intellectual disability, even 
when typical syndromic features are lacking, especially in those who trace their 
ancestry to Saudi Arabia where a founder C12orf57 mutation is among the most 
common recessive causes of intellectual disability.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38615
PMID: 29383837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]