---
reference_id: "PMID:9764363"
title: "Sexual and mother-to-child transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1: a review."
authors:
- Chermann JC
journal: Am J Reprod Immunol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0897.1998.tb00411.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sexual and mother-to-child transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1: a review.
**Authors:** Chermann JC
**Journal:** Am J Reprod Immunol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0897.1998.tb00411.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0897.1998.tb00411.x)

## Content

1. Am J Reprod Immunol. 1998 Sep;40(3):183-6. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0897.1998.tb00411.x.

Sexual and mother-to-child transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus type 
1: a review.

Chermann JC(1).

Author information:
(1)INSERM Unité de Recherche sur les Rétrovirus et Maladies, Technologique de 
Luminy, Marseille, France.

PROBLEM: Sexual and mother-to-child transmission of the human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) type 1 occurs only with a low percentage of infection. Many 
instances of sexual intercourse result in no transmission, and only 20% of 
children are infected from seropositive mothers (3% in mothers treated with 
azidothymidine).
METHOD OF STUDY: We analyzed the presence of HIV in various ejaculates of the 
same HIV-infected patients, as well as in the cervico-vaginal fluid. We have 
studied the mechanism of transmission from mother to child, by analyzing the 
cell-to-cell transmission in the trophoblast.
RESULTS: Some ejaculates collected at different times from the same HIV-infected 
males are free of virus, explaining the low rate of sexual transmission. We 
never found HIV in mobile spermatozoa. The trophoblast can be infected by HIV 
with a strain dependence and also transiently. By analyzing the tissue of the 
fetus, it was found that only some organs are infected, confirming the 
cell-to-cell transmission between the mother and child and not a true vertical 
transmission through the germinal lines.
CONCLUSIONS: HIV is not always present in the genital secretion, explaining the 
low rate of sexual transmission. Mother-to-child transmission occurs during 
pregnancy but often after the second trimester and at delivery after 
cell-to-cell or blood transmission, respectively.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0897.1998.tb00411.x
PMID: 9764363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]