---
reference_id: "PMID:27823605"
title: Lipodystrophy Syndromes.
authors:
- Hussain I
- Garg A
journal: Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ecl.2016.06.012
keywords:
- Fatty Liver/complications
- HIV Infections/complications
- Humans
- Hypertriglyceridemia/complications
- Insulin Resistance
- "Lipodystrophy/classification, physiopathology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lipodystrophy Syndromes.
**Authors:** Hussain I, Garg A
**Journal:** Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ecl.2016.06.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecl.2016.06.012)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2016 Dec;45(4):783-797. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecl.2016.06.012. Epub 2016 Oct 6.

Lipodystrophy Syndromes.

Hussain I(1), Garg A(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern 
Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-8537, USA.
(2)Division of Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Center for Human Nutrition, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry 
Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-8537, USA. Electronic address: 
abhimanyu.garg@utsouthwestern.edu.

Lipodystrophies are heterogeneous disorders characterized by varying degrees of 
body fat loss and predisposition to insulin resistance and its metabolic 
complications. They are subclassified depending on degree of fat loss and 
whether the disorder is genetic or acquired. The two most common genetic 
varieties include congenital generalized lipodystrophy and familial partial 
lipodystrophy; the two most common acquired varieties include acquired 
generalized lipodystrophy and acquired partial lipodystrophy. Highly active 
antiretroviral therapy-induced lipodystrophy in patients infected with human 
immunodeficiency virus and drug-induced localized lipodystrophy are common 
subtypes. The metabolic abnormalities associated with lipodystrophy include 
insulin resistance, hypertriglyceridemia, and hepatic steatosis. Management 
focuses on preventing and treating metabolic complications.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecl.2016.06.012
PMCID: PMC7590232
PMID: 27823605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]