---
reference_id: "PMID:27603525"
title: "Statins in Asthma: A Closer Look into the Pharmacological Mechanism of Action."
authors:
- Al-Sawalha NA
- Knoll BJ
journal: Pharmacology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000449062
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Statins in Asthma: A Closer Look into the Pharmacological Mechanism of Action.
**Authors:** Al-Sawalha NA, Knoll BJ
**Journal:** Pharmacology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000449062](https://doi.org/10.1159/000449062)

## Content

1. Pharmacology. 2016;98(5-6):279-283. doi: 10.1159/000449062. Epub 2016 Sep 8.

Statins in Asthma: A Closer Look into the Pharmacological Mechanism of Action.

Al-Sawalha NA(1), Knoll BJ.

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, 
Jordan.

The effect of stains in asthma is mediated through targeting several signaling 
molecules that are involved in the development of asthma phenotype. In vitro and 
in vivo studies revealed that statins reduce airway smooth muscle cells 
proliferation and inflammatory mediators' release. Statins reduce chemokine 
release and mucus production from airway epithelial cells besides attenuating 
subepithelial fibrosis and eosinophils recruitment. In acute and chronic 
allergen driven animal models of asthma, statins reduce airway 
hyper-responsiveness, inflammation and remodeling. However, the effectiveness of 
statins in clinical trials results in contradictory conclusions based on study 
design and treatment protocol. Therefore, more clinical trials are needed to 
evaluate their role in asthma patients.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000449062
PMID: 27603525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]