---
reference_id: "PMID:37036722"
title: "Efficacy and Safety of Avalglucosidase Alfa in Patients With Late-Onset Pompe Disease After 97 Weeks: A Phase 3 Randomized Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Kishnani PS
- Diaz-Manera J
- Toscano A
- Clemens PR
- Ladha S
- Berger KI
- Kushlaf H
- Straub V
- Carvalho G
- Mozaffar T
- Roberts M
- Attarian S
- Chien YH
- Choi YC
- Day JW
- Erdem-Ozdamar S
- Illarioshkin S
- Goker-Alpan O
- Kostera-Pruszczyk A
- van der Ploeg AT
- An Haack K
- Huynh-Ba O
- Tammireddy S
- Thibault N
- Zhou T
- Dimachkie MM
- Schoser B
- COMET Investigator Group
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2023.0552
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Female
- Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/drug therapy
- Quality of Life
- Treatment Outcome
- Vital Capacity
- Double-Blind Method
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Avalglucosidase Alfa in Patients With Late-Onset Pompe Disease After 97 Weeks: A Phase 3 Randomized Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Kishnani PS, Diaz-Manera J, Toscano A, Clemens PR, Ladha S, Berger KI, Kushlaf H, Straub V, Carvalho G, Mozaffar T, Roberts M, Attarian S, Chien YH, Choi YC, Day JW, Erdem-Ozdamar S, Illarioshkin S, Goker-Alpan O, Kostera-Pruszczyk A, van der Ploeg AT, An Haack K, Huynh-Ba O, Tammireddy S, Thibault N, Zhou T, Dimachkie MM, Schoser B, COMET Investigator Group
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2023.0552](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2023.0552)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2023 Jun 1;80(6):558-567. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2023.0552.

Efficacy and Safety of Avalglucosidase Alfa in Patients With Late-Onset Pompe
Disease After 97 Weeks: A Phase 3 Randomized Clinical Trial.

Kishnani PS(1), Diaz-Manera J(2), Toscano A(3), Clemens PR(4)(5), Ladha S(6),
Berger KI(7)(8), Kushlaf H(9)(10), Straub V(2), Carvalho G(11), Mozaffar T(12),
Roberts M(13), Attarian S(14), Chien YH(15), Choi YC(16), Day JW(17)(18),
Erdem-Ozdamar S(19), Illarioshkin S(20), Goker-Alpan O(21), Kostera-Pruszczyk
A(22), van der Ploeg AT(23), An Haack K(24), Huynh-Ba O(24), Tammireddy S(25),
Thibault N(25), Zhou T(25), Dimachkie MM(26), Schoser B(27); COMET Investigator
Group.

Collaborators: Behin A, Boentert M, Carvalho G, Chahin N, Charrow J, Deegan P,
Durmus Tekce H, Duval F, Genge A, Gutmann L, Henderson RD, Hennermann JB, Hiwot
T, Hughes D, Karaa A, Karam C, Kautzky-Willer A, Komaki H, Laforet P, Longo N,
Malinova V, Maré R, Maxit C, Mengel E, Moggio MG, Molnár MJ, Mongini TE,
Nadaj-Pakleza A, Nascimento Osorio A, Noury JB, Oliveira ASB, Parman Y, Pena L,
Remiche G, Sciacco M, Shieh PBS, Smith C, Stulnig T, Taithe F, Tard C,
Tarnopolsky M, Vorgerd M, Whitley C, Young P, Alonso-Pérez J, Altemus P,
Aubé-Nathier AC, Avelar JB, Bailey C, Bekircan-Kurt CE, Billy J, Boschi S, Brown
KE, Carrera Garcia L, Chase L, Cirne H, Danjoux L, Davion JB, DeArmey S,
Fedotova E, Gandolfo E, Grosz Z, Guellec D, Guettsches AK, Guglieri M, Hatcher
E, Helms S, Hufgard-Leitner M, Klyushnikov SA, Langton J, Linková L, Mavroudakis
N, Mazurová S, Mori M, Müller-Miny L, Musumeci O, Nance CS, Natera-de Benito D,
Neel R, Niizawa GA, Noll L, Ortega E, Pasnoor M, Pautot V, Potulska-Chromik A,
Pugliese A, Questienne C, Ramos Lopes M, Reyes-Leiva D, Riedl M, Rugiero MF,
Salort-Campana E, Sgobbi Souza PV, Sole G, Solera L, Souto Lopes S, Specht S,
Statland J, Swenson A, Tan CY, Tizon S, van der Beek NAME, van Kooten HA, Wencel
M, Wenninger S, Zagnoli F.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.
(2)Newcastle University John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre,
Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Reference Center for Rare
Neuromuscular Disorders, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(5)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(6)Gregory W. Fulton ALS and Neuromuscular Center, Barrow Neurological
Institute, Phoenix, Arizona.
(7)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, NYU Grossman School
of Medicine, New York, New York.
(8)André Cournand Pulmonary Physiology Laboratory, Bellevue Hospital, New York,
New York.
(9)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(11)Instituto Chronos de Apoio à Pesquisa, Brasília, Brazil.
(12)Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, Orange.
(13)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, United Kingdom.
(14)Referral Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases and ALS, European Reference
Network Neuromuscular Diseases, Hôpital La Timone, Marseille, France.
(15)Department of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, National Taiwan University
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(16)Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University, College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.
(17)Department of Neurology, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(19)Department of Neurology, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey.
(20)Research Center of Neurology, Moscow, Russia.
(21)Lysosomal and Rare Disorders Research and Treatment Center, Fairfax,
Virginia.
(22)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(23)Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus MC, University Medical
Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(24)Sanofi, Chilly-Mazarin, France.
(25)Sanofi, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(26)University of Kansas Medical Center, Department of Neurology, Kansas City.
(27)Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Department of Neurology, LMU Klinikum, München,
München, Germany.

IMPORTANCE: In the previously reported Comparative Enzyme Replacement Trial With
neoGAA Versus rhGAA (COMET) trial, avalglucosidase alfa treatment for 49 weeks
showed clinically meaningful improvements in upright forced vital capacity (FVC)
percent predicted and 6-minute walk test (6MWT) compared with alglucosidase
alfa.
OBJECTIVE: To report avalglucosidase alfa treatment outcomes during the COMET
trial extension.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This phase 3 double-blind randomized clinical
trial with crossover in the extension period enrolled patients 3 years and older
with previously untreated late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) between November 2,
2016, and February 10, 2021, with primary analysis after 49 weeks. Patients were
treated at 55 referral centers in 20 countries. Efficacy outcomes were assessed
at 97 weeks and safety outcomes to last follow-up, with data cutoff at February
10, 2021. Data were analyzed from May to June 2021.
INTERVENTIONS: Random assignment (1:1) to receive 20 mg/kg of avalglucosidase
alfa or alglucosidase alfa by intravenous infusion every other week for 49
weeks; thereafter, all patients received 20 mg/kg of avalglucosidase alfa every
other week.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was the least squares (LS) mean
change from baseline in FVC percent predicted. Secondary outcomes included the
LS mean change from baseline in 6MWT, muscle strength, motor function, quality
of life, and disease biomarkers. Safety and tolerability were also assessed.
RESULTS: Of 100 participants from the double-blind treatment period, 95 entered
the extension period. Of these, 51 (54%) were men, and the mean (range) age was
48.3 (10-79) years. At the start of this study, mean upright FVC percent
predicted was similar between treatment arms, and 6MWT distance was greater in
the avalglucosidase alfa arm. From baseline to week 97, LS mean (SE) FVC percent
predicted increased by 2.65 (1.05) for those who continued avalglucosidase alfa
and 0.36 (1.12) for those who switched to avalglucosidase alfa. The LS mean (SE)
6MWT distance increased by 18.60 (12.01) m and 4.56 (12.44) m, respectively. For
participants who switched to avalglucosidase alfa, FVC percent predicted
remained stable (LS mean [SE] change from week 49 to 97, 0.09 [0.88]) and 6MWT
distance improved (LS mean [SE] change from week 49 to 97, 5.33 [10.81] m).
Potentially treatment-related adverse events were reported in 29 patients
(56.9%) who continued avalglucosidase alfa and in 25 patients (56.8%) who
switched.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this randomized clinical trial extension,
maintenance of positive clinical outcomes was demonstrated for patients
continuing avalglucosidase alfa treatment and, to a lesser extent, patients who
switched from alglucosidase alfa. No new safety concerns were observed.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02782741.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2023.0552
PMCID: PMC10087094
PMID: 37036722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Kishnani
has received grants from Sanofi Genzyme, Amicus Therapeutics, and Valerion as
well as personal fees from Sanofi Genzyme, Amicus Therapeutics, Maze
Therapeutics, JCR Pharmaceutical, Vertex, and Asklepios Biopharmaceutical
(AskBio) during the conduct of the study; serves on advisory boards for Sanofi
Genzyme, Amicus Therapeutics, and Baebies; and holds equity in Asklepios
Biopharmaceutical (AskBio), Baebies, and Maze Therapeutics. Dr Diaz-Manera has
received grants from Sanofi, Spark, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Audiences as well
as personal fees from Sanofi, Amicus, Lupin, Sarepta, and PTC Therapeutics
during the conduct of the study. Dr Toscano has received personal fees from
Sanofi. Dr Clemens has received grants from Sanofi during the conduct of the
study; grants from Amicus, NS Pharma, Spark, ReveraGen Biopharma, National
Institutes of Health, and US Food and Drug Administration; institutional funding
from Foundation to Eradicate Duchenne; and personal fees from Roche, Epirium,
Spark, and NS Pharma outside the submitted work. Dr Ladha has received grants
and personal fees from Sanofi outside the submitted work. Dr Berger has received
personal fees from Sanofi during the conduct of the study as well as personal
fees from Asklepios Biopharmaceutical (AskBio), Spark, Takeda, Amicus, and
Valerion outside the submitted work. Dr Kushlaf has received grants from
Muscular Dystrophy Association and Healey ALS Platform as well as personal fees
from Sanofi, Akcea, Alexion, AstraZeneca, Argenx, Immunovant, UCB, Catalyst
Pharmaceuticals, and PTC Therapeutics outside the submitted work. Dr Straub has
received grants from Sanofi during the conduct of the study; grants from
Astellas Gene Therapy and Ultragenyx; and personal fees from AveXis, Exonics
Therapeutic, Roche, Sanofi, and Sarepta Therapeutics outside the submitted work.
Dr Mozaffar has received grants from Sanofi, Amicus, Alexion, Alnylam, Baxter,
Bio-Blast, Biogen, BioMarin, CSL Behring, Valerion, Spark, Astellas Gene
Therapy, Grifols, GlaxoSmithKline, Idera, ISIS Pharmaceuticals, National
Institutes of Health, Novartis, and Ultragenyx as well as personal fees from
Amicus, BioMarin, Idera, Grifols, Novartis, Sanofi, Ultragenyx, Maze
Therapeutics, NuFactor, Sarepta Therapeutics, and Walgreens during the conduct
of the study. Dr Roberts has received grants from Amicus; personal fees from
Sanofi, BioMarin, NIL, and Amicus; and royalties from NIL. Dr Chien has received
grants and personal fees from Sanofi outside the submitted work. Dr Day has
received grants from Biogen, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Cytokinetics, Roche, AveXis,
Sanofi, Sarepta Therapeutics, and Scholar Rock as well as personal fees from
Audentes, Biogen, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Cytokinetics, Pfizer, AveXis,
Roche/Genentech Pharmaceuticals, AMO Pharmaceuticals, and Sarepta Therapeutics.
Dr Erdem-Ozdamar has received personal fees from Sanofi-Genzyme, Pfizer, Biogen,
GlaxoSmithKline, CSL Behring, and Alexion outside the submitted work. Dr
Illarioshkin has received personal fees from Actelion, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Ever Pharma, Merz Pharma, Servier, Takeda, and Teva. Dr Goker-Alpan has received
grants from Sanofi-Genzyme during the conduct of the study; grants from Amicus,
Freeline, Genentech, Protalix, Sangamo, Sanofi, and Takeda; and personal fees
from Sanofi-Genzyme, Amicus, BioMarin, Sanofi, Shire HGT, and Takeda outside the
submitted work. Dr Kostera-Pruszczyk has received grants from Sanofi-Genzyme and
Biogen; personal fees from Sanofi-Genzyme, Biogen, PTC Therapeutics, Roche,
Novartis, Argenx, Takeda, CSL Behring, and UCB; and nonfinancial support from
Sanofi-Genzyme, Biogen, PTC Therapeutics, Roche, and CSL Behring outside the
submitted work. Dr van der Ploeg has received grants and personal fees from
Sanofi-Genzyme paid to his institution during the conduct of the study as well
as grants and personal fees from Amicus Therapeutics, Spark, and Denali paid to
his institution outside the submitted work. Dr An Haack has a patent for
US8759501 issued and a patent for PCT/US2021/037111 pending. Dr Dimachkie has
received grants, personal fees, and nonfinancial support from Sanofi during the
conduct of the study; grants from Amicus, BioMarin, Spark, Abcuro, Alexion,
Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Bristol Myers Squibb, Catalyst, Corbus, CSL Behring, US
Food and Drug Administration/Office of Orphan Products Development,
GlaxoSmithKline, Genentech, Grifols, Kezar, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, MDA,
National Institutes of Health, Novartis, Octapharma, Orphazyme, Ra Pharma/UCB,
Sarepta Therapeutics, Shire Takeda, The Myositis Association,
Viromed/Healixmith, and TMA; and personal fees from MDA, Astellas, Spark,
Abcuro, Amazentis, ArgenX, Catalyst, Covance/Labcorp, CSL Behring, Cello,
Eco-R1, Janssen, Kezar, Medlink, Momenta, NuFactor, Octapharma, Priovant,
RaPharma/UCB, RMS Medical, Roivant Sciences, Shire Takeda, Scholar Rock,
Abata/Third Rock, UCB Biopharma, and UpToDate outside the submitted work. Dr
Schoser has received grants from Amicus as well as personal fees from Sanofi,
Amicus, Taysha, Pepgen, Avrobio, Kedrion, Astellas, and Argenx outside the
submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.
