---
reference_id: "PMID:37147124"
title: "Short-term air pollution exposure and exacerbation events in mild to moderate COPD: a case-crossover study within the CanCOLD cohort."
authors:
- Ross BA
- Doiron D
- Benedetti A
- Aaron SD
- Chapman K
- Hernandez P
- Maltais F
- Marciniuk D
- O'Donnell DE
- Sin DD
- Walker BL
- Tan W
- Bourbeau J
- CanCOLD Collaborative Research Group and the Canadian Respiratory Research Network
journal: Thorax
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/thorax-2022-219619
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Short-term air pollution exposure and exacerbation events in mild to moderate COPD: a case-crossover study within the CanCOLD cohort.
**Authors:** Ross BA, Doiron D, Benedetti A, Aaron SD, Chapman K, Hernandez P, Maltais F, Marciniuk D, O'Donnell DE, Sin DD, Walker BL, Tan W, Bourbeau J, CanCOLD Collaborative Research Group and the Canadian Respiratory Research Network
**Journal:** Thorax (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/thorax-2022-219619](https://doi.org/10.1136/thorax-2022-219619)

## Content

1. Thorax. 2023 Oct;78(10):974-982. doi: 10.1136/thorax-2022-219619. Epub 2023
May  5.

Short-term air pollution exposure and exacerbation events in mild to moderate 
COPD: a case-crossover study within the CanCOLD cohort.

Ross BA(1)(2), Doiron D(1), Benedetti A(1), Aaron SD(3), Chapman K(4), Hernandez 
P(5), Maltais F(6), Marciniuk D(7), O'Donnell DE(8), Sin DD(9), Walker BL(10), 
Tan W(9), Bourbeau J(11)(2); CanCOLD Collaborative Research Group and the 
Canadian Respiratory Research Network.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit, Centre for Outcomes 
Research and Evaluation, Research Institute of the McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(3)The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.
(4)Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(5)Medicine, Dalhousie University Faculty of Medicine, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
(6)Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec, Université 
Laval, Québec, Québec, Canada.
(7)Respiratory Research Centre, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, Canada.
(8)Medicine, Queens University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, St. Paul's Hospital, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(10)Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(11)Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit, Centre for Outcomes 
Research and Evaluation, Research Institute of the McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal, Québec, Canada jean.bourbeau@mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: Infections are considered as leading causes of acute exacerbations 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Non-infectious risk factors 
such as short-term air pollution exposure may play a clinically important role. 
We sought to estimate the relationship between short-term air pollutant exposure 
and exacerbations in Canadian adults living with mild to moderate COPD.
METHODS: In this case-crossover study, exacerbations ('symptom based': ≥48 hours 
of dyspnoea/sputum volume/purulence; 'event based': 'symptom based' plus 
requiring antibiotics/corticosteroids or healthcare use) were collected 
prospectively from 449 participants with spirometry-confirmed COPD within the 
Canadian Cohort Obstructive Lung Disease. Daily nitrogen dioxide (NO2), fine 
particulate matter (PM2.5), ground-level ozone (O3), composite of NO2 and O3 
(Ox), mean temperature and relative humidity estimates were obtained from 
national databases. Time-stratified sampling of hazard and control periods on 
day '0' (day-of-event) and Lags ('-1' to '-6') were compared by fitting 
generalised estimating equation models. All data were dichotomised into 'warm' 
(May-October) and 'cool' (November-April) seasons. ORs and 95% CIs were 
estimated per IQR increase in pollutant concentrations.
RESULTS: Increased warm season ambient concentration of NO2 was associated with 
symptom-based exacerbations on Lag-3 (1.14 (1.01 to 1.29), per IQR), and 
increased cool season ambient PM2.5 was associated with symptom-based 
exacerbations on Lag-1 (1.11 (1.03 to 1.20), per IQR). There was a negative 
association between warm season ambient O3 and symptom-based events on Lag-3 
(0.73 (0.52 to 1.00), per IQR).
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term ambient NO2 and PM2.5 exposure were associated with 
increased odds of exacerbations in Canadians with mild to moderate COPD, further 
heightening the awareness of non-infectious triggers of COPD exacerbations.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/thorax-2022-219619
PMID: 37147124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: BAR reports 
grants/contracts from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Réseau 
de Recherche en Santé Respiratoire du Québec (RSRQ), Research Institute of the 
MUHC (RI MUHC), Ministère de l'Économie et de l'Innovation (MEI) Québec, McGill 
University Health Centre (MUHC) Foundation Grant, Fonds de Recherche Santé 
Québec (FRSQ), and CHEST Foundation Grant; and payments/honoraria from the 
Canadian Thoracic Society (CTS), CHEST/ACCP, Respiplus (non-profit), Alberta 
Kinesiology Association (AKA), and McGill University Continuing Professional 
Development (CPD). SDA reports payments/honoraria from AstraZeneca, GSK; and 
participation on Data Safety Monitoring/Advisory Board for AstraZeneca, GSK, and 
Sanofi. PH reports grants/contracts from Boehringer Ingelheim, Cyclomedica, 
Grifols, Vertex; consulting fees from Acceleron, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Covis, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Novartis, Sanofi, Teva, Takeda, 
Valeo; and leadership/fiduciary role in the Canadian Thoracic Society. FM 
reports grants/contracts from GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Sanofi, Novartis, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Grifols; consulting fees from AstraZeneca; 
payment/honoraria from GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Grifols, Novartis; 
and stock/stock options from Oxynov. DM reports grants/contracts from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Canadian Institute of Health Research, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Lung Association—Saskatchewan, Novartis, Sanofi, 
Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation, Schering-Plough; consulting fees from 
Alberta Health Services, Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement, Health 
Canada, Lung Association—Saskatchewan, Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term 
Care, Saskatchewan Health Authority, Yukon Health and Social Services; 
payment/honoraria from the Lung Association—Saskatchewan, American College of 
Chest Physicians; leadership/fiduciary role in the CHEST journal, Canadian 
Thoracic Society, American Thoracic Society and AARC; and is an employee of the 
University of Saskatchewan. DE O’D reports grants/contracts from AstraZeneca, 
Lung Health Foundation and Boehringer Ingelheim Canada; and payment/honoraria 
from GSK and Viajes Pacifico. BLW reports payment/honoraria from AstraZeneca, 
GSK, Sanofi; and Data Safety Monitoring/Advisory Board participation for 
AstraZeneca, GSK, and Sanofi. JB reports grants/contracts from the Canadian 
Institute of Health Research (CIHR), Réseau en santé respiratoire du FRQS, 
McGill University, McGill University Health Centre Foundation, AstraZeneca 
Canada Ltd, Boehringer Ingelheim Canada Ltd, GSK, Grifols, Novartis, Sanofil, 
Trudell Canada Ltd; and payment/honoraria from AstraZeneca Canada Ltd, 
Boehringer Ingelheim Canada Ltd, GSK, Pfizer Canada Ltd, and Trudell Canada Ltd.