---
reference_id: "PMID:34122512"
title: Four New Cases of SLC35A2-CDG With Novel Mutations and Clinical Features.
authors:
- Abuduxikuer K
- Wang JS
journal: Front Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.658786
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Four New Cases of SLC35A2-CDG With Novel Mutations and Clinical Features.
**Authors:** Abuduxikuer K, Wang JS
**Journal:** Front Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2021.658786](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2021.658786)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2021 May 27;12:658786. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.658786.
eCollection  2021.

Four New Cases of SLC35A2-CDG With Novel Mutations and Clinical Features.

Abuduxikuer K(1), Wang JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

SLC35A2-CDG is a rare type of X-linked CDG with more than 60 reported cases. We 
retrospectively analyzed clinical phenotypes and SLC35A2 genotypes of four cases 
of SLC35A2-CDG from four unrelated families of Han ethnicity in China. All 
patients had infantile onset epilepsies that were completely or partly resistant 
to multiple anti-epileptic medications or ketogenic diet. Three patients had 
severe developmental delay. All patients were female patients carrying de novo 
deleterious mutations in SLC35A2 (NM_001042498.2) gene, including one canonical 
splice-site mutation (c.426+1G > A), one large deletion (c.-322_c.274+1del), and 
two frameshift mutations leading to premature stop codon 
(c.781delC/p.Arg289ValfsTer88 and c.601delG/p.Ala201GlnfsTer148). Novel clinical 
features in some of our patients include anemia, hypertriglyceridemia, 
hypertonia, small ears, extra folds on earlobes, and maternal oligohydramnios or 
hypothyroidism during pregnancy. In one patient, concomitant Marfan syndrome was 
confirmed for having positive family history, carrying a heterozygous known 
disease-causing mutation in FBN1 gene (c.7240C > T/p.Arg2414Ter), and presence 
of typical features (rachnodactyly, ventrical septal defect, and mitral valve 
regurgitation). In conclusion, we expanded clinical phenotype and genetic 
mutation spectrum of SLC35A2-CDG by reporting four new cases with novel 
pathogenic variants and novel clinical features.

Copyright © 2021 Abuduxikuer and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.658786
PMCID: PMC8191577
PMID: 34122512

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.