---
reference_id: "PMID:22341691"
title: "[Pregnancy and antiphospholipid syndrome]."
authors:
- Costedoat-Chalumeau N
- Guettrot-Imbert G
- Leguern V
- Leroux G
- Le Thi Huong D
- Wechsler B
- Morel N
- Vauthier-Brouzes D
- Dommergues M
- Cornet A
- Aumaître O
- Pourrat O
- Piette JC
- Nizard J
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2012.01.003
keywords:
- "Abortion, Spontaneous/immunology"
- Abruptio Placentae/immunology
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/therapeutic use"
- Anticoagulants/therapeutic use
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Eclampsia/immunology
- Female
- Fetal Death/immunology
- Fetal Growth Retardation/immunology
- Follow-Up Studies
- HELLP Syndrome/immunology
- Heparin/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Oligohydramnios/immunology
- Pre-Eclampsia/immunology
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications/immunology
- Premature Birth/etiology
- Prognosis
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Pregnancy and antiphospholipid syndrome].
**Authors:** Costedoat-Chalumeau N, Guettrot-Imbert G, Leguern V, Leroux G, Le Thi Huong D, Wechsler B, Morel N, Vauthier-Brouzes D, Dommergues M, Cornet A, Aumaître O, Pourrat O, Piette JC, Nizard J
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2012.01.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2012.01.003)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2012 Apr;33(4):209-16. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2012.01.003.
Epub  2012 Feb 14.

[Pregnancy and antiphospholipid syndrome].

[Article in French]

Costedoat-Chalumeau N(1), Guettrot-Imbert G, Leguern V, Leroux G, Le Thi Huong 
D, Wechsler B, Morel N, Vauthier-Brouzes D, Dommergues M, Cornet A, Aumaître O, 
Pourrat O, Piette JC, Nizard J.

Author information:
(1)Service de médecine interne, centre de référence national pour le lupus 
systémique et le syndrome des antiphospholipides, hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
AP-HP, université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie Paris 6, 47-83, boulevard de l'Hôpital, 
75651 Paris cedex 13, France. nathalie.costedoat@gmail.com

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is associated with a risk of obstetrical 
complications, affecting both the mother and the fetus. Obstetrical APS is 
defined by a history of three consecutive spontaneous miscarriages before 10 
weeks of gestation (WG), an intra-uterine fetal death after 10 WG, or a 
premature birth before 34 WG because of severe pre-eclampsia, eclampsia or 
placental adverse outcomes (intrauterine growth retardation, oligohydramnios). 
Pregnancy in women with a diagnosis of obstetric APS is at increased risk for 
placental abruption, HELLP (Hemolysis, Elevated Liver enzymes, Low Platelet 
count) syndrome and thrombosis that may be part of a catastrophic 
antiphospholipid syndrome (CAPS). A previous thrombosis and the presence of a 
lupus anticoagulant are risk factors for pregnancy failure. A multidisciplinary 
approach, associating the internist, the anesthesiologist and the obstetrician, 
is recommended for these high-risk pregnancies. Preconception counseling is 
proposed to identify pregnancy contraindications, and to define and adapt the 
treatment prior and during the upcoming pregnancy. Heparin and low-dose aspirin 
are the main treatments. The choice between therapeutic or prophylactic doses of 
heparin will depend on the patient's medical history. The anticoagulant 
therapeutic window for delivery should be as narrow as possible and adapted to 
maternal thrombotic risk. There is a persistent maternal risk in the postpartum 
period (thrombosis, HELLP syndrome, CAPS) justifying an antithrombotic coverage 
during this period. We suggest a monthly clinical and biological monitoring 
which can be more frequent towards the end of pregnancy. The persistence of 
notches at the Doppler-ultrasound evaluation seems to be the best predictor for 
a higher risk of placental vascular complications. Treatment optimization and 
multidisciplinary antenatal care improve the prognosis of pregnancies in women 
with obstetric APS, leading to a favorable outcome most of the time.

Copyright © 2012 Société nationale Française de médecine interne (SNFMI). 
Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2012.01.003
PMID: 22341691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]