---
reference_id: "PMID:10992329"
title: Krabbe disease--clinical profile.
authors:
- Tullu MS
- Muranjan MN
- Kondurkar PP
- Bharucha BA
journal: Indian Pediatr
year: '2000'
keywords:
- Age Distribution
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Developing Countries
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- India/epidemiology
- Infant
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Sex Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Krabbe disease--clinical profile.
**Authors:** Tullu MS, Muranjan MN, Kondurkar PP, Bharucha BA
**Journal:** Indian Pediatr (2000)

## Content

1. Indian Pediatr. 2000 Sep;37(9):939-46.

Krabbe disease--clinical profile.

Tullu MS(1), Muranjan MN, Kondurkar PP, Bharucha BA.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Division, Department of Pediatrics, Seth G.S. Medical College and 
K.E.M. Hospital, Parel, Mumbai 400 012, Maharashtra, India.

OBJECTIVE: To study clinical features and investigations of children with Krabbe 
Disease (KD).
DESIGN: Retrospective.
SETTING: Genetic Clinic of a tertiary care teaching hospital.
METHODS: Hospital records of patients with enzymatically confirmed KD were 
analyzed with respect to their clinical features and investigations including 
neuroimaging (CT-scan and/or MRI). Galactocerebrosidase (GALC) activity was 
estimated photometrically in the peripheral blood leukocytes.
RESULTS: Nine children (age ranging from 2 1/2 months to 8 years) were studied, 
of which 5 had the classical infantile disease, 3 had late infantile form and 
one was diagnosed as juvenile KD. GALC levels in peripheral blood leukocytes 
were low or absent in all. Most of the children with infantile disease presented 
with neurodegeneration, seizures or fever. Optic atrophy was uncommon in our 
series (present only in a single case). Majority of the cases had elevated 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein levels and peripheral neuropathy on nerve 
conduction (NC) studies. Findings typical of KD were noted in 7 patients who 
underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The sole patient with juvenile 
disease presented with developmental delay and progressive spastic 
quadriparesis.
CONCLUSION: Krabbe disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
early infantile onset of neurodegeneration with seizures. Likewise, older 
children with progressive ataxia or spastic quadriparesis in whom the etiology 
remains obscure, must be investigated for Krabbe disease. MRI can be diagnostic 
in absence of availability of enzyme diagnosis.

PMID: 10992329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]