---
reference_id: "PMID:22595642"
title: "Neuropsychiatric lupus: the prevalence and autoantibody associations depend on the definition: results from the 1000 faces of lupus cohort."
authors:
- Borowoy AM
- Pope JE
- Silverman E
- Fortin PR
- Pineau C
- Smith CD
- Arbillaga H
- Gladman D
- Urowitz M
- Zummer M
- Hudson M
- Tucker L
- Peschken C
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.03.011
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- "American Indian or Alaska Native/ethnology, statistics & numerical data"
- "Antibodies, Antiphospholipid/blood"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Canada/epidemiology
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Health Status
- Humans
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology"
- Male
- Prevalence
- Seroepidemiologic Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychiatric lupus: the prevalence and autoantibody associations depend on the definition: results from the 1000 faces of lupus cohort.
**Authors:** Borowoy AM, Pope JE, Silverman E, Fortin PR, Pineau C, Smith CD, Arbillaga H, Gladman D, Urowitz M, Zummer M, Hudson M, Tucker L, Peschken C
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.03.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.03.011)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Oct;42(2):179-85. doi:
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.03.011. Epub 2012 May 16.

Neuropsychiatric lupus: the prevalence and autoantibody associations depend on
the definition: results from the 1000 faces of lupus cohort.

Borowoy AM(1), Pope JE, Silverman E, Fortin PR, Pineau C, Smith CD, Arbillaga H,
Gladman D, Urowitz M, Zummer M, Hudson M, Tucker L, Peschken C.

Author information:
(1)Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: The (ever) prevalence of neuropsychiatric systemic lupus
erythematosus (NPSLE) can vary widely depending on the definition used. We
determined the prevalence of NPSLE in 1000 Faces of Lupus, a large multicenter
Canadian cohort.
METHODS: Adults enrolled at 10 sites who satisfied the American College of
Rheumatology (ACR) classification for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) were
included. NPSLE was defined as (i) NPSLE by ACR classification criteria
(seizures or psychosis), (ii) ACR, SLEDAI (seizure, psychosis, organic brain
syndrome, cranial nerve disorder, headache, and cerebrovascular accident (CVA)),
SLAM (CVA, seizure, cortical dysfunction, and headache), and SLICC (cognitive
impairment, psychosis, seizures, CVA, cranial or peripheral neuropathy, and
transverse myelitis) with and (iii) without minor nonspecific NPSLE
manifestations (including mild depression, mild cognitive impairment, and
electromyogram-negative neuropathies), and (iv) by ACR and SLEDAI
neuropsychiatric (NP) indexes alone. Factors associated with NPSLE were explored
using regression models.
RESULTS: Cohort size was 1253, with mean disease 12 ± 10 years, mean age 41 ± 16
years, and 86% female. Subgroup size was dependent on the specific definition of
NPSLE. Prevalence of NPSLE was 6.4% in group (i), n = 1253 (n = 80); 38.6% in
group (ii), n = 681(n = 263); 28.7% in group (iii), n = 586 (n = 168); and 10.2%
in group (iv), n = 1125 (n = 115). In univariate analysis, Aboriginals had a
nearly 2-fold increase in frequency of NPSLE in all groups. Education level and
income were not associated with NPSLE (P = 0.32 and 0.03, respectively). As
well, number of ACR criteria, SLAM, age at diagnosis, disease duration, and
gender were not associated with NPSLE. Anti-Ro was significantly associated in
groups (i) and (iv) and antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) were increased in
groups (i), (ii), and (iii); however, this lost significance when thromboembolic
events were excluded from SLICC, SLEDAI, and SLAM indexes. In group (iv),
absence of anti-Sm was significant. In multivariate analysis, anti-Ro and aPL
(i) and anti-Ro+ and lack of anti-Sm (iv) were significant. NPSLE was not
increased in those with +anti-DNA, La, or ribonucleoprotein (RNP), lupus
anticoagulant (LAC), or anticardiolipin (aCL) antibody.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence and factors associated with NPSLE varied depending
on the definition used, was highest in Aboriginals, and may be higher if
+anti-Ro or aPL are present. SLAM and SLICC include mild subjective disease
manifestations, which contributed to a 10% higher prevalence of NPSLE compared
to a more strict definition. NPSLE may be less in this database than other
publications as its overall prevalence may be decreasing, or because of
selection bias inherent to those who enter an observational cohort. NPSLE was
associated with aPL and often anti-Ro and varied by ethnicity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.03.011
PMID: 22595642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
