---
reference_id: "PMID:30773340"
title: A Platform of Synthetic Lethal Gene Interaction Networks Reveals that the GNAQ Uveal Melanoma Oncogene Controls the Hippo Pathway through FAK.
authors:
- Feng X
- Arang N
- Rigiracciolo DC
- Lee JS
- Yeerna H
- Wang Z
- Lubrano S
- Kishore A
- Pachter JA
- König GM
- Maggiolini M
- Kostenis E
- Schlaepfer DD
- Tamayo P
- Chen Q
- Ruppin E
- Gutkind JS
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2019.01.009
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation
- Computational Biology
- Focal Adhesion Kinase 1/metabolism
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gq-G11/metabolism"
- "Genes, Lethal"
- Hippo Signaling Pathway
- Humans
- Melanoma/metabolism
- Mice
- Neoplasm Transplantation
- Phosphorylation
- Prognosis
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Survival Analysis
- Uveal Neoplasms/metabolism
- Uveal Melanoma
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# A Platform of Synthetic Lethal Gene Interaction Networks Reveals that the GNAQ Uveal Melanoma Oncogene Controls the Hippo Pathway through FAK.
**Authors:** Feng X, Arang N, Rigiracciolo DC, Lee JS, Yeerna H, Wang Z, Lubrano S, Kishore A, Pachter JA, König GM, Maggiolini M, Kostenis E, Schlaepfer DD, Tamayo P, Chen Q, Ruppin E, Gutkind JS
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2019.01.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2019.01.009)

## Content

1. Cancer Cell. 2019 Mar 18;35(3):457-472.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2019.01.009. 
Epub 2019 Feb 14.

A Platform of Synthetic Lethal Gene Interaction Networks Reveals that the GNAQ 
Uveal Melanoma Oncogene Controls the Hippo Pathway through FAK.

Feng X(1), Arang N(2), Rigiracciolo DC(3), Lee JS(4), Yeerna H(5), Wang Z(2), 
Lubrano S(5), Kishore A(5), Pachter JA(6), König GM(7), Maggiolini M(8), 
Kostenis E(7), Schlaepfer DD(5), Tamayo P(9), Chen Q(10), Ruppin E(11), Gutkind 
JS(12).

Author information:
(1)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA; State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research 
Center for Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu 610041, China.
(2)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA; Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(3)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA; Department of Pharmacy and Health and Nutritional Sciences, 
University of Calabria, Rende 87036, Italy.
(4)Cancer Data Science Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, National Institute 
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; Center for Bioinformatics and Computational 
Biology & Department of Computer Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park, 
MD 20742, USA. Electronic address: lee.joosang@gmail.com.
(5)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA.
(6)Verastem Oncology, Needham, MA, USA.
(7)Molecular, Cellular and Pharmacobiology Section, Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Biology, University of Bonn, Bonn 53115, Germany.
(8)Department of Pharmacy and Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of 
Calabria, Rende 87036, Italy.
(9)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA; Division of Medical Genetics, UC San Diego School of Medicine, La 
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for 
Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610041, China. Electronic address: qmchen@scu.edu.cn.
(11)Cancer Data Science Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; Center for Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology & Department of Computer Sciences, University of Maryland, 
College Park, MD 20742, USA. Electronic address: eyruppin@gmail.com.
(12)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA. Electronic address: sgutkind@ucsd.edu.

Activating mutations in GNAQ/GNA11, encoding Gαq G proteins, are initiating 
oncogenic events in uveal melanoma (UM). However, there are no effective 
therapies for UM. Using an integrated bioinformatics pipeline, we found that 
PTK2, encoding focal adhesion kinase (FAK), represents a candidate synthetic 
lethal gene with GNAQ activation. We show that Gαq activates FAK through 
TRIO-RhoA non-canonical Gαq-signaling, and genetic ablation or pharmacological 
inhibition of FAK inhibits UM growth. Analysis of the FAK-regulated 
transcriptome demonstrated that GNAQ stimulates YAP through FAK. Dissection of 
the underlying mechanism revealed that FAK regulates YAP by tyrosine 
phosphorylation of MOB1, inhibiting core Hippo signaling. Our findings establish 
FAK as a potential therapeutic target for UM and other Gαq-driven 
pathophysiologies that involve unrestrained YAP function.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2019.01.009
PMCID: PMC6737937
PMID: 30773340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Recent advances in omics technologies have enabled the sequencing and characterization of cancers to an unprecedented depth, revealing novel mechanisms of growth and molecular drivers of disease. Bioinformatics analyses of these data have demonstrated a large heterogeneity in genetic drivers, highlighting complex biological networks towards the identification of therapeutic targets. These large-scale genomics efforts have revealed a small set of cancers that are driven by only a select number of mutational events. One such cancer, uveal melanoma (UM), is characterized by a gain of function mutation in the heterotrimeric G protein, Gαq. A hotspot mutation in GNAQ or GNA11 encodes constitutively active Gαq proteins rendering them as driver oncogenes in approximately 93% of UM (Van Raamsdonk et al., 2009; Van Raamsdonk et al., 2010). Another ~4% of UM harbor activating mutations in CYSLTR2, a Gαq-linked G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) (Moore et al., 2016) firmly establishing UM as a Gαq-driven malignancy.

Aberrant activity of G proteins and GPCRs have been frequently associated with an oncogenic state and promotion of tumorigenesis (Dorsam and Gutkind, 2007; O’Hayre et al., 2013). However, the precise molecular mechanisms by which prolonged Gaq signaling controls cancer cell growth are under current investigation. We and others have previously shown that these mechanisms are in part due to unique signaling circuitries that lead to the activation of YAP, a transcriptional co-activator regulated by the Hippo pathway. In turn, YAP activation is necessary for UM growth (Feng et al., 2014b; Yu et al., 2014a). As a key downstream target of the tumor suppressive Hippo signaling cascade, YAP is typically over-activated in multiple cancers (Moroishi et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2015). Despite this, pharmacological targeting of YAP or the Hippo pathway has been proven to be challenging. Verteporfin, an ophthalmological drug, inhibits YAP-TEAD interaction, which is the major transcriptional factor regulated by YAP, in UM (Feng et al., 2014b; Yu et al., 2014a) with some anecdotal clinical success (Barbazetto et al., 2003; Soucek and Cihelkova, 2006); however, its potential as a therapeutic candidate has been hindered due to high systemic toxicities after prolonged use (Arnold et al., 2004; Azab et al., 2004). Currently, no effective therapeutic targets are available for UM, and no specific YAP inhibitors are currently in clinical use (Moroishi et al., 2015). As such, full dissection of Hippo/YAP- regulating mechanisms in cancer could identify urgently needed therapeutic opportunities to inhibit YAP-dependent tumor growth in UM and other cancer types.

The highly distinctive and well defined genetic landscape of UM provides a unique opportunity for the application of unbiased bioinformatics approaches to investigate the precise molecular mechanisms by which prolonged Gαq signaling controls cancer cell growth, and how these pathways can be targeted for precision therapies of Gαq-driven pathophysiologies. Here, we applied a novel computational framework to predict synthetic lethal gene interactions of Gαq activation (that is, synthetic dosage lethalities of Gαq). Taking advantage of publicly available large-scale genomics and patient data sets included in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (Cancer Genome Atlas Research et al., 2013), and related efforts, our pipeline searches for the drug targets that lead to selective death or growth suppression specifically in Gαq-activated tumors. These studies revealed that the PTK2 gene, encoding the non-receptor tyrosine kinase known as focal adhesion kinase (FAK), is strictly required for UM cell growth and survival, and the dissection of the underlying mechanism led to the finding that FAK acts as a key mediator of Gαq-driven signaling to YAP. Moreover, we discovered that FAK regulates YAP activation through inhibition of Hippo signaling by the direct tyrosine phosphorylation of MOB1, a component of the core Hippo kinase pathway, and YAP. Finally, we demonstrate that targeting the Gαq-FAK- Hippo/YAP signaling axis by inhibition of FAK blocks YAP-dependent growth in UM, thereby establishing FAK as a novel viable therapeutic target for the treatment of this aggressive human malignancy.

To identify the specific vulnerabilities of GNAQ-driven tumor, we adapted our recently established bioinformatics pipeline that Identifies clinically relevant Synthetic Lethal Interactions (termed ISLE, (Lee et al., 2018)). We denote a sample with mutations or gene amplification of GNAQ, GNA11 and CYSLTR2 as Gαq+, while a sample with the absence of these GNAQ, GNA11 or CYSLTR2 gene alterations as Gαq-. Adapting the rationale of the ISLE pipeline to our specific aim here, a candidate gene was determined to be a synthetic lethal (and thus a druggable vulnerability) of Gαq+ tumors if it satisfies the following four conditions (Fig. 1A): (i) molecular condition: Gαq+ tumor should differentially overexpress the candidate gene vs Gαq-samples (ii) clinical condition: Overexpression of the candidate gene should be associated poor survival in Gαq+ tumors, (iii) phenotypic condition: The candidate gene is significantly more essential in Gαq+ than in Gαq-cell lines, (iv) druggable condition: Targeting the candidate gene with inhibitors is significantly more effective in Gαq+ than in Gαq-cell lines.

In more details, our analysis has proceeded along these four steps as follows: (i) First, taking advantage of the publicly available cancer genome atlas (TCGA) data, we extracted those genes that are differentially overexpressed in Gαq+ UM samples (>96%). Since there are no sufficient UM Gαq-samples, we used Gαq- samples of skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM) as a control. Indeed, we observed significant overlap in the overexpressed genes in UM Gαq+ and SKCM Gαq+ samples (hypergeometric p<4.83 e−199, see Methods) compared to SKCM Gαq-samples, justifying the use of SKCM Gαq-samples as a control for Gαq+ UM. We excluded the genes overexpressed in UM compared to SKCM samples irrespective of Gαq status to control for cancer type-specific differential expression (see Methods). (ii) Second, among the genes that pass the first filter, we identified the genes whose expression correlates with poor prognosis of UM patients (see Methods). (iii) Third, we further selected those genes from in vitro functional screens that show significantly higher essentiality (or drug response) in the context of Gαq+ cancer cell lines following the standard procedure to determine cancer cell dependency (Tsherniak et al., 2017). (iv). Lastly, we selected only those genes that are druggable, i.e. targets of known cancer drugs (Fig. 1A, n=7). We performed cell viability assays after siRNA mediated gene expression inhibition, confirming the vulnerabilities of our predicted hits in Gαq+ cells (Fig. 1B). This four steps Gαq+ SL identification process results in 7 predicted SL genes, which play roles in multiple biological processes, including, cell growth, cell survival, lipid metabolism regulation, cell cycle control and the processing of class I MHC peptide, all of which showed reduced cell growth when knocked down. Among them, the top predicted gene, PTK2, also known as Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) reduced cell viability almost 60% after inhibition using PTK2 specific siRNA knockdown (Fig. 1B).

PTK2 itself is not mutated in UM, a disease that is characterized by mutations, primarily mutually-exclusive activating mutations in GNAQ, GNA11 and CYSLTR2, and mutually exclusive mutations in genes encoding two RNA splicing factors, EIF1AX and SF3B1, or a deubiquitinase BAP1 (Moore et al., 2016; Robertson et al., 2017; Van Raamsdonk et al., 2009; Van Raamsdonk et al., 2010). Instead, statistically significant gain of chromosome 8q (Robertson et al., 2017), including PTK2 and MYC, occurs in UM. Interestingly, PTK2 and MYC are amplified in 18% of UM patients (TCGA), and 38% of UM patients also exhibit PTK2 mRNA upregulation independent of amplification (Fig. 1C). In total 56% of UM patients have alterations in PTK2 resulting in gene amplification or mRNA upregulation (Fig. 1C). Interestingly, we found that expression of FAK is significantly correlated with reduced overall patient survival (Fig. 1D). Strikingly, a pan-cancer analysis of alteration frequency of FAK reveals that UM has the highest alteration frequency among all available TCGA solid tumor cohorts (Fig. S1A). We next tested the sensitivity of five representative UM cell lines, 92.1, OMM1.3, OMM1.5, Mel270, and Mel202, all of which harbor GNAQ mutations, to FAK inhibition using VS-4718, a new generation orally-bioavailable FAK inhibitor (FAKi) (Sulzmaier et al., 2014), using an SKCM cell line SK-MEK-28 (BRAF mutant) as a control (Fig. 1E). In vitro, UM cell lines demonstrate a dose-dependent sensitivity to FAK inhibition with an EC50 of around 1μM (Fig. 1E). Similar results were obtained with PF562771, a chemically distinct FAKi (Fig. S1B). Instead, the SKCM cell line SK-MEK-28 (BRAF) was largely insensitive to FAKi, with an EC50>10μM for VS-4718 (Fig. 1E). siRNA knockdown of PTK2 reduced cell viability in two representative UM cells nearly as potently as GNAQ knock down (Fig. S1C, D, E and F). GNAQ knock down reduced the accumulation of FAK in its active, tyrosine 397 phosphorylated form (pY397-FAK) (Sulzmaier et al., 2014) (Fig. S1D), while FAK knock down reduced total FAK and pY397-FAK protein levels, as expected (Fig. S1E). FAKi inhibited FAK rapidly (Fig. 1F and S1G), and resulted in UM apoptosis as judged by the accumulation of cleaved PARP (Fig. 1F). We further assessed whether inhibition of FAK impacted the oncogenic potential of UM cells by measuring their clonogenic capacity in semisolid media, an assay often used to assess cancer stem cell properties. We found that FAKi nearly abolished the colony formation ability of UM cells (Fig. 1G). Together, these findings support that FAK may be required for GNAQ-driven UM cell proliferation, survival, and clonogenic growth, thereby representing a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of UM.

We next sought to investigate the mechanism by which Gαq controls FAK. To understand the impact of GNAQ mutation on FAK activation, we transfected human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells with an HA-tagged activated mutant of GNAQ observed in UM, encoding Gαq-Q209L (HA-GαqQL), and an empty vector control. Immunoblotting against total and phosphorylated forms of FAK revealed that phosphorylation of FAK at Y397 was significantly increased after transfection with GαqQL (Fig. 2A). We next took advantage of a previously established synthetic Gαq-coupled GPCR (Gαq-DREADD) that can be solely activated by a synthetic ligand, Clozapine N-oxide (CNO) (Armbruster et al., 2007; Vaque et al., 2013). We stimulated Gαq-DREADD expressing HEK293 cells with CNO over a time course and found increasingly elevated levels of pY397 FAK in response to CNO (Fig. 2B). In UM cells, GNAQ siRNA knockdown or inhibition by FR900359 (FR), a potent Gαq inhibitor (Schrage et al., 2015), diminished FAK and ERK activation (Fig. 2C and see above, Fig. S1D). Consistent with these data, Gaαq inhibition with FR in UM cells and SKCM cells showed inhibition of cell proliferation exclusively in UM cells (Fig. 2D). These results support the emerging notion that FAK acts downstream from the GNAQ oncogene in UM. However, it is unclear which of the multiple Gαq or Gαq coupled receptor-initiated signaling pathways are responsible for regulating FAK activation.

PLCβ-dependent second messenger activation is among the best-known downstream events stimulated by Gαq (Griner and Kazanietz, 2007; Hubbard and Hepler, 2006), and is considered to be the canonical Gαq signaling pathway, causing transient ERK activation (Vaque et al., 2013). Inhibition of PLCβ by the use of a small-molecule PLC inhibitor (PLCi) abolished the ERK activation, as we previously reported (Vaque et al., 2013), but did not have an impact on the activation of FAK (Fig. 2E). Similarly, inhibition of PKC blocked ERK activation but not FAK in UM cells (Fig. 2F), indicating that FAK may be activated independently of PLCβ. As Gαq activation of the AP1 and YAP transcriptional programs involves the stimulation of the TRIO guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for Rho GTPases (Feng et al., 2014b; Vaque et al., 2013), we next asked if this non-canonical Gαq signaling pathway is involved in FAK activation by Gαq. Knockdown of TRIO or RHOA prevented the activation of FAK by Gαq-DREADD in HEK293 cells and GNAQ in UM cells (Fig. 2G and H). In line with these findings, knockdown of RAC1 had no impact on FAK activation (Fig. 2G). Further analysis showed that blocking actin polymerization by inhibiting ROCK or actomyosin contraction by Y-27632 (Ikeda et al., 2003; Narumiya et al., 2000) and blebbistatin (Kovacs et al., 2004), respectively, repressed FAK activation by Gαq-DREADD in HEK293 cells and GNAQ in UM cells (Fig. 2I and J). Together, these findings suggest that Gαq stimulates FAK independently of PLCβ and PKC, but instead Gαq activates FAK through a non-canonical TRIO-dependent pathway resulting in RHOA activation and consequent cytoskeletal changes and actomyosin-initiated cell contraction and signaling (Fig. 2K).

FAK is at the intersection of multiple signaling pathways that promote cancer progression (Sulzmaier et al., 2014), but it is not clear which downstream targets of FAK play a critical role in UM. As an approach to identify key downstream targets of the Gαq-FAK signaling axis, we performed transcriptomic RNA-sequencing on UM cells treated with FAKi, and performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)(Subramanian et al., 2005) to characterize the transcriptional effects of inhibiting Gαq and FAK at the pathway level using over 10,000 gene sets from the MSigDB (Molecular
Signatures
Database), including two sub-collections of oncogenic signatures and hallmark gene sets that our team has added to the database recently (Liberzon et al., 2015). In spite of this large collection of transcriptional regulated genes, only 20 oncogenic signature gene sets were significantly repressed and 5 were activated by FAKi in UM cells (Fig. 3A and S2A). These include the downregulation of genes described as stimulated by KRAS and EGFR, and cytokines such as IL21 and IL15, consistent with the likely role in the activation of growth promoting pathways by FAK (Sulzmaier et al., 2014). FAKi also reduced the expression of genes repressed (KD) by JAK2, p53, and BMI, suggesting that FAK inhibition may trigger a p53-response and stimulate BMI and JAK2, all of which may contribute to FAK-dependent cell growth and warrant further investigation. One of the most remarkable observations was that FAKi treatment resulted in a significant downregulation of YAP-signature genes (Zhao et al., 2008) (Fig. 3A–D and S2A and B). The involvement of Hippo/YAP signaling in cancer progression, as well as previous work demonstrating the key role of YAP signaling in uveal melanoma (Feng et al., 2014b; Yu et al., 2014a; Yu et al., 2014b) led us to pursue this specific gene signature. To validate these findings, we performed qPCR for the classical YAP-target genes CTGF and CYR61 in UM cells and found significant reduction in the presence of FAKi and knockdown of FAK or GNAQ (Fig. 3E and S2C and D). We also found that FAKi clearly diminished YAP nuclear accumulation through quantification of anti-YAP staining, and western blot analysis of nuclear and cytoplasmic cellular fractions (Fig. 3F and G and S2E). We further confirmed the functional impact of FAKi and FAK knock down on YAP by performing YAP/TAZ luciferase reporter assays, and using GNAQ inhibition and knock down as a control (Fig. 3H–K, see Fig. S1D and E for knock down validation). Interestingly, inhibition of Gαq or FAK or siRNA-mediated FAK knockdown repressed YAP phosphorylation on tyrosine 357 (Y357), a residue that is associated with YAP activation (Li et al., 2016; Taniguchi et al., 2015), and increased phosphorylation on serine 127 (S127), which is one of the main repressive targets of Hippo signaling (Pan, 2010) (Fig. 3I and K). We recapitulated these findings in heterologous systems, using HEK293 cells expressing Gαq-DREADD stimulated with CNO and HEK293 cells transfected with GαqQL. In both cases, FAK inhibition or knockdown reduced YAP pY357 and increased pS127, and reduced mRNA levels of YAP targets and YAP activity measured by luciferase reporter assay (Fig. S2F–J), similar to UM cells. Inhibition of SRC in UM cells had no impact on YAP activity, measured by YAP/TAZ luciferase reporter assay, and failed to promote changes in YAP phosphorylation status (Fig. 3J and K). Together, these results suggest that Gαq and FAK regulate YAP activation in UM, and that this process is likely independent of SRC.

We sought to further investigate the impact of FAK on YAP activity via YAP/TAZ luciferase reporter assay and found that overexpression of FAK in HEK293 cells leads to a significant increase of YAP activity (Fig. 4A). It is well-established that YAP activity and stability is tightly controlled by its phosphorylation status on a number of key phosphorylation sites (Moroishi et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2015). To define the phosphorylation state of YAP in the context of aberrant Gαq signaling, we transfected HEK293 cells with GαqQL as well as active FAK in vitro. Overexpression of GαqQL or FAK led to an increase in total levels of YAP protein, resulted in diminished YAP pS127, increased YAP pY357, and FAK alone was sufficient to stimulate YAP/TAZ luciferase reporter activity (Fig. 4 A, B and C). The latter results are aligned with our previous observations after FAKi (Fig. 3K), suggesting that FAK can promote tyrosine phosphorylation of YAP directly (see below, Fig. S4E).

Regarding the remarkable changes in YAP pS127 levels, we hypothesized that FAK may also repress inhibitory signals to YAP from the Hippo pathway through direct phosphorylation on the core kinases of the Hippo pathway. In the canonical Hippo pathway, MST1/2 kinases bound to their regulatory protein SAV1 activate the LATS1/2 kinases (collectively referred to as LATS) as part of a complex with MOB1A/B. LATS in turn phosphorylates YAP (or in certain cells TAZ) at multiple serine residues, including pS127, leading to YAP inactivation by cytoplasmic retention and subsequent degradation (Moroishi et al., 2015; Pan, 2010; Yu et al., 2015). By a systematic analysis of the tyrosine phosphorylation status of each Hippo core kinase cascade component after co-transfection with FAK, we found only MOB1A to be tyrosine phosphorylated, as judged by its detection with anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies in tagged MOB1A immune precipitates (Fig. 4D). MOB1 plays a critical regulatory role in the Hippo signaling cascade by transferring the upstream signal from the kinase complex of MST1/SAV1 to LATS (Meng et al., 2016). Consistent with our findings, scanning through large phosphoprotein databases (PhosphoSitePlus® PTM Resource, Cell signaling technology), we found that Y26 on MOB1A/B is conserved among mammals, and that this particular residue is phosphorylated in numerous high-throughput phosphoproteomic datasets (n=161) (Fig. S3A). To interrogate the functional impact of this phosphorylation site (Y26) on MOB1, we transfected HEK293 cells with HA-MOB1 and performed anti-HA and anti-pY IPs. Firstly, we found that an antibody raised anti-pY26 MOB1 recognized MOB1 only when co-transfected with FAK, which was abolished upon mutation of Y26 residue on MOB1 to Y26F (Fig. 4E and4F), thus serving as a specificity control. We further verified that FAK was able to directly phosphorylate MOB1 on its Y26 site by in vitro kinase reaction using purified recombinant proteins (Fig. S3B). When exploring the consequences of this post translational modification in the assembly of Hippo kinase complexes, we found that phosphorylation on Y26-MOB1 by FAK dissociates the MOB1/LATS complex (Fig. 4E). Strikingly, mutation of Y26 residue on MOB1 to Y26F rescued the dissociation with LATS1 (Fig. 4F) and abolished YAP activation by FAK (Fig. S3C). Together, these data suggest that FAK regulates MOB1 Y26 phosphorylation, resulting in the dissociation of the functional MOB1/LATS complex, preventing Hippo-dependent inhibition of YAP and thereby promoting YAP activity.

To study the effect of FAK inhibition on the Hippo pathway in UM cells, we examined the phosphorylation status of key Hippo pathway components after a time course of FAKi. We observed an increase of pS127-YAP, p909-LATS1, p1079-LATS1, a dose-dependent decrease in pY26 MOB1, and in line with our previous data, enhanced MOB1/LATS interaction (Fig. 5A and B, and S4A). In contrast, the MOB1-Y26F mutant demonstrated constitutively strong interaction with LATS independent of FAKi treatment (Fig. S4B and C) and remarkably, expression of MOB1-Y26F in UM cells phenocopied FAKi treatment as it drastically diminished cell proliferation that could not be further reduced by FAKi (Fig. S4D). Of interest, however, we did not observe an increase in p-MST1 in response to FAK inhibition (Fig. 5A), nor a change in phosphorylation of MOB1 at T35, the main target of MST1 on MOB1 (Meng et al., 2016) with FAKi or knockdown of FAK (Fig. S4B and C). This suggests that in UM, FAK regulates the link between LATS1 and YAP through MOB1, acting downstream from MST1 rather than controlling MST1 (Hippo) activity. In conjunction, we found FAK was able to phosphorylate YAP at Y357 in vitro, (Fig. S4E), a post translational modification that has been shown to regulate YAP stability and activity (Li et al., 2016; Taniguchi et al., 2015), and aligned with this finding, that FAK inhibition also caused diminished phosphorylation of Y357-YAP in UM cells (Fig. 5A). Indeed, we confirmed that long-term (up to 36 hours) FAK inhibition caused YAP protein downregulation (Fig. 5C). Furthermore, LATS1/2 knockdown was sufficient to rescue from the growth inhibition by FAKi in UM cells (Fig. 5D), supporting that YAP signaling plays a key role in growth promotion downstream from FAK in UM cells. Altogether, our data suggest that FAK drives UM cell growth through promotion of YAP activity by coordinating the previously described the F-actin-mediated release of YAP from AMOT, which enhances the pool of cytosolic YAP and enables its nuclear translocation (Feng et al., 2014b), with the release of the inhibitory Hippo kinase cascade through the FAK-mediated phosphorylation of MOB1, and the concomitant tyrosine phosphorylation and stabilization of YAP (Fig. 5E).

We next tested the preclinical potential of FAK inhibition for UM treatment. For these studies, we first used lentiviral-delivered Cas9-sgPTK2 to knockout (KO) FAK expression in UM cells (Fig. 6A). Most UM cells did not survive after genome editing of FAK (not shown), only mass cultures of MEL270 targeted for FAK grew in culture after puromycin selection, displaying nearly abolished FAK protein levels (Fig. 6A). Re-expression of FAK under control of a doxycycline-inducible promoter was sufficient to rescue cell viability in UM cells in which FAK expression was reduced (Fig. S5A). We observed that FAK KO cells developed only very small tumors, clearly smaller than control cells (Fig. 6B), suggesting that FAK activation may represent a molecular event involved in UM tumor growth in vivo. These observations further support the therapeutic potential of targeting FAK for UM. While there are multiple FAKi under clinical evaluation (Sulzmaier et al., 2014), VS-4718, chosen for our studies, was specifically designed for oral administration. We found that FAKi reduces both UM tumor size and cell proliferation in two different UM tumor models, the latter clearly visible by Ki67 staining that was nearly absent in VS-4718 treated mice (Fig. 6C–F). We observed clearly increased cytoplasmic retention of YAP in FAKi treated tumors, consistent with our previous findings that FAK controls YAP-activity in UM cells (Fig. 6G and H). These results suggest that the pharmacological inhibition of FAK by VS-4718 may represent a viable therapeutic approach for the treatment of patients with UM harboring increased YAP activity.

The generation of massive quantities of genomic, epigenomic and proteomic data has greatly enhanced our understanding of oncogenesis and cancer as a cellular state. In particular, development of bioinformatics pipelines to predict previously unanticipated nodes of connectivity between transcriptional and signaling networks can significantly expedite efforts to identify and exploit molecular vulnerabilities for the treatment of cancer. We focused here on applying such methods to UM, as the constitutive activation of the Gαq pathway via a limited number of mutations is sufficient as a key oncogenic driver of this malignancy, such that targeting these network alterations may help reveal effective treatment options (in contrast to, e.g., SKCM, a related cancer but with high mutational burden (Robertson et al., 2017). We thus hypothesized that focusing on a cancer type specifically driven by few activating (Gαq) mutations may serve as a good testbed for studying such an approach, harnessing a novel SL-based integrated bioinformatics analysis to uncover novel oncogenic signaling mechanisms controlled by Gαq and target them. In this study, we demonstrate that FAK acts as a critical oncogenic signaling node in UM—mediating Gαq-driven regulation of the Hippo/YAP pathway and enabling the promotion of an oncogenic state. We provide evidence that FAK destabilizes interactions between key core Hippo pathway members thereby activating YAP in an MST1 (Hippo)-independent manner. Furthermore, we show that the oncogenic activity of FAK in UM is targetable by clinically relevant therapeutic agents.

The transformative potential of Gαq signaling was established in the early 1990s (Gutkind et al., 1991; Kalinec et al., 1992) however, the precise signaling events by which Gαq and its linked receptors transduce sustained proliferative signals is not yet well defined. This is due in part to the large number of second messenger generating systems and signaling events that can be perturbed upon Gαq activation. The activation of these second messenger systems and their direct targets, including ion channels and regulated kinases, such as PKC, CAMKs and MAPK are responsible for most of the rapid physiological responses elicited by GPCRs (Griner and Kazanietz, 2007; Howe, 2011; Julius and Nathans, 2012; Newton, 2010; Prevarskaya et al., 2011; Rozengurt, 2007; Sassone-Corsi). Recent studies have identified additional members of this network for UM, highlighting the role of GEFs such as RasGRP3 in MAPK activation (Chen et al., 2017). Despite this link, therapeutic strategies targeting MAPKs have proven to be unsuccessful. The MEK inhibitor selumetinib has been extensively evaluated for UM treatment; however, recent clinical trials demonstrated that MEK inhibition with this agent or trametinib, as single agents or in combination with Dacarbazine has nearly no impact on the overall survival of UM patients (Carvajal et al., 2018; Carvajal et al., 2014). This suggests that although MEK/MAPK networks activated by PLCβ may contribute to UM initiation, they may not be critical for the maintenance of tumorigenic potential in UM.

Contrary to the transient nature of signal transmission through PLCβ, unbiased genome-wide RNAi screens revealed that the signaling events driven by Gαq which result in aberrant cell proliferation that are dependent on highly specific protein-protein interactions, rather than solely on diffusible second-messenger systems. Specifically, prior systems biology approaches have identified the RhoGEF TRIO as critical for activating Gαq-driven AP-1-regulated transcriptional networks independently of PLCβ to achieve sustained stimulation of proliferative pathways (Vaque et al., 2013). Further work has shown that this novel pathway converges in the activation of YAP, and that in turn, YAP activation is critical for oncogenic potential of UM (Feng et al., 2014a; Feng et al., 2014b; Yu et al., 2014a). The Hippo/YAP cascade is a key growth-regulating pathway in normal cellular physiology (Bhatt et al., 2010; Moroishi et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2015). Unsurprisingly, dysregulation of the Hippo pathway is seen frequently in cancer; however, core components are rarely mutated (Martin et al., 2018; Moroishi et al., 2015). Rather, external pressures from upstream oncogenes typically drive YAP-dependent cell proliferation. Identifying the key molecular players that facilitate oncogenic signaling through Hippo/YAP pathway may also uncover potential network vulnerabilities. Interestingly, inhibition of PLCβ does not impact the activation of YAP after Gαq stimulation (Feng et al., 2014b). Together, these findings suggest that the canonical Gαq-PLCβ-MAPK signaling axis may be critical for tumor initiation rather than tumor maintenance, and that opportunities for intervention may lie within the distinct signaling circuitry transduced through TRIO.

We sought to define the distinct molecular framework involved in UM tumor maintenance by taking advantage of a bioinformatics pipeline designed to identify molecular vulnerabilities based on the prediction of synthetic lethal genetic interactions. The top candidate of our screen, FAK, is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase whose role as a downstream target of Gαq has been well established by biochemical studies (Gutkind and Robbins, 1992); however, the contribution of FAK as a mediator of oncogenic Gαq signaling has not been previously explored. Our finding that FAK is rapidly activated by Gαq-linked GPCRs and the GNAQ oncogene through TRIO and RHOA, rather than PLCβ, in experimental cellular systems and UM cells, prompted us to focus on the possibility that FAK may represent an integral component of the non-canonical pathway by which Gαq regulates aberrant cell growth. We found that FAK knock down and pharmacological inhibition is sufficient to reduce UM cell proliferation, and if prolonged, to trigger apoptotic cell death. This remarkable response was unanticipated, as FAK inhibitors often have limited activity as single agents in most cancers, but instead synergize with cytotoxic agents, as we have shown for ovarian cancer that overexpresses FAK, as a typical example (Sulzmaier et al., 2014). We hypothesized that as compared to other cancer types with FAK gene upregulation, the compounding impact of FAK copy number gain and gene upregulation and Gαq-driven FAK activity in UM, creates a unique cellular state which may be highly dependent on the activity of FAK and therefore highly sensitive to FAK inhibition. This unexpected convergence of computational predictions, biochemical, and genetic information enabled the discovery of the therapeutic potential of FAK inhibitors for UM treatment.

Our RNAseq studies examining the functional role of FAK in UM, revealed an enrichment of several oncogenic signatures including KRAS and EGFR-regulated genes; however, strikingly, YAP conserved signature was among the top hits. FAK has been recently linked to YAP activity in the context of mechanotransduction, as well as in the coordination of cell proliferation and differentiation in mouse incisors during development; however, the underlying cell-context specific and developmental mechanisms are still not fully understood (Hu et al., 2017; Lachowski et al., 2018). We provide evidence that in UM the role of FAK converges on promoting YAP activity through the tandem inhibition of Hippo pathway signals by Y26 phosphorylation of MOB1, and the regulation of YAP by Y357 phosphorylation. In the case of YAP phosphorylation, these observations extend prior studies indicating the role of JAK2 and SRC tyrosine kinases in Y357 phosphorylation (Li et al., 2016; Taniguchi et al., 2015). However, downstream from FAK, we observed both tyrosine-phosphorylated YAP and a decrease in pS127 YAP, the latter a direct target of the Hippo signaling pathway. In this regard, there is increasing evidence suggesting that Hippo signaling is tightly regulated by the assembly and dissociation of key signaling complexes. Our interrogation of these complexes in response to FAK activation led to the finding that FAK phosphorylates MOB1 on Y26, resulting in the disassembly of the MOB1/LATS complex and disruption of the Hippo pathway downstream from MST1, effectively rewiring the cellular forces in control of YAP activity, and that mutation of this tyrosine residue is sufficient to abolish the effect of FAK. Whereas further work may be required to establish the structural basis for this inhibition, as well as alternative FAK-driven pathways in mechanotransduction and development, our findings support that disruption of the MOB1/LATS signaling complex by FAK is a key regulatory step resulting in YAP activation by Gαq. Ultimately, this novel mechanism may coordinate the Gαq-induced increase in cytosolic free YAP, which is mediated by Rho-induced actin polymerization (Feng et al., 2014b), with Hippo kinase cascade inhibition through the FAK-mediated phosphorylation of MOB1, resulting in the YAP-dependent UM cell growth.

The current lack of effective approved targeted treatments for primary or metastatic UM leaves a large therapeutic gap for patients and clinicians underscoring an urgent need for the identification of novel pharmacological targets for therapeutic intervention in diseases involving persistent Gαq signaling. As YAP-targeting strategies have remained elusive thus far, the success of FAK inhibition in our in vivo models in the context of previously established success and safety of FAK inhibitors in human clinical trials highlight the direct translational potential of our findings and establish FAK as a novel precision therapeutic target for the treatment of UM. Towards this end, the application of systems-level and bioinformatics investigation will be a powerful strategy to identify novel precision treatment options for UM and a myriad of Gαq-driven diseases.

Requests for further information or resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Dr. J. Silvio Gutkind (sgutkind@ucsd.edu). Plasmids used and generated in this study are subject to restrictions under a simple material transfer agreement (MTA) with UCSD.

HEK293 and HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., MO) containing 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., MO) and 1× antibiotic/antimycotic solution (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., MO). Culture conditions for UM cells (OMM1.3, OMM1.5, MEL202, MEL270 and 92.1) have been described elsewhere (Schmitt et al., 2007; Zuidervaart et al., 2005). SK-MEL-28 cells were purchased from ATCC and cultured following ATCC recommendations in EMEM containing 10% FBS. VS-4718 (PND-1186) was purchased from MedChemExpress (MCE) pre-prepared as a 10mM solution in DMSO. FR900359 (FR) was graciously supplied by the lab of Dr. Evi Kostenis.

Plasmids pCEFL-HA, pCEFL-HA-GαqQL, pCEFL-HA-Gαq-DREADD, pCEFL-3x-Flag-Renilla-luciferase were described previously (Marinissen et al., 2003; Teramoto et al., 2003). pCEFL-myr-FAK was described previously (Chikumi et al., 2002; Igishi et al., 1999). Plasmids pCMV-myc-MST1 (Addgene #8847, originally from Joseph Avruch’s lab), pCMV2-FLAG-SAV1 (Addgene #18970, originally from Marius Sudol’ lab), pcDNA3-HA-MOB1 (Addgene #32835, originally from Kunliang Guan’s lab), p2xFLAG-CMV2-LATS1 (Addgene #18971, originally from Marius Sudol’s lab) and 8xGTIIC-luciferase (Addgene #34615, originally from Stefano Piccolo’s Lab).

To identify the clinically-relevant vulnerabilities for UM, we performed an analysis that follows the main concepts of our previous work, ISLE (Lee et al., 2018) with modifications for Gαq-driven UM. We analyzed the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) (Cancer Genome Atlas Research et al., 2013) UM samples with skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM) samples as control together with the large-scale functional (Cheung et al., 2011; Cowley et al., 2014; Marcotte et al., 2012; Marcotte et al., 2016) and drug response (Barretina et al., 2012; Friedman et al., 2015; Iorio et al., 2016) screens. We downloaded the gene expression, copy number alteration, and patient survival and other clinical characteristics of TCGA UM and SKCM cohort from cBioPortal (Gao et al., 2013) on Feb 1, 2017. We used 80 UM samples and 287 SKCM samples for our analysis. We obtained the data from cBioPortal as it integrates the mutation analysis from different TCGA centers to avoid center specific bias in mutation calls.

We denoted a tumor sample as Gαq+ if any of the Gαq-family genes (GNAQ, GNA11 and CYSLTR2) are either mutated or amplified in the given sample (amplification, if the Gistic score is greater than 0.35), and as Gαq-if the sample lacks GNAQ, GNA11 and CYSLTR2 genes mutation and amplification. First, we selected important genes in UM, that are (i) highly over expressed in Gαq+ UM (n=77, excluding 3 Gαq-cases) with respect to control Gαq-SKCM TCGA samples (n=209) using Wilcoxon rank sum test (p<0.05). We filtered out (ii) those genes that are overexpressed in UM compared to all SKCM samples irrespective of Gαq status (Wilcoxon rank sum p>0.05), leading to 1,146 out of total 18,087 satisfying both conditions. We tested whether these genes show significant overlap with the genes overexpressed in Gαq+ skin melanoma TCGA samples (n=78, mutation=16, amplification=65, overlap=13) compared to Gαq-SKCM samples using hypergeometric test, truncating the hypergeometric p values to 10−16.

Second, we further selected the genes whose inactivation leads to better patient survival in UM, thus potential target of a therapy. We used a stratified Cox proportional hazard model to evaluate the association, while controlling for available potential confounders in the dataset including patients’ sex and tumor stage (Therneau and Grambsch, 2000). The inactivation of 293 genes (out of 1,146 genes that passed the previous screen) show significant association with improved patient survival.

Third, we used gene essentiality (Cheung et al., 2011; Cowley et al., 2014; Marcotte et al., 2012; Marcotte et al., 2016) and drug response screens (Barretina et al., 2012; Friedman et al., 2015; Iorio et al., 2016) in a wide panel of cancer cell lines to identify the genes whose knockdown/inhibition specifically reduces Gαq+ cell viability. We used the mutation and copy number data from the measurements on the cell lines in CCLE collection (Barretina et al., 2012) to determine the status of Gαq-family genes in these cell lines. We performed Wilcoxon rank sum test between the essentiality or drug response values between the cell lines that are Gαq+ vs. Gαq-. The essentiality or the drug inhibition identified 72 genes out of 293 genes (that passed the 2nd filter) that satisfy this condition.

Finally, we prioritized the druggable targets. We collected the druggable genome using the drug-to-target mapping curated in DrugBank database (Law et al., 2014) and the literature including (Barretina et al., 2012; Basu et al., 2013; Friedman et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2013; Garnett et al., 2012; Iorio et al., 2016). Our collection encompasses 756 targetable genes, including 273 targets of FDA-approved drugs, 10 targets of drugs under clinical trials, and 473 experimental drugs. We further removed the genes that belong to the same chromosomes to the Gαq-family genes to avoid the confounding effect of genomic linkage. This step led to the final set of 7 targets.

Western blot assays were performed as described previously (Feng et al., 2014b). Western blots were developed using Immobilon Western Chemiluminescent HRP substrate (Millipore, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

PTK2-sgRNA-CRISPR/Cas9-all-in-one-lentivector vector was purchased from Applied Biological Materials Inc. (Cat. K1752206). Lentivirus were prepared with HEK293T cells as the packaging cells as previously reported (Basile et al., 2004). To establish PTK2-knock out, cells were infected with the corresponding lentiviral supernatants for 16 hours, after which the media was changed to normal growth medium containing puromycin (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., MO) selection.

All cells were transfected using Lipofectamine® RNAiMAX Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions.

MOB1-Y26F point mutant was generated using the Quickchange Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit following manufacturer’s instructions (Agilent Genomics, CA). pcDNA3-HA-MOB1 was used as the template and the primers were designed as follows. Y26F-forward: 5’- CAT GTTTT AAGAGTT CAAACT GATGAGATCCTT CAGGGAT ATT CTT C-3’, Y26F-reverse: 5’-GAAGAAT ATCCCTGAAGGAT CT CAT CAGTTTGAACT CTT AAAACATG-3’.

Female NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1wjl/SzJ mice (commonly known as NOD scid gamma, Jackson Laboratory, Maine), 6 to 8 weeks of age and weighing 18 to 20g, were used in the study of UM cells, housed in appropriate sterile filter-capped cages, and provided food and water ad libitum. All procedures were essentially as previously described (Feng et al., 2014b; Schrage et al., 2015; Vaque et al., 2013). Briefly, exponentially growing cultures were harvested, washed, resuspended in RPMI 1640, and 2 × 106 viable cells were transplanted subcutaneously into the flanks of mice. For tumor growth analysis, tumor volume was assessed as [(LW2/2); where L and W represent the length and the width of the tumor]. The animals were monitored twice weekly for tumor development. Results of animal experiments were expressed as mean ± SEM of a total of tumors analyzed. To administer VS-4718 (Verastem Oncology; Needham, MA) to mice, 10mg/ml VS-4718 was prepared in 0.5% carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) (C5678, Sigma-Aldrich; St . Louis, MO) 0.1% Tween 80 (P1754, Sigma Aldrich; St. Louis, MO) in sterile water, 100 mg/kg administered via oral gavage twice daily, control group was treated with vehicle.

Cells cultured on coverslips were washed with PBS, fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 30 min, and permeabilized using 0.05% Triton X-100 for 10 min. Fixed cells were blocked with 3% FBS-containing PBS for 30 min, and incubated with YAP (Cell signaling technology, MI) antibody (in 3% FBS-PBS otherwise stated) for 1h at room temperature.

The reaction was visualized with Alexa-labeled secondary antibodies (Invitrogen, CA). Samples were mounted in PBS buffer containing Hoechst 33342 (Molecular Probes, OR) for nuclear staining. Images were acquired with an Axio Imager Z1 microscope equipped with ApoTome system controlled by ZEN 2012 software (Carl Zeiss, NY).

Cells were co-transfected with pCEFL-3x-Flag-Renilla-luciferase and 8xGTIIC-luciferase (Addgene 34615) in 6-well plates overnight to the detection of the luciferase activity, using a Dual-Glo Luciferase Assay Kit (Promega, WI) and a Microtiter plate luminometer (Dynex Tech., VA).

The following antibodies were used for immunohistochemistry anti-Ki67 (DAKO) and anti-YAP (CST). Unstained 5μm paraffin sections were dewaxed in Safeclear II (Fisher Scientific, PA), hydrated through graded alcohols and distilled water, and washed three times with PBS. Antigens were retrieved using or 10mM citrate buffer boiled in a microwave for 20 min (2 min at 100% power and 18 min at 10% power). The slides were allowed to cool down for 30 min at room temperature, rinsed twice with PBS, incubated in 3% hydrogen peroxide in PBS for 10 min to quench the endogenous peroxidase. The sections were then sequentially washed in distilled water and PBS, incubated in blocking solution (2.5% bovine serum albumin in PBS) for 30 min at room temperature. Excess solution was discarded and the primary antibodies were applied diluted in blocking solution at 4°C overnight. After washing with PBS, the slides were sequentially incubated with the biotinylated secondary antibody (1:400) (Vector Laboratories, CA) for 30 min and with the avidin-biotin complex, reconstituted according to the instruction of the manufacturer in PBS (Vector Stain Elite, ABC kit) (Vector Laboratories, CA), for 30 min at room temperature. The slides were developed in 3,3-diaminobenzidine (Sigma FASTDAB tablet) (Sigma Chemical, MO) diluted in distilled water under a microscope.

Cells were lysed with IP lysis buffer [10mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0), 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.3% CHAPS, 50mM NaF, 1.5mM Na3VO4, protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific, CO), 1mM DTT, 1mM PMSF], and centrifuged at 16,000g for 5min at 4°C. Supernatants were incubated with first antibody for 1h at 4°C, and protein G or protein A conjugated resin for another 1h. Resins were then washed 3 times with lysis buffer and boiled in SDS-loading buffer.

Cell growth assays were performed as described previously (Yamaguchi et al., 2016). Cells were cultured in 96-well-plate and treated with drugs for 72 hours. The manufacturer’s instructions of Alamar Blue Cell Viability Reagent were followed to complete the assay.

3-dimensional cultures were performed as described previously (Tancioni et al., 2015). Briefly, 10,000 cells were embedded in 1% methylcellulose diluted in growth media and plated onto 6-well poly-hyodroxyethyl methacrylic acid (poly-HEMA)-coated plates.

GST fusion proteins were prepared engineered, expressed in bacteria, and purified as previously described in (Martin et al., 2018) using standard procedures.

Kinase reactions were performed as previously described in Bernard-Trifilo et al. Briefly, 1.5 μg of substrate (MOB1-GST, MOB1-Y26F-GST, GST-only control, or recombinant YAP) was resuspended in 40uL FAK Kinase buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.4, 10% glycerol, 10mM MgCl2, 10mM MnCl2, and 150mM NaCl). 5μL magnesium/ATP cocktail (75mM MgCl2, 20mM MOPS pH 7.2, 25mM β-glycerol phosphate, 5mM EGTA, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 1mM dithiothreitol) with or without 50μM ATP was added to appropriate tubes, and placed in 32° water bath for 15 minutes. Samples were bolied in sample buffer and processed on SDS-PAGE.

Subcellular fractionated lysates were generated using NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents (Thermo Scientific, CO) following manufacturer instructions.

All data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism version 7.03 for Windows (GraphPad Software, CA). The data were analyzed by ANOVA test or t-test (* p<0.05, **p<0.01, *** p< 0.001).