---
reference_id: "PMID:29766272"
title: Blood pressure is normal, but is the heart?
authors:
- Çelik SF
- Karakurt C
- Tabel Y
- Elmas T
- Yoloğlu S
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-018-3968-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blood pressure is normal, but is the heart?
**Authors:** Çelik SF, Karakurt C, Tabel Y, Elmas T, Yoloğlu S
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-018-3968-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-018-3968-5)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2018 Sep;33(9):1585-1591. doi: 10.1007/s00467-018-3968-5.
Epub  2018 May 15.

Blood pressure is normal, but is the heart?

Çelik SF(1), Karakurt C(2), Tabel Y(3), Elmas T(3), Yoloğlu S(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Adnan Menderes 
University, Aydın, Turkey. docser2003@yahoo.com.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Inonu University, 
Malatya, Turkey.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Inonu University, 
Malatya, Turkey.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Inonu University, Malatya, 
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: There is no detailed strain analysis of cardiac functions in treated 
hypertensive pediatric patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
cardio-protective effects of different drug classes in treated pediatric 
hypertensive patients.
METHODS: Sixty non-obese-treated hypertensive patients with preserved left 
ventricular (LV) systolic function and 45 age-, sex-, and body mass 
index-matched healthy subjects underwent clinical evaluation, including 24-h 
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, standard echocardiographic examination, 
tissue Doppler imaging, and two-dimensional Speckle Tracking Echocardiography. 
The patients were divided into two subgroups based on the effects of the drugs 
on the Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone System. The subgroup hypertension (HT) 1 
received angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor 
blocker, and HT 2 subgroup received calcium channel blocker, β-blocker, or 
diuretics.
RESULTS: There was no difference between the two groups and subgroups with 
respect to clinical, demographic, ABPM, ventricular volumes, ejection fraction, 
and tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) parameters. For patients and controls, 
respectively, global longitudinal strain was - 18.70 ± 3.41 versus 
- 21.01 ± 3.82 (P < 0.001), and global radial strain was 40.6 ± 9.8 versus 
54.8 ± 12.8 (P = 0.004). Peak LV twist and peak LV torsion were not 
significantly different. The patient subgroup analyses with each other revealed 
no difference in systolic and diastolic myocardial deformation properties.
CONCLUSIONS: Strain parameters were reduced in all treated hypertensive children 
compared to normotensive children, and the various cardiac mechanic parameters 
were similarly abnormal no matter what type of antihypertensive agent was used.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-018-3968-5
PMID: 29766272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]