---
reference_id: "PMID:39614971"
title: Molecular Mechanisms of Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 17.
authors:
- Davidenko A
- Bogomazova A
- Illarioshkin S
- Lagarkova M
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-024-04645-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Animals
- "TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Peptides/metabolism, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Mechanisms of Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 17.
**Authors:** Davidenko A, Bogomazova A, Illarioshkin S, Lagarkova M
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-024-04645-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-024-04645-z)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2025 May;62(5):5720-5729. doi: 10.1007/s12035-024-04645-z. Epub
 2024 Nov 30.

Molecular Mechanisms of Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 17.

Davidenko A(1)(2), Bogomazova A(3), Illarioshkin S(4), Lagarkova M(5).

Author information:
(1)Lopukhin Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine
of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, 119435, Russia.
davidenko.av@rcpcm.ru.
(2)Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, 119991, Russia.
davidenko.av@rcpcm.ru.
(3)Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic Technologies for Biomedicine,
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Federal
Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, 119435, Russia.
(4)Research Center of Neurology, Moscow, 125367, Russia.
(5)Lopukhin Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine
of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, 119435, Russia.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) is a hereditary neurodegenerative
disorder characterized by progressive motor and cognitive decline, leading to
severe disability and death. SCA17 is caused by a CAG repeat expansion mutation
in the TBP gene, resulting in the production of an abnormally long polyglutamine
tract, which classifies it as a polyglutamine disorder. At present, there is no
effective treatment for SCA17, and existing therapies provide only symptomatic
relief. While the exact pathogenic mechanisms of SCA17 remain unclear, the TBP
mutation affects a well-characterized transcription factor, making it an ideal
model for studying polyglutamine-related neurodegeneration. Here, we review the
clinical features of SCA17 and explore proposed mechanisms of its pathogenesis.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-024-04645-z
PMID: 39614971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics Approval: Not applicable.
Consent to Participate: Not applicable. Consent for Publication: Not applicable.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
