---
reference_id: "PMID:31340837"
title: "Assessment of the risk and characterization of non-melanoma skin cancer in Kindler syndrome: study of a series of 91 patients."
authors:
- Guerrero-Aspizua S
- Conti CJ
- Escamez MJ
- Castiglia D
- Zambruno G
- Youssefian L
- Vahidnezhad H
- Requena L
- Itin P
- Tadini G
- Yordanova I
- Martin L
- Uitto J
- Has C
- Del Rio M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1158-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Blister/complications, genetics"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/complications, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- "Periodontal Diseases/complications, genetics"
- "Photosensitivity Disorders/complications, genetics"
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of the risk and characterization of non-melanoma skin cancer in Kindler syndrome: study of a series of 91 patients.
**Authors:** Guerrero-Aspizua S, Conti CJ, Escamez MJ, Castiglia D, Zambruno G, Youssefian L, Vahidnezhad H, Requena L, Itin P, Tadini G, Yordanova I, Martin L, Uitto J, Has C, Del Rio M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1158-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1158-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Jul 24;14(1):183. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1158-6.

Assessment of the risk and characterization of non-melanoma skin cancer in 
Kindler syndrome: study of a series of 91 patients.

Guerrero-Aspizua S(1)(2)(3)(4), Conti CJ(5)(6), Escamez MJ(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Castiglia D(7), Zambruno G(8), Youssefian L(9), Vahidnezhad H(10)(11), Requena 
L(2), Itin P(12), Tadini G(13), Yordanova I(14), Martin L(15), Uitto J(10), Has 
C(16), Del Rio M(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Leganés, 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Hospital Fundación Jiménez Díaz e Instituto de Investigación FJD, Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)Epithelial Biomedicine Division, CIEMAT, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), U714, 
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Leganés, 
Madrid, Spain. cconti@ing.uc3m.es.
(6)Hospital Fundación Jiménez Díaz e Instituto de Investigación FJD, Madrid, 
Spain. cconti@ing.uc3m.es.
(7)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Istituto Dermopatico 
dell'Immacolata (IDI)-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(8)Genetic and Rare Diseases Research Area, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
IRCCS, Piazza Sant'Onofrio, 4, 00165, Rome, Italy.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(10)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical 
College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(11)Biotechnology Research Center, Department of Molecular Medicine, Pasteur 
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(12)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(13)Pediatric Dermatology, Department of Physiopathology and Transplantation, 
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico di Milano, University 
of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(14)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, Medical University Pleven, Pleven, 
Bulgaria.
(15)Department of Dermatology, Angers University Hospital, Angers, France.
(16)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Kindler Syndrome (KS) is a rare genodermatosis characterized by skin 
fragility, skin atrophy, premature aging and poikiloderma. It is caused by 
mutations in the FERMT1 gene, which encodes kindlin-1, a protein involved in 
integrin signalling and the formation of focal adhesions. Several reports have 
shown the presence of non-melanoma skin cancers in KS patients but a systematic 
study evaluating the risk of these tumors at different ages and their potential 
outcome has not yet been published. We have here addressed this condition in a 
retrospective study of 91 adult KS patients, characterizing frequency, 
metastatic potential and body distribution of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in 
these patients. SCC developed in 13 of the 91 patients.
RESULTS: The youngest case arose in a 29-year-old patient; however, the 
cumulative risk of SCC increased to 66.7% in patients over 60 years of age. The 
highly aggressive nature of SCCs in KS was confirmed showing that 53.8% of the 
patients bearing SCCs develop metastatic disease. Our data also showed there are 
no specific mutations that correlate directly with the development of SCC; 
however, the mutational distribution along the gene appears to be different in 
patients bearing SCC from SCC-free patients. The body distribution of the tumor 
appearance was also unique and different from other bullous diseases, being 
concentrated in the hands and around the oral cavity, which are areas of high 
inflammation in this disease.
CONCLUSIONS: This study characterizes SCCs in the largest series of KS patients 
reported so far, showing the high frequency and aggressiveness of these tumors. 
It also describes their particular body distribution and their relationship with 
mutations in the FERMT-1 gene. These data reinforce the need for close 
monitoring of premalignant or malignant lesions in KS patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1158-6
PMCID: PMC6657209
PMID: 31340837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.