---
reference_id: "PMID:30597645"
title: Frequent mutations of genes encoding vacuolar H(+) -ATPase components in granular cell tumors.
authors:
- Sekimizu M
- Yoshida A
- Mitani S
- Asano N
- Hirata M
- Kubo T
- Yamazaki F
- Sakamoto H
- Kato M
- Makise N
- Mori T
- Yamazaki N
- Sekine S
- Oda I
- Watanabe SI
- Hiraga H
- Yonemoto T
- Kawamoto T
- Naka N
- Funauchi Y
- Nishida Y
- Honoki K
- Kawano H
- Tsuchiya H
- Kunisada T
- Matsuda K
- Inagaki K
- Kawai A
- Ichikawa H
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.22727
keywords:
- Granular Cell Tumor/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation Rate
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics"
- Vacuolar Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics
- Prorenin Receptor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequent mutations of genes encoding vacuolar H(+) -ATPase components in granular cell tumors.
**Authors:** Sekimizu M, Yoshida A, Mitani S, Asano N, Hirata M, Kubo T, Yamazaki F, Sakamoto H, Kato M, Makise N, Mori T, Yamazaki N, Sekine S, Oda I, Watanabe SI, Hiraga H, Yonemoto T, Kawamoto T, Naka N, Funauchi Y, Nishida Y, Honoki K, Kawano H, Tsuchiya H, Kunisada T, Matsuda K, Inagaki K, Kawai A, Ichikawa H
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.22727](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.22727)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2019 Jun;58(6):373-380. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22727. Epub
 2019 Jan 21.

Frequent mutations of genes encoding vacuolar H(+) -ATPase components in 
granular cell tumors.

Sekimizu M(1)(2)(3), Yoshida A(4), Mitani S(1), Asano N(5), Hirata M(6), Kubo 
T(1)(7), Yamazaki F(1)(8), Sakamoto H(1), Kato M(9), Makise N(4), Mori T(4), 
Yamazaki N(10), Sekine S(4), Oda I(11), Watanabe SI(12), Hiraga H(13), Yonemoto 
T(14), Kawamoto T(15), Naka N(16), Funauchi Y(17), Nishida Y(18), Honoki K(19), 
Kawano H(20), Tsuchiya H(21), Kunisada T(22), Matsuda K(23), Inagaki K(3), Kawai 
A(2), Ichikawa H(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Musculoskeletal Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Showa University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology and Clinical Laboratories, National Cancer Center 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(6)Laboratory of Genome Technology, Institute of Medical Science, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Division of Translational Genomics, National Cancer Center-Exploratory 
Oncology Research & Clinical Trial Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Bioinformatics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Dermatologic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(11)Endoscopy Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Department of Thoracic Surgery, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(13)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hokkaido Cancer Center, Sapporo, Japan.
(14)Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Chiba Cancer Center, Chiba, Japan.
(15)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kobe University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
(16)Musculoskeletal Oncology Service, Osaka International Cancer Institute, 
Osaka, Japan.
(17)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation 
for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.
(18)Department of Rehabilitation, Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.
(19)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Nara Medical University, Kashihara, Nara, 
Japan.
(20)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Teikyo University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(21)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kanazawa University Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, Kanazawa, Japan.
(22)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(23)Laboratory of Clinical Genome Sequencing, Graduate School of Frontier 
Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Granular cell tumors (GCTs) are rare mesenchymal tumors that exhibit a 
characteristic morphology and a finely granular cytoplasm. The genetic 
alterations responsible for GCT tumorigenesis had been unknown until recently, 
when loss-of-function mutations of ATP6AP1 and ATP6AP2 were described. Thus, we 
performed whole-exome sequencing, RNA sequencing, and targeted sequencing of 51 
GCT samples. From these genomic analyses, we identified mutations in genes 
encoding vacuolar H+ -ATPase (V-ATPase) components, including ATP6AP1 and 
ATP6AP2, in 33 (65%) GCTs. ATP6AP1 and ATP6AP2 mutations were found in 23 (45%) 
and 2 (4%) samples, respectively, and all were truncating or splice site 
mutations. In addition, seven other genes encoding V-ATPase components were also 
mutated, and three mutations in ATP6V0C occurred on the same amino acid 
(isoleucine 136). These V-ATPase component gene mutations were mutually 
exclusive, with one exception. These results suggest that V-ATPase function is 
impaired in GCTs not only by loss-of-function mutations of ATP6AP1 and ATP6AP2 
but also through mutations of other subunits. Our findings provide additional 
support for the hypothesis that V-ATPase dysfunction promotes GCT tumorigenesis.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.22727
PMID: 30597645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]