---
reference_id: "PMID:6750750"
title: "Giardiasis: nutritional implications."
authors:
- Solomons NW
journal: Rev Infect Dis
year: '1982'
doi: 10.1093/4.4.859
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giardiasis: nutritional implications.
**Authors:** Solomons NW
**Journal:** Rev Infect Dis (1982)
**DOI:** [10.1093/4.4.859](https://doi.org/10.1093/4.4.859)

## Content

1. Rev Infect Dis. 1982 Jul-Aug;4(4):859-69. doi: 10.1093/4.4.859.

Giardiasis: nutritional implications.

Solomons NW.

The debate about the pathogenicity of Giardia lamblia in man has ended, and th 
issues regarding the prevalence of clinical and subclinical infections and their 
nutritonal impact have become the foremost considerations. Giardiasis can 
produce steatorrhea, maldigestion, and malabsorption of carbohydrates and of 
vitamins A and B12. The mechanisms of the absorptive dysfunction are not clear, 
but morphological abnormalities of the intestinal mucosa and/or bacterial 
overgrowth might play a role. Severe clinical giardiasis can cause "failure to 
thrive" in young children, but the impact, if any, of subclinical giardiasis on 
growth in general populations is not well defined. Protein-energy malnutrition 
appears to predispose to giardial infection, perhaps because of the accompanying 
hypochlorhydria, immunosuppression, and altered gastrointestinal flora. The lack 
of a sensitive and noninvasive diagnostic test for human giardial infection 
limits the investigation of the nutritional correlates of giardiasis.

DOI: 10.1093/4.4.859
PMID: 6750750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]