---
reference_id: "PMID:23773889"
title: "Psychosocial Treatments for Schizophrenia: An Evaluation of Theoretically Divergent Treatment Paradigms, and Their Efficacy."
authors:
- Clark CM
journal: Clin Schizophr Relat Psychoses
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychosocial Treatments for Schizophrenia: An Evaluation of Theoretically Divergent Treatment Paradigms, and Their Efficacy.
**Authors:** Clark CM
**Journal:** Clin Schizophr Relat Psychoses (2016)

## Content

1. Clin Schizophr Relat Psychoses. 2016 spring;10(1):41-50. Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Psychosocial Treatments for Schizophrenia: An Evaluation of Theoretically 
Divergent Treatment Paradigms, and Their Efficacy.

Clark CM.

General Purpose: This paper chronologically examines four theoretically 
divergent psychosocial treatments for schizophrenia, each intended to augment 
pharmacological treatment. The goal is to familiarize readers with a sample of 
well-established psychosocial treatments to provide an enhanced perspective on 
newer and future psychosocial treatments for schizophrenia. Clinical 
implications and future research directions are discussed.
METHODOLOGY: Social skills training, cognitive behavioral therapy, cognitive 
remediation, and social cognitive training therapy paradigms were searched and 
the extant literature is summarized for each, with particular focus on: 1) the 
rationale for treatment methodology; 2) particular methods of treatment; and, 3) 
meta-analytic data regarding their efficacy and/or effectiveness.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: Each of the four treatment methodologies discussed evinces 
particular strengths and specific weaknesses for clinical practice, with no 
clear superior methodology across all clinical populations/situations. Future 
research must continue to examine social cognitive treatments, as well as the 
effects of combined psychosocial treatments.

PMID: 23773889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]