---
reference_id: "PMID:39254828"
title: "Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms following curative treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia: incidence, correlation with therapeutic regimen, and future directions."
authors:
- Menon A
- Sukhanova M
- Gao J
- Wolniak K
- Fu L
- Chen YH
- Chen QC
- Tariq H
journal: J Hematop
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12308-024-00606-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Incidence
- "Tretinoin/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Arsenic Trioxide/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Neoplasms, Second Primary/epidemiology, chemically induced"
- Retrospective Studies
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms following curative treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia: incidence, correlation with therapeutic regimen, and future directions.
**Authors:** Menon A, Sukhanova M, Gao J, Wolniak K, Fu L, Chen YH, Chen QC, Tariq H
**Journal:** J Hematop (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12308-024-00606-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12308-024-00606-6)

## Content

1. J Hematop. 2024 Dec;17(4):201-208. doi: 10.1007/s12308-024-00606-6. Epub 2024
Sep 10.

Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms following curative treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukemia: incidence, correlation with therapeutic regimen, and
future directions.

Menon A(1), Sukhanova M(1), Gao J(1), Wolniak K(1), Fu L(1), Chen YH(1), Chen
QC(1), Tariq H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, 251 E. Huron St, Chicago, IL, 60611,
USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, 251 E. Huron St, Chicago, IL, 60611,
USA. hamza.tariq@northwestern.edu.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO) have revolutionized
the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), offering a cure rate
of > 80%. Along with improved survival, the long-term consequences of anti-APL
therapy are becoming increasingly apparent, including potential therapy-related
myeloid neoplasms (t-MNs). T-MNs are well known to arise after cytotoxic
chemotherapy, but the leukemogenic potential of regimens utilizing only ATRA/ATO
is not well established. The objective of this study is to examine the
incidence, long-term risk, and clinicopathologic features of t-MNs arising after
anti-APL therapy and how they correlates with the therapeutic regimen employed.
We retrospectively collected treated APL patients between 01/2001 and 02/2021,
categorized them into ATRA/ATO + chemo and ATRA/ATO groups based on the regimen
used, and evaluated for the development of t-MN. A total of 110 APL patients
were identified, including 67 (61%) treated with ATRA/ATO + chemo and 43 (39%)
treated with ATRA/ATO only. Overall, 4/110 (3.6%) patients developed t-MNs, with
all four emerging in the ATRA/ATO + chemo group. Ultimately, the incidence of
t-MN in ATRA/ATO + chemo group was significantly higher compared with ATRA/ATO
only group(5.97% vs. 0.0%, respectively; p = 0.0289). Our data spanning over two
decades suggests that conventional chemotherapy for APL is associated with a
small but significant risk of t-MN, whereas ATR/ATO does not carry this risk.
This takes on new significance, considering several recent and ongoing trials
have shown that a chemotherapy-free approach might become feasible for all risk
APL types in the near future. Consequently, the omission of leukemogenic and
arguably unnecessary chemotherapy from APL regimens may reduce the incidence of
t-MNs in long-term survivors without sacrificing their cure rates.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12308-024-00606-6
PMID: 39254828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: This study was
approved by the Northwestern University institutional review board. Consent for
publication: For this type of study, consent for publication is not required.
Informed consent: For this type of study, formal consent is not required.
Conflict of interest: The authors declare no competing interests.
