---
reference_id: "PMID:40606564"
title: A Novel Heterozygous IHH c.331_333del Mutation Identified in a Fetus with Brachydactyly Type A1 Causes IHH Protein Maturation Failure in HEK293T Cells.
authors:
- Zhu T
- Guan L
- Chen D
- Luo Y
- Zhu M
- Sun R
- Shi J
- Wang Q
- Chen Y
- Wang Y
- Wang H
- Lu Z
- Wang D
journal: Phenomics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s43657-024-00191-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Heterozygous IHH c.331_333del Mutation Identified in a Fetus with Brachydactyly Type A1 Causes IHH Protein Maturation Failure in HEK293T Cells.
**Authors:** Zhu T, Guan L, Chen D, Luo Y, Zhu M, Sun R, Shi J, Wang Q, Chen Y, Wang Y, Wang H, Lu Z, Wang D
**Journal:** Phenomics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s43657-024-00191-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s43657-024-00191-9)

## Content

1. Phenomics. 2024 Dec 21;5(2):123-136. doi: 10.1007/s43657-024-00191-9. 
eCollection 2025 Apr.

A Novel Heterozygous IHH c.331_333del Mutation Identified in a Fetus with 
Brachydactyly Type A1 Causes IHH Protein Maturation Failure in HEK293T Cells.

Zhu T(#)(1)(2), Guan L(#)(3), Chen D(1)(4), Luo Y(1)(5), Zhu M(1), Sun R(1), Shi 
J(1), Wang Q(1), Chen Y(1), Wang Y(1), Wang H(2), Lu Z(6), Wang D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, No. 2 Fuxue Road, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000 P. R. China.
(2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Intelligent Cancer Biomarker Discovery and 
Translation, First Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 
325035 China.
(3)Department of Ultrasound Imaging, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou 
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000 P. R. China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Yongjia People's Hospital, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000 
P.R. China.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Taizhou Women and Children's Hospital of Wenzhou 
Medical University, Taizhou, Zhejiang 318000 P.R. China.
(6)The Key Laboratory of Emergency and Disaster Medicine of Wenzhou, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000 P. 
R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

Brachydactyly A1 (BDA1) is a rare disorder characterized by the disproportionate 
shortening of fingers and/or toes with or without symphalangism. Mutations in 
Indian hedgehog signaling molecule (IHH), which impair the effect of functional 
IHH protein derived from its precursor IHH, are commonly identified in patients 
with BDA1 or acrocapitofemoral dysplasia (ACFD). The ultrasound phenotype of 
fetuses with IHH mutations has rarely been described. To better understand the 
consequences of IHH mutation, we analyzed the characteristics of a Chinese fetus 
with BDA1 caused by a novel heterozygous IHH mutation. Clinical data and genomic 
DNA were collected from the proband and family members. Whole-exome sequencing 
(WES) was performed to identify potential causative mutations. Sequence analysis 
was performed to investigate the conservation of the affected leucine residue in 
IHH. Protein 3D modeling was performed to predict the effects of the mutation on 
protein structure. In vitro overexpression transfection experiments in human 
embryonic kidney 293T (HEK293T) cell lines were performed to evaluate the 
pathogenicity of the identified mutation. The fetal proband carried a novel 
heterozygous mutation in IHH (NM_002181.4: c.331_333delCTG, NP_002172.2: 
p.Leu111del) inherited from the father; this mutation manifested as shortening 
of the limbs, with more severe shortening observed in the proximal extremities 
than in the distal extremities, as evidenced by ultrasound. The Leu111 residue 
is highly conserved among vertebrates, and deletion of this residue destabilizes 
the protein structure. Western blotting analysis of HEK293T cells in 
overexpression transfection experiments revealed that the Leu111del mutation led 
to an increase in the level of the IHH precursor and a reduction in the level of 
functional IHH protein compared with those in HEK293T cells expressing wild-type 
IHH, indicating that this mutation might cause IHH protein dysmaturity. The 
novel heterozygous mutation c.331_333delCTG (p.Leu111del) in the IHH gene is the 
likely cause of BDA1 in this Chinese fetus. This mutation causes IHH protein 
maturation failure. These findings contribute to our understanding of the 
molecular pathogenesis of BDA1 and the clinical identification of fetal BDA1.

© The Author(s) 2024.

DOI: 10.1007/s43657-024-00191-9
PMCID: PMC12209099
PMID: 40606564

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestThe authors have no relevant 
financial or nonfinancial competing interests to disclose.