---
reference_id: "PMID:33794348"
title: Non-classic splicing mutation in the CPLANE1 (C5orf42) gene cause Joubert syndrome in a fetus with severe craniocerebral dysplasia.
authors:
- Zhu H
- Chen W
- Ren H
- Zhang Y
- Niu Y
- Wu D
- Jiang L
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104212
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-classic splicing mutation in the CPLANE1 (C5orf42) gene cause Joubert syndrome in a fetus with severe craniocerebral dysplasia.
**Authors:** Zhu H, Chen W, Ren H, Zhang Y, Niu Y, Wu D, Jiang L
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104212](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104212)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2021 Jun;64(6):104212. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104212. Epub 
2021 Mar 30.

Non-classic splicing mutation in the CPLANE1 (C5orf42) gene cause Joubert 
syndrome in a fetus with severe craniocerebral dysplasia.

Zhu H(1), Chen W(2), Ren H(3), Zhang Y(3), Niu Y(4), Wu D(4), Jiang L(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The Sixth Medical Center of PLA 
General Hospital, Beijing, 100048, China. Electronic address: 
fbird2004@sina.com.
(2)Kaiumph Medical Diagnostics Co, Ltd, Cuihuyun Center 17-3-3, Beijing, 100102, 
China.
(3)Departments of Ultrasound Medicine, The Sixth Medical Center of PLA General 
Hospital, Beijing, 100048, China.
(4)Departments of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The Sixth Medical Center of PLA 
General Hospital, Beijing, 100048, China.

BACKGROUD: Joubert syndrome is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder characterized 
by clinical and genetic heterogeneity. The characteristic molar tooth sign, 
which resulted from cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and midbrain anomalies, is 
expected to be the key diagnostic feature for this disease. However, it is not 
easy to make a definite diagnosis in prenatal only based on the imageology due 
to its clinical heterogeneity.
CASE REPORT: We report on a fetus who was detected cerebellum dysplasia and 
encephalocele by ultrasound at 19 and 23 gestational weeks and confirmed by MRI 
examination. The pregnancy was terminated at 23 weeks of gestation. Postaxial 
polydactyly and deficiency in occipital bone and skin were identified in the 
induced fetus.
RESULTS: The whole exome sequencing identified a novel compound heterozygous 
variation in the CPLANE1 gene related with Joubert syndrome, including a 2-bp 
insertion, NM_023073.3:c.1383_1384dup; p.(Gly462Glufs*3) and a non-classic 
splicing variation, NC_000005.10(NM_023073.3):c.7691-5_7691-4del. The 
pathogenicity of the non-classic splicing variation was further confirmed by 
cDNA level sequencing, which showed a exon 39 skipping that would introduce a 
premature termination. The novel compound heterozygous variation caused a 
complete function loss of the CPLANE1 gene.
CONCLUSION: The cerebellum dysplasia fetus without obvious molar tooth sign was 
finally diagnosed as Joubert syndrome, combined with genetic detecting and the 
postnatal clinical symptoms. We also highlight the clinical heterogeneity of 
encephalodysplasia in Joubert syndrome, which increases the clinical diagnosis 
difficulty, especially for prenatal diagnosis. Our findings provided a new 
perspective for the prenatal diagnosis of Joubert syndrome with severe 
craniocerebral dysplasia and expanded the variation spectrum of the CPLANE1 
gene.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104212
PMID: 33794348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]