---
reference_id: "PMID:24633901"
title: Tic disorder probably associated with steroid responsive encephalopathy with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT).
authors:
- Saygi S
- Ozkale Y
- Erol I
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s12098-014-1374-y
keywords:
- Child
- Encephalitis/complications
- Hashimoto Disease/complications
- Humans
- Male
- Tic Disorders/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tic disorder probably associated with steroid responsive encephalopathy with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT).
**Authors:** Saygi S, Ozkale Y, Erol I
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12098-014-1374-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-014-1374-y)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2014 Oct;81(10):1105-7. doi: 10.1007/s12098-014-1374-y. Epub
 2014 Mar 16.

Tic disorder probably associated with steroid responsive encephalopathy with 
autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT).

Saygi S(1), Ozkale Y, Erol I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child Neurology, Baskent University 
Faculty of Medicine, Adana Teaching and Medical Research Center, Adana, Turkey, 
semra_saygi@yahoo.com.

Steroid responsive encephalopathy with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT), a rare 
disorder in individuals of all age groups, including children, is characterized 
by high titers of anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies. The present report 
concerns a previously healthy 12-y-old boy who presented with motor tics. The 
patient underwent an extensive work-up to identify the underlying etiologies and 
risk factors predisposing him to tic disorder. Based on the clinical and 
laboratory results, a diagnosis of SREAT was made. Although some studies have 
reported associated behavioral and cognitive changes, myoclonus, seizures, 
pyramidal tract dysfunction, psychosis, and coma. The authors describe a case of 
tic disorder, probably due to SREAT, as well as its course of treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-014-1374-y
PMID: 24633901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]