---
reference_id: "PMID:39109100"
title: "A Solitary Peutz-Jeghers Hamartomatous Polyp in the Gastric Body: A Case Report."
authors:
- Madera N
- Acevedo N
- González-Peralta C
- Castro R
- Mezquita-Luna V
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.63943
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Solitary Peutz-Jeghers Hamartomatous Polyp in the Gastric Body: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Madera N, Acevedo N, González-Peralta C, Castro R, Mezquita-Luna V
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.63943](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.63943)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jul 6;16(7):e63943. doi: 10.7759/cureus.63943. eCollection 2024 
Jul.

A Solitary Peutz-Jeghers Hamartomatous Polyp in the Gastric Body: A Case Report.

Madera N(1), Acevedo N(2), González-Peralta C(3), Castro R(4), Mezquita-Luna 
V(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Clínica Corominas, Santiago, DOM.
(2)Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica Madre y Maestra, Santiago, DOM.
(3)Gastroenterology, Clínica Corominas, Santiago, DOM.
(4)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hospital Regional José María Cabral y 
Báez, Santiago, DOM.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare autosomal dominant genetic condition 
characterized by the development of hamartoma-type intestinal polyposis and 
areas of skin pigmentation, among other signs. Additionally, the occurrence of 
solitary Peutz-Jeghers polyps is exceedingly rare. We present the case of a 
50-year-old female with a medical history of hypothyroidism, chronic gastritis, 
and dyslipidemia, who presented with dyspeptic symptoms and occasional rectal 
bleeding. Endoscopic examination revealed a solitary hamartomatous polyp in the 
gastric body and other gastrointestinal abnormalities. The patient underwent 
treatment and is being monitored with regular endoscopic studies and evaluations 
for other potential neoplasms. This case underscores the importance of 
considering the syndrome as a potential differential diagnosis. It emphasizes 
the necessity of a multidisciplinary approach to managing and monitoring such 
cases, particularly the early detection of possible neoplasms.

Copyright © 2024, Madera et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.63943
PMCID: PMC11300189
PMID: 39109100

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.