---
reference_id: "PMID:1844355"
title: "Double vagina, cardiac, pulmonary, and other genital malformations with 46,XY karyotype."
authors:
- Meacham LR
- Winn KJ
- Culler FL
- Parks JS
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320410420
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/embryology, genetics"
- Female
- Genitalia/abnormalities
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Karyotyping
- Lung/abnormalities
- Male
- Vagina/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Double vagina, cardiac, pulmonary, and other genital malformations with 46,XY karyotype.
**Authors:** Meacham LR, Winn KJ, Culler FL, Parks JS
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320410420](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320410420)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1991 Dec 15;41(4):478-81. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320410420.

Double vagina, cardiac, pulmonary, and other genital malformations with 46,XY
karyotype.

Meacham LR(1), Winn KJ, Culler FL, Parks JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet. 1992 Sep 15;44(2):252. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320440232.

We have studied two unrelated genetic males with a novel constellation of
genital, cardiac, and pulmonary malformations. The genital abnormalities
consisted of a true double vagina, retention of Müllerian structures, and
undervirilization of the external genitalia. Both infants had complex cyanotic
congenital heart defects, hypoplastic right lungs, anomalous pulmonary venous
return, and abnormalities of the diaphragm. One patient had rhabdomyomatous
dysplasia of the lungs. The cause of this malformation pattern is unknown. There
was no family history of similar defects, no consanguinity, no known exposure to
teratogens, and no chromosome abnormality. The retention of Müllerian structures
and undervirilization of male genitalia in these cases could be the result of
failure in production of adequate amounts of testosterone and Müllerian
inhibitory factor at appropriate times in gestation. Because the developing
human vagina is at no stage a duplicate structure, a double vagina cannot be the
result of arrested genital differentiation. The unusual occurrence of a true
double vagina should lead to careful pulmonary and cardiac evaluation.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320410420
PMID: 1844355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
