---
reference_id: "PMID:40172088"
title: "BRAF in non-small cell lung cancer: From molecular mechanisms to clinical practice."
authors:
- Parisi C
- Planchard D
journal: Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.35781
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF in non-small cell lung cancer: From molecular mechanisms to clinical practice.
**Authors:** Parisi C, Planchard D
**Journal:** Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.35781](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.35781)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2025 Mar 15;131 Suppl 1:e35781. doi: 10.1002/cncr.35781.

BRAF in non-small cell lung cancer: From molecular mechanisms to clinical
practice.

Parisi C(1)(2)(3), Planchard D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Thoracic Cancer Group, Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy and
International Center for Thoracic Cancers, Villejuif, France.
(2)Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(3)Department of Medical-Surgical Sciences and Translational Medicine, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

V-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF) mutations are found in up
to 4% of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Approximately 2% of
advanced NSCLC cases harbor a BRAF V600E (class I) mutation. Because targeted
therapies inhibiting BRAF (e.g., dabrafenib and encorafenib) and MEK (trametinib
and binimetinib) are associated with improved outcomes as first- or second-line
treatment for BRAF V600E-mutant NSCLC, both European Society for Medical
Oncology and National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines recommend testing
for the BRAF V600E oncogenic driver at the time of diagnosis. In recent years,
the treatment landscape of this molecular subgroup has seen great development.
Different therapeutic strategies including anti-programmed death ligand 1
antibodies and kinase inhibitors have been assessed thus far, with novel agents
(e.g., pan-BRAF inhibitors) and therapeutic associations underway in preclinical
and clinical trials. This review describes the current understanding of the BRAF
clinicopathologic role in NSCLC, with a special focus on published trials
assessing currently approved therapies. Mechanisms of drug resistance and future
perspectives on the therapeutic approach of BRAF-deregulated NSCLC are also
summarized.

© 2025 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.35781
PMID: 40172088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
