---
reference_id: "PMID:12622783"
title: "Association of HLA-DR and type II collagen autoimmunity with Meniere's disease."
authors:
- Koo JW
- Oh SH
- Chang SO
- Park MH
- Lim MJ
- Yoo TJ
- Kim CS
journal: Tissue Antigens
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.2003.610112.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of HLA-DR and type II collagen autoimmunity with Meniere's disease.
**Authors:** Koo JW, Oh SH, Chang SO, Park MH, Lim MJ, Yoo TJ, Kim CS
**Journal:** Tissue Antigens (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1034/j.1399-0039.2003.610112.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-0039.2003.610112.x)

## Content

1. Tissue Antigens. 2003 Jan;61(1):99-103. doi:
10.1034/j.1399-0039.2003.610112.x.

Association of HLA-DR and type II collagen autoimmunity with Meniere's disease.

Koo JW(1), Oh SH, Chang SO, Park MH, Lim MJ, Yoo TJ, Kim CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Department of Clinical Pathology, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

To investigate HLA-associated genetic susceptibility to Meniere's disease in 
relation to type II collagen (CII) autoimmunity status, HLA-DRB1 genotyping and 
ELISA measurement of anti-CII antibody were performed in 41 Korean patients with 
Meniere's disease. In the anti-CII positive subgroup (20%) of patients, the 
frequency of HLA-DRB1*0405 was significantly increased (uncorrected) compared 
with both controls (63% vs 16%) and anti-CII negative patients (63% vs 12%). In 
the anti-CII negative subgroup, HLA-DRB1*1201 was significantly increased 
(uncorrected) (27% vs 10%) and DRB1*13 was decreased (6% vs 24%) compared with 
controls; these alleles appeared to confer susceptibility and resistance to the 
development of the disease. Association of HLA-DRB1*0405 with anti-CII positive 
Meniere's disease in this study suggests that it shares a specific HLA-DR 
sequence, QRRAA, as a genetic susceptibility factor with the anti-CII positive 
rheumatoid arthritis. In conclusion, whilst type II collagen autoimmunity may 
have a partial role in Meniere's disease, different HLA-DR alleles may also be 
associated with either susceptibility or resistance to the development of the 
disease in relation to anti-CII antibody status.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.2003.610112.x
PMID: 12622783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]