---
reference_id: "PMID:33991782"
title: "Clinical utility of next generation sequencing to detect IGH/IL3 rearrangements [t(5;14)(q31.1;q32.1)] in B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma."
authors:
- Guenzel AJ
- Smadbeck JB
- Golden CL
- Williamson CM
- Benevides Demasi JC
- Vasmatzis G
- Pearce KE
- Olteanu H
- Xu X
- Hoppman NL
- Greipp PT
- Baughn LB
- Ketterling RP
- Peterson JF
journal: Ann Diagn Pathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2021.151761
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Biopsy, Needle/methods"
- Bone Marrow/pathology
- Child
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14"
- Cytogenetics/methods
- Eosinophilia/immunology
- Female
- Gene Rearrangement/genetics
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence/methods"
- Interleukin-3/genetics
- Karyotype
- Male
- "Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/diagnosis, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical utility of next generation sequencing to detect IGH/IL3 rearrangements [t(5;14)(q31.1;q32.1)] in B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.
**Authors:** Guenzel AJ, Smadbeck JB, Golden CL, Williamson CM, Benevides Demasi JC, Vasmatzis G, Pearce KE, Olteanu H, Xu X, Hoppman NL, Greipp PT, Baughn LB, Ketterling RP, Peterson JF
**Journal:** Ann Diagn Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2021.151761](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2021.151761)

## Content

1. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2021 Aug;53:151761. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2021.151761. 
Epub 2021 May 10.

Clinical utility of next generation sequencing to detect IGH/IL3 rearrangements 
[t(5;14)(q31.1;q32.1)] in B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.

Guenzel AJ(1), Smadbeck JB(2), Golden CL(1), Williamson CM(1), Benevides Demasi 
JC(1), Vasmatzis G(2), Pearce KE(1), Olteanu H(3), Xu X(1), Hoppman NL(1), 
Greipp PT(1), Baughn LB(1), Ketterling RP(4), Peterson JF(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Laboratory Genetics and Genomics, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of America.
(2)Center for Individualized Medicine-Biomarker Discovery, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, United States of America.
(3)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of America.
(4)Division of Laboratory Genetics and Genomics, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of America; 
Division of Hematopathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of America.
(5)Division of Laboratory Genetics and Genomics, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of America. 
Electronic address: Peterson.Jess@mayo.edu.

The t(5;14)(q31.1;q32.1) associated with B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma 
(B-ALL/LBL) is a rare, recurrent genetic abnormality recognized as a distinct 
entity by the 2017 World Health Organization (WHO) classification. In these 
cases, the IGH enhancer region (14q32.1) is juxtaposed to the vicinity of the 
IL3 gene (5q31.1), resulting in increased production of interleukin-3 (IL3) and 
subsequently a characteristic reactive eosinophilia. B-ALL with 
t(5;14)(q31.1;q32.1) may have a low lymphoblast count that can complicate 
detection of t(5;14)(q31.1;q32.1) by conventional chromosome studies. We have 
identified four patients with IGH/IL3 rearrangements despite normal conventional 
chromosome studies in each case [one patient had a non-clonal t(5;14)(q31;q32) 
finding]. Fluorescence in situ hybridization utilizing a laboratory-developed 
IGH break-apart probe set identified IGH rearrangements in three of four cases, 
and a next generation sequencing (NGS) based assay, mate-pair sequencing 
(MPseq), was required to characterize the IGH/IL3 rearrangements in each case. 
Three patients demonstrated a balanced t(5;14)(q31.1;q32.1) while one patient 
had a cryptic insertion of the IL3 gene into the IGH region. These results 
demonstrate that NGS-based assays, such as MPseq, confer an advantage in the 
detection of IGH/IL3 rearrangements that are otherwise challenging to 
characterize by traditional cytogenetic methodologies.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2021.151761
PMID: 33991782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]