---
reference_id: "PMID:39116206"
title: Lipid-associated macrophages for osimertinib resistance and leptomeningeal metastases in NSCLC.
authors:
- Li YS
- Lai WP
- Yin K
- Zheng MM
- Tu HY
- Guo WB
- Li L
- Lin SH
- Wang Z
- Zeng L
- Jiang BY
- Chen ZH
- Zhou Q
- Zhang XC
- Yang JJ
- Zhong WZ
- Yang XN
- Wang BC
- Pan Y
- Chen HJ
- Xiao FM
- Sun H
- Sun YL
- Bai XY
- Ke EE
- Lin JX
- Liu SM
- Li Y
- Luo OJ
- Wu YL
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114613
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/pathology, drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/pathology, drug therapy"
- "Aniline Compounds/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Acrylamides/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- "Macrophages/metabolism, drug effects"
- Animals
- Mice
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Female
- "Meningeal Carcinomatosis/drug therapy, pathology, secondary"
- Lipid Metabolism/drug effects
- "CD47 Antigen/metabolism, genetics"
- Male
- Phagocytosis/drug effects
- "ErbB Receptors/metabolism, genetics"
- Indoles
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lipid-associated macrophages for osimertinib resistance and leptomeningeal metastases in NSCLC.
**Authors:** Li YS, Lai WP, Yin K, Zheng MM, Tu HY, Guo WB, Li L, Lin SH, Wang Z, Zeng L, Jiang BY, Chen ZH, Zhou Q, Zhang XC, Yang JJ, Zhong WZ, Yang XN, Wang BC, Pan Y, Chen HJ, Xiao FM, Sun H, Sun YL, Bai XY, Ke EE, Lin JX, Liu SM, Li Y, Luo OJ, Wu YL
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114613](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114613)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2024 Aug 27;43(8):114613. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114613. Epub
2024  Aug 7.

Lipid-associated macrophages for osimertinib resistance and leptomeningeal
metastases in NSCLC.

Li YS(1), Lai WP(2), Yin K(3), Zheng MM(3), Tu HY(3), Guo WB(3), Li L(4), Lin
SH(5), Wang Z(3), Zeng L(3), Jiang BY(3), Chen ZH(3), Zhou Q(3), Zhang XC(3),
Yang JJ(3), Zhong WZ(3), Yang XN(3), Wang BC(3), Pan Y(3), Chen HJ(3), Xiao
FM(3), Sun H(3), Sun YL(3), Bai XY(3), Ke EE(3), Lin JX(3), Liu SM(6), Li Y(6),
Luo OJ(7), Wu YL(8).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital
(Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510080 China; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine in
Lung Cancer, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital (Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510080, China; School
of Medicine, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China;
Department of Oncology, Heyuan Hospital of Guangdong Provincial People's
Hospital, Heyuan People's Hospital, Heyuan 517000, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China; Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of
Education, Institute of Hematology, School of Medicine, Jinan University,
Guangzhou 510632, China; Department of Systems Biomedical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.
(3)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital
(Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510080 China; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine in
Lung Cancer, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital (Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510080, China.
(4)Medical Research Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital (Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510080,
China.
(5)China-New Zealand Joint Laboratory on Biomedicine and Health, State Key
Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, CAS Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology,
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
GIBH-HKU Guangdong-Hong Kong Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Research
Centre, GIBH-CUHK Joint Research Laboratory on Stem Cell and Regenerative
Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Guangzhou 510700, China.
(6)Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China; Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of
Education, Institute of Hematology, School of Medicine, Jinan University,
Guangzhou 510632, China.
(7)Department of Systems Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, Jinan
University, Guangzhou 510632, China. Electronic address: luojh@jnu.edu.cn.
(8)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital
(Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510080 China; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine in
Lung Cancer, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital (Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510080, China; School
of Medicine, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China.
Electronic address: syylwu@live.cn.

Leptomeningeal metastases (LMs) remain a devastating complication of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), particularly following osimertinib resistance. We
conducted single-cell RNA sequencing on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from
EGFR-mutant NSCLC with central nervous system metastases. We found that
macrophages of LMs displayed functional and phenotypic heterogeneity and
enhanced immunosuppressive properties. A population of lipid-associated
macrophages, namely RNASE1_M, were linked to osimertinib resistance and LM
development, which was regulated by Midkine (MDK) from malignant epithelial
cells. MDK exhibited significant elevation in both CSF and plasma among patients
with LMs, with higher MDK levels correlating to poorer outcomes in an
independent cohort. Moreover, MDK could promote macrophage M2 polarization with
lipid metabolism and phagocytic function. Furthermore, malignant epithelial
cells in CSF, particularly after resistance to osimertinib, potentially achieved
immune evasion through CD47-SIRPA interactions with RNASE1_M. In conclusion, we
revealed a specific subtype of macrophages linked to osimertinib resistance and
LM development, providing a potential target to overcome LMs.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114613
PMID: 39116206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests Y.-L.W. has received
honoraria from AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, Roche, Pierre Fabre, Pfizer, and Sanofi
and has consulting or advisory roles with AstraZeneca, Roche, Merck, Boehringer
Ingelheim, and Roche outside the submitted work.
