---
reference_id: "PMID:1971141"
title: "Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita: genetic linkage to type II collagen (COL2AI)."
authors:
- Anderson IJ
- Goldberg RB
- Marion RW
- Upholt WB
- Tsipouras P
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1990'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita: genetic linkage to type II collagen (COL2AI).
**Authors:** Anderson IJ, Goldberg RB, Marion RW, Upholt WB, Tsipouras P
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1990)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1990 May;46(5):896-901.

Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita: genetic linkage to type II collagen 
(COL2AI).

Anderson IJ(1), Goldberg RB, Marion RW, Upholt WB, Tsipouras P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington 
06032.

Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC) is an autosomal dominantly 
inherited chondrodysplasia characterized by disproportionate short stature 
(short trunk), abnormal epiphyses, and flattened vertebral bodies. 
Manifestations are present at birth. We ascertained a 4-generation family 
exhibiting the clinical manifestations of the disorder. Previous evidence 
suggesting defects of type II collagen associated with the SEDC phenotype led us 
to genotype the family for various COL2A1 gene-associated RFLPs. A total of 17 
affected and unaffected members of this family were studied. The family was 
informative for a recently discovered HinfI RFLP. No recombinants between the 
marker and the phenotype were found in eight informative meioses. A maximum LOD 
score of 3.01 was obtained at a recombination fraction of .00. Our results 
indicate that the SEDC phenotype in this family is caused by mutations in or 
very close to the COL2A1 locus.

PMCID: PMC1683599
PMID: 1971141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]