---
reference_id: "PMID:26047794"
title: Autosomal-Recessive Mutations in SLC34A1 Encoding Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter 2A Cause Idiopathic Infantile Hypercalcemia.
authors:
- Schlingmann KP
- Ruminska J
- Kaufmann M
- Dursun I
- Patti M
- Kranz B
- Pronicka E
- Ciara E
- Akcay T
- Bulus D
- Cornelissen EA
- Gawlik A
- Sikora P
- Patzer L
- Galiano M
- Boyadzhiev V
- Dumic M
- Vivante A
- Kleta R
- Dekel B
- Levtchenko E
- Bindels RJ
- Rust S
- Forster IC
- Hernando N
- Jones G
- Wagner CA
- Konrad M
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2014101025
keywords:
- Animals
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Hypercalcemia/genetics
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infant, Newborn, Diseases/genetics"
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins/genetics
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type IIa/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal-Recessive Mutations in SLC34A1 Encoding Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter 2A Cause Idiopathic Infantile Hypercalcemia.
**Authors:** Schlingmann KP, Ruminska J, Kaufmann M, Dursun I, Patti M, Kranz B, Pronicka E, Ciara E, Akcay T, Bulus D, Cornelissen EA, Gawlik A, Sikora P, Patzer L, Galiano M, Boyadzhiev V, Dumic M, Vivante A, Kleta R, Dekel B, Levtchenko E, Bindels RJ, Rust S, Forster IC, Hernando N, Jones G, Wagner CA, Konrad M
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2014101025](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2014101025)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Feb;27(2):604-14. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2014101025. Epub
2015  Jun 5.

Autosomal-Recessive Mutations in SLC34A1 Encoding Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter
2A Cause Idiopathic Infantile Hypercalcemia.

Schlingmann KP(1), Ruminska J(2), Kaufmann M(3), Dursun I(4), Patti M(2), Kranz
B(1), Pronicka E(5), Ciara E(5), Akcay T(6), Bulus D(7), Cornelissen EA(8),
Gawlik A(9), Sikora P(10), Patzer L(11), Galiano M(12), Boyadzhiev V(13), Dumic
M(14), Vivante A(15), Kleta R(16), Dekel B(15), Levtchenko E(17), Bindels
RJ(18), Rust S(1), Forster IC(2), Hernando N(2), Jones G(19), Wagner CA(2),
Konrad M(20).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Münster,
Germany;
(2)Institute of Physiology and Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology
(ZIHP), University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland;
(3)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University,
Kingston, Ontario, Canada;
(4)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Münster,
Germany; Department of Pediatrics, Kayseri University, Kayseri, Turkey;
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute,
Warsaw, Poland;
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Marmara
University, Istanbul, Turkey;
(7)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Keçiören Research and Educational
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;
(8)Pediatric Nephrology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands;
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland;
(10)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin,
Poland;
(11)Children's Hospital St. Elisabeth and St. Barbara, Halle/Saale, Germany;
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen, Germany;
(13)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital St. Marina, Varna Medical
University, Varna, Bulgaria;
(14)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia;
(15)Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel;
(16)University College London, London, United Kingdom;
(17)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium;
(18)Department of Physiology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands; and.
(19)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University,
Kingston, Ontario, Canada; Department of Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada.
(20)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Münster,
Germany; konradma@uni-muenster.de.

Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia (IIH) is characterized by severe
hypercalcemia with failure to thrive, vomiting, dehydration, and
nephrocalcinosis. Recently, mutations in the vitamin D catabolizing enzyme
25-hydroxyvitamin D3-24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1) were described that lead to
increased sensitivity to vitamin D due to accumulation of the active metabolite
1,25-(OH)2D3. In a subgroup of patients who presented in early infancy with
renal phosphate wasting and symptomatic hypercalcemia, mutations in CYP24A1 were
excluded. Four patients from families with parental consanguinity were subjected
to homozygosity mapping that identified a second IIH gene locus on chromosome
5q35 with a maximum logarithm of odds (LOD) score of 6.79. The sequence analysis
of the most promising candidate gene, SLC34A1 encoding renal sodium-phosphate
cotransporter 2A (NaPi-IIa), revealed autosomal-recessive mutations in the four
index cases and in 12 patients with sporadic IIH. Functional studies of mutant
NaPi-IIa in Xenopus oocytes and opossum kidney (OK) cells demonstrated disturbed
trafficking to the plasma membrane and loss of phosphate transport activity.
Analysis of calcium and phosphate metabolism in Slc34a1-knockout mice
highlighted the effect of phosphate depletion and fibroblast growth factor-23
suppression on the development of the IIH phenotype. The human and mice data
together demonstrate that primary renal phosphate wasting caused by defective
NaPi-IIa function induces inappropriate production of 1,25-(OH)2D3 with
subsequent symptomatic hypercalcemia. Clinical and laboratory findings persist
despite cessation of vitamin D prophylaxis but rapidly respond to phosphate
supplementation. Therefore, early differentiation between SLC34A1 (NaPi-IIa) and
CYP24A1 (24-hydroxylase) defects appears critical for targeted therapy in
patients with IIH.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2014101025
PMCID: PMC4731111
PMID: 26047794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
