---
reference_id: "PMID:28659245"
title: Newborn screening for hyperargininemia due to arginase 1 deficiency.
authors:
- Therrell BL
- Currier R
- Lapidus D
- Grimm M
- Cederbaum SD
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.06.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newborn screening for hyperargininemia due to arginase 1 deficiency.
**Authors:** Therrell BL, Currier R, Lapidus D, Grimm M, Cederbaum SD
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.06.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.06.003)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2017 Aug;121(4):308-313. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.06.003.
Epub  2017 Jun 20.

Newborn screening for hyperargininemia due to arginase 1 deficiency.

Therrell BL(1), Currier R(2), Lapidus D(3), Grimm M(4), Cederbaum SD(5).

Author information:
(1)National Newborn Screening and Global Resource Center, Austin, TX, Department 
of Pediatrics, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San 
Antonio, TX, United States. Electronic address: threrrell@uthscsa.edu.
(2)Genetic Disease Screening Program, California Department of Public Heath, 
Richmond, CA, United States.
(3)LapidusData Inc., Oklahoma City, OK, United States.
(4)Aeglea Biotherapeutics, Austin, TX, United States.
(5)Departments of Psychiatry, Pediatrics and Human Genetics, The Intellectual 
Development and Disabilities Research Center, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, United States.

Hyperargininemia caused by Arginase 1 deficiency is a rare disorder of the urea 
cycle that can be diagnosed by elevation of arginine in newborn screening blood 
spots when analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry. Hyperargininemia is currently 
included as a secondary target on the U.S. Recommended Uniform Screening Panel, 
which directly influences state-based newborn screening. Because of the apparent 
low disease frequency and lack of case detection and treatment data, detailed 
attention has not been given to a model newborn screening algorithm including 
appropriate analytical cutoff values for disease indicators. In this paper we 
assess the frequency of hyperargininemia in the U.S. identified by newborn 
screening to date and document the current status and variability of 
hyperargininemia newborn screening across U.S. newborn screening programs. We 
also review other data that support improved screening efficacy by utilizing the 
arginine/ornithine ratio and other amino acid ratios as discriminators in the 
screening algorithm. Analysis of archived California screening data showed that 
an arginine cutoff of 50μM combined with an arginine/ornithine ratio of 1.4 
would have resulted in a recall rate of 0.01%. Using an arginine cutoff of 60μM 
and an arginine/(phenylalanine x leucine) ratio of 1.4, reportedly used in one 
screening program, or the R4S Tool Runner, would have resulted in a recall rate 
of <0.005%. All 9 diagnosed patients would have been found for either protocol. 
Thus, use of appropriate ratios as part of the screening algorithm has the 
potential to increase both screening sensitivity and specificity. Improved 
newborn screening effectiveness should lead to better case detection and more 
rapid treatment to lower plasma arginine levels hence improving long term 
outcome of individuals with hyperargininemia.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.06.003
PMID: 28659245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]