---
reference_id: "PMID:38474060"
title: Metabolic Rewiring and Altered Glial Differentiation in an iPSC-Derived Astrocyte Model Derived from a Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia Patient.
authors:
- Arribas-Carreira L
- Castro M
- García F
- Navarrete R
- Bravo-Alonso I
- Zafra F
- Ugarte M
- Richard E
- Pérez B
- Rodríguez-Pombo P
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25052814
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metabolic Rewiring and Altered Glial Differentiation in an iPSC-Derived Astrocyte Model Derived from a Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia Patient.
**Authors:** Arribas-Carreira L, Castro M, García F, Navarrete R, Bravo-Alonso I, Zafra F, Ugarte M, Richard E, Pérez B, Rodríguez-Pombo P
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25052814](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25052814)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Feb 28;25(5):2814. doi: 10.3390/ijms25052814.

Metabolic Rewiring and Altered Glial Differentiation in an iPSC-Derived 
Astrocyte Model Derived from a Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia Patient.

Arribas-Carreira L(1)(2), Castro M(2)(3), García F(2)(3), Navarrete R(1)(2)(3), 
Bravo-Alonso I(2)(3), Zafra F(1)(4), Ugarte M(1)(2)(3)(4), Richard 
E(1)(2)(3)(4), Pérez B(1)(2)(3)(4), Rodríguez-Pombo P(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa UAM-CSIC, Instituto de Biología 
Molecular, Departamento de Biología Molecular, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 
28049 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares (CEDEM), 28049 Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
ISCIII, 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(4)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital La Paz (IdiPaz), ISCIII, 28029 
Madrid, Spain.

The pathophysiology of nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH), a rare neuro-metabolic 
disorder associated with severe brain malformations and life-threatening 
neurological manifestations, remains incompletely understood. Therefore, a valid 
human neural model is essential. We aimed to investigate the impact of GLDC gene 
variants, which cause NKH, on cellular fitness during the differentiation 
process of human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) into iPSC-derived 
astrocytes and to identify sustainable mechanisms capable of overcoming GLDC 
deficiency. We developed the GLDC27-FiPS4F-1 line and performed metabolomic, 
mRNA abundance, and protein analyses. This study showed that although 
GLDC27-FiPS4F-1 maintained the parental genetic profile, it underwent a 
metabolic switch to an altered serine-glycine-one-carbon metabolism with a 
coordinated cell growth and cell cycle proliferation response. We then 
differentiated the iPSCs into neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and 
astrocyte-lineage cells. Our analysis showed that GLDC-deficient NPCs had 
shifted towards a more heterogeneous astrocyte lineage with increased expression 
of the radial glial markers GFAP and GLAST and the neuronal markers MAP2 and 
NeuN. In addition, we detected changes in other genes related to serine and 
glycine metabolism and transport, all consistent with the need to maintain 
glycine at physiological levels. These findings improve our understanding of the 
pathology of nonketotic hyperglycinemia and offer new perspectives for 
therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25052814
PMCID: PMC10931996
PMID: 38474060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.