---
reference_id: "PMID:27826008"
title: Functional Rescue of ABCC6 Deficiency by 4-Phenylbutyrate Therapy Reduces Dystrophic Calcification in Abcc6(-/-) Mice.
authors:
- Pomozi V
- Brampton C
- Szeri F
- Dedinszki D
- Kozák E
- van de Wetering K
- Hopkins H
- Martin L
- Váradi A
- Le Saux O
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2016.10.035
keywords:
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, physiology"
- Alleles
- Animals
- Calcinosis/metabolism
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Liver/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- Phenylbutyrates/therapeutic use
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional Rescue of ABCC6 Deficiency by 4-Phenylbutyrate Therapy Reduces Dystrophic Calcification in Abcc6(-/-) Mice.
**Authors:** Pomozi V, Brampton C, Szeri F, Dedinszki D, Kozák E, van de Wetering K, Hopkins H, Martin L, Váradi A, Le Saux O
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jid.2016.10.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2016.10.035)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2017 Mar;137(3):595-602. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2016.10.035.
Epub  2016 Nov 5.

Functional Rescue of ABCC6 Deficiency by 4-Phenylbutyrate Therapy Reduces
Dystrophic Calcification in Abcc6(-/-) Mice.

Pomozi V(1), Brampton C(2), Szeri F(3), Dedinszki D(3), Kozák E(3), van de
Wetering K(4), Hopkins H(2), Martin L(5), Váradi A(3), Le Saux O(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, John A. Burns School of Medicine,
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA; Institute of Enzymology, RCNS,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, John A. Burns School of Medicine,
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.
(3)Institute of Enzymology, RCNS, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest,
Hungary.
(4)Division of Molecular Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)University of Angers, Angers, France; CHU Angers, Centre de consultation PXE,
Angers, France.
(6)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, John A. Burns School of Medicine,
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. Electronic address:
Lesaux@hawaii.edu.

Soft-tissue calcification is associated with aging, common conditions such as
diabetes or hypercholesterolemia, and with certain genetic disorders. ABCC6 is
an efflux transporter primarily expressed in liver facilitating the release of
adenosine triphosphate from hepatocytes. Within the liver vasculature, adenosine
triphosphate is converted into pyrophosphate, a major inhibitor of ectopic
calcification. ABCC6 mutations thus lead to reduced plasma pyrophosphate levels,
resulting in the calcification disorder pseudoxanthoma elasticum and some cases
of generalized arterial calcification of infancy. Most mutations in ABCC6 are
missense, and many preserve transport activity but are retained intracellularly.
We have previously shown that the chemical chaperone 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA)
promotes the maturation of ABCC6 mutants to the plasma membrane. In a humanized
mouse model of pseudoxanthoma elasticum, we investigated whether 4-PBA
treatments could rescue the calcification inhibition potential of selected ABCC6
mutants. We used the dystrophic cardiac calcification phenotype of Abcc6-/- mice
as an indicator of ABCC6 function to quantify the effect of 4-PBA on human ABCC6
mutants transiently expressed in the liver. We showed that 4-PBA administrations
restored the physiological function of ABCC6 mutants, resulting in enhanced
calcification inhibition. This study identifies 4-PBA treatment as a promising
strategy for allele-specific therapy of ABCC6-associated calcification
disorders.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2016.10.035
PMCID: PMC5326614
PMID: 27826008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors state no
conflict of interest
