---
reference_id: "PMID:26388044"
title: "Low-level arsenic exposure and developmental neurotoxicity in children: A systematic review and risk assessment."
authors:
- Tsuji JS
- Garry MR
- Perez V
- Chang ET
journal: Toxicology
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2015.09.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low-level arsenic exposure and developmental neurotoxicity in children: A systematic review and risk assessment.
**Authors:** Tsuji JS, Garry MR, Perez V, Chang ET
**Journal:** Toxicology (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tox.2015.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2015.09.002)

## Content

1. Toxicology. 2015 Nov 4;337:91-107. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2015.09.002. Epub 2015
Sep  18.

Low-level arsenic exposure and developmental neurotoxicity in children: A 
systematic review and risk assessment.

Tsuji JS(1), Garry MR(2), Perez V(3), Chang ET(4).

Author information:
(1)Exponent, Center for Toxicology and Mechanistic Biology, Bellevue, WA, USA. 
Electronic address: tsujij@exponent.com.
(2)Exponent, Center for Toxicology and Mechanistic Biology, Bellevue, WA, USA.
(3)Exponent, Center for Epidemiology and Computational Biology, Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(4)Exponent, Center for Epidemiology and Computational Biology, Menlo Park, CA, 
USA.

Risk assessments of arsenic have focused on skin, bladder, and lung cancers and 
skin lesions as the sensitive cancer and non-cancer health endpoints, 
respectively; however, an increasing number of epidemiologic studies that can 
inform risk assessment have examined neurodevelopmental effects in children. We 
conducted a systematic review and risk assessment based on the epidemiologic 
literature on possible neurodevelopmental effects at lower arsenic exposures. 
Twenty-four cross-sectional, case-control, and cohort studies were identified 
that report on the association between low-level arsenic exposure (i.e., largely 
<100 μg/L of arsenic in drinking water) and neurological outcomes in children. 
Although the overall evidence does not consistently show a causal dose-response 
relationship at low doses, the most rigorously conducted studies from Bangladesh 
indicate possible inverse associations with cognitive function, predominantly 
involving concurrent arsenic exposure as measured by biomarkers (i.e., arsenic 
in urine or blood) and raw verbal test scores at ages 5-11 years. Issues such as 
non-comparability of outcome measures across studies; inaccuracies of biomarkers 
and other measures of inorganic arsenic exposure; potential effect modification 
by cultural practices; insufficient adjustment for nutritional deficiencies, 
maternal IQ, and other important confounders; and presence of other 
neurotoxicants in foreign populations limit generalizability to U.S.
POPULATIONS: Of the few U.S. studies available, the most rigorously conducted 
study did not find a consistent dose-response relationship between arsenic 
concentrations in tap water or toenails and decrements in IQ scores. Assuming 
that the strongest dose-response relationship from the most rigorous evidence 
from Bangladesh is generalizable to U.S. populations, possible reference doses 
were estimated in the range of 0.0004-0.001 mg/kg-day. These doses are higher 
than the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency reference dose for chronic 
lifetime exposure, thus indicating protectiveness of the existing value for 
potential neurotoxicity in children. This reference dose is undergoing revision 
as EPA considers various health endpoints in the reassessment of inorganic 
arsenic health risks.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2015.09.002
PMID: 26388044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]