---
reference_id: PMID:26052388
title: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in end-stage liver disease.
authors:
- Antoury C
- Lopez R
- Zein N
- Stoller JK
- Alkhouri N
journal: World J Hepatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.4254/wjh.v7.i10.1427
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in end-stage liver disease.
**Authors:** Antoury C, Lopez R, Zein N, Stoller JK, Alkhouri N
**Journal:** World J Hepatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4254/wjh.v7.i10.1427](https://doi.org/10.4254/wjh.v7.i10.1427)

## Content

1. World J Hepatol. 2015 Jun 8;7(10):1427-32. doi: 10.4254/wjh.v7.i10.1427.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in 
end-stage liver disease.

Antoury C(1), Lopez R(1), Zein N(1), Stoller JK(1), Alkhouri N(1).

Author information:
(1)Clara Antoury, Department of Internal Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 
Cleveland, OH 44195, United States.

AIM: To evaluate the association between alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (A1ATD) 
and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in patients with end-stage liver disease 
(ESLD).
METHODS: Patients with cirrhosis and ESLD referred to the Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation for liver transplantation between 2003 and 2014 were included in the 
study (N = 675). ESLD was defined as having histological features of cirrhosis 
and/or radiological evidence of cirrhosis in the context of portal hypertension 
(ascites, variceal bleeding, thrombocytopenia, or hepatic encephalopathy). A1ATD 
was diagnosed using phenotype characterization (MZ or ZZ), liver biopsy 
detection of PAS-positive diastase-resistant (PAS+) globules, or both. Patients 
with other causes of liver diseases such as hepatitis C virus (HCV), alcoholic 
liver disease and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) or NASH were also 
included in the study. HCC was diagnosed by using imaging modalities, biopsy 
findings, or explanted liver inspection. Follow-up time was defined as the 
number of years from the diagnosis of cirrhosis to the diagnosis of 
hepatocellular carcinoma, or from the diagnosis of cirrhosis to the last follow 
up visit. The rate of HCC was assessed using time-to-interval analysis for 
interval censored data.
RESULTS: This study included 675 patients. 7% of subjects had A1ATD (n = 47). 
Out of all subjects who did not have A1ATD, 46% had HCV, 17% had alcoholic liver 
disease, 19% had NASH and 18% had another primary diagnosis. Of the 47 subjects 
with A1ATD, 15 had a primary diagnosis of A1ATD (PI*ZZ phenotype and PAS+ 
globules), 8 had a PI*MZ phenotype alone, 14 had PAS+ alone, and 10 had both the 
PI*MZ phenotype and PAS+. Median follow-up time was 3.4 (25(th), 75(th) 
percentiles: 1, 5.2) years. The overall rate of hepatocellular carcinoma in all 
subjects was 29% (n = 199). In the A1ATD group, the incidence rate of HCC was 
8.5% compared to 31% in the group of patients with other causes of cirrhosis (P 
= 0.001). Patients with ESLD due to A1ATD had the lowest yearly cumulative rate 
of hepatocellular carcinoma at 0.88% per year compared to 2.7% for those with 
HCV cirrhosis, 1.5% in patients with NASH and 0.9% in alcohol-induced liver 
disease (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Within this group of patients with ESLD, there was no significant 
association between A1ATD and increased risk of HCC.

DOI: 10.4254/wjh.v7.i10.1427
PMCID: PMC4450206
PMID: 26052388