---
reference_id: PMID:27518561
title: Epigenetic Mechanisms of Longevity and Aging.
authors:
- Sen P
- Shah PP
- Nativio R
- Berger SL
journal: Cell
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.050
keywords:
- Aging/genetics
- Animals
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- Longevity
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Epigenetic Mechanisms of Longevity and Aging.
**Authors:** Sen P, Shah PP, Nativio R, Berger SL
**Journal:** Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.050](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.050)

## Content

1. Cell. 2016 Aug 11;166(4):822-839. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.050.

Epigenetic Mechanisms of Longevity and Aging.

Sen P(1), Shah PP(1), Nativio R(1), Berger SL(2).

Author information:
(1)Epigenetics Program, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19130, USA.
(2)Epigenetics Program, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19130, USA. Electronic address: 
bergers@upenn.edu.

Aging is an inevitable outcome of life, characterized by progressive decline in 
tissue and organ function and increased risk of mortality. Accumulating evidence 
links aging to genetic and epigenetic alterations. Given the reversible nature 
of epigenetic mechanisms, these pathways provide promising avenues for 
therapeutics against age-related decline and disease. In this review, we provide 
a comprehensive overview of epigenetic studies from invertebrate organisms, 
vertebrate models, tissues, and in vitro systems. We establish links between 
common operative aging pathways and hallmark chromatin signatures that can be 
used to identify "druggable" targets to counter human aging and age-related 
disease.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.050
PMCID: PMC5821249
PMID: 27518561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]