---
reference_id: "PMID:29239767"
title: "Everyday cognitive failure and depressive symptoms predict fatigue in sarcoidosis: A prospective follow-up study."
authors:
- Hendriks C
- Drent M
- De Kleijn W
- Elfferich M
- Wijnen P
- De Vries J
journal: Respir Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.11.008
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anxiety/epidemiology, psychology"
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/epidemiology, physiopathology, psychology"
- "Depression/epidemiology, psychology"
- "Dyspnea/epidemiology, physiopathology"
- "Fatigue/epidemiology, physiopathology, psychology"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Forced Expiratory Volume
- Humans
- Lung/physiopathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Pulmonary Diffusing Capacity
- Quality of Life
- "Sarcoidosis/epidemiology, physiopathology, psychology"
- "Small Fiber Neuropathy/epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Social Support
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Vital Capacity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Everyday cognitive failure and depressive symptoms predict fatigue in sarcoidosis: A prospective follow-up study.
**Authors:** Hendriks C, Drent M, De Kleijn W, Elfferich M, Wijnen P, De Vries J
**Journal:** Respir Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2017.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2017.11.008)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2018 May;138S:S24-S30. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.11.008. Epub 2017
Nov 20.

Everyday cognitive failure and depressive symptoms predict fatigue in
sarcoidosis: A prospective follow-up study.

Hendriks C(1), Drent M(2), De Kleijn W(3), Elfferich M(4), Wijnen P(5), De Vries
J(6).

Author information:
(1)ILD Care Foundation Research Team, Ede, The Netherlands; Faculty of Medicine,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands; ILD Center of Excellence, St.
Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(2)ILD Care Foundation Research Team, Ede, The Netherlands; ILD Center of
Excellence, St. Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands; Dept. of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Science,
Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
m.drent@antoniusziekenhuis.nl.
(3)ILD Care Foundation Research Team, Ede, The Netherlands; Dept. of Psychology
and Artificial Intelligence, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)ILD Care Foundation Research Team, Ede, The Netherlands.
(5)ILD Care Foundation Research Team, Ede, The Netherlands; Central Diagnostic
Laboratory, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(6)ILD Care Foundation Research Team, Ede, The Netherlands; Dept. of Medical
Psychology, St. Elisabeth Hospital Tilburg, Tilburg, The Netherlands; Dept. of
Medical and Clinical Psychology, Tilburg University, Tilburg, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Fatigue is a major and disabling problem in sarcoidosis. Knowledge
concerning correlates of the development of fatigue and possible
interrelationships is lacking.
OBJECTIVE: A conceptual model of fatigue was developed and tested.
METHODS: Sarcoidosis outpatients (n = 292) of Maastricht University Medical
Center completed questionnaires regarding trait anxiety, depressive symptoms,
cognitive failure, dyspnea, social support, and small fiber neuropathy (SFN) at
baseline. Fatigue was assessed at 6 and 12 months. Sex, age, and time since
diagnosis were taken from medical records. Pathways were estimated by means of
path analyses in AMOS.
RESULTS: Everyday cognitive failure, depressive symptoms, symptoms suggestive of
SFN, and dyspnea were positive predictors of fatigue. Fit indices of the model
were good.
CONCLUSIONS: The model validly explains variation in fatigue. Everyday cognitive
failure and depressive symptoms were the most important predictors of fatigue.
In addition to physical functioning, cognitive and psychological aspects should
be included in the management of sarcoidosis patients.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.11.008
PMID: 29239767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
