---
reference_id: "PMID:36746939"
title: LSD1/PRMT6-targeting gene therapy to attenuate androgen receptor toxic gain-of-function ameliorates spinobulbar muscular atrophy phenotypes in flies and mice.
authors:
- Prakasam R
- Bonadiman A
- Andreotti R
- Zuccaro E
- Dalfovo D
- Marchioretti C
- Tripathy D
- Petris G
- Anderson EN
- Migazzi A
- Tosatto L
- Cereseto A
- Battaglioli E
- Sorarù G
- Lim WF
- Rinaldi C
- Sambataro F
- Pourshafie N
- Grunseich C
- Romanel A
- Pandey UB
- Contestabile A
- Ronzitti G
- Basso M
- Pennuto M
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36186-9
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- "Receptors, Androgen/genetics, metabolism"
- "Bulbo-Spinal Atrophy, X-Linked/genetics"
- Androgens
- Diptera
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Phenotype
- Histone Demethylases/genetics
- "Muscular Disorders, Atrophic/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LSD1/PRMT6-targeting gene therapy to attenuate androgen receptor toxic gain-of-function ameliorates spinobulbar muscular atrophy phenotypes in flies and mice.
**Authors:** Prakasam R, Bonadiman A, Andreotti R, Zuccaro E, Dalfovo D, Marchioretti C, Tripathy D, Petris G, Anderson EN, Migazzi A, Tosatto L, Cereseto A, Battaglioli E, Sorarù G, Lim WF, Rinaldi C, Sambataro F, Pourshafie N, Grunseich C, Romanel A, Pandey UB, Contestabile A, Ronzitti G, Basso M, Pennuto M
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-36186-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36186-9)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Feb 6;14(1):603. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36186-9.

LSD1/PRMT6-targeting gene therapy to attenuate androgen receptor toxic 
gain-of-function ameliorates spinobulbar muscular atrophy phenotypes in flies 
and mice.

Prakasam R(#)(1), Bonadiman A(#)(2), Andreotti R(#)(3)(4)(5), Zuccaro 
E(3)(4)(5), Dalfovo D(2), Marchioretti C(3)(4)(5), Tripathy D(2), Petris 
G(2)(6)(7), Anderson EN(8), Migazzi A(1)(2), Tosatto L(1), Cereseto A(2), 
Battaglioli E(9), Sorarù G(5)(10), Lim WF(11)(12), Rinaldi C(11)(12), Sambataro 
F(5)(10), Pourshafie N(13), Grunseich C(13), Romanel A(2), Pandey UB(8), 
Contestabile A(14), Ronzitti G(15)(16), Basso M(17), Pennuto M(18)(19)(20)(21).

Author information:
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute at the Department of Cellular, Computational and 
Integrative Biology, University of Trento, Trento, Italy.
(2)Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology, University of 
Trento, Trento, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Veneto Institute of Molecular Medicine, Padova, Italy.
(5)Padova Neuroscience Center, Padova, Italy.
(6)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Saffron 
Walden, UK.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(9)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of 
Milan, Milan, Italy.
(10)Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(11)MDUK Oxford Neuromuscular Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(12)Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Medicine, Department of 
Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(13)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(14)Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy.
(15)Université Paris-Saclay, Univ Evry, Inserm, Genethon, Evry, France.
(16)Genethon, 91000, Evry, France.
(17)Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology, University of 
Trento, Trento, Italy. manuela.basso@unitn.it.
(18)Dulbecco Telethon Institute at the Department of Cellular, Computational and 
Integrative Biology, University of Trento, Trento, Italy. 
maria.pennuto@unipd.it.
(19)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. 
maria.pennuto@unipd.it.
(20)Veneto Institute of Molecular Medicine, Padova, Italy. 
maria.pennuto@unipd.it.
(21)Padova Neuroscience Center, Padova, Italy. maria.pennuto@unipd.it.
(#)Contributed equally

Spinobulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is caused by CAG expansions in the androgen 
receptor gene. Androgen binding to polyQ-expanded androgen receptor triggers 
SBMA through a combination of toxic gain-of-function and loss-of-function 
mechanisms. Leveraging cell lines, mice, and patient-derived specimens, we show 
that androgen receptor co-regulators lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) and 
protein arginine methyltransferase 6 (PRMT6) are overexpressed in an 
androgen-dependent manner specifically in the skeletal muscle of SBMA patients 
and mice. LSD1 and PRMT6 cooperatively and synergistically transactivate 
androgen receptor, and their effect is enhanced by expanded polyQ. 
Pharmacological and genetic silencing of LSD1 and PRMT6 attenuates 
polyQ-expanded androgen receptor transactivation in SBMA cells and suppresses 
toxicity in SBMA flies, and a preclinical approach based on miRNA-mediated 
silencing of LSD1 and PRMT6 attenuates disease manifestations in SBMA mice. 
These observations suggest that targeting overexpressed co-regulators can 
attenuate androgen receptor toxic gain-of-function without exacerbating 
loss-of-function, highlighting a potential therapeutic strategy for patients 
with SBMA.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-36186-9
PMCID: PMC9902531
PMID: 36746939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.P., M.B., G.R., and A.C. are named as 
co-inventors on the patent application Italian Priority N. 102022000026595 “New 
inhibitors of epigenetic regulators/nuovi inibitori di regolatori epigenetici”. 
The other authors declare no competing interests.