---
reference_id: "PMID:36193717"
title: "Update from the 2022 World Health Organization Classification of Thyroid Tumors: A Standardized Diagnostic Approach."
authors:
- Jung CK
- Bychkov A
- Kakudo K
journal: Endocrinol Metab (Seoul)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3803/EnM.2022.1553
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/pathology"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Adenocarcinoma, Follicular/genetics"
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary"
- World Health Organization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update from the 2022 World Health Organization Classification of Thyroid Tumors: A Standardized Diagnostic Approach.
**Authors:** Jung CK, Bychkov A, Kakudo K
**Journal:** Endocrinol Metab (Seoul) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3803/EnM.2022.1553](https://doi.org/10.3803/EnM.2022.1553)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Metab (Seoul). 2022 Oct;37(5):703-718. doi: 10.3803/EnM.2022.1553.
Epub 2022 Oct 4.

Update from the 2022 World Health Organization Classification of Thyroid Tumors:
A Standardized Diagnostic Approach.

Jung CK(1)(2), Bychkov A(3), Kakudo K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hospital Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Cancer Research Institute, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kameda Medical Center, Kamogawa, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Cancer Genome Center and Thyroid Disease Center,
Izumi City General Hospital, Izumi, Japan.

The fifth edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) histologic
classification of thyroid neoplasms released in 2022 includes newly recognized
tumor types, subtypes, and a grading system. Follicular cell-derived neoplasms
are categorized into three families (classes): benign tumors, low-risk
neoplasms, and malignant neoplasms. The terms "follicular nodular disease" and
"differentiated high-grade thyroid carcinoma" are introduced to account for
multifocal hyperplastic/neoplastic lesions and differentiated thyroid carcinomas
with high-grade features, respectively. The term "Hürthle cells" is replaced
with "oncocytic cells." Invasive encapsulated follicular and cribriform morular
variants of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) are now redefined as distinct
tumor types, given their different genetic alterations and clinicopathologic
characteristics from other PTC subtypes. The term "variant" to describe a
subclass of tumor has been replaced with the term "subtype." Instead, the term
"variant" is reserved to describe genetic alterations. A histologic grading
system based on the mitotic count, necrosis, and/or the Ki67 index is used to
identify high-grade follicular-cell derived carcinomas and medullary thyroid
carcinomas. The 2022 WHO classification introduces the following new categories:
"salivary gland-type carcinomas of the thyroid" and "thyroid tumors of uncertain
histogenesis." This review summarizes the major changes in the 2022 WHO
classification and their clinical relevance.

DOI: 10.3803/EnM.2022.1553
PMCID: PMC9633223
PMID: 36193717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article was reported.
