---
reference_id: "PMID:20843200"
title: "Klinefelter syndrome: clinical and molecular aspects."
authors:
- Giltay JC
- Maiburg MC
journal: Expert Rev Mol Diagn
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1586/erm.10.63
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Klinefelter syndrome: clinical and molecular aspects.
**Authors:** Giltay JC, Maiburg MC
**Journal:** Expert Rev Mol Diagn (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1586/erm.10.63](https://doi.org/10.1586/erm.10.63)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2010 Sep;10(6):765-76. doi: 10.1586/erm.10.63.

Klinefelter syndrome: clinical and molecular aspects.

Giltay JC(1), Maiburg MC.

Author information:
(1)University Medical Centre Utrecht, Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands. j.c.giltay@umcutrecht.nl

Klinefelter syndrome is the most common chromosome abnormality in humans. The 
estimated prevalence is one in 500 to one in 1000 males but due to the widely 
variable and often aspecific features, only one in four cases are recognized. 
The most specific clinical features which can be observed at adult age are small 
testes, gynecomastia, female distribution of fat and body hair, slightly 
increased body length due to an increased leg length and azoospermia. Cognition 
is characterized by verbal deficits and psychosocial features include 
autistiform behavior. Structural brain abnormalities have been observed by MRI, 
such as decreased brain volumes and a decrease of asymmetry in areas 
corresponding to language performance. In the vast majority of cases a 
non-mosaic 47,XXY karyotype is observed. Parental imprinting of the extra X 
chromosome, variable inactivation of some X-chromosomal genes and CAG repeat 
length polymorphism of the androgen receptor may all be related to the 
variability of the phenotype. Surgical procedures of obtaining sperm in 
combination with repeated intracytoplasmic sperm injection/in vitro 
fertilization treatment may allow up to one in four men with Klinefelter 
syndrome to father children.

DOI: 10.1586/erm.10.63
PMID: 20843200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]