---
reference_id: "PMID:36113987"
title: Clinical diversity and molecular mechanism of VPS35L-associated Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome.
authors:
- Otsuji S
- Nishio Y
- Tsujita M
- Rio M
- Huber C
- Antón-Plágaro C
- Mizuno S
- Kawano Y
- Miyatake S
- Simon M
- van Binsbergen E
- van Jaarsveld RH
- Matsumoto N
- Cormier-Daire V
- J Cullen P
- Saitoh S
- Kato K
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108602
keywords:
- Humans
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Dandy-Walker Syndrome/genetics
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/genetics"
- Hypercholesterolemia
- Vesicular Transport Proteins
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical diversity and molecular mechanism of VPS35L-associated Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome.
**Authors:** Otsuji S, Nishio Y, Tsujita M, Rio M, Huber C, Antón-Plágaro C, Mizuno S, Kawano Y, Miyatake S, Simon M, van Binsbergen E, van Jaarsveld RH, Matsumoto N, Cormier-Daire V, J Cullen P, Saitoh S, Kato K
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg-2022-108602](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg-2022-108602)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2023 Apr;60(4):359-367. doi: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108602. Epub 2022
Sep  16.

Clinical diversity and molecular mechanism of VPS35L-associated 
Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome.

Otsuji S(1), Nishio Y(1)(2), Tsujita M(3), Rio M(4), Huber C(4), Antón-Plágaro 
C(5), Mizuno S(6), Kawano Y(7), Miyatake S(8)(9), Simon M(10), van Binsbergen 
E(10), van Jaarsveld RH(10), Matsumoto N(8), Cormier-Daire V(4), J Cullen P(11), 
Saitoh S(12), Kato K(12)(5)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences and Medical School, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences and Medical School, Nagoya, Japan.
(4)Université Paris Cité, Génétique clinique, INSERM UMR 1163, Institut Imagine, 
Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(5)School of Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, UK.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Aichi Developmental Disability Center, Kasugai, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Toyota Memorial Hospital, Toyota, Japan.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University School of Medicine 
Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Yokohama City University Hospital, Yokohama, 
Japan.
(10)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(11)School of Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, UK kohji.kato@bristol.ac.uk ss11@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp 
Pete.Cullen@bristol.ac.uk.
(12)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences and Medical School, Nagoya, Japan 
kohji.kato@bristol.ac.uk ss11@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp Pete.Cullen@bristol.ac.uk.
(13)Department of Genetics, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya 
University, Nagoya, Japan.

PURPOSE: The Retriever subunit VPS35L is the third responsible gene for 
Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome (RSS) after WASHC5 and CCDC22. To date, only one pair 
of siblings have been reported and their condition was significantly more severe 
than typical RSS. This study aimed to understand the clinical spectrum and 
underlying molecular mechanism in VPS35L-associated RSS.
METHODS: We report three new patients with biallelic VPS35L variants. 
Biochemical and cellular analyses were performed to elucidate disease aetiology.
RESULTS: In addition to typical features of RSS, we confirmed 
hypercholesterolaemia, hypogammaglobulinaemia and intestinal lymphangiectasia as 
novel complications of VPS35L-associated RSS. The latter two complications as 
well as proteinuria have not been reported in patients with CCDC22 and WASHC5 
variants. One patient showed a severe phenotype and the other two were milder. 
Cells established from patients with the milder phenotypes showed relatively 
higher VPS35L protein expression. Cellular analysis found VPS35L ablation 
decreased the cell surface level of lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 and 
low-density lipoprotein receptor, resulting in reduced low-density lipoprotein 
cellular uptake.
CONCLUSION: VPS35L-associated RSS is a distinct clinical entity with diverse 
phenotype and severity, with a possible molecular mechanism of 
hypercholesterolaemia. These findings provide new insight into the essential and 
distinctive role of Retriever in human development.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108602
PMCID: PMC10086474
PMID: 36113987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.