---
reference_id: PMID:16799052
title: "Prevalence of disease-causing mutations in families with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa: a screen of known genes in 200 families."
authors:
- Sullivan LS
- Bowne SJ
- Birch DG
- Hughbanks-Wheaton D
- Heckenlively JR
- Lewis RA
- Garcia CA
- Ruiz RS
- Blanton SH
- Northrup H
- Gire AI
- Seaman R
- Duzkale H
- Spellicy CJ
- Zhu J
- Shankar SP
- Daiger SP
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.05-1443
keywords:
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, X-Linked"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Genetic Testing
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Nuclear Family
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Prevalence
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of disease-causing mutations in families with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa: a screen of known genes in 200 families.
**Authors:** Sullivan LS, Bowne SJ, Birch DG, Hughbanks-Wheaton D, Heckenlively JR, Lewis RA, Garcia CA, Ruiz RS, Blanton SH, Northrup H, Gire AI, Seaman R, Duzkale H, Spellicy CJ, Zhu J, Shankar SP, Daiger SP
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.05-1443](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.05-1443)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Jul;47(7):3052-64. doi: 10.1167/iovs.05-1443.

Prevalence of disease-causing mutations in families with autosomal dominant 
retinitis pigmentosa: a screen of known genes in 200 families.

Sullivan LS(1), Bowne SJ, Birch DG, Hughbanks-Wheaton D, Heckenlively JR, Lewis 
RA, Garcia CA, Ruiz RS, Blanton SH, Northrup H, Gire AI, Seaman R, Duzkale H, 
Spellicy CJ, Zhu J, Shankar SP, Daiger SP.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health, Department of Ophthalmology 
and Visual Science, the University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston 
77030, USA. lori.s.sullivan@uth.tmc.edu

PURPOSE: To survey families with clinical evidence of autosomal dominant 
retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) for mutations in genes known to cause adRP.
METHODS: Two hundred adRP families, drawn from a cohort of more than 400 
potential families, were selected by analysis of pedigrees. Minimum criteria for 
inclusion in the adRP cohort included either evidence of at least three 
generations of affected individuals or two generations with evidence of 
male-to-male transmission. Probands from each family were screened for mutations 
in 13 genes known to cause adRP: CA4, CRX, FSCN2, IMPDH1, NRL, PRPF3 (RP18), 
PRPF8 (RP13), PRPF31 (RP11), RDS, RHO, ROM1, RP1, and RP9. Families without 
mutations in autosomal genes and in which an X-linked mode of inheritance could 
not be excluded were tested for mutations in ORF 15 of X-linked RPGR. 
Potentially pathogenic variants were evaluated based on a variety of genetic and 
computational criteria, to confirm or exclude pathogenicity.
RESULTS: A total of 82 distinct, rare (nonpolymorphic) variants were detected 
among the genes tested. Of these, 57 are clearly pathogenic based on multiple 
criteria, 10 are probably pathogenic, and 15 are probably benign. In the cohort 
of 200 families, 94 (47%) have one of the clearly pathogenic variants and 10 
(5%) have one of the probably pathogenic variants. One family (0.5%) has digenic 
RDS-ROM1 mutations. Two families (1%) have a pathogenic RPGR mutation, 
indicating that families with apparent autosomal transmission of RP may actually 
have X-linked genetic disease. Thus, 107 families (53.5%) have mutations in 
known genes, leaving 93 whose underlying cause is still unknown.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, the known adRP genes account for retinal disease in 
approximately half of the families in this survey, mostly Americans of European 
origin. Among the adRP genes, IMPDH1, PRPF8, PRPF31, RDS, RHO, and RP1 each 
accounts for more than 2% of the total; CRX, PRPF3, and RPGR each accounts for 
roughly 1%. Disease-causing mutations were not found in CA4, FSCN2, NRL, or RP9. 
Because some mutations are frequent and some regions are more likely to harbor 
mutations than others, more than two thirds of the detected mutations can be 
found by screening less than 10% of the total gene sequences. Among the 
remaining families, mutations may lie in regions of known genes that were not 
tested, mutations may not be detectable by PCR-based sequencing, or other loci 
may be involved.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.05-1443
PMCID: PMC2585061
PMID: 16799052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]