---
reference_id: "PMID:38137127"
title: "Lafora Disease: A Case Report and Evolving Treatment Advancements."
authors:
- Ferrari Aggradi CR
- Rimoldi M
- Romagnoli G
- Velardo D
- Meneri M
- Iacobucci D
- Ripolone M
- Napoli L
- Ciscato P
- Moggio M
- Comi GP
- Ronchi D
- Corti S
- Abati E
journal: Brain Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/brainsci13121679
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lafora Disease: A Case Report and Evolving Treatment Advancements.
**Authors:** Ferrari Aggradi CR, Rimoldi M, Romagnoli G, Velardo D, Meneri M, Iacobucci D, Ripolone M, Napoli L, Ciscato P, Moggio M, Comi GP, Ronchi D, Corti S, Abati E
**Journal:** Brain Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/brainsci13121679](https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci13121679)

## Content

1. Brain Sci. 2023 Dec 6;13(12):1679. doi: 10.3390/brainsci13121679.

Lafora Disease: A Case Report and Evolving Treatment Advancements.

Ferrari Aggradi CR(1), Rimoldi M(2)(3), Romagnoli G(1), Velardo D(2), Meneri 
M(1)(4), Iacobucci D(5), Ripolone M(2), Napoli L(2), Ciscato P(2), Moggio M(2), 
Comi GP(1)(5), Ronchi D(1)(5), Corti S(1)(2), Abati E(1).

Author information:
(1)Dino Ferrari Centre, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation 
(DEPT), University of Milan, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(2)Neuromuscular and Rare Diseases Unit, Department of Neuroscience, Fondazione 
IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(3)Medical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(4)Stroke Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 20122 
Milan, Italy.
(5)Neurology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
20122 Milan, Italy.

Lafora disease is a rare genetic disorder characterized by a disruption in 
glycogen metabolism. It manifests as progressive myoclonus epilepsy and 
cognitive decline during adolescence. Pathognomonic is the presence of abnormal 
glycogen aggregates that, over time, produce large inclusions (Lafora bodies) in 
various tissues. This study aims to describe the clinical and histopathological 
aspects of a novel Lafora disease patient, and to provide an update on the 
therapeutical advancements for this disorder. A 20-year-old Libyan boy presented 
with generalized tonic-clonic seizures, sporadic muscular jerks, eyelid spasms, 
and mental impairment. Electroencephalography showed multiple discharges across 
both brain hemispheres. Brain magnetic resonance imaging was unremarkable. 
Muscle biopsy showed increased lipid content and a very mild increase of 
intermyofibrillar glycogen, without the polyglucosan accumulation typically 
observed in Lafora bodies. Despite undergoing three lines of antiepileptic 
treatment, the patient's condition showed minimal to no improvement. We 
identified the homozygous variant c.137G>A, p.(Cys46Tyr), in the EPM2B/NHLRC1 
gene, confirming the diagnosis of Lafora disease. To our knowledge, the presence 
of lipid aggregates without Lafora bodies is atypical. Lafora disease should be 
considered during the differential diagnosis of progressive, myoclonic, and 
refractory epilepsies in both children and young adults, especially when 
accompanied by cognitive decline. Although there are no effective therapies yet, 
the development of promising new strategies prompts the need for an early and 
accurate diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci13121679
PMCID: PMC10742041
PMID: 38137127

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.