---
reference_id: "PMID:15784740"
title: "Defective N-acetylaspartate catabolism reduces brain acetate levels and myelin lipid synthesis in Canavan's disease."
authors:
- Madhavarao CN
- Arun P
- Moffett JR
- Szucs S
- Surendran S
- Matalon R
- Garbern J
- Hristova D
- Johnson A
- Jiang W
- Namboodiri MA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0409184102
keywords:
- Acetic Acid/metabolism
- "Amidohydrolases/deficiency, genetics"
- Animals
- "Aspartic Acid/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- Base Sequence
- Brain/metabolism
- "Canavan Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA/genetics
- Humans
- Lipids/biosynthesis
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Models, Neurological"
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- Rats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defective N-acetylaspartate catabolism reduces brain acetate levels and myelin lipid synthesis in Canavan's disease.
**Authors:** Madhavarao CN, Arun P, Moffett JR, Szucs S, Surendran S, Matalon R, Garbern J, Hristova D, Johnson A, Jiang W, Namboodiri MA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0409184102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0409184102)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Apr 5;102(14):5221-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0409184102. Epub 2005 Mar 22.

Defective N-acetylaspartate catabolism reduces brain acetate levels and myelin
lipid synthesis in Canavan's disease.

Madhavarao CN(1), Arun P, Moffett JR, Szucs S, Surendran S, Matalon R, Garbern
J, Hristova D, Johnson A, Jiang W, Namboodiri MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Physiology, and Genetics, Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814,
USA.

Canavan's disease (CD) is a fatal, hereditary disorder of CNS development that
has been linked to mutations in the gene for the enzyme aspartoacylase (ASPA)
(EC 3.5.1.15). ASPA acts to hydrolyze N-acetylaspartate (NAA) into l-aspartate
and acetate, but the connection between ASPA deficiency and the failure of
proper CNS development is unclear. We hypothesize that one function of ASPA is
to provide acetate for the increased lipid synthesis that occurs during
postnatal CNS myelination. The gene encoding ASPA has been inactivated in the
mouse model of CD, and here we show significant decreases in the synthesis of
six classes of myelin-associated lipids, as well as reduced acetate levels, in
the brains of these mice at the time of peak postnatal CNS myelination. Analysis
of the lipid content of white matter from a human CD patient showed decreased
cerebroside and sulfatide relative to normal white matter. These results
demonstrate that myelin lipid synthesis is significantly compromised in CD and
provide direct evidence that defective myelin synthesis, resulting from a
deficiency of NAA-derived acetate, is involved in the pathogenesis of CD.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0409184102
PMCID: PMC555036
PMID: 15784740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
