---
reference_id: "PMID:33313117"
title: "Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis with peripheral neuropathy: a clinical and neurophysiological study in Chinese population."
authors:
- Zhang S
- Li W
- Zheng R
- Zhao B
- Zhang Y
- Zhao D
- Zhao C
- Yan C
- Zhao Y
journal: Ann Transl Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.21037/atm-20-2746
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis with peripheral neuropathy: a clinical and neurophysiological study in Chinese population.
**Authors:** Zhang S, Li W, Zheng R, Zhao B, Zhang Y, Zhao D, Zhao C, Yan C, Zhao Y
**Journal:** Ann Transl Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.21037/atm-20-2746](https://doi.org/10.21037/atm-20-2746)

## Content

1. Ann Transl Med. 2020 Nov;8(21):1372. doi: 10.21037/atm-20-2746.

Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis with peripheral neuropathy: a clinical and
neurophysiological study in Chinese population.

Zhang S(1), Li W(1), Zheng R(2), Zhao B(2), Zhang Y(2), Zhao D(1), Zhao C(2),
Yan C(1)(2), Zhao Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases and
Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(2)Qilu Hospital of Shandong University (Qingdao), Qingdao, China.

Erratum in
    Ann Transl Med. 2021 Mar;9(5):442. doi: 10.21037/atm-2021-2.

BACKGROUND: Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) is an inborn disorder of bile
acid metabolism caused by deficiency of sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A1) gene.
CTX-related peripheral neuropathy has rarely been discussed in Chinese
population. Here, we reported 6 CTX cases and performed a literature review
focused on CTX with neuropathy to summarize its clinical and neurophysiological
features.
METHODS: All clinical data of 6 CTX cases were collected, and 21 reported
Chinese CTX patients (including this study) were reviewed and summarized.
RESULTS: Clinical manifestations of 6 CTX cases showed great heterogeneity.
Cognitive decline, spastic paraplegia, cerebellar ataxia and advanced bulbar
palsy were common neurological disorders, often accompanied by non-neurological
signs like xanthomas, cataract, diarrhea and pes cavus. Dentate nuclei
hyperintensity with or without hyposignal is a valuable MRI hallmark. Pooling
our patients and literature review together, peripheral neuropathy was
predominant sensorimotor demyelinating type in Chinese population, with an
evident length dependent pattern and increased vulnerability in motor nerves.
Demyelinating and axonal degeneration tend to exist in severe neuropathy. Three
novel mutations including c.1055C>A; c.432T>G; c.472T>G were identified in
CYP27A1 and predicted to be pathogenic. Oral CDCA therapy could ameliorate some
of the existing symptoms and provide clinical stability, but it could not cease
disease progression completely.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study broadens the phenotype and mutation spectrum of CTX.
Patients with cognitive decline, spastic tetraparesis, cerebellar ataxia and
bulbar palsy, should be highly suspicious of CTX even no xanthomas disclosed.
Peripheral neuropathy was predominant sensorimotor demyelinating type in Chinese
population, with mixed axonal and demyelinating type in severe cases. Three
novel likely pathogenic mutations including c.1055C>A; c.432T>G; c.472T>G were
identified in CYP27A1.

2020 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-20-2746
PMCID: PMC7723652
PMID: 33313117

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-20-2746). The authors have no conflicts of
interest to declare.
