---
reference_id: "PMID:20869622"
title: Tetrabenazine, a monoamine-depleting drug used in the treatment of hyperkinetic movement disorders.
authors:
- Guay DR
journal: Am J Geriatr Pharmacother
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2010.08.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tetrabenazine, a monoamine-depleting drug used in the treatment of hyperkinetic movement disorders.
**Authors:** Guay DR
**Journal:** Am J Geriatr Pharmacother (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjopharm.2010.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjopharm.2010.08.006)

## Content

1. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2010 Aug;8(4):331-73. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2010.08.006.

Tetrabenazine, a monoamine-depleting drug used in the treatment of hyperkinetic 
movement disorders.

Guay DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. guayx001@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: Few drugs are available for the management of hyperkinetic movement 
disorders such as the dystonias, choreas, dyskinesias, and tics. Those that are 
available (primarily neuroleptics) are associated with a wide range of 
potentially serious adverse effects, including induction of tardive movement 
disorders. Tetrabenazine (TBZ) is a monoamine-depleting agent initially studied 
in the 1950s and currently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for 
the treatment of chorea in Huntington's disease.
OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the chemistry, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, 
therapeutic use, tolerability, drug-interaction potential, and dosing and 
administration of TBZ.
METHODS: MEDLINE was searched (1950-February 2010) for English-language articles 
investigating any aspect of TBZ. Search terms included tetrabenazine, Ro 1-9569, 
Nitoman, benzoquinolizines, and reserpine. The reference lists of the identified 
articles were searched for other pertinent publications, particularly those that 
were not indexed in the 1950s and 1960s.
RESULTS: In the search for a chemical compound that was simpler than reserpine 
while preserving reserpine-like psychotropic activity, TBZ was identified in the 
1950s as one member of a large group of benzoquinolizine derivatives. TBZ acts 
by depletion of the monoamines serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine in the 
central nervous system (CNS). It does this by reversibly inhibiting vesicle 
monoamine transporter type 2 and thus preventing monoamine uptake into 
presynaptic neurons. Clinical studies suggest that TBZ may have therapeutic 
applications in a wide range of hyperkinetic movement disorders. TBZ has been 
associated with numerous adverse effects, some of them serious and potentially 
fatal; these include parkinsonism, other extrapyramidal symptoms (particularly 
akathisia), depression and suicidality, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and 
sedation. TBZ is subject to important drug-drug interactions with inhibitors and 
inducers of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6, reserpine, and lithium. It is one of very 
few drugs whose dosing is based, in part, on the results of genotyping (in its 
case, genotyping for CYP2D6 metabolizer status).
CONCLUSIONS: TBZ is a complicated drug in terms of its mechanism of action and 
its activities against the 3 major monoamines in the CNS, making it difficult to 
predict its efficacy and tolerability in patients with hyperkinetic movement 
disorders. It is associated with numerous adverse effects and several important 
drug-drug interactions. Much work remains to be done to determine the 
therapeutic potential of TBZ in the treatment of hyperkinetic movement 
disorders.

Copyright © 2010 Excerpta Medica Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2010.08.006
PMID: 20869622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]