---
reference_id: "PMID:32456483"
title: "In search of pathobiological endotypes: a systems approach to early rheumatoid arthritis."
authors:
- Tarn JR
- Lendrem DW
- Isaacs JD
journal: Expert Rev Clin Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/1744666X.2020.1771183
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In search of pathobiological endotypes: a systems approach to early rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Tarn JR, Lendrem DW, Isaacs JD
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1744666X.2020.1771183](https://doi.org/10.1080/1744666X.2020.1771183)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2020 Jun;16(6):621-630. doi: 
10.1080/1744666X.2020.1771183. Epub 2020 May 27.

In search of pathobiological endotypes: a systems approach to early rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Tarn JR(1), Lendrem DW(1), Isaacs JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University Medical 
School , Newcastle, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, systemic autoimmune 
disease. Early referral and treatment are key to the effective management of the 
disease. This makes imperative the identification of biomarkers and of 
pathobiological endotypes.
AREAS COVERED: This review describes recent efforts to integrate large-scale 
datasets for the identification of disease endotypes for precision medicine in 
early, seropositive RA. We conducted a search for systems and multi-omics papers 
in early RA patients through to 1 January 2020. We reviewed investigations of 
multiple technologies such as transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic 
platforms as well as extensive clinical datasets. We outline progress made and 
describe some of the advantages and limitations of current computational and 
statistical methods.
EXPERT OPINION: The search for pathobiological endotypes in early RA is rapidly 
developing. While currently, studies tend to be small, reliant upon new 
technologies and unproven analytical tools, as the technology becomes cheaper 
and more reliable, and the properties of analytical tools for the integration of 
cross-platform biology become better understood, it seems likely that better 
biomarkers of disease, remission and response to individual therapies will 
emerge.

DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2020.1771183
PMID: 32456483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]