---
reference_id: "PMID:39087855"
title: Neurocardiac pathologies associated with potassium channelopathies.
authors:
- Singh V
- Auerbach DS
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/epi.18066
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurocardiac pathologies associated with potassium channelopathies.
**Authors:** Singh V, Auerbach DS
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.18066](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.18066)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2024 Sep;65(9):2537-2552. doi: 10.1111/epi.18066. Epub 2024 Aug 1.

Neurocardiac pathologies associated with potassium channelopathies.

Singh V(1), Auerbach DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New 
York, USA.

Voltage-gated potassium channels are expressed throughout the human body and are 
essential for physiological functions. These include delayed rectifiers, A-type 
channels, outward rectifiers, and inward rectifiers. They impact electrical 
function in the heart (repolarization) and brain (repolarization and 
stabilization of the resting membrane potential). KCNQx and KCNHx encode Kv7.x 
and Kv11.x proteins, which form delayed rectifier potassium channels. KCNQx and 
KCNHx channelopathies are associated with both cardiac and neuronal pathologies. 
These include electrocardiographic abnormalities, cardiac arrhythmias, sudden 
cardiac death (SCD), epileptiform discharges, seizures, bipolar disorder, and 
sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). Due to the ubiquitous expression of 
KCNQx and KCNHx channels, abnormalities in their function can be particularly 
harmful, increasing the risk of sudden death. For example, KCNH2 variants have a 
dual role in both cardiac and neuronal pathologies, whereas KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 
variants are associated with severe and refractory epilepsy. Recurrent and 
uncontrolled seizures lead to secondary abnormalities, which include autonomics, 
cardiac electrical function, respiratory drive, and neuronal electrical 
activity. Even with a wide array of anti-seizure therapies available on the 
market, one-third of the more than 70 million people worldwide with epilepsy 
have uncontrolled seizures (i.e., intractable/drug-resistant epilepsy), which 
negatively impact neurodevelopment and quality of life. To capture the current 
state of the field, this review examines KCNQx and KCNHx expression patterns and 
electrical function in the brain and heart. In addition, it discusses several 
KCNQx and KCNHx variants that have been clinically and electrophysiologically 
characterized. Because these channel variants are associated with multi-system 
pathologies, such as epileptogenesis, Kv7 channel modulators provide a potential 
anti-seizure therapy, particularly for people with intractable epilepsy. 
Ultimately an increased understanding of the role of Kv channels throughout the 
body will fuel the development of innovative, safe, and effective therapies for 
people at a high risk of sudden death (SCD and SUDEP).

© 2024 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.18066
PMCID: PMC11702590
PMID: 39087855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None of the authors have 
any conflict of interest to disclose.