---
reference_id: "PMID:37805864"
title: "Clear cell chondrosarcoma: a review of clinicopathologic characteristics, differential diagnoses, and patient management."
authors:
- Alexiev BA
- Vormittag-Nocito ER
- Peabody TD
- Samet J
- Laskin WB
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2023.06.004
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Chondrosarcoma, Clear Cell/diagnosis"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Bone Neoplasms/pathology
- Bone and Bones/pathology
- "Chondrosarcoma/therapy, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clear cell chondrosarcoma: a review of clinicopathologic characteristics, differential diagnoses, and patient management.
**Authors:** Alexiev BA, Vormittag-Nocito ER, Peabody TD, Samet J, Laskin WB
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2023.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2023.06.004)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2023 Sep;139:126-134. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2023.06.004. Epub
2023  Jun 16.

Clear cell chondrosarcoma: a review of clinicopathologic characteristics,
differential diagnoses, and patient management.

Alexiev BA(1), Vormittag-Nocito ER(2), Peabody TD(3), Samet J(4), Laskin WB(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address:
Borislav.Alexiev@northwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Lavin Family Pavilion, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Imaging, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Yale-New Haven Hospital, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Clear cell chondrosarcoma (CCC), an extremely rare primary bone tumor, is
currently classified by the World Health Organization as a low-grade malignant
cartilaginous neoplasm. Clinically, CCC occurs primarily in males with a peak
incidence in the third to fifth decades of life, and occasionally, it presents
in skeletally immature patients. Unlike conventional chondrosarcoma, CCC has a
predilection for the epiphysis of long bones and often displays radiologic
features reminiscent of chondroblastoma. The recommended treatment is wide
operative resection. CCC has a local recurrence rate of approximately 30%, and
nearly 20% cases metastasize mainly to bone and lung often a decade after
surgical intervention. Incomplete excision or curettage is associated with a
high rate of recurrence. Histologically, the process is characterized by
infiltrative lobules and sheets of round to oval cells with abundant cleared
cytoplasm and well-defined cell borders associated with trabecula of osteoid and
woven bone, scattered osteoclasts, and foci of conventional low-grade
chondrosarcoma in about one-half of cases. Correlation with clinical and
radiologic characteristics, such as epiphyseal location and young patient age,
assists in establishing a correct diagnosis. Pathologic diagnosis of CCC is
complicated by the low diagnostic accuracy of core needle biopsy, overlapping
histologic features with other matrix-rich primary bone tumors, and a lack of a
specific immunohistochemical and molecular profile. DNA methylation-based
profiling classifier (sarcoma classifier) is one recent technologic advancement
that may help to confirm the histopathological diagnosis of CCC or indicate the
need for thorough reassessment in cases where results contradict previous
conventional findings.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2023.06.004
PMID: 37805864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
