---
reference_id: "PMID:36119696"
title: "Case report: Huppke-Brendel syndrome in an adult, mistaken for and treated as Wilson disease for 25 years."
authors:
- Kirk FT
- Munk DE
- Ek J
- Birk Møller L
- Bendixen Thorup M
- Hvid Danielsen E
- Vilstrup H
- Ott P
- Damgaard Sandahl T
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.957794
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Huppke-Brendel syndrome in an adult, mistaken for and treated as Wilson disease for 25 years.
**Authors:** Kirk FT, Munk DE, Ek J, Birk Møller L, Bendixen Thorup M, Hvid Danielsen E, Vilstrup H, Ott P, Damgaard Sandahl T
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.957794](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.957794)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Sep 1;13:957794. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.957794.
eCollection  2022.

Case report: Huppke-Brendel syndrome in an adult, mistaken for and treated as 
Wilson disease for 25 years.

Kirk FT(1), Munk DE(1), Ek J(2), Birk Møller L(2), Bendixen Thorup M(3), Hvid 
Danielsen E(4), Vilstrup H(1), Ott P(1), Damgaard Sandahl T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Aarhus University Hospital, 
ERN Rare Liver, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Department of Genetics, Copenhagen University, Rigshospitalet, København, 
Denmark.
(3)Department of Radiology and MR-center, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Neurology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Huppke-Brendel (HB) syndrome is an autosomal recessive disease 
caused by variants in the SLC33A1 gene. Since 2012, less than ten patients have 
been reported, none survived year six. With neurologic involvement and 
ceruloplasmin deficiency, it may mimic Wilson disease (WD).
OBJECTIVES AND METHODS: We report the first adult patient with HB.
RESULTS: The patient suffered from moderate intellectual disability, partial 
hearing loss, spastic ataxia, hypotonia, and unilateral tremor of parkinsonian 
type. At age 29, she was diagnosed with WD based on neurology, elevated 24H 
urinary copper, low ceruloplasmin, and pathological 65Cu test. Approximately 25 
years later, genetic testing did not support WD or aceruloplasminemia. Full 
genome sequencing revealed two likely pathogenic variants in SLC33A1 which 
combined with re-evaluation of neurologic symptoms and MRI suggested the 
diagnosis of HB.
CONCLUSION: Adult patients with HB exist and may be confused with WD. Low 
ceruloplasmin and the absence of ATP7B variants should raise suspicion.

Copyright © 2022 Kirk, Munk, Ek, Birk Møller, Bendixen Thorup, Hvid Danielsen, 
Vilstrup, Ott and Damgaard Sandahl.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.957794
PMCID: PMC9475109
PMID: 36119696

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.