---
reference_id: "PMID:36831022"
title: "Primary Mediastinal Germ Cell Tumors: A Thorough Literature Review."
authors:
- Ozgun G
- Nappi L
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11020487
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Mediastinal Germ Cell Tumors: A Thorough Literature Review.
**Authors:** Ozgun G, Nappi L
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines11020487](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines11020487)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2023 Feb 8;11(2):487. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11020487.

Primary Mediastinal Germ Cell Tumors: A Thorough Literature Review.

Ozgun G(1), Nappi L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Agency Vancouver 
Center, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4E6, Canada.

Primary mediastinal germ cell tumors (PMGCTs) are a rare type of cancer 
affecting young adults. They have different molecular and clinical features 
compared to testicular germ cell tumors. Non-seminoma PMGCTs have the shortest 
5-year overall survival and the poorest prognosis among all of the germ cell 
tumor presentations, while seminomas share the same survival and prognosis as 
their testicular counterparts. There is an unmet need for better treatment 
options for patients with non-seminoma PMGCTs in both first-line and salvage 
therapy, as the available options are associated with underwhelming outcomes. 
Identifying biological and genetic factors to predict treatment responses would 
be helpful in improving the survival of these patients.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11020487
PMCID: PMC9953372
PMID: 36831022

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.