---
reference_id: "PMID:32210430"
title: Molecular subtypes in canine hemangiosarcoma reveal similarities with human angiosarcoma.
authors:
- Wang G
- Wu M
- Durham AC
- Radaelli E
- Mason NJ
- Xu X
- Roth DB
journal: PLoS One
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229728
keywords:
- Animals
- Dog Diseases/genetics
- Dogs
- Exome/genetics
- "Genes, Neoplasm"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/genetics, veterinary"
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Reproducibility of Results
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
- ras Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular subtypes in canine hemangiosarcoma reveal similarities with human angiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Wang G, Wu M, Durham AC, Radaelli E, Mason NJ, Xu X, Roth DB
**Journal:** PLoS One (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0229728](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0229728)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2020 Mar 25;15(3):e0229728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229728.
eCollection 2020.

Molecular subtypes in canine hemangiosarcoma reveal similarities with human
angiosarcoma.

Wang G(1), Wu M(2), Durham AC(3), Radaelli E(3), Mason NJ(3)(4), Xu X(1), Roth
DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Raymond and Ruth Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States
of America.
(2)Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States of America.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences and Advanced Medicine, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States of
America.

Angiosarcoma (AS) is a rare neoplasm with limited treatment options and a poor
survival rate. Development of effective therapies is hindered by the rarity of
this disease. Dogs spontaneously develop hemangiosarcoma (HSA), a common,
histologically similar neoplasm. Metastatic disease occurs rapidly and despite
chemotherapy, most dogs die several months after diagnosis. These features
suggest that HSA might provide a tractable model to test experimental therapies
in clinical trials. We previously reported whole exome sequencing of 20 HSA
cases. Here we report development of a NGS targeted resequencing panel to detect
driver mutations in HSA and other canine tumors. We validated the panel by
resequencing the original 20 cases and sequenced 30 additional cases. Overall,
we identified potential driver mutations in over 90% of the cases, including
well-documented (in human cancers) oncogenic mutations in PIK3CA (46%), PTEN
(6%), PLCG1(4%), and TP53 (66%), as well as previously undetected recurrent
activating mutations in NRAS (24%). The driver role of these mutations is
further demonstrated by augmented downstream signaling crucial to tumor growth.
The recurrent, mutually exclusive mutation patterns suggest distinct molecular
subtypes of HSA. Driver mutations in some subtypes closely resemble those seen
in some AS cases, including NRAS, PLCG1, PIK3CA and TP53. Furthermore,
activation of the MAPK and PI3K pathways appear to be key oncogenic mechanisms
in both species. Together, these observations suggest that dogs with spontaneous
HSA could serve as a useful model for testing the efficacy of targeted
therapies, some of which could potentially be of therapeutic value in AS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229728
PMCID: PMC7094861
PMID: 32210430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of
interest, and no competing financial interest in relation to the work described.
MW received support in the form of salary from Illumina. There are no patents,
products in development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter our
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.
