---
reference_id: "PMID:37885879"
title: The first case report of complement component 7 deficiency in Qatar and a 10-year follow-up.
authors:
- Khalil SM
- Aqel S
- Mudawi DS
- Mobayed H
- Al-Nesf MA
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1253301
keywords:
- Male
- Meningitis
- Humans
- Qatar
- Adult
- "Complement C7/genetics, deficiency"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Neisseria meningitidis
- Hereditary Complement Deficiency Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The first case report of complement component 7 deficiency in Qatar and a 10-year follow-up.
**Authors:** Khalil SM, Aqel S, Mudawi DS, Mobayed H, Al-Nesf MA
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1253301](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1253301)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Oct 11;14:1253301. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1253301. 
eCollection 2023.

The first case report of complement component 7 deficiency in Qatar and a 
10-year follow-up.

Khalil SM(1), Aqel S(1), Mudawi DS(1), Mobayed H(1), Al-Nesf MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Allergy and Immunology Division, Department of Medicine, Hamad Medical 
Corporation, Doha, Qatar.

INTRODUCTION: Neisseria meningitidis is a significant cause of bacterial 
meningitis and septicemia worldwide. Recurrent Neisseria meningitidis is 
frequently associated with terminal complement protein deficiency, including 
Complement component 7. This report discusses the first case of C7 deficiency in 
Qatar.
CASE REPORT: A 30-year-old Qatari man presented with a meningococcal infection, 
which was verified by a blood culture. He experienced two episodes of meningitis 
caused by an undetermined organism. His blood tests revealed low levels of CH50 
and C7. His C7 gene testing revealed a homozygous mutation in exon 10 (c.1135G>C 
p.Gly379Arg), a mutation that has not been previously documented in Qatar. 
However, it has been observed in 1% of Moroccan-origin Israeli Jews who also 
exhibit C7 deficiency. Regular prophylactic quadrivalent vaccinations against 
types A, C, Y, and W-135 with azithromycin tabs were administered. Over the last 
10 years of follow-up, he remained in good health, with no further meningitis 
episodes.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first confirmed case of C7 deficiency 
reported in the Arabian Gulf countries. Such rare diseases should be a public 
health priority. Awareness among medical practitioners and the community should 
help with early detection of C7 deficiency and the prevention of its 
consequences.

Copyright © 2023 Khalil, Aqel, Mudawi, Mobayed and Al-Nesf.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1253301
PMCID: PMC10598862
PMID: 37885879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.