---
reference_id: "PMID:21739440"
title: Hepatitis B surface antigen confirmatory testing for diagnosis of hepatitis B virus infection in Taiwan.
authors:
- Chu FY
- Su FH
- Cheng SH
- Lin YS
- Li CY
- Chien CC
- Lin YC
- Chiang SY
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.22127
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B surface antigen confirmatory testing for diagnosis of hepatitis B virus infection in Taiwan.
**Authors:** Chu FY, Su FH, Cheng SH, Lin YS, Li CY, Chien CC, Lin YC, Chiang SY
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.22127](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.22127)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2011 Sep;83(9):1514-21. doi: 10.1002/jmv.22127.

Hepatitis B surface antigen confirmatory testing for diagnosis of hepatitis B 
virus infection in Taiwan.

Chu FY(1), Su FH, Cheng SH, Lin YS, Li CY, Chien CC, Lin YC, Chiang SY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei 
City, Taiwan; Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, 
Yuanpei University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. jacphajacpha@yahoo.com.tw

This study aimed to examine the application of hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg) confirmatory testing when diagnosing hepatitis B infection among young 
persons in Taiwan with a low prevalence rate of hepatitis B infection. HBsAg 
status, the presence of antibodies against HBsAg (anti-HBs), and the presence of 
antibodies against hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) were compared among 403 
graduate students (mean age 22.8 ± 0.7 years) and 1,745 undergraduate students 
(18.6 ± 1.0 years) from one university, and 367 adult subjects (41.1 ± 15.8 
years) in 2008. Any HBsAg-positive subjects were tested with an HBsAg 
confirmatory test. Chi-square tests for trend and predictive values of 
positivity (PVP) when using HBsAg-positive only for determining confirmed cases 
of hepatitis B infection were compared across the three cohorts. The prevalence 
of HBsAg positivity among subjects decreased from 16.3% in the adults to 5.2% in 
the graduate students and then to 2.8% for the undergraduate students (P = 
0.0007). The PVP of HBsAg testing when determining cases of hepatitis B 
decreased from 0.97 for the adults to 0.81 for the graduate students and then to 
0.56 for the undergraduate students (P < 0.0001). Thus, a significant decrease 
in the true-positive rate of HBsAg among the students born after the 
introduction of hepatitis B vaccination was observed only when HBsAg testing was 
applied. Additional neutralization tests may therefore become mandatory for 
persons with a positive HBsAg test result who were born after the commencement 
of the universal neonatal hepatitis B vaccination program in Taiwan.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.22127
PMID: 21739440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]