---
reference_id: "PMID:22705998"
title: "Marfan syndrome: from gene to therapy."
authors:
- Bolar N
- Van Laer L
- Loeys BL
journal: Curr Opin Pediatr
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283557d4c
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Marfan syndrome: from gene to therapy.
**Authors:** Bolar N, Van Laer L, Loeys BL
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pediatr (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283557d4c](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283557d4c)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2012 Aug;24(4):498-504. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283557d4c.

Marfan syndrome: from gene to therapy.

Bolar N(1), Van Laer L, Loeys BL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Aneurysmal Disease Research, Center for Medical Genetics, 
University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Although historically Marfan syndrome (MFS) has always been 
considered as a condition caused by the deficiency of a structural extracellular 
matrix protein, fibrillin-1, the study of Marfan mouse models and Marfan-related 
conditions has shifted our current understanding to a pathogenic model that 
involves dysregulation of the cytokine-transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) 
signaling.
RECENT FINDINGS: In this review, we focus on the impact of the revised MFS 
clinical diagnostic criteria. We discuss lessons that have been learned from 
molecular findings in relevant Marfan-related conditions, such as sporadic 
thoracic aortic aneurysm/dissection, stiff skin syndrome, acromelic dysplasias 
and Loeys-Dietz syndrome. We explore the latest insights into the role of the 
alternative TGF-β signaling pathways in MFS pathogenesis. Finally, we give an 
update on the current and future treatment strategies.
SUMMARY: The recent insights into the pathogenesis of MFS and related disorders 
have offered a prime example of translational medicine with immediate bridge 
between molecular findings and therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283557d4c
PMID: 22705998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]