---
reference_id: "PMID:27492813"
title: "The many faces of Meckel's diverticulum and its complications."
authors:
- Choi SY
- Hong SS
- Park HJ
- Lee HK
- Shin HC
- Choi GC
journal: J Med Imaging Radiat Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/1754-9485.12505
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The many faces of Meckel's diverticulum and its complications.
**Authors:** Choi SY, Hong SS, Park HJ, Lee HK, Shin HC, Choi GC
**Journal:** J Med Imaging Radiat Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1754-9485.12505](https://doi.org/10.1111/1754-9485.12505)

## Content

1. J Med Imaging Radiat Oncol. 2017 Apr;61(2):225-231. doi: 
10.1111/1754-9485.12505. Epub 2016 Aug 4.

The many faces of Meckel's diverticulum and its complications.

Choi SY(1), Hong SS(2), Park HJ(3), Lee HK(1), Shin HC(4), Choi GC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital, Bucheon, 
Korea.
(2)Department of Radiology, Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital, Seoul, 
Korea.
(3)Department of Radiology, Chung-Ang University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Radiology, Soonchunhyang University Cheonan Hospital, Cheonan, 
Korea.
(5)Department of Radiology, Soonchunhyang University Gumi Hospital, Gumi, Korea.

Meckel's diverticulum is the most frequent congenital malformation of the 
gastrointestinal tract, occurring in 2% of the general population. Meckel's 
diverticulum is usually asymptomatic and found incidentally. However, the 
lifetime risk of complications is 4-40%. In this essay, we describe the clinical 
and imaging findings in 12 cases of Meckel's diverticula with complications over 
a 5-year period, which were confirmed pathologically. The major complications of 
Meckel's diverticulum include gastrointestinal bleeding, bowel obstruction, 
perforation and inflammation. Small bowel follow-through (SBFT), computed 
tomography (CT) including CT enterography and RI scintigraphy can be used to 
show typical imaging features of Meckel's diverticulum and its complications. 
Knowledge of the clinical and radiologic findings of Meckel's diverticulum can 
aid in the early and accurate diagnosis of this anomaly and its complications.

© 2016 The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists.

DOI: 10.1111/1754-9485.12505
PMID: 27492813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]