---
reference_id: "PMID:15894097"
title: "Effects of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy for early breast cancer on recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of the randomised trials."
authors:
- "Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group (EBCTCG)"
journal: Lancet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66544-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy for early breast cancer on recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of the randomised trials.
**Authors:** Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group (EBCTCG)
**Journal:** Lancet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66544-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66544-0)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2005 May 14-20;365(9472):1687-717. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66544-0.

Effects of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy for early breast cancer on 
recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of the randomised trials.

Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group (EBCTCG).

Comment in
    Lancet. 2005 May 14-20;365(9472):1665-6. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66524-5.
    ACP J Club. 2005 Nov-Dec;143(3):58.

BACKGROUND: Quinquennial overviews (1985-2000) of the randomised trials in early 
breast cancer have assessed the 5 year and 10-year effects of various systemic 
adjuvant therapies on breast cancer recurrence and survival. Here, we report the 
10-year and 15-year effects.
METHODS: Collaborative meta-analyses were undertaken of 194 unconfounded 
randomised trials of adjuvant chemotherapy or hormonal therapy that began by 
1995. Many trials involved CMF (cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, fluorouracil), 
anthracycline-based combinations such as FAC (fluorouracil, doxorubicin, 
cyclophosphamide) or FEC (fluorouracil, epirubicin, cyclophosphamide), 
tamoxifen, or ovarian suppression: none involved taxanes, trastuzumab, 
raloxifene, or modern aromatase inhibitors.
FINDINGS: Allocation to about 6 months of anthracycline-based polychemotherapy 
(eg, with FAC or FEC) reduces the annual breast cancer death rate by about 38% 
(SE 5) for women younger than 50 years of age when diagnosed and by about 20% 
(SE 4) for those of age 50-69 years when diagnosed, largely irrespective of the 
use of tamoxifen and of oestrogen receptor (ER) status, nodal status, or other 
tumour characteristics. Such regimens are significantly (2p=0.0001 for 
recurrence, 2p<0.00001 for breast cancer mortality) more effective than CMF 
chemotherapy. Few women of age 70 years or older entered these chemotherapy 
trials. For ER-positive disease only, allocation to about 5 years of adjuvant 
tamoxifen reduces the annual breast cancer death rate by 31% (SE 3), largely 
irrespective of the use of chemotherapy and of age (<50, 50-69, > or =70 years), 
progesterone receptor status, or other tumour characteristics. 5 years is 
significantly (2p<0.00001 for recurrence, 2p=0.01 for breast cancer mortality) 
more effective than just 1-2 years of tamoxifen. For ER-positive tumours, the 
annual breast cancer mortality rates are similar during years 0-4 and 5-14, as 
are the proportional reductions in them by 5 years of tamoxifen, so the 
cumulative reduction in mortality is more than twice as big at 15 years as at 5 
years after diagnosis. These results combine six meta-analyses: 
anthracycline-based versus no chemotherapy (8000 women); CMF-based versus no 
chemotherapy (14,000); anthracycline-based versus CMF-based chemotherapy 
(14,000); about 5 years of tamoxifen versus none (15,000); about 1-2 years of 
tamoxifen versus none (33,000); and about 5 years versus 1-2 years of tamoxifen 
(18,000). Finally, allocation to ovarian ablation or suppression (8000 women) 
also significantly reduces breast cancer mortality, but appears to do so only in 
the absence of other systemic treatments. For middle-aged women with ER-positive 
disease (the commonest type of breast cancer), the breast cancer mortality rate 
throughout the next 15 years would be approximately halved by 6 months of 
anthracycline-based chemotherapy (with a combination such as FAC or FEC) 
followed by 5 years of adjuvant tamoxifen. For, if mortality reductions of 38% 
(age <50 years) and 20% (age 50-69 years) from such chemotherapy were followed 
by a further reduction of 31% from tamoxifen in the risks that remain, the final 
mortality reductions would be 57% and 45%, respectively (and, the trial results 
could well have been somewhat stronger if there had been full compliance with 
the allocated treatments). Overall survival would be comparably improved, since 
these treatments have relatively small effects on mortality from the aggregate 
of all other causes.
INTERPRETATION: Some of the widely practicable adjuvant drug treatments that 
were being tested in the 1980s, which substantially reduced 5-year recurrence 
rates (but had somewhat less effect on 5-year mortality rates), also 
substantially reduce 15-year mortality rates. Further improvements in long-term 
survival could well be available from newer drugs, or better use of older drugs.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66544-0
PMID: 15894097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]