---
reference_id: "PMID:35333944"
title: "Toxicology and pharmacology of botulinum and tetanus neurotoxins: an update."
authors:
- Pirazzini M
- Montecucco C
- Rossetto O
journal: Arch Toxicol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00204-022-03271-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toxicology and pharmacology of botulinum and tetanus neurotoxins: an update.
**Authors:** Pirazzini M, Montecucco C, Rossetto O
**Journal:** Arch Toxicol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00204-022-03271-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-022-03271-9)

## Content

1. Arch Toxicol. 2022 Jun;96(6):1521-1539. doi: 10.1007/s00204-022-03271-9. Epub 
2022 Mar 25.

Toxicology and pharmacology of botulinum and tetanus neurotoxins: an update.

Pirazzini M(1)(2), Montecucco C(3)(4), Rossetto O(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Via Ugo Bassi 58/B, 
35131, Padova, Italy.
(2)Centro Interdipartimentale di Ricerca di Miologia, CIR-Myo, University of 
Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35131, Padova, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Via Ugo Bassi 58/B, 
35131, Padova, Italy. cesare.montecucco@gmail.com.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience, National Research Council, Via Ugo Bassi 58/B, 
35131, Padova, Italy. cesare.montecucco@gmail.com.
(5)Institute of Neuroscience, National Research Council, Via Ugo Bassi 58/B, 
35131, Padova, Italy.

Tetanus and botulinum neurotoxins cause the neuroparalytic syndromes of tetanus 
and botulism, respectively, by delivering inside different types of neurons, 
metalloproteases specifically cleaving the SNARE proteins that are essential for 
the release of neurotransmitters. Research on their mechanism of action is 
intensively carried out in order to devise improved therapies based on 
antibodies and chemical drugs. Recently, major results have been obtained with 
human monoclonal antibodies and with single chain antibodies that have allowed 
one to neutralize the metalloprotease activity of botulinum neurotoxin type A1 
inside neurons. In addition, a method has been devised to induce a rapid 
molecular evolution of the metalloprotease domain of botulinum neurotoxin 
followed by selection driven to re-target the metalloprotease activity versus 
novel targets with respect to the SNARE proteins. At the same time, an intense 
and wide spectrum clinical research on novel therapeutics based on botulinum 
neurotoxins is carried out, which are also reviewed here.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-022-03271-9
PMCID: PMC9095541
PMID: 35333944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interests.