---
reference_id: "PMID:34269512"
title: Frequency of carriers for rare recessive Mendelian diseases in a Brazilian cohort of 320 patients.
authors:
- Quaio CRDC
- Chung CH
- Perazzio SF
- Dutra AP
- Moreira CM
- Filho GMN
- Sacramento-Bobotis PR
- Penna MG
- de Souza RRF
- Cintra VP
- Carnavalli JEP
- da Silva RA
- Paixão D
- Baratela WADR
- Olivati C
- Spolador GM
- Santos MNP
- Pintao MC
- Fornari ARDS
- Burger M
- Ramalho RF
- Pereira OJE
- E Ferreira EN
- Mitne-Neto M
- Kim CA
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31932
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of carriers for rare recessive Mendelian diseases in a Brazilian cohort of 320 patients.
**Authors:** Quaio CRDC, Chung CH, Perazzio SF, Dutra AP, Moreira CM, Filho GMN, Sacramento-Bobotis PR, Penna MG, de Souza RRF, Cintra VP, Carnavalli JEP, da Silva RA, Paixão D, Baratela WADR, Olivati C, Spolador GM, Santos MNP, Pintao MC, Fornari ARDS, Burger M, Ramalho RF, Pereira OJE, E Ferreira EN, Mitne-Neto M, Kim CA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31932](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31932)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2021 Sep;187(3):364-372. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31932. Epub 2021 Jul 16.

Frequency of carriers for rare recessive Mendelian diseases in a Brazilian 
cohort of 320 patients.

Quaio CRDC(1)(2)(3), Chung CH(2), Perazzio SF(2)(4), Dutra AP(2), Moreira CM(2), 
Filho GMN(2), Sacramento-Bobotis PR(2), Penna MG(2), de Souza RRF(2), Cintra 
VP(2), Carnavalli JEP(2), da Silva RA(2)(5), Paixão D(2), Baratela WADR(2), 
Olivati C(2), Spolador GM(1)(2), Santos MNP(2), Pintao MC(2), Fornari ARDS(2), 
Burger M(2), Ramalho RF(2), Pereira OJE(2), E Ferreira EN(2), Mitne-Neto M(2), 
Kim CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto da Crianca (Children's Hospital), Hospital das Clinicas HCFMUSP, 
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Fleury Medicina e Saúde, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório Clínico, Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Hepatologia Molecular Aplicada (LHeMA), Escola Paulista de 
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Several Mendelian disorders follow an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. 
Epidemiological information on many inherited disorders may be useful to guide 
health policies for rare diseases, but it is often inadequate, particularly in 
developing countries. We aimed to calculate the carrier frequencies of rare 
autosomal recessive Mendelian diseases in a cohort of Brazilian patients using 
whole exome sequencing (WES). We reviewed the molecular findings of WES from 320 
symptomatic patients who had carrier status for recessive diseases. Using the 
Hardy-Weinberg equation, we estimated recessive disease frequencies (q2 ) 
considering the respective carrier frequencies (2pq) observed in our study. We 
calculated the sensitivity of carrier screening tests based on lists of genes 
from five different clinical laboratories that offer them in Brazil. A total of 
425 occurrences of 351 rare variants were reported in 278 different genes from 
230 patients (71.9%). Almost half (48.8%) were carriers of at least one 
heterozygous pathogenic/likely pathogenic variant for rare metabolic disorders, 
while 25.9% of epilepsy, 18.1% of intellectual disabilities, 15.6% of skeletal 
disorders, 10.9% immune disorders, and 9.1% of hearing loss. We estimated that 
an average of 67% of the variants would not have been detected by carrier 
screening panels. The combined frequencies of autosomal recessive diseases were 
estimated to be 26.39/10,000 (or ~0.26%). This study shows the potential 
research utility of WES to determine carrier status, which may be a possible 
strategy to evaluate the clinical and social burden of recessive diseases at the 
population level and guide the optimization of carrier screening panels.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31932
PMID: 34269512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]