---
reference_id: "PMID:19369399"
title: Sulfation of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans is necessary for proper Indian hedgehog signaling in the developing growth plate.
authors:
- Cortes M
- Baria AT
- Schwartz NB
journal: Development
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1242/dev.030742
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Cell Proliferation
- "Chondrocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- Chondroitin Sulfate Proteoglycans/metabolism
- "Extremities/growth & development, physiology"
- Glycosaminoglycans/metabolism
- "Growth Plate/growth & development, physiology"
- Hedgehog Proteins/physiology
- Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans/metabolism
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Multienzyme Complexes/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sulfate Adenylyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sulfation of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans is necessary for proper Indian hedgehog signaling in the developing growth plate.
**Authors:** Cortes M, Baria AT, Schwartz NB
**Journal:** Development (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.030742](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.030742)

## Content

1. Development. 2009 May;136(10):1697-706. doi: 10.1242/dev.030742. Epub 2009 Apr
 15.

Sulfation of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans is necessary for proper Indian 
hedgehog signaling in the developing growth plate.

Cortes M(1), Baria AT, Schwartz NB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

In contrast to the functional role of heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), the 
importance of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) in modulating signaling 
pathways involving hedgehog proteins, wingless-related proteins and fibroblast 
growth factors remains unclear. To elucidate the importance of sulfated CSPGs in 
signaling paradigms required for endochondral bone formation, the brachymorphic 
(bm) mouse was used as a model for undersulfated CSPGs. The bm mouse exhibits a 
postnatal chondrodysplasia caused by a mutation in the phosphoadenosine 
phosphosulfate (PAPS) synthetase (Papss2) gene, leading to reduced levels of 
PAPS and undersulfated proteoglycans. Biochemical analysis of the 
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) content in bm cartilage via sulfate labeling and 
fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis revealed preferential 
undersulfation of chondroitin chains (CS) and normal sulfation of heparan 
sulfate chains. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis of bm 
limb growth plates showed diminished Indian hedgehog (Ihh) signaling and 
abnormal Ihh protein distribution in the extracellular matrix. Consistent with 
the decrease in hedgehog signaling, BrdU incorporation exhibited a significant 
reduction in chondrocyte proliferation. Direct measurements of Ihh binding to 
defined GAG chains demonstrated that Ihh interacts with CS, particularly 
chondroitin-4-sulfate. Furthermore, co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed 
that Ihh binds to the major cartilage CSPG aggrecan via its CS chains. Overall, 
this study demonstrates an important function for CSPGs in modulating Ihh 
signaling in the developing growth plate, and highlights the importance of 
carbohydrate sulfation in regulating growth factor signaling.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.030742
PMCID: PMC2673757
PMID: 19369399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]