---
reference_id: "PMID:15157948"
title: Basal circadian and pulsatile ACTH and cortisol secretion in patients with fibromyalgia and/or chronic fatigue syndrome.
authors:
- Crofford LJ
- Young EA
- Engleberg NC
- Korszun A
- Brucksch CB
- McClure LA
- Brown MB
- Demitrack MA
journal: Brain Behav Immun
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2003.12.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Basal circadian and pulsatile ACTH and cortisol secretion in patients with fibromyalgia and/or chronic fatigue syndrome.
**Authors:** Crofford LJ, Young EA, Engleberg NC, Korszun A, Brucksch CB, McClure LA, Brown MB, Demitrack MA
**Journal:** Brain Behav Immun (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbi.2003.12.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2003.12.011)

## Content

1. Brain Behav Immun. 2004 Jul;18(4):314-25. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2003.12.011.

Basal circadian and pulsatile ACTH and cortisol secretion in patients with 
fibromyalgia and/or chronic fatigue syndrome.

Crofford LJ(1), Young EA, Engleberg NC, Korszun A, Brucksch CB, McClure LA, 
Brown MB, Demitrack MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan School of Medicine, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA. crofford@umich.edu

The objective of this study was to evaluate and compare the basal circadian and 
pulsatile architecture of the HPA axis in groups of patients with FMS, CFS, or 
both syndromes with individually matched control groups. Forty patients with 
either FMS (n = 13), FMS and CFS (n = 12), or CFS (n = 15) were matched by age 
(18-65), sex, and menstrual status to healthy controls. Subjects were excluded 
if they met criteria for major Axis I psychiatric disorders by structured 
clinical interview (SCID). Subjects were admitted to the General Clinical 
Research Center where meals and activities were standardized. Blood was 
collected from an intravenous line every 10 min over 24 h for analysis of ACTH 
and cortisol. Samples were evaluable for ACTH in 36 subject pairs and for 
cortisol in 37 subject pairs. There was a significant delay in the rate of 
decline from acrophase to nadir for cortisol levels in patients with FMS (P 
<.01). Elevation of cortisol in the late evening quiescent period was evident in 
half of the FMS patients compared with their control group, while cortisol 
levels were numerically, but not significantly, lower in the overnight period in 
patients with CFS compared with their control group. Pulsatility analyses did 
not reveal statistically significant differences between patient and control 
groups. We conclude that the pattern of differences for basal circadian 
architecture of HPA axis hormones differs between patients with FMS and CFS 
compared to their matched control groups. The abnormalities in FMS patients are 
consistent with loss of HPA axis resiliency.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2003.12.011
PMID: 15157948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]