---
reference_id: "PMID:435641"
title: "Arsenic-induced bone marrow toxicity: ultrastructural and electron-probe analysis."
authors:
- Feussner JR
- Shelburne JD
- Bredehoeft S
- Cohen HJ
journal: Blood
year: '1979'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic-induced bone marrow toxicity: ultrastructural and electron-probe analysis.
**Authors:** Feussner JR, Shelburne JD, Bredehoeft S, Cohen HJ
**Journal:** Blood (1979)

## Content

1. Blood. 1979 May;53(5):820-7.

Arsenic-induced bone marrow toxicity: ultrastructural and electron-probe 
analysis.

Feussner JR, Shelburne JD, Bredehoeft S, Cohen HJ.

A patient with severe arsenic poisoning that resulted in marked peripheral blood 
and bone marrow abnormalities, including megaloblastic erythropoiesis 
experienced many of the previously reported hematologic complications of arsenic 
poisoning: leukopenia, granulocytopenia, absolute eosinophilia, and profound 
anemia. In this study we report an ultrastructural and electron-probe analysis 
of the bone marrow. Although megaloblastic anemia associated with arsenic 
poisoning has been described rarely, the presence of arsenic in the local bone 
marrow milieu has not been demonstrated previously. The ultrastructural features 
of arsenic-induced bone marrow toxicity are similar to those described in other 
dyserythropoietic states and include marked nuclear aberrations involving shape, 
chromatin distribution, and nuclear envelope. Using the technique of 
energy-dispersive x-ray analysis (electron probe) we demonstrated arsenic in 
bone marrow spicules; this supports the contention that arsenic can cause 
megaloblastic anemia. We suggest that this technique may be a useful tool in 
further studies that attempt to explore the mechanism of arsenic-induced 
hematologic toxicity. Finally, we suggest that arsenic has a direct toxic effect 
on DNA synthesis that results in marked disturbances of nuclear division. We 
recommend that the most appropriate screening procedure to evaluate possible 
arsenic poisoning is tissue arsenic measurements (hair and nails) rather than 
24-hr urinary measurements.

PMID: 435641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]