---
reference_id: "PMID:39457141"
title: "Preterm Infant with Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy Who Survived Due to Early Diagnosis and Appropriate Treatment with Bisphosphonates: A Case Report."
authors:
- Tanaka M
- Kobayashi A
- Kuwabara H
- Nirei J
- Ozawa J
- Sawano K
- Shibata N
- Nagasaki K
- Saitoh A
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/children11101176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preterm Infant with Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy Who Survived Due to Early Diagnosis and Appropriate Treatment with Bisphosphonates: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Tanaka M, Kobayashi A, Kuwabara H, Nirei J, Ozawa J, Sawano K, Shibata N, Nagasaki K, Saitoh A
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children11101176](https://doi.org/10.3390/children11101176)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2024 Sep 27;11(10):1176. doi: 10.3390/children11101176.

Preterm Infant with Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy Who Survived 
Due to Early Diagnosis and Appropriate Treatment with Bisphosphonates: A Case 
Report.

Tanaka M(1), Kobayashi A(1), Kuwabara H(1), Nirei J(1), Ozawa J(1), Sawano K(1), 
Shibata N(1), Nagasaki K(1), Saitoh A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Niigata University Medical and Dental Hospital, 
Niigata 951-8514, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Niigata 951-8514, Japan.

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is a rare disease 
characterized by arterial calcification. GACI is caused by a mutation in the 
ENPP1 or ABCC6 genes. GACI causes severe hypertension and heart failure, and 
approximately 50% of patients die within the first 6 months. In particular, 
preterm infants with GACI often die due to immature cardiac function. 
Bisphosphonates are effective in treating GACI; however, no standardized 
treatment regimen is available. We experienced a case of a preterm infant with 
GACI born at 30 weeks gestation. Ultrasonography showed high-intensity lesions 
in the arteries, and computed tomography revealed calcification of the arteries 
throughout the body, leading to the diagnosis of GACI. We administered 
intravenous pamidronate, and her cardiac contraction improved. The initial 
scheduled interval between drug administrations was 2 months. However, the 
cardiac contraction worsened 1 month after the pamidronate administration. 
Therefore, we decreased the dosing interval and administered a second course of 
pamidronate, which improved her cardiac function. We then switched to oral 
etidronate. To improve the morbidity and mortality rates of preterm infants with 
GACI, it is important to obtain an early diagnosis of GACI by investigating 
high-intensity lesions in the arteries and performing early administration of an 
appropriate type of bisphosphonate.

DOI: 10.3390/children11101176
PMCID: PMC11505654
PMID: 39457141

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.