---
reference_id: "PMID:31713637"
title: "Recent advances in the pathogenesis of hereditary fructose intolerance: implications for its treatment and the understanding of fructose-induced non-alcoholic fatty liver disease."
authors:
- Buziau AM
- Schalkwijk CG
- Stehouwer CDA
- Tolan DR
- Brouwers MCGJ
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-019-03348-2
keywords:
- Animals
- "Fructose/adverse effects, metabolism"
- "Fructose Intolerance/drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Mice
- "Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/chemically induced, drug therapy, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in the pathogenesis of hereditary fructose intolerance: implications for its treatment and the understanding of fructose-induced non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
**Authors:** Buziau AM, Schalkwijk CG, Stehouwer CDA, Tolan DR, Brouwers MCGJ
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-019-03348-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-019-03348-2)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2020 May;77(9):1709-1719. doi: 10.1007/s00018-019-03348-2.
Epub 2019 Nov 12.

Recent advances in the pathogenesis of hereditary fructose intolerance:
implications for its treatment and the understanding of fructose-induced
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.

Buziau AM(1)(2)(3), Schalkwijk CG(2)(3), Stehouwer CDA(2)(3)(4), Tolan DR(5),
Brouwers MCGJ(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory for Metabolism and Vascular Medicine, Division of General Internal
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht, The
Netherlands.
(4)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA. tolan@bu.edu.
(6)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands. mcgj.brouwers@mumc.nl.
(7)Laboratory for Metabolism and Vascular Medicine, Division of General Internal
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, The Netherlands. mcgj.brouwers@mumc.nl.
(8)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht, The
Netherlands. mcgj.brouwers@mumc.nl.

Comment in
    Cell Mol Life Sci. 2020 Sep;77(17):3465-3466. doi:
10.1007/s00018-020-03575-y.

Hereditary fructose intolerance (HFI) is a rare inborn disease characterized by
a deficiency in aldolase B, which catalyzes the cleavage of fructose
1,6-bisphosphate and fructose 1-phosphate (Fru 1P) to triose molecules. In
patients with HFI, ingestion of fructose results in accumulation of Fru 1P and
depletion of ATP, which are believed to cause symptoms, such as nausea,
vomiting, hypoglycemia, and liver and kidney failure. These sequelae can be
prevented by a fructose-restricted diet. Recent studies in aldolase B-deficient
mice and HFI patients have provided more insight into the pathogenesis of HFI,
in particular the liver phenotype. Both aldolase B-deficient mice (fed a very
low fructose diet) and HFI patients (treated with a fructose-restricted diet)
displayed greater intrahepatic fat content when compared to controls. The liver
phenotype in aldolase B-deficient mice was prevented by reduction in
intrahepatic Fru 1P concentrations by crossing these mice with mice deficient
for ketohexokinase, the enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of Fru 1P. These new
findings not only provide a potential novel treatment for HFI, but lend insight
into the pathogenesis of fructose-induced non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD), which has raised to epidemic proportions in Western society. This
narrative review summarizes the most recent advances in the pathogenesis of HFI
and discusses the implications for the understanding and treatment of
fructose-induced NAFLD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-019-03348-2
PMCID: PMC11105038
PMID: 31713637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
