---
reference_id: "PMID:35005117"
title: A heterozygous N-terminal truncation mutation of NFKBIA results in an impaired NF-κB dependent inflammatory response.
authors:
- Wen W
- Wang L
- Deng M
- Li Y
- Tang X
- Mao H
- Zhao X
journal: Genes Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.gendis.2021.03.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A heterozygous N-terminal truncation mutation of NFKBIA results in an impaired NF-κB dependent inflammatory response.
**Authors:** Wen W, Wang L, Deng M, Li Y, Tang X, Mao H, Zhao X
**Journal:** Genes Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gendis.2021.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gendis.2021.03.005)

## Content

1. Genes Dis. 2021 Apr 3;9(1):176-186. doi: 10.1016/j.gendis.2021.03.005. 
eCollection 2022 Jan.

A heterozygous N-terminal truncation mutation of NFKBIA results in an impaired 
NF-κB dependent inflammatory response.

Wen W(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Wang L(1)(7)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Deng M(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), 
Li Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Tang X(1)(7)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Mao H(1)(7)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), 
Zhao X(1)(7)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Child Infection and Immunity, Children's Hospital 
of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, PR China.
(2)Pediatric Research Institute, Chongqing, 400014 PR China.
(3)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, 
Chongqing 400014, PR China.
(4)National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Chongqing, 
400014 PR China.
(5)China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Child 
Development and Critical Disorders, Chongqing 400014, PR China.
(6)Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, PR 
China.
(7)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, 400014 PR China.

Germline heterozygous gain-of-function (GOF) mutation of NFKBIA, encoding IκBα, 
would affect the activation of NF-κB pathway and cause an autosomal dominant 
(AD) form of anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-ID). 
Here we reported a Chinese patient with a heterozygous N-terminal truncation 
mutation of NFKBIA/IκBα. She presented recurrent fever, infectious pneumonia and 
chronic diarrhea with EDA-ID. Impaired NF-κB translocation and IL1R and TLR4 
pathway activation were revealed in this patient. The findings suggested that 
the truncation mutation of IκBα caused medium impaired of activation of NF-κB 
but the early death. Furthermore, we reviewed all the reported patients with 
NFKBIA mutation to learn more about this disease.

© 2021 Chongqing Medical University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gendis.2021.03.005
PMCID: PMC8720704
PMID: 35005117

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.