---
reference_id: "PMID:27625864"
title: Osteogenesis imperfecta caused by PPIB mutation with severe phenotype and congenital hearing loss.
authors:
- Rush ET
- Caldwell KS
- Kreikemeier RM
- Lutz RE
- Esposito PW
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3233/PGE-14080
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta caused by PPIB mutation with severe phenotype and congenital hearing loss.
**Authors:** Rush ET, Caldwell KS, Kreikemeier RM, Lutz RE, Esposito PW
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3233/PGE-14080](https://doi.org/10.3233/PGE-14080)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2014 Mar;3(1):29-34. doi: 10.3233/PGE-14080.

Osteogenesis imperfecta caused by PPIB mutation with severe phenotype and 
congenital hearing loss.

Rush ET(1), Caldwell KS(2), Kreikemeier RM(3), Lutz RE(4), Esposito PW(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 
USA; Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE, USA; Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA; 
Munroe-Meyer Institute for Genetics and Rehabilitation, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(2)Munroe-Meyer Institute for Genetics and Rehabilitation, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(3)Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 
USA; Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA; Munroe-Meyer 
Institute for Genetics and Rehabilitation, University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 
USA; Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE, USA; Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is an inherited disorder of connective tissue 
typically caused by defects in either COL1A1 or COL1A2. A number of other genes 
causative of this disorder have been found, including PPIB, which forms one 
subunit of the prolyl 3-hydroxylase enzyme complex. Patients with homozygous or 
compound heterozygous mutations in this gene have OI with a trend toward lethal 
or severe phenotype. We present a Native American female with prenatal diagnosis 
of OI. Long bones were shortened with significant rhizomelia. At birth, 
fractures were present in ribs, humerii, and femurs. She had significant 
respiratory disease at birth, and required oxygen throughout her life. She also 
had recurrent pneumonias, one of which ultimately caused her death at age 16 mo. 
She also had significant bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Molecular testing 
showed that the patient was homozygous for a single nucleotide substitution in 
PPIB (c. 136-2A>G). Patients with OI caused by PPIB mutations have had variable 
disease, but with majority of either with perinatal lethality or progressively 
deforming severe disease. Patients with OI due to PPIB mutation have shown some 
differences in phenotype. There appears to be a trend toward rhizomelic 
shortening and less severe bowing of the extremities, as compared to patients 
with comparably severe OI caused by COL1A1 or COL1A2 mutation. Congenital 
hearing loss may be an inconsistent feature of this condition, or may have 
co-occurred in our patient for unrelated reasons. Still, patients with OI caused 
by PPIB mutation should have appropriate early and regular management of their 
hearing.

DOI: 10.3233/PGE-14080
PMCID: PMC5020983
PMID: 27625864