---
reference_id: "PMID:36779427"
title: "Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision."
authors:
- Unger S
- Ferreira CR
- Mortier GR
- Ali H
- Bertola DR
- Calder A
- Cohn DH
- Cormier-Daire V
- Girisha KM
- Hall C
- Krakow D
- Makitie O
- Mundlos S
- Nishimura G
- Robertson SP
- Savarirayan R
- Sillence D
- Simon M
- Sutton VR
- Warman ML
- Superti-Furga A
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63132
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision.
**Authors:** Unger S, Ferreira CR, Mortier GR, Ali H, Bertola DR, Calder A, Cohn DH, Cormier-Daire V, Girisha KM, Hall C, Krakow D, Makitie O, Mundlos S, Nishimura G, Robertson SP, Savarirayan R, Sillence D, Simon M, Sutton VR, Warman ML, Superti-Furga A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63132](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63132)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 May;191(5):1164-1209. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63132. Epub 
2023 Feb 13.

Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision.

Unger S(1), Ferreira CR(2), Mortier GR(3), Ali H(4), Bertola DR(5)(6), Calder 
A(7), Cohn DH(8)(9), Cormier-Daire V(10), Girisha KM(11), Hall C(12), Krakow 
D(13), Makitie O(14)(15), Mundlos S(16), Nishimura G(17), Robertson SP(18), 
Savarirayan R(19), Sillence D(20), Simon M(21), Sutton VR(22), Warman 
ML(23)(24), Superti-Furga A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital and University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Skeletal Genomics Unit, Metabolic Medicine Branch, National Human Genome 
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven and KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(4)INSERM, US14-Orphanet, Paris, France.
(5)Unidade de Genética, Instituto da Criança, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade 
de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Departamento de Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(7)Radiology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(8)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(9)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(10)Paris Cité University, Reference Center for Skeletal Dysplasia, INSERM UMR 
1163, Imagine Institute, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal 
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(12)Emerita Consultant Paediatric Radiologist at Great Ormond Street Childrens' 
Hospital, London, UK.
(13)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Orthopaedic Surgery and Human 
Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(14)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(15)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(16)Institut für medizinische Genetik und Humangenetik, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(17)Department of Radiology, Musashino-Yowakai Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(18)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, 
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(19)Murdoch Children's Research Institute and University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(20)Specialities of Genomic Medicine and Paediatrics and Adolescent Health, 
Sydney University Clinical School, Children's Hospital, Westmead, NSW, 
Australia.
(21)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(22)Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine & Texas 
Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(23)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(24)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The "Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders" has undergone its 11th revision and 
now contains 771 entries associated with 552 genes reflecting advances in 
molecular delineation of new disorders thanks to advances in DNA sequencing 
technology. The most significant change as compared to previous versions is the 
adoption of the dyadic naming system, systematically associating a phenotypic 
entity with the gene it arises from. We consider this a significant step forward 
as dyadic naming is more informative and less prone to errors than the 
traditional use of list numberings and eponyms. Despite the adoption of dyadic 
naming, efforts have been made to maintain strong ties to the MIM catalog and 
its historical data. As with the previous versions, the list of disorders and 
genes in the Nosology may be useful in considering the differential diagnosis in 
the clinic, directing bioinformatic analysis of next-generation sequencing 
results, and providing a basis for novel advances in biology and medicine.

© 2023 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC. This article has been contributed to by U.S. Government 
employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63132
PMCID: PMC10081954
PMID: 36779427