---
reference_id: "PMID:9097826"
title: "[Beta mannosidosis: a new case]."
authors:
- Gourrier E
- Thomas MP
- Munnich A
- Poenaru L
- Asensi D
- Jan D
- Leraillez J
journal: Arch Pediatr
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0929-693x(97)86159-3
keywords:
- Deglutition Disorders/etiology
- Esophageal Motility Disorders/etiology
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "alpha-Mannosidosis/complications, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Beta mannosidosis: a new case].
**Authors:** Gourrier E, Thomas MP, Munnich A, Poenaru L, Asensi D, Jan D, Leraillez J
**Journal:** Arch Pediatr (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0929-693x(97)86159-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0929-693x(97)86159-3)

## Content

1. Arch Pediatr. 1997 Feb;4(2):147-51. doi: 10.1016/s0929-693x(97)86159-3.

[Beta mannosidosis: a new case].

[Article in French]

Gourrier E(1), Thomas MP, Munnich A, Poenaru L, Asensi D, Jan D, Leraillez J.

Author information:
(1)Service de néonatologie et réanimation, hôpital René-Dubos, Pontoise, France.

BACKGROUND: Only 11 cases of beta mannosidase deficiency have been reported 
until now. We report a new case.
CASE HISTORY: J was born at full term to consanguineous parents; her weight was 
2,080 g and her height was 44 cm. During the first months of life she was 
hypotonic and had feeding difficulties. At the age of 7 months, she was admitted 
to an intensive care unit because of a serious inhalation. Standard blood 
analysis, chest X-ray, abdominal ultrasonography, electroencephalogram, cerebral 
nuclear magnetic resonance and electromyography were normal. Blood and urine 
amino acids and urine organic acids were also normal. The only detected 
abnormality was a marked deficiency of beta mannosidase in her serum and 
leukocytes. Later on, she suffered from recurring respiratory infections, and 
she had abnormalities of esophageal mobility, hypotoria of the lower esophageal 
sphincter, and at the age of 2 years, achalasia requiring surgery. To date, her 
motor development is retarded.
CONCLUSIONS: The main clinical manifestations of beta mannosidosis are various 
degrees of mental retardation, speech disorders and hearing loss. Our patient 
presented with abnormalities of swallowing and esophageal motility resulting in 
recurring respiratory infections, previously reported in some other cases.

DOI: 10.1016/s0929-693x(97)86159-3
PMID: 9097826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]