---
reference_id: "PMID:15917207"
title: Cilia and disease.
authors:
- Eley L
- Yates LM
- Goodship JA
journal: Curr Opin Genet Dev
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2005.04.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cilia and disease.
**Authors:** Eley L, Yates LM, Goodship JA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Genet Dev (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gde.2005.04.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2005.04.008)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2005 Jun;15(3):308-14. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2005.04.008.

Cilia and disease.

Eley L(1), Yates LM, Goodship JA.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Newcastle, International Centre 
for Life, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK. 
lorraine.eley@ncl.ac.uk

Cilia are classified according to their microtubule components as 9+2 (motile) 
and 9+0 (primary) cilia. Disruption of 9+2 cilia, which move mucus across 
respiratory epithelia, leads to rhinitis, sinusitis and bronchiectasis. 
Approximately half of the patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) have 
situs inversus, providing a link between left-right asymmetry and cilia. 9+0 
cilia at the embryonic node are also motile and involved in establishing 
left-right asymmetry. Most 9+0 cilia, however, act as antennae, sensing the 
external environment. Defective 9+0 cilia of principal cells of the nephron 
cause cystic diseases of the kidney. In the rods and cones of the retina, 
photoreceptor discs and visual pigments are synthesized in the inner segment and 
transported to the distal outer segment through a narrow 9+0 connecting cilium; 
defects in this process lead to retinitis pigmentosa. Although the function of 
primary cilia in some organs is being elucidated, in many other organs they have 
not been studied at all. It is probable that many more cilia-related disorders 
remain to be discovered.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gde.2005.04.008
PMID: 15917207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]