---
reference_id: "PMID:31303264"
title: "Mutations in ANAPC1, Encoding a Scaffold Subunit of the Anaphase-Promoting Complex, Cause Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome Type 1."
authors:
- Ajeawung NF
- Nguyen TTM
- Lu L
- Kucharski TJ
- Rousseau J
- Molidperee S
- Atienza J
- Gamache I
- Jin W
- Plon SE
- Lee BH
- Teodoro JG
- Wang LL
- Campeau PM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.06.011
keywords:
- Anaphase-Promoting Complex-Cyclosome/genetics
- "Apc1 Subunit, Anaphase-Promoting Complex-Cyclosome/genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in ANAPC1, Encoding a Scaffold Subunit of the Anaphase-Promoting Complex, Cause Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome Type 1.
**Authors:** Ajeawung NF, Nguyen TTM, Lu L, Kucharski TJ, Rousseau J, Molidperee S, Atienza J, Gamache I, Jin W, Plon SE, Lee BH, Teodoro JG, Wang LL, Campeau PM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.06.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.06.011)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2019 Sep 5;105(3):625-630. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.06.011.
Epub  2019 Jul 11.

Mutations in ANAPC1, Encoding a Scaffold Subunit of the Anaphase-Promoting 
Complex, Cause Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome Type 1.

Ajeawung NF(1), Nguyen TTM(1), Lu L(2), Kucharski TJ(3), Rousseau J(1), 
Molidperee S(1), Atienza J(1), Gamache I(1), Jin W(2), Plon SE(4), Lee BH(5), 
Teodoro JG(3), Wang LL(6), Campeau PM(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine Research Center, University 
of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T 1C5, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: llwang@bcm.edu.
(7)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine Research Center, University 
of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T 1C5, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T 1C5, Canada. Electronic address: 
p.campeau@umontreal.ca.

Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS) is an autosomal-recessive disorder characterized 
by poikiloderma, sparse hair, short stature, and skeletal anomalies. Type 2 RTS, 
which is defined by the presence of bi-allelic mutations in RECQL4, is 
characterized by increased cancer susceptibility and skeletal anomalies, whereas 
the genetic basis of RTS type 1, which is associated with juvenile cataracts, is 
unknown. We studied ten individuals, from seven families, who had RTS type 1 and 
identified a deep intronic splicing mutation of the ANAPC1 gene, a component of 
the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), in all affected individuals, 
either in the homozygous state or in trans with another mutation. Fibroblast 
studies showed that the intronic mutation causes the activation of a 95 bp 
pseudoexon, leading to mRNAs with premature termination codons and 
nonsense-mediated decay, decreased ANAPC1 protein levels, and prolongation of 
interphase. Interestingly, mice that were heterozygous for a knockout mutation 
have an increased incidence of cataracts. Our results demonstrate that 
deficiency in the APC/C is a cause of RTS type 1 and suggest a possible link 
between the APC/C and RECQL4 helicase because both proteins are involved in DNA 
repair and replication.

Copyright © 2019 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.06.011
PMCID: PMC6731352
PMID: 31303264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.