---
reference_id: "PMID:32871559"
title: "Spinal neurovascular complications with anterior thoracolumbar spine surgery: a systematic review and review of thoracolumbar vascular anatomy."
authors:
- Shlobin NA
- Raz E
- Shapiro M
- Clark JR
- Hoffman SC
- Shaibani A
- Hurley MC
- Ansari SA
- Jahromi BS
- Dahdaleh NS
- Potts MB
journal: Neurosurg Focus
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3171/2020.6.FOCUS20373
keywords:
- Humans
- "Infarction/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Lumbar Vertebrae/blood supply, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Postoperative Complications/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Spinal Cord Ischemia/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Spinal Diseases/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Thoracic Vertebrae/blood supply, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal neurovascular complications with anterior thoracolumbar spine surgery: a systematic review and review of thoracolumbar vascular anatomy.
**Authors:** Shlobin NA, Raz E, Shapiro M, Clark JR, Hoffman SC, Shaibani A, Hurley MC, Ansari SA, Jahromi BS, Dahdaleh NS, Potts MB
**Journal:** Neurosurg Focus (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3171/2020.6.FOCUS20373](https://doi.org/10.3171/2020.6.FOCUS20373)

## Content

1. Neurosurg Focus. 2020 Sep;49(3):E9. doi: 10.3171/2020.6.FOCUS20373.

Spinal neurovascular complications with anterior thoracolumbar spine surgery: a
systematic review and review of thoracolumbar vascular anatomy.

Shlobin NA(1), Raz E(2), Shapiro M(2), Clark JR(1), Hoffman SC(1), Shaibani
A(1)(3), Hurley MC(1)(3), Ansari SA(1)(3), Jahromi BS(1)(3), Dahdaleh NS(1),
Potts MB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of1Neurological Surgery and.
(2)3Departments of Radiology and Neurological Surgery, New York University
Grossman School of Medicine, Bernard and Irene Schwartz Neurointerventional
Radiology Section, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, New York.
(3)2Radiology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois; and.

OBJECTIVE: Spinal cord infarction due to interruption of the spinal vascular
supply during anterior thoracolumbar surgery is a rare but devastating
complication. Here, the authors sought to summarize the data on this
complication in terms of its incidence, risk factors, and operative
considerations. They also sought to summarize the relevant spinal vascular
anatomy.
METHODS: They performed a systematic literature review of the PubMed, Scopus,
and Embase databases to identify reports of spinal cord vascular injury related
to anterior thoracolumbar spine procedures as well as operative adjuncts and
considerations related to management of the segmental artery ligation during
such anterior procedures. Titles and abstracts were screened, and studies
meeting inclusion criteria were reviewed in full.
RESULTS: Of 1200 articles identified on the initial screening, 16 met the
inclusion criteria and consisted of 2 prospective cohort studies, 10
retrospective cohort studies, and 4 case reports. Four studies reported on the
incidence of spinal cord ischemia with anterior thoracolumbar surgery, which
ranged from 0% to 0.75%. Eight studies presented patient-level data for 13 cases
of spinal cord ischemia after anterior thoracolumbar spine surgery. Proposed
risk factors for vasculogenic spinal injury with anterior thoracolumbar surgery
included hyperkyphosis, prior spinal deformity surgery, combined
anterior-posterior procedures, left-sided approaches, operating on the concavity
side of a scoliotic curve, and intra- or postoperative hypotension. In addition,
eight studies analyzed operative considerations to reduce spinal cord ischemic
complications in anterior thoracolumbar surgery, including intraoperative
neuromonitoring and preoperative spinal angiography.
CONCLUSIONS: While spinal cord infarction related to anterior thoracolumbar
surgery is rare, it warrants proper consideration in the pre-, intra-, and
postoperative periods. The spine surgeon must be aware of the relevant risk
factors as well as the pre- and intraoperative adjuncts that can minimize these
risks. Most importantly, an understanding of the relevant spinal vascular
anatomy is critical to minimizing the risks associated with anterior
thoracolumbar spine surgery.

DOI: 10.3171/2020.6.FOCUS20373
PMID: 32871559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
