---
reference_id: "PMID:32102014"
title: "Potential and Limitations of the New P2Y12 Inhibitor, Cangrelor, in Preventing Heparin-Induced Platelet Aggregation During Cardiac Surgery: An In Vitro Study."
authors:
- Scala E
- Gerschheimer C
- Gomez FJ
- Alberio L
- Marcucci C
journal: Anesth Analg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000004700
keywords:
- "Adenosine Monophosphate/analogs & derivatives, blood, pharmacology"
- "Anticoagulants/adverse effects, blood"
- "Cardiac Surgical Procedures/adverse effects, methods"
- "Heparin/adverse effects, blood"
- Humans
- "Platelet Aggregation/drug effects, physiology"
- "Purinergic P2Y Receptor Antagonists/blood, pharmacology"
- "Receptors, Purinergic P2Y12/blood"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential and Limitations of the New P2Y12 Inhibitor, Cangrelor, in Preventing Heparin-Induced Platelet Aggregation During Cardiac Surgery: An In Vitro Study.
**Authors:** Scala E, Gerschheimer C, Gomez FJ, Alberio L, Marcucci C
**Journal:** Anesth Analg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1213/ANE.0000000000004700](https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000004700)

## Content

1. Anesth Analg. 2020 Aug;131(2):622-630. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000004700.

Potential and Limitations of the New P2Y12 Inhibitor, Cangrelor, in Preventing
Heparin-Induced Platelet Aggregation During Cardiac Surgery: An In Vitro Study.

Scala E(1)(2), Gerschheimer C(2), Gomez FJ(2), Alberio L(2), Marcucci C(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Anesthesiology.
(2)Division of Hematology, Department of Oncology and Central Hematology
Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Lausanne University
Hospital (Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois [CHUV]) and University of
Lausanne (UNIL), Lausanne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) can put cardiac surgery
patients at a high risk of lethal complications. If anti-PF4/heparin antibodies
(anti-PF4/Hep Abs) are present, 2 strategies exist to prevent intraoperative
aggregation during bypass surgery: first, using an alternative anticoagulant,
and second, using heparin combined with an antiaggregant. The new P2Y12
inhibitor, cangrelor, could be an attractive candidate for the latter strategy;
several authors have reported its successful use. The present in vitro study
evaluated cangrelor's ability to inhibit heparin-induced platelet aggregation in
the presence of anti-PF4/Hep Abs.
METHODS: Platelet-poor plasma (PPP) from 30 patients with functional
anti-PF4/Hep Abs was mixed with platelet-rich plasma (PRP) from 5 healthy
donors.Light transmission aggregometry was used to measure platelet aggregation
after adding 0.5 IU·mL of heparin (HIT) to the plasma, and this was compared
with samples spiked with normal saline (control) and samples spiked with
cangrelor 500 ng·mL and heparin 0.5 IU·mL (treatment). Friedman test with post
hoc Dunn-Bonferroni test was used for between-group comparisons.
RESULTS: Heparin 0.5 IU·mL triggered aggregation in 22 of 44 PPP-PRP mixtures,
with a median aggregation of 86% (interquartile range [IQR], 69-91). The median
aggregation of these 22 positive samples' respective control tests was 22% (IQR,
16-30) (P < .001). Median aggregation in the cangrelor-treated samples was 29%
(IQR, 19-54) and significantly lower than the HIT samples (P < .001). Cangrelor
inhibited heparin-induced aggregation by a median of 91% (IQR, 52-100).
Cangrelor only reduced heparin-induced aggregation by >95% in 10 of the 22
positive samples (45%). Cangrelor inhibited heparin-induced aggregation by <50%
in 5 of the 22 positive samples (22%) and by <10% in 3 samples (14%).
CONCLUSIONS: This in vitro study found that cangrelor was an unreliable
inhibitor of heparin-induced aggregation in the presence of anti-PF4/Hep Abs. We
conclude that cangrelor should not be used as a standard antiaggregant for
cardiac patients affected by HIT during surgery. Unless cangrelor's efficacy in
a particular patient has been confirmed in a presurgery aggregation test, other
strategies should be chosen.

DOI: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000004700
PMID: 32102014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
