---
reference_id: "PMID:37071847"
title: Comprehensive Clinical Diagnostic Pipelines Reveal New Variants in Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
authors:
- Ottaviani S
- Bartoli G
- Carroll TP
- Gangemi F
- Balderacchi AM
- Barzon V
- Corino A
- Piloni D
- McElvaney NG
- Corsico AG
- Irving JA
- Fra A
- Ferrarotti I
journal: Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2022-0470OC
keywords:
- Humans
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/diagnosis, genetics"
- Genotype
- Mutation/genetics
- Pulmonary Emphysema
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive Clinical Diagnostic Pipelines Reveal New Variants in Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Ottaviani S, Bartoli G, Carroll TP, Gangemi F, Balderacchi AM, Barzon V, Corino A, Piloni D, McElvaney NG, Corsico AG, Irving JA, Fra A, Ferrarotti I
**Journal:** Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1165/rcmb.2022-0470OC](https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2022-0470OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2023 Sep;69(3):355-366. doi: 
10.1165/rcmb.2022-0470OC.

Comprehensive Clinical Diagnostic Pipelines Reveal New Variants in Alpha-1 
Antitrypsin Deficiency.

Ottaviani S(1), Bartoli G(2), Carroll TP(3), Gangemi F(2), Balderacchi AM(1), 
Barzon V(4), Corino A(1), Piloni D(1), McElvaney NG(3), Corsico AG(1)(4)(5), 
Irving JA(6), Fra A(2), Ferrarotti I(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Diagnosis of Inherited Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency, Unità 
Operativa Complessa Pneumologia, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a 
Carattere Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Experimental Oncology and Immunology, Department of Molecular and 
Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(3)α-1 Foundation Ireland, Irish Centre for Genetic Lung Disease, Royal College 
of Surgeons in Ireland Education and Research Centre, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, Pulmonology Unit, 
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(5)European Reference Network on Rare Respiratory Diseases (ERN-LUNG); and.
(6)University College London Respiratory, Rayne Institute and the Institute of 
Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is an underdiagnosed disorder associated 
with mutations in the SERPINA1 gene encoding alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT). Severe 
AATD can manifest as pulmonary emphysema and progressive liver disease. Besides 
the most common pathogenic variants S (E264V) and Z (E342K), many rarer genetic 
variants of AAT have been found in patients and in the general population. Here 
we report a panel of new SERPINA1 variants, including 4 null and 16 missense 
alleles, identified among a cohort of individuals with suspected AATD whose 
phenotypic follow-up showed inconclusive or atypical results. Because the 
pathogenic significance of the missense variants was unclear purely on the basis 
of clinical data, the integration of computational, biochemical, and cellular 
studies was used to define the associated risk of disease. Established 
pathogenicity predictors and structural analysis identified a panel of candidate 
damaging mutations that were characterized by expression in mammalian cell 
models. Polymer formation, intracellular accumulation, and secretory efficiency 
were evaluated experimentally. Our results identified two AAT mutants with a 
Z-like polymerogenic severe deficiency profile (Smilano and Mcampolongo) and 
three milder variants (Xsarezzo, Pdublin, and Ctiberias). Overall, the 
experimentally determined behavior of the variants was in agreement with the 
pathogenicity scores of the REVEL (an ensemble method for predicting the 
pathogenicity of rare missense variants) predictor, supporting the utility of 
this bioinformatic tool in the initial assessment of newly identified amino acid 
substitutions of AAT. Our study, in addition to describing 20 new SERPINA1 
variants, provides a model for a multidisciplinary approach to classification of 
rare AAT variants and their clinical impact on individuals with rare AATD 
genotypes.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2022-0470OC
PMID: 37071847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]