---
reference_id: "PMID:37795464"
title: "Cancer Risk of Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome and Treatment Experience: A Chinese Medical Center."
authors:
- Xu Z
- Gu G
journal: Clin Colon Rectal Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1767704
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer Risk of Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome and Treatment Experience: A Chinese Medical Center.
**Authors:** Xu Z, Gu G
**Journal:** Clin Colon Rectal Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0043-1767704](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-1767704)

## Content

1. Clin Colon Rectal Surg. 2023 May 3;36(6):406-414. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1767704.
 eCollection 2023 Nov.

Cancer Risk of Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome and Treatment Experience: A Chinese 
Medical Center.

Xu Z(1)(2), Gu G(2).

Author information:
(1)Fifth Clinical College of Anhui Medical University, Air Force Clinical 
College of Anhui Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Air Force Medical Center, Beijing, China.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS), also known as hereditary mucocutaneous pigmented 
gastrointestinal polyposis, is a clinically rare autosomal dominant genetic 
disease, which falls into the category of hereditary colorectal cancer. There 
are ∼7,000 new cases of PJS in China every year, and 170,000 PJS patients may 
survive for a long time in society. PJS polyps are characterized by an early age 
of onset, difficult diagnosis and treatment, and easy recurrence. With repeated 
growth, polyps can lead to serious complications such as intestinal obstruction, 
intussusception, gastrointestinal bleeding, and cancerization, which cause 
serious clinical problems. Due to repeated hospitalization and endoscopic 
follow-up, PJS patients and their families suffer from great physical and mental 
pain and economic burden. With the in-depth understanding of PJS and the 
development and popularization of endoscopic techniques in the past decade, an 
integrated treatment modality based on endoscopy plus surgery has gradually 
become the preferred treatment in most hospitals, which greatly improves the 
quality of life of PJS patients. However, there is still a lack of effective 
drug prevention and cure means. In this paper, the current clinical treatment 
means for PJS polyps were summarized by literature review combined with the 
treatment experience of our medical center, with a focus on their clinical 
diagnosis, treatment, and cancer risk.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-1767704
PMCID: PMC10547534
PMID: 37795464

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.