---
reference_id: "PMID:15295709"
title: Hemoglobin C and resistance to severe malaria in Ghanaian children.
authors:
- Mockenhaupt FP
- Ehrhardt S
- Cramer JP
- Otchwemah RN
- Anemana SD
- Goltz K
- Mylius F
- Dietz E
- Eggelte TA
- Bienzle U
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1086/422847
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemoglobin C and resistance to severe malaria in Ghanaian children.
**Authors:** Mockenhaupt FP, Ehrhardt S, Cramer JP, Otchwemah RN, Anemana SD, Goltz K, Mylius F, Dietz E, Eggelte TA, Bienzle U
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1086/422847](https://doi.org/10.1086/422847)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2004 Sep 1;190(5):1006-9. doi: 10.1086/422847. Epub 2004 Jul 26.

Hemoglobin C and resistance to severe malaria in Ghanaian children.

Mockenhaupt FP(1), Ehrhardt S, Cramer JP, Otchwemah RN, Anemana SD, Goltz K, 
Mylius F, Dietz E, Eggelte TA, Bienzle U.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Medical Faculty Charité, Humboldt University, 
Berlin, Germany. frank.mockenhaupt@charite.de

Hemoglobin (Hb) C has been reported to protect against severe malaria. It is 
unclear whether relative resistance affects infection, disease, or both. Its 
extent may vary between regions and with disease pattern. We conducted a 
case-control study of children with severe malaria, asymptomatic parasitemic 
children, and healthy children in Ghana. HbAC did not prevent infection but 
reduced the odds of developing severe malaria and severe anemia. Protection was 
stronger with HbAS. The frequencies of HbCC and HbSC decreased, from healthy 
children to asymptomatic parasitemic children to children with severe malaria. 
These data support the notion that natural selection of HbC occurs because of 
the relative resistance it confers against severe malaria but argue against the 
notion that HbC offers resistance to infection.

DOI: 10.1086/422847
PMID: 15295709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]