---
reference_id: PMID:39630431
title: Clinical and Genetic Findings in Patients With Palmoplantar Keratoderma.
authors:
- Gram SB
- Brusgaard K
- Lei U
- Sommerlund M
- Vinding GR
- Sleire SOK
- Christensen AH
- Fast SP
- Bach R
- Bygum A
- Ousager LB
journal: JAMA Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.4824
keywords:
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Adolescent
- Prospective Studies
- Young Adult
- Phenotype
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Denmark
- Genetic Testing
- Genetic Association Studies
- Exome Sequencing
- Cohort Studies
- CARD Signaling Adaptor Proteins/genetics
- Guanylate Cyclase/genetics
- Desmoglein 1/genetics
- Keratin-9/genetics
- Cornified Envelope Proline-Rich Proteins/genetics
- Membrane Proteins
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Genetic Findings in Patients With Palmoplantar Keratoderma.
**Authors:** Gram SB, Brusgaard K, Lei U, Sommerlund M, Vinding GR, Sleire SOK, Christensen AH, Fast SP, Bach R, Bygum A, Ousager LB
**Journal:** JAMA Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.4824](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.4824)

## Content

1. JAMA Dermatol. 2025 Feb 1;161(2):157-166. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.4824.

Clinical and Genetic Findings in Patients With Palmoplantar Keratoderma.

Gram SB(1)(2)(3), Brusgaard K(1)(2), Lei U(4), Sommerlund M(5), Vinding 
GR(3)(6), Sleire SOK(1), Christensen AH(7), Fast SP(8), Bach R(9), Bygum 
A(1)(2)(10), Ousager LB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(3)European Reference Network for Rare Skin Diseases, Odense and Roskilde, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev 
and Gentofte Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Zealand University Hospital, University of 
Copenhagen, Roskilde, Denmark.
(7)Department of Cardiology, Rigshospitalet and Herlev-Gentofte Hospitals, 
Hellerup, Denmark.
(8)Fredericia Hudklinik, Fredericia, Denmark.
(9)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(10)Hudklinikken Kolding, Kolding, Denmark.

IMPORTANCE: Palmoplantar keratoderma poses diagnostic challenges due to its 
clinical and genetic heterogeneity, and knowledge on the value of systematic 
genetic testing on clinically well-described patient cohorts is sparse.
OBJECTIVE: To improve knowledge of the clinical and genetic spectrum of patients 
with palmoplantar keratoderma.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cohort study prospectively recruited 
patients and affected family members with palmoplantar keratoderma between 
September 1, 2016, and December 31, 2022. Patients were recruited from private 
practitioners in dermatology and dermatology departments in Denmark. Study 
participants were patients 18 years or older either newly diagnosed with 
palmoplantar keratoderma or being followed up for the disease at referral 
centers.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Phenotypes and clinical subtypes were classified. 
Genetic testing was performed by whole-exome or genome sequencing using an in 
silico panel containing genes related to palmoplantar keratoderma, or by Sanger 
sequencing for specific variants. Descriptive analysis, such as proportions and 
frequency, were used to describe clinical characteristics, distribution of 
disease-causing variants, and genotype-phenotype associations.
RESULTS: This study included 142 study participants from 76 families (90 [63%] 
female; median [range] age, 52 [18-92] years). Clinical subtypes included 42 
punctate (55%), 26 diffuse (34%), 5 focal (7%), and 3 striate (4%). A genetic 
diagnosis was found in 63 of 76 families (83%), including 27 disease-causing 
variants within 13 different genes: AAGAB (n = 39), DSG1 (n = 8), KRT1 (n = 3), 
DSP (n = 2), KRT9 (n = 2), AQP5 (n = 2), KRT16 (n = 1), SERPINA12 (n = 1), 
ABCA12 (n = 1), COL7A1 (n = 1), CARD14 (n = 1), DST (n = 1), and LORICRIN 
(n = 1). All participants with AAGAB variants presented with punctate 
palmoplantar keratoderma, showing a clear genotype-phenotype correlation. The 
other subtypes (diffuse, focal, and striate) proved more challenging to 
clinically subclassify, and disease-causing variants were identified in 12 
genes, contributing to more complex genotype-phenotype patterns. Patients with 
palmoplantar keratoderma due to DSP variants were found, which is important to 
identify because of an associated risk of cardiomyopathy.
CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: This study provides novel insights into the clinical 
and genetic spectrum of patients with palmoplantar keratoderma. It demonstrates 
the value of genetic testing for accurate diagnoses and to distinguish between 
different subtypes. The established and well-described cohort lays the 
foundation for future research in palmoplantar keratoderma.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2024.4824
PMCID: PMC11618570
PMID: 39630431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.