---
reference_id: "PMID:10053178"
title: Hyper-IgE syndrome with recurrent infections--an autosomal dominant multisystem disorder.
authors:
- Grimbacher B
- Holland SM
- Gallin JI
- Greenberg F
- Hill SC
- Malech HL
- Miller JA
- "O'Connell AC"
- Puck JM
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1056/NEJM199903043400904
keywords:
- Abscess/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- "Fractures, Bone/genetics"
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin E/blood
- "Job Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pedigree
- Pneumonia/genetics
- Scoliosis/genetics
- Skin Diseases/genetics
- Tooth Resorption/genetics
- "Tooth, Deciduous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyper-IgE syndrome with recurrent infections--an autosomal dominant multisystem disorder.
**Authors:** Grimbacher B, Holland SM, Gallin JI, Greenberg F, Hill SC, Malech HL, Miller JA, O'Connell AC, Puck JM
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJM199903043400904](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199903043400904)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 1999 Mar 4;340(9):692-702. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199903043400904.

Hyper-IgE syndrome with recurrent infections--an autosomal dominant multisystem 
disorder.

Grimbacher B(1), Holland SM, Gallin JI, Greenberg F, Hill SC, Malech HL, Miller 
JA, O'Connell AC, Puck JM.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4442, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 1999 Jul 29;341(5):375-6; author reply 376-7. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM199907293410517.
    N Engl J Med. 1999 Jul 29;341(5):376-7.

BACKGROUND: The hyper-IgE syndrome with recurrent infections is a rare 
immunodeficiency characterized by recurrent skin and pulmonary abscesses and 
extremely elevated levels of IgE in serum. Associated facial and skeletal 
features have been recognized, but their frequency is unknown, and the genetic 
basis of the hyper-IgE syndrome is poorly understood.
METHODS: We studied 30 patients with the hyper-IgE syndrome and 70 of their 
relatives. We took histories, reviewed records, performed physical and dental 
examinations, took anthropometric measurements, and conducted laboratory 
studies.
RESULTS: Nonimmunologic features of the hyper-IgE syndrome were present in all 
patients older than eight years. Seventy-two percent had the previously 
unrecognized feature of failure or delay of shedding of the primary teeth owing 
to lack of root resorption. Common findings among patients were recurrent 
fractures (in 57 percent of patients), hyperextensible joints (in 68 percent), 
and scoliosis (in 76 percent of patients 16 years of age or older). The classic 
triad of abscesses, pneumonia, and an elevated IgE level was identified in 77 
percent of all patients and in 85 percent of those older than eight. In 6 of 23 
adults (26 percent), IgE levels declined over time and came closer to or fell 
within the normal range. Autosomal dominant transmission of the hyper-IgE 
syndrome was found, but with variable expressivity. Of the 27 relatives at risk 
for inheriting the hyper-IgE syndrome, 10 were fully affected, 11 were 
unaffected, and 6 had combinations of mild immunologic, dental, and skeletal 
features of the hyper-IgE syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: The hyper-IgE syndrome is a multisystem disorder that affects the 
dentition, the skeleton, connective tissue, and the immune system. It is 
inherited as a single-locus autosomal dominant trait with variable expressivity.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM199903043400904
PMID: 10053178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]