---
reference_id: "PMID:26918385"
title: Auditory neuropathy in Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome due to riboflavin transporter RFVT2 deficiency.
authors:
- Menezes MP
- "O'Brien K"
- Hill M
- Webster R
- Antony J
- Ouvrier R
- Birman C
- Gardner-Berry K
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/dmcn.13084
keywords:
- Acoustic Stimulation
- Age of Onset
- Audiometry
- "Bulbar Palsy, Progressive/complications, etiology, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cochlear Implantation/methods
- Electroencephalography
- "Evoked Potentials, Auditory, Brain Stem/drug effects, genetics"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Hearing Loss, Central/complications, drug therapy, surgery"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/complications, etiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- "Membrane Transport Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Otoacoustic Emissions, Spontaneous/drug effects, genetics"
- Riboflavin/therapeutic use
- "Riboflavin Deficiency/complications, drug therapy"
- "Speech Perception/drug effects, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Auditory neuropathy in Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome due to riboflavin transporter RFVT2 deficiency.
**Authors:** Menezes MP, O'Brien K, Hill M, Webster R, Antony J, Ouvrier R, Birman C, Gardner-Berry K
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dmcn.13084](https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.13084)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2016 Aug;58(8):848-54. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.13084. Epub
2016  Feb 25.

Auditory neuropathy in Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome due to riboflavin 
transporter RFVT2 deficiency.

Menezes MP(1), O'Brien K(2), Hill M(3), Webster R(1), Antony J(1), Ouvrier R(1), 
Birman C(4), Gardner-Berry K(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Neuroscience and Muscle Research and Discipline of Paediatrics 
and Child Health, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Department of Audiology, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)Sydney Cochlear Implant Centre, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of ENT and Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, The 
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

AIM: Mutations in the genes encoding the riboflavin transporters RFVT2 and RFVT3 
have been identified in Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome, a neurodegenerative 
disorder characterized by hearing loss and pontobulbar palsy. Treatment with 
riboflavin has been shown to benefit individuals with the phenotype of RFVT2 
deficiency. Understanding the characteristics of hearing loss in riboflavin 
transporter deficiency would enable early diagnosis and therapy.
METHOD: We performed hearing assessments in seven children (from four families) 
with RFVT2 deficiency and reviewed results from previous assessments. 
Assessments were repeated after 12 months and 24 months of riboflavin therapy 
and after cochlear implantation in one individual.
RESULTS: Hearing loss in these individuals was due to auditory neuropathy 
spectrum disorder (ANSD). Hearing loss was identified between 3 years and 8 
years of age and progressed rapidly. Hearing aids were not beneficial. 
Riboflavin therapy resulted in improvement of hearing thresholds during the 
first year of treatment in those with recent-onset hearing loss. Cochlear 
implantation resulted in a significant improvement in speech perception in one 
individual.
INTERPRETATION: Riboflavin transporter deficiency should be considered in all 
children presenting with an auditory neuropathy. Speech perception in children 
with ANSD due to RFVT2 deficiency may be significantly improved by cochlear 
implantation.

© 2016 Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.13084
PMID: 26918385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]