---
reference_id: "PMID:16770338"
title: "Primate segmental duplications: crucibles of evolution, diversity and disease."
authors:
- Bailey JA
- Eichler EE
journal: Nat Rev Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/nrg1895
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primate segmental duplications: crucibles of evolution, diversity and disease.
**Authors:** Bailey JA, Eichler EE
**Journal:** Nat Rev Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrg1895](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg1895)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Genet. 2006 Jul;7(7):552-64. doi: 10.1038/nrg1895. Epub 2006 Jun 13.

Primate segmental duplications: crucibles of evolution, diversity and disease.

Bailey JA(1), Eichler EE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Case Western University School of Medicine and 
University Hospitals of Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2006 Nov;7(11):898.

Compared with other mammals, the genomes of humans and other primates show an 
enrichment of large, interspersed segmental duplications (SDs) with high levels 
of sequence identity. Recent evidence has begun to shed light on the origin of 
primate SDs, pointing to a complex interplay of mechanisms and indicating that 
distinct waves of duplication took place during primate evolution. There is also 
evidence for a strong association between duplication, genomic instability and 
large-scale chromosomal rearrangements. Exciting new findings suggest that SDs 
have not only created novel primate gene families, but might have also 
influenced current human genic and phenotypic variation on a previously 
unappreciated scale. A growing number of examples link natural human genetic 
variation of these regions to susceptibility to common disease.

DOI: 10.1038/nrg1895
PMID: 16770338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]