---
reference_id: "PMID:34192430"
title: A Randomized Trial of a Transglutaminase 2 Inhibitor for Celiac Disease.
authors:
- Schuppan D
- Mäki M
- Lundin KEA
- Isola J
- Friesing-Sosnik T
- Taavela J
- Popp A
- Koskenpato J
- Langhorst J
- Hovde Ø
- Lähdeaho ML
- Fusco S
- Schumann M
- Török HP
- Kupcinskas J
- Zopf Y
- Lohse AW
- Scheinin M
- Kull K
- Biedermann L
- Byrnes V
- Stallmach A
- Jahnsen J
- Zeitz J
- Mohrbacher R
- Greinwald R
- CEC-3 Trial Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2032441
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adult
- "Celiac Disease/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Double-Blind Method
- "Duodenum/immunology, pathology"
- Female
- "GTP-Binding Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Glutens/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Humans
- "Imidazoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Intestinal Mucosa/immunology, pathology"
- Lymphocyte Count
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Proof of Concept Study
- Protein Glutamine gamma Glutamyltransferase 2
- "Pyridines/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Quality of Life
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Transglutaminases/antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Randomized Trial of a Transglutaminase 2 Inhibitor for Celiac Disease.
**Authors:** Schuppan D, Mäki M, Lundin KEA, Isola J, Friesing-Sosnik T, Taavela J, Popp A, Koskenpato J, Langhorst J, Hovde Ø, Lähdeaho ML, Fusco S, Schumann M, Török HP, Kupcinskas J, Zopf Y, Lohse AW, Scheinin M, Kull K, Biedermann L, Byrnes V, Stallmach A, Jahnsen J, Zeitz J, Mohrbacher R, Greinwald R, CEC-3 Trial Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2032441](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2032441)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 Jul 1;385(1):35-45. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2032441.

A Randomized Trial of a Transglutaminase 2 Inhibitor for Celiac Disease.

Schuppan D(1), Mäki M(1), Lundin KEA(1), Isola J(1), Friesing-Sosnik T(1),
Taavela J(1), Popp A(1), Koskenpato J(1), Langhorst J(1), Hovde Ø(1), Lähdeaho
ML(1), Fusco S(1), Schumann M(1), Török HP(1), Kupcinskas J(1), Zopf Y(1), Lohse
AW(1), Scheinin M(1), Kull K(1), Biedermann L(1), Byrnes V(1), Stallmach A(1),
Jahnsen J(1), Zeitz J(1), Mohrbacher R(1), Greinwald R(1); CEC-3 Trial Group.

Collaborators: Kull K, Salupere R, Koskenpato J, Scheinin M, Koffert J, Lähdeaho
ML, Törmänen S, Taavela J, Mäki M, Schuppan D, Friesing-Sosnik T, Schumann M,
Lissner DC, Branchi F, Zopf Y, Dieterich W, Stallmach A, Grunert PC, Lohse AW,
Hübener S, Fusco S, Klag T, Langhorst J, Schöls M, Langhorst A, Török HP,
Stallhofer J, Byrnes V, Egan B, Kupcinskas J, Jonaitis L, Zvirbliene A, Lundin
KEA, Aabakken L, Paulsen V, Hovde Ø, Jahnsen J, Espeland K, Biedermann L, Scharl
S, Rogler G, Zeitz J, Hils M, Pasternack R, Tewes B, Krauss M, Bouma G, Corazza
G.

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Translational Immunology and Celiac Center, Research
Center for Immune Therapy, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg
University, Mainz (D.S., T.F.-S.), the Department of Internal and Integrative
Medicine, Sozialstiftung Bamberg, Bamberg (J.L.), the Department of Integrative
Medicine, University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg-Essen (J.L.), the Division of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine I, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen (S.F.), the Department of
Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases, and Rheumatology, Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Charité-University Medicine Berlin, Berlin (M. Schumann), the
Department of Medicine II, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University,
Munich (H.P.T.), the Department of Medicine 1, Hector Center for Nutrition,
Exercise, and Sports, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen (Y.Z.), the
Department of Medicine I, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg
(A.W.L.), the Department of Internal Medicine IV, University Hospital,
Friedrich-Schiller University Jena, Jena (A.S.), and Dr. Falk Pharma, Freiburg
(R.M., R.G.) - all in Germany; the Division of Gastroenterology and Celiac
Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston
(D.S.); the Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University and
Tampere University Hospital (M.M., A.P., M.-L.L.), the Faculty of Medicine and
Health Technology, Tampere University (J.I., J.T.), Jilab (J.I.), and the
Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital (M.-L.L.), Tampere, the
Department of Internal Medicine, Central Finland Central Hospital, Jyväskylä
(J.T.), Lääkärikeskus Aava Helsinki Kamppi, Helsinki (J. Koskenpato), and
Clinical Research Services Turku, Turku (M. Scheinin) - all in Finland; Oslo
University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, and Stiftelsen K.G. Jebsen Celiac Disease
Research Center, University of Oslo, Oslo (K.E.A.L.), the Medical Department,
Innlandet Hospital Trust, Gjøvik (O.H.), and Akershus University Hospital,
Lørenskog (J.J.) - all in Norway; the University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Carol
Davila" and the National Institute for Mother and Child Health
"Alessandrescu-Rusescu," Bucharest, Romania (A.P.); the Gastroenterology
Department and Institute for Digestive Research, Lithuanian University of Health
Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania (J. Kupcinskas); the Department of Gastroenterology,
Internal Medicine Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia (K.K.); the
Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Zurich (L.B.,
J.Z.), and the Swiss Celiac Center, Center of Gastroenterology, Clinic
Hirslanden (J.Z.) - both in Zurich, Switzerland; and University College Hospital
Galway, Galway, Ireland (V.B.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Jul 1;385(1):76-77. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2107502.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Oct 14;385(16):e57. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2112688.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Oct 14;385(16):e57. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2112688.

BACKGROUND: In celiac disease, small intestinal transglutaminase 2 causes
deamidation of glutamine residues in gluten peptides, which enhances stimulation
of T cells and leads to mucosal injury. Inhibition of transglutaminase 2 is a
potential treatment for celiac disease.
METHODS: In a proof-of-concept trial, we assessed the efficacy and safety of a
6-week treatment with ZED1227, a selective oral transglutaminase 2 inhibitor, at
three dose levels as compared with placebo, in adults with well-controlled
celiac disease who underwent a daily gluten challenge. The primary end point was
the attenuation of gluten-induced mucosal damage, as measured by the ratio of
villus height to crypt depth. Secondary end points included intraepithelial
lymphocyte density, the Celiac Symptom Index score, and the Celiac Disease
Questionnaire score (for assessment of health-related quality of life).
RESULTS: Of the 41 patients assigned to the 10-mg ZED1227 group, the 41 assigned
to the 50-mg group, the 41 assigned to the 100-mg group, and the 40 assigned to
the placebo group, 35, 39, 38, and 30 patients, respectively, had adequate
duodenal-biopsy samples for the assessment of the primary end point. Treatment
with ZED1227 at all three dose levels attenuated gluten-induced duodenal mucosal
injury. The estimated difference from placebo in the change in the mean ratio of
villus height to crypt depth from baseline to week 6 was 0.44 (95% confidence
interval [CI], 0.15 to 0.73) in the 10-mg group (P = 0.001), 0.49 (95% CI, 0.20
to 0.77) in the 50-mg group (P<0.001), and 0.48 (95% CI, 0.20 to 0.77) in the
100-mg group (P<0.001). The estimated differences from placebo in the change in
intraepithelial lymphocyte density were -2.7 cells per 100 epithelial cells (95%
CI, -7.6 to 2.2) in the 10-mg group, -4.2 cells per 100 epithelial cells (95%
CI, -8.9 to 0.6) in the 50-mg group, and -9.6 cells per 100 epithelial cells
(95% CI, -14.4 to -4.8) in the 100-mg group. Use of the 100-mg dose may have
improved symptom and quality-of-life scores. The most common adverse events, the
incidences of which were similar across all groups, were headache, nausea,
diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Rash developed in 3 of 40 patients (8%)
in the 100-mg group.
CONCLUSIONS: In this preliminary trial, treatment with ZED1227 attenuated
gluten-induced duodenal mucosal damage in patients with celiac disease. (Funded
by Dr. Falk Pharma; CEC-3 EudraCT number, 2017-002241-30.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2032441
PMID: 34192430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
