---
reference_id: "PMID:28941527"
title: Pediatric Optic Neuritis.
authors:
- Chang MY
- Pineles SL
journal: Semin Pediatr Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2017.04.004
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Optic Neuritis/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Optic Neuritis.
**Authors:** Chang MY, Pineles SL
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.spen.2017.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spen.2017.04.004)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2017 May;24(2):122-128. doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2017.04.004.
 Epub 2017 Apr 10.

Pediatric Optic Neuritis.

Chang MY(1), Pineles SL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Stein Eye Institute, University of California, 
Los Angeles, CA.

Optic neuritis is rare in children in comparison to adults, but accounts for 
approximately 25% of pediatric acute demyelinating syndromes. Features of 
pediatric optic neuritis that differ from adults include a higher rate of 
bilaterality, poor visual acuity on presentation, and papillitis. Diagnostic 
work-up includes brain magnetic resonance imaging, lumbar puncture, and blood 
tests to exclude infectious and inflammatory disorders. Pediatric optic neuritis 
may occur following infection or vaccination, or in association with a systemic 
demyelinating process such as acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, 
neuromyelitis optica, or multiple sclerosis. Treatment is controversial, but 
most practitioners administer corticosteroids. Most children with optic neuritis 
experience full visual recovery. The recently launched Pediatric Optic Neuritis 
Prospective Data Collection Study (PON1) aims to provide estimates of visual 
acuity outcome and assess the potential to recruit for a future pediatric optic 
neuritis treatment trial.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.spen.2017.04.004
PMID: 28941527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]