---
reference_id: "PMID:40314740"
title: Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors-A Descriptive Study of the Presenting Features in a 20-Year Surgical Resection Cohort at a Tertiary Institution.
authors:
- Singh J
- Gudmundsdottir H
- Halfdanarson TR
- Cleary SP
- Kendrick ML
- Truty MJ
- Smoot RL
- Nagorney DM
- Vege SS
journal: Pancreas
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000002452
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/surgery, pathology, diagnosis, diagnostic imaging"
- Male
- Female
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/surgery, pathology, diagnosis, diagnostic imaging"
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tertiary Care Centers/statistics & numerical data"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Pancreatectomy
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors-A Descriptive Study of the Presenting Features in a 20-Year Surgical Resection Cohort at a Tertiary Institution.
**Authors:** Singh J, Gudmundsdottir H, Halfdanarson TR, Cleary SP, Kendrick ML, Truty MJ, Smoot RL, Nagorney DM, Vege SS
**Journal:** Pancreas (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPA.0000000000002452](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPA.0000000000002452)

## Content

1. Pancreas. 2025 May 1;54(5):e423-e429. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000002452.

Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors-A Descriptive Study of the Presenting Features 
in a 20-Year Surgical Resection Cohort at a Tertiary Institution.

Singh J(1), Gudmundsdottir H(2), Halfdanarson TR(3), Cleary SP(4), Kendrick 
ML(5), Truty MJ(5), Smoot RL(2), Nagorney DM(5), Vege SS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Vincent Hospital, Worcester, MA.
(2)Departments of Surgery.
(3)Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(4)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreas Surgery, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Departments of Hepatobiliary and Pancreas Surgery.
(6)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

OBJECTIVES: Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs) are uncommon, comprising 
3%-7% of pancreatic tumors. With increasing incidence due to advanced imaging 
techniques, there is a need for detailed characterization of these tumors. This 
study aims to describe the clinical features, diagnostic evaluations, and 
pathology characteristics of pNETs in a large cohort from a single tertiary 
center, and to compare these findings with other larger cohort studies.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis of 866 patients with pNETs who 
underwent surgical resection at Mayo Clinic, Rochester, from March 2000 to 
December 2019. Data on demographics, clinical presentation, laboratory tests, 
imaging, and pathology were extracted and analyzed. Descriptive statistics were 
used to summarize the data.
RESULTS: The cohort had a median age of 57 years. Nonfunctional tumors were much 
more prevalent (77.5%), with functional tumors primarily being insulinomas 
(75.9%). Common presenting symptoms included gastrointestinal (45.3%) and 
nongastrointestinal symptoms (30.7%). Chromogranin A levels were elevated in 
57.5% of patients. Imaging revealed enhancing lesions in most cases, with 
computed tomography scans performed in 90.9% of patients. Endoscopic ultrasound 
(EUS) identified tumors in 98.1% of cases, with EUS-FNA showing a sensitivity of 
82%. Ki-67 index, used in 58.1% of cases, indicated grade 2 tumors as the most 
common (55.9%). Metastasis was observed in 39.4% of patients at the time of 
diagnosis, predominantly in the liver.
CONCLUSION: This study provides a comprehensive description of pNET 
characteristics in a large surgical cohort. Findings highlight the predominance 
of nonfunctional tumors and the importance of imaging and EUS in diagnosis. The 
data can aid in inter-institutional comparisons and enhance understanding of 
pNETs, contributing to improved patient management and future research.

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000002452
PMID: 40314740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.