---
reference_id: "PMID:38008402"
title: "GLP-1/Sigma/RAGE receptors: An evolving picture of Alzheimer's disease pathology and treatment."
authors:
- Neha
- Wali Z
- Pinky
- Hattiwale SH
- Jamal A
- Parvez S
journal: Ageing Res Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2023.102134
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GLP-1/Sigma/RAGE receptors: An evolving picture of Alzheimer's disease pathology and treatment.
**Authors:** Neha, Wali Z, Pinky, Hattiwale SH, Jamal A, Parvez S
**Journal:** Ageing Res Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arr.2023.102134](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2023.102134)

## Content

1. Ageing Res Rev. 2024 Jan;93:102134. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2023.102134. Epub 2023 
Nov 25.

GLP-1/Sigma/RAGE receptors: An evolving picture of Alzheimer's disease pathology 
and treatment.

Neha(1), Wali Z(2), Pinky(3), Hattiwale SH(4), Jamal A(5), Parvez S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Jamia Hamdard, 
New Delhi 110062, India. Electronic address: 
neha.bhardwaj_sch@jamiahamdard.ac.in.
(2)Department of Toxicology, School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Jamia Hamdard, 
New Delhi 110062, India.
(3)Department of Toxicology, School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Jamia Hamdard, 
New Delhi 110062, India. Electronic address: pinkyatwal_sch@jamiahamdard.ac.in.
(4)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Majmaah 
University, Al-Majmaah 11952, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Biology, College of Science Al-Zulfi, Majmaah University, 
Al-Majmaah 11952, Saudi Arabia; Health and Basic Science Research Centre, 
Majmaah University, Al-Majmaah 11952, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Toxicology, School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Jamia Hamdard, 
New Delhi 110062, India. Electronic address: sparvez@jamiahamdard.ac.in.

According to the facts and figures 2023stated that 6.7 million Americans over 
the age of 65 have Alzheimer's disease (AD). The scenario of AD has reached up 
to the maximum, of 4.1 million individuals, 2/3rd are female patients, and 
approximately 1 in 9 adults over the age of 65 have dementia with AD dementia. 
The fact that there are now no viable treatments for AD indicates that the 
underlying disease mechanisms are not fully understood. The progressive 
neurodegenerative disease, AD is characterized by amyloid plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) of abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau protein and 
senile plaques (SPs), which are brought on by the buildup of amyloid beta (Aβ). 
Numerous attempts have been made to produce compounds that interfere with these 
characteristics because of significant research efforts into the primary 
pathogenic hallmark of this disorder. Here, we summarize several research that 
highlights interesting therapy strategies and the neuroprotective effects of 
GLP-1, Sigma, and, AGE-RAGE receptors in pre-clinical and clinical AD models.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arr.2023.102134
PMID: 38008402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest There is no 
conflict of interest.