---
reference_id: "PMID:38318125"
title: "Rycal S48168 (ARM210) for RYR1-related myopathies: a phase one, open-label, dose-escalation trial."
authors:
- Todd JJ
- Lawal TA
- Chrismer IC
- Kokkinis A
- Grunseich C
- Jain MS
- Waite MR
- Biancavilla V
- Pocock S
- Brooks K
- Mendoza CJ
- Norato G
- Cheung K
- Riekhof W
- Varma P
- Colina-Prisco C
- Emile-Backer M
- Meilleur KG
- Marks AR
- Webb Y
- Marcantonio EE
- Foley AR
- Bönnemann CG
- Mohassel P
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102433
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rycal S48168 (ARM210) for RYR1-related myopathies: a phase one, open-label, dose-escalation trial.
**Authors:** Todd JJ, Lawal TA, Chrismer IC, Kokkinis A, Grunseich C, Jain MS, Waite MR, Biancavilla V, Pocock S, Brooks K, Mendoza CJ, Norato G, Cheung K, Riekhof W, Varma P, Colina-Prisco C, Emile-Backer M, Meilleur KG, Marks AR, Webb Y, Marcantonio EE, Foley AR, Bönnemann CG, Mohassel P
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102433](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102433)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2024 Jan 25;68:102433. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102433. 
eCollection 2024 Feb.

Rycal S48168 (ARM210) for RYR1-related myopathies: a phase one, open-label, 
dose-escalation trial.

Todd JJ(1)(2)(3), Lawal TA(2), Chrismer IC(2), Kokkinis A(4), Grunseich C(4), 
Jain MS(5), Waite MR(5), Biancavilla V(5), Pocock S(2), Brooks K(1)(3), Mendoza 
CJ(1), Norato G(3), Cheung K(6), Riekhof W(2), Varma P(2), Colina-Prisco C(7), 
Emile-Backer M(2), Meilleur KG(2), Marks AR(8), Webb Y(9), Marcantonio EE(9), 
Foley AR(1), Bönnemann CG(1), Mohassel P(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular and Neurogenetic Disorders of Childhood Section, National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.
(2)National Institute of Nursing Research, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.
(3)Clinical Trials Unit, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.
(5)Mark O. Hatfield Clinical Research Center, Rehabilitation Medicine 
Department, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.
(6)Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, NY 10032, USA.
(7)Section of Sensory Science and Metabolism, National Institute on Alcohol 
Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.
(8)Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics, Columbia University Vagelos 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(9)ARMGO Pharma, Inc, Ardsley, NY 10591, USA.

BACKGROUND: RYR1-related myopathies (RYR1-RM) are caused by pathogenic variants 
in the RYR1 gene which encodes the type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1). RyR1 is the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) calcium release channel that mediates 
excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle. RyR1 sub-conductance, SR 
calcium leak, reduced RyR1 expression, and oxidative stress often contribute to 
RYR1-RM pathogenesis. Loss of RyR1-calstabin1 association, SR calcium leak, and 
increased RyR1 open probability were observed in 17 RYR1-RM patient skeletal 
muscle biopsies and improved following ex vivo treatment with Rycal compounds. 
Thus, we initiated a first-in-patient trial of Rycal S48168 (ARM210) in 
ambulatory adults with genetically confirmed RYR1-RM.
METHODS: Participants received 120 mg (n = 3) or 200 mg (n = 4) S48168 (ARM210) 
daily for 29 days. The primary endpoint was safety and tolerability. Exploratory 
endpoints included S48168 (ARM210) pharmacokinetics (PK), target engagement, 
motor function measure (MFM)-32, hand grip and pinch strength, timed functional 
tests, PROMIS fatigue scale, semi-quantitative physical exam strength 
measurements, and oxidative stress biomarkers. The trial was registered with 
clinicaltrials.gov (NCT04141670) and was conducted at the National Institutes of 
Health Clinical Center between October 28, 2019 and December 12, 2021.
FINDINGS: S48168 (ARM210) was well-tolerated, did not cause any serious adverse 
events, and exhibited a dose-dependent PK profile. Three of four participants 
who received the 200 mg/day dose reported improvements in PROMIS-fatigue at 28 
days post-dosing, and also demonstrated improved proximal muscle strength on 
physical examination.
INTERPRETATION: S48168 (ARM210) demonstrated favorable safety, tolerability, and 
PK, in RYR1-RM affected individuals. Most participants who received 200 mg/day 
S48168 (ARM210) reported decreased fatigue, a key symptom of RYR1-RM. These 
results set the foundation for a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
proof of concept trial to determine efficacy of S48168 (ARM210) in RYR1-RM.
FUNDING: NINDS and NINR Intramural Research Programs, NIH Clinical Center Bench 
to Bedside Award (2017-551673), ARMGO Pharma Inc., and its development partner 
Les Laboratoires Servier.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102433
PMCID: PMC10839573
PMID: 38318125

Conflict of interest statement: E.E.M is an employee of ARMGO Pharma, Inc., 
during the conduct of the study; an employee of ARMGO Pharma, Inc., outside the 
submitted work; In addition, E.E.M has a patent US2023/0372358 pending. Y.W is 
an employee of ARMGO Pharma, Inc. In addition, Y.W has a patent US8853198 
issued. A.R.M. is a co-founder of ARMGO Pharma Inc, chairs the Scientific 
Advisory Board of ARMGO Pharma Inc., and holds stock in the company. All other 
authors declare no conflict of interest with the research in this manuscript.