---
reference_id: "PMID:21054565"
title: Depigmentation therapies for normal skin in vitiligo universalis.
authors:
- AlGhamdi KM
- Kumar A
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03876.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Depigmentation therapies for normal skin in vitiligo universalis.
**Authors:** AlGhamdi KM, Kumar A
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03876.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03876.x)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2011 Jul;25(7):749-57. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03876.x. Epub 2010 Nov 4.

Depigmentation therapies for normal skin in vitiligo universalis.

AlGhamdi KM(1), Kumar A.

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Department, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia. kmgderm@yahoo.com

If vitiligo involves most of the body, it might be easier to depigment the 
normal remaining skin rather than to attempt repigmentation. We reviewed the 
literature to date regarding available therapies for depigmenting the normal 
skin in vitiligo universalis. Our review revealed that the threshold regarding 
what percentage of body surface area qualifies as depigmentation is variable 
among practitioners. Monobenzyl ether of hydroquinone (MBEH) is the most widely 
used depigmenting agent and has few side-effects. Tretinoin in combination with 
MBEH is able to speed depigmentation of the skin. Monomethylether of 
hydroquinone has also been used successfully for depigmentation. Eighty-eight 
per cent phenol is also effective in depigmenting the skin but its application 
on large areas is toxic for liver and kidney. Different types of lasers are also 
available to destruct the melanocytes selectively, but this technique can be 
painful and expensive. Cryotherapy is a cheap depigmenting therapy but, because 
of scarring risk, it should only be used by experienced dermatologists. No 
trials have compared the efficacy of the above-mentioned well-established 
depigmentation agents/techniques. Certain drugs such as imatinib, imiquimod and 
diphencyprone, which are used to treat other diseases, caused depigmentation as 
a side-effect. Some depigmentation agents used for branding cattle can also 
serve as topical depigmentation agents. In conclusion, comparative clinical 
trials are needed to compare the efficacy of various depigmentation 
agents/techniques. In particular, topical imatinib, imiquimod and diphencyprone 
may be considered as potential depigmenting agents, which require further 
investigation. This review revealed that MBEH is safe and effective depigmenting 
agent.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology © 2010 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03876.x
PMID: 21054565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]