---
reference_id: "PMID:31695196"
title: Dynamic lineage priming is driven via direct enhancer regulation by ERK.
authors:
- Hamilton WB
- Mosesson Y
- Monteiro RS
- Emdal KB
- Knudsen TE
- Francavilla C
- Barkai N
- Olsen JV
- Brickman JM
journal: Nature
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1732-z
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Lineage
- "Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mediator Complex/deficiency, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dynamic lineage priming is driven via direct enhancer regulation by ERK.
**Authors:** Hamilton WB, Mosesson Y, Monteiro RS, Emdal KB, Knudsen TE, Francavilla C, Barkai N, Olsen JV, Brickman JM
**Journal:** Nature (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-019-1732-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1732-z)

## Content

1. Nature. 2019 Nov;575(7782):355-360. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1732-z. Epub 2019 
Nov 6.

Dynamic lineage priming is driven via direct enhancer regulation by ERK.

Hamilton WB(1), Mosesson Y(#)(2), Monteiro RS(#)(1), Emdal KB(3), Knudsen TE(1), 
Francavilla C(3)(4), Barkai N(2), Olsen JV(3), Brickman JM(5).

Author information:
(1)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Biology, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(2)Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
(3)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Division of Molecular and Cellular Function, School of Biological Sciences, 
FBMH, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Biology, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. joshua.brickman@sund.ku.dk.
(#)Contributed equally

Central to understanding cellular behaviour in multi-cellular organisms is the 
question of how a cell exits one transcriptional state to adopt and eventually 
become committed to another. Fibroblast growth factor-extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (FGF -ERK) signalling drives differentiation of mouse 
embryonic stem cells (ES cells) and pre-implantation embryos towards primitive 
endoderm, and inhibiting ERK supports ES cell self-renewal1. Paracrine FGF-ERK 
signalling induces heterogeneity, whereby cells reversibly progress from 
pluripotency towards primitive endoderm while retaining their capacity to 
re-enter self-renewal2. Here we find that ERK reversibly regulates transcription 
in ES cells by directly affecting enhancer activity without requiring a change 
in transcription factor binding. ERK triggers the reversible association and 
disassociation of RNA polymerase II and associated co-factors from genes and 
enhancers with the mediator component MED24 having an essential role in 
ERK-dependent transcriptional regulation. Though the binding of mediator 
components responds directly to signalling, the persistent binding of 
pluripotency factors to both induced and repressed genes marks them for 
activation and/or reactivation in response to fluctuations in ERK activity. 
Among the repressed genes are several core components of the pluripotency 
network that act to drive their own expression and maintain the ES cell state; 
if their binding is lost, the ability to reactivate transcription is 
compromised. Thus, as long as transcription factor occupancy is maintained, so 
is plasticity, enabling cells to distinguish between transient and sustained 
signals. If ERK signalling persists, pluripotency transcription factor levels 
are reduced by protein turnover and irreversible gene silencing and commitment 
can occur.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-019-1732-z
PMCID: PMC7618169
PMID: 31695196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.