---
reference_id: "PMID:6986979"
title: The separation of pineocytoma from pineoblastoma.
authors:
- Borit A
- Blackwood W
- Mair WG
journal: Cancer
year: '1980'
doi: "10.1002/1097-0142(19800315)45:6<1408::aid-cncr2820450619>3.0.co;2-0"
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- "Brain Neoplasms/pathology, radiotherapy, surgery"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pinealoma/pathology, radiotherapy, surgery"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The separation of pineocytoma from pineoblastoma.
**Authors:** Borit A, Blackwood W, Mair WG
**Journal:** Cancer (1980)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1097-0142(19800315)45:6<1408::aid-cncr2820450619>3.0.co;2-0](https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0142(19800315)45:6<1408::aid-cncr2820450619>3.0.co;2-0)

## Content

1. Cancer. 1980 Mar 15;45(6):1408-18. doi:
10.1002/1097-0142(19800315)45:6<1408::aid-cncr2820450619>3.0.co;2-0.

The separation of pineocytoma from pineoblastoma.

Borit A, Blackwood W, Mair WG.

From our study of eight pineoblastomas and five pineocytomas and a review of the
literature, we have described two clinicopathologic syndromes that characterize
these neoplasms. Pineoblastomas highly resemble the
medulloblastoma-neuroblastoma group of tumors and occur mostly in young people.
The tempo of progression of the disease is fast, the length of illness is short.
These are infiltrating neoplasms that commonly spread via the cerebrospinal
fluid. They are radiosensitive. Histologically they are also similar to the
medulloblastoma-neuroblastoma group and are characterized by the scarcity of
cytoplasmic processes and by the Homer Wright rosette. They contain giant cells.
Pineocytomas are tumors of adults. The tempo of progression of the disease is
slow, and the length of illness is long. They expand by compressing the
surrounding tissues. Histologically they are characterized by the abundance of
cytoplasmic processes and by the pineocytomatous rosette. They contain giant
cells. Areas composed of neoplastic gangliocytes and astrocytes in various
combinations are common variants in some of these neoplasms.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0142(19800315)45:6<1408::aid-cncr2820450619>3.0.co;2-0
PMID: 6986979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
