---
reference_id: "PMID:10906878"
title: Orthopaedic manifestations of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Stanitski DF
- Nadjarian R
- Stanitski CL
- Bawle E
- Tsipouras P
journal: Clin Orthop Relat Res
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1097/00003086-200007000-00029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orthopaedic manifestations of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Stanitski DF, Nadjarian R, Stanitski CL, Bawle E, Tsipouras P
**Journal:** Clin Orthop Relat Res (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00003086-200007000-00029](https://doi.org/10.1097/00003086-200007000-00029)

## Content

1. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2000 Jul;(376):213-21. doi: 
10.1097/00003086-200007000-00029.

Orthopaedic manifestations of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Stanitski DF(1), Nadjarian R, Stanitski CL, Bawle E, Tsipouras P.

Author information:
(1)Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, USA.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is the most prevalent heritable disorder of connective 
tissue. Musculoskeletal problems include joint pain, swelling and instability, 
and spinal deformity. This study was undertaken to assess functional orthopaedic 
problems of patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Sixty patients with 
genetically verified Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (range, 8-60 years; mean, 34 years) 
who attended a National Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Foundation learning conference 
were evaluated by questionnaire, clinical examination, and when indicated, 
radiographs. A database of 250 items per patient was constructed and 
statistically assessed using analysis of variance. Because of rarity of Types 
VII and VIII, these two patients were dropped from the analysis. Fifty-eight 
patients had Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Types I, II, III, or IV and form the study 
cohort. Among these four types, there were no significant differences in history 
of joint dislocation, swelling, or types of orthopaedic surgical procedures 
experienced. Thirty patients with Type III Ehlers-Danlos syndrome reported joint 
pain more frequently than did patients with Types I, II, or IV. Ambulation was 
impaired significantly in patients with Type III disorder as a whole, as was 
functional hand strength and upper extremity function. Back or neck pain was a 
common (67.2%) report among patients with all types of disease but did not 
correlate with the presence or absence of spinal deformity. Contrary to most 
previous reports, the patients in this study showed that Type III Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome was the most debilitating form with respect to musculoskeletal 
function.

DOI: 10.1097/00003086-200007000-00029
PMID: 10906878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]