---
reference_id: "PMID:39663273"
title: "Post-infectious central nervous system vasculitides in adults: an underdiagnosed and treatable disease : Part I. Overview."
authors:
- Zedde M
- Quatrale R
- Andreone V
- Pezzella FR
- Micieli G
- Cortelli P
- Del Sette M
- Pascarella R
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-024-07935-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Adult
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-infectious central nervous system vasculitides in adults: an underdiagnosed and treatable disease : Part I. Overview.
**Authors:** Zedde M, Quatrale R, Andreone V, Pezzella FR, Micieli G, Cortelli P, Del Sette M, Pascarella R
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-024-07935-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-024-07935-5)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2025 Feb;46(2):633-650. doi: 10.1007/s10072-024-07935-5. Epub 2024
 Dec 12.

Post-infectious central nervous system vasculitides in adults: an underdiagnosed 
and treatable disease : Part I. Overview.

Zedde M(1), Quatrale R(2), Andreone V(3), Pezzella FR(4), Micieli G(5), Cortelli 
P(6)(7), Del Sette M(8), Pascarella R(9).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Stroke Unit, Azienda Unità Sanitaria Locale-IRCCS di Reggio 
Emilia, Via Amendola 2, Reggio Emilia, 42122, Italy. 
zedde.marialuisa@ausl.re.it.
(2)Dipartimento Di Scienze Neurologiche, UOC Di Neurologia, Ospedale Dell'Angelo 
AULSS 3 Serenissima, Venice Mestre, Italy.
(3)Neurology and Stroke Unit, A.O.R.N. Antonio Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy.
(4)Head, Neck and Neuroscience Department, San Camillo Forlanini Hospital, Rome, 
Italy.
(5)Former Department of Emergency Neurology, IRCCS C. Mondino Foundation, Pavia, 
Italy.
(6)IRCCS Istituto Delle Scienze Neurologiche Di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(7)DIBINEM, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(8)IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
(9)Neuroradiology Unit, Azienda Unità Sanitaria Locale-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, 
Via Amendola 2, Reggio Emilia, 42122, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The differential diagnosis of Primary Central Nervous System 
Angiitis (PACNS) is complex and includes several inflammatory and 
non-inflammatory conditions. Among the first ones, post-infectious CNS 
vasculitides represent a relevant topic and they are often underdiagnosed.
AIMS: The main aim of this review is to summarize the clinical and neuroimaging 
features of post-infectious vasculitides, highlighting the diagnostic clues and 
the need to carefully consider them in the differential diagnosis of PACNS.
FINDINGS: Several infectious agents (viruses, bacteria, fungi and parasites) can 
be involved in documented post-infectious vasculitides, often with a 
pathological confirmation. Post-infectious vasculitides involve not only 
immunocompromised hosts but also immunocompetent people and the diagnosis might 
be complicated by the lack of close time relationship between infections and 
neuro-logical symptoms, as in Varicella Zoster Virus (VZV) related vasculopathy 
in adults. Several complications may occur, ranging from ischemic to hemorrhagic 
stroke, from arterial to venous thrombosis, from large to small vessel 
involvement, often simultaneously.
CONCLUSIONS: Post-infectious vasculitides are caused by a broad spectrum of 
microorganisms and they should be carefully considered in the differential 
diagnosis of some neurological pictures and neuroradiologicals findings in 
immunocompetent adults too.

© 2024. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-024-07935-5
PMID: 39663273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: Not applicable. 
Competing interests: The authors have no competing interests to declare that are 
relevant to the content of this article.