---
reference_id: "PMID:37048642"
title: "Irritable Bowel Syndrome and the Gut Microbiome: A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Shaikh SD
- Sun N
- Canakis A
- Park WY
- Weber HC
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12072558
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Irritable Bowel Syndrome and the Gut Microbiome: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Shaikh SD, Sun N, Canakis A, Park WY, Weber HC
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12072558](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12072558)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Mar 28;12(7):2558. doi: 10.3390/jcm12072558.

Irritable Bowel Syndrome and the Gut Microbiome: A Comprehensive Review.

Shaikh SD(1), Sun N(1), Canakis A(2), Park WY(3), Weber HC(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Chobanian & Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston 
University, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, The Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown 
University, Providence, RI 02903, USA.
(4)Section of Gastroenterology, Chobanian & Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston 
University, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(5)Section of Gastroenterology, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA 02130, 
USA.

Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) is a functional disorder of the gastrointestinal 
tract characterized by abdominal pain and altered bowel habits. It has a 
prevalence of 10 to 25% in the United States and has a high disease burden, as 
evidenced by reduced quality of life, decreased work productivity and increased 
healthcare utilization and costs. IBS has been associated with several 
intra-intestinal and extra-intestinal conditions, including psychiatric 
comorbidities. Although the pathophysiology of IBS has not been fully 
elucidated, it involves dysregulation of communication between the brain and gut 
(brain-gut axis) which is associated with alterations in intestinal motility, 
gut permeability, visceral hypersensitivity and gut microbiota composition. The 
purpose of this article is to review the role the gut microbiota plays in the 
pathophysiology of IBS, understand factors that affect the gut microbiome and 
explore the microbiome as a target of treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12072558
PMCID: PMC10095554
PMID: 37048642

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.