---
reference_id: "PMID:8412017"
title: "Canavan disease: biochemical and molecular studies."
authors:
- Matalon R
- Kaul R
- Michals K
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1007/BF00711906
keywords:
- "Amidohydrolases/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- Animals
- Canavan Disease/diagnosis
- "DNA, Complementary/isolation & purification"
- Female
- Genetic Carrier Screening
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Canavan disease: biochemical and molecular studies.
**Authors:** Matalon R, Kaul R, Michals K
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00711906](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00711906)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 1993;16(4):744-52. doi: 10.1007/BF00711906.

Canavan disease: biochemical and molecular studies.

Matalon R(1), Kaul R, Michals K.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute Miami Children's Hospital, FL 33155.

Deficiency of the enzyme aspartoacylase and the accumulation of N-acetylaspartic
acid lead to a severe leukodystrophy and spongy degeneration of the brain,
Canavan disease (McKusick 271900). Since our discovery in 1988 of the defect in
Canavan disease, 144 patients with Canavan disease have been diagnosed in our
laboratory. Most of these children are of Ashkenazi Jewish extraction. The level
of enzyme activity can be used for carrier testing. Prenatal diagnosis has been
difficult using the enzyme assay owing to the low activity of aspartoacylase in
cultured chorionic villus samples or amniocytes. The determination of
N-acetylaspartic acid in the amniotic fluid is another parameter for diagnosis;
however, the levels may not always be elevated. Bovine and human aspartoacylase
have been purified in our laboratory. Bovine and human cDNA and genomic clones
have been isolated and six exons have been localized. This information is being
used for the study of Canavan disease at the molecular level.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00711906
PMID: 8412017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
