---
reference_id: "PMID:17618523"
title: "Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome: clinical features, genetics, and testing guidelines."
authors:
- Berry-Kravis E
- Abrams L
- Coffey SM
- Hall DA
- Greco C
- Gane LW
- Grigsby J
- Bourgeois JA
- Finucane B
- Jacquemont S
- Brunberg JA
- Zhang L
- Lin J
- Tassone F
- Hagerman PJ
- Hagerman RJ
- Leehey MA
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/mds.21493
keywords:
- "Ataxia/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Family Health
- Female
- "Fragile X Syndrome/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Genetic Testing
- Guidelines as Topic/standards
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Sex Factors
- "Tremor/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome: clinical features, genetics, and testing guidelines.
**Authors:** Berry-Kravis E, Abrams L, Coffey SM, Hall DA, Greco C, Gane LW, Grigsby J, Bourgeois JA, Finucane B, Jacquemont S, Brunberg JA, Zhang L, Lin J, Tassone F, Hagerman PJ, Hagerman RJ, Leehey MA
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.21493](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.21493)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2007 Oct 31;22(14):2018-30, quiz 2140. doi: 10.1002/mds.21493.

Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome: clinical features, genetics, and 
testing guidelines.

Berry-Kravis E(1), Abrams L, Coffey SM, Hall DA, Greco C, Gane LW, Grigsby J, 
Bourgeois JA, Finucane B, Jacquemont S, Brunberg JA, Zhang L, Lin J, Tassone F, 
Hagerman PJ, Hagerman RJ, Leehey MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 
60612, USA. Elizabeth_m_berry-kravis@rush.edu

Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a neurodegenerative 
disorder with core features of action tremor and cerebellar gait ataxia. 
Frequent associated findings include parkinsonism, executive function deficits 
and dementia, neuropathy, and dysautonomia. Magnetic Resonance Imaging studies 
in FXTAS demonstrate increased T2 signal intensity in the middle cerebellar 
peduncles (MCP sign) in the majority of patients. Similar signal alterations are 
seen in deep and subependymal cerebral white matter, as is general cortical and 
subcortical atrophy. The major neuropathological feature of FXTAS is the 
presence of intranuclear, neuronal, and astrocytic, inclusions in broad 
distribution throughout the brain and brainstem. FXTAS is caused by moderate 
expansions (55-200 repeats; premutation range) of a CGG trinucleotide in the 
fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene, the same gene which causes fragile X 
syndrome when in the full mutation range (200 or greater CGG repeats). The 
pathogenic mechanism is related to overexpression and toxicity of the FMR1 mRNA 
per se. Although only recently discovered, and hence currently under-diagnosed, 
FXTAS is likely to be one of the most common single-gene disorders leading to 
neurodegeneration in males. In this report, we review information available on 
the clinical, radiological, and pathological features, and prevalence and 
management of FXTAS. We also provide guidelines for the practitioner to assist 
with identifying appropriate patients for DNA testing for FXTAS, as well as 
recommendations for genetic counseling once a diagnosis of FXTAS is made.

(c) 2007 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21493
PMID: 17618523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]