---
reference_id: "PMID:27886014"
title: Embryonic Mutant Huntingtin Aggregate Formation in Mouse Models of Huntington's Disease.
authors:
- Osmand AP
- Bichell TJ
- Bowman AB
- Bates GP
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-160217
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Embryonic Mutant Huntingtin Aggregate Formation in Mouse Models of Huntington's Disease.
**Authors:** Osmand AP, Bichell TJ, Bowman AB, Bates GP
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-160217](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-160217)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2016 Dec 15;5(4):343-346. doi: 10.3233/JHD-160217.

Embryonic Mutant Huntingtin Aggregate Formation in Mouse Models of Huntington's 
Disease.

Osmand AP(1), Bichell TJ(2), Bowman AB(3), Bates GP(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of 
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Neurology, and Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University 
(VU) and VU Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(4)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, UCL Institute 
of Neurology, London, UK.

The role of aggregate formation in the pathophysiology of Huntington's disease 
(HD) remains uncertain. However, the temporal appearance of aggregates tends to 
correlate with the onset of symptoms and the numbers of neuropil aggregates 
correlate with the progression of clinical disease. Using highly sensitive 
immunohistochemical methods we have detected the appearance of diffuse 
aggregates during embryonic development in the R6/2 and YAC128 mouse models of 
HD. These are initially seen in developing axonal tracts and appear to spread 
throughout the cerebrum in the early neonate.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-160217
PMCID: PMC5181660
PMID: 27886014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]