---
reference_id: "PMID:22875662"
title: "Cerclage pessary for preventing preterm birth in women with a singleton pregnancy and a short cervix at 20 to 24 weeks: a randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- Hui SY
- Chor CM
- Lau TK
- Lao TT
- Leung TY
journal: Am J Perinatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1322550
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerclage pessary for preventing preterm birth in women with a singleton pregnancy and a short cervix at 20 to 24 weeks: a randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** Hui SY, Chor CM, Lau TK, Lao TT, Leung TY
**Journal:** Am J Perinatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0032-1322550](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0032-1322550)

## Content

1. Am J Perinatol. 2013 Apr;30(4):283-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1322550. Epub 2012
Aug  8.

Cerclage pessary for preventing preterm birth in women with a singleton 
pregnancy and a short cervix at 20 to 24 weeks: a randomized controlled trial.

Hui SY(1), Chor CM, Lau TK, Lao TT, Leung TY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. anniehui@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effectiveness of cerclage pessary in the prevention 
of preterm birth in asymptomatic Chinese women with a short cervix at 20 to 24 
weeks.
METHODS: Low-risk women carrying singleton pregnancies were screened with 
transvaginal ultrasound, and those with a cervical length <25 mm at 20 to 24 
weeks were recruited into a randomized controlled trial, comparing the 
prophylactic use of cerclage pessary with expectant management. The analysis was 
by intent-to-treat. The primary outcome measure was preterm delivery before 34 
weeks.
RESULTS: Among 4438 screened women, 203 women (4.6%) met the inclusion criteria 
and 108 (58%) consented for the study. A total of 53 and 55 women were allocated 
to pessary and control groups, respectively. There was no difference in 
background demographics, including the mean cervical length (19.6 mm versus 20.5 
mm) and the mean gestational age at randomization (both 21.9 weeks). Delivery 
before 34 weeks occurred in 9.4% and 5.5% (p = 0.46) in the pessary and the 
control groups, respectively. No differences in major side effects were noted 
between the groups.
CONCLUSION: In our population, <5% had a cervical length of less than 25 mm at 
20 to 24 weeks' gestation. The prophylactic use of cerclage pessary did not 
reduce the rate of preterm delivery before 34 weeks.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1322550
PMID: 22875662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]