---
reference_id: "PMID:30837110"
title: "Antidepressants for the treatment of narcolepsy: A prospective study of 148 patients in northern China."
authors:
- Jin L
- Shi L
- Zhang Y
- Chen BB
- Wang XL
- Liu YH
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2019.02.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antidepressants for the treatment of narcolepsy: A prospective study of 148 patients in northern China.
**Authors:** Jin L, Shi L, Zhang Y, Chen BB, Wang XL, Liu YH
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2019.02.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2019.02.014)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2019 May;63:27-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2019.02.014. Epub 2019
 Mar 2.

Antidepressants for the treatment of narcolepsy: A prospective study of 148 
patients in northern China.

Jin L(1), Shi L(2), Zhang Y(1), Chen BB(1), Wang XL(1), Liu YH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, XiAn XD Group Hospital, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, China. Electronic address: liuyhong@fmmu.edu.cn.

Narcolepsy is a life-long neurological disorder characterized by excessive 
daytime sleepiness (EDS) and cataplexy. At present, Sodium oxybate, modafinil, 
methylphenidate and other stimulants are recommended first-line therapies for 
narcolepsy but are difficult to obtain in China. One hundred forty-eight 
patients with narcolepsy were treated with antidepressants and administered the 
Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) and the Maintenance of Wakefulness Test (MWT) 
before and after treatment from August 2012 to August 2017. The subjects were 
followed for 1-6 years after treatment. Improvement in sleepiness, cataplexy, 
cataplexy-like episodes, and antidepressant side effects were assessed. There 
were significant differences in the mean sleep latency (MSL) and sleep onset 
rapid eye movement periods (SOREMPs) in MWT and ESS scores, cataplexy and 
cataplexy-like episodes before and after treatment (p < 0.01). Venlafaxine 
demonstrated significantly greater improvements in MSL in the MWT (p < 0.01). 
Early awakenings and dry mouth were the most common adverse effects.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2019.02.014
PMID: 30837110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]