---
reference_id: "PMID:30530701"
title: Molecular basis for the acid-initiated uncoating of human enterovirus D68.
authors:
- Liu Y
- Sheng J
- van Vliet ALW
- Buda G
- van Kuppeveld FJM
- Rossmann MG
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1803347115
keywords:
- Acids/pharmacology
- "Capsid/drug effects, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Capsid Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- "Enterovirus D, Human/drug effects, genetics, physiology, ultrastructure"
- Enterovirus Infections/virology
- Humans
- Hydrogen-Ion Concentration
- "Virion/drug effects, genetics, physiology, ultrastructure"
- Virus Uncoating/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular basis for the acid-initiated uncoating of human enterovirus D68.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Sheng J, van Vliet ALW, Buda G, van Kuppeveld FJM, Rossmann MG
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1803347115](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1803347115)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Dec 26;115(52):E12209-E12217. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1803347115. Epub 2018 Dec 10.

Molecular basis for the acid-initiated uncoating of human enterovirus D68.

Liu Y(1), Sheng J(1), van Vliet ALW(2), Buda G(1), van Kuppeveld FJM(2),
Rossmann MG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
47907.
(2)Virology Division, Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Faculty
of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, 3584 CL Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
47907; mr@purdue.edu.

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) belongs to a group of enteroviruses that contain a
single positive-sense RNA genome surrounded by an icosahedral capsid. Like
common cold viruses, EV-D68 mainly causes respiratory infections and is
acid-labile. The molecular mechanism by which the acid-sensitive EV-D68 virions
uncoat and deliver their genome into a host cell is unknown. Using cryoelectron
microscopy (cryo-EM), we have determined the structures of the full native
virion and an uncoating intermediate [the A (altered) particle] of EV-D68 at
2.2- and 2.7-Å resolution, respectively. These structures showed that acid
treatment of EV-D68 leads to particle expansion, externalization of the viral
protein VP1 N termini from the capsid interior, and formation of pores around
the icosahedral twofold axes through which the viral RNA can exit. Moreover,
because of the low stability of EV-D68, cryo-EM analyses of a mixed population
of particles at neutral pH and following acid treatment demonstrated the
involvement of multiple structural intermediates during virus uncoating. Among
these, a previously undescribed state, the expanded 1 ("E1") particle, shows a
majority of internal regions (e.g., the VP1 N termini) to be ordered as in the
full native virion. Thus, the E1 particle acts as an intermediate in the
transition from full native virions to A particles. Together, the present work
delineates the pathway of EV-D68 uncoating and provides the molecular basis for
the acid lability of EV-D68 and of the related common cold viruses.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1803347115
PMCID: PMC6310856
PMID: 30530701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
