---
reference_id: "PMID:37334833"
title: Congenital Pulmonary Airway Malformations With a Reconsideration and Current Perspective on the Stocker Classification.
authors:
- Dehner LP
- Schultz KAP
- Hill DA
journal: Pediatr Dev Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/10935266221146823
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation of Lung, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Lung/pathology
- "Pulmonary Blastoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Lung Neoplasms/congenital
- "Respiratory System Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- Bronchopulmonary Sequestration/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Pulmonary Airway Malformations With a Reconsideration and Current Perspective on the Stocker Classification.
**Authors:** Dehner LP, Schultz KAP, Hill DA
**Journal:** Pediatr Dev Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10935266221146823](https://doi.org/10.1177/10935266221146823)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2023 May-Jun;26(3):241-249. doi:
10.1177/10935266221146823.  Epub 2023 Feb 21.

Congenital Pulmonary Airway Malformations With a Reconsideration and Current 
Perspective on the Stocker Classification.

Dehner LP(1)(2), Schultz KAP(2), Hill DA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Lauren V. Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, St. Louis Children's 
Hospital, Washington University Medical Center, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(2)International Pleuropulmonary Blastoma/DICER1Registry, Cancer and Blood 
Disorders, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Congenital cystic pulmonary lesions (CCPLs) are represented by the following 
entities: congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), formerly congenital 
cystic adenomatoid malformation, extra- and intralobar sequestration (EIS), 
congenital lobar emphysema (overexpansion), and bronchogenic cyst. The 
developmental model of CPAM histogenesis by Stocker proposed perturbations 
designated as CPAM type 0 to type 4 without known or specific pathogenetic 
mechanisms along the airway from the bronchus to the alveolus. This review 
highlights mutational events either at the somatic level in KRAS (CPAM types 1 
and possibly 3) or germline variants in congenital acinar dysplasia, formerly 
CPAM type 0, and pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB), type I, formerly CPAM type 4. 
The potential for overt malignant progression exists in the case of PPB type I 
and CPAM type 1 in some cases to well-differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma. On 
the other hand, CPAM type 2 is an acquired lesion resulting from interruption in 
lung development secondary to bronchial atresia. The latter is also regarded as 
the etiology of EIS whose pathologic features are similar, if not identical, to 
CPAM type 2. These observations have provided important insights into the 
pathogenetic mechanisms in the development of the CPAMs since the Stocker 
classification.

DOI: 10.1177/10935266221146823
PMID: 37334833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]