---
reference_id: "PMID:41209172"
title: Autophagy in the Pathogenesis of Membranous Nephropathy.
authors:
- Ponticelli C
- Reggiani F
- Moroni G
journal: Kidney Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.xkme.2025.101101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autophagy in the Pathogenesis of Membranous Nephropathy.
**Authors:** Ponticelli C, Reggiani F, Moroni G
**Journal:** Kidney Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xkme.2025.101101](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xkme.2025.101101)

## Content

1. Kidney Med. 2025 Sep 12;7(11):101101. doi: 10.1016/j.xkme.2025.101101.
eCollection 2025 Nov.

Autophagy in the Pathogenesis of Membranous Nephropathy.

Ponticelli C(1), Reggiani F(2)(3), Moroni G(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Independent investigator, Milan, Italy.
(2)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano,
Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele,
Milan, Italy.

Membranous nephropathy (MN) is a leading cause of nephrotic syndrome in adults.
In most cases, its etiology is unknown (idiopathic), while ∼30% of cases are
secondary to other diseases, infections, or exposure to drugs and toxic agents.
Up to 70% of patients with idiopathic MN have circulating antibodies against the
M-type phospholipase A2 receptor, a podocyte surface protein. The formation of
immune complexes on podocytes triggers complement activation, leading to the
activation of both the C5b-C9 complex and C5a. Recently, several novel podocyte
antigens have been identified in both idiopathic and secondary MN. Autophagy, a
cellular mechanism that removes and recycles damaged cytoplasmic material, may
have a dual role in MN pathogenesis. It can regulate innate and adaptive immune
responses, promoting the production of autoantibodies against podocyte antigens.
However, autophagy also protects podocytes from apoptosis and injury. In
addition, it plays a role in the progression of tubular atrophy and interstitial
fibrosis, which can lead to chronic kidney disease and kidney failure. This
article explores the mechanisms that activate and regulate macroautophagy and
examines its role in MN. The potential therapeutic implications of autophagy
regulation in MN, based on preliminary studies, are also discussed.

© 2025 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xkme.2025.101101
PMCID: PMC12595375
PMID: 41209172
