---
reference_id: "PMID:35294522"
title: Phase Ib/II Trial of Ribociclib in Combination with Binimetinib in Patients with NRAS-mutant Melanoma.
authors:
- Schuler M
- Zimmer L
- Kim KB
- Sosman JA
- Ascierto PA
- Postow MA
- De Vos FYFL
- van Herpen CML
- Carlino MS
- Johnson DB
- Berking C
- Reddy MB
- Harney AS
- Berlin JD
- Amaria RN
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-3872
keywords:
- Aminopyridines/adverse effects
- "Benzimidazoles/administration & dosage"
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Humans
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Purines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase Ib/II Trial of Ribociclib in Combination with Binimetinib in Patients with NRAS-mutant Melanoma.
**Authors:** Schuler M, Zimmer L, Kim KB, Sosman JA, Ascierto PA, Postow MA, De Vos FYFL, van Herpen CML, Carlino MS, Johnson DB, Berking C, Reddy MB, Harney AS, Berlin JD, Amaria RN
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-3872](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-3872)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2022 Jul 15;28(14):3002-3010. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-3872.

Phase Ib/II Trial of Ribociclib in Combination with Binimetinib in Patients with
NRAS-mutant Melanoma.

Schuler M(1)(2), Zimmer L(3), Kim KB(4), Sosman JA(5), Ascierto PA(6), Postow
MA(7)(8), De Vos FYFL(9), van Herpen CML(10), Carlino MS(11)(12), Johnson
DB(13), Berking C(14), Reddy MB(15), Harney AS(15), Berlin JD(13), Amaria
RN(16).

Author information:
(1)West German Cancer Center Essen, Department of Medical Oncology, University
Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site University Hospital Essen,
Essen, Germany.
(3)West German Cancer Center Essen, Department of Dermatology, University
Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(4)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco,
California.
(5)Robert H. Lurie Cancer Center, Northwestern Medical Group, Chicago, Illinois.
(6)Melanoma Unit, Cancer Immunotherapy and Development Therapeutics, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori IRCCS Fondazione Pascale, Naples, Italy.
(7)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
(8)Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(10)Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(11)Westmead Hospital, Crown Princess, Mary Cancer Centre, Corner of Hawkesbury
and Darcy Roads, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.
(12)Australia Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Sydney,
New South Wales, Australia.
(13)Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, The
Vanderbilt Clinic, Nashville, Tennessee.
(14)Department of Dermatology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center
Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany.
(15)Pfizer Inc., New York, New York.
(16)Department of Melanoma Medical Oncology, Division of Cancer Medicine, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2022 Jul 15;28(14):2977-2979. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-1256.

PURPOSE: Enhanced MAPK pathway signaling and cell-cycle checkpoint dysregulation
are frequent in NRAS-mutant melanoma and, as such, the regimen of the MEK
inhibitor binimetinib and the selective CDK4/6 inhibitor ribociclib is a
rational combination.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is a phase Ib/II, open-label study of ribociclib +
binimetinib in patients with NRAS-mutant melanoma (NCT01781572). Primary
objectives were to estimate the MTD/recommended phase II dose (RP2D) of the
combination (phase Ib) and to characterize combination antitumor activity at the
RP2D (phase II). Tumor genomic characterization and
pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Ten patients (16.4%) experienced dose-limiting toxicities in cycle 1 of
phase Ib. Overall response rate in the phase II cohort (n = 41) for the selected
RP2D (binimetinib 45 mg twice daily + ribociclib 200 mg once daily, 21 days on/7
days off) was 19.5% [8/41; 95% confidence interval (CI), 8.8-34.9]. The response
rate was 32.5% (13/40; 95% CI, 20.1-48.0) in patients with NRAS mutation with
concurrent alterations of CDKN2A, CDK4, or CCND1. Median progression-free
survival was 3.7 months (95% CI, 3.5-5.6) and median overall survival was 11.3
months (95% CI, 9.3-14.2) for all patients. Common treatment-related toxicities
included creatine phosphokinase elevation, rash, edema, anemia, nausea,
diarrhea, and fatigue. Pharmacokinetics and safety were consistent with
single-agent data, supporting a lack of drug-drug interaction.
CONCLUSIONS: Ribociclib + binimetinib can be safely administered and is
clinically active in patients with NRAS-mutant melanoma. Co-mutations of
cell-cycle genes may define a population with greater likelihood of treatment
benefit. See related commentary by Moschos, p. 2977.

©2022 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-3872
PMCID: PMC9365377
PMID: 35294522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
