---
reference_id: "PMID:34599655"
title: "Type 1 diabetes in 2017: global estimates of incident and prevalent cases in children and adults."
authors:
- Green A
- Hede SM
- Patterson CC
- Wild SH
- Imperatore G
- Roglic G
- Beran D
journal: Diabetologia
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00125-021-05571-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 1 diabetes in 2017: global estimates of incident and prevalent cases in children and adults.
**Authors:** Green A, Hede SM, Patterson CC, Wild SH, Imperatore G, Roglic G, Beran D
**Journal:** Diabetologia (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00125-021-05571-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-021-05571-8)

## Content

1. Diabetologia. 2021 Dec;64(12):2741-2750. doi: 10.1007/s00125-021-05571-8. Epub
 2021 Oct 2.

Type 1 diabetes in 2017: global estimates of incident and prevalent cases in 
children and adults.

Green A(1)(2), Hede SM(3), Patterson CC(4), Wild SH(5), Imperatore G(6), Roglic 
G(7), Beran D(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Applied Economics and Health Research, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
agreen@dadlnet.dk.
(2)Steno Diabetes Center Odense, Department of Clinical Research, Odense 
University Hospital and University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. 
agreen@dadlnet.dk.
(3)Institute of Applied Economics and Health Research, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Centre for Public Health, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK.
(5)Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(6)Division of Diabetes Translation, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Atlanta, 
GA, USA.
(7)Department of Noncommunicable Diseases, World Health Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(8)Division of Tropical and Humanitarian Medicine, University of Geneva and 
Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland. david.beran@unige.ch.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Data on type 1 diabetes incidence and prevalence are limited, 
particularly for adults. This study aims to estimate global numbers of incident 
and prevalent cases of type 1 diabetes in 2017 for all age groups, by country 
and areas defined by income and region.
METHODS: Incidence rates of type 1 diabetes in children (available from 94 
countries) from the IDF Atlas were used and extrapolated to countries without 
data. Age-specific incidence rates in adults (only known across full age range 
for fewer than ten countries) were obtained by applying scaling ratios for each 
adult age group relative to the incidence rate in children. Age-specific 
incidence rates were applied to population estimates to obtain incident case 
numbers. Duration of diabetes was estimated from available data and adjusted 
using differences in childhood mortality rate between countries from United 
Nations demographic data. Prevalent case numbers were derived by modelling the 
relationship between prevalence, incidence and disease duration. Sensitivity 
analyses were performed to quantify the impact of alternative assumptions and 
model inputs.
RESULTS: Global numbers of incident and prevalent cases of type 1 diabetes were 
estimated to be 234,710 and 9,004,610, respectively, in 2017. High-income 
countries, with 17% of the global population, accounted for 49% of global 
incident cases and 52% of prevalent cases. Asia, which has the largest 
proportion of the world's population (60%), had the largest number of incident 
(32%) and prevalent (31%) cases of type 1 diabetes. Globally, 6%, 35%, 43% and 
16% of prevalent cases were in the age groups 0-14, 15-39, 40-64 and 65+ years, 
respectively. Based on sensitivity analyses, the estimates could deviate by 
±15%.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Globally, type 1 diabetes represents about 2% of the 
estimated total cases of diabetes, ranging from less than 1% in certain Pacific 
countries to more than 15% in Northern European populations in 2017. This study 
provides information for the development of healthcare and policy approaches to 
manage type 1 diabetes. The estimates need further validation due to limitations 
and assumptions related to data availability and estimation methods.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-021-05571-8
PMCID: PMC8563635
PMID: 34599655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]