---
reference_id: "PMID:21216643"
title: The effect of blood phenylalanine concentration on Kuvan™ response in phenylketonuria.
authors:
- Elsas LJ
- Greto J
- Wierenga A
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.12.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effect of blood phenylalanine concentration on Kuvan™ response in phenylketonuria.
**Authors:** Elsas LJ, Greto J, Wierenga A
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.12.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.12.003)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2011 Apr;102(4):407-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.12.003.
Epub  2010 Dec 13.

The effect of blood phenylalanine concentration on Kuvan™ response in 
phenylketonuria.

Elsas LJ(1), Greto J, Wierenga A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pediatrics, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA. lelsas@med.miami.edu

Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase 
gene (PAH) with consequent elevation of blood phenylalanine (Phe), reduction in 
tyrosine (Tyr) and elevation of Phe/Tyr ratio (P/T). Although newborn screening 
for PKU with early dietary treatment improved severe, irreversible brain damage, 
older patients suffer reversible losses in executive function when Phe 
concentrations are elevated. The maintenance of strict nutritional control in 
older children and adults remains difficult. An adjunct to dietary therapy, oral 
tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) has recently been approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration as a stable, synthetic BH(4) called Kuvan™. Published studies of 
Kuvan response in PKU varies and involved primarily children. In this 
prospective study we evaluated dose-response, response frequency and factors 
predicting response in 21 patients with PKU (aged 8-30 years), who required 
life-long dietary treatment. Response to Kuvan was defined at 24h (acute) and 
over 4 weeks (chronic) as a ≥ 30% decline in the Phe or P/T ratio. A dose of 
20mg/kg Kuvan was chosen with 29% responding in 24h and 33% of patients at 4 
weeks. We then compared baseline Phe, Tyr, P/T, Phe intake, and frequency of 
"severe" versus "moderate" mutant PAH alleles among acute and chronic responders 
and non-responders to Kuvan. Predictors of response to Kuvan, both acute and 
chronic were baseline Phe and baseline P/T. Baseline Phe and P/T were higher 
among non-responders (P<0.05). By contrast baseline Tyr was similar (P=0.45). 
Phe intake tended to be higher (18 ± 20mg/kg/24h) among Kuvan responders than 
non-responders (15 ± 11 mg/kg/24h), P<0.07 NS. Similarly the frequency of 
"severe" mutant PAH alleles tended to be more frequent (67%) among 
non-responders than responders (40%) by Chi(2) test, P=0.08 NS. These results 
were reproducible in a "responder" to Kuvan. To assess directly the effect of 
elevated blood Phe, Phe was lowered in four, "non-responder" patients, but all 
failed to respond to Kuvan. We conclude that baseline blood Phe and P/T ratio 
can predict increased probability for response to Kuvan by patients with classic 
PKU, but the in vivo mechanisms of response to Kuvan remain enigmatic.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.12.003
PMID: 21216643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]