---
reference_id: "PMID:27307146"
title: Maternal Risk Factors and Perinatal Characteristics for Hirschsprung Disease.
authors:
- Löf Granström A
- Svenningsson A
- Hagel E
- Oddsberg J
- Nordenskjöld A
- Wester T
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2015-4608
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maternal Risk Factors and Perinatal Characteristics for Hirschsprung Disease.
**Authors:** Löf Granström A, Svenningsson A, Hagel E, Oddsberg J, Nordenskjöld A, Wester T
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2015-4608](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2015-4608)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2016 Jul;138(1):e20154608. doi: 10.1542/peds.2015-4608. Epub 2016 
Jun 15.

Maternal Risk Factors and Perinatal Characteristics for Hirschsprung Disease.

Löf Granström A(1), Svenningsson A(2), Hagel E(3), Oddsberg J(2), Nordenskjöld 
A(4), Wester T(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Women's and Children's Health and Division of Pediatric 
Surgery, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital and anna.lof@ki.ses.
(2)Departments of Women's and Children's Health and Division of Pediatric 
Surgery, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital and.
(3)Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics (LIME), Unit for Medical 
Statistics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; and.
(4)Departments of Women's and Children's Health and Division of Pediatric 
Surgery, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital and Center of Molecular Medicine, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a congenital defect of 
the enteric nervous system characterized by a lack of ganglion cells in the 
distal hindgut. The aim of this study was to assess the birth prevalence, 
perinatal characteristics, and maternal risk factors in HSCR patients in Sweden.
METHODS: This was a nationwide, population-based, case-control study of all 
children born in Sweden between 1982 and 2012 and registered in the Swedish 
Medical Birth Register. Cases were identified in the Swedish National Patient 
Register and data on potential maternal risk factors and patient characteristics 
were collected from the Swedish National Patient Register and the Swedish 
Medical Birth Register. Five age- and sex-matched controls were randomly 
selected for each case. The association between studied risk factors and HSCR 
was analyzed using conditional logistic regression to calculate the odds ratio 
(OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI).
RESULTS: The study population comprised 600 HSCR cases and 3000 controls with a 
male-to-female ratio of 3.7:1. The birth prevalence of HSCR was 1.91/10 000. 
Maternal obesity was associated with an increased risk for the child to have 
HSCR (OR 1.74; CI 1.25-2.44). Children with HSCR were born at an earlier 
gestational age (OR 1.60; CI 1.18-2.17) than control children. Associated 
malformations were identified in 34.5% of the cases.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that the Swedish birth prevalence of HSCR was 
1.91/10 000. Children with HSCR disease were born at a lower gestational age 
than controls. Maternal obesity may increase the risk for the child to have 
HSCR.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2015-4608
PMID: 27307146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]