---
reference_id: "PMID:33560420"
title: A mouse model of BBS identifies developmental and homeostatic effects of BBS5 mutation and identifies novel pituitary abnormalities.
authors:
- Bentley-Ford MR
- Engle SE
- Clearman KR
- Haycraft CJ
- Andersen RS
- Croyle MJ
- Rains AB
- Berbari NF
- Yoder BK
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model of BBS identifies developmental and homeostatic effects of BBS5 mutation and identifies novel pituitary abnormalities.
**Authors:** Bentley-Ford MR, Engle SE, Clearman KR, Haycraft CJ, Andersen RS, Croyle MJ, Rains AB, Berbari NF, Yoder BK
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddab039](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddab039)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2021 Apr 26;30(3-4):234-246. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab039.

A mouse model of BBS identifies developmental and homeostatic effects of BBS5 
mutation and identifies novel pituitary abnormalities.

Bentley-Ford MR(1), Engle SE(2), Clearman KR(1), Haycraft CJ(1), Andersen RS(1), 
Croyle MJ(1), Rains AB(1), Berbari NF(2), Yoder BK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Primary cilia are critical sensory and signaling compartments present on most 
mammalian cell types. These specialized structures require a unique signaling 
protein composition relative to the rest of the cell to carry out their 
functions. Defects in ciliary structure and signaling result in a broad group of 
disorders collectively known as ciliopathies. One ciliopathy, Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome (BBS; OMIM 209900), presents with diverse clinical features, many of 
which are attributed to defects in ciliary signaling during both embryonic 
development and postnatal life. For example, patients exhibit obesity, 
polydactyly, hypogonadism, developmental delay and skeletal abnormalities along 
with sensory and cognitive deficits, but for many of these phenotypes it is 
uncertain, which are developmental in origin. A subset of BBS proteins assembles 
into the core BBSome complex, which is responsible for mediating transport of 
membrane proteins into and out of the cilium, establishing it as a sensory and 
signaling hub. Here, we describe two new mouse models for BBS resulting from a 
targeted LacZ gene trap allele (Bbs5-/-) that is a predicted congenital null 
mutation and conditional (Bbs5flox/flox) allele of Bbs5. Bbs5-/- mice develop a 
complex phenotype consisting of increased pre-weaning lethality craniofacial and 
skeletal defects, ventriculomegaly, infertility and pituitary anomalies. 
Utilizing the conditional allele, we show that the male fertility defects, 
ventriculomegaly and pituitary abnormalities are only present when Bbs5 is 
disrupted prior to postnatal day 7, indicating a developmental origin. In 
contrast, mutation of Bbs5 results in obesity, independent of the age of Bbs5 
loss.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddab039
PMCID: PMC8355464
PMID: 33560420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]