---
reference_id: "PMID:27741995"
title: Diagnosis and Treatment of Central Nervous System Infections in the Emergency Department.
authors:
- Dorsett M
- Liang SY
journal: Emerg Med Clin North Am
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.emc.2016.06.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Treatment of Central Nervous System Infections in the Emergency Department.
**Authors:** Dorsett M, Liang SY
**Journal:** Emerg Med Clin North Am (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.emc.2016.06.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emc.2016.06.013)

## Content

1. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2016 Nov;34(4):917-942. doi:
10.1016/j.emc.2016.06.013.

Diagnosis and Treatment of Central Nervous System Infections in the Emergency 
Department.

Dorsett M(1), Liang SY(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Emergency Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 
South Euclid Avenue, Campus Box 8072, St Louis, MO 64110, USA.
(2)Division of Emergency Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 
South Euclid Avenue, Campus Box 8072, St Louis, MO 64110, USA; Division of 
Infectious Diseases, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid 
Avenue, Campus Box 8051, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: 
sliang@dom.wustl.edu.

Erratum in
    Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2017 May;35(2):xix. doi: 10.1016/j.emc.2017.02.001.

Central nervous system (CNS) infections, including meningitis, encephalitis, and 
brain abscess, are rare but time-sensitive emergency department (ED) diagnoses. 
Patients with CNS infection can present to the ED with nonspecific signs and 
symptoms, including headache, fever, altered mental status, and behavioral 
changes. Neuroimaging and CSF fluid analysis can appear benign early in the 
course of disease. Delaying therapy negatively impacts outcomes, particularly 
with bacterial meningitis and herpes simplex virus encephalitis. Therefore, 
diagnosis of CNS infection requires vigilance and a high index of suspicion 
based on the history and physical examination, which must be confirmed with 
appropriate imaging and laboratory evaluation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.emc.2016.06.013
PMCID: PMC5082707
PMID: 27741995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.D. and S.Y.L. report no conflicts of interest 
in this work.