---
reference_id: "PMID:31053785"
title: "Variable expressivity of syndromic BMP4-related eye, brain, and digital anomalies: A review of the literature and description of three new cases."
authors:
- Blackburn PR
- Zepeda-Mendoza CJ
- Kruisselbrink TM
- Schimmenti LA
- García-Miñaur S
- Palomares M
- Nevado J
- Mori MA
- Le Meur G
- Klee EW
- Le Caignec C
- Lapunzina P
- Isidor B
- Babovic-Vuksanovic D
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0423-4
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- "Eye Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- Facies
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Infant
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Microcephaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable expressivity of syndromic BMP4-related eye, brain, and digital anomalies: A review of the literature and description of three new cases.
**Authors:** Blackburn PR, Zepeda-Mendoza CJ, Kruisselbrink TM, Schimmenti LA, García-Miñaur S, Palomares M, Nevado J, Mori MA, Le Meur G, Klee EW, Le Caignec C, Lapunzina P, Isidor B, Babovic-Vuksanovic D
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-019-0423-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0423-4)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2019 Sep;27(9):1379-1388. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0423-4.
Epub  2019 May 3.

Variable expressivity of syndromic BMP4-related eye, brain, and digital 
anomalies: A review of the literature and description of three new cases.

Blackburn PR(1)(2)(3), Zepeda-Mendoza CJ(3), Kruisselbrink TM(1)(4), Schimmenti 
LA(4)(5)(6), García-Miñaur S(7)(8), Palomares M(7)(8), Nevado J(7)(8), Mori 
MA(7)(8), Le Meur G(9), Klee EW(1)(2)(3)(4), Le Caignec C(10), Lapunzina 
P(7)(8), Isidor B(10), Babovic-Vuksanovic D(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Health Science Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(4)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(7)Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La 
Paz, IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain.
(8)CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, 
ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
(9)CHU Nantes, Service d'ophtalmologie, Nantes, France.
(10)CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France.
(11)Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
dbabovic@mayo.edu.
(12)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA. dbabovic@mayo.edu.
(13)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
dbabovic@mayo.edu.

Microphthalmia with brain and digital anomalies (MCOPS6, MIM# 607932) is an 
autosomal dominant disorder caused by loss-of-function variants or large 
deletions involving BMP4, which encodes bone morphogenetic protein 4, a member 
of the TGF-β protein superfamily. BMP4 has a number of roles in embryonic 
development including neurogenesis, lens induction, development of cartilage and 
bone, urogenital development, limb and digit patterning, hair follicle 
regeneration, as well as tooth formation. In addition to syndromic 
microphthalmia, BMP4 variants have been implicated in non-syndromic cleft lip 
with or without cleft palate and congenital healed cleft lip indicating 
different allelic presentations. MCOPS6 subjects may also lack some of the major 
phenotypic hallmarks of the disorder, including microphthalmia, indicating 
variable expressivity. As only a handful of individuals with MCOPS6 have been 
described, we review the clinical findings in previously reported cases with 
either deletions or loss-of-function variants in BMP4. We describe three new 
cases, including two subjects with novel deletions and one subject with a likely 
pathogenic de novo nonsense variant [c.1052C>G, p.(S351*)] in BMP4. One of the 
subjects had dual molecular diagnoses including a co-occurring microdeletion at 
17q21.31 associated with Koolen de Vries syndrome, which has a partially 
overlapping disease phenotype. None of these individuals had clinically apparent 
microphthalmia or anopthalmia, which have been reported in a majority of 
previously described cases. One subject had exophthalmia and strabismus, while 
another had bilateral Peters anomaly and sclerocornea, thus expanding the 
phenotype associated with BMP4 loss-of-function variants.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-019-0423-4
PMCID: PMC6777538
PMID: 31053785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.