---
reference_id: "PMID:28132947"
title: An Addison disease revealed with a serious hyponatremia.
authors:
- Maguet H
- Carreau A
- Hautefeuille S
- Bonnin P
- Beaune G
journal: Ann Biol Clin (Paris)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1684/abc.2016.1212
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Addison disease revealed with a serious hyponatremia.
**Authors:** Maguet H, Carreau A, Hautefeuille S, Bonnin P, Beaune G
**Journal:** Ann Biol Clin (Paris) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1684/abc.2016.1212](https://doi.org/10.1684/abc.2016.1212)

## Content

1. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2017 Feb 1;75(1):87-91. doi: 10.1684/abc.2016.1212.

An Addison disease revealed with a serious hyponatremia.

[Article in English]

Maguet H(1), Carreau A(2), Hautefeuille S(3), Bonnin P(4), Beaune G(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire.
(2)Unité d'endocrinologie.
(3)Service de réanimation.
(4)Service d'accueil urgence, Centre Hospitalier de la Région d'Annecy Genevois, 
Metz-Tessy, Pringy, France.

We present the case of an Addison's disease revealed by a serious hyponatremia. 
The serum concentration of ACTH and 21-hydroxylase antibodies were increased and 
lead to the diagnosis. The cortisol blood level was lowered but required to take 
into account the stress induced by the hospitalisation of the patient. Addison's 
disease is characterized by the destruction of the adrenal cortex. Autoimmune 
adrenalitis is the main cause of adrenal insufficiency. Treatment involves 
normalisation of sodium concentration and corticosteroids replacement. With a 
good patient compliance, the survival rate of Addisonian patient is similar to 
that of the normal population. Management of patient requires vigilance because 
of the occurrence of others autoimmunes diseases during patient life.

DOI: 10.1684/abc.2016.1212
PMID: 28132947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]