---
reference_id: "PMID:24906371"
title: "Zebrafish enpp1 mutants exhibit pathological mineralization, mimicking features of generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) and pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE)."
authors:
- Apschner A
- Huitema LF
- Ponsioen B
- Peterson-Maduro J
- Schulte-Merker S
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.015693
keywords:
- Animals
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Calcinosis/complications, drug therapy, enzymology"
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Choristoma/enzymology, pathology"
- "Etidronic Acid/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- Homeostasis/drug effects
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- "Notochord/drug effects, pathology"
- "Osteoclasts/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Phosphates/metabolism
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/complications, drug therapy, enzymology"
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- "Vascular Calcification/complications, drug therapy, enzymology"
- Zebrafish/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zebrafish enpp1 mutants exhibit pathological mineralization, mimicking features of generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) and pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE).
**Authors:** Apschner A, Huitema LF, Ponsioen B, Peterson-Maduro J, Schulte-Merker S
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.015693](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.015693)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2014 Jul;7(7):811-22. doi: 10.1242/dmm.015693. Epub 2014 Jun
6.

Zebrafish enpp1 mutants exhibit pathological mineralization, mimicking features
of generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) and pseudoxanthoma
elasticum (PXE).

Apschner A(1), Huitema LF(1), Ponsioen B(1), Peterson-Maduro J(1),
Schulte-Merker S(2).

Author information:
(1)Hubrecht Institute - KNAW & UMC Utrecht, 3548CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Hubrecht Institute - KNAW & UMC Utrecht, 3548CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.
WUR, Experimental Zoology, 3700AH Wageningen, The Netherlands. Institute of
Cardiovascular Organogenesis and Regeneration, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany. s.schulte@hubrecht.eu.

In recent years it has become clear that, mechanistically, biomineralization is
a process that has to be actively inhibited as a default state. This inhibition
must be released in a rigidly controlled manner in order for mineralization to
occur in skeletal elements and teeth. A central aspect of this concept is the
tightly controlled balance between phosphate, a constituent of the biomineral
hydroxyapatite, and pyrophosphate, a physiochemical inhibitor of mineralization.
Here, we provide a detailed analysis of a zebrafish mutant, dragonfish (dgf),
which is mutant for ectonucleoside pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (Enpp1),
a protein that is crucial for supplying extracellular pyrophosphate. Generalized
arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is a fatal human disease, and the
majority of cases are thought to be caused by mutations in ENPP1. Furthermore,
some cases of pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) have recently been linked to ENPP1.
Similar to humans, we show here that zebrafish enpp1 mutants can develop ectopic
calcifications in a variety of soft tissues - most notably in the skin,
cartilage elements, the heart, intracranial space and the notochord sheet. Using
transgenic reporter lines, we demonstrate that ectopic mineralizations in these
tissues occur independently of the expression of typical osteoblast or cartilage
markers. Intriguingly, we detect cells expressing the osteoclast markers Trap
and CathepsinK at sites of ectopic calcification at time points when osteoclasts
are not yet present in wild-type siblings. Treatment with the bisphosphonate
etidronate rescues aspects of the dgf phenotype, and we detected deregulated
expression of genes that are involved in phosphate homeostasis and
mineralization, such as fgf23, npt2a, entpd5 and spp1 (also known as
osteopontin). Employing a UAS-GalFF approach, we show that forced expression of
enpp1 in blood vessels or the floorplate of mutant embryos is sufficient to
rescue the notochord mineralization phenotype. This indicates that enpp1 can
exert its function in tissues that are remote from its site of expression.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.015693
PMCID: PMC4073271
PMID: 24906371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
