---
reference_id: "PMID:39239833"
title: Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals the important role of Dcaf17 in spermatogenesis of golden hamsters†.
authors:
- Ma R
- Liang S
- Zeng W
- Li J
- Lai Y
- Yang X
- Diao F
journal: Biol Reprod
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/biolre/ioae132
keywords:
- Animals
- Male
- Spermatogenesis/genetics
- Mesocricetus
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Cricetinae
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- "Infertility, Male/genetics"
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals the important role of Dcaf17 in spermatogenesis of golden hamsters†.
**Authors:** Ma R, Liang S, Zeng W, Li J, Lai Y, Yang X, Diao F
**Journal:** Biol Reprod (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/biolre/ioae132](https://doi.org/10.1093/biolre/ioae132)

## Content

1. Biol Reprod. 2024 Dec 12;111(6):1326-1340. doi: 10.1093/biolre/ioae132.

Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals the important role of Dcaf17 in 
spermatogenesis of golden hamsters†.

Ma R(1), Liang S(2), Zeng W(2), Li J(2), Lai Y(2), Yang X(1), Diao F(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health, Clinical 
Center of Reproductive Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Jiangsu Province, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health, Jiangsu 
Animal Experimental Center of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Cell Biology, 
Animal Core facility, Key Laboratory of Model Animal, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cardiovascular Disease Translational Medicine, National Vaccine 
Innovation Platform, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing  China.

Erratum in
    Biol Reprod. 2024 Nov 11;111(5):1169. doi: 10.1093/biolre/ioae144.

Dcaf17, also known as DDB1- and CUL4-associated factor 17, is a member of the 
DCAF family and acts as the receptor for the CRL4 ubiquitin E3 ligase complex. 
Several previous studies have reported that mutations in Dcaf17 cause 
Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome, which results in oligoasthenoteratozoospermia and 
male infertility. As a model to explore the role of Dcaf17 in the male 
reproductive system, we created Dcaf17-deficient male golden hamsters using 
CRISPR-Cas9 technology; the results of which demonstrate that deletion of Dcaf17 
led to abnormal spermatogenesis and infertility. To uncover the underlying 
molecular mechanisms involved, we conducted single cell Ribonucleic Acid 
sequencing analysis to evaluate the effect of Dcaf17 deficiency on 
transcriptional levels in spermatogenic cells during various stages of 
spermatogenesis. These data emphasize the significant regulatory role played by 
Dcaf17 in early spermatogenic cells, with many biological processes being 
affected, including spermatogenesis and protein degradation. Dysregulation of 
genes associated with these functions ultimately leads to abnormalities. In 
summary, our findings highlight the critical function of Dcaf17 in 
spermatogenesis and clarify the specific stage at which Dcaf17 exerts its 
effects, while simultaneously providing a novel animal model for the study of 
Dcaf17.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for the Study of Reproduction. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/biolre/ioae132
PMID: 39239833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]