---
reference_id: "PMID:28440867"
title: "The epileptology of Koolen-de Vries syndrome: Electro-clinico-radiologic findings in 31 patients."
authors:
- Myers KA
- Mandelstam SA
- Ramantani G
- Rushing EJ
- de Vries BB
- Koolen DA
- Scheffer IE
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/epi.13746
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroencephalography/drug effects
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Genetic Carrier Screening
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The epileptology of Koolen-de Vries syndrome: Electro-clinico-radiologic findings in 31 patients.
**Authors:** Myers KA, Mandelstam SA, Ramantani G, Rushing EJ, de Vries BB, Koolen DA, Scheffer IE
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.13746](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.13746)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2017 Jun;58(6):1085-1094. doi: 10.1111/epi.13746. Epub 2017 Apr 25.

The epileptology of Koolen-de Vries syndrome: Electro-clinico-radiologic 
findings in 31 patients.

Myers KA(1)(2), Mandelstam SA(3)(4)(5), Ramantani G(6)(7), Rushing EJ(8), de 
Vries BB(9), Koolen DA(9), Scheffer IE(1)(3)(5)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Epilepsy Research Centre, The University of 
Melbourne, Austin Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Section of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children's Hospital, 
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Radiology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(5)The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, 
Australia.
(6)Division of Child Neurology, University Children's Hospital, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(7)Swiss Epilepsy Center, Zurich, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Neuropathology, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behavior, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Neurology, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

OBJECTIVE: This study was designed to describe the spectrum of epilepsy 
phenotypes in Koolen-de Vries syndrome (KdVS), a genetic syndrome involving 
dysmorphic features, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and congenital 
malformations, that occurs secondary to 17q21.31 microdeletions and heterozygous 
mutations in KANSL1.
METHODS: We were invited to attend a large gathering of individuals with KdVS 
and their families. While there, we recruited individuals with KdVS and 
seizures, and performed thorough phenotyping. Additional subjects were included 
who approached us after the family support group brought attention to our 
research via social media. Inclusion criteria were genetic testing results 
demonstrating 17q21.31 deletion or KANSL1 mutation, and at least one seizure.
RESULTS: Thirty-one individuals were studied, aged 2-35 years. Median age at 
seizure onset was 3.5 years, and 9 of 22 had refractory seizures 2 years after 
onset. Focal impaired awareness seizures were the most frequent seizure type 
occurring in 20 of 31, usually with prominent autonomic features. Twenty-one 
patients had prolonged seizures and, at times, refractory status epilepticus. 
Electroencephalography (EEG) showed focal/multifocal epileptiform discharges in 
20 of 26. MRI studies of 13 patients were reviewed, and all had structural 
anomalies. Corpus callosum dysgenesis, abnormal hippocampi, and dilated 
ventricles were the most common, although periventricular nodular heterotopia, 
focal cortical dysplasia, abnormal sulcation, and brainstem and cerebellum 
abnormalities were also observed. One patient underwent epilepsy surgery for a 
lesion that proved to be an angiocentric glioma.
SIGNIFICANCE: The typical epilepsy phenotype of KdVS involves childhood-onset 
focal seizures that are prolonged and have prominent autonomic features. 
Multifocal epileptiform discharges are the typical EEG pattern. Structural brain 
abnormalities may be universal, including signs of abnormal neuroblast migration 
and abnormal axonal guidance. Epilepsy surgery should be undertaken with care 
given the widespread neuroanatomic abnormalities; however, tumors are a rare, 
yet important, occurrence.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2017 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.13746
PMID: 28440867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]