---
reference_id: "PMID:26731266"
title: Lys-315 at the Interfaces of Diagonal Subunits of δ-Crystallin Plays a Critical Role in the Reversibility of Folding and Subunit Assembly.
authors:
- Huang CW
- Lin HC
- Chou CY
- Kao WC
- Chou WY
- Lee HJ
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145957
keywords:
- Animals
- Geese
- "Lysine/chemistry, genetics"
- Molecular Dynamics Simulation
- Point Mutation
- Protein Aggregates
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Denaturation
- Protein Folding
- Protein Multimerization
- "Protein Subunits/chemistry, genetics"
- delta-Crystallins/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lys-315 at the Interfaces of Diagonal Subunits of δ-Crystallin Plays a Critical Role in the Reversibility of Folding and Subunit Assembly.
**Authors:** Huang CW, Lin HC, Chou CY, Kao WC, Chou WY, Lee HJ
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0145957](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145957)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 5;11(1):e0145957. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145957.
eCollection 2016.

Lys-315 at the Interfaces of Diagonal Subunits of δ-Crystallin Plays a Critical
Role in the Reversibility of Folding and Subunit Assembly.

Huang CW(1)(2), Lin HC(3), Chou CY(4), Kao WC(3), Chou WY(3), Lee HJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacy Division, Kaohsiung Armed Forces General Hospital, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

δ-Crystallin is the major structural protein in avian eye lenses and is
homologous to the urea cycle enzyme argininosuccinate lyase. This protein is
structurally assembled as double dimers. Lys-315 is the only residue which is
arranged symmetrically at the diagonal subunit interfaces to interact with each
other. This study found that wild-type protein had both dimers and monomers
present in 2-4 M urea whilst only monomers of the K315A mutant were observed
under the same conditions, as judged by sedimentation velocity analysis. The
assembly of monomeric K315A mutant was reversible in contrast to wild-type
protein. Molecular dynamics simulations showed that the dissociation of primary
dimers is prior to the diagonal dimers in wild-type protein. These results
suggest the critical role of Lys-315 in stabilization of the diagonal dimer
structure. Guanidinium hydrochloride (GdmCl) denatured wild-type or K315A mutant
protein did not fold into functional protein. However, the urea dissociated
monomers of K315A mutant protein in GdmCl were reversible folding through a
multiple steps mechanism as measured by tryptophan and ANS fluorescence. Two
partly unfolded intermediates were detected in the pathway. Refolding of the
intermediates resulted in a conformation with greater amounts of hydrophobic
regions exposed which was prone to the formation of protein aggregates. The
formation of aggregates was not prevented by the addition of α-crystallin. These
results highlight that the conformational status of the monomers is critical for
determining whether reversible oligomerization or aggregate formation occurs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145957
PMCID: PMC4701392
PMID: 26731266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
