---
reference_id: "PMID:29462280"
title: "Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection in Adults and Children: 2017 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA)."
authors:
- McDonald LC
- Gerding DN
- Johnson S
- Bakken JS
- Carroll KC
- Coffin SE
- Dubberke ER
- Garey KW
- Gould CV
- Kelly C
- Loo V
- Shaklee Sammons J
- Sandora TJ
- Wilcox MH
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/cid/cix1085
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection in Adults and Children: 2017 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA).
**Authors:** McDonald LC, Gerding DN, Johnson S, Bakken JS, Carroll KC, Coffin SE, Dubberke ER, Garey KW, Gould CV, Kelly C, Loo V, Shaklee Sammons J, Sandora TJ, Wilcox MH
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/cix1085](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cix1085)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2018 Mar 19;66(7):e1-e48. doi: 10.1093/cid/cix1085.

Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection in Adults and 
Children: 2017 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and 
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA).

McDonald LC(1), Gerding DN(2), Johnson S(2)(3), Bakken JS(4), Carroll KC(5), 
Coffin SE(6), Dubberke ER(7), Garey KW(8), Gould CV(1), Kelly C(9), Loo V(10), 
Shaklee Sammons J(6), Sandora TJ(11), Wilcox MH(12).

Author information:
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)Edward Hines Jr Veterans Administration Hospital, Hines.
(3)Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, Illinois.
(4)St Luke's Hospital, Duluth, Minnesota.
(5)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryl.
(6)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(7)Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri.
(8)University of Houston College of Pharmacy, Texas.
(9)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(10)McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada.
(11)Boston Children's Hospital, Massachusetts.
(12)Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2018 Oct 30;67(10):1640. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciy251.
    Clin Infect Dis. 2018 Oct 30;67(10):1639. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciy249.

A panel of experts was convened by the Infectious Diseases Society of America 
(IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA) to update the 
2010 clinical practice guideline on Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in 
adults. The update, which has incorporated recommendations for children 
(following the adult recommendations for epidemiology, diagnosis, and 
treatment), includes significant changes in the management of this infection and 
reflects the evolving controversy over best methods for diagnosis. Clostridium 
difficile remains the most important cause of healthcare-associated diarrhea and 
has become the most commonly identified cause of healthcare-associated infection 
in adults in the United States. Moreover, C. difficile has established itself as 
an important community pathogen. Although the prevalence of the epidemic and 
virulent ribotype 027 strain has declined markedly along with overall CDI rates 
in parts of Europe, it remains one of the most commonly identified strains in 
the United States where it causes a sizable minority of CDIs, especially 
healthcare-associated CDIs. This guideline updates recommendations regarding 
epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, infection prevention, and environmental 
management.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/cix1085
PMCID: PMC6018983
PMID: 29462280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]