---
reference_id: "PMID:40577679"
title: "Metachromatic Leukodystrophy: New Therapy Advancements and Emerging Research Directions."
authors:
- Asbreuk MABC
- Schoenmakers DH
- Adang LA
- Beerepoot S
- Bergner C
- Bley A
- Boelens JJ
- Bugiani M
- Calbi V
- García-Cazorla À
- Eklund EA
- Fumagalli F
- Grønborg SW
- Groeschel S
- Van Hasselt PM
- Hollak CEM
- Jones SA
- de Koning TJ
- van Kuilenburg ABP
- Laugwitz L
- Lindemans C
- Mochel F
- Øberg A
- Ram D
- Schöls L
- Sevin C
- Sinha J
- Vaz FM
- Zerem A
- Wolf NI
journal: Neurology
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000213817
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukodystrophy, Metachromatic/therapy, diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/methods
- Neonatal Screening
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metachromatic Leukodystrophy: New Therapy Advancements and Emerging Research Directions.
**Authors:** Asbreuk MABC, Schoenmakers DH, Adang LA, Beerepoot S, Bergner C, Bley A, Boelens JJ, Bugiani M, Calbi V, García-Cazorla À, Eklund EA, Fumagalli F, Grønborg SW, Groeschel S, Van Hasselt PM, Hollak CEM, Jones SA, de Koning TJ, van Kuilenburg ABP, Laugwitz L, Lindemans C, Mochel F, Øberg A, Ram D, Schöls L, Sevin C, Sinha J, Vaz FM, Zerem A, Wolf NI
**Journal:** Neurology (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000213817](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000213817)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2025 Jul 22;105(2):e213817. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000213817. Epub
 2025 Jun 27.

Metachromatic Leukodystrophy: New Therapy Advancements and Emerging Research 
Directions.

Asbreuk MABC(1)(2)(3), Schoenmakers DH(1)(2)(3), Adang LA(4)(5), Beerepoot 
S(1)(2)(6), Bergner C(7), Bley A(8), Boelens JJ(9), Bugiani M(10)(11), Calbi 
V(12)(13), García-Cazorla À(14), Eklund EA(15), Fumagalli F(12)(13)(16), 
Grønborg SW(17), Groeschel S(18), Van Hasselt PM(19), Hollak CEM(3)(20), Jones 
SA(21), de Koning TJ(15)(22)(23), van Kuilenburg ABP(24), Laugwitz L(25)(26), 
Lindemans C(6)(27)(28), Mochel F(29), Øberg A(30), Ram D(31), Schöls L(32)(33), 
Sevin C(34), Sinha J(35), Vaz FM(36)(37)(38), Zerem A(39), Wolf NI(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Neurology, Emma's Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC 
location Vrije Universiteit, the Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Cellular & Molecular 
Mechanisms, the Netherlands.
(3)Medicine for Society, Platform at Amsterdam UMC location University of 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(6)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(7)Leukodystrophy Center, Department of Neurology, University Hospital Leipzig, 
Germany.
(8)University Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Stem Cell Transplant and Cellular Therapies, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(10)Department of Paediatrics/Child Neurology, VU University Medical Centre, 
Amsterdam Neuroscience, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, the Netherlands.
(12)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-TIGET), Milan, Italy.
(13)Pediatric Immuno-Hematology Unit, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele Milan, Italy.
(14)Neurometabolic Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital Sant Joan de D'eu, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(15)Pediatrics, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Sweden.
(16)Unit of Neurology, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele Milan, Italy.
(17)Center for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine and Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University 
Hospital Rigshospitalet, Denmark.
(18)Neuropediatrics, General Pediatrics, Diabetology, Endocrinology and Social 
Pediatrics, University of Tübingen, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany.
(19)Department of Metabolic Diseases, University Medical Center Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(20)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Amsterdam UMC location 
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(21)Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS FT, United Kingdom.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, Lund University, Sweden.
(23)Department of Neurology and Genetics, University of Groningen and University 
of Medical Center Groningen, the Netherlands.
(24)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Department of Clinical Chemistry, 
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam Gastroenterology & 
Metabolism, the Netherlands.
(25)Neuropediatrics, General Pediatrics, Diabetology, Endocrinology and Social 
Pediatrics, University of Tuebingen, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany.
(26)Institute for Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, 
Germany.
(27)Department of Pediatric Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation, UMC Utrecht 
and Princess Maxima Center, the Netherlands.
(28)Regenerative Medicine Institute, University Medical Center Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(29)Reference Center for Adult Leukodystrophy, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Sorbonne University, Paris Brain Institute, La Pitié-Salpêtrière University 
Hospital, France.
(30)Norwegian National Unit for Newborn Screening, Division of Pediatric and 
Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Norway.
(31)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
United Kingdom.
(32)Department of Neurology and Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
University of Tübingen, Germany.
(33)German Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tübingen, Germany.
(34)Reference Center for Leukodystrophies, Pediatric Neurology Department, 
Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(35)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Center of Neurosciences, Narayana 
Hospital, RN Tagore Hospital, Kolkata, India.
(36)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC location University of 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(37)Amsterdam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, Inborn Errors of 
Metabolism, the Netherlands.
(38)Core Facility Metabolomics, Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands; and.
(39)Pediatric Neurology Institute, Leukodystrophy Center, Dana-Dwek Children's 
Hospital, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Israel.

Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal 
storage disorder caused by disease-causing variants in the gene coding for 
arylsulfatase A, leading to deficient enzyme activity and subsequent 
accumulation of sulfatides. MLD is characterized by demyelination and 
neurodegeneration of the central and peripheral nervous system, manifesting as 
progressive motor and cognitive defects in affected individuals. This review 
provides a comprehensive overview of the significant progress made in MLD 
research in the past decade, regarding natural history, disease and treatment 
mechanisms, and newborn screening (NBS). Traditionally, MLD has been classified 
according to age at onset (late-infantile, early-juvenile and late-juvenile, and 
adult MLD), with earlier forms leading to more rapid neurologic decline. New 
data show that the type of presenting symptoms further influences the dynamic of 
disease progression. Patients with a cognitive presentation have a much slower 
or even no motor decline than patients with a mixed motor and cognitive 
presentation. Research advancements have enabled improved understanding of the 
effects of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and the 
development of novel therapeutic approaches, including hematopoietic stem cell 
gene therapy, which is now authorized in the EU, United Kingdom, and United 
States as treatment for selected patients with early-onset forms of MLD. Both 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy 
are most effective when administered before disease onset. To identify 
presymptomatic patients, NBS for MLD is becoming available in several countries, 
resulting in new challenges. Decisions regarding patient eligibility for these 
treatments in already symptomatic individuals, as well as the timing of 
treatment for patients identified through NBS, require thorough understanding of 
disease progression. Biomarkers may be helpful for disease staging and 
prediction of disease evolution. Moreover, apart from timing, challenges remain 
regarding optimal treatment strategies across MLD subtypes, especially 
late-onset MLD, and management of the clinical heterogeneity and course of the 
disease. Another important issue is ensuring therapy accessibility, which forms 
a substantial barrier for equitable care. Continued research and international 
collaboration are essential to address these challenges, with the goal of 
improving care and outcomes for patients with MLD and their families.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000213817
PMCID: PMC12205745
PMID: 40577679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.A.B.C. Asbreuk, D.H. Schoenmakers, L.A. Adang, 
S. Beerepoot, C. Bergner, A. Bley, J.J. Boelens, V. Calbi, A. García-Cazorla, 
E.A. Eklund, F. Fumagalli, S.W. Grønborg, S. Groeschel, P.M. Van Hasselt, C.E.M. 
Hollak, S.A. Jones, T.J. de Koning, L. Laugwitz, C. Lindemans, F. Mochel, A. 
Øberg, D. Ram, L. Schöls, C. Sevin, A. Zerem, and N.I. Wolf are members of the 
MLD initiative, which is an academic registry and collaborative platform for 
metachromatic leukodystrophy. The MLD initiative was a case study at the program 
“Managing patient registries for expensive drugs” and received funding from the 
Dutch Healthcare Institute between April 2021 and March 2027. N.I. Wolf is an 
advisor and/or coinvestigator for premarketing clinical trials in metachromatic 
leukodystrophy and other leukodystrophies (Shire/Takeda, Orchard, Ionis, 
PassageBio, VigilNeuro, Sana Biotech, Lilly), without personal payment. M.A.B.C. 
Asbreuk, D.H. Schoenmakers, and C.E.M. Hollak are members of platform “Medicijn 
voor de Maatschappij,” an academic initiative to support sustainable access to 
medicines for rare diseases. This platform is financially supported by a grant 
from “de Nationale Postcode Loterij,” a National Lottery that distributes funds 
raised by this lottery for good causes primarily concerning health and welfare 
in Netherlands. L.A. Adang is a consultant and/or coinvestigator for clinical 
trials in metachromatic leukodystrophy and other leukodystrophies (Shire/Takeda, 
Orchard Therapeutics, Ionis, Lilly). A. Bley is a site subinvestigator for the 
Takeda SHP611 trial; and received travelling support from Orchard-Tx. J.J. 
Boelens received consulting fees from Sobi, Sanofi, SmartImmune, and Merck. V. 
Calbi and F. Fumagalli are investigators of haematopoietic stem cell gene 
therapy clinical trials for MLD sponsored by Orchard Therapeutics, the license 
holder of investigational medicinal product OTL-200. Both are ad hoc consultants 
for the advisory board of Orchard Therapeutics. A. García-Cazorla has 
participated in an advisory board organized by Orchard Therapeutics. E.A. Eklund 
participated in several advisory boards arranged by Orchard Therapeutics. S.W. 
Grønborg participated in an Orchard Therapeutics advisory board. S. Groeschel 
received institutional research grants from Shire (a Takeda company) and Orchard 
Therapeutics; and is an advisor for Clario and Orchard Therapeutics, without 
personal payments. C.E.M. Hollak is involved in pre-marketing studies with 
pharmaceutical companies (Sanofi, Protalix, Idorsia) without personal fees. S.A. 
Jones is an investigator and consultant for Orchard and Takeda. T.J. de Koning 
has received an unrestricted grant and speaker fee from PTC Pharmaceuticals, 
unrelated to MLD; and received a grant from the Dutch Brain Foundation 
(DR_2023-00428 on progressive myoclonus epilepsy). C. Lindemans is an ad hoc 
advisor in Orchard Therapeutics and Bluebird Bio expertise panels. F. Mochel 
participated in advisory boards arranged by Minoryx Therapeutics and Vigil 
Neuroscience; and her research work is funded by the French Ministry of Health 
(PHRC), the French Ministry of Research (ANR), the Paris Brain Institute, and 
Minoryx Therapeutics. D. Ram is a principal investigator of the Takeda clinical 
trial and consultant for Orchard Therapeutics. L. Schöls is consultant to Vico 
Therapeutics, Alexion, and Novartis; and is a site principal investigator for 
trials of Vigil Neuroscience, Stealth Biotherapeutics, and PTC Therapeutics, all 
unrelated to MLD. C. Sevin is an advisor and/or investigator for clinical trials 
in MLD and other leukodystrophies (Bluebird Bio, Shire/Takeda, Minoryx 
Therapeutics, Orchard, Ionis). A. Zerem is a coinvestigator for clinical trials 
in MLD and other leukodystrophies (Shire/Takeda, Ionis, Minoryx Therapeutics). 
F.M. Vaz is a consultant for Scenic Biotech. All other authors report no 
disclosures relevant to the manuscript. Go to Neurology.org/N for full 
disclosures.