---
reference_id: "PMID:39591193"
title: Human Papillomavirus-Related Cancer Vaccine Strategies.
authors:
- Cai X
- Xu L
journal: Vaccines (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/vaccines12111291
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Papillomavirus-Related Cancer Vaccine Strategies.
**Authors:** Cai X, Xu L
**Journal:** Vaccines (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/vaccines12111291](https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines12111291)

## Content

1. Vaccines (Basel). 2024 Nov 19;12(11):1291. doi: 10.3390/vaccines12111291.

Human Papillomavirus-Related Cancer Vaccine Strategies.

Cai X(1), Xu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynaecology, Minhang Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 
201199, China.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus (HPV) persistent infection is a major 
pathogenic factor for HPV-related cancers, such as cervical cancer (CC), vaginal 
cancer, vulvar cancer, anal cancer, penile cancer, and head and neck cancer 
(HNC). Since the introduction of the world's first prophylactic HPV vaccine, 
there has been a decline in the incidence of HPV infections and associated 
cancers. This article reviews the latest literature on the research progress, 
efficacy, and safety of HPV vaccines for these cancers, providing a reference 
for HPV vaccination strategy.
METHODS: By utilizing databases such as PubMed, Google Scholar, CNKI, and 
Wanfang, we conducted a literature search on research papers related to HPV 
vaccines from 2014 to 2024, employing keywords such as "HPV", "HPV vaccine", 
"CC", "vaginal cancer", "vulvar cancer", "anal cancer", "penile cancer" and 
"HNC". Additionally, we reviewed the latest information available on official 
websites, including the World Health Organization (WHO). Based on the quality 
and relevance of the papers, we selected over 100 of the most representative 
articles for further summarization and analysis.
RESULTS: Vaccination against HPV can effectively block the transmission of the 
virus and prevent HPV-related cancers. Current studies have confirmed the 
efficacy and safety of prophylactic HPV vaccination. However, numerous 
challenges remain. The global vaccination rate for preventive vaccines remains 
low, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. Nonetheless, in the 
future, we can enhance the accessibility, affordability, and coverage of HPV 
vaccines by expanding the indications of already licensed vaccines, continuously 
developing new vaccines.
CONCLUSIONS: The HPV vaccine is an extremely effective measure for the 
prevention and treatment of HPV-related cancers. Although there are many 
challenges in expanding the coverage of the HPV vaccine. It is believed that in 
the not-too-distant future, both prophylactic and therapeutic HPV vaccines will 
achieve commendable results.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines12111291
PMCID: PMC11598756
PMID: 39591193

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.