---
reference_id: "PMID:37854153"
title: "First-line versus second-line use of pralsetinib in treatment of rearranged during transfection (RET) fusion-positive advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a cost-effectiveness analysis."
authors:
- Liu W
- Huo G
- Li M
- Chen P
journal: Transl Lung Cancer Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.21037/tlcr-23-469
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First-line versus second-line use of pralsetinib in treatment of rearranged during transfection (RET) fusion-positive advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a cost-effectiveness analysis.
**Authors:** Liu W, Huo G, Li M, Chen P
**Journal:** Transl Lung Cancer Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tlcr-23-469](https://doi.org/10.21037/tlcr-23-469)

## Content

1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2023 Sep 28;12(9):1949-1958. doi:
10.21037/tlcr-23-469.  Epub 2023 Sep 21.

First-line versus second-line use of pralsetinib in treatment of rearranged
during transfection (RET) fusion-positive advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a
cost-effectiveness analysis.

Liu W(#)(1), Huo G(#)(1), Li M(#)(1), Chen P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute
and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Key Laboratory of
Cancer Prevention and Therapy of Tianjin, Tianjin's Clinical Research Center for
Cancer, Tianjin, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The ARROW study demonstrated favorable clinical efficacy and safety
of pralsetinib (PRL) in treating rearranged during transfection (RET) fusion
positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in clinical trials. However, due to
the high cost of PRL, evaluating its cost-effective characteristics is crucial.
Currently, there has been no cost-effectiveness analysis specifically for PRL.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to assess the cost-effectiveness
characteristics of using PRL as a first-line therapy versus reserving it until
the second-line versus solely relying on chemotherapy from the perspective of
payers in the United States.
METHODS: A Markov model was developed to evaluate the 3 above mentioned
PRL-based treatment strategies. Clinical data from the ARROW trial were
incorporated into the model, and costs and utilities values were obtained
through previously published literature and public databases, with both being
discounted at 3% per year. To ensure the robustness of the model, both
probabilistic and univariate sensitivity analyses were performed. The primary
endpoints included quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), lifetime costs, and
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER).
RESULTS: Compared to chemotherapy, the use of PRL in the first-line therapy
resulted in an additional 0.07 QALYs at a cost of $133,561, with an ICER of
$1,353,849.65 per QALY. Similarly, when used in the second-line setting, PRL led
to an additional 0.09 QALYs at a cost of $92,797, with an ICER of $559,232.70
per QALY. The ICER value in the first-line or in the second-line therapy
strategy was higher than the US willingness-to-pay (WTP) threshold of $150,000
per QALY. Univariable sensitivity analyses revealed that the cost of PRL and the
utility of progressed disease had the most significant impact on the ICER. To be
considered cost-effective at a WTP threshold of $150,000 per QALY, the cost of
PRL would need to be reduced by 71.34% in first-line treatment or 84.49% in
second-line treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on current pricing, neither PRL as first-line nor second-line
therapy was found to be cost-effective for patients with RET fusion-positive
advanced NSCLC compared to chemotherapy. Reserving PRL until second-line therapy
may be a compromise approach to maintaining control over healthcare expenses yet
still achieving favorable clinical outcomes.

2023 Translational Lung Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr-23-469
PMCID: PMC10579832
PMID: 37854153

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://tlcr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tlcr-23-469/coif). The authors
have no conflicts of interest to declare.
