---
reference_id: "PMID:36898382"
title: "The role of UBE3A in the autism and epilepsy-related Dup15q syndrome using patient-derived, CRISPR-corrected neurons."
authors:
- Elamin M
- Dumarchey A
- Stoddard C
- Robinson TM
- Cowie C
- Gorka D
- Chamberlain SJ
- Levine ES
journal: Stem Cell Reports
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.02.002
keywords:
- Humans
- "Autistic Disorder/genetics, metabolism"
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of UBE3A in the autism and epilepsy-related Dup15q syndrome using patient-derived, CRISPR-corrected neurons.
**Authors:** Elamin M, Dumarchey A, Stoddard C, Robinson TM, Cowie C, Gorka D, Chamberlain SJ, Levine ES
**Journal:** Stem Cell Reports (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.02.002)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Reports. 2023 Apr 11;18(4):884-898. doi:
10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.02.002.  Epub 2023 Mar 9.

The role of UBE3A in the autism and epilepsy-related Dup15q syndrome using
patient-derived, CRISPR-corrected neurons.

Elamin M(1), Dumarchey A(2), Stoddard C(2), Robinson TM(1), Cowie C(1), Gorka
D(2), Chamberlain SJ(2), Levine ES(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut School of Medicine,
Farmington, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, University of Connecticut School
of Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut School of Medicine,
Farmington, CT, USA. Electronic address: eslevine@uchc.edu.

Chromosome 15q11-q13 duplication syndrome (Dup15q) is a neurodevelopmental
disorder caused by maternal duplications of this region. Autism and epilepsy are
key features of Dup15q. UBE3A, which encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase, is likely a
major driver of Dup15q because UBE3A is the only imprinted gene expressed solely
from the maternal allele. Nevertheless, the exact role of UBE3A has not been
determined. To establish whether UBE3A overexpression is required for Dup15q
neuronal deficits, we generated an isogenic control line for a Dup15q
patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cell line. Dup15q neurons exhibited
hyperexcitability compared with control neurons, and this phenotype was
generally prevented by normalizing UBE3A levels using antisense
oligonucleotides. Overexpression of UBE3A resulted in a profile similar to that
of Dup15q neurons except for synaptic phenotypes. These results indicate that
UBE3A overexpression is necessary for most Dup15q cellular phenotypes but also
suggest a role for other genes in the duplicated region.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.02.002
PMCID: PMC10147551
PMID: 36898382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests S.J.C. is an employee of
Roche and shareholder of Ovid Therapeutics. E.S.L. is a member of the scientific
advisory board of Kicho.
