---
reference_id: "PMID:37254024"
title: Guideline-Directed Medical Therapy for the Treatment of Heart Failure with Reduced Ejection Fraction.
authors:
- Patel J
- Rassekh N
- Fonarow GC
- Deedwania P
- Sheikh FH
- Ahmed A
- Lam PH
journal: Drugs
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40265-023-01887-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Guideline-Directed Medical Therapy for the Treatment of Heart Failure with Reduced Ejection Fraction.
**Authors:** Patel J, Rassekh N, Fonarow GC, Deedwania P, Sheikh FH, Ahmed A, Lam PH
**Journal:** Drugs (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40265-023-01887-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-023-01887-4)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2023 Jun;83(9):747-759. doi: 10.1007/s40265-023-01887-4. Epub 2023 May 
31.

Guideline-Directed Medical Therapy for the Treatment of Heart Failure with 
Reduced Ejection Fraction.

Patel J(#)(1)(2), Rassekh N(#)(1), Fonarow GC(3), Deedwania P(4), Sheikh 
FH(1)(2), Ahmed A(2)(5)(6), Lam PH(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)MedStar Heart and Vascular Institute, MedStar Washington Hospital Center, 110 
Irving St. NW, Washington, DC, 20010, USA.
(2)Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.
(6)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.
(7)MedStar Heart and Vascular Institute, MedStar Washington Hospital Center, 110 
Irving St. NW, Washington, DC, 20010, USA. Phillip.H.Lam@medstar.net.
(8)Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA. Phillip.H.Lam@medstar.net.
(9)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA. 
Phillip.H.Lam@medstar.net.
(#)Contributed equally

Guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) is the cornerstone of pharmacological 
therapy for patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) 
and consists of the four main drug classes: renin-angiotensin system inhibitors, 
evidence-based β-blockers, mineralocorticoid inhibitors and sodium glucose 
cotransporter 2 inhibitors. The recommendation for use of GDMT is based on the 
results of multiple major randomized controlled trials demonstrating improved 
clinical outcomes in patients with HFrEF who are maintained on this therapy. The 
effect is most beneficial when medications from the four main drug classes are 
used in conjunction. Despite this, there is an underutilization of GDMT, 
partially due to lack of awareness of how to safely and effectively initiate and 
titrate these medications. In this review article, we describe the different 
drug classes included in GDMT and offer an approach to initiation and effective 
titration in both the inpatient as well as outpatient setting.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-023-01887-4
PMID: 37254024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]