---
reference_id: "PMID:35483357"
title: Tuning levels of low-complexity domain interactions to modulate endogenous oncogenic transcription.
authors:
- Chong S
- Graham TGW
- Dugast-Darzacq C
- Dailey GM
- Darzacq X
- Tjian R
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2022.04.007
keywords:
- Animals
- Carcinogenesis/genetics
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- Mammals/metabolism
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/drug therapy, genetics"
- Transcriptional Activation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuning levels of low-complexity domain interactions to modulate endogenous oncogenic transcription.
**Authors:** Chong S, Graham TGW, Dugast-Darzacq C, Dailey GM, Darzacq X, Tjian R
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2022.04.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2022.04.007)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2022 Jun 2;82(11):2084-2097.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2022.04.007.
Epub 2022 Apr 27.

Tuning levels of low-complexity domain interactions to modulate endogenous
oncogenic transcription.

Chong S(1), Graham TGW(2), Dugast-Darzacq C(3), Dailey GM(3), Darzacq X(3),
Tjian R(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; CIRM Center of Excellence, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; Li Ka Shing Center for Biomedical
& Health Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA;
CIRM Center of Excellence, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA. Electronic address: jmlim@berkeley.edu.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2022 Jun 2;82(11):1974-1975. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2022.05.015.

Gene activation by mammalian transcription factors (TFs) requires multivalent
interactions of their low-complexity domains (LCDs), but how such interactions
regulate transcription remains unclear. It has been proposed that extensive
LCD-LCD interactions culminating in liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of TFs
is the dominant mechanism underlying transactivation. Here, we investigated how
tuning the amount and localization of LCD-LCD interactions in vivo affects
transcription of endogenous human genes. Quantitative single-cell and
single-molecule imaging reveals that the oncogenic TF EWS::FLI1 requires a
narrow optimum of LCD-LCD interactions to activate its target genes associated
with GGAA microsatellites. Increasing LCD-LCD interactions toward putative LLPS
represses transcription of these genes in patient-derived cells. Likewise,
ectopically creating LCD-LCD interactions to sequester EWS::FLI1 into a
well-documented LLPS compartment, the nucleolus, inhibits EWS::FLI1-driven
transcription and oncogenic transformation. Our findings show how altering the
balance of LCD-LCD interactions can influence transcriptional regulation and
suggest a potential therapeutic strategy for targeting disease-causing TFs.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2022.04.007
PMID: 35483357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests R. Tjian and X. Darzacq
are co-founders of Eikon Therapeutics.
