---
reference_id: PMID:36715085
title: Neuropathology of microbleeds in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL).
authors:
- Magaki S
- Chen Z
- Severance A
- Williams CK
- Diaz R
- Fang C
- Khanlou N
- Yong WH
- Paganini-Hill A
- Kalaria RN
- Vinters HV
- Fisher M
journal: J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/jnen/nlad004
keywords:
- Humans
- "CADASIL/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Hemosiderin
- "Cerebral Infarction/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Leukoencephalopathies/pathology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Cerebral Hemorrhage/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Iron
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathology of microbleeds in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL).
**Authors:** Magaki S, Chen Z, Severance A, Williams CK, Diaz R, Fang C, Khanlou N, Yong WH, Paganini-Hill A, Kalaria RN, Vinters HV, Fisher M
**Journal:** J Neuropathol Exp Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnen/nlad004](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnen/nlad004)

## Content

1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2023 Mar 20;82(4):333-344. doi:
10.1093/jnen/nlad004.

Neuropathology of microbleeds in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with 
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL).

Magaki S(1), Chen Z(1), Severance A(1), Williams CK(1), Diaz R(1), Fang C(2), 
Khanlou N(1), Yong WH(1), Paganini-Hill A(2), Kalaria RN(3), Vinters 
HV(1)(4)(5), Fisher M(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center and David Geffen School of Medicine, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of California-Irvine School of Medicine, 
Irvine, California, USA.
(3)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University, Campus 
for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(4)Department of Neurology, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center and David Geffen 
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(5)Brain Research Institute, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center and David Geffen 
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
California-Irvine School of Medicine, Irvine, California, USA.

Cerebral microbleeds (CMBs) detected on magnetic resonance imaging are common in 
patients with cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts 
and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL). The neuropathologic correlates of CMBs are 
unclear. In this study, we characterized findings relevant to CMBs in autopsy 
brain tissue of 8 patients with genetically confirmed CADASIL and 10 controls 
within the age range of the CADASIL patients by assessing the distribution and 
extent of hemosiderin/iron deposits including perivascular hemosiderin leakage 
(PVH), capillary hemosiderin deposits, and parenchymal iron deposits (PID) in 
the frontal cortex and white matter, basal ganglia and cerebellum. We also 
characterized infarcts, vessel wall thickening, and severity of vascular smooth 
muscle cell degeneration. CADASIL subjects had a significant increase in 
hemosiderin/iron deposits compared with controls. This increase was principally 
seen with PID. Hemosiderin/iron deposits were seen in the majority of CADASIL 
subjects in all brain areas. PVH was most pronounced in the frontal white matter 
and basal ganglia around small to medium sized arterioles, with no predilection 
for the vicinity of vessels with severe vascular changes or infarcts. CADASIL 
subjects have increased brain hemosiderin/iron deposits but these do not occur 
in a periarteriolar distribution. Pathogenesis of these lesions remains 
uncertain.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jnen/nlad004
PMCID: PMC10025882
PMID: 36715085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no duality or conflicts of 
interest to declare.