---
reference_id: "PMID:37924280"
title: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Vertebral Artery Injury After Cervical Spine Trauma.
authors:
- Goyal K
- Sunny JT
- Gillespie CS
- Wilby M
- Clark SR
- Kaiser R
- Fehlings MG
- Srikandarajah N
journal: Global Spine J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/21925682231209631
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Vertebral Artery Injury After Cervical Spine Trauma.
**Authors:** Goyal K, Sunny JT, Gillespie CS, Wilby M, Clark SR, Kaiser R, Fehlings MG, Srikandarajah N
**Journal:** Global Spine J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/21925682231209631](https://doi.org/10.1177/21925682231209631)

## Content

1. Global Spine J. 2024 May;14(4):1356-1368. doi: 10.1177/21925682231209631. Epub
 2023 Nov 4.

A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Vertebral Artery Injury After Cervical 
Spine Trauma.

Goyal K(1)(2), Sunny JT(1)(3), Gillespie CS(1)(4), Wilby M(1), Clark SR(1), 
Kaiser R(5), Fehlings MG(6), Srikandarajah N(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, 
Liverpool, UK.
(2)Northern General Hospital, Sheffield Teaching Hospital Trusts, Sheffield, UK.
(3)Cambridge University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Addenbrooke's Hospital, 
Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery and Neurooncology, First Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University and Military University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Division of Neurosurgery and Spine Program, Department of Surgery, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, Liverpool, UK.

STUDY DESIGN: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
OBJECTIVE: Identify the incidence, mechanism of injury, investigations, 
management, and outcomes of Vertebral Artery Injury (VAI) after cervical spine 
trauma.
METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted in accordance with 
the PRISMA guidelines (PROSPERO-ID CRD42021295265). Three databases were 
searched (PubMed, SCOPUS, Google Scholar, CINAHL PLUS). Incidence of VAI, 
investigations to diagnose (Computed Tomography Angiography, Digital Subtraction 
Angiography, Magnetic Resonance Angiography), stroke incidence, and management 
paradigms (conservative, antiplatelets, anticoagulants, surgical, endovascular 
treatment) were delineated. Incidence was calculated using pooled proportions 
random effects meta-analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 44 studies were included (1777 patients). 20-studies (n = 
503) included data on trauma type; 75.5% (n = 380) suffered blunt trauma and 
24.5% (n = 123) penetrating. The overall incidence of VAI was .95% (95% CI 
0.65-1.29). From the 16 studies which reported data on outcomes, 8.87% (95% CI 
5.34- 12.99) of patients with VAI had a posterior stroke. Of the 33 studies with 
investigation data, 91.7% (2929/3629) underwent diagnostic CTA; 7.5% (242/3629) 
underwent MRA and 3.0% (98/3629) underwent DSA. Management data from 20 papers 
(n = 475) showed 17.9% (n = 85) undergoing conservative therapy, anticoagulation 
in 14.1% (n = 67), antiplatelets in 16.4% (n = 78), combined therapy in 25.5% (n 
= 121) and the rest (n = 124) managed using surgical and endovascular 
treatments.
CONCLUSION: VAI in cervical spine trauma has an approximate posterior 
circulation stroke risk of 9%. Optimal management paradigms for the prevention 
and management of VAI are yet to be standardized and require further research.

DOI: 10.1177/21925682231209631
PMCID: PMC11289537
PMID: 37924280

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.