---
reference_id: "PMID:30513392"
title: "Tuberculous neck lymphadenopathy: A diagnostic challenge."
authors:
- Brucoli M
- Borello G
- Boffano P
- Benech A
journal: J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jormas.2018.11.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculous neck lymphadenopathy: A diagnostic challenge.
**Authors:** Brucoli M, Borello G, Boffano P, Benech A
**Journal:** J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jormas.2018.11.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jormas.2018.11.012)

## Content

1. J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2019 Jun;120(3):267-269. doi: 
10.1016/j.jormas.2018.11.012. Epub 2018 Dec 1.

Tuberculous neck lymphadenopathy: A diagnostic challenge.

Brucoli M(1), Borello G(2), Boffano P(1), Benech A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, 
Italy.
(2)Division of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, 
Italy.

Tuberculosis (TB) continues to be a major health problem for the developing 
world and a rise in the number of cases has been noted in the western hemisphere 
too. TB can affect most organs in the head and neck region, such as the lymph 
nodes, larynx, middle ear, oral cavity and pharynx. In particular, as for 
cervical tuberculosis lymphadenopathy, a predominant involvement of the 
posterior triangle, supraclavicular, and internal jugular group of nodes 
bilaterally can be observed. As the early manifestation of Head and Neck TB is 
often similar to neoplasms, clinical consideration usually occurs only after an 
ineffective anti-inflammatory treatment, fine-needle aspiration, or 
biopsy/resection. In fact, this type of presentation often represents a 
diagnostic and therapeutic challenge to the clinician. Therefore, the aim of the 
present article is to present and discuss the management of a case of cervical 
tuberculosis lymphadenopathy.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jormas.2018.11.012
PMID: 30513392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]