---
reference_id: "PMID:27267311"
title: Epilepsy in KCNH1-related syndromes.
authors:
- Mastrangelo M
- Scheffer IE
- Bramswig NC
- Nair LD
- Myers CT
- Dentici ML
- Korenke GC
- Schoch K
- Campeau PM
- White SM
- Shashi V
- Kansagra S
- Van Essen AJ
- Leuzzi V
journal: Epileptic Disord
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1684/epd.2016.0830
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epilepsy in KCNH1-related syndromes.
**Authors:** Mastrangelo M, Scheffer IE, Bramswig NC, Nair LD, Myers CT, Dentici ML, Korenke GC, Schoch K, Campeau PM, White SM, Shashi V, Kansagra S, Van Essen AJ, Leuzzi V
**Journal:** Epileptic Disord (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1684/epd.2016.0830](https://doi.org/10.1684/epd.2016.0830)

## Content

1. Epileptic Disord. 2016 Jun 1;18(2):123-36. doi: 10.1684/epd.2016.0830.

Epilepsy in KCNH1-related syndromes.

Mastrangelo M(1), Scheffer IE(2), Bramswig NC(3), Nair LD(4), Myers CT(5), 
Dentici ML(6), Korenke GC(7), Schoch K(8), Campeau PM(9), White SM(10), Shashi 
V(8), Kansagra S(11), Van Essen AJ(12), Leuzzi V(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology Division Department of Pediatrics, Child Neurology and 
Psychiatry, Sapienza-University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Florey Institute and University of Melbourne, Austin Health and Royal 
Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Saveetha Medical College, Chennai, India.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(7)Klinik für Neuropädiatrie, Klinikum Oldenburg, Germany.
(8)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada.
(10)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, Department of 
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(11)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, USA.
(12)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, The Netherlands.

KCNH1 mutations have been identified in patients with Zimmermann-Laband syndrome 
and Temple-Baraitser syndrome, as well as patients with uncharacterized 
syndromes with intellectual disability and overlapping features. These syndromes 
include dysmorphic facial features, nail hypo/aplasia, thumb and skeletal 
anomalies, intellectual disability, and seizures. We report the epilepsy 
phenotype in patients with KCNH1 mutations. Demographic data, electroclinical 
features, response to antiepileptic drugs, and results of significant diagnostic 
investigations of nine patients carrying mutations in KCNH1 were obtained from 
referring centres. Epilepsy was present in 7/9 patients. Both generalized and 
focal tonic-clonic seizures were observed. Complete seizure control was achieved 
with pharmacological treatment in 2/7 patients; polytherapy was required in 4/7 
patients. Status epilepticus occurred in 4/7 patients. EEG showed a diffusely 
slow background in 7/7 patients with epilepsy, with variable epileptiform 
abnormalities. Cerebral folate deficiency and an increase in urinary 
hypoxanthine and uridine were observed in one patient. Epilepsy is a key 
phenotypic feature in most individuals with KCNH1-related syndromes, suggesting 
a direct role of KCNH1 in epileptogenesis, although the underlying mechanism is 
not understood.

DOI: 10.1684/epd.2016.0830
PMID: 27267311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]