---
reference_id: "PMID:20495147"
title: NFATc3 contributes to intermittent hypoxia-induced arterial remodeling in mice.
authors:
- de Frutos S
- Caldwell E
- Nitta CH
- Kanagy NL
- Wang J
- Wang W
- Walker MK
- Gonzalez Bosc LV
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00341.2010
keywords:
- "1-(5-Isoquinolinesulfonyl)-2-Methylpiperazine/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Actins/metabolism
- Animals
- "Aorta, Thoracic/drug effects, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Bosentan
- Dioxoles/pharmacology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endothelin A Receptor Antagonists
- Endothelin-1/metabolism
- "Genes, Reporter"
- Hemodynamics
- "Hyperoxia/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Hypertension/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Mesenteric Arteries/drug effects, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "NFATC Transcription Factors/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Receptor, Endothelin A/metabolism"
- Sulfonamides/pharmacology
- Time Factors
- "rho-Associated Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NFATc3 contributes to intermittent hypoxia-induced arterial remodeling in mice.
**Authors:** de Frutos S, Caldwell E, Nitta CH, Kanagy NL, Wang J, Wang W, Walker MK, Gonzalez Bosc LV
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00341.2010](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00341.2010)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010 Aug;299(2):H356-63. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00341.2010. Epub 2010 May 21.

NFATc3 contributes to intermittent hypoxia-induced arterial remodeling in mice.

de Frutos S(1), Caldwell E, Nitta CH, Kanagy NL, Wang J, Wang W, Walker MK,
Gonzalez Bosc LV.

Author information:
(1)Vascular Physiology Group, Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, School
of Medicine, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Sleep apnea (SA) is defined as intermittent respiratory arrest during sleep and
affects up to 20% of the adult population. SA is also associated with an
increased incidence of hypertension and peripheral vascular disease. Exposing
rodents to intermittent hypoxia during sleep mimics the cyclical
hypoxia/normoxia of SA. We have previously shown that in mice and rats
intermittent hypoxia induces ET-1 upregulation and systemic hypertension.
Furthermore, intermittent hypoxia (IH) in mice increases nuclear factor of
activated T cells isoform 3 (NFATc3) transcriptional activity in aorta and
mesenteric arteries, whereas the calcineurin/NFAT inhibitor cyclosporin A
prevents IH-induced hypertension. More importantly, NFATc3 knockout (KO) mice do
not develop IH-induced hypertension. The goals of this study were to determine
the role of NFATc3 in IH-induced arterial remodeling and whether IH-induced
NFATc3 activation is mediated by ET-1. Oral administration of both a dual
(bosentan) and a selective endothelin receptor type A antagonist (PD155080)
during 2 days of IH exposure attenuated NFAT activation in aorta and mesenteric
arteries. Rho kinase inhibition with fasudil also prevented IH-induced NFAT
activation. Mesenteric artery cross-sectional wall thickness was increased by IH
in wild-type (WT) and vehicle-treated mice but not in bosentan-treated and
NFATc3 KO mice. The arterial remodeling in mesenteric arteries after IH was
characterized by increased expression of the hypertrophic NFATc3 target smooth
muscle-alpha-actin in WT but not in KO mice. These results indicate that ET-1 is
an upstream activator of NFATc3 during intermittent hypoxia, contributing to the
resultant hypertension and increased wall thickness.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00341.2010
PMCID: PMC2930384
PMID: 20495147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
