---
reference_id: "PMID:31235867"
title: Update of the EMQN/ACGS best practice guidelines for molecular analysis of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes.
authors:
- Beygo J
- Buiting K
- Ramsden SC
- Ellis R
- Clayton-Smith J
- Kanber D
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0435-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update of the EMQN/ACGS best practice guidelines for molecular analysis of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes.
**Authors:** Beygo J, Buiting K, Ramsden SC, Ellis R, Clayton-Smith J, Kanber D
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-019-0435-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0435-0)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2019 Sep;27(9):1326-1340. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0435-0.
Epub  2019 Jun 24.

Update of the EMQN/ACGS best practice guidelines for molecular analysis of 
Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes.

Beygo J(#)(1), Buiting K(2), Ramsden SC(3), Ellis R(4), Clayton-Smith J(3)(5), 
Kanber D(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. jasmin.beygo@uni-due.de.
(2)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(3)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Manchester, UK.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill NHS Trust, Yorkhill Hospital, 
Glasgow, G3 8SJ, UK.
(5)Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences School of Biological Sciences 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(6)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. deniz.kanber@uni-due.de.
(#)Contributed equally

This article is an update of the best practice guidelines for the molecular 
analysis of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes published in 2010 in BMC Medical 
Genetics [1]. The update takes into account developments in terms of techniques, 
differential diagnoses and (especially) reporting standards. It highlights the 
advantages and disadvantages of each method and moreover, is meant to facilitate 
the interpretation of the obtained results - leading to improved standardised 
reports.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-019-0435-0
PMCID: PMC6777528
PMID: 31235867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.