---
reference_id: "PMID:26569658"
title: Sofosbuvir and Velpatasvir for HCV in Patients with Decompensated Cirrhosis.
authors:
- Curry MP
- "O'Leary JG"
- Bzowej N
- Muir AJ
- Korenblat KM
- Fenkel JM
- Reddy KR
- Lawitz E
- Flamm SL
- Schiano T
- Teperman L
- Fontana R
- Schiff E
- Fried M
- Doehle B
- An D
- McNally J
- Osinusi A
- Brainard DM
- McHutchison JG
- Brown RS Jr
- Charlton M
- ASTRAL-4 Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1512614
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sofosbuvir and Velpatasvir for HCV in Patients with Decompensated Cirrhosis.
**Authors:** Curry MP, O'Leary JG, Bzowej N, Muir AJ, Korenblat KM, Fenkel JM, Reddy KR, Lawitz E, Flamm SL, Schiano T, Teperman L, Fontana R, Schiff E, Fried M, Doehle B, An D, McNally J, Osinusi A, Brainard DM, McHutchison JG, Brown RS Jr, Charlton M, ASTRAL-4 Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1512614](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1512614)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2015 Dec 31;373(27):2618-28. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1512614. Epub
2015  Nov 16.

Sofosbuvir and Velpatasvir for HCV in Patients with Decompensated Cirrhosis.

Curry MP(1), O'Leary JG, Bzowej N, Muir AJ, Korenblat KM, Fenkel JM, Reddy KR, 
Lawitz E, Flamm SL, Schiano T, Teperman L, Fontana R, Schiff E, Fried M, Doehle 
B, An D, McNally J, Osinusi A, Brainard DM, McHutchison JG, Brown RS Jr, 
Charlton M; ASTRAL-4 Investigators.

Collaborators: Al-Assi TM, Alsina A, Bhandari BR, Borg BB, Brown KA, Brown RS, 
Bzowej N, Charlton M, Curry M, Etzkorn KP, Everson G, Fenkel JM, Firpi-Morell 
RJ, Flamm S, Fontana R, Frenette CT, Fried MW, Gallant JE, Gilroy R, Herring RW 
Jr, Humar A, Korenblat K, Kumar PN, Kwo PY, Landis C, Lawitz EJ, Muir A, O'Leary 
J, Pound D, Reddy K, Rodriguez-Torres M, Romero-Marrero CJ, Ruane PJ, Ryan MJ, 
Schiano TD, Schiff E, Sepe TE, Shaikh OS, Sheikh AM, Shiffman M, Sulkowski M, 
Teperman L, Terrault N, Tong MJ, Tran T, Vargas HE, Venkat D, Watt K, Younes Z, 
Zamor PJ.

Author information:
(1)From the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston (M.P.C.); Baylor 
University Medical Center, Dallas (J.G.O.), and Texas Liver Institute, 
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio (E.L.) - both in Texas; 
Ochsner Medical Center, New Orleans (N.B.); Duke University, Durham (A.J.M.), 
and School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill 
(M.F.) - both in North Carolina; Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis (K.M.K.); Thomas Jefferson University (J.M.F.) and University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine (K.R.R.) - both in Philadelphia; Northwestern 
University, Chicago (S.L.F.); Mount Sinai Hospital (T.S.), New York University 
School of Medicine (L.T.), and Weill Cornell Medical College (R.S.B.) - all in 
New York; University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (R.F.); University of Miami, Miami 
(E.S.); Gilead Sciences, Foster City, CA (B.D., D.A., J.M., A.O., D.M.B., 
J.G.M.); and Intermountain Medical Center, Salt Lake City (M.C.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Apr 28;374(17):1688.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Dec 31;373(27):2678-80. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1513245.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Apr 28;374(17):1687. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1601160.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Apr 28;374(17):1688. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1601160.
    Ann Transl Med. 2016 Oct;4(Suppl 1):S8. doi: 10.21037/atm.2016.08.56.

BACKGROUND: As the population that is infected with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
ages, the number of patients with decompensated cirrhosis is expected to 
increase.
METHODS: We conducted a phase 3, open-label study involving both previously 
treated and previously untreated patients infected with HCV genotypes 1 through 
6 who had decompensated cirrhosis (classified as Child-Pugh-Turcotte class B). 
Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive the nucleotide 
polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir and the NS5A inhibitor velpatasvir once daily 
for 12 weeks, sofosbuvir-velpatasvir plus ribavirin for 12 weeks, or 
sofosbuvir-velpatasvir for 24 weeks. The primary end point was a sustained 
virologic response at 12 weeks after the end of therapy.
RESULTS: Of the 267 patients who received treatment, 78% had HCV genotype 1, 4% 
genotype 2, 15% genotype 3, 3% genotype 4, and less than 1% genotype 6; no 
patients had genotype 5. Overall rates of sustained virologic response were 83% 
(95% confidence interval [CI], 74 to 90) among patients who received 12 weeks of 
sofosbuvir-velpatasvir, 94% (95% CI, 87 to 98) among those who received 12 weeks 
of sofosbuvir-velpatasvir plus ribavirin, and 86% (95% CI, 77 to 92) among those 
who received 24 weeks of sofosbuvir-velpatasvir. Post hoc analysis did not 
detect any significant differences in rates of sustained virologic response 
among the three study groups. Serious adverse events occurred in 19% of patients 
who received 12 weeks of sofosbuvir-velpatasvir, 16% of those who received 12 
weeks of sofosbuvir-velpatasvir plus ribavirin, and 18% of those who received 24 
weeks of sofosbuvir-velpatasvir. The most common adverse events were fatigue 
(29%), nausea (23%), and headache (22%) in all patients and anemia (31%) in the 
patients receiving ribavirin.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with sofosbuvir-velpatasvir with or without ribavirin for 
12 weeks and with sofosbuvir-velpatasvir for 24 weeks resulted in high rates of 
sustained virologic response in patients with HCV infection and decompensated 
cirrhosis. (Funded by Gilead Sciences; ASTRAL-4 ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT02201901.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1512614
PMID: 26569658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]