---
reference_id: "PMID:37939119"
title: Dengue virus infection induces selective expansion of Vγ4 and Vγ6TCR γδ T cells in the small intestine and a cytokine storm driving vascular leakage in mice.
authors:
- Kurosu T
- Okuzaki D
- Sakai Y
- Kadi MA
- Phanthanawiboon S
- Ami Y
- Shimojima M
- Yoshikawa T
- Fukushi S
- Nagata N
- Suzuki T
- Kamimura D
- Murakami M
- Ebihara H
- Saijo M
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011743
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue virus infection induces selective expansion of Vγ4 and Vγ6TCR γδ T cells in the small intestine and a cytokine storm driving vascular leakage in mice.
**Authors:** Kurosu T, Okuzaki D, Sakai Y, Kadi MA, Phanthanawiboon S, Ami Y, Shimojima M, Yoshikawa T, Fukushi S, Nagata N, Suzuki T, Kamimura D, Murakami M, Ebihara H, Saijo M
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0011743](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0011743)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2023 Nov 8;17(11):e0011743. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0011743. eCollection 2023 Nov.

Dengue virus infection induces selective expansion of Vγ4 and Vγ6TCR γδ T cells 
in the small intestine and a cytokine storm driving vascular leakage in mice.

Kurosu T(1), Okuzaki D(2), Sakai Y(3), Kadi MA(2), Phanthanawiboon S(1), Ami 
Y(4), Shimojima M(1), Yoshikawa T(1), Fukushi S(1), Nagata N(3), Suzuki T(3), 
Kamimura D(5), Murakami M(5)(6)(7)(8), Ebihara H(1), Saijo M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology I, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Human Immunology (Single Cell Genomics), WPI Immunology 
Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Management Department of Biosafety, Laboratory Animal, and Pathogen Bank, 
National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Division of Molecular Psychoimmunology, Institute for Genetic Medicine and 
Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(6)Team of Quantumimmunology, Institute for Quantum Life Science, National 
Institute for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology (QST), Chiba, 
Japan.
(7)Division of Molecular Neuroimmunology, Department of Homeostatic Regulation, 
National Institute for Physiological Sciences, National Institutes of Natural 
Sciences, Aichi, Japan.
(8)Institute for Vaccine Research and Development (HU-IVReD), Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Dengue is a major health problem in tropical and subtropical regions. Some 
patients develop a severe form of dengue, called dengue hemorrhagic fever, which 
can be fatal. Severe dengue is associated with a transient increase in vascular 
permeability. A cytokine storm is thought to be the cause of the vascular 
leakage. Although there are various research reports on the pathogenic 
mechanism, the complete pathological process remains poorly understood. We 
previously reported that dengue virus (DENV) type 3 P12/08 strain caused a 
lethal systemic infection and severe vascular leakage in interferon (IFN)-α/β 
and γ receptor knockout mice (IFN-α/β/γRKO mice), and that blockade of TNF-α 
signaling protected mice. Here, we performed transcriptome analysis of liver and 
small intestine samples collected chronologically from P12/08-infected 
IFN-α/β/γRKO mice in the presence/absence of blockade of TNF-α signaling and 
evaluated the cytokine and effector-level events. Blockade of TNF-α signaling 
mainly protected the small intestine but not the liver. Infection induced the 
selective expansion of IL-17A-producing Vγ4 and Vγ6 T cell receptor (TCR) γδ T 
cells in the small intestine, and IL-17A, together with TNF-α, played a critical 
role in the transition to severe disease via the induction of inflammatory 
cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and particularly the excess production of IL-6. 
Infection also induced the infiltration of neutrophils, as well as neutrophil 
collagenase/matrix metalloprotease 8 production. Blockade of IL-17A signaling 
reduced mortality and suppressed the expression of most of these cytokines, 
including TNF-α, indicating that IL-17A and TNF-α synergistically enhance 
cytokine expression. Blockade of IL-17A prevented nuclear translocation of NF-κB 
p65 in stroma-like cells and epithelial cells in the small intestine but only 
partially prevented recruitment of immune cells to the small intestine. This 
study provides an overall picture of the pathogenesis of infection in individual 
mice at the cytokine and effector levels.

Copyright: © 2023 Kurosu et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011743
PMCID: PMC10659169
PMID: 37939119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.