---
reference_id: "PMID:34590129"
title: Pertussis (Whooping Cough).
authors:
- Decker MD
- Edwards KM
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiaa469
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pertussis (Whooping Cough).
**Authors:** Decker MD, Edwards KM
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiaa469](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiaa469)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2021 Sep 30;224(12 Suppl 2):S310-S320. doi: 
10.1093/infdis/jiaa469.

Pertussis (Whooping Cough).

Decker MD(1)(2), Edwards KM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Policy, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Pertussis (whooping cough) is a respiratory infection caused by Bordetella 
pertussis. All ages are susceptible. In the prevaccine era, almost all children 
became infected. Pertussis is particularly dangerous in young infants, who 
account for practically all hospitalizations and deaths, but clinical disease is 
burdensome at any age. Widespread use of pertussis vaccines dramatically reduced 
cases, but concern over adverse reactions led to the replacement of standard 
whole-cell by acellular pertussis vaccines that contain only a few selected 
pertussis antigens and are far less reactogenic. Routine administration of 
acellular pertussis vaccines combined with diphtheria and tetanus toxoids is 
recommended in infancy with toddler and preschool boosters, at age 11, and 
during pregnancy. Boosting in the second half of every pregancy is critical to 
protection of the newborn. Waning of vaccine immunity over time has become an 
increasing concern, and several new pertussis vaccines are being evaluated to 
address this problem.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiaa469
PMCID: PMC8482022
PMID: 34590129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]