---
reference_id: "PMID:23011036"
title: "Histologic evolution and long-term outcome of Wilson's disease: results of a single-center experience."
authors:
- Sini M
- Sorbello O
- Sanna F
- Battolu F
- Civolani A
- Fanni D
- Faa G
- Demelia L
journal: Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/MEG.0b013e328358f7da
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histologic evolution and long-term outcome of Wilson's disease: results of a single-center experience.
**Authors:** Sini M, Sorbello O, Sanna F, Battolu F, Civolani A, Fanni D, Faa G, Demelia L
**Journal:** Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MEG.0b013e328358f7da](https://doi.org/10.1097/MEG.0b013e328358f7da)

## Content

1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Jan;25(1):111-7. doi: 
10.1097/MEG.0b013e328358f7da.

Histologic evolution and long-term outcome of Wilson's disease: results of a 
single-center experience.

Sini M(1), Sorbello O, Sanna F, Battolu F, Civolani A, Fanni D, Faa G, Demelia 
L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, AOU of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Wilson's disease (WD) is a rare inborn disease related to 
copper storage, leading to liver cirrhosis and neuropsychological deterioration. 
The aim of this study was to determine the clinical presentation and long-term 
outcome, and to examine the progression of hepatic histopathology in serial 
liver biopsies from WD patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We carried out a retrospective analysis of 60 patients 
with WD treated with zinc and/or penicillamine. Demographic, clinical, and 
laboratory data were gathered and 40 patients underwent an initial biopsy and at 
least one repeat biopsy. Patients were divided into two groups: progressors 
(patients who presented worsening of at least one unit of fibrosis) and 
nonprogressors (patients who presented stable or improved fibrosis scores).
RESULTS: A total of 33/40 (83%) patients (nonprogressors) showed stable hepatic 
histology or improvement. Seven of 40 (17%) patients (progressors) showed 
worsening of fibrosis. There was no significant correlation between the 
histological findings and clinical parameters or initial presentation.
CONCLUSION: In our study cohort, liver disease was stable or improving in most 
of the patients, and development of progressive hepatic symptoms while under 
treatment was a rare event. The development of new symptoms while under 
treatment or progression of pre-existing symptoms was more often recorded for 
neurological than for hepatic symptoms.

DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0b013e328358f7da
PMID: 23011036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]