---
reference_id: "PMID:26494426"
title: The scenario approach for countries considering the addition of oral cholera vaccination in cholera preparedness and control plans.
authors:
- Deen J
- von Seidlein L
- Luquero FJ
- Troeger C
- Reyburn R
- Lopez AL
- Debes A
- Sack DA
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00298-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The scenario approach for countries considering the addition of oral cholera vaccination in cholera preparedness and control plans.
**Authors:** Deen J, von Seidlein L, Luquero FJ, Troeger C, Reyburn R, Lopez AL, Debes A, Sack DA
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00298-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00298-4)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016 Jan;16(1):125-129. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00298-4.
 Epub 2015 Oct 19.

The scenario approach for countries considering the addition of oral cholera 
vaccination in cholera preparedness and control plans.

Deen J(1), von Seidlein L(2), Luquero FJ(3), Troeger C(4), Reyburn R(5), Lopez 
AL(6), Debes A(7), Sack DA(7).

Author information:
(1)Delivering Oral Vaccine Effectively (DOVE), Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: 
deen.jacqueline@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Delivering Oral Vaccine Effectively (DOVE), Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA; Epicentre, Paris, France.
(4)Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Pneumococcal Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(6)National Institutes of Health, University of the Philippines Manila, Manila, 
Philippines.
(7)Delivering Oral Vaccine Effectively (DOVE), Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Oral cholera vaccination could be deployed in a diverse range of situations from 
cholera-endemic areas and locations of humanitarian crises, but no clear 
consensus exists. The supply of licensed, WHO-prequalified cholera vaccines is 
not sufficient to meet endemic and epidemic needs worldwide and so 
prioritisation is needed. We have developed a scenario approach to 
systematically classify situations in which oral cholera vaccination might be 
useful. Our scenario approach distinguishes between five types of cholera 
epidemiology based on experiences from around the world and provides evidence 
that we hope will spur the development of detailed guidelines on how and where 
oral cholera vaccines could, and should, be most rationally deployed.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00298-4
PMID: 26494426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]