---
reference_id: "PMID:32179626"
title: Strain-Dependent Inhibition of Clostridioides difficile by Commensal Clostridia Carrying the Bile Acid-Inducible (bai) Operon.
authors:
- Reed AD
- Nethery MA
- Stewart A
- Barrangou R
- Theriot CM
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1128/JB.00039-20
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Strain-Dependent Inhibition of Clostridioides difficile by Commensal Clostridia Carrying the Bile Acid-Inducible (bai) Operon.
**Authors:** Reed AD, Nethery MA, Stewart A, Barrangou R, Theriot CM
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.00039-20](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00039-20)

## Content

1. J Bacteriol. 2020 May 11;202(11):e00039-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00039-20. Print
2020  May 11.

Strain-Dependent Inhibition of Clostridioides difficile by Commensal Clostridia 
Carrying the Bile Acid-Inducible (bai) Operon.

Reed AD(1), Nethery MA(2), Stewart A(3), Barrangou R(2), Theriot CM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Food, Bioprocessing and Nutrition Sciences, North Carolina 
State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Molecular Education, Technology and Research Innovation Center, North 
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(4)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA 
cmtherio@ncsu.edu.

Clostridioides difficile is one of the leading causes of antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea. Gut microbiota-derived secondary bile acids and commensal Clostridia 
that carry the bile acid-inducible (bai) operon are associated with protection 
from C. difficile infection (CDI), although the mechanism is not known. In this 
study, we hypothesized that commensal Clostridia are important for providing 
colonization resistance against C. difficile due to their ability to produce 
secondary bile acids, as well as potentially competing against C. difficile for 
similar nutrients. To test this hypothesis, we examined the abilities of four 
commensal Clostridia carrying the bai operon (Clostridium scindens VPI 12708, C. 
scindens ATCC 35704, Clostridium hiranonis, and Clostridium hylemonae) to 
convert cholate (CA) to deoxycholate (DCA) in vitro, and we determined whether 
the amount of DCA produced was sufficient to inhibit the growth of a clinically 
relevant C. difficile strain. We also investigated the competitive relationships 
between these commensals and C. difficile using an in vitro coculture system. We 
found that inhibition of C. difficile growth by commensal Clostridia 
supplemented with CA was strain dependent, correlated with the production of 
∼2 mM DCA, and increased the expression of bai operon genes. We also found that 
C. difficile was able to outcompete all four commensal Clostridia in an in vitro 
coculture system. These studies are instrumental in understanding the 
relationship between commensal Clostridia and C. difficile in the gut, which is 
vital for designing targeted bacterial therapeutics. Future studies dissecting 
the regulation of the bai operon in vitro and in vivo and how this affects CDI 
will be important.IMPORTANCE Commensal Clostridia carrying the bai operon, such 
as C. scindens, have been associated with protection against CDI; however, the 
mechanism for this protection is unknown. Herein, we show four commensal 
Clostridia that carry the bai operon and affect C. difficile growth in a 
strain-dependent manner, with and without the addition of cholate. Inhibition of 
C. difficile by commensals correlated with the efficient conversion of cholate 
to deoxycholate, a secondary bile acid that inhibits C. difficile germination, 
growth, and toxin production. Competition studies also revealed that C. 
difficile was able to outcompete the commensals in an in vitro coculture system. 
These studies are instrumental in understanding the relationship between 
commensal Clostridia and C. difficile in the gut, which is vital for designing 
targeted bacterial therapeutics.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00039-20
PMCID: PMC7221253
PMID: 32179626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]