---
reference_id: "PMID:40099651"
title: "Isolated aortitis - is it truly isolated? An approach to diagnosis and management."
authors:
- Gewurz-Singer O
- Lee E
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000001084
keywords:
- Humans
- "Aortitis/diagnosis, therapy"
- Giant Cell Arteritis/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolated aortitis - is it truly isolated? An approach to diagnosis and management.
**Authors:** Gewurz-Singer O, Lee E
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000001084](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000001084)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2025 May 1;37(3):185-191. doi:
10.1097/BOR.0000000000001084. Epub 2025 Mar 17.

Isolated aortitis - is it truly isolated? An approach to diagnosis and
management.

Gewurz-Singer O(1), Lee E(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan, Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology.
(2)University of Michigan, Department of Radiology, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: With the rise in incidence of aortic aneurysm surgeries and
the advances in large vessel imaging's ability to detect vessel wall
inflammation, rheumatologists can expect to see an increase in isolated aortitis
(IA) cases in their clinics. The purpose of this article is to review the latest
data on IA, discuss its natural history and to provide an approach on how to
diagnose and manage this inflammatory aortic disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: IA can be diagnosed on surgical histology or on imaging
studies. Preoperative imaging in patients with thoracic aortic aneurysms does
not detect all aortitis cases. Patients with IA have a high risk (up to 50%) of
developing new aortic and branch lesions. Histologic and mechanistic studies
show an overlap with giant cell arteritis.
SUMMARY: Evaluation for underlying infections and systemic diseases is
recommended for diagnosis. Surveillance of patients with IA with repeated
clinical assessments and imaging is recommended.

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000001084
PMID: 40099651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
