---
reference_id: "PMID:30448501"
title: "Hypersensitivity pneumonitis: A fibrosing alveolitis produced by inhalation of diverse antigens."
authors:
- Greenberger PA
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.09.040
keywords:
- "Alveolitis, Extrinsic Allergic/immunology, pathology"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypersensitivity pneumonitis: A fibrosing alveolitis produced by inhalation of diverse antigens.
**Authors:** Greenberger PA
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2018.09.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2018.09.040)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019 Apr;143(4):1295-1301. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2018.09.040. Epub 2018 Nov 15.

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis: A fibrosing alveolitis produced by inhalation of 
diverse antigens.

Greenberger PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Ill. Electronic address: 
p-greenberger@northwestern.edu.

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is a TH1 lymphocyte-biased fibrosing 
alveolitis caused by antigens ranging from avian excreta, fungi, thermophilic 
bacteria, and protozoa to reactive chemicals found in the workplace. Mimicking a 
viral syndrome, acute exposures to inciting antigens cause abrupt onset of 
nonproductive cough, dyspnea, and chills with arthralgias or malaise usually 
from 4 to 8 hours later so that the temporal relationship between antigen 
exposure and symptoms might be unsuspected. The histology of HP reveals 
prominent lymphocyte infiltrates that thicken the alveolar septa with poorly 
formed granulomas or giant cells. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid demonstrates 
greater than 20% lymphocytes in nearly all patients. Abnormalities on 
high-resolution computed tomographic examinations range from nodular 
centrilobular opacities in acute/subacute disease to increased reticular 
markings and honeycombing fibrosis, which typically are predominant in the upper 
lobes, in patients with advanced disease. Descriptors include "mosaic" 
attenuation and ground-glass opacities. Repeated episodes can result in nodular 
pulmonary infiltrates and suspected nonspecific interstitial pneumonia or 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Clinicians require a high level of suspicion to 
make an early diagnosis of HP before extensive pulmonary fibrosis or restrictive 
lung disease has occurred.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.09.040
PMID: 30448501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]