---
reference_id: "PMID:23257783"
title: MCL1 is deregulated in subgroups of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Wenzel SS
- Grau M
- Mavis C
- Hailfinger S
- Wolf A
- Madle H
- Deeb G
- Dörken B
- Thome M
- Lenz P
- Dirnhofer S
- Hernandez-Ilizaliturri FJ
- Tzankov A
- Lenz G
journal: Leukemia
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.367
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MCL1 is deregulated in subgroups of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Wenzel SS, Grau M, Mavis C, Hailfinger S, Wolf A, Madle H, Deeb G, Dörken B, Thome M, Lenz P, Dirnhofer S, Hernandez-Ilizaliturri FJ, Tzankov A, Lenz G
**Journal:** Leukemia (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/leu.2012.367](https://doi.org/10.1038/leu.2012.367)

## Content

1. Leukemia. 2013 Jun;27(6):1381-90. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.367. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

MCL1 is deregulated in subgroups of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Wenzel SS(1), Grau M, Mavis C, Hailfinger S, Wolf A, Madle H, Deeb G, Dörken B, 
Thome M, Lenz P, Dirnhofer S, Hernandez-Ilizaliturri FJ, Tzankov A, Lenz G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumor Immunology, Molecular Cancer 
Research Center, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.

Myeloid cell leukemia-1 (MCL1) is an anti-apoptotic member of the BCL2 family 
that is deregulated in various solid and hematological malignancies. However, 
its role in the molecular pathogenesis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) 
is unclear. We analyzed gene expression profiling data from 350 DLBCL patient 
samples and detected that activated B-cell-like (ABC) DLBCLs express MCL1 at 
significantly higher levels compared with germinal center B-cell-like DLBCL 
patient samples (P=2.7 × 10(-10)). Immunohistochemistry confirmed high MCL1 
protein expression predominantly in ABC DLBCL in an independent patient cohort 
(n=249; P=0.001). To elucidate molecular mechanisms leading to aberrant MCL1 
expression, we analyzed array comparative genomic hybridization data of 203 
DLBCL samples and identified recurrent chromosomal gains/amplifications of the 
MCL1 locus that occurred in 26% of ABC DLBCLs. In addition, aberrant STAT3 
signaling contributed to high MCL1 expression in this subtype. Knockdown of MCL1 
as well as treatment with the BH3-mimetic obatoclax induced apoptotic cell death 
in MCL1-positive DLBCL cell lines. In summary, MCL1 is deregulated in a 
significant fraction of ABC DLBCLs and contributes to therapy resistance. These 
data suggest that specific inhibition of MCL1 might be utilized therapeutically 
in a subset of DLBCLs.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2012.367
PMID: 23257783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]