---
reference_id: "PMID:18469440"
title: "Are pancreatic autoantibodies associated with azathioprine-induced pancreatitis in Crohn's disease?"
authors:
- Weersma RK
- Batstra MR
- Kleibeuker JH
- van Dullemen HM
journal: JOP
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Are pancreatic autoantibodies associated with azathioprine-induced pancreatitis in Crohn's disease?
**Authors:** Weersma RK, Batstra MR, Kleibeuker JH, van Dullemen HM
**Journal:** JOP (2008)

## Content

1. JOP. 2008 May 8;9(3):283-9.

Are pancreatic autoantibodies associated with azathioprine-induced pancreatitis 
in Crohn's disease?

Weersma RK(1), Batstra MR, Kleibeuker JH, van Dullemen HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. 
r.k.weersma@int.umcg.nl

CONTEXT: Azathioprine is frequently used in the treatment of Crohn's disease. A 
severe side effect is acute pancreatitis, which is specific for Crohn's disease. 
Autoantibodies against exocrine pancreas occur in about 30% of Crohn's disease 
cases but not in other inflammatory diseases. Pancreatic autoantibody positive 
Crohn's disease patients might have a low grade inflammation of the pancreas 
which may be aggravated by the introduction of azathioprine, resulting in 
clinically overt acute pancreatitis.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that the presence of pancreatic autoantibodies in 
Crohn's disease patients is associated with the development of 
azathioprine-induced pancreatitis.
PARTICIPANTS: Eight patients with Crohn's disease and azathioprine-induced 
pancreatitis and 26 patients with Crohn's disease not using azathioprine.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Pancreatic autoantibodies were determined by a 
standardized immunofluorescence method.
RESULTS: Two out of 8 patients with azathioprine-induced pancreatitis were 
positive for pancreatic autoantibodies (25.0%), detectable in serum dilutions of 
1:40 and 1:160, respectively. In the control group of Crohn's disease patients, 
two (7.7%) were positive in serum dilutions of 1:2. All positive samples had an 
extracellular fluorescence pattern. The difference in the prevalence of 
pancreatic autoantibodies was not statistically significant (P=0.229).
CONCLUSIONS: We could not confirm our hypothesis that most or all patients with 
azathioprine-induced pancreatitis were pancreatic autoantibody positive. The 
prevalence of pancreatic autoantibodies in the Crohn's disease patients in our 
group was lower than in previous reports.This study does not support an 
association between pancreatic autoantibodies and azathioprine-induced 
pancreatitis in Crohn's disease. However, this association should not be 
definitively excluded and larger, preferably prospective, studies are needed.

PMID: 18469440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]