---
reference_id: "PMID:17224690"
title: "X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy: clinical definition and molecular mapping."
authors:
- Dressman D
- Ahearn ME
- Yariz KO
- Basterrecha H
- Martínez F
- Palau F
- Barmada MM
- Clark RD
- Meindl A
- Wirth B
- Hoffman EP
- Baumbach-Reardon L
journal: Genet Med
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1097/gim.0b013e31802d8353
keywords:
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- DNA/genetics
- Family
- Female
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Pedigree
- Spinal Muscular Atrophies of Childhood/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy: clinical definition and molecular mapping.
**Authors:** Dressman D, Ahearn ME, Yariz KO, Basterrecha H, Martínez F, Palau F, Barmada MM, Clark RD, Meindl A, Wirth B, Hoffman EP, Baumbach-Reardon L
**Journal:** Genet Med (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1097/gim.0b013e31802d8353](https://doi.org/10.1097/gim.0b013e31802d8353)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2007 Jan;9(1):52-60. doi: 10.1097/gim.0b013e31802d8353.

X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy: clinical definition and molecular 
mapping.

Dressman D(1), Ahearn ME, Yariz KO, Basterrecha H, Martínez F, Palau F, Barmada 
MM, Clark RD, Meindl A, Wirth B, Hoffman EP, Baumbach-Reardon L.

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Genetic Medicine, Children's National Medical Center, 
Washington, DC, USA.

PURPOSE: X-linked infantile spinal-muscular atrophy (XL-SMA) is a rare disorder, 
which presents with the clinical characteristics of hypotonia, areflexia, and 
multiple congenital contractures (arthrogryposis) associated with loss of 
anterior horn cells and death in infancy. We have previously reported a single 
family with XL-SMA that mapped to Xp11.3-q11.2. Here we report further clinical 
description of XL-SMA plus an additional seven unrelated (XL-SMA) families from 
North America and Europe that show linkage data consistent with the same region.
METHODS: We first investigated linkage to the candidate disease gene region 
using microsatellite repeat markers. We further saturated the candidate disease 
gene region using polymorphic microsatellite repeat markers and single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in an effort to narrow the critical region. Two-point 
and multipoint linkage analysis was performed using the Allegro software 
package.
RESULTS: Linkage analysis of all XL-SMA families displayed linkage consistent 
with the original XL-SMA region.
CONCLUSION: The addition of new families and new markers has narrowed the 
disease gene interval for a XL-SMA locus between SNP FLJ22843 near marker DXS 
8080 and SNP ARHGEF9 which is near DXS7132 (Xp11.3-Xq11.1).

DOI: 10.1097/gim.0b013e31802d8353
PMID: 17224690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]