---
reference_id: "PMID:36204319"
title: "Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: A rare inherited dyslipidemia but potential ubiquitous factor in the development of atherosclerosis and fatty liver disease."
authors:
- Besler KJ
- Blanchard V
- Francis GA
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1013266
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: A rare inherited dyslipidemia but potential ubiquitous factor in the development of atherosclerosis and fatty liver disease.
**Authors:** Besler KJ, Blanchard V, Francis GA
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.1013266](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.1013266)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Sep 20;13:1013266. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1013266.
eCollection 2022.

Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: A rare inherited dyslipidemia but potential
ubiquitous factor in the development of atherosclerosis and fatty liver disease.

Besler KJ(1), Blanchard V(1), Francis GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, Providence
Research, St. Paul's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.

Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL), encoded by the gene LIPA, is the sole neutral lipid
hydrolase in lysosomes, responsible for cleavage of cholesteryl esters and
triglycerides into their component parts. Inherited forms of complete (Wolman
Disease, WD) or partial LAL deficiency (cholesteryl ester storage disease, CESD)
are fortunately rare. Recently, LAL has been identified as a cardiovascular risk
gene in genome-wide association studies, though the directionality of risk
conferred remains controversial. It has also been proposed that the low
expression and activity of LAL in arterial smooth muscle cells (SMCs) that
occurs inherently in nature is a likely determinant of the propensity of SMCs to
form the majority of foam cells in atherosclerotic plaque. LAL also likely plays
a potential role in fatty liver disease. This review highlights the nature of
LAL gene mutations in WD and CESD, the association of LAL with prediction of
cardiovascular risk from genome-wide association studies, the importance of
relative LAL deficiency in SMC foam cells, and the need to further interrogate
the pathophysiological impact and cell type-specific role of enhancing LAL
activity as a novel treatment strategy to reduce the development and induce the
regression of ischemic cardiovascular disease and fatty liver.

Copyright © 2022 Besler, Blanchard and Francis.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1013266
PMCID: PMC9530988
PMID: 36204319

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
