---
reference_id: "PMID:39539543"
title: A guideline on biomarkers in the diagnosis and evaluation in axial spondyloarthritis.
authors:
- Liu D
- Xie Y
- Tu L
- Wen X
- Lv Q
- Liu B
- Yang M
- Wu X
- Zheng X
- Luo X
- Zhou L
- Wu J
- Liu B
- Wang K
- Jin O
- Wang X
- Qin J
- Wu L
- Zhao D
- He D
- He S
- Huang W
- Ye S
- Zhou H
- Wu J
- Wang Y
- Liu S
- Li Z
- Tan Z
- Xu C
- Wang Y
- Zheng D
- Zhan F
- Lin C
- Wen Y
- Wu J
- Wen S
- Liao Z
- Shen Y
- Yang K
- Gu J
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1394148
keywords:
- Humans
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Axial Spondyloarthritis/diagnosis, blood"
- HLA-B27 Antigen
- "C-Reactive Protein/analysis, metabolism"
- Consensus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A guideline on biomarkers in the diagnosis and evaluation in axial spondyloarthritis.
**Authors:** Liu D, Xie Y, Tu L, Wen X, Lv Q, Liu B, Yang M, Wu X, Zheng X, Luo X, Zhou L, Wu J, Liu B, Wang K, Jin O, Wang X, Qin J, Wu L, Zhao D, He D, He S, Huang W, Ye S, Zhou H, Wu J, Wang Y, Liu S, Li Z, Tan Z, Xu C, Wang Y, Zheng D, Zhan F, Lin C, Wen Y, Wu J, Wen S, Liao Z, Shen Y, Yang K, Gu J
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1394148](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1394148)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Oct 30;15:1394148. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1394148. 
eCollection 2024.

A guideline on biomarkers in the diagnosis and evaluation in axial 
spondyloarthritis.

Liu D(#)(1), Xie Y(#)(1), Tu L(1), Wen X(2)(3), Lv Q(4), Liu B(1), Yang M(1), Wu 
X(1), Zheng X(1), Luo X(1), Zhou L(1), Wu J(1), Liu B(5), Wang K(6), Jin O(1), 
Wang X(7), Qin J(7), Wu L(8), Zhao D(9), He D(10), He S(11), Huang W(12), Ye 
S(13), Zhou H(14), Wu J(15), Wang Y(16), Liu S(17), Li Z(18), Tan Z(19), Xu 
C(20), Wang Y(21), Zheng D(22), Zhan F(23), Lin C(24), Wen Y(4), Wu J(4), Wen 
S(4), Liao Z(1), Shen Y(25), Yang K(26), Gu J(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Shenzhen Longhua District Central Hospital, 
Shenzhen, China.
(3)Shenzhen Longhua Institute of Immunology Transformation, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Department of Spine Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(6)Department of Joint Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(7)Department of Radiology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, People's Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous 
Region, Urumchi, China.
(9)Department of Rheumatology, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai, China.
(10)Department of Rheumatology, Shanghai Guanghua Hospital, Shanghai University 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(11)Department of Rheumatology, Zhongshan City People's Hospital, Zhongshan, 
China.
(12)Department of Rheumatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(13)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(14)Department of Rheumatology, The Fourth Central Hospital Chinese PLA Medical 
School, Xi'an, China.
(15)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanning, China.
(16)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Baotou Medical 
College, Baotou, China.
(17)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(18)Department of Rheumatology, Bethune International Peace Hospital, 
Shijiazhuang, China.
(19)Department of Rheumatology, Huizhou Central Hospital, Huizhou, China.
(20)Department of Rheumatology, The Second People's Hospital of Shenzhen City, 
Shenzhen, China.
(21)Department of Rheumatology, Jiangxi Province People's Hospital, Nanchang, 
China.
(22)Department of Rheumatology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(23)Department of Nephropathy and Rheumatology, Hainan General Hospital, Hainan 
Affiliated Hospital of Hainan Medical University, Haikou, China.
(24)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(25)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, 
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(26)Evidence-Based Medicine Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: To develop a guideline for selecting biomarkers in the diagnosis and 
assessment in patients with axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA).
METHOD: A joint effort was carried out by the core team, the literature review 
team and the multidisciplinary voting panel to formulate recommendations 
regarding biomarkers in axSpA, using an evidence-based and consensus-based 
strategy. Certainty of evidence and strength of recommendation were determined, 
and levels of agreement within the voting panel were calculated.
RESULTS: A total of 20 recommendations were formulated in this guideline, with 
levels of agreement ranging from 6.48 to 9.71. The two strong recommendations, 
HLA-B27 testing in patients suspected of axSpA and regular-interval monitoring 
of CRP/ESR represent the status quo of axSpA evaluation, while the 13 
conditional recommendations represent the promising biomarkers with clinical 
utility in diagnosis, disease activity assessment, prediction of radiographic 
progression and therapeutic responses. This guideline does not dictate clinical 
choices of tests on axSpA, and decisions should be made based on comprehensive 
consideration of costs, accessibility, patients' values and willingness as well 
as the objective of testing in the local context.
CONCLUSION: This guideline addresses the interpretation of the clinical 
significance of biomarkers in axSpA, and the biomarkers endorsed in this 
guideline composed a clinical toolkit for healthcare professionals to choose 
from.

Copyright © 2024 Liu, Xie, Tu, Wen, Lv, Liu, Yang, Wu, Zheng, Luo, Zhou, Wu, 
Liu, Wang, Jin, Wang, Qin, Wu, Zhao, He, He, Huang, Ye, Zhou, Wu, Wang, Liu, Li, 
Tan, Xu, Wang, Zheng, Zhan, Lin, Wen, Wu, Wen, Liao, Shen, Yang and Gu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1394148
PMCID: PMC11557325
PMID: 39539543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.