---
reference_id: "PMID:26250421"
title: Genotype of UGT1A1 and phenotype correlation between Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II and Gilbert syndrome.
authors:
- Maruo Y
- Nakahara S
- Yanagi T
- Nomura A
- Mimura Y
- Matsui K
- Sato H
- Takeuchi Y
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/jgh.13071
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Asian People
- Bilirubin/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Crigler-Najjar Syndrome/blood, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- "Gilbert Disease/blood, genetics"
- Glucuronosyltransferase/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Young Adult
- UGT1A1 Enzyme
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype of UGT1A1 and phenotype correlation between Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II and Gilbert syndrome.
**Authors:** Maruo Y, Nakahara S, Yanagi T, Nomura A, Mimura Y, Matsui K, Sato H, Takeuchi Y
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jgh.13071](https://doi.org/10.1111/jgh.13071)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Feb;31(2):403-8. doi: 10.1111/jgh.13071.

Genotype of UGT1A1 and phenotype correlation between Crigler-Najjar syndrome 
type II and Gilbert syndrome.

Maruo Y(1), Nakahara S(1), Yanagi T(1), Nomura A(1), Mimura Y(1), Matsui K(1), 
Sato H(2), Takeuchi Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Health and Nutrition, Nagoya Bunri University, Inazawa, Aichi, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Hereditary unconjugated hyperbilirubinemias, Crigler-Najjar 
syndrome type I, Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II (CN-2), and Gilbert syndrome 
(GS) all result from mutations of the bilirubin uridine 5'-diphosphate 
(UDP)-glucuronosyltransferase gene (UGT1A1). Often, to distinguish between CN-2 
and GS is difficult because the borderline of the two syndromes is unclear. We 
analyzed the genotypes and phenotypes of 163 Japanese patients with CN-2 or GS.
METHODS: Japanese patients (99 males and 64 females) with unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia were analyzed. Their serum bilirubin concentrations varied 
from 1.2 to 22.2 mg/dL (20 to 379 μM). Genetic analysis of UGT1A1 was performed 
by PCR-amplified direct sequencing. Association between serum bilirubin 
concentrations and genotypes group (typical CN-2, intermediate group, and 
typical GS) was studied.
RESULTS: Most patients had biallelic mutations of UGT1A1. Moreover, many of them 
(78.5%) had multiple mutations. The mutation in typical CN-2 was a homozygous 
double missense mutation of p.[G71R:Y486D]. In typical GS group, four prevalent 
genotypes were detected: homozygous UGT1A1*28, UGT1A1*6/UGT1A1*28, and 
homozygous UGT1A1*6, and UGT1A1*27/UGT1A1*28. In the intermediate group, three 
genotypes, p.[G71R:Y486D]/UGT1A1*7, p.[G71R:Y486D]/UGT1A1*6, and homozygous 
UGT1A1*7, were detected. Serum bilirubin concentrations of typical CN-2, 
intermediate group, and typical GS are respectively 12.9 ± 5.1, 5.2 ± 2.2, and 
2.8 ± 1.1 mg/dL. Serum bilirubin concentration among the three groups is 
statistically different (P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: The serum bilirubin concentration varied continuously from GS to 
CN-2 depending on genotypes. Because of the combination of the mutations and 
polymorphisms, many patients showed intermediate serum bilirubin concentration 
between two syndromes. Clinically, it is difficult to distinguish clearly 
between the two syndromes.

© 2015 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jgh.13071
PMID: 26250421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]