---
reference_id: PMID:30278852
title: Chronic Neurological Disease Due to Methylmercury Poisoning.
authors:
- Jackson AC
journal: Can J Neurol Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1017/cjn.2018.323
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/drug effects
- "Chronic Disease/prevention & control"
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Humans
- Mercury Poisoning/complications
- Methylmercury Compounds/toxicity
- Nervous System Diseases/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Neurological Disease Due to Methylmercury Poisoning.
**Authors:** Jackson AC
**Journal:** Can J Neurol Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1017/cjn.2018.323](https://doi.org/10.1017/cjn.2018.323)

## Content

1. Can J Neurol Sci. 2018 Nov;45(6):620-623. doi: 10.1017/cjn.2018.323. Epub 2018
 Oct 3.

Chronic Neurological Disease Due to Methylmercury Poisoning.

Jackson AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine (Neurology) and Medical Microbiology, 
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Organic mercury, especially methylmercury, poisoning causes chronic neurological 
disease predominantly affecting the brain. There have been documented exposures 
from eating fish from contaminated waters in Japan and in northwestern Ontario 
and in Iraq from eating bread made from seed wheat treated with methylmercuric 
fungicide. The neurological disease is called Minamata disease in Japan. Visual 
field constriction due to involvement of the calcarine cortex, sensory 
disturbance due to involvement of the somatosensory cortex, and cerebellar 
ataxia due to involvement of granule cell neurons of the cerebellum are common 
and characteristic features due to methylmercury poisoning. Other neurological 
features include dysarthria, postural and action tremor, cognitive impairment, 
and hearing loss and dysequilibrium. In contrast, peripheral nerve disease is 
more characteristic of inorganic mercury intoxication. Similarly, psychosis is 
more typical of exposure to inorganic mercury, which has been documented in the 
felt hat industry ("mad hatter"). Laboratory tests (e.g., on blood and hair and 
toenail samples) are of limited value in the assessment of chronic neurological 
disease due to mercury poisoning because they may not reflect remote neuronal 
injury due to mercury. Methylmercury also causes injury to fetal brains during 
development. There is no effective treatment.

DOI: 10.1017/cjn.2018.323
PMID: 30278852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]