---
reference_id: "PMID:32728000"
title: The Clinical Efficacy of Endothelin Receptor Antagonists in Patients with Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
authors:
- Maki H
- Hara T
- Tsuji M
- Saito A
- Minatsuki S
- Inaba T
- Amiya E
- Hosoya Y
- Hatano M
- Morita H
- Yao A
- Kinugawa K
- Komuro I
journal: Int Heart J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1536/ihj.20-173
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Clinical Efficacy of Endothelin Receptor Antagonists in Patients with Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
**Authors:** Maki H, Hara T, Tsuji M, Saito A, Minatsuki S, Inaba T, Amiya E, Hosoya Y, Hatano M, Morita H, Yao A, Kinugawa K, Komuro I
**Journal:** Int Heart J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1536/ihj.20-173](https://doi.org/10.1536/ihj.20-173)

## Content

1. Int Heart J. 2020;61(4):799-805. doi: 10.1536/ihj.20-173.

The Clinical Efficacy of Endothelin Receptor Antagonists in Patients with 
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.

Maki H(1), Hara T(1), Tsuji M(1), Saito A(1), Minatsuki S(1), Inaba T(1), Amiya 
E(1)(2), Hosoya Y(1)(2), Hatano M(1)(2), Morita H(1), Yao A(1)(3), Kinugawa 
K(4), Komuro I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo.
(2)Therapeutic Strategy for Heart Failure, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo.
(3)Division for Health Service Promotion, The University of Tokyo.
(4)Second Department of Internal Medicine, University of Toyama.

Therapeutic strategies for pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) have made 
remarkable progress over the last two decades. Currently, 3 types of drugs can 
be used to treat PAH; prostacyclins, phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors, and 
endothelin receptor antagonists (ERA). In Japan, the first generation ERA 
bosentan was reimbursed in 2005, following which the 2nd generation ERAs 
ambrisentan and macitentan were reimbursed in 2009 and 2015, respectively. The 
efficacy of each ERA on hemodynamics in PAH patients remains to be elucidated. 
The aims of this study were to evaluate the hemodynamic effects of ERAs and 
compare these effects among each generation of ERAs.We retrospectively examined 
the clinical parameters of 42 PAH patients who were prescribed an ERA (15 
bosentan, 12 ambrisentan, and 15 macitentan) and who underwent a hemodynamic 
examination before and after ERA introduction at our institution from January 
2007 to July 2019.In a total of 42 patients, mean pulmonary arterial pressure 
(mPAP) and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) were significantly decreased and 
cardiac index was significantly increased after ERA introduction (P < 0.001) and 
the World Health Organization-Functional class (WHO-Fc) was significantly 
improved after ERA introduction (P = 0.005). Next, in a comparison between 1st 
and 2nd generation ERAs, 2nd generation ERAs were found to have brought about 
greater improvements in hemodynamic parameters (mPAP and PVR. P < 0.01), heart 
rate, brain natriuretic peptide, arterial oxygen saturation, and mixed venous 
oxygen saturation than the 1st generation ERA bosentan.We conclude that all ERAs 
could successfully improve the hemodynamics of PAH patients and that the newer 
generation ERAs, ambrisentan and macitentan, seemed to be preferable to 
bosentan.

DOI: 10.1536/ihj.20-173
PMID: 32728000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]