---
reference_id: "PMID:23291686"
title: Clinical and serial MRI findings of a sialidosis type I patient with a novel missense mutation in the NEU1 gene.
authors:
- Sekijima Y
- Nakamura K
- Kishida D
- Narita A
- Adachi K
- Ohno K
- Nanba E
- Ikeda S
journal: Intern Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.52.8901
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Disease Progression
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Japan
- "Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- Male
- "Monitoring, Physiologic/methods"
- "Mucolipidoses/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Neuraminidase/genetics
- Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and serial MRI findings of a sialidosis type I patient with a novel missense mutation in the NEU1 gene.
**Authors:** Sekijima Y, Nakamura K, Kishida D, Narita A, Adachi K, Ohno K, Nanba E, Ikeda S
**Journal:** Intern Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.52.8901](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.52.8901)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 2013;52(1):119-24. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.52.8901. Epub
2013  Jan 1.

Clinical and serial MRI findings of a sialidosis type I patient with a novel
missense mutation in the NEU1 gene.

Sekijima Y(1), Nakamura K, Kishida D, Narita A, Adachi K, Ohno K, Nanba E, Ikeda
S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Neurology and Rheumatology), Shinshu University
School of Medicine, Japan. sekijima@shinshu-u.ac.jp

The case of a Japanese sialidosis type I patient with a novel NEU1 gene mutation
is described. The patient developed an unsteady gait at age 14 and was referred
to our hospital at age 16. On admission, subnormal intelligence, dysarthria,
myoclonus, intentional tremors, limb and gait ataxia, hyperreflexia and macular
cherry-red spots were observed. An enzymological analysis revealed a primary
deficiency of neuraminidase. An NEU1 gene analysis identified two heterozygous
missense mutations: p.P80L and p.D135N. The p.D135N mutation is a novel mutation
that is considered to be associated with the mild clinical phenotype of
sialidosis. Serial brain MRI showed diffuse brain atrophy progressing rapidly
over the 41-month observation period.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.52.8901
PMID: 23291686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
