---
reference_id: "PMID:15618006"
title: The Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg cell.
authors:
- Küppers R
- Hansmann ML
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2003.10.025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg cell.
**Authors:** Küppers R, Hansmann ML
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2003.10.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2003.10.025)

## Content

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2005 Mar;37(3):511-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.biocel.2003.10.025.

The Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg cell.

Küppers R(1), Hansmann ML.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell Biology (Tumor Research), University of Duisburg-Essen, 
Medical School, Virchowstr. 173, 45122 Essen, Germany. ralf.kuppers@uni-essen.de

Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg (HRS) cells are the hallmark cells of Hodgkin's 
lymphoma (HL). They are large, often multinucleated with a peculiar morphology 
and an unusual immunophenotype, that does not resemble any normal cell in the 
body. Despite their rarity in HL tissues, HRS cells are the clonal tumour cells 
of HL. HRS cells in nearly all cases of HL derive from B cells, and only rarely 
from T cells. Notably, the pattern of somatic mutations in their rearranged 
immunoglobulin V genes suggests that they are derived from pre-apoptotic 
germinal center B cells. The pathogenesis of HL is still largely unresolved, but 
it is now clear that aberrant activation of several signalling pathways (such as 
the NFkappaB pathway) is of key importance for HRS cell survival. HRS or 
HRS-like cells are also found in several other diseases, e.g. as rare 
intermingled cells in some non-Hodgkin lymphomas and in infectious 
mononucleosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2003.10.025
PMID: 15618006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]