---
reference_id: "PMID:38168088"
title: "Novel molecular mechanism in Malan syndrome uncovered through genome sequencing reanalysis, exon-level Array, and RNA sequencing."
authors:
- Zhao J
- Longo N
- Lewis RG
- Nicholas TJ
- Boyden SE
- Andrews A
- Larson A
- Undiagnosed Diseases Network
- Bayrak-Toydemir P
- Botto LD
- Mao R
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63516
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- NFI Transcription Factors/genetics
- Sotos Syndrome/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Megalencephaly/genetics
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- Septo-Optic Dysplasia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel molecular mechanism in Malan syndrome uncovered through genome sequencing reanalysis, exon-level Array, and RNA sequencing.
**Authors:** Zhao J, Longo N, Lewis RG, Nicholas TJ, Boyden SE, Andrews A, Larson A, Undiagnosed Diseases Network, Bayrak-Toydemir P, Botto LD, Mao R
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63516](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63516)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2024 May;194(5):e63516. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63516. Epub 2024
 Jan 2.

Novel molecular mechanism in Malan syndrome uncovered through genome sequencing 
reanalysis, exon-level Array, and RNA sequencing.

Zhao J(1)(2), Longo N(1)(2)(3), Lewis RG(1)(2), Nicholas TJ(4), Boyden SE(4), 
Andrews A(3), Larson A(5); Undiagnosed Diseases Network; Bayrak-Toydemir 
P(1)(2), Botto LD(3), Mao R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(2)ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Utah Center for Genetic Discovery, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(5)Section of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

The NFIX gene encodes a DNA-binding protein belonging to the nuclear factor one 
(NFI) family of transcription factors. Pathogenic variants of NFIX are 
associated with two autosomal dominant Mendelian disorders, Malan syndrome (MIM 
614753) and Marshall-Smith syndrome (MIM 602535), which are clinically distinct 
due to different disease-causing mechanisms. NFIX variants associated with Malan 
syndrome are missense variants mostly located in exon 2 encoding the N-terminal 
DNA binding and dimerization domain or are protein-truncating variants that 
trigger nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) resulting in NFIX haploinsufficiency. 
NFIX variants associated with Marshall-Smith syndrome are protein-truncating and 
are clustered between exons 6 and 10, including a recurrent Alu-mediated 
deletion of exons 6 and 7, which can escape NMD. The more severe phenotype of 
Marshall-Smith syndrome is likely due to a dominant-negative effect of these 
protein-truncating variants that escape NMD. Here, we report a child with 
clinical features of Malan syndrome who has a de novo NFIX intragenic 
duplication. Using genome sequencing, exon-level microarray analysis, and RNA 
sequencing, we show that this duplication encompasses exons 6 and 7 and leads to 
NFIX haploinsufficiency. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of 
Malan Syndrome caused by an intragenic NFIX duplication.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63516
PMCID: PMC11003828
PMID: 38168088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to disclose.