---
reference_id: "PMID:23554946"
title: Drosophila bestrophin-1 currents are regulated by phosphorylation via a CaMKII dependent mechanism.
authors:
- Duran C
- Chien LT
- Hartzell HC
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058875
keywords:
- Animals
- Bestrophins
- Calcium/metabolism
- Calcium-Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase Type 2/metabolism
- Cell Line
- "Chloride Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Drosophila Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- Phosphorylation/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drosophila bestrophin-1 currents are regulated by phosphorylation via a CaMKII dependent mechanism.
**Authors:** Duran C, Chien LT, Hartzell HC
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0058875](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0058875)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58875. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058875. Epub 2013 Mar
12.

Drosophila bestrophin-1 currents are regulated by phosphorylation via a CaMKII
dependent mechanism.

Duran C(1), Chien LT, Hartzell HC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Cell swelling induced by hypo-osmotic stress results in activation of
volume-regulated anion channels (VRAC) that drive a compensatory regulatory
volume decrease. We have previously shown that the Best1 gene in Drosophila
encodes a VRAC that is also activated by increases in intracellular Ca(2+). The
role of Best1 as a VRAC has recently been independently confirmed by the Clapham
lab in an unbiased RNAi screen. Although dBest1 is clearly a volume-regulated
channel, its mechanisms of regulation remain unknown. Here we investigate
Drosophila Best1 (dBest1) regulation using the Drosophila S2 cell model system.
Because dBest1 activates slowly after establishing whole-cell recording, we
tested the hypothesis that the channel is activated by phosphorylation. Two
experiments indicate that phosphorylation is required for dBest1 activation:
nonspecific protein kinase inhibitors or intracellular perfusion with the
non-hydrolyzable ATP analog AMP-PNP dramatically reduce the amplitude of dBest1
currents. Furthermore, intracellular perfusion with ATP-γ-S augments channel
activation. The kinase responsible for dBest1 activation is likely
Ca(2+)/calmodulin dependent kinase II (CaMKII), because specific inhibitors of
this kinase dramatically inhibit dBest1 current activation. Neither specific PKA
inhibitors nor inactive control inhibitors have effects on dBest1currents. Our
results demonstrate that dBest1 currents are regulated by phosphorylation via a
CaMKII dependent mechanism.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058875
PMCID: PMC3595206
PMID: 23554946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
