---
reference_id: "PMID:24450239"
title: "Clinical profile of patients diagnosed with leptospirosis after a typhoon: a multicenter study."
authors:
- Mendoza MT
- Roxas EA
- Ginete JK
- Alejandria MM
- Roman AD
- Leyritana KT
- Penamora MA
- Pineda CC
journal: Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical profile of patients diagnosed with leptospirosis after a typhoon: a multicenter study.
**Authors:** Mendoza MT, Roxas EA, Ginete JK, Alejandria MM, Roman AD, Leyritana KT, Penamora MA, Pineda CC
**Journal:** Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health (2013)

## Content

1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2013 Nov;44(6):1021-35.

Clinical profile of patients diagnosed with leptospirosis after a typhoon: a 
multicenter study.

Mendoza MT(1), Roxas EA(2), Ginete JK(3), Alejandria MM(4), Roman AD(2), 
Leyritana KT(2), Penamora MA(2), Pineda CC(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, University of the Philippines-Philippine General 
Hospital, Manila, Phillipines. myrnatmendoza@yahoo.com
(2)Section of Infectious Diseases, University of the Philippines-Philippine 
General Hospital, Manila, Phillipines.
(3)National Kidney and Transplant Institute, Manila, Phillipines.
(4)College of Medicine, University of The Philippines-Philippine-General 
Hospital, Manila, Philippines.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of The Philippines-Philippine-General 
Hospital, Manila, Philippines.

This study described the clinical features and complications of leptospirosis 
among patients seen at nine tertiary hospitals from September 28 to November 30, 
2009 after a heavy rainfall typhoon. The clinical findings of the confirmed 
cases were compared with the previous clinical studies on seasonal leptospirosis 
in the Philippines. Risk factors for complicated disease were also identified. 
Confirmed cases were based on any of the following: positive leptospiral 
cultures of blood or urine, single high leptospira microscopic agglutination 
test (MAT) titer of 1:1,600, a fourfold rise in MAT, and/or seroconversion. Of 
670 patients with possible leptospirosis, 591 were probable by the WHO criteria, 
259 (44%) were confirmed. Diagnosis was confirmed by MAT 176 (68%), by culture 
57 (22%), and by MAT and culture 26 (10%). The mean age of the confirmed cases 
was 38.9 years (SD 14.3). The majority were males (82%) and had a history of 
wading in floodwaters (98%). The majority of the patients presented with 
nonspecific signs, with fever as the most common (98.5%). Other findings were 
myalgia (78.1%), malaise (74.9%), conjunctival suffusion (59.3%), oliguria 
(56.6%), diarrhea (39%), and jaundice (38%). Most of the patients presented with 
a moderate-to-severe form of leptospirosis (83%). Complications identified were 
renal failure (82%), pulmonary hemorrhage (8%), meningitis (5%), and myocarditis 
(4%). Mortality rate was 5%, mostly due to pulmonary hemorrhage. This study 
emphasizes the importance of public awareness and high index of suspicion among 
clinicians of leptospirosis during the monsoon months when flooding is common. 
Early recognition and detection of the disease should decrease morbidity and 
mortality.

PMID: 24450239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]