---
reference_id: "PMID:36890565"
title: "Clinical, biochemical, and genetic analysis of 28 Chinese patients with holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency."
authors:
- Ling S
- Qiu W
- Zhang H
- Liang L
- Lu D
- Chen T
- Zhan X
- Wang Y
- Gu X
- Han L
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02656-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, biochemical, and genetic analysis of 28 Chinese patients with holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency.
**Authors:** Ling S, Qiu W, Zhang H, Liang L, Lu D, Chen T, Zhan X, Wang Y, Gu X, Han L
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02656-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02656-y)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Mar 8;18(1):48. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02656-y.

Clinical, biochemical, and genetic analysis of 28 Chinese patients with 
holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency.

Ling S(1), Qiu W(1), Zhang H(1), Liang L(1), Lu D(1), Chen T(1), Zhan X(1), Wang 
Y(1), Gu X(1), Han L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Shanghai 
Institute for Pediatric Research, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200092, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Shanghai 
Institute for Pediatric Research, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200092, China. hanlianshu@xinhuamed.com.cn.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to describe the clinical, biochemical, and 
molecular characteristics of Chinese patients with holocarboxylase synthetase 
(HLCS) deficiency, and to investigate the mutation spectrum of HCLS deficiency 
as well as their potential correlation with phenotype.
METHODS: A total of 28 patients with HLCS deficiency were enrolled between 2006 
and 2021. Clinical and laboratory data were reviewed retrospectively from 
medical records.
RESULTS: Among the 28 patients, six patients underwent newborn screening, of 
which only one was missed. Therefore, 23 patients were diagnosed because of 
disease onset. Among all the patients, 24 showed varying degrees of symptoms 
such as rash, vomiting, seizures, and drowsiness, while only four cases remained 
asymptomatic nowadays. The concentration of 3-hydroxyisovalerylcarnitine (C5-OH) 
in blood and pyruvate, 3-hydroxypropionate, methylcitric acid, 3-hydroxyvaleric 
acid, 3-methylcrotonylglycine in urine were increased greatly among affected 
individuals. After prompt supplement of biotin, both the clinical and 
biochemical symptoms were dramatically resolved and nearly all patients 
developed normal intelligence and physique on follow-up. DNA sequencing revealed 
12 known and 6 novel variants in the HLCS gene of patients. Among them, the 
variant of c.1522C > T was the most common.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings expanded the spectrum of phenotypes and genotypes for 
HLCS deficiency in Chinese populations and suggested that with timely biotin 
therapy, patients with HLCS deficiency showed low mortality and optimistic 
prognosis. Newborn screening is crucial for early diagnosis, treatment, and 
long-term outcomes.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02656-y
PMCID: PMC9997024
PMID: 36890565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential competing 
interest.