---
reference_id: "PMID:32416898"
title: L1CAM mutations in three fetuses diagnosed by medical exome sequencing.
authors:
- Li YT
- Chen JS
- Jian W
- He YD
- Li N
- Xie YN
- Wang J
- Zhang VW
- Huang WR
- Jiang FM
- Ye XQ
- Chen DJ
- Chen M
journal: Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2020.03.022
keywords:
- Adult
- "Agenesis of Corpus Callosum/diagnosis, embryology, genetics"
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Fetus/abnormalities
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnosis, embryology, genetics"
- Humans
- "Hydrocephalus/diagnosis, embryology, genetics"
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, embryology, genetics"
- Mutation
- Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule L1/genetics
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/diagnosis, embryology, genetics"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# L1CAM mutations in three fetuses diagnosed by medical exome sequencing.
**Authors:** Li YT, Chen JS, Jian W, He YD, Li N, Xie YN, Wang J, Zhang VW, Huang WR, Jiang FM, Ye XQ, Chen DJ, Chen M
**Journal:** Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tjog.2020.03.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tjog.2020.03.022)

## Content

1. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2020 May;59(3):451-455. doi: 
10.1016/j.tjog.2020.03.022.

L1CAM mutations in three fetuses diagnosed by medical exome sequencing.

Li YT(1), Chen JS(1), Jian W(1), He YD(2), Li N(1), Xie YN(1), Wang J(2), Zhang 
VW(3), Huang WR(1), Jiang FM(4), Ye XQ(1), Chen DJ(1), Chen M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Fetal Medicine and Prenatal Diagnosis, The Third Affiliated 
Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510150, China; Obstetrics & 
Gynecology Institute of Guangzhou, Guangzhou, 510150, China; The Medical Centre 
for Critical Pregnant Women in Guangzhou, Guangzhou, 510150, China; Key 
Laboratory for Major Obstetric Diseases of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, 
510150, China.
(2)AmCare Genomics Lab, Guangzhou, 510300, China.
(3)AmCare Genomics Lab, Guangzhou, 510300, China; Department of Molecular and 
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(4)Guangzhou Jingke Medical Laboratory, Guangzhou, 510320, China.
(5)Department of Fetal Medicine and Prenatal Diagnosis, The Third Affiliated 
Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510150, China; Obstetrics & 
Gynecology Institute of Guangzhou, Guangzhou, 510150, China; The Medical Centre 
for Critical Pregnant Women in Guangzhou, Guangzhou, 510150, China; Key 
Laboratory for Major Obstetric Diseases of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, 
510150, China. Electronic address: edchen99@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: The L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM) gene, encodes the L1 cell 
adhesion molecule, is involved in the central nervous system development. Its 
mutations result in L1 syndrome which is associated with brain malformation and 
nervous developmental delay.
CASE REPORT: We presented three fetuses with hydrocephalus and agenesis of the 
corpus callosum detected by ultrasound, followed by medical exome sequencing 
(MES) test with L1CAM mutations: two known missense mutation c.551G > A (p. 
R184Q) and c.1354G > A (p. G452R), and a novel frameshift mutation c.1322delG 
which causes the early termination of translation (p. G441Afs∗72). By utilizing 
multiple computational analysis, all the variants were scored to be likely 
pathogenic.
CONCLUSION: Combined use of ultrasound and MES to identify the molecular 
etiology of fetal anomalies may contribute to expanding our knowledge of the 
clinical phenotype of L1 syndrome observed in the south Chinese population.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tjog.2020.03.022
PMID: 32416898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.