---
reference_id: "PMID:29972438"
title: Natural history of 39 patients with Achondroplasia.
authors:
- Ceroni JRM
- Soares DCQ
- Testai LC
- Kawahira RSH
- Yamamoto GL
- Sugayama SMM
- Oliveira LAN
- Bertola DR
- Kim CA
journal: Clinics (Sao Paulo)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.6061/clinics/2018/e324
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques
- Mutation
- Radiography
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of 39 patients with Achondroplasia.
**Authors:** Ceroni JRM, Soares DCQ, Testai LC, Kawahira RSH, Yamamoto GL, Sugayama SMM, Oliveira LAN, Bertola DR, Kim CA
**Journal:** Clinics (Sao Paulo) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.6061/clinics/2018/e324](https://doi.org/10.6061/clinics/2018/e324)

## Content

1. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2018 Jul 2;73:e324. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2018/e324.

Natural history of 39 patients with Achondroplasia.

Ceroni JRM(1), Soares DCQ(1), Testai LC(2), Kawahira RSH(1), Yamamoto GL(1), 
Sugayama SMM(1), Oliveira LAN(3), Bertola DR(1), Kim CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidade de Genetica, Instituto da Crianca (ICR), Hospital das Clinicas 
HCFMUSP, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, BR.
(2)Centro de Pesquisas sobre o Genoma Humano e Celulas-Tronco (CEGH-CEL), 
Instituto de Biociencias (IB), Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, BR.
(3)Unidade de Radiologia, Instituto da Crianca (ICR), Hospital das Clinicas 
HCFMUSP, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, BR.

OBJECTIVES: To characterize the natural history of 39 achondroplastic patients 
diagnosed by clinical, radiological and molecular assessments.
METHODS: Observational and retrospective study of 39 patients who were attended 
at a public tertiary level hospital between 1995 and 2016.
RESULTS: Diagnosis was made prenatally in 11 patients, at birth in 9 patients 
and within the first year of life in 13 patients. The most prevalent clinical 
findings were short stature, high forehead, trident hands, genu varum and 
macrocephaly. The most prevalent radiographic findings were rhizomelic 
shortening of the long bones and narrowing of the interpediculate distance of 
the caudal spine. There was motor developmental delay in 18 patients and speech 
delay in 16 patients. The most common clinical intercurrences were middle ear 
dysfunction, sleep apnea, limb pain and obesity from 2 to 9 years of age. One 
patient was large for the gestational age but did not develop obesity. One 
patient developed hydrocephalus at 10 years old. The current age of the patients 
varies from 15 months to 36 years. The molecular study performed by Sanger 
sequencing of the common heterozygous mutation 1138G>A in FGFR3 was positive in 
all patients. Four cases were inherited, and 35 were sporadic (paternal age from 
19 to 66 years).
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnoses were made early based on clinical and radiographic 
findings. All cases were confirmed molecularly. Despite presenting a benign 
course, it is necessary to establish a systematic protocol for the surveillance 
of these patients due to the common clinical intercurrences.

DOI: 10.6061/clinics/2018/e324
PMCID: PMC6005962
PMID: 29972438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported.