---
reference_id: "PMID:35102733"
title: "Management of bladder dysfunction in multiple sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of studies regarding bladder rehabilitation."
authors:
- Vecchio M
- Chiaramonte R
- DI Benedetto P
journal: Eur J Phys Rehabil Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.23736/S1973-9087.22.07217-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of bladder dysfunction in multiple sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of studies regarding bladder rehabilitation.
**Authors:** Vecchio M, Chiaramonte R, DI Benedetto P
**Journal:** Eur J Phys Rehabil Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S1973-9087.22.07217-3](https://doi.org/10.23736/S1973-9087.22.07217-3)

## Content

1. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med. 2022 Jun;58(3):387-396. doi: 
10.23736/S1973-9087.22.07217-3. Epub 2022 Feb 1.

Management of bladder dysfunction in multiple sclerosis: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of studies regarding bladder rehabilitation.

Vecchio M(1)(2), Chiaramonte R(3), DI Benedetto P(4).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pharmacology, Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological 
Sciences, University of Catania, Catania, Italy - michele.vecchio@unict.it.
(2)Unit of Rehabilitation, Vittorio Emanuele Polyclinic, Catania, Italy - 
michele.vecchio@unict.it.
(3)Section of Pharmacology, Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological 
Sciences, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(4)Polimedica Center Pradamano, Udine, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of the study was to investigate the efficacy of 
rehabilitation programs for bladder disorders in patients with multiple 
sclerosis (MS) and to guide physicians in delineating therapeutic tools and 
programs for physiatrists, using the best current strategies.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: A search was conducted on PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane 
Library and Web of Science. Studies were eligible if they included adults with 
bladder disorders related to MS and described specific treatments of 
rehabilitation interest. The search identified 190,283 articles using the key 
words "multiple sclerosis" AND "rehabilitation" AND "urinary" OR "bladder," of 
which the reviewers analyzed 81 full-texts; 21 publications met the criteria and 
were included in the systematic review.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: The systematic review identified the specific rehabilitation 
treatments reported in the current literature. The meta-analysis compared the 
scores and scales used to quantify bladder disorders due to MS, both before and 
after rehabilitation or in a comparison with a control group.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests the need of a specific therapeutic 
protocol, based on the degree of disability and symptom complexity in patients 
with MS-related neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction (NLUTD). 
Particularly, the meta-analysis shows the effectiveness of peripheral tibial 
nerve stimulation (PTNS) and pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) for neurogenic 
detrusor overactivity (NDO). However, the goal of physiotherapy is to treat 
incontinence without making urinary retention worse and vice-versa, reducing the 
loss of urine urgency, while ensuring the emptying of the bladder.

DOI: 10.23736/S1973-9087.22.07217-3
PMCID: PMC9980558
PMID: 35102733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest.—The authors certify that 
there is no conflict of interest with any financial organization regarding the 
material discussed in the manuscript.