---
reference_id: "PMID:17048442"
title: "Thanatophoric dysplasia: roentgenographic findings and detection of a de novo mutation of FGFR3 gene in a Thai patient."
authors:
- Wattanasirichaigoon D
- Charoenpipop D
journal: J Med Assoc Thai
year: '2006'
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Outcome
- Radiography
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- Thailand
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thanatophoric dysplasia: roentgenographic findings and detection of a de novo mutation of FGFR3 gene in a Thai patient.
**Authors:** Wattanasirichaigoon D, Charoenpipop D
**Journal:** J Med Assoc Thai (2006)

## Content

1. J Med Assoc Thai. 2006 Aug;89(8):1287-92.

Thanatophoric dysplasia: roentgenographic findings and detection of a de novo 
mutation of FGFR3 gene in a Thai patient.

Wattanasirichaigoon D(1), Charoenpipop D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. radwc@mahidol.ac.th

Thanatophoric dysplasia is the most common neonatal lethal skeletal dysplasia 
with an estimated incidence of 1 in 20,000 live births. This condition shares 
some similarity of radiological findings with other types of lethal skeletal 
dysplasias. Definite diagnosis is necessary for accurate medical and genetic 
counseling. The authors describe a male neonate who had characteristic features 
of thanatophoric dysplasia type I including severe shortening of limbs with 
redundant skin folds, large head, frontal bossing, depressed nasal bridge, and 
narrow thoracic cage with severe respiratory insufficiency. Postmortem 
radiographs revealed short ribs, flat vertebral bodies (platyspondyly), 
hypoplastic iliac bones, marked shortening of long bones including short and 
mild bowing of both femora, oval radiolucent area of proximal femur. Molecular 
analysis of Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene identified a de 
novo mutation, p.R248C, in exon 7.

PMID: 17048442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]