---
reference_id: "PMID:23273569"
title: Exome sequencing identifies INPPL1 mutations as a cause of opsismodysplasia.
authors:
- Huber C
- Faqeih EA
- Bartholdi D
- Bole-Feysot C
- Borochowitz Z
- Cavalcanti DP
- Frigo A
- Nitschke P
- Roume J
- Santos HG
- Shalev SA
- Superti-Furga A
- Delezoide AL
- Le Merrer M
- Munnich A
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.015
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exome
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- "Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-Trisphosphate 5-Phosphatases"
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing identifies INPPL1 mutations as a cause of opsismodysplasia.
**Authors:** Huber C, Faqeih EA, Bartholdi D, Bole-Feysot C, Borochowitz Z, Cavalcanti DP, Frigo A, Nitschke P, Roume J, Santos HG, Shalev SA, Superti-Furga A, Delezoide AL, Le Merrer M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.015)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Jan 10;92(1):144-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.015. Epub
 2012 Dec 27.

Exome sequencing identifies INPPL1 mutations as a cause of opsismodysplasia.

Huber C(1), Faqeih EA, Bartholdi D, Bole-Feysot C, Borochowitz Z, Cavalcanti DP, 
Frigo A, Nitschke P, Roume J, Santos HG, Shalev SA, Superti-Furga A, Delezoide 
AL, Le Merrer M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V.

Author information:
(1)Département de Génétique, Unité INSERM U781, Université Paris 
Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Fondation Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants 
Malades, Paris 75015, France.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2013 Jun;83(6):527-9. doi: 10.1111/cge.12136.

Opsismodysplasia (OPS) is a severe autosomal-recessive chondrodysplasia 
characterized by pre- and postnatal micromelia with extremely short hands and 
feet. The main radiological features are severe platyspondyly, squared 
metacarpals, delayed skeletal ossification, and metaphyseal cupping. In order to 
identify mutations causing OPS, a total of 16 cases (7 terminated pregnancies 
and 9 postnatal cases) from 10 unrelated families were included in this study. 
We performed exome sequencing in three cases from three unrelated families and 
only one gene was found to harbor mutations in all three cases: inositol 
polyphosphate phosphatase-like 1 (INPPL1). Screening INPPL1 in the remaining 
cases identified a total of 12 distinct INPPL1 mutations in the 10 families, 
present at the homozygote state in 7 consanguinous families and at the compound 
heterozygote state in the 3 remaining families. Most mutations (6/12) resulted 
in premature stop codons, 2/12 were splice site, and 4/12 were missense 
mutations located in the catalytic domain, 5-phosphatase. INPPL1 belongs to the 
inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate 5-phosphatase family, a family of signal-modulating 
enzymes that govern a plethora of cellular functions by regulating the levels of 
specific phosphoinositides. Our finding of INPPL1 mutations in OPS, a severe 
spondylodysplastic dysplasia with major growth plate disorganization, supports a 
key and specific role of this enzyme in endochondral ossification.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.015
PMCID: PMC3542463
PMID: 23273569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]