---
reference_id: "PMID:33078349"
title: STK4 Deficiency Impairs Innate Immunity and Interferon Production Through Negative Regulation of TBK1-IRF3 Signaling.
authors:
- Jørgensen SE
- Al-Mousawi A
- Assing K
- Hartling U
- Grosen D
- Fisker N
- Nielsen C
- Jakobsen MA
- Mogensen TH
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-020-00891-7
keywords:
- Adaptive Immunity
- Alleles
- Autophagy
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Proliferation
- Cell Survival/genetics
- Cytokines/biosynthesis
- Female
- Genotype
- Hippo Signaling Pathway
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/genetics"
- Immunocompromised Host
- Immunophenotyping
- "Infections/etiology, metabolism"
- Interferon Regulatory Factor-3/metabolism
- Interferons/biosynthesis
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/deficiency
- Lymphocyte Activation
- "Macrophages/immunology, metabolism"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Neutrophils/immunology, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/deficiency, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Hippo Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STK4 Deficiency Impairs Innate Immunity and Interferon Production Through Negative Regulation of TBK1-IRF3 Signaling.
**Authors:** Jørgensen SE, Al-Mousawi A, Assing K, Hartling U, Grosen D, Fisker N, Nielsen C, Jakobsen MA, Mogensen TH
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-020-00891-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-020-00891-7)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2021 Jan;41(1):109-124. doi: 10.1007/s10875-020-00891-7. Epub 
2020 Oct 19.

STK4 Deficiency Impairs Innate Immunity and Interferon Production Through 
Negative Regulation of TBK1-IRF3 Signaling.

Jørgensen SE(#)(1)(2), Al-Mousawi A(#)(1)(2), Assing K(#)(3), Hartling U(4), 
Grosen D(4), Fisker N(4), Nielsen C(3), Jakobsen MA(3), Mogensen TH(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Immunology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark. trine.mogensen@biomed.au.dk.
(6)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. 
trine.mogensen@biomed.au.dk.
(7)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. 
trine.mogensen@biomed.au.dk.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: STK4 deficiency due to homozygous mutations in the STK4 gene 
encoding the STK4/MST1 kinase was first described in 2012. STK4/MST1 kinase 
regulates cell proliferation, survival, differentiation, and immune responses 
through canonical and non-canonical Hippo signaling pathways.
OBJECTIVE: We describe an 11-year-old girl with a clinical presentation 
consisting of severe recurrent herpes zoster, chronic warts, and recurrent 
pneumonias, as well as a somatic phenotype with hypothyroidism and low stature. 
Whole exome sequencing revealed STK4 deficiency due to homozygosity for a novel 
frameshift variant in STK4, c.523dupA, p.(L174fsTer45), resulting in a premature 
stop codon within the kinase domain.
METHODS: We performed a thorough investigation of the genetics and innate and 
adaptive immunological abnormalities in STK4 deficiency.
RESULTS: We show significantly impaired type I, II, and III interferon (IFN) 
responses and partly reduced proinflammatory cytokine responses to ligands of 
Toll-like receptor (TLR)3, TLR9, and the cytosolic RNA and DNA sensors as well 
as to microorganisms. Impaired IFN responses could be attributed to reduced 
phosphorylation of TBK1 and IRF3. Moreover, virus infection induced enhanced 
cell death by apoptosis. Importantly, autophagy pathways were slightly 
disturbed, with enhanced LC3B-Ito LCB3-II conversion at the single cell level 
but normal overall formation of LCB3 punctae. Finally, the patient displayed 
some indicators of impaired adaptive immunity in the form of insufficient 
vaccination responses, T cell lymphopenia, and reduced Treg fractions, although 
with largely normal T cell proliferation and normal IFNg production.
CONCLUSION: Here, we demonstrate disturbances in various immune cell populations 
and pathways involved in innate immune responses, cell death, autophagy, and 
adaptive immunity in a patient homozygous for a novel STK4 frameshift mutation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-020-00891-7
PMID: 33078349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]