---
reference_id: "PMID:22550239"
title: "Field cancerization in non-small cell lung cancer: implications in disease pathogenesis."
authors:
- Kadara H
- Wistuba II
journal: Proc Am Thorac Soc
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1513/pats.201201-004MS
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Field cancerization in non-small cell lung cancer: implications in disease pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Kadara H, Wistuba II
**Journal:** Proc Am Thorac Soc (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1513/pats.201201-004MS](https://doi.org/10.1513/pats.201201-004MS)

## Content

1. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2012 May;9(2):38-42. doi: 10.1513/pats.201201-004MS.

Field cancerization in non-small cell lung cancer: implications in disease 
pathogenesis.

Kadara H(1), Wistuba II.

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology , University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 085, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Lung cancer, of which non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) composes the majority, 
is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States and 
worldwide. NSCLCs are tumors with complex biology that we have recently started 
to understand with the advent of various histological, transcriptomic, genomic, 
and proteomic technologies. However, the histological and molecular pathogenesis 
of this malignancy, in particular of adenocarcinomas, is still largely unknown. 
Earlier studies have highlighted a field cancerization phenomenon in which 
histologically normal-appearing tissue adjacent to neoplastic and pre-neoplastic 
lesions display molecular abnormalities, some of which are in common with those 
in the tumors. This review will summarize advances in understanding the field 
cancerization phenomenon and the potential relevance of this knowledge to gain 
important and novel insights into the molecular pathogenesis of NSCLC as well as 
to subsequent development of biomarkers for early detection of lung cancers and 
possibly personalized prevention.

DOI: 10.1513/pats.201201-004MS
PMCID: PMC5821032
PMID: 22550239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]