---
reference_id: "PMID:34830822"
title: "The Classification of Myeloproliferative Neoplasms: Rationale, Historical Background and Future Perspectives with Focus on Unclassifiable Cases."
authors:
- Pizzi M
- Croci GA
- Ruggeri M
- Tabano S
- Dei Tos AP
- Sabattini E
- Gianelli U
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cancers13225666
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Classification of Myeloproliferative Neoplasms: Rationale, Historical Background and Future Perspectives with Focus on Unclassifiable Cases.
**Authors:** Pizzi M, Croci GA, Ruggeri M, Tabano S, Dei Tos AP, Sabattini E, Gianelli U
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers13225666](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13225666)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Nov 12;13(22):5666. doi: 10.3390/cancers13225666.

The Classification of Myeloproliferative Neoplasms: Rationale, Historical 
Background and Future Perspectives with Focus on Unclassifiable Cases.

Pizzi M(1), Croci GA(2)(3), Ruggeri M(4), Tabano S(5), Dei Tos AP(1), Sabattini 
E(6), Gianelli U(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Surgical Pathology and Cytopathology Unit, Department of Medicine-DIMED, 
University of Padua, 35128 Padua, Italy.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 20122 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Hematology, San Bortolo Hospital, 36100 Vicenza, Italy.
(5)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Foundation IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(6)Haematopathology Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, 
40138 Bologna, Italy.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are a heterogeneous group of clonal 
hematopoietic stem cell disorders, characterized by increased proliferation of 
one or more myeloid lineages in the bone marrow. The classification and 
diagnostic criteria of MPNs have undergone relevant changes over the years, 
reflecting the increased awareness on these conditions and a better 
understanding of their biological and clinical-pathological features. The 
current World Health Organization (WHO) Classification acknowledges four main 
sub-groups of MPNs: (i) Chronic Myeloid Leukemia; (ii) classical 
Philadelphia-negative MPNs (Polycythemia Vera; Essential Thrombocythemia; 
Primary Myelofibrosis); (iii) non-classical Philadelphia-negative MPNs (Chronic 
Neutrophilic Leukemia; Chronic Eosinophilic Leukemia); and (iv) MPNs, 
unclassifiable (MPN-U). The latter are currently defined as MPNs with 
clinical-pathological findings not fulfilling the diagnostic criteria for any 
other entity. The MPN-U spectrum traditionally encompasses early phase MPNs, 
terminal (i.e., advanced fibrotic) MPNs, and cases associated with inflammatory 
or neoplastic disorders that obscure the clinical-histological picture. Several 
lines of evidence and clinical practice suggest the existence of additional 
myeloid neoplasms that may expand the spectrum of MPN-U. To gain insight into 
such disorders, this review addresses the history of MPN classification, the 
evolution of their diagnostic criteria and the complex clinical-pathological and 
biological features of MPN-U.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13225666
PMCID: PMC8616346
PMID: 34830822

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors declare no conflict of interest.