---
reference_id: "PMID:30518652"
title: Spatiotemporal Differences in Presentation of CD8 T Cell Epitopes during Hepatitis B Virus Infection.
authors:
- Khakpoor A
- Ni Y
- Chen A
- Ho ZZ
- Oei V
- Yang N
- Giri R
- Chow JX
- Tan AT
- Kennedy PT
- Maini M
- Urban S
- Bertoletti A
journal: J Virol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01457-18
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spatiotemporal Differences in Presentation of CD8 T Cell Epitopes during Hepatitis B Virus Infection.
**Authors:** Khakpoor A, Ni Y, Chen A, Ho ZZ, Oei V, Yang N, Giri R, Chow JX, Tan AT, Kennedy PT, Maini M, Urban S, Bertoletti A
**Journal:** J Virol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01457-18](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01457-18)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2019 Feb 5;93(4):e01457-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01457-18. Print 2019 Feb
 15.

Spatiotemporal Differences in Presentation of CD8 T Cell Epitopes during 
Hepatitis B Virus Infection.

Khakpoor A(1), Ni Y(2)(3), Chen A(4), Ho ZZ(5), Oei V(1), Yang N(6), Giri R(1), 
Chow JX(1), Tan AT(1), Kennedy PT(7), Maini M(8), Urban S(2)(3), Bertoletti 
A(9)(6).

Author information:
(1)Emerging Infectious Diseases Program, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 
Republic of Singapore.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, University Hospital 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Baden-Württemberg, Germany.
(3)German Center for Infection Research, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Infectious Disease and Vaccines, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Beerse, Belgium.
(5)Lion TCR Private Limited, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.
(6)Singapore Immunology Network, A*STAR, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.
(7)Hepatology, Centre for Immunobiology, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(8)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(9)Emerging Infectious Diseases Program, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 
Republic of Singapore antonio@duke-nus.edu.sg.

Distinct populations of hepatocytes infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV) or 
only harboring HBV DNA integrations coexist within an HBV chronically infected 
liver. These hepatocytes express HBV antigens at different levels and with 
different intracellular localizations, but it is not known whether this 
heterogeneity of viral antigen expression could result in an uneven hepatic 
presentation of distinct HBV epitopes/HLA class I complexes triggering different 
levels of activation of HBV-specific CD8+ T cells. Using antibodies specific to 
two distinct HLA-A*02:01/HBV epitope complexes of HBV nucleocapsid and envelope 
proteins, we mapped their topological distributions in liver biopsy specimens of 
two anti-hepatitis B e antigen-positive (HBe+) chronic HBV (CHB) patients. We 
demonstrated that the core and envelope CD8+ T cell epitopes were not uniformly 
distributed in the liver parenchyma but preferentially located in distinct and 
sometimes mutually exclusive hepatic zones. The efficiency of HBV epitope 
presentation was then tested in vitro utilizing HLA-A*02:01/HBV epitope-specific 
antibodies and the corresponding CD8+ T cells in primary human hepatocyte and 
hepatoma cell lines either infected with HBV or harboring HBV DNA integration. 
We confirmed the existence of a marked variability in the efficiency of HLA 
class I/HBV epitope presentation among the different targets that was influenced 
by the presence of gamma interferon (IFN-γ) and availability of newly translated 
viral antigens. In conclusion, HBV antigen presentation can be heterogeneous 
within an HBV-infected liver. As a consequence, CD8+ T cells of different HBV 
specificities might have different antiviral efficacies.IMPORTANCE The inability 
of patients with chronic HBV infection to clear HBV is associated with defective 
HBV-specific CD8+ T cells. Hence, the majority of immunotherapy developments 
focus on HBV-specific T cell function restoration. However, knowledge of whether 
distinct HBV-specific T cells can equally target all the HBV-infected 
hepatocytes of a chronically infected liver is lacking. In this work, analysis 
of CHB patient liver parenchyma and in vitro HBV infection models shows a 
nonuniform distribution of HBV CD8+ T cell epitopes that is influenced by the 
presence of IFN-γ and availability of newly translated viral antigens. These 
results suggest that CD8+ T cells recognizing different HBV epitopes can be 
necessary for efficient immune therapeutic control of chronic HBV infection.

Copyright © 2019 Khakpoor et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01457-18
PMCID: PMC6364024
PMID: 30518652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]