---
reference_id: "PMID:9036797"
title: "Intravenous cidofovir for peripheral cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with AIDS. A randomized, controlled trial."
authors:
- Lalezari JP
- Stagg RJ
- Kuppermann BD
- Holland GN
- Kramer F
- Ives DV
- Youle M
- Robinson MR
- Drew WL
- Jaffe HS
journal: Ann Intern Med
year: '1997'
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-126-4-199702150-00001
keywords:
- "AIDS-Related Opportunistic Infections/drug therapy, physiopathology, virology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antiviral Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Cidofovir
- "Cytomegalovirus Retinitis/drug therapy, physiopathology, virology"
- "Cytosine/administration & dosage, adverse effects, analogs & derivatives"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Organophosphonates
- "Organophosphorus Compounds/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Prospective Studies
- Visual Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous cidofovir for peripheral cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with AIDS. A randomized, controlled trial.
**Authors:** Lalezari JP, Stagg RJ, Kuppermann BD, Holland GN, Kramer F, Ives DV, Youle M, Robinson MR, Drew WL, Jaffe HS
**Journal:** Ann Intern Med (1997)
**DOI:** [10.7326/0003-4819-126-4-199702150-00001](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-126-4-199702150-00001)

## Content

1. Ann Intern Med. 1997 Feb 15;126(4):257-63. doi: 
10.7326/0003-4819-126-4-199702150-00001.

Intravenous cidofovir for peripheral cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with 
AIDS. A randomized, controlled trial.

Lalezari JP(1), Stagg RJ, Kuppermann BD, Holland GN, Kramer F, Ives DV, Youle M, 
Robinson MR, Drew WL, Jaffe HS.

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Francisco, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis is the most common intraocular 
infection in patients with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). If 
left untreated, it may lead to progressive destruction of retinal tissue and 
blindness. Cidofovir is a nucleotide analogue of cytosine that has potent, 
prolonged in vitro and in vivo activity against herpesviruses, including many 
CMV isolates that are resistant to ganciclovir and foscarnet.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether intravenous cidofovir delays progression of 
previously untreated CMV retinitis.
DESIGN: Randomized, controlled trial comparing immediate with deferred cidofovir 
treatment. Patients in the deferred treatment group were eligible to receive 
cidofovir after progression of CMV retinitis was documented by retinal 
photography.
SETTING: Eight academic medical centers and an independent center that read 
retinal photographs.
PATIENTS: 48 patients with AIDS and previously untreated peripheral CMV 
retinitis who were randomly assigned to immediate (n = 25) or deferred treatment 
(n = 23).
INTERVENTION: Intravenous cidofovir, 5 mg/kg of body weight, once weekly for 2 
weeks and then once every other week. To minimize nephrotoxicity, oral 
probenecid and intravenous hydration with normal saline were administered with 
each cidofovir infusion.
MEASUREMENTS: Progression of CMV retinitis was assessed by bilateral, full-field 
retinal photographs that were read by an ophthalmologist who was masked to 
treatment assignment. Incidence of side effects, changes in visual acuity, 
effect on CMV shedding in urine and blood, and mortality were also assessed.
RESULTS: The median time to progression of CMV retinitis was 22 days (95% CI, 10 
to 27 days) in the deferred treatment group and 120 days (CI, 40 to 134 days) in 
the immediate treatment group (P < 0.001). Neutropenia (15%) and proteinuria 
(12%), both asymptomatic, were the most common serious adverse events considered 
to be possibly related to cidofovir. Cidofovir treatment was discontinued in 10 
of 41 patients (24%) because of protocol-defined treatment-limiting 
nephrotoxicity. Transient reactions to probenecid, including mild to moderate 
constitutional symptoms or nausea, occurred in 23 of 41 patients (56%) and were 
dose limiting in 3 (7%).
CONCLUSIONS: Cidofovir was efficacious in delaying progression of previously 
untreated CMV retinitis. Treatment was associated with manageable side effects; 
strict adherence to monitoring of renal function before cidofovir was 
administered and concomitant administration of probenecid and saline hydration 
appeared to minimize drug-related nephrotoxicity.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-126-4-199702150-00001
PMID: 9036797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]