---
reference_id: "PMID:38311882"
title: "Identification of a founder variant AAGAB c.370C>T, p.Arg124Ter in patients with punctate palmoplantar keratoderma in Southern Denmark."
authors:
- Gram SB
- Jørgensen ASF
- Bygum A
- Brusgaard K
- Ousager LB
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14486
keywords:
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics"
- Skin
- Heterozygote
- Haplotypes
- Denmark
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a founder variant AAGAB c.370C>T, p.Arg124Ter in patients with punctate palmoplantar keratoderma in Southern Denmark.
**Authors:** Gram SB, Jørgensen ASF, Bygum A, Brusgaard K, Ousager LB
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14486](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14486)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2024 May;105(5):561-566. doi: 10.1111/cge.14486. Epub 2024 Feb 4.

Identification of a founder variant AAGAB c.370C>T, p.Arg124Ter in patients with 
punctate palmoplantar keratoderma in Southern Denmark.

Gram SB(1)(2)(3), Jørgensen ASF(1), Bygum A(1)(2)(4), Brusgaard K(1)(2), Ousager 
LB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(3)European Reference Network for Rare Skin Diseases (ERN-Skin), Odense, 
Denmark.
(4)Hudklinikken Kolding, Kolding, Denmark.

Palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) is a heterogeneous group of rare skin diseases 
characterized by hyperkeratosis on the palms or soles. The subtype isolated 
punctate PPK is caused by heterozygous variants in AAGAB. We investigated if the 
variant AAGAB c.370C>T, p.Arg124Ter in patients with punctate PPK in the Region 
of Southern Denmark represented a founder variant and estimated the age to the 
most recent common ancestor. We performed haplotype analysis on samples from 20 
patients diagnosed with punctate PPK and the AAGAB c.370C>T, p.Arg124Ter 
variant. Using the Gamma Method, we calculated the years to the most recent 
common ancestor. We also explored the presence of the variant in other 
populations through literature and databases (HGMD, ClinVar, and gnomAD). Our 
analysis revealed a shared haplotype of 3.0 Mb, suggesting shared ancestry. The 
ancestral haplogroup was estimated to an age of 12.1 generations (CI: 4.9-20.3) 
equivalent to approximately 339 years (CI: 137-568). This study confirms that 
the frequently observed variant AAGAB c.370C>T, p.Arg124Ter in punctate PPK 
among patients in the Region of Southern Denmark is caused by a founder variant. 
We recommend testing for the variant as initial screening in our region and 
potentially for all Danish patients presenting with punctate PPK.

© 2024 The Authors. Clinical Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14486
PMID: 38311882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]