---
reference_id: "PMID:19914252"
title: Experimentally derived metastasis gene expression profile predicts recurrence and death in patients with colon cancer.
authors:
- Smith JJ
- Deane NG
- Wu F
- Merchant NB
- Zhang B
- Jiang A
- Lu P
- Johnson JC
- Schmidt C
- Bailey CE
- Eschrich S
- Kis C
- Levy S
- Washington MK
- Heslin MJ
- Coffey RJ
- Yeatman TJ
- Shyr Y
- Beauchamp RD
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.11.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Experimentally derived metastasis gene expression profile predicts recurrence and death in patients with colon cancer.
**Authors:** Smith JJ, Deane NG, Wu F, Merchant NB, Zhang B, Jiang A, Lu P, Johnson JC, Schmidt C, Bailey CE, Eschrich S, Kis C, Levy S, Washington MK, Heslin MJ, Coffey RJ, Yeatman TJ, Shyr Y, Beauchamp RD
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2009.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2009.11.005)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2010 Mar;138(3):958-68. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.11.005. 
Epub 2009 Nov 13.

Experimentally derived metastasis gene expression profile predicts recurrence 
and death in patients with colon cancer.

Smith JJ(1), Deane NG, Wu F, Merchant NB, Zhang B, Jiang A, Lu P, Johnson JC, 
Schmidt C, Bailey CE, Eschrich S, Kis C, Levy S, Washington MK, Heslin MJ, 
Coffey RJ, Yeatman TJ, Shyr Y, Beauchamp RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Staging inadequately predicts metastatic risk in patients 
with colon cancer. We used a gene expression profile derived from invasive, 
murine colon cancer cells that were highly metastatic in an immunocompetent 
mouse model to identify patients with colon cancer at risk of recurrence.
METHODS: This phase 1, exploratory biomarker study used 55 patients with 
colorectal cancer from Vanderbilt Medical Center (VMC) as the training dataset 
and 177 patients from the Moffitt Cancer Center as the independent dataset. The 
metastasis-associated gene expression profile developed from the mouse model was 
refined with comparative functional genomics in the VMC gene expression profiles 
to identify a 34-gene classifier associated with high risk of metastasis and 
death from colon cancer. A metastasis score derived from the biologically based 
classifier was tested in the Moffitt dataset.
RESULTS: A high score was significantly associated with increased risk of 
metastasis and death from colon cancer across all pathologic stages and 
specifically in stage II and stage III patients. The metastasis score was shown 
to independently predict risk of cancer recurrence and death in univariate and 
multivariate models. For example, among stage III patients, a high score 
translated to increased relative risk of cancer recurrence (hazard ratio, 4.7; 
95% confidence interval, 1.566-14.05). Furthermore, the metastasis score 
identified patients with stage III disease whose 5-year recurrence-free survival 
was >88% and for whom adjuvant chemotherapy did not increase survival time.
CONCLUSION: A gene expression profile identified from an experimental model of 
colon cancer metastasis predicted cancer recurrence and death, independently of 
conventional measures, in patients with colon cancer.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.11.005
PMCID: PMC3388775
PMID: 19914252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors disclose no 
conflicts.