---
reference_id: "PMID:17176487"
title: "Lyme disease in pregnancy: case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Walsh CA
- Mayer EW
- Baxi LV
journal: Obstet Gynecol Surv
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1097/01.ogx.0000251024.43400.9a
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lyme disease in pregnancy: case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Walsh CA, Mayer EW, Baxi LV
**Journal:** Obstet Gynecol Surv (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.ogx.0000251024.43400.9a](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.ogx.0000251024.43400.9a)

## Content

1. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 2007 Jan;62(1):41-50. doi: 
10.1097/01.ogx.0000251024.43400.9a.

Lyme disease in pregnancy: case report and review of the literature.

Walsh CA(1), Mayer EW, Baxi LV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Columbia University Medical Center 
at the New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Lyme disease is the most common vector-borne disease in the United States. A 
number of other spirochetal diseases, if contracted in pregnancy, have been 
shown to cause fetal harm and there is concern over a similar effect with 
gestational borreliosis. Previously published individual case reports have 
suggested a possible association between gestational borreliosis and adverse 
pregnancy outcome; however, no specific pattern of teratogenicity has been 
shown, and a causal relationship has never been proven. In addition, larger 
epidemiological and serological series have consistently failed to demonstrate 
an increased risk to pregnant women who develop Lyme disease if they receive 
appropriate antimicrobial therapy. We describe a favorable outcome in a 
42-year-old woman who developed Lyme disease in the third trimester and was 
treated with a full course of oral amoxicillin. In addition, we offer a review 
of the relevant literature regarding Lyme disease and pregnancy. The appropriate 
investigation and management of a woman with gestational borreliosis are 
discussed.
TARGET AUDIENCE: Obstetricians & Gynecologists, Family Physicians.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES: After completion of this article, the reader should be able 
to recall that Lyme disease is not an uncommon disease during pregnancy and can 
occur in states outside of the Northeast, explain that the diagnosis is made 
clinically and may be confirmed by laboratory tests, state that treatment is 
recommended during pregnancy, and summarize that there is no consistent data of 
adverse fetal effects even though the placenta is infected.

DOI: 10.1097/01.ogx.0000251024.43400.9a
PMID: 17176487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]