---
reference_id: "PMID:21970482"
title: Microsatellite instability and colorectal cancer.
authors:
- Geiersbach KB
- Samowitz WS
journal: Arch Pathol Lab Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.5858/arpa.2011-0035-RA
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microsatellite instability and colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Geiersbach KB, Samowitz WS
**Journal:** Arch Pathol Lab Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.5858/arpa.2011-0035-RA](https://doi.org/10.5858/arpa.2011-0035-RA)

## Content

1. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2011 Oct;135(10):1269-77. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2011-0035-RA.

Microsatellite instability and colorectal cancer.

Geiersbach KB(1), Samowitz WS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84108, USA. katherine.geiersbach@aruplab.com

CONTEXT: About 15% of colorectal cancers are characterized by genomic 
microsatellite instability, and of these, about 1 in 5 (2%-4% overall) are due 
to Lynch syndrome, a dominantly inherited condition predisposing the patient to 
cancers of multiple organ systems, including the gastrointestinal tract. 
Identification of individuals with Lynch syndrome allows for increased 
surveillance of the affected individual and of potentially affected family 
members.
OBJECTIVE: To review the literature on microsatellite instability in colorectal 
cancer and current laboratory diagnostic testing strategies for the detection of 
Lynch syndrome.
DATA SOURCES: This review is based on peer-reviewed literature, published 
guidelines from professional organizations (Evaluation of Genomic Applications 
in Practice and Prevention Working Group, National Comprehensive Cancer 
Network), and information from clinical laboratories performing microsatellite 
instability testing.
CONCLUSIONS: Universal screening for Lynch syndrome in all individuals affected 
with colorectal cancer has been recommended by the Evaluation of Genomic 
Applications in Practice and Prevention Working Group. Preliminary screening 
tests can identify individuals unlikely to be affected by Lynch syndrome, 
thereby reducing the need for full gene analysis. Immunohistochemistry and 
polymerase chain reaction-based tests for microsatellite instability have 
similar clinical sensitivity and specificity, and each method has advantages and 
limitations. BRAF and MLH1 methylation testing are useful reflex tests for those 
with a defect in MLH1 identified by immunohistochemistry. Emerging technologies, 
such as high-throughput sequencing, may substantially affect diagnostic 
algorithms in the future.

DOI: 10.5858/arpa.2011-0035-RA
PMID: 21970482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]