---
reference_id: "PMID:38067338"
title: A Review of Recent Advances in Computer-Aided Detection Methods Using Hyperspectral Imaging Engineering to Detect Skin Cancer.
authors:
- Huang HY
- Hsiao YP
- Karmakar R
- Mukundan A
- Chaudhary P
- Hsieh SC
- Wang HC
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15235634
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Review of Recent Advances in Computer-Aided Detection Methods Using Hyperspectral Imaging Engineering to Detect Skin Cancer.
**Authors:** Huang HY, Hsiao YP, Karmakar R, Mukundan A, Chaudhary P, Hsieh SC, Wang HC
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15235634](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15235634)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Nov 29;15(23):5634. doi: 10.3390/cancers15235634.

A Review of Recent Advances in Computer-Aided Detection Methods Using
Hyperspectral Imaging Engineering to Detect Skin Cancer.

Huang HY(1), Hsiao YP(2)(3), Karmakar R(4), Mukundan A(4), Chaudhary P(5), Hsieh
SC(6), Wang HC(4)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chiayi Christian
Hospital, Chia Yi City 60002, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, No.110,
Sec. 1, Jianguo N. Rd., South District, Taichung City 40201, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Medicine, School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University,
No.110, Sec. 1, Jianguo N. Rd., South District, Taichung City 40201, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Chung Cheng University, 168,
University Rd., Min Hsiung, Chia Yi City 62102, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Aeronautical Engineering, Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala
R&D Institute of Science and Technology, Avadi, Chennai 600 062, India.
(6)Department of Plastic Surgery, Kaohsiung Armed Forces General Hospital, 2,
Zhongzheng 1st. Rd., Lingya District, Kaohsiung 80284, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Medical Research, Dalin Tzu Chi General Hospital, No. 2,
Min-Sheng Rd., Dalin Town, Chia Yi City 62247, Taiwan.
(8)Technology Development, Hitspectra Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd.,
Kaohsiung 80661, Taiwan.

Skin cancer, a malignant neoplasm originating from skin cell types including
keratinocytes, melanocytes, and sweat glands, comprises three primary forms:
basal cell carcinoma (BCC), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and malignant
melanoma (MM). BCC and SCC, while constituting the most prevalent categories of
skin cancer, are generally considered less aggressive compared to MM. Notably,
MM possesses a greater capacity for invasiveness, enabling infiltration into
adjacent tissues and dissemination via both the circulatory and lymphatic
systems. Risk factors associated with skin cancer encompass ultraviolet (UV)
radiation exposure, fair skin complexion, a history of sunburn incidents,
genetic predisposition, immunosuppressive conditions, and exposure to
environmental carcinogens. Early detection of skin cancer is of paramount
importance to optimize treatment outcomes and preclude the progression of
disease, either locally or to distant sites. In pursuit of this objective,
numerous computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems have been developed.
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI), distinguished by its capacity to capture
information spanning the electromagnetic spectrum, surpasses conventional RGB
imaging, which relies solely on three color channels. Consequently, this study
offers a comprehensive exploration of recent CAD investigations pertaining to
skin cancer detection and diagnosis utilizing HSI, emphasizing diagnostic
performance parameters such as sensitivity and specificity.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15235634
PMCID: PMC10705122
PMID: 38067338

Conflict of interest statement: Hsiang-Chen Wang is from Hitspectra Intelligent
Technology Co., Ltd. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
