---
reference_id: "PMID:25708615"
title: "Adult primary central nervous system vasculitis treatment and course: analysis of one hundred sixty-three patients."
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Brown RD Jr
- Christianson TJ
- Huston J 3rd
- Giannini C
- Miller DV
- Hunder GG
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/art.39068
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy/complications
- Cohort Studies
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Logistic Models
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- Prednisone/therapeutic use
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Recurrence
- Retrospective Studies
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult primary central nervous system vasculitis treatment and course: analysis of one hundred sixty-three patients.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Christianson TJ, Huston J 3rd, Giannini C, Miller DV, Hunder GG
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.39068](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.39068)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Jun;67(6):1637-45. doi: 10.1002/art.39068.

Adult primary central nervous system vasculitis treatment and course: analysis 
of one hundred sixty-three patients.

Salvarani C(1), Brown RD Jr(2), Christianson TJ(2), Huston J 3rd(2), Giannini 
C(2), Miller DV(2), Hunder GG(2).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, and Azienda Ospedaliera IRCCS di Reggio 
Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(2)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the treatment and outcomes of patients with primary 
central nervous system (CNS) vasculitis.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied a cohort of 163 consecutive patients with 
primary CNS vasculitis who were seen at the Mayo Clinic over a 29-year period. 
We analyzed treatments, treatment responses, and factors predictive of outcomes.
RESULTS: A favorable response was observed in 85% of patients treated with 
prednisone alone and in 80% of patients treated with prednisone and 
cyclophosphamide. Relapses were observed in 27% of patients, and 25% of patients 
had discontinued therapy by the time of the last followup visit. Treatment with 
prednisone alone was associated with more frequent relapses (odds ratio [OR] 
2.90), while large vessel involvement (OR 6.14) and cerebral infarcts at the 
time of diagnosis (OR 3.32) were associated with a poor response to treatment. 
Prominent gadolinium-enhanced cerebral lesions or meninges were linked with 
continued treatment at the last followup encounter (OR 2.28). Higher disability 
scores at the last followup visit were associated with increasing age at the 
time of diagnosis (OR 1.44) and cerebral infarctions (OR 3.74), while lower 
disability scores were associated with gadolinium-enhanced cerebral lesions or 
meninges (OR 0.35) and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (OR 0.24). Increased 
mortality was associated with increasing age at diagnosis (hazard ratio [HR] 
1.39), diagnosis by angiography (HR 3.28), cerebral infarction (HR 4.44), and 
large vessel involvement (HR 4.98), while reduced mortality was associated with 
gadolinium-enhanced cerebral lesions or meninges (HR 0.20).
CONCLUSION: The majority of patients with primary CNS vasculitis responded to 
treatment. Recognition of findings at diagnosis that predict the course or 
outcome may aid in decision-making regarding therapy.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.39068
PMID: 25708615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]