---
reference_id: "PMID:36571257"
title: "Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in adults: Characteristics, treatment, and outcomes."
authors:
- Lai CC
- Hsu CK
- Hsueh SC
- Yen MY
- Ko WC
- Hsueh PR
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.28426
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in adults: Characteristics, treatment, and outcomes.
**Authors:** Lai CC, Hsu CK, Hsueh SC, Yen MY, Ko WC, Hsueh PR
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.28426](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.28426)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2023 Feb;95(2):e28426. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28426.

Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in adults: Characteristics, treatment, and 
outcomes.

Lai CC(1), Hsu CK(2), Hsueh SC(3), Yen MY(4), Ko WC(5)(6), Hsueh 
PR(3)(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hospital Medicine, Chi Mei 
Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, E-Da Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Cheng Hsin General Hospital, School of 
Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, 
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(9)School of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(10)Departments of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

Following the rapidly increasing number of multisystem inflammatory syndromes in 
children (MIS-C), a similar clinical scenario has been observed in adult 
patients. Although its prevalence is low and probably related to underdiagnosis, 
its development can be associated with high mortality. Multisystem inflammatory 
syndrome in adults (MIS-A) can develop following both asymptomatic and 
symptomatic severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
infection and in previously healthy people. Like MIS-C, MIS-A is a multisystem 
disease that can involve the cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, 
dermatologic, hematologic, and neurologic systems. In addition to the clinical 
manifestations, the diagnosis of MIS-A requires laboratory evidence of 
inflammation and SARS-CoV-2 infection. The appropriate treatment for MIS-A 
remains unclear; anti-inflammatory agents, including intravenous immunoglobulin 
and corticosteroids, are commonly used. However, there are still many unknowns 
regarding MIS-A. Further studies are needed to determine the true prevalence, 
pathogenesis, and effective treatment for MIS-A.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.28426
PMID: 36571257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]