---
reference_id: "PMID:24404580"
title: The potent oncogene NPM-ALK mediates malignant transformation of normal human CD4(+) T lymphocytes.
authors:
- Zhang Q
- Wei F
- Wang HY
- Liu X
- Roy D
- Xiong QB
- Jiang S
- Medvec A
- Danet-Desnoyers G
- Watt C
- Tomczak E
- Kalos M
- Riley JL
- Wasik MA
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.08.030
keywords:
- Animals
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Large B-Cell, Diffuse/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The potent oncogene NPM-ALK mediates malignant transformation of normal human CD4(+) T lymphocytes.
**Authors:** Zhang Q, Wei F, Wang HY, Liu X, Roy D, Xiong QB, Jiang S, Medvec A, Danet-Desnoyers G, Watt C, Tomczak E, Kalos M, Riley JL, Wasik MA
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.08.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.08.030)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2013 Dec;183(6):1971-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.08.030.

The potent oncogene NPM-ALK mediates malignant transformation of normal human
CD4(+) T lymphocytes.

Zhang Q, Wei F, Wang HY, Liu X, Roy D, Xiong QB, Jiang S, Medvec A,
Danet-Desnoyers G, Watt C, Tomczak E, Kalos M, Riley JL, Wasik MA.

With this study we have demonstrated that in vitro transduction of normal human
CD4(+) T lymphocytes with NPM-ALK results in their malignant transformation. The
transformed cells become immortalized and display morphology and immunophenotype
characteristic of patient-derived anaplastic large-cell lymphomas. These unique
features, which are strictly dependent on NPM-ALK activity and expression,
include perpetual cell growth, proliferation, and survival; activation of the
key signal transduction pathways STAT3 and mTORC1; and expression of CD30 (the
hallmark of anaplastic large-cell lymphoma) and of immunosuppressive cytokine
IL-10 and cell-surface protein PD-L1/CD274. Implantation of NPM-ALK-transformed
CD4(+) T lymphocytes into immunodeficient mice resulted in formation of tumors
indistinguishable from patients' anaplastic large-cell lymphomas. Our findings
demonstrate that the key aspects of human carcinogenesis closely recapitulating
the features of the native tumors can be faithfully reproduced in vitro when an
appropriate oncogene is used to transform its natural target cells; this in turn
points to the fundamental role in malignant cell transformation of potent
oncogenes expressed in the relevant target cells. Such transformed cells should
permit study of the early stages of carcinogenesis, and in particular the
initial oncogene-host cell interactions. This experimental design could also be
useful for studies of the effects of early therapeutic intervention and likely
also the mechanisms of malignant progression.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.08.030
PMCID: PMC5745542
PMID: 24404580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
