---
reference_id: "PMID:26232243"
title: Environmental factors and the age at onset in first episode psychosis.
authors:
- O'Donoghue B
- Lyne J
- Madigan K
- Lane A
- Turner N
- O'Callaghan E
- Clarke M
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2015.07.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental factors and the age at onset in first episode psychosis.
**Authors:** O'Donoghue B, Lyne J, Madigan K, Lane A, Turner N, O'Callaghan E, Clarke M
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2015.07.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2015.07.004)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2015 Oct;168(1-2):106-12. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2015.07.004.
Epub  2015 Jul 29.

Environmental factors and the age at onset in first episode psychosis.

O'Donoghue B(1), Lyne J(2), Madigan K(3), Lane A(4), Turner N(5), O'Callaghan 
E(6), Clarke M(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Youth Mental Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Australia; Orygen, The National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health, 
Melbourne, Australia. Electronic address: briannoelodonoghue@gmail.com.
(2)DETECT Early Intervention for Psychosis Service, Avila House, Blackrock 
Business Park, Dublin 4, Ireland; University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, 
Ireland. Electronic address: john.paul.lyne@gmail.com.
(3)Orygen, The National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health, Melbourne, 
Australia; Institute of Leadership, Royal College of Surgeons, Ireland. 
Electronic address: kevin.madigan@hotmail.com.
(4)University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. Electronic address: 
abbielane0@gmail.com.
(5)DETECT Early Intervention for Psychosis Service, Avila House, Blackrock 
Business Park, Dublin 4, Ireland. Electronic address: niall.turner@sjog.ie.
(6)DETECT Early Intervention for Psychosis Service, Avila House, Blackrock 
Business Park, Dublin 4, Ireland; University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, 
Ireland.
(7)DETECT Early Intervention for Psychosis Service, Avila House, Blackrock 
Business Park, Dublin 4, Ireland; University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, 
Ireland. Electronic address: mary.clarke@sjog.ie.

OBJECTIVE: Factors that influence the age at onset in psychotic disorders could 
provide valuable insights into precipitating or causative factors of the 
disorder. Despite being established risk factors, it is not yet known whether 
migration status, place of birth, social class at birth and season of birth 
influence the age at onset of psychotic disorders. This study aimed to determine 
whether these environmental factors, in addition to cannabis abuse and obstetric 
complications, influence the age at onset. Additionally, we investigated whether 
environmental factors could have a cumulative effect on the age at onset.
METHOD: Data was obtained from two first episode of psychosis (FEP) cohort 
studies. Diagnosis was established using the Structured Clinical Interview for 
DSM IV diagnoses.
RESULTS: The age at onset was determined for 555 individuals with a FEP and the 
median age at onset was 27.3years. Individuals with a history of cannabis abuse 
had an earlier age at onset by nearly six years. There was a trend for a history 
of obstetric complications to be associated with a younger age at onset by 
2.7years and this was significant in the subgroup with a family history of 
psychosis. Social class at birth, migration status, place of birth and season of 
birth were not associated with the age at onset. Exposure to a higher number of 
environmental factors was associated with an earlier age at onset.
CONCLUSIONS: Cannabis and obstetric complications are associated with an earlier 
age at onset and there appears to be a cumulative effect of exposure to multiple 
environmental factors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2015.07.004
PMID: 26232243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]