---
reference_id: "PMID:40835292"
title: "Acne, Perioral Dermatitis, Rosacea, and Hidradenitis Suppurativa."
authors:
- Schiaffino MA
- Regula V
- Coleman H
journal: Prim Care
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.pop.2025.05.008
keywords:
- Humans
- "Rosacea/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Dermatitis, Perioral/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Acne Vulgaris/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Primary Health Care
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acne, Perioral Dermatitis, Rosacea, and Hidradenitis Suppurativa.
**Authors:** Schiaffino MA, Regula V, Coleman H
**Journal:** Prim Care (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pop.2025.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pop.2025.05.008)

## Content

1. Prim Care. 2025 Sep;52(3):593-621. doi: 10.1016/j.pop.2025.05.008.

Acne, Perioral Dermatitis, Rosacea, and Hidradenitis Suppurativa.

Schiaffino MA(1), Regula V(2), Coleman H(2).

Author information:
(1)Family Medicine Residency, Department of Family Medicine, Summa Akron City 
Hospital, 55 Arch Street, Suite 3 A, Akron, OH 44304, USA. Electronic address: 
schiaffinom@summahealth.org.
(2)Family Medicine Residency, Department of Family Medicine, Summa Akron City 
Hospital, 55 Arch Street, Suite 3 A, Akron, OH 44304, USA.

Acne and related dermatoses encompass a spectrum of conditions that present at 
different stages in life and are commonly seen in the primary care setting. The 
primary care clinician should be familiar with the presentation, diagnosis, 
differentiation and management of acne, perioral dermatitis, rosacea, and 
hidradenitis suppurativa. Factors such as patient age, genetics, hormones, 
infections, occupation, habits, cosmetics, and medications may impact the 
presentation of acne-like eruptions. Clinical presentation offers clues to the 
physician that help differentiate acneiform conditions like perioral dermatitis, 
rosacea, and hidradenitis suppurativa. These conditions do not respond to 
standard acne therapy and require different treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pop.2025.05.008
PMID: 40835292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors have nothing to 
disclose.