---
reference_id: "PMID:29195050"
title: "Resilience of the Oral Microbiota in Health: Mechanisms That Prevent Dysbiosis."
authors:
- Rosier BT
- Marsh PD
- Mira A
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1177/0022034517742139
keywords:
- "Dysbiosis/prevention & control"
- Humans
- Microbiota/physiology
- Mouth Diseases/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resilience of the Oral Microbiota in Health: Mechanisms That Prevent Dysbiosis.
**Authors:** Rosier BT, Marsh PD, Mira A
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0022034517742139](https://doi.org/10.1177/0022034517742139)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2018 Apr;97(4):371-380. doi: 10.1177/0022034517742139. Epub 2017
Dec  1.

Resilience of the Oral Microbiota in Health: Mechanisms That Prevent Dysbiosis.

Rosier BT(1), Marsh PD(2), Mira A(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Genomics and Health, FISABIO Foundation, Center for Advanced
Research in Public Health, Valencia, Spain.
(2)2 Department of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, University of Leeds, UK.

Dental diseases are now viewed as a consequence of a deleterious shift in the
balance of the normally stable resident oral microbiome. It is known that
frequent carbohydrate consumption or reduced saliva flow can lead to caries, and
excessive plaque accumulation increases the risk of periodontal diseases.
However, when these "disease drivers" are present, while some individuals appear
to be susceptible, others are more tolerant or resilient to suffering from
undesirable changes in their oral microbiome. Health-maintaining mechanisms that
limit the effect of disease drivers include the complex set of metabolic and
functional interrelationships that develop within dental biofilms and between
biofilms and the host. In contrast, "positive feedback loops" can develop within
these microbial communities that disrupt resilience and provoke a large and
abrupt change in function and structure of the ecosystem (a microbial "regime
shift"), which promotes dysbiosis and oral disease. For instance, acidification
due to carbohydrate fermentation or inflammation in response to accumulated
plaque select for a cariogenic or periopathogenic microbiota, respectively, in a
chain of self-reinforcing events. Conversely, in tolerant individuals,
health-maintaining mechanisms, including negative feedback to the drivers, can
maintain resilience and promote resistance to and recovery from disease drivers.
Recently studied health-maintaining mechanisms include ammonia production,
limiting a drop in pH that can lead to caries, and denitrification, which could
inhibit several stages of disease-associated positive feedback loops. Omics
studies comparing the microbiome of, and its interaction with, susceptible and
tolerant hosts can detect markers of resilience. The neutralization or
inhibition of disease drivers, together with the identification and promotion of
health-promoting species and functions, for example, by pre- and probiotics,
could enhance microbiome resilience and lead to new strategies to prevent
disease.

DOI: 10.1177/0022034517742139
PMID: 29195050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
