---
reference_id: "PMID:25761772"
title: SOXC Transcription Factors Induce Cartilage Growth Plate Formation in Mouse Embryos by Promoting Noncanonical WNT Signaling.
authors:
- Kato K
- Bhattaram P
- Penzo-Méndez A
- Gadi A
- Lefebvre V
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2504
keywords:
- 3T3 Cells
- Alleles
- Animals
- COS Cells
- Cartilage/embryology
- "Cartilage, Articular/embryology"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Proliferation
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Chondrocytes/cytology
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Growth Plate/metabolism
- Ligands
- Mice
- Mutation
- SOXC Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Transcriptional Activation
- Wnt Proteins/metabolism
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- Wnt-5a Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SOXC Transcription Factors Induce Cartilage Growth Plate Formation in Mouse Embryos by Promoting Noncanonical WNT Signaling.
**Authors:** Kato K, Bhattaram P, Penzo-Méndez A, Gadi A, Lefebvre V
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.2504](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2504)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2015 Sep;30(9):1560-71. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2504. Epub 2015
May  21.

SOXC Transcription Factors Induce Cartilage Growth Plate Formation in Mouse 
Embryos by Promoting Noncanonical WNT Signaling.

Kato K(1), Bhattaram P(1), Penzo-Méndez A(1), Gadi A(1), Lefebvre V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Orthopaedic and Rheumatologic 
Research Center, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, OH 
44195, USA.

Growth plates are specialized cartilage structures that ensure the elongation of 
most skeletal primordia during vertebrate development. They are made by 
chondrocytes that proliferate in longitudinal columns and then progress in a 
staggered manner towards prehypertrophic, hypertrophic and terminal maturation. 
Complex molecular networks control the formation and activity of growth plates, 
but remain incompletely understood. We investigated here the importance of the 
SoxC genes, which encode the SOX4, SOX11 and SOX12 transcription factors, in 
growth plates. We show that the three genes are expressed robustly in 
perichondrocytes and weakly in growth plate chondrocytes. SoxC(Prx1Cre) mice, 
which deleted SoxC genes in limb bud skeletogenic mesenchyme, were born with 
tiny appendicular cartilage primordia because of failure to form growth plates. 
In contrast, SoxC(Col2Cre) and SoxC(ATC) mice, which deleted SoxC genes 
primarily in chondrocytes, were born with mild dwarfism and fair growth plates. 
Chondrocytes in the latter mutants matured normally, but formed irregular 
columns, proliferated slowly and died ectopically. Asymmetric distribution of 
VANGL2 was defective in both SoxC(Prx1Cre) and SoxC(ATC) chondrocytes, 
indicating impairment of planar cell polarity, a noncanonical WNT signaling 
pathway that controls growth plate chondrocyte alignment, proliferation and 
survival. Accordingly, SoxC genes were necessary in perichondrocytes for 
expression of Wnt5a, which encodes a noncanonical WNT ligand required for growth 
plate formation, and in chondrocytes and perichondrocytes for expression of Fzd3 
and Csnk1e, which encode a WNT receptor and casein kinase-1 subunit mediating 
planar cell polarity, respectively. Reflecting the differential strengths of the 
SOXC protein transactivation domains, SOX11 was more powerful than SOX4, and 
SOX12 interfered with the activity of SOX4 and SOX11. Altogether, these findings 
provide novel insights into the molecular regulation of skeletal growth by 
proposing that SOXC proteins act cell- and non-cell-autonomously in 
perichondrocytes and chondrocytes to establish noncanonical WNT signaling 
crosstalk essential for growth plate induction and control.

© 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2504
PMCID: PMC4540656
PMID: 25761772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]