---
reference_id: "PMID:33246136"
title: Type I interferon in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Postal M
- Vivaldo JF
- Fernandez-Ruiz R
- Paredes JL
- Appenzeller S
- Niewold TB
journal: Curr Opin Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2020.10.014
keywords:
- Humans
- Interferon Type I/immunology
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type I interferon in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Postal M, Vivaldo JF, Fernandez-Ruiz R, Paredes JL, Appenzeller S, Niewold TB
**Journal:** Curr Opin Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coi.2020.10.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2020.10.014)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Immunol. 2020 Dec;67:87-94. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2020.10.014. Epub
2020  Nov 24.

Type I interferon in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Postal M(1), Vivaldo JF(2), Fernandez-Ruiz R(3), Paredes JL(3), Appenzeller
S(4), Niewold TB(5).

Author information:
(1)Autoimmunity Lab, School of Medical Science, State University of Campinas,
Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(2)Autoimmunity Lab, School of Medical Science, State University of Campinas,
Campinas, SP, Brazil; Graduate Program of Child and Adolescent Health, School of
Medical Science, State University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(3)Colton Center for Autoimmunity, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY, USA.
(4)Autoimmunity Lab, School of Medical Science, State University of Campinas,
Campinas, SP, Brazil; Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, School of
Medical Science, State University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(5)Colton Center for Autoimmunity, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY, USA. Electronic address: Timothy.Niewold@nyulangone.org.

Type I interferon (IFN) is a primary pathogenic factor in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). Gain-of-function genetic variants in the type I IFN pathway
have been associated with risk of disease. Common polygenic as well as rare
monogenic influences on type I IFN have been demonstrated, supporting a complex
genetic basis for high IFN in many SLE patients. Both SLE-associated
autoantibodies and high type I IFN can be observed in the pre-disease state.
Patients with SLE and evidence of high type I IFN have more active disease and a
greater propensity to nephritis and other severe manifestations. Despite the
well-established association between type I IFN and SLE, the specific triggers
of type I IFN production, the mechanisms by which IFNs help perpetuate the cycle
of autoreactive cells and autoantibody production are not completely clear. This
review provides an updated overview of type I IFN in SLE pathogenesis, clinical
manifestations, and current therapeutic strategies targeting this pathway.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coi.2020.10.014
PMCID: PMC8054829
PMID: 33246136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
