---
reference_id: "PMID:37506977"
title: Single-cell profiling of prurigo nodularis demonstrates immune-stromal crosstalk driving profibrotic responses and reversal with nemolizumab.
authors:
- Ma F
- Gharaee-Kermani M
- Tsoi LC
- Plazyo O
- Chaskar P
- Harms P
- Patrick MT
- Xing X
- Hile G
- Piketty C
- Lazzari A
- Van Delm W
- Maverakis E
- Nakamura M
- Modlin RL
- Kahlenberg JM
- Billi AC
- Julia V
- Krishnaswamy JK
- Gudjonsson JE
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2023.07.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell profiling of prurigo nodularis demonstrates immune-stromal crosstalk driving profibrotic responses and reversal with nemolizumab.
**Authors:** Ma F, Gharaee-Kermani M, Tsoi LC, Plazyo O, Chaskar P, Harms P, Patrick MT, Xing X, Hile G, Piketty C, Lazzari A, Van Delm W, Maverakis E, Nakamura M, Modlin RL, Kahlenberg JM, Billi AC, Julia V, Krishnaswamy JK, Gudjonsson JE
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2023.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2023.07.005)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2024 Jan;153(1):146-160. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2023.07.005. Epub 2023 Jul 26.

Single-cell profiling of prurigo nodularis demonstrates immune-stromal crosstalk 
driving profibrotic responses and reversal with nemolizumab.

Ma F(1), Gharaee-Kermani M(1), Tsoi LC(2), Plazyo O(1), Chaskar P(3), Harms 
P(4), Patrick MT(1), Xing X(1), Hile G(1), Piketty C(3), Lazzari A(3), Van Delm 
W(3), Maverakis E(5), Nakamura M(1), Modlin RL(6), Kahlenberg JM(7), Billi 
AC(1), Julia V(3), Krishnaswamy JK(3), Gudjonsson JE(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich; 
Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich; Department 
of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Mich.
(3)Galderma, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich; 
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(5)Department of Dermatology, University of California-Davis, Sacramento, Calif.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University of California-Los Angeles, Calif.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich; Taubman Medical Research Institute, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(8)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich; 
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich; Taubman Medical Research Institute, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich. Electronic address: johanng@med.umich.edu.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2024 Jan;153(1):93-94. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2023.11.003.

BACKGROUND: Prurigo nodularis (PN) is a chronic neuroimmune skin disease 
characterized by bilaterally distributed pruritic hyperkeratotic nodules on 
extremities and trunk. Neuroimmune dysregulation and chronic scratching are 
believed to both induce and maintain the characteristic lesions.
OBJECTIVES: This study sought to provide a comprehensive view of the molecular 
pathogenesis of PN at the single-cell level to identify and outline key 
pathologic processes and the cell types involved. Features that distinguish PN 
skin from the skin of patients with atopic dermatitis were of particular 
interest. We further aimed to determine the impact of the IL31RA antagonist, 
nemolizumab, and its specificity at the single-cell level.
METHODS: Single-cell RNA-sequencing of skin from 15 healthy donors and 
nonlesional and lesional skin from 6 patients each with PN and atopic 
dermatitis, combined with spatial-sequencing using the 10x Visium platform. 
Integration with bulk RNA-sequencing data from patients treated with 
nemolizumab.
RESULTS: This study demonstrates that PN is an inflammatory skin disease 
characterized by both keratinocyte proliferation and activation of profibrotic 
responses. This study also demonstrates that the COL11A1+ fibroblast subset is a 
major contributor to fibrosis and is predominantly found in the papillary dermis 
of PN skin. Activation of fibrotic responses is the main distinguishing feature 
between PN and atopic dermatitis skin. This study further shows the broad effect 
of nemolizumab on PN cell types, with a prominent effect driving COL11A1+ 
fibroblast and keratinocyte responses toward normal.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a high-resolution characterization of the cell 
types and cellular processes activated in PN skin, establishing PN as a chronic 
fibrotic inflammatory skin disease. It further demonstrates the broad effect of 
nemolizumab on pathological processes in PN skin.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2023.07.005
PMCID: PMC11231883
PMID: 37506977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]