---
reference_id: "PMID:38332909"
title: Serum S100A8/A9 and MMP-9 levels are elevated in systemic lupus erythematosus patients with cognitive impairment.
authors:
- Muñoz-Grajales C
- Barraclough ML
- Diaz-Martinez JP
- Su J
- Bingham K
- Kakvan M
- Kretzmann RP
- Tartaglia MC
- Ruttan L
- Choi MY
- Appenzeller S
- Marzouk S
- Bonilla D
- Katz P
- Beaton D
- Green R
- Gladman DD
- Wither J
- Touma Z
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1326751
keywords:
- Humans
- Calgranulin A
- Calgranulin B
- Cognitive Dysfunction/diagnosis
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, diagnosis"
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 9/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum S100A8/A9 and MMP-9 levels are elevated in systemic lupus erythematosus patients with cognitive impairment.
**Authors:** Muñoz-Grajales C, Barraclough ML, Diaz-Martinez JP, Su J, Bingham K, Kakvan M, Kretzmann RP, Tartaglia MC, Ruttan L, Choi MY, Appenzeller S, Marzouk S, Bonilla D, Katz P, Beaton D, Green R, Gladman DD, Wither J, Touma Z
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1326751](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1326751)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Jan 25;14:1326751. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1326751.
eCollection 2023.

Serum S100A8/A9 and MMP-9 levels are elevated in systemic lupus erythematosus
patients with cognitive impairment.

Muñoz-Grajales C(1)(2), Barraclough ML(1)(3), Diaz-Martinez JP(1)(2), Su
J(1)(2), Bingham K(4), Kakvan M(1)(2), Kretzmann RP(1)(2), Tartaglia MC(5),
Ruttan L(6), Choi MY(7), Appenzeller S(8), Marzouk S(4), Bonilla D(1)(2), Katz
P(9), Beaton D(10), Green R(6), Gladman DD(1)(2), Wither J(1)(11)(12), Touma
Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Schroeder Arthritis Institute, Krembil Research Institute, University Health
Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)University of Toronto Lupus Clinic, Centre for Prognosis Studies in the
Rheumatic Diseases, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR), Manchester Biomedical
Research Centre, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic
Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Centre for Mental Health, University Health Network, Department of
Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Neurology, University of Toronto Krembil
Neurosciences Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Department of Psychology, University Health Network-Toronto Rehabilitation
Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(8)School of Medical Science, Department of Orthopedics, Rheumatology and
Traumatology, University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(9)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, and Institute for Health
Policy Studies, University of California, San Francisco, Novato, CA, United
States.
(10)Institute for Work and Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(11)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(12)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Cognitive impairment (CI) is one of the most common manifestations of
Neuropsychiatric Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (NPSLE). Despite its frequency, we
have a limited understanding of the underlying immune mechanisms, resulting in a
lack of pathways to target. This study aims to bridge this gap by investigating
differences in serum analyte levels in SLE patients based on their cognitive
performance, independently from the attribution to SLE, and exploring the
potential for various serum analytes to differentiate between SLE patients with
and without CI.
METHODS: Two hundred ninety individuals aged 18-65 years who met the
2019-EULAR/ACR classification criteria for SLE were included. Cognitive function
was measured utilizing the adapted ACR-Neuropsychological Battery (ACR-NB). CI
was defined as a z-score of ≤-1.5 in two or more domains. The serum levels of
nine analytes were measured using ELISA. The data were randomly partitioned into
a training (70%) and a test (30%) sets. Differences in the analyte levels
between patients with and without CI were determined; and their ability to
discriminate CI from non-CI was evaluated.
RESULTS: Of 290 patients, 40% (n=116) had CI. Serum levels of S100A8/A9 and
MMP-9, were significantly higher in patients with CI (p=0.006 and p=0.036,
respectively). For most domains of the ACR-NB, patients with CI had higher
S100A8/A9 serum levels than those without. Similarly, S100A8/A9 had a negative
relationship with multiple CI tests and the highest AUC (0.74, 95%CI: 0.66-0.88)
to differentiate between patients with and without CI.
CONCLUSION: In this large cohort of well-characterized SLE patients, serum
S100A8/A9 and MMP-9 were elevated in patients with CI. S100A8/A9 had the
greatest discriminatory ability in differentiating between patients with and
without CI.

Copyright © 2024 Muñoz-Grajales, Barraclough, Diaz-Martinez, Su, Bingham,
Kakvan, Kretzmann, Tartaglia, Ruttan, Choi, Appenzeller, Marzouk, Bonilla, Katz,
Beaton, Green, Gladman, Wither and Touma.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1326751
PMCID: PMC10851148
PMID: 38332909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MT is Scientific advisor for Women’s Brain
Project, Brain Injury Canada and PSP Canada and reports a relationship via
clinical trials with Janssen, Biogen, Avanex, Green Valley and Roche. SA reports
honoraria for lectures/speakers fees from GSK and AstraZeneca. DB serves Chair
Methodology of the OMERACT Management Group. RG serves on the INS Board of
Governors and Brain Injury Canada Scientific Advisory Committee. JW reports a
relationship with honoraria for lectures from AstraZeneca, participation on the
AstraZeneca Advisory Board, indirect support for meeting attendance/travel from
multiples drug companies through Lupus 21st Century and indirect salary support
from unrestricted funds given by Pfizer for a research chair in the Division of
Rheumatology. ZT reports a relationship in the form of consulting fees from
AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline Inc, Merck, Ampel, Sarkana Pharma, AbbVie and UCB.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.
