---
reference_id: "PMID:38204917"
title: "Biological Markers in Newly Diagnosed Generalized Anxiety Disorder Patients: 8-OHdG, S100B and Oxidative Stress."
authors:
- Oktay M
- Asoğlu M
- Taskin S
- Kirmit A
journal: Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2147/NDT.S444506
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biological Markers in Newly Diagnosed Generalized Anxiety Disorder Patients: 8-OHdG, S100B and Oxidative Stress.
**Authors:** Oktay M, Asoğlu M, Taskin S, Kirmit A
**Journal:** Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2147/NDT.S444506](https://doi.org/10.2147/NDT.S444506)

## Content

1. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2024 Jan 6;20:19-24. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S444506. 
eCollection 2024.

Biological Markers in Newly Diagnosed Generalized Anxiety Disorder Patients: 
8-OHdG, S100B and Oxidative Stress.

Oktay M(1), Asoğlu M(2), Taskin S(3), Kirmit A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Istanbul Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Harran University, Sanliurfa, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Harran University, Sanliurfa, 
Turkey.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Iskenderun State Hospital, Hatay, Türkiye.

PURPOSE: Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD) is a chronic disease persisting for 
at least 6 months, characterized by excessive and continuous anxiety, which 
leads to evident problems and functional disorders. S100B is a glial protein 
that plays a role in intercellular communication regulating cell growth and 
differentiation, and intracellular signal transmission. This study aimed to 
analyze the serum S100B, 8-OHdG, and oxidative stress levels of patients newly 
diagnosed with GAD who had not started treatment, to better understand the 
underlying neurobiological basis of the etiology of GAD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Forty-four patients diagnosed with GAD according to DSM-5 
diagnostic criteria and 44 healthy controls were included in the study. The Beck 
Anxiety Inventory (BAI) was used to determine the anxiety levels of the GAD 
patients. The serum S100B, 8-OHdG, total oxidant status (TOS), and total 
antioxidant status (TAS) levels were measured in the patient and control groups.
RESULTS: The 8-OHdG values of the GAD group were determined to be statistically 
significantly higher than those of the control group (p=0.028). No significant 
difference was determined between the GAD patients and the control group in 
respect of the TAS, TOS, and oxidative stress index (OSI) values (p>0.05). The 
S100B levels of the GAD group were found to be higher than those of the control 
group.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study showed that there could be DNA damage 
because of oxidative stress in GAD patients. There is a need for further studies 
to confirm the role of S100B protein in GAD etiology and pathogenesis.

© 2024 Oktay et al.

DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S444506
PMCID: PMC10778226
PMID: 38204917

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.