---
reference_id: "PMID:38585548"
title: "Expanding the Phenotypic and Genotypic Spectrum of Weaver Syndrome: A Missense Variant of the EZH2 Gene."
authors:
- Kendir-Demirkol Y
- Yeter B
- Jenny LA
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000533733
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the Phenotypic and Genotypic Spectrum of Weaver Syndrome: A Missense Variant of the EZH2 Gene.
**Authors:** Kendir-Demirkol Y, Yeter B, Jenny LA
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000533733](https://doi.org/10.1159/000533733)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2024 Mar;15(2):161-166. doi: 10.1159/000533733. Epub 2023 Sep
28.

Expanding the Phenotypic and Genotypic Spectrum of Weaver Syndrome: A Missense 
Variant of the EZH2 Gene.

Kendir-Demirkol Y(1), Yeter B(1), Jenny LA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Health Science University, Ümraniye 
Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, 
NY, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Weaver syndrome (WS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder 
characterized by distinctive facial features, pre- and post-natal overgrowth, 
macrocephaly, and variable developmental delay. The characteristic facial 
features are ocular hypertelorism, a broad forehead, almond-shaped palpebral 
fissures and, in early childhood, large, fleshy ears, a pointed "stuck-on" chin 
with horizontal skin creases, and retrognathia. Heterozygous pathogenic/likely 
pathogenic variants in the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) gene are 
responsible for WS.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here, we report a male patient with a heterozygous likely 
pathogenic variant in EZH2 gene who has tall stature, distinctive facial 
features, mild development delay, hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy with a MRI 
finding of periventricular leukomalacia, gingival hypertrophy, and early onset 
high hypermetropia.
CONCLUSION: This case demonstrates the importance of reporting detailed 
molecular and clinical findings in patients to expand the genotypic and 
phenotypic findings of this rare syndrome.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000533733
PMCID: PMC10996336
PMID: 38585548

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.