---
reference_id: "PMID:20024590"
title: Effects of the bisphosphonate risedronate on osteopenia in OASIS-deficient mice.
authors:
- Sekiya H
- Murakami T
- Saito A
- Hino S
- Tsumagari K
- Ochiai K
- Imaizumi K
journal: J Bone Miner Metab
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s00774-009-0142-y
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use
- "Bone Diseases, Metabolic/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Bone and Bones/drug effects, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Cyclic AMP Response Element-Binding Protein/deficiency, genetics"
- "Diphosphonates/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/drug effects, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Etidronic Acid/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Immunoblotting
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Risedronic Acid
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of the bisphosphonate risedronate on osteopenia in OASIS-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Sekiya H, Murakami T, Saito A, Hino S, Tsumagari K, Ochiai K, Imaizumi K
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Metab (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00774-009-0142-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00774-009-0142-y)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Metab. 2010 Jul;28(4):384-94. doi: 10.1007/s00774-009-0142-y.
Epub  2009 Dec 19.

Effects of the bisphosphonate risedronate on osteopenia in OASIS-deficient mice.

Sekiya H(1), Murakami T, Saito A, Hino S, Tsumagari K, Ochiai K, Imaizumi K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Anatomy, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 5200 Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki, 889-1692, 
Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been reported to be linked to various 
diseases such as diabetes, neurodegenerative diseases, and osteogenesis 
imperfecta (OI). Old astrocyte specifically induced substance (OASIS), a novel 
type of ER stress transducer, is a basic leucine zipper transcription factor 
belonging to the CREB/ATF family and is markedly expressed in osteoblasts. 
Recently, we demonstrated that OASIS activates the transcription of the gene for 
type I collagen, Col1a1, and contributes to the secretion of bone matrix 
proteins in osteoblasts. OASIS-/- mice exhibit severe osteopenia involving a 
decrease in type I collagen in the bone matrix and a dysfunction of osteoblasts, 
which show abnormal expansion of the rough ER. These phenotypic features of 
osteopenia are similar to those observed in OI type I. In this study, we 
investigated whether administration of the third-generation bisphosphonate 
risedronate (RIS) is effective for treating osteopenia in OASIS-/- mice. 
Histological and histomorphometric analyses revealed that the trabecular bones 
increased dramatically in OASIS-/- mice treated with RIS, owing to the 
inhibition of bone resorption. Intriguingly, the abnormal expansion of the rough 
ER in OASIS-/- osteoblasts was improved by the treatment with RIS. Taken 
together, we conclude that OASIS-/- mice will be useful as new model mice for 
evaluating the medicinal effects of osteopenia treatments and developing new 
drugs for the osteopenia associated with diseases such as OI and osteoporosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00774-009-0142-y
PMID: 20024590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]