---
reference_id: "PMID:8651834"
title: Beta-blockers in hypertensive and coronary heart disease.
authors:
- Goldstein S
journal: Arch Intern Med
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beta-blockers in hypertensive and coronary heart disease.
**Authors:** Goldstein S
**Journal:** Arch Intern Med (1996)

## Content

1. Arch Intern Med. 1996 Jun 24;156(12):1267-76.

Beta-blockers in hypertensive and coronary heart disease.

Goldstein S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Mich., 
USA.

Beta-Blockers are widely used in cardiovascular medicine. In patients with 
hypertension, beta-blockers show beneficial effects on clinical end points of 
stroke and coronary heart disease prevention and mortality. beta-blockers also 
are well established in improving exercise tolerance and decreasing the number 
and duration of anginal attacks in patients with angina pectoris. Based on 
evidence showing reduced mortality and morbidity, beta-blockers are the 
cornerstone of therapy after acute myocardial infarction. Unfortunately, 
presumption of poor tolerance has left these drugs underutilized in this 
clinical setting, despite data that indicate a wide range of tolerability. The 
use of beta-blockers in patients with congestive heart failure results in 
beneficial hemodynamic effects and symptomatic improvement. Among factors that 
should be considered when selecting a beta-blocker for an individual patient are 
demonstrated efficacy of the drug in a specific indication, tolerability, 
product formulation and duration of action, and the presence or absence of 
specific properties such as cardioselectivity.

PMID: 8651834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]