---
reference_id: "PMID:38509432"
title: Treatment of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
authors:
- Tong T
- Jin YH
- Wang M
- Gong FQ
journal: World J Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12519-024-00798-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
**Authors:** Tong T, Jin YH, Wang M, Gong FQ
**Journal:** World J Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12519-024-00798-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12519-024-00798-y)

## Content

1. World J Pediatr. 2024 Apr;20(4):325-339. doi: 10.1007/s12519-024-00798-y. Epub
 2024 Mar 21.

Treatment of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.

Tong T(1), Jin YH(1), Wang M(1), Gong FQ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, No. 3333 Binsheng 
Road, Hangzhou, 310052, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, No. 3333 Binsheng 
Road, Hangzhou, 310052, China. gongfangqi@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), a relatively 
uncommon but severe pediatric complication, is associated with coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19). A variety of treatment approaches, including 
intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIGs), glucocorticoids (GCs) and biologic agents, 
such as anakinra and infliximab, have been described for the management of 
COVID-19-related MIS-C. Anticoagulant therapy is also important. However, a 
well-developed treatment system has not been established, and many issues remain 
controversial. Several recently published articles related to the treatment of 
MIS-C have been released. Hence, in this review, we identified relevant articles 
published recently and summarized the treatment of MIS-C more comprehensively 
and systematically.
DATA SOURCES: We reviewed the literature on the treatment of MIS-C through 20 
September 2023. The PubMed/Medline, Web of Science, EMBASE, and Cochrane Library 
databases were searched with the combination of the terms "multisystem 
inflammatory syndrome", "MIS-C", "PIMS-TS", "therapy", "treatment", "drug", 
"IVIG", "GCs", "intravenous immunoglobulin", "corticosteroids", "biological 
agent", and "aspirin".
RESULTS: The severity of MIS-C varies, and different treatment schemes should be 
used according to the specific condition. Ongoing research and data collection 
are vital to better understand the pathophysiology and optimal management of 
MIS-C.
CONCLUSIONS: MIS-C is a disease involving multiple systems and has great 
heterogeneity. With the accumulation of additional experience, we have garnered 
fresh insights into its treatment strategies. However, there remains a critical 
need for greater standardization in treatment protocols, alongside the pressing 
necessity for more robust and meticulously conducted studies to deepen our 
understanding of these protocols. Supplementary file1 (MP4 208044 kb).

© 2024. Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine.

DOI: 10.1007/s12519-024-00798-y
PMID: 38509432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]