---
reference_id: "PMID:23682579"
title: "Tall cell variant of papillary thyroid microcarcinoma: clinicopathologic features with BRAF(V600E) mutational analysis."
authors:
- Bernstein J
- Virk RK
- Hui P
- Prasad A
- Westra WH
- Tallini G
- Adeniran AJ
- Udelsman R
- Sasaki CT
- Roman SA
- Sosa JA
- Prasad ML
journal: Thyroid
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0154
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/genetics, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphatic Metastasis/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tall cell variant of papillary thyroid microcarcinoma: clinicopathologic features with BRAF(V600E) mutational analysis.
**Authors:** Bernstein J, Virk RK, Hui P, Prasad A, Westra WH, Tallini G, Adeniran AJ, Udelsman R, Sasaki CT, Roman SA, Sosa JA, Prasad ML
**Journal:** Thyroid (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.2013.0154](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.2013.0154)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2013 Dec;23(12):1525-31. doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0154. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Tall cell variant of papillary thyroid microcarcinoma: clinicopathologic
features with BRAF(V600E) mutational analysis.

Bernstein J(1), Virk RK, Hui P, Prasad A, Westra WH, Tallini G, Adeniran AJ,
Udelsman R, Sasaki CT, Roman SA, Sosa JA, Prasad ML.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine , New Haven, Connecticut.

BACKGROUND: The tall cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma is an
aggressive subtype that generally presents as a large tumor in the advanced
stage; however, little is known about the tall cell variant of microcarcinoma
(tumors measuring <1 cm). In this study, we compare the tall cell variant of
microcarcinoma (microTCV) with classic papillary microcarcinomas to examine the
hypothesis that, despite the small size, the microTCV may be more aggressive
than the classic papillary microcarcinoma.
METHODS: We identified 27 microTCV patients and compared their clinicopathologic
features and BRAF(V600E) mutational status with classic papillary
microcarcinomas matched by age and size. The patients with microTCV included 22
women and 5 men aged 33 to 74 years (median age, 56 years). All patients
underwent total thyroidectomy; 20 patients had lymph node dissection.
RESULTS: Tumor size in microTCV patients ranged from 2 mm to 10 mm (median,
7 mm). Extrathyroidal extension and lymphovascular invasion were seen in 9 (33%)
and 4 (15%) tumors, respectively. Thirteen patients (48%) harbored multifocal
papillary carcinomas. Metastasis to central compartment lymph nodes was seen in
8 patients and to lateral cervical nodes in 3 patients. Nine of the 25 patients
(36%) presented at an advanced stage (stage III/IVA). The BRAF(V600E) mutation
was detected in 25 of 27 tumors (92.6%). In contrast, age- and size-matched
classic papillary microcarcinomas (n=26) showed no extrathyroidal extension
(p=0.002), lymphovascular invasion in 1, central compartment lymph node
metastasis in 2, lateral cervical node metastasis in 1, multifocal tumors in 10
(38.5%), the BRAF(V600E) mutation in 20 (76.9%), and it infrequently presented
in stage III/IVA (7.7%, p=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: The microTCV form is associated with aggressive features at
presentation, and it should be differentiated from other papillary thyroid
microcarcinomas.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2013.0154
PMID: 23682579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
