---
reference_id: "PMID:18957054"
title: Association of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations with EGFR amplification in advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Morinaga R
- Okamoto I
- Fujita Y
- Arao T
- Sekijima M
- Nishio K
- Ito H
- Fukuoka M
- Kadota J
- Nakagawa K
journal: Cancer Sci
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00962.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations with EGFR amplification in advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Morinaga R, Okamoto I, Fujita Y, Arao T, Sekijima M, Nishio K, Ito H, Fukuoka M, Kadota J, Nakagawa K
**Journal:** Cancer Sci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00962.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00962.x)

## Content

1. Cancer Sci. 2008 Dec;99(12):2455-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00962.x.
Epub  2008 Oct 16.

Association of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations with EGFR 
amplification in advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Morinaga R(1), Okamoto I, Fujita Y, Arao T, Sekijima M, Nishio K, Ito H, Fukuoka 
M, Kadota J, Nakagawa K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University School of Medicine, 377-2 
Ohno-higashi, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan.

Somatic mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are 
associated with the response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in patients with 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Increased EGFR copy number has also been 
associated with sensitivity to these drugs. However, given that it is often 
difficult to obtain sufficient amounts of tumor tissue for genetic analysis from 
patients with advanced NSCLC, the relationship between these two types of EGFR 
alterations has remained unclear. We have now evaluated EGFR mutation status 
both by direct sequencing and with a high-sensitivity assay, the 
Scorpion-amplification-refractory mutation system, and have determined EGFR copy 
number by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis in paired tumor 
specimens obtained from 100 consecutive patients with advanced NSCLC treated 
with chemotherapy. EGFR mutations or FISH positivity (EGFR amplification or high 
polysomy) were apparent in 18% (18/100) and 32% (32/100) of patients, 
respectively. The Scorpion-amplification-refractory mutation system was more 
sensitive than direct sequencing for the detection of EGFR mutations. 
Furthermore, EGFR mutations were associated with EGFR amplification (P = 0.009) 
but not with FISH positivity (P = 0.266). Our results therefore suggest the 
existence of a significant association between EGFR mutation and EGFR 
amplification in patients with advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00962.x
PMCID: PMC11158508
PMID: 18957054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]