---
reference_id: "PMID:19389824"
title: Asymmetric dimethylarginine and mortality in stages 3 to 4 chronic kidney disease.
authors:
- Young JM
- Terrin N
- Wang X
- Greene T
- Beck GJ
- Kusek JW
- Collins AJ
- Sarnak MJ
- Menon V
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.06671208
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asymmetric dimethylarginine and mortality in stages 3 to 4 chronic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Young JM, Terrin N, Wang X, Greene T, Beck GJ, Kusek JW, Collins AJ, Sarnak MJ, Menon V
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.06671208](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.06671208)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Jun;4(6):1115-20. doi: 10.2215/CJN.06671208. Epub 
2009 Apr 23.

Asymmetric dimethylarginine and mortality in stages 3 to 4 chronic kidney 
disease.

Young JM(1), Terrin N, Wang X, Greene T, Beck GJ, Kusek JW, Collins AJ, Sarnak 
MJ, Menon V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), an endogenous 
inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase, reduces bioavailability of nitric oxide and 
induces endothelial dysfunction. This dimethylated amino acid accumulates in 
chronic kidney disease and may be involved in the pathophysiology of 
cardiovascular disease (CVD) in this population.
DESIGN, SETTINGS, PARTICIPANTS, & METHODS: The Modification of Diet in Renal 
Disease Study was a randomized, controlled trial conducted between 1989 and 
1993. We measured ADMA in frozen samples collected at baseline (n = 820) and 
obtained survival status, up to December 31, 2000, from the National Death 
Index. We examined the relationship of ADMA with prevalent CVD and performed 
multivariable Cox models to examine the relationship of ADMA with all-cause and 
CVD mortality.
RESULTS: Mean (SD) age was 52 (12) yr, GFR was 32 +/- 12 ml/min per 1.73 m(2), 
and ADMA was 0.70 +/- 0.25 micromol/L. A 1-SD increase in ADMA was associated 
with a 31% increased odds of prevalent CVD in an adjusted logistic regression 
model. During the 10-yr follow-up period, 202 (25%) participants died of any 
cause, 122 (15%) from CVD, and 545 (66%) reached kidney failure. In 
multivariable Cox models, a 1-SD increase in ADMA was associated with a 9% 
increased risk for all-cause and 19% increased risk for CVD mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort of patients with predominantly nondiabetic, stages 3 
to 4 chronic kidney disease, there was a strong association of ADMA with 
prevalent CVD and a modest association with all-cause and CVD mortality.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.06671208
PMCID: PMC2689879
PMID: 19389824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]