---
reference_id: "PMID:8592332"
title: "The Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (familial, early onset encephalopathy with calcifications of the basal ganglia and chronic cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytosis)."
authors:
- Tolmie JL
- Shillito P
- Hughes-Benzie R
- Stephenson JB
journal: J Med Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.32.11.881
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- "Basal Ganglia Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Brain/abnormalities
- "Brain Diseases/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Calcinosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Cerebrospinal Fluid/cytology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- "Fetal Diseases/diagnosis, virology"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Interferon-alpha/cerebrospinal fluid
- Lymphocytosis/cerebrospinal fluid
- Male
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
- Nerve Degeneration
- Persistent Vegetative State/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (familial, early onset encephalopathy with calcifications of the basal ganglia and chronic cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytosis).
**Authors:** Tolmie JL, Shillito P, Hughes-Benzie R, Stephenson JB
**Journal:** J Med Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.32.11.881](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.32.11.881)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 1995 Nov;32(11):881-4. doi: 10.1136/jmg.32.11.881.

The Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (familial, early onset encephalopathy with
calcifications of the basal ganglia and chronic cerebrospinal fluid
lymphocytosis).

Tolmie JL(1), Shillito P, Hughes-Benzie R, Stephenson JB.

Author information:
(1)Duncan Guthrie Institute of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill Hospitals NHS Trust,
Glasgow, UK.

Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (Mendelian inheritance in man Catalog No *225750) is
an autosomal recessive encephalopathy which causes developmental arrest,
intracerebral calcification, and white matter disease in the presence of chronic
cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytosis, and a raised level of cerebrospinal fluid
interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha). Diagnosis requires the presence of progressive
encephalopathy with onset shortly after birth, and characteristic clinical
neurological and neuroimaging signs together with chronic CSF lymphocytosis. The
syndrome has superficial resemblance to the neurological sequelae of congenital
infection, thus a rigorous search for microbiological and serological evidence
of embryopathic infections should be carried out in each case.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.32.11.881
PMCID: PMC1051740
PMID: 8592332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
