---
reference_id: "PMID:26147380"
title: "Ebola virus disease: societal challenges and new treatments."
authors:
- Mirazimi A
journal: J Intern Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/joim.12386
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus disease: societal challenges and new treatments.
**Authors:** Mirazimi A
**Journal:** J Intern Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/joim.12386](https://doi.org/10.1111/joim.12386)

## Content

1. J Intern Med. 2015 Sep;278(3):227-37. doi: 10.1111/joim.12386. Epub 2015 Jul
5.

Ebola virus disease: societal challenges and new treatments.

Mirazimi A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(2)National Veterinary Institute, Uppsala, Sweden.

Ebola virus disease (EVD) is a zoonotic disease that causes severe haemorrhagic 
fever, with high fatality rates of up to 90% in humans. Today, there is no 
effective treatment available. Person-to-person transmission occurs through 
exposure to blood or body fluids, which can threaten other household members and 
first-line healthcare workers. The first cases of EVD in Guinea were identified 
on 22 March 2014. It was initially believed that this like previous outbreaks 
would be self-limiting. However, lack of public health infrastructure, delays in 
virus detection and late implementation of control interventions contributed to 
widespread transmission of EVD in a region inexperienced in dealing with the 
disease. Socio-cultural and economic factors probably also played a key role in 
the spread of the disease, resulting in the current large-scale outbreak. Some 
promising candidate treatments for this disease are now being developed.

© 2015 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.12386
PMCID: PMC7166513
PMID: 26147380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author has no conflicts of interest to 
declare.