---
reference_id: "PMID:33093005"
title: "Nutrition management guideline for very-long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (VLCAD): An evidence- and consensus-based approach."
authors:
- Van Calcar SC
- Sowa M
- Rohr F
- Beazer J
- Setlock T
- Weihe TU
- Pendyal S
- Wallace LS
- Hansen JG
- Stembridge A
- Splett P
- Singh RH
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nutrition management guideline for very-long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (VLCAD): An evidence- and consensus-based approach.
**Authors:** Van Calcar SC, Sowa M, Rohr F, Beazer J, Setlock T, Weihe TU, Pendyal S, Wallace LS, Hansen JG, Stembridge A, Splett P, Singh RH
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.001)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2020 Sep-Oct;131(1-2):23-37. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.001.  Epub 2020 Oct 6.

Nutrition management guideline for very-long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency (VLCAD): An evidence- and consensus-based approach.

Van Calcar SC(1), Sowa M(2), Rohr F(3), Beazer J(4), Setlock T(5), Weihe TU(6), 
Pendyal S(7), Wallace LS(8), Hansen JG(9), Stembridge A(10), Splett P(11), Singh 
RH(10).

Author information:
(1)Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA. Electronic address: 
vancalca@ohsu.edu.
(2)CHOC Children's, Orange, CA, USA.
(3)Met Ed Co, Boulder, CO, USA; Children's Hospital of Boston, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)National PKU News, How Much Phe, LLC, Helena, MT, USA.
(5)Shodair Children's Hospital, Helena, MT, USA.
(6)Children's Mercy, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(7)Duke University Health System, Durham, NC, USA.
(8)University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.
(9)Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(10)Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(11)University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN, USA.

The nutrition management guideline for very-long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency (VLCAD) is the fourth in a series of web-based guidelines focusing on 
the diet treatment for inherited metabolic disorders and follows previous 
publication of guidelines for maple syrup urine disease (2014), phenylketonuria 
(2016) and propionic acidemia (2019). The purpose of this guideline is to 
establish harmonization in the treatment and monitoring of individuals with 
VLCAD of all ages in order to improve clinical outcomes. Six research questions 
were identified to support guideline development on: nutrition recommendations 
for the healthy individual, illness management, supplementation, monitoring, 
physical activity and management during pregnancy. This report describes the 
methodology used in its development including review, critical appraisal and 
abstraction of peer-reviewed studies and unpublished practice literature; expert 
input through two Delphi surveys and a nominal group process; and external 
review from metabolic physicians and dietitians. It includes the summary 
statements of the nutrition management recommendations for each research 
question, followed by a standardized rating based on the strength of the 
evidence. Online, open access of the full published guideline allows utilization 
by health care providers, researchers and collaborators who advise, advocate and 
care for individuals with VLCAD and their families and can be accessed from the 
Genetic Metabolic Dietitians International (https://GMDI.org) and Southeast 
Regional Genetics Network (https://southeastgenetics.org/ngp) websites.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.001
PMID: 33093005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors do 
not report any conflicts of interest related to management of LC-FOADs.