---
reference_id: "PMID:36107794"
title: Clinical Use of Tecovirimat (Tpoxx) for Treatment of Monkeypox Under an Investigational New Drug Protocol - United States, May-August 2022.
authors:
- O'Laughlin K
- Tobolowsky FA
- Elmor R
- Overton R
- O'Connor SM
- Damon IK
- Petersen BW
- Rao AK
- Chatham-Stephens K
- Yu P
- Yu Y
- CDC Monkeypox Tecovirimat Data Abstraction Team
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7137e1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Use of Tecovirimat (Tpoxx) for Treatment of Monkeypox Under an Investigational New Drug Protocol - United States, May-August 2022.
**Authors:** O'Laughlin K, Tobolowsky FA, Elmor R, Overton R, O'Connor SM, Damon IK, Petersen BW, Rao AK, Chatham-Stephens K, Yu P, Yu Y, CDC Monkeypox Tecovirimat Data Abstraction Team
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.mm7137e1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7137e1)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2022 Sep 16;71(37):1190-1195. doi: 
10.15585/mmwr.mm7137e1.

Clinical Use of Tecovirimat (Tpoxx) for Treatment of Monkeypox Under an 
Investigational New Drug Protocol - United States, May-August 2022.

O'Laughlin K, Tobolowsky FA, Elmor R, Overton R, O'Connor SM, Damon IK, Petersen 
BW, Rao AK, Chatham-Stephens K, Yu P, Yu Y; CDC Monkeypox Tecovirimat Data 
Abstraction Team.

Collaborators: Ahmadi S(1), Avery R(1), Bean K(1), Beavers L(1), Belanger 
Giguere K(1), Brownlee J(1), Campbell C(1), Cheng M(1), Clinton R(1), Coleman 
T(1), Davis MS(1), Dubreus M(1), Henry M(1), Lozoya SB(1), Morgan J(1), Muhammad 
K(1), Parker CM(1), Peters N(1), Rybak E(1), Schwenk A(1), van Loben Sels J(1), 
Veillard M(1).

Author information:
(1)CDC.

Currently, no Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved treatments for human 
monkeypox are available. Tecovirimat (Tpoxx), however, is an antiviral drug that 
has demonstrated efficacy in animal studies and is FDA-approved for treating 
smallpox. Use of tecovirimat for treatment of monkeypox in the United States is 
permitted only through an FDA-regulated Expanded Access Investigational New Drug 
(EA-IND) mechanism. CDC holds a nonresearch EA-IND protocol that facilitates 
access to and use of tecovirimat for treatment of monkeypox.ยง The protocol 
includes patient treatment and adverse event reporting forms to monitor safety 
and ensure intended clinical use in accordance with FDA EA-IND requirements. The 
current multinational monkeypox outbreak, first detected in a country where 
Monkeypox virus infection is not endemic in May 2022, has predominantly affected 
gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men (MSM) (1,2). To describe 
characteristics of persons treated with tecovirimat for Monkeypox virus 
infection, demographic and clinical data abstracted from available tecovirimat 
EA-IND treatment forms were analyzed. As of August 20, 2022, intake and outcome 
forms were available for 549 and 369 patients, respectively; 97.7% of patients 
were men, with a median age of 36.5 years. Among patients with available data, 
38.8% were reported to be non-Hispanic White (White) persons, 99.8% were 
prescribed oral tecovirimat, and 93.1% were not hospitalized. Approximately one 
half of patients with Monkeypox virus infection who received tecovirimat were 
living with HIV infection. The median interval from initiation of tecovirimat to 
subjective improvement was 3 days and did not differ by HIV infection status. 
Adverse events were reported in 3.5% of patients; all but one adverse event were 
nonserious. These data support the continued access to and treatment with 
tecovirimat for patients with or at risk for severe disease in the ongoing 
monkeypox outbreak.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7137e1
PMCID: PMC9484807
PMID: 36107794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the 
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of 
potential conflicts of interest. Riad Elmor reports contract support (DCIPHER 
Program Management and Data Analytic Services) from Booz Allen Hamilton. No 
other potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.