---
reference_id: "PMID:28087227"
title: A novel kindred with inherited STAT2 deficiency and severe viral illness.
authors:
- Moens L
- Van Eyck L
- Jochmans D
- Mitera T
- Frans G
- Bossuyt X
- Matthys P
- Neyts J
- Ciancanelli M
- Zhang SY
- Gijsbers R
- Casanova JL
- Boisson-Dupuis S
- Meyts I
- Liston A
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.033
keywords:
- Alleles
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Pedigree
- STAT2 Transcription Factor/deficiency
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Virus Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- Whole Genome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel kindred with inherited STAT2 deficiency and severe viral illness.
**Authors:** Moens L, Van Eyck L, Jochmans D, Mitera T, Frans G, Bossuyt X, Matthys P, Neyts J, Ciancanelli M, Zhang SY, Gijsbers R, Casanova JL, Boisson-Dupuis S, Meyts I, Liston A
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.033)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017 Jun;139(6):1995-1997.e9. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.033. Epub 2017 Jan 10.

A novel kindred with inherited STAT2 deficiency and severe viral illness.

Moens L(1), Van Eyck L(2), Jochmans D(3), Mitera T(4), Frans G(1), Bossuyt X(1), 
Matthys P(4), Neyts J(3), Ciancanelli M(5), Zhang SY(6), Gijsbers R(7), Casanova 
JL(8), Boisson-Dupuis S(6), Meyts I(9), Liston A(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Experimental Laboratory 
Immunology, Childhood Immunology, Katholieke Universiteit (KU) Leuven, Leuven, 
Flanders, Belgium.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Autoimmune Genetics Laboratory, 
Vlaams Instituut Biotechnologie and KU Leuven, Leuven, Flanders, Belgium.
(3)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Rega Institute, Laboratory 
Virology and Chemotherapy, KU Leuven, Leuven, Flanders, Belgium.
(4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Rega Institute, Laboratory of 
Immunobiology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Flanders, Belgium.
(5)St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY.
(6)St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY; Laboratory of Human Genetics 
of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale-U1163, Paris, France; Paris Descartes University, Imagine 
Institute, Paris, France.
(7)Laboratory for Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Flanders, Belgium.
(8)St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY; Laboratory of Human Genetics 
of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale-U1163, Paris, France; Pediatric Hematology and Immunology 
Unit, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, 
Paris, France; Paris Descartes University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France; 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY.
(9)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Childhood Immunology, Leuven, 
Flanders, Belgium; Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven and KU 
Leuven, Leuven, Flanders, Belgium. Electronic address: 
Isabelle.Meyts@uzleuven.be.
(10)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Autoimmune Genetics Laboratory, 
Vlaams Instituut Biotechnologie and KU Leuven, Leuven, Flanders, Belgium. 
Electronic address: adrian.liston@vib.be.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.10.033
PMID: 28087227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]