---
reference_id: "PMID:19647672"
title: Recommendations on the diagnosis and management of Niemann-Pick disease type C.
authors:
- NP-C Guidelines Working Group
- Wraith JE
- Baumgartner MR
- Bembi B
- Covanis A
- Levade T
- Mengel E
- Pineda M
- Sedel F
- Topçu M
- Vanier MT
- Widner H
- Wijburg FA
- Patterson MC
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.06.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mass Screening
- Middle Aged
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type C/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recommendations on the diagnosis and management of Niemann-Pick disease type C.
**Authors:** NP-C Guidelines Working Group, Wraith JE, Baumgartner MR, Bembi B, Covanis A, Levade T, Mengel E, Pineda M, Sedel F, Topçu M, Vanier MT, Widner H, Wijburg FA, Patterson MC
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.06.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.06.008)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2009 Sep-Oct;98(1-2):152-65. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.06.008.  Epub 2009 Jun 14.

Recommendations on the diagnosis and management of Niemann-Pick disease type C.

NP-C Guidelines Working Group; Wraith JE, Baumgartner MR, Bembi B, Covanis A, 
Levade T, Mengel E, Pineda M, Sedel F, Topçu M, Vanier MT, Widner H, Wijburg FA, 
Patterson MC.

Comment in
    Mol Genet Metab. 2010 Jan;99(1):98. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.09.011.

Niemann-Pick disease type C (NP-C) is a lysosomal storage disease in which 
impaired intracellular lipid trafficking leads to excess storage of cholesterol 
and glycosphingolipids in the brain and other tissues. It is characterized 
clinically by a variety of progressive, disabling neurological symptoms 
including clumsiness, limb and gait ataxia, dysarthria, dysphagia and cognitive 
deterioration (dementia). Until recently, there has been no disease-modifying 
therapy available for NP-C, with treatment limited to supportive measures. In 
most countries, NP-C is managed through specialist centers, with non-specialist 
support provided locally. However, effective patient support is hampered by the 
absence of national or international clinical management guidelines. In this 
paper, we seek to address this important gap in the current literature. An 
expert panel was convened in Paris, France in January 2009 to discuss best care 
practices for NP-C. This commentary reviews current literature on key aspects of 
the clinical management of NP-C in children, juveniles and adults, and provides 
recommendations based on consensus between the experts at the meeting.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.06.008
PMID: 19647672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]