---
reference_id: "PMID:32750121"
title: Bone marrow-derived myeloid progenitors as driver mutation carriers in high- and low-risk Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
authors:
- Xiao Y
- van Halteren AGS
- Lei X
- Borst J
- Steenwijk E
- de Wit T
- Grabowska J
- Voogd R
- Kemps P
- Picarsic J
- van den Bos C
- Borst J
journal: Blood
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2020005209
keywords:
- "Bone Marrow/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Differentiation
- "Dendritic Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Myeloid Progenitor Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone marrow-derived myeloid progenitors as driver mutation carriers in high- and low-risk Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
**Authors:** Xiao Y, van Halteren AGS, Lei X, Borst J, Steenwijk E, de Wit T, Grabowska J, Voogd R, Kemps P, Picarsic J, van den Bos C, Borst J
**Journal:** Blood (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2020005209](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020005209)

## Content

1. Blood. 2020 Nov 5;136(19):2188-2199. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020005209.

Bone marrow-derived myeloid progenitors as driver mutation carriers in high- and 
low-risk Langerhans cell histiocytosis.

Xiao Y(1)(2)(3), van Halteren AGS(4)(5), Lei X(1)(2)(3), Borst J(4), Steenwijk 
E(4), de Wit T(1)(2)(3), Grabowska J(1), Voogd R(1), Kemps P(4), Picarsic 
J(6)(7), van den Bos C(5)(8), Borst J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Biology and Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, and.
(3)Oncode Institute, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Willem Alexander Children's Hospital/Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA.
(7)Division of Pathology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, OH; and.
(8)Emma Children's Hospital/Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a myeloid neoplasia, driven by sporadic 
activating mutations in the MAPK pathway. The misguided myeloid dendritic cell 
(DC) model proposes that high-risk, multisystem, risk-organ-positive (MS-RO+) 
LCH results from driver mutation in a bone marrow (BM)-resident multipotent 
hematopoietic progenitor, while low-risk, MS-RO- and single-system LCH would 
result from driver mutation in a circulating or tissue-resident, DC-committed 
precursor. We have examined the CD34+c-Kit+Flt3+ myeloid progenitor population 
as potential mutation carrier in all LCH disease manifestations. This population 
contains oligopotent progenitors of monocytes (Mo's)/macrophages (MΦs), 
osteoclasts (OCs), and DCs. CD34+c-Kit+Flt3+ cells from BM of MS-RO+ LCH 
patients produced Langerhans cell (LC)-like cells in vitro. Both LC-like and DC 
offspring from this progenitor carried the BRAF mutation, confirming their 
common origin. In both high- and low-risk LCH patients, CD34+c-Kit+Flt3+ 
progenitor frequency in blood was higher than in healthy donors. In one MS-RO+ 
LCH patient, CD34+c-Kit+Flt3+ cell frequency in blood and its BRAF-mutated 
offspring reported response to chemotherapy. CD34+c-Kit+Flt3+ progenitors from 
blood of both high- and low-risk LCH patients gave rise to DCs and LC-like cells 
in vitro, but the driver mutation was not easily detectable, likely due to low 
frequency of mutated progenitors. Mutant BRAF alleles were found in Mo's /MΦs, 
DCs, LC-like cells, and/or OC-like cells in lesions and/or Mo and DCs in blood 
of multiple low-risk patients. We therefore hypothesize that in both high- and 
low-risk LCH, the driver mutation is present in a BM-resident myeloid progenitor 
that can be mobilized to the blood.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020005209
PMID: 32750121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]