---
reference_id: "PMID:33244661"
title: "The Microbiome in Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Review."
authors:
- Wark KJL
- Cains GD
journal: Dermatol Ther (Heidelb)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s13555-020-00465-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Microbiome in Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Review.
**Authors:** Wark KJL, Cains GD
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (Heidelb) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13555-020-00465-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13555-020-00465-w)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2021 Feb;11(1):39-52. doi:
10.1007/s13555-020-00465-w.  Epub 2020 Nov 26.

The Microbiome in Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Review.

Wark KJL(1)(2), Cains GD(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
kirsty.jl.wark@gmail.com.
(2)School of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
kirsty.jl.wark@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(4)School of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic autoinflammatory skin
disease. It is characterised by the development of abscesses and nodules in
intertriginous anatomical sites. Whilst it is now recognised as an
autoinflammatory condition rather than an infective disease, bacteria are
implicated in disease pathogenesis.
METHODS: We performed a search of the literature from inception to 12 August
2020 using the search terms "hidradenitis suppurativa", "Verneuil's disease",
"acne inversa", "microbiome", "bacteriology" and "microbiology". Studies were
included if they assessed the cutaneous, gut or oral bacteria, bacteriology or
microbiome in hidradenitis suppurativa.
RESULTS: Twenty-one studies examining the cutaneous microbiome and two studies
examining the gastrointestinal microbiome in HS were identified. No studies
examining the oral microbiome in HS were identified. A total of 972 patients and
46 healthy controls were included across studies examining the cutaneous
microbiome. A total of 100 patients and 36 controls were included across both
gut microbiome studies. Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, anaerobes such as
Porphyromonas and Prevotella, and Staphylococcus aureus species were commonly
encountered organisms across the included cutaneous microbiome studies. The
studies examining the gut microbiome were limited, with one small study
demonstrating an alteration in the gut microbiome composition compared to
controls. The other study found no alteration to the gut microbiome in patients
with HS compared to those with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and HS, and IBD
and/or psoriasis.
CONCLUSION: Research should be undertaken into the oral microbiome in HS.
Further research should be undertaken examining the cutaneous and gut microbiome
in HS, and its relationship with documented co-morbidities. Additionally,
metagenomics-focused studies may help identify the relationship between
microorganisms and host, and this may shed light on new pathways of disease
pathogenesis. This may help identify potential future therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1007/s13555-020-00465-w
PMCID: PMC7859000
PMID: 33244661
