---
reference_id: "PMID:34825110"
title: A case series from a single family of familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity with common history of sudden visual loss.
authors:
- Obayashi T
- Kato A
- Suzuki H
- Ohashi K
- Yoshida M
- Shibata Y
- Ogura Y
- Yasukawa T
journal: Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2021.101230
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case series from a single family of familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity with common history of sudden visual loss.
**Authors:** Obayashi T, Kato A, Suzuki H, Ohashi K, Yoshida M, Shibata Y, Ogura Y, Yasukawa T
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajoc.2021.101230](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajoc.2021.101230)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep. 2021 Nov 9;24:101230. doi:
10.1016/j.ajoc.2021.101230.  eCollection 2021 Dec.

A case series from a single family of familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity 
with common history of sudden visual loss.

Obayashi T(1), Kato A(1), Suzuki H(2), Ohashi K(3), Yoshida M(1), Shibata Y(1), 
Ogura Y(1), Yasukawa T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Nagoya City University 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(2)Suzuki Eye Clinic Midori, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.

PURPOSE: To report family members with familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity 
(FRAT) identified after sudden visual loss.
OBSERVATIONS: A 15-year-old boy had sudden visual loss in his left eye while 
playing on a horizontal bar. He was referred to Nagoya City University Hospital 
from an eye clinic. The ophthalmologic examination showed retinal hemorrhage 
bilaterally. His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/17 in the right eye 
and 20/67 in the left eye. Bilateral retinal arteriolar tortuosity as well as 
retinal hemorrhage was seen. Since his mother with 54 years of age also had a 
history of retinal hemorrhage that improved spontaneously, fundus examination 
was performed, revealing tortuosity of the retinal arterioles. Consequently, the 
patient and his mother were diagnosed as FRAT. He was followed without 
intervention. Retinal hemorrhage gradually decreased and resolved after 3 
months. The BCVA of his left eye gradually improved and reached 20/20 after 1 
year.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPORTANCE: In this case, the family history was very useful for 
early diagnosis. Immediate and accurate diagnosis allowed the patient to be 
followed without intervention and achieve subsequent resolution of retinal 
hemorrhage and improved vision. FRAT should be considered in cases of 
sub-internal limiting membrane hemorrhages in young patients even in the 
presence of discrete retinal arteriolar tortuosity.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2021.101230
PMCID: PMC8603015
PMID: 34825110

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest associated with this report.