---
reference_id: "PMID:20727470"
title: "NS1 antigen as an early diagnostic marker in dengue: report from India."
authors:
- Singh MP
- Majumdar M
- Singh G
- Goyal K
- Preet K
- Sarwal A
- Mishra B
- Ratho RK
journal: Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2010.04.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NS1 antigen as an early diagnostic marker in dengue: report from India.
**Authors:** Singh MP, Majumdar M, Singh G, Goyal K, Preet K, Sarwal A, Mishra B, Ratho RK
**Journal:** Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2010.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2010.04.004)

## Content

1. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2010 Sep;68(1):50-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2010.04.004.

NS1 antigen as an early diagnostic marker in dengue: report from India.

Singh MP(1), Majumdar M, Singh G, Goyal K, Preet K, Sarwal A, Mishra B, Ratho 
RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India. minipsingh@gmail.com

Detection of specific IgM antibodies by ELISA forms the mainstay for diagnosis 
of dengue infection. However, IgM antibodies develop after 4 to 5 days of 
infection. The methods for early diagnosis include virus isolation and reverse 
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) which need a sophisticated 
laboratory. Another alternative that has recently come up is NS1 antigen 
detection. The present study compared IgM antibody detection with NS1 antigen 
for the diagnosis of acute dengue in 87 samples. NS1 antigen could be detected 
with good sensitivity (71-100%) till day 3 of fever, whereas IgM had a 
sensitivity of 0% to 50% at this time. On day 4 of illness, both the tests had 
comparative sensitivity. Beyond day 4, IgM antibody detection was superior to 
NS1. Both these diagnostic modalities were also compared with RT-PCR in 40 acute 
samples. NS1 detected additional 15 samples, which were missed by PCR. NS1 
antigen is an early diagnostic marker that is feasible in a routine diagnostic 
laboratory.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2010.04.004
PMID: 20727470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]