---
reference_id: "PMID:21193204"
title: Cross-sectional and longitudinal assessment of aortic root dilation and valvular anomalies in hypermobile and classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Atzinger CL
- Meyer RA
- Khoury PR
- Gao Z
- Tinkle BT
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.11.023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cross-sectional and longitudinal assessment of aortic root dilation and valvular anomalies in hypermobile and classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Atzinger CL, Meyer RA, Khoury PR, Gao Z, Tinkle BT
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.11.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.11.023)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2011 May;158(5):826-830.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.11.023. Epub 
2010 Dec 28.

Cross-sectional and longitudinal assessment of aortic root dilation and valvular 
anomalies in hypermobile and classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Atzinger CL(1), Meyer RA, Khoury PR, Gao Z, Tinkle BT.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. Carrie.atzinger@cchmc.org

OBJECTIVES: To delineate the prevalence of cardiac findings in hypermobile and 
classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and provide longitudinal analysis of aortic root 
growth.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective chart review was conducted, and data were analyzed 
for cross-sectional prevalence of aortic dilation and valvular anomalies. The 
clinical implications of aortic root growth were determined by assessment of 
progression of aortic root measurements over time and clinical symptoms.
RESULTS: Patients whose first echocardiogram was obtained in late childhood or 
adulthood were less likely to have aortic dilation (P < .002) than those whose 
first echocardiogram was obtained in early childhood. Longitudinally, seven 
individuals had dilated aortas before age 14, and only one individual continued 
to show dilation after age 14 (P = .0143). No patient with a normal aortic root 
in childhood had development of dilation in adulthood. Fifteen of the 252 
patients (6.0%) had mitral valve prolapse (MVP), although only one patient 
(0.4%) had MVP that was mild to moderate.
CONCLUSIONS: Although aortic root size and MVP are increased in patients with 
these types of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, they tend to be of little clinical 
consequence. Echocardiography may still be warranted as part of cardiovascular 
assessment, but decreased frequency of screening is recommended especially in 
symptom-free adults.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.11.023
PMID: 21193204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]