---
reference_id: "PMID:35297082"
title: Differences between pediatric and adult atopic dermatitis.
authors:
- Ramírez-Marín HA
- Silverberg JI
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/pde.14971
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology"
- Eczema
- Humans
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differences between pediatric and adult atopic dermatitis.
**Authors:** Ramírez-Marín HA, Silverberg JI
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.14971](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.14971)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2022 May;39(3):345-353. doi: 10.1111/pde.14971. Epub 2022
Mar  16.

Differences between pediatric and adult atopic dermatitis.

Ramírez-Marín HA(1), Silverberg JI(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, 
USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, The George Washington University School of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a common disease with a broad spectrum of clinical 
manifestations. AD can manifest differently in adults than children. Core AD 
features are similar between children and adults overall, including lesions 
affecting flexural areas, presence of atopy, and xerosis. Adults have more signs 
of chronic disease, higher prevalence and different patterns of hand eczema, and 
a stronger relationship of disease activity with emotional factors, whereas 
children with AD have more exudative lesions, perifollicular accentuation, 
pityriasis alba, Dennie-Morgan folds, and seborrheic dermatitis-like 
presentation. These differences may be due in part to pathophysiologic 
differences in AD in children compared with adults. Atopic diseases commonly 
co-occur with AD, although most do not temporally have the "atopic march." 
Further research is warranted to better understand the differential roles of 
immune dysregulation, epidermal-barrier disruption, and dysbiosis between 
children and adults and determine whether such differences translate into 
differences in therapeutic efficacy.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.14971
PMID: 35297082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]