---
reference_id: "PMID:18362173"
title: Somatically acquired JAK1 mutations in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
authors:
- Flex E
- Petrangeli V
- Stella L
- Chiaretti S
- Hornakova T
- Knoops L
- Ariola C
- Fodale V
- Clappier E
- Paoloni F
- Martinelli S
- Fragale A
- Sanchez M
- Tavolaro S
- Messina M
- Cazzaniga G
- Camera A
- Pizzolo G
- Tornesello A
- Vignetti M
- Battistini A
- Cavé H
- Gelb BD
- Renauld JC
- Biondi A
- Constantinescu SN
- Foà R
- Tartaglia M
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20072182
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic"
- Humans
- Janus Kinase 1/genetics
- Mice
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutant Proteins/metabolism
- Mutation/genetics
- "Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Somatically acquired JAK1 mutations in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
**Authors:** Flex E, Petrangeli V, Stella L, Chiaretti S, Hornakova T, Knoops L, Ariola C, Fodale V, Clappier E, Paoloni F, Martinelli S, Fragale A, Sanchez M, Tavolaro S, Messina M, Cazzaniga G, Camera A, Pizzolo G, Tornesello A, Vignetti M, Battistini A, Cavé H, Gelb BD, Renauld JC, Biondi A, Constantinescu SN, Foà R, Tartaglia M
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20072182](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20072182)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2008 Apr 14;205(4):751-8. doi: 10.1084/jem.20072182. Epub 2008 Mar 
24.

Somatically acquired JAK1 mutations in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Flex E(1), Petrangeli V, Stella L, Chiaretti S, Hornakova T, Knoops L, Ariola C, 
Fodale V, Clappier E, Paoloni F, Martinelli S, Fragale A, Sanchez M, Tavolaro S, 
Messina M, Cazzaniga G, Camera A, Pizzolo G, Tornesello A, Vignetti M, 
Battistini A, Cavé H, Gelb BD, Renauld JC, Biondi A, Constantinescu SN, Foà R, 
Tartaglia M.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Cellulare e Neuroscienze, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità, Rome, 00161, Italy.

Aberrant signal transduction contributes substantially to leukemogenesis. The 
Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) gene encodes a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase that 
noncovalently associates with a variety of cytokine receptors and plays a 
nonredundant role in lymphoid cell precursor proliferation, survival, and 
differentiation. We report that somatic mutations in JAK1 occur in individuals 
with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). JAK1 mutations were more prevalent 
among adult subjects with the T cell precursor ALL, where they accounted for 18% 
of cases, and were associated with advanced age at diagnosis, poor response to 
therapy, and overall prognosis. All mutations were missense, and some were 
predicted to destabilize interdomain interactions controlling the activity of 
the kinase. Three mutations that were studied promoted JAK1 gain of function and 
conferred interleukin (IL)-3-independent growth in Ba/F3 cells and/or 
IL-9-independent resistance to dexamethasone-induced apoptosis in T cell 
lymphoma BW5147 cells. Such effects were associated with variably enhanced 
activation of multiple downstream signaling pathways. Leukemic cells with 
mutated JAK1 alleles shared a gene expression signature characterized by 
transcriptional up-regulation of genes positively controlled by JAK signaling. 
Our findings implicate dysregulated JAK1 function in ALL, particularly of T cell 
origin, and point to this kinase as a target for the development of novel 
antileukemic drugs.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20072182
PMCID: PMC2292215
PMID: 18362173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]