---
reference_id: "PMID:33797273"
title: Single-cell transcriptomics trajectory and molecular convergence of clinically relevant mutations in Brugada syndrome.
authors:
- Tambi R
- Abdel Hameid R
- Bankapur A
- Nassir N
- Begum G
- Alsheikh-Ali A
- Uddin M
- Berdiev BK
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00061.2021
keywords:
- "Brugada Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Mutation
- NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel/genetics
- NAV1.8 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel/genetics
- Phenotype
- Proteomics
- TRPM Cation Channels/genetics
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell transcriptomics trajectory and molecular convergence of clinically relevant mutations in Brugada syndrome.
**Authors:** Tambi R, Abdel Hameid R, Bankapur A, Nassir N, Begum G, Alsheikh-Ali A, Uddin M, Berdiev BK
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00061.2021](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00061.2021)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2021 May 1;320(5):H1935-H1948. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00061.2021. Epub 2021 Apr 2.

Single-cell transcriptomics trajectory and molecular convergence of clinically
relevant mutations in Brugada syndrome.

Tambi R(1), Abdel Hameid R(1), Bankapur A(1), Nassir N(1), Begum G(1),
Alsheikh-Ali A(1), Uddin M(1), Berdiev BK(1).

Author information:
(1)Mohammed Bin Rashid University of Medicine and Health Sciences, Dubai, United
Arab Emirates.

Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a rare, inherited arrhythmia with high risk of sudden
cardiac death. To evaluate the molecular convergence of clinically relevant
mutations and to identify developmental cardiac cell types that are associated
with BrS etiology, we collected 733 mutations represented by 16 sodium, calcium,
potassium channels, and regulatory and structural genes related to BrS. Among
the clinically relevant mutations, 266 are unique singletons and 88 mutations
are recurrent. We observed an over-representation of clinically relevant
mutations (∼80%) in SCN5A gene and also identified several candidate genes,
including GPD1L, TRPM4, and SCN10A. Furthermore, protein domain enrichment
analysis revealed that a large proportion of the mutations impacted ion
transport domains in multiple genes, including SCN5A, TRPM4, and SCN10A. A
comparative protein domain analysis of SCN5A further established a significant
(P = 0.04) enrichment of clinically relevant mutations within ion transport
domain, including a significant (P = 0.02) mutation hotspot within 1321-1380
residue. The enrichment of clinically relevant mutations within SCN5A ion
transport domain is stronger (P = 0.00003) among early onset of BrS. Our
spatiotemporal cellular heart developmental (prenatal to adult) trajectory
analysis applying single-cell transcriptome identified the most frequently
BrS-mutated genes (SCN5A and GPD1L) are significantly upregulated in the
prenatal cardiomyocytes. A more restrictive cellular expression trajectory is
prominent in the adult heart ventricular cardiomyocytes compared to prenatal.
Our study suggests that genomic and proteomic hotspots in BrS converge into ion
transport pathway and cardiomyocyte as a major BrS-associated cell type that
provides insight into the complex genetic etiology of BrS.NEW & NOTEWORTHY
Brugada syndrome is a rare inherited arrhythmia with high risk of sudden cardiac
death. We present the findings for a molecular convergence of clinically
relevant mutations and identification of a single-cell transcriptome-derived
cardiac cell types that are associated with the etiology of BrS. Our study
suggests that genomic and proteomic hotspots in BrS converge into ion transport
pathway and cardiomyocyte as a major BrS-associated cell type that provides
insight into the complex genetic etiology of BrS.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00061.2021
PMID: 33797273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
