---
reference_id: "PMID:9988267"
title: The gene encoding ribosomal protein S19 is mutated in Diamond-Blackfan anaemia.
authors:
- Draptchinskaia N
- Gustavsson P
- Andersson B
- Pettersson M
- Willig TN
- Dianzani I
- Ball S
- Tchernia G
- Klar J
- Matsson H
- Tentler D
- Mohandas N
- Carlsson B
- Dahl N
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/5951
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The gene encoding ribosomal protein S19 is mutated in Diamond-Blackfan anaemia.
**Authors:** Draptchinskaia N, Gustavsson P, Andersson B, Pettersson M, Willig TN, Dianzani I, Ball S, Tchernia G, Klar J, Matsson H, Tentler D, Mohandas N, Carlsson B, Dahl N
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/5951](https://doi.org/10.1038/5951)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Feb;21(2):169-75. doi: 10.1038/5951.

The gene encoding ribosomal protein S19 is mutated in Diamond-Blackfan anaemia.

Draptchinskaia N(1), Gustavsson P, Andersson B, Pettersson M, Willig TN, 
Dianzani I, Ball S, Tchernia G, Klar J, Matsson H, Tentler D, Mohandas N, 
Carlsson B, Dahl N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Diamond-Blackfan anaemia (DBA) is a constitutional erythroblastopenia 
characterized by absent or decreased erythroid precursors. The disease, 
previously mapped to human chromosome 19q13, is frequently associated with a 
variety of malformations. To identify the gene involved in DBA, we cloned the 
chromosome 19q13 breakpoint in a patient with a reciprocal X;19 chromosome 
translocation. The breakpoint occurred in the gene encoding ribosomal protein 
S19. Furthermore, we identified mutations in RPS19 in 10 of 40 unrelated DBA 
patients, including nonsense, frameshift, splice site and missense mutations, as 
well as two intragenic deletions. These mutations are associated with clinical 
features that suggest a function for RPS19 in erythropoiesis and embryogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/5951
PMID: 9988267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]