---
reference_id: "PMID:38362118"
title: "The role of BAFF and APRIL in IgA nephropathy: pathogenic mechanisms and targeted therapies."
authors:
- Cheung CK
- Barratt J
- Liew A
- Zhang H
- Tesar V
- Lafayette R
journal: Front Nephrol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneph.2023.1346769
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of BAFF and APRIL in IgA nephropathy: pathogenic mechanisms and targeted therapies.
**Authors:** Cheung CK, Barratt J, Liew A, Zhang H, Tesar V, Lafayette R
**Journal:** Front Nephrol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneph.2023.1346769](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneph.2023.1346769)

## Content

1. Front Nephrol. 2024 Feb 1;3:1346769. doi: 10.3389/fneph.2023.1346769.
eCollection 2023.

The role of BAFF and APRIL in IgA nephropathy: pathogenic mechanisms and
targeted therapies.

Cheung CK(1)(2), Barratt J(1)(2), Liew A(3), Zhang H(4), Tesar V(5), Lafayette
R(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester,
United Kingdom.
(2)John Walls Renal Unit, University Hospitals of Leicester National Health
Service (NHS) Trust, Leicester, United Kingdom.
(3)The Kidney & Transplant Practice, Mount Elizabeth Novena Hospital, Singapore.
(4)Renal Division in the Department of Medicine, Peking University First
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Nephrology, First School of Medicine and General University
Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czechia.
(6)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States.

Immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN), characterized by mesangial deposition of
galactose-deficient-IgA1 (Gd-IgA1), is the most common biopsy-proven primary
glomerulonephritis worldwide. Recently, an improved understanding of its
underlying pathogenesis and the substantial risk of progression to kidney
failure has emerged. The "four-hit hypothesis" of IgAN pathogenesis outlines a
process that begins with elevated circulating levels of Gd-IgA1 that trigger
autoantibody production. This results in the formation and deposition of immune
complexes in the mesangium, leading to inflammation and kidney injury. Key
mediators of the production of Gd-IgA1 and its corresponding autoantibodies are
B-cell activating factor (BAFF), and A proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL),
each playing essential roles in the survival and maintenance of B cells and
humoral immunity. Elevated serum levels of both BAFF and APRIL are observed in
patients with IgAN and correlate with disease severity. This review explores the
complex pathogenesis of IgAN, highlighting the pivotal roles of BAFF and APRIL
in the interplay between mucosal hyper-responsiveness, B-cell activation, and
the consequent overproduction of Gd-IgA1 and its autoantibodies that are key
features in this disease. Finally, the potential therapeutic benefits of
inhibiting BAFF and APRIL in IgAN, and a summary of recent clinical trial data,
will be discussed.

Copyright © 2024 Cheung, Barratt, Liew, Zhang, Tesar and Lafayette.

DOI: 10.3389/fneph.2023.1346769
PMCID: PMC10867227
PMID: 38362118

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
