---
reference_id: "PMID:22053211"
title: "High prevalence of systemic autoimmune diseases in patients with Menière's disease."
authors:
- Gazquez I
- Soto-Varela A
- Aran I
- Santos S
- Batuecas A
- Trinidad G
- Perez-Garrigues H
- Gonzalez-Oller C
- Acosta L
- Lopez-Escamez JA
journal: PLoS One
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026759
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High prevalence of systemic autoimmune diseases in patients with Menière's disease.
**Authors:** Gazquez I, Soto-Varela A, Aran I, Santos S, Batuecas A, Trinidad G, Perez-Garrigues H, Gonzalez-Oller C, Acosta L, Lopez-Escamez JA
**Journal:** PLoS One (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0026759](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0026759)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26759. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026759. Epub 2011 Oct 
28.

High prevalence of systemic autoimmune diseases in patients with Menière's 
disease.

Gazquez I(1), Soto-Varela A, Aran I, Santos S, Batuecas A, Trinidad G, 
Perez-Garrigues H, Gonzalez-Oller C, Acosta L, Lopez-Escamez JA.

Author information:
(1)Genyo, Centro de Genómica e Investigación Oncológica, Pfizer/Universidad de 
Granada/Junta de Andalucia, Granada, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmunity appears to be associated with the pathophysiology of 
Meniere's disease (MD), an inner ear disorder characterized by episodes of 
vertigo associated with hearing loss and tinnitus. However, the prevalence of 
autoimmune diseases (AD) in patients with MD has not been studied in individuals 
with uni or bilateral sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL).
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We estimated the prevalence of AD in 690 outpatients with 
MD with uni or bilateral SNHL from otoneurology clinics at six tertiary referral 
hospitals by using clinica criteria and an immune panel (lymphocyte populations, 
antinuclear antibodies, C3, C4 and proinflammatory cytokines TNFα, INFγ). The 
observed prevalence of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) and ankylosing spondylitis (AS) was higher than expected for the general 
population (1.39 for RA, 0.87 for SLE and 0.70 for AS, respectively). Systemic 
AD were more frequently observed in patients with MD and diagnostic criteria for 
migraine than cases with MD and tension-type headache (p = 0.007). There were 
clinical differences between patients with uni or bilateral SNHL, but no 
differences were found in the immune profile. Multiple linear regression showed 
that changes in lymphocytes subpopulations were associated with hearing loss and 
persistence of vertigo, suggesting a role for the immune response in MD.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite some limitations, MD displays an elevated prevalence of 
systemic AD such as RA, SLE and AS. This finding, which suggests an autoimmune 
background in a subset of patients with MD, has important implications for the 
treatment of MD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026759
PMCID: PMC3203881
PMID: 22053211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.