---
reference_id: "PMID:31239556"
title: CTCF variants in 39 individuals with a variable neurodevelopmental disorder broaden the mutational and clinical spectrum.
authors:
- Konrad EDH
- Nardini N
- Caliebe A
- Nagel I
- Young D
- Horvath G
- Santoro SL
- Shuss C
- Ziegler A
- Bonneau D
- Kempers M
- Pfundt R
- Legius E
- Bouman A
- Stuurman KE
- Õunap K
- Pajusalu S
- Wojcik MH
- Vasileiou G
- Le Guyader G
- Schnelle HM
- Berland S
- Zonneveld-Huijssoon E
- Kersten S
- Gupta A
- Blackburn PR
- Ellingson MS
- Ferber MJ
- Dhamija R
- Klee EW
- McEntagart M
- Lichtenbelt KD
- Kenney A
- Vergano SA
- Abou Jamra R
- Platzer K
- Ella Pierpont M
- Khattar D
- Hopkin RJ
- Martin RJ
- Jongmans MCJ
- Chang VY
- Martinez-Agosto JA
- Kuismin O
- Kurki MI
- Pietiläinen O
- Palotie A
- Maarup TJ
- Johnson DS
- Venborg Pedersen K
- Laulund LW
- Lynch SA
- Blyth M
- Prescott K
- Canham N
- Ibitoye R
- Brilstra EH
- Shinawi M
- Fassi E
- DDD Study
- Sticht H
- Gregor A
- Van Esch H
- Zweier C
journal: Genet Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0585-z
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# CTCF variants in 39 individuals with a variable neurodevelopmental disorder broaden the mutational and clinical spectrum.
**Authors:** Konrad EDH, Nardini N, Caliebe A, Nagel I, Young D, Horvath G, Santoro SL, Shuss C, Ziegler A, Bonneau D, Kempers M, Pfundt R, Legius E, Bouman A, Stuurman KE, Õunap K, Pajusalu S, Wojcik MH, Vasileiou G, Le Guyader G, Schnelle HM, Berland S, Zonneveld-Huijssoon E, Kersten S, Gupta A, Blackburn PR, Ellingson MS, Ferber MJ, Dhamija R, Klee EW, McEntagart M, Lichtenbelt KD, Kenney A, Vergano SA, Abou Jamra R, Platzer K, Ella Pierpont M, Khattar D, Hopkin RJ, Martin RJ, Jongmans MCJ, Chang VY, Martinez-Agosto JA, Kuismin O, Kurki MI, Pietiläinen O, Palotie A, Maarup TJ, Johnson DS, Venborg Pedersen K, Laulund LW, Lynch SA, Blyth M, Prescott K, Canham N, Ibitoye R, Brilstra EH, Shinawi M, Fassi E, DDD Study, Sticht H, Gregor A, Van Esch H, Zweier C
**Journal:** Genet Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-019-0585-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-019-0585-z)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2019 Dec;21(12):2723-2733. doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0585-z. Epub
2019  Jun 26.

CTCF variants in 39 individuals with a variable neurodevelopmental disorder 
broaden the mutational and clinical spectrum.

Konrad EDH(1), Nardini N(1), Caliebe A(2), Nagel I(2)(3), Young D(4), Horvath 
G(4), Santoro SL(5), Shuss C(5), Ziegler A(6), Bonneau D(6), Kempers M(7), 
Pfundt R(7), Legius E(8), Bouman A(9), Stuurman KE(9), Õunap K(10)(11)(12), 
Pajusalu S(10)(11)(13), Wojcik MH(12)(14), Vasileiou G(1), Le Guyader G(15), 
Schnelle HM(16), Berland S(16), Zonneveld-Huijssoon E(17), Kersten S(7), Gupta 
A(18), Blackburn PR(19), Ellingson MS(19), Ferber MJ(19), Dhamija R(20), Klee 
EW(18), McEntagart M(21), Lichtenbelt KD(22), Kenney A(23), Vergano SA(23), Abou 
Jamra R(24), Platzer K(24), Ella Pierpont M(25), Khattar D(26), Hopkin RJ(26), 
Martin RJ(27), Jongmans MCJ(7), Chang VY(28)(29), Martinez-Agosto JA(30)(31), 
Kuismin O(32)(33)(34)(35), Kurki MI(32)(36)(37), Pietiläinen O(37)(38), Palotie 
A(32)(36)(37)(39)(40), Maarup TJ(41), Johnson DS(42), Venborg Pedersen K(43), 
Laulund LW(44), Lynch SA(45), Blyth M(46), Prescott K(46), Canham N(47), Ibitoye 
R(47), Brilstra EH(22), Shinawi M(48), Fassi E(48); DDD Study; Sticht H(49), 
Gregor A(1), Van Esch H(50), Zweier C(51).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig Holstein Campus 
Kiel and Christian-Albrechts-Universität, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, University Hospital 
Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(4)Adult Metabolic Diseases Clinic, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(5)Division of Molecular and Human Genetics, Nationwide Children's Hospital, 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(6)Département de Biochimie et Génétique, CHU Angers et Mitolab INSERM 1083-CNRS 
6015, Angers, France.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center and Radboud 
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven and Center for Human Genetics, 
University Hospital Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University 
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University 
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(12)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(13)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(14)Divisions of Genetics and Genomics and Newborn Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(15)Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(16)Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway.
(17)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(18)Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(19)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(20)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(21)South West Thames Regional Genetics Centre, St. George's Healthcare NHS 
Trust, St. George's, University of London, London, UK.
(22)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(23)Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of The 
King's Daughters, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(24)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(25)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(26)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(27)The Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK.
(28)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(29)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(30)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School 
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(31)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(32)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(33)PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(34)Medical Research Center, Oulu University Hospital, University of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland.
(35)Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(36)Psychiatric & Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(37)The Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, The Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(38)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(39)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(40)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(41)Department of Genetics, Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(42)Sheffield Children's Hospital, Sheffield, UK.
(43)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, 
Denmark.
(44)Department of Pediatrics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(45)University College Dublin and Temple Street Children's Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(46)Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds 
Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK.
(47)North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, Northwick Park Hospital, 
Harrow, UK.
(48)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(49)Institute of Biochemistry, Emil-Fischer Center, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(50)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(51)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany. christiane.zweier@uk-erlangen.de.

PURPOSE: Pathogenic variants in the chromatin organizer CTCF were previously 
reported in seven individuals with a neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD).
METHODS: Through international collaboration we collected data from 39 subjects 
with variants in CTCF. We performed transcriptome analysis on RNA from blood 
samples and utilized Drosophila melanogaster to investigate the impact of Ctcf 
dosage alteration on nervous system development and function.
RESULTS: The individuals in our cohort carried 2 deletions, 8 likely 
gene-disruptive, 2 splice-site, and 20 different missense variants, most of them 
de novo. Two cases were familial. The associated phenotype was of variable 
severity extending from mild developmental delay or normal IQ to severe 
intellectual disability. Feeding difficulties and behavioral abnormalities were 
common, and variable other findings including growth restriction and cardiac 
defects were observed. RNA-sequencing in five individuals identified 3828 
deregulated genes enriched for known NDD genes and biological processes such as 
transcriptional regulation. Ctcf dosage alteration in Drosophila resulted in 
impaired gross neurological functioning and learning and memory deficits.
CONCLUSION: We significantly broaden the mutational and clinical spectrum 
ofCTCF-associated NDDs. Our data shed light onto the functional role of CTCF by 
identifying deregulated genes and show that Ctcf alterations result in nervous 
system defects in Drosophila.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-019-0585-z
PMCID: PMC6892744
PMID: 31239556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

CCCTC-binding factor CTCF is one of the most important chromatin
organizers in vertebrates. It is crucial for orchestrating the three-dimensional
chromatin structure by intra- and interchromosomal loop formation and by
contributing to the organization of topologically associated
domains.1,2
Additionally, it is involved in many chromatin regulating processes, including gene
regulation, blocking of heterochromatin spreading,
imprinting,3 and X-inactivation.4 CTCF is able to bind various
DNA motifs with different specific combinations of its 11 C2H2-type zinc
fingers5 and has over 30,000 binding sites in the human
genome.6

In 2013 Gregor et al. identified a larger de novo deletion (280 kb, 8
genes), two intragenic likely gene-disruptive (LGD) variants (c.375dupT,
p.(Val126Cysfs*14); c.1186dupA, p.[Arg496Lysfs*13]) and one missense variant
(c.1699C > T, p.[Arg567Trp]) in CTCF in four
individuals with variable intellectual disability (ID), microcephaly, and growth
retardation7 (mental retardation, autosomal dominant 21,
MRD21, MIM 615502). In three of these individuals RNA-sequencing was performed,
which revealed a broad deregulation of genes involved in cellular response to
extracellular stimuli.7 Since that initial report, only a few other case
studies on intragenic pathogenic CTCF variants
have been published. A de novo frameshift variant was identified in a girl with
developmental delay, short stature, severe microcephaly, heart defects, and various
other anomalies,8 and very recently, two frameshifting and the same
missense variant as in Gregor et al.7 were reported in three Chinese individuals
with ID, feeding difficulties, and microcephaly.9 Additionally, two larger
deletions of 1.1 and 1.6 Mb, respectively, encompassing CTCF, were identified in individuals with developmental delay and
growth impairment.10 Further studies reported the identification ofCTCF variants in large cohorts with various
clinical indications but did not provide detailed clinical
information.11–13

We now report on 39 additional individuals with variants in CTCF, further delineating the mutational and clinical
spectrum of CTCF-related neurodevelopmental
disorders (NDD). By RNA-sequencing we confirm a broad deregulation of genes in five
affected individuals. By utilizing Drosophila
melanogaster we could demonstrate that Ctcf is crucial for learning
and memory in a dosage-sensitive manner, thus confirming loss of function or
haploinsufficiency as the driving force in CTCF-related NDDs.

Personal communication with colleagues following the initial
report,7 searching the DECIPHER
database,14,15 and using
GeneMatcher16 enabled us to collect clinical and
mutational details on 39 individuals with variants in CTCF. Testing (for individual methods see Table S1) in collaborating centers was performed
either in the setting of routine diagnostic testing without the requirement for
institutional ethics approval or within research settings approved by the
ethical review board of the respective institutions (University
Erlangen-Nuremberg, University of Tartu, UZ Leuven, Northern Ostrobothnia
Hospital District, Cambridge South REC, Republic of Ireland REC; see also
Table S1). Informed consent for
publication of patient photos and for testing and for publication of mutational
and clinical data was obtained from the individuals, or their parents or legal
guardians. RNA from blood lymphocytes was collected with the PAXgene system
(PreAnalytiX, BD and Qiagen, Hombrechtikon, Switzerland) from three individuals
with missense variants and two individuals with LGD variants plus from two
individuals with unclear splice-site or nonsense variants. RNA samples from four
healthy female and four healthy male young adults were used as controls.

Structural analysis for selected variants was performed as described
in the Supplementary Methods.

Quality control of RNA samples was performed using a Bioanalyzer
2100 (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Library preparation was performed using
the TruSeq Stranded mRNA LT Sample Prep Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA,
USA).

Libraries were subjected to single-end sequencing (101 bp) on a
HighSeq-2500 platform (Illumina). The obtained reads were converted to .fastq
format and demultiplexed using bcl2fastq v2.17.1.14. Quality filtering was
performed using cutadapt v. 1.15;17 then reads were mapped against the human
reference genome (Ensembl GRCh37, release 87) using the STAR aligner v.
2.5.4a,18 and a STAR genome directory created by
supplying the Ensembl gtf annotation file (release 87). Read counts per gene
were obtained using featureCounts program v. 1.6.119 and the Ensembl gtf
annotation file. Subsequent analyses were performed using R version
3.5.0.20 In particular, differential expression
analysis was performed with the DESeq2 package
v.1.20.0.21 Additionally, the lfc shrink function of the
apeglm package was used to control for expression changes in lowly expressed
genes.22 Gene lists were filtered for protein coding
genes with a base mean count of at least 10. Differentially expressed (DE) genes
were identified by filtering for padj ≤0.01. DE genes with a log2foldchange
>0 or <0 were considered as “upregulated” and “downregulated,”
respectively. Enrichment of GO Terms among DE genes was analyzed utilizing the
PANTHER version 14.023 enrichment analysis tool on the Gene
Ontology24,25 homepage with the following settings: test:
“Fisher’s Exact”; correction: “Calculate false discovery rate”; and GO-Slim
terms as annotation data set. A list of all expressed genes within controls and
the affected individuals was used as background.

Immunofluorescence and fractionation to assess subcellular
localization of CTCF are described in detail in the Supplementary Material and Methods.

Flies were kept on standard food containing cornmeal, sugar, yeast,
and agar. Tissue-specific knockdown or overexpression was attained with the
UAS/GAL4 system.26 Crosses were carried out at 28 °C to induce
knockdown and at 25 °C to induce overexpression (and knockdown for the courtship
conditioning assay). The Ctcf-RNAi line (VDRC
108857/KK) and the respective control (VDRC 60100) were obtained from the Vienna
Drosophila Resource Center (VDRC, Vienna, Austria),27 as well as the control
(VDRC 60000) used for the hypomorphic Ctcf
mutant line (BL 21162). This line and the GAL4-driver stocks (BL 4414, actin-GAL4 for ubiquitous expression; BL 8816,D42-GAL4 for motoneurons; BL 8184,DJ757-GAL4 expressed in muscle; BL 7415,repo-GAL4 expressed in glia; BL 8765,elav-GAL4/Cyo expressed pan-neuronal) and
the control line for UAS-Ctcf (BL 24749) were
obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila
Stock Center (BDSC, Bloomington, IN, USA). The Ctcf mutant line was isogenized by backcrossing it with vdrc
60000 for at least 7 generations. UAS-Ctcf
was obtained from the Zurich ORFeome Project (FlyORF, Zurich,
Switzerland).28 The driver lines for class IV dendritic
arborization (da) neurons (UAS-Dcr-2;477-GAL4,UAS-mCD8::GFP;ppk-GAL4/Tm3sb), mushroom body (UAS-Dcr-2;247-GAL4), and
pan-neuronal expression (elav-GAL4;elav-GAL4) were assembled from colleagues. We
confirmed Ctcf knockdown and overexpression
by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
(Fig. S1).

Analysis of type 1b neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) of larval muscle
4 as well as analysis of dendritic arborization (da) neurons were performed as
described previously29 (for detailed description, see Supplementary
Methods).

Climbing behavior and bang sensitivity testing was performed as
described elsewhere29 and as in more detail in the Supplementary
Methods upon pan-neuronal
(elav-GAL4), motoneuronal (D42-GAL4), and/or glial (repo-GAL4) manipulation.

The courtship conditioning paradigm assays were performed as
described previously29 with the mutant Ctcf line and upon mushroom body (UAS-Dcr-2;247-GAL4) specific
knockdown or overexpression of Ctcf. Flies
were kept at 25 °C and 70% humidity at a 12:12 light–dark cycle. Virgin males
were trained individually by pairing them with premated females. Learning and
short-term memory were tested immediately or 1 hour after a training period of
1 hour, respectively. Long-term memory was tested 24 hours after a training
period of 14 hours. The courtship index (CI), the percentage of time each male
spent courting a nonreceptive female, was manually assessed from 10-minute
movies. By comparing the CI of naïve and trained males a learning index was
calculated: LI = (CInaive − CItrained) / CInaive. Differences between LIs of
control and mutant flies were statistically compared by a randomization test
with 10,000 bootstrap replicates with a custom R
script.30

The identified aberrations in CTCF include two large deletions in 16q22.1, encompassingCTCF plus 26 (arr[GRCh37]
16q22.1[67588276_68173459]×1) or 43 (arr[GRCh37] 16q22.1[67345851_68899546]×1)
neighboring genes, respectively. In addition, we identified six frameshifting
variants (including a deletion of exon 8); two nonsense variants; two variants
in the splice acceptor site of exon 4, for one of which in-frame deletion of
exon 4 was demonstrated (Fig. S2a,b);
and 20 different missense variants (Fig. 1, Table S1).
Regarding the latter, seven amino acid residues were recurrently affected:
p.Arg342 was twice exchanged to Cys and to His in three individuals from one
family; p.Arg368 was altered twice to Cys and once to His; p.His373 once to Asp
and once to Pro; and p.(Arg377His), p.(Pro378Leu), and p.(Arg448Gln) were
observed twice, respectively (Fig. 1,
Table S1). p.(Arg567Trp) has been
reported in two individuals previously.7,9 All missense variants were located in
exons encoding one of the 11 zinc fingers. Of note, the majority (6/8) of LGD
variants were located in exons 3 and 4, just upstream of or at the start of the
zinc finger domains. Most variants were shown to be de novo. In six cases one or
both parents were not available for testing, and two cases were familial with
the variant being transmitted from a presumably healthy mother to her affected
son or from an affected father to his twin children. In the first family, the
nonsense variant p.(Arg654*) was located rather C-terminal, therefore we
confirmed nonsense-mediated messenger RNA (mRNA) decay by RT-PCR
(Fig. S2c). Language barrier
prevented a proper evaluation of the mother’s cognitive capabilities, and though
not indicated by the read distribution in DNA from blood, a tissue-specific
mosaicism in her could not be excluded. In the second family, structural
analysis of the p.(Arg342His) variant indicated a negative effect on CTCF
stability, mildly weaker compared with the p.(Arg342Cys) variant observed de
novo in two individuals (Fig. S3a–c).
One missense variant was mosaic with an alternative allele frequency of
approximately 13%. Apart from the previously published p.(Arg567Trp) variant,
all missense variants were novel, affected highly conserved amino acids, and
were predicted to be deleterious by several in vitro prediction programs
(Table S1). The p.(Arg368His)
variant occurred once in gnomAD, while all other variants were absent. Several
residues of identified missense variants, i.e., p.(Arg278Leu), p.(Asp529Asn),
p.(Arg567Trp), carried one other amino acid exchange in gnomAD
(Table S1). Comparing the
recurrent pathogenic variant p.(Arg567Trp) with p.(Arg567Gln) from gnomAD by
structural modeling indicated an only mild impairment of polar interaction with
the phosphate backbone of the DNA for the Arg567Gln variant, while the Arg567Trp
variant resulted in a significantly reduced binding affinity (Fig. S3d–f).Fig. 1Variants identified inCTCF. a Schematic drawing of the CTCF gene with known and novel
variants. Noncoding exons are displayed in light gray, coding
exons in medium gray, and exons encoding zinc fingers in dark
gray. b Schematic drawing of
the CTCF protein. Missense or in-frame variants are displayed
above and likely gene-disruptive variants below the scheme.
Nonbold variants and p.(Arg567Trp) were published previously
with or *without clinical details.7–9, 11–13 Underlined variants are
recurrent. All identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic
in-frame or missense variants affect one of the 11 zinc finger
domains.

Variants identified inCTCF. a Schematic drawing of the CTCF gene with known and novel
variants. Noncoding exons are displayed in light gray, coding
exons in medium gray, and exons encoding zinc fingers in dark
gray. b Schematic drawing of
the CTCF protein. Missense or in-frame variants are displayed
above and likely gene-disruptive variants below the scheme.
Nonbold variants and p.(Arg567Trp) were published previously
with or *without clinical details.7–9, 11–13 Underlined variants are
recurrent. All identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic
in-frame or missense variants affect one of the 11 zinc finger
domains.

According to the guidelines of the American College of Medical
Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), variants in 36 individuals were considered as
pathogenic or likely pathogenic, while three variants (p.[Arg278Leu],
p.[Ser360Arg], p.[Asp529Asn]) remained of unknown significance due to an
atypical phenotype or lack of segregation testing (Table S1). While structural modeling for the
p.(Asp529Asn) variant indicated that it might be tolerated without significantly
affecting the CTCF structure (Fig. S3d), it suggested a decreased DNA-binding affinity for the
p.(Arg278Leu) variant (Fig. S3g–h) and
impaired DNA base pair recognition for the p.(Ser360Arg) variant
(Fig. S3i–k).

All but one (due to young age) of the 36 affected individuals with
intragenic CTCF aberrations classified as
pathogenic or likely pathogenic presented with developmental delay and/or ID.
Cognitive impairment was extremely variable, ranging from learning difficulties,
normal IQ, and attending mainstream school or graduating from college in seven
individuals to severe ID in three individuals. Walking age ranged from 12 months
to three years, and age of first words from 12–18 months to lack of speech at
age 12 years. Older individuals with active speech usually spoke in sentences.
Intrauterine growth restriction or low birth measurements were reported in ten
individuals, and failure to thrive or feeding difficulties, often requiring tube
feeding, occurred in 23 individuals. Postnatal short stature was noted in 6 and
(borderline) microcephaly in 12 individuals. Tall stature and/or obesity were
observed in three individuals. Behavioral anomalies such as autistic features,
attention deficit and hyperactivity or aggressivity were common and reported in
24 individuals. Cardiac defects occurred in 11 individuals, and palatal
anomalies such as cleft palate or high palate were present in 12 individuals.
Conductive and/or sensorineuronal hearing loss were reported in 10 and vision
anomalies in 15 individuals. Recurrent urinary tract, airway, or middle ear
infections were reported in 14 individuals. Febrile or nonfebrile seizures or
teeth anomalies occurred in four individuals, respectively. Furthermore,
nonspecific magnetic resonance image (MRI) anomalies and minor skeletal
anomalies were reported (Table 1,
Table S1). Minor facial
dysmorphisms were frequently noted but did not point to a recognizable, typical
facial gestalt (Fig. 2,
Table S1). Individuals 1 and 2
with larger deletions presented with a similar phenotype with mild to moderate
ID and without growth and other major abnormalities (Table S1). Individual 1 carrying the 1.5-Mb deletion
is at high risk of developing gastric cancer because CDH1 maps within the deleted fragment. No obvious
genotype–phenotype correlations between LGD and missense variants or between
intragenic variants and larger deletions could be delineated (Table 1).Table 1Main clinical features in individuals with pathogenic or
likely pathogenic variants in CTCFLGD variants n = 8Missense/in-frame variants n = 26Published variantsan = 7Total intragenicLarge deletionsbn = 5IUGR/SGA2/88/255/737%0/5Feeding difficulties/FTT6/817/237/778%3/5Short stature1/85/255/727%2–3/5cMicrocephaly3/77–9/227/752%2–3/5cWalking age14–32 months12–36 months14 months to >3.5 years23 months to >4.2 yearsAge first words12 months–4 years12 mo—no speech12 months to >3.5 years18 months to >4.2 yearsUnspecified DD/ID0/87/251/720%0/5Mild/borderline DD/ID5/89/253/742%2/5Moderate ID3/86/251/725%3/5Severe ID0/83/252/712%0/5Behavioral anomalies5/619/234/777%4/5Seizures1/83/230/710%1/5Cardiac defects2/69/233/738%0/5Palatal anomalies3/89/232/736%0/5Hearing loss0/810/230/726%1/5Vision anomalies6/89/196/761%3/5Recurrent infections2/712/233/745%1/5DD developmental delay,FTT failure to thrive,ID intellectual
disability,IUGR intrauterine growth
restriction, LGD likely
gene-disruptive, SGA small for
gestational age.aSee refs.
7–9.bTwo patients from this study
plus three published ones.7–10cOne patient was treated with
growth hormones.Fig. 2Facial gestalt of individuals with
pathogenic variants inCTCF. Note minor facial
dysmorphism such as a long face (e.g., I5, I8, I11, I27), a
prominent forehead (e.g., I4, I8, I18, I33, I35) or a bulbous
nasal tip and long palpebral fissures in several individuals,
but no overall distinct, recognizable facial
gestalt.

Main clinical features in individuals with pathogenic or
likely pathogenic variants in CTCF

DD developmental delay,FTT failure to thrive,ID intellectual
disability,IUGR intrauterine growth
restriction, LGD likely
gene-disruptive, SGA small for
gestational age.

aSee refs.
7–9.

bTwo patients from this study
plus three published ones.7–10

cOne patient was treated with
growth hormones.

Facial gestalt of individuals with
pathogenic variants inCTCF. Note minor facial
dysmorphism such as a long face (e.g., I5, I8, I11, I27), a
prominent forehead (e.g., I4, I8, I18, I33, I35) or a bulbous
nasal tip and long palpebral fissures in several individuals,
but no overall distinct, recognizable facial
gestalt.

Individuals 38 and 39 with variants of unknown significance due to
lack of parental samples also presented with similar phenotypes, while in
contrast, individual 37 with an unclear de novo variant did not show any
developmental delay or cognitive impairment, but showed immune deficiency.
Although recurrent infections are common in individuals with CTCF variants, it remains unclear if the severe
proneness to infections in individual 37 might be caused by the CTCF variant alone.

To investigate a possible effect of missense variants on the
subcellular localization and DNA-binding capacities of CTCF, we performed
immunofluorescence upon overexpression of eight different mutant CTCF constructs in HeLa cells, respectively. All
tested variants resulted in a nuclear localization with traces of protein in the
cytosol, thus closely resembling wild-type CTCF and indicating that missense
variants do not alter gross subcellular localization or distribution
(Fig. S4a). Fractionating
lymphoblastoid cell lines from two affected individuals into subcellular
compartments did not indicate differences in the distribution of mutant CTCF
compared with a healthy control (Fig. S4b).

RNA-sequencing on RNA from blood cells of five individuals with
pathogenic CTCF variants and eight healthy
controls confirmed similarly decreased CTCF
expression for the two LGD variants (log2 fold changes = −0.94 and −1.07,
respectively), indicating nonsense-mediated mRNA decay as previously confirmed
for two other frameshifting variants.7 In accordance with previous
findings,7 at least two of the three individuals with
missense variants had only mildly decreased CTCF levels compared with controls (log2 fold changes
p.[Arg368Cys]: −0.83; p.[Arg342Cys]: −0.02; p.[Glu336Gln]: −0.2)
(Table S2). Affected individuals
clustered with each other as did controls regarding differentially expressed
genes (Fig. 3a).Fig. 3Transcriptome analysis
inCTCF-deficient individuals.a Heatmap displaying the 3828
differentially expressed genes between five affected individuals
and eight healthy controls and depicting the expression
similarity between individuals with corrected p value <0.01; 2161 genes were
downregulated and 1667 genes were upregulated in the affected
individuals. Individuals are clustered by Euclidean distance,
and genes are sorted by adjusted p value. Blue, downregulated; red, upregulated.b, c Gene Ontology (GO) term analysis on b downregulated and c upregulated genes depicting the top
five GO terms for biological processes FDR false discovery rate.

Transcriptome analysis
inCTCF-deficient individuals.a Heatmap displaying the 3828
differentially expressed genes between five affected individuals
and eight healthy controls and depicting the expression
similarity between individuals with corrected p value <0.01; 2161 genes were
downregulated and 1667 genes were upregulated in the affected
individuals. Individuals are clustered by Euclidean distance,
and genes are sorted by adjusted p value. Blue, downregulated; red, upregulated.b, c Gene Ontology (GO) term analysis on b downregulated and c upregulated genes depicting the top
five GO terms for biological processes FDR false discovery rate.

There were 3828 genes that were differentially expressed between
affected individuals and controls; 1667 were upregulated and 2161 were
downregulated (Table S2). Regarding
differentially expressed genes, affected individuals behaved more similarly
within their mutational group (likely gene-disruptive variants vs. missense
variants) (Fig. 3a). Nevertheless, we
found significant overlap between differentially expressed genes in the two
individuals with LGD variants and the three individuals with missense variants
(p < 1 × 10−16, hypergeometric
test), indicating similar consequences of various types of pathogenic variants
on gene regulation.

To investigate the role of differentially expressed genes in
neurodevelopmental function and dysfunction, we calculated enrichment of known
NDD-associated genes (SysID, status November 2018, Table S2) among the deregulated genes. This was
significant for both the upregulated and the downregulated genes (p = 4.13 × 10−4 and
2.2 × 10−16, respectively, chi-square
test).

Downregulated genes were enriched for Gene Ontology (GO) terms such
as transcription-related processes and regulation of biological processes
(Fig. 3b, Table S2). Upregulated genes were enriched for
translational processes and ribonucleoprotein and ribosomal processes
(Fig. 3c, Table S2).

Given that CTCF
haploinsufficiency leads to disease, we utilized Drosophila melanogaster as a model organism to investigate the
consequences of altered Ctcf dosage on
nervous system development and function. First, we investigated whether altered
levels of Ctcf resulted in altered
development and morphology of larval neuromuscular junctions (NMJs). These large
synapses represent an established model system for vertebrate glutamatergic
synapses.31 We did not observe any significant or
consistent alterations regarding NMJ area, length, or number of synaptic boutons
or active zones in the mutant, or upon pan-neuronal knockdown or overexpression
(Fig. S5a–c). As a significant
decrease of dendritic branching has been reported in a conditional Ctcf knockout
mouse,32 we examined the large dendritic arborization
(da) neurons in Drosophila larvae. We did not
observe any significant alterations regarding number or length of dendrites upon
knockdown of Ctcf in these neurons compared with controls, while overexpressing
Ctcf resulted in a mild increase in total length (Fig. S6). Also testing for bang sensitivity, a model
for seizure susceptibility,33 did not result in aberrant phenotypes
upon pan-neuronal knockdown or overexpression or in the mutant condition
(Fig. S5d–f).

The impact of Ctcf dosage
alteration on gross neurological function was addressed with the climbing assay,
which is based on the negative geotaxis, an innate behavior to climb up after
being tapped down.34 Flies with knockdown of Ctcf in all neurons or specifically in motoneurons
showed a significant impairment in their climbing abilities while it was not
altered in flies with glial knockdown. Pan-neuronal overexpression of Ctcf did
not result in impaired climbing behavior, but overexpression in motoneurons or
particularly in glia cells did (Fig. 4a,
c).Fig. 4Impact ofCtcfdosage alteration on fly gross
neurological functioning and learning and memory.a–c Flies with knockdown of Ctcf in a motoneurons and b all neurons but not in c glia showed significant locomotor impairment
in the climbing assay. Pan-neuronal overexpression b had no effect, but c glial and a motoneuronal driven overexpression ofCtcf resulted in
significant locomotor impairment. The numbers below the columns
represent the samples in groups of ten flies tested per
genotype. d In the courtship
conditioning paradigm, the hypomorphic Ctcf mutant line showed highly significant
impairment of learning (L) and short-term memory (STM) and
significant impairment of long-term memory (LTM). e In accordance, mushroom body–driven
(UAS-Dcr-2;247-GAL4) knockdown of Ctcf resulted in significantly
reduced short-term memory (STM). Similar tendencies were
observed for L and LTM, but not reaching significance. f Overexpression of Ctcf in the mushroom body did not
result in a significant effect on L and STM, but in a
significant impairment of long-term memory. Graphs display mean
values of the number of animals indicated below the columns per
genotype from at least three independent test days. Differences
between learning indexes of control and mutant flies were
statistically compared by a randomization test with 10,000
bootstrap replicates with a custom R
script.30 Error bars depict SEM.
Asterisks indicate statistical significance (p value: *≤0.05, **≤0.01,
***≤0.001).

Impact ofCtcfdosage alteration on fly gross
neurological functioning and learning and memory.a–c Flies with knockdown of Ctcf in a motoneurons and b all neurons but not in c glia showed significant locomotor impairment
in the climbing assay. Pan-neuronal overexpression b had no effect, but c glial and a motoneuronal driven overexpression ofCtcf resulted in
significant locomotor impairment. The numbers below the columns
represent the samples in groups of ten flies tested per
genotype. d In the courtship
conditioning paradigm, the hypomorphic Ctcf mutant line showed highly significant
impairment of learning (L) and short-term memory (STM) and
significant impairment of long-term memory (LTM). e In accordance, mushroom body–driven
(UAS-Dcr-2;247-GAL4) knockdown of Ctcf resulted in significantly
reduced short-term memory (STM). Similar tendencies were
observed for L and LTM, but not reaching significance. f Overexpression of Ctcf in the mushroom body did not
result in a significant effect on L and STM, but in a
significant impairment of long-term memory. Graphs display mean
values of the number of animals indicated below the columns per
genotype from at least three independent test days. Differences
between learning indexes of control and mutant flies were
statistically compared by a randomization test with 10,000
bootstrap replicates with a custom R
script.30 Error bars depict SEM.
Asterisks indicate statistical significance (p value: *≤0.05, **≤0.01,
***≤0.001).

Finally, we tested the consequences of Ctcf dosage alterations on complex learning and memory processes
utilizing the courtship condition paradigm.35 Ubiquitous low levels
of Ctcf in the hypomorphic mutant as well as
knockdown of Ctcf specifically in the
mushroom body, the fly center for learning and memory, resulted in significantly
impaired learning and short-term memory compared with the respective controls.
Overexpression of Ctcf in the mushroom body
did not result in significantly altered learning and short-term memory, but in
significantly reduced long-term memory (Fig. 4d–f), indicating a crucial role of correct Ctcf dosage for complex learning and memory
processes.

By assembling data on additional 36 individuals with pathogenic or
likely pathogenic variants in CTCF we
considerably contribute to the delineation of the mutational and clinical spectrum
of CTCF-associated NDDs. The phenotype associated
with CTCF aberrations is highly variable. All
individuals presented with developmental delay and/or a variable degree of learning
or cognitive difficulties, extending into (low) normal IQ ranges. The mild end of
the phenotypic spectrum is reflected by two familial cases in our cohort. As also
true for other, potentially mild NDDs, autosomal dominant inheritance has to be
considered, particularly in trio exome approaches when primarily searching for de
novo variants. Our observations might also imply that due to a possibly very mild
phenotype or incomplete penetrance, very rare presence of a variant in public
databases such as ExAC or gnomAD is not necessarily an exclusion criterion for its
pathogenicity.

Feeding anomalies and failure to thrive, as well as behavioral
anomalies, were the most frequently associated symptoms. In addition, postnatal
short stature and microcephaly, as well as a whole range of different birth
malformations and anomalies, including cardiac defects, cleft palate, hearing loss,
vision anomalies, recurrent infections, and muscular hypotonia were noted. Despite
this wide range of anomalies and despite noticing minor facial dysmorphism in many
of the affected individuals, we consider the phenotype not sufficiently distinct as
to be clinically recognizable.

Previous studies have pointed to haploinsufficiency of CTCF as the main disease-causing
mechanism.7,8,10 An earlier hypothesis
suggested a possible genotype–phenotype correlation between missense and LGD
variants but was based on a very small number of affected
individuals.7 Our extensive follow-up study does not indicate
any clear correlation between nature and location of variants and clinical
presentation. Furthermore, differentially expressed genes significantly overlapped
between individuals with either missense or LGD variants, and we did not observe
effects on gene regulation or gross subcellular localization, though subtle changes
would still be possible. Both the previous and all newly identified missense
variants are located within several of the 11 zinc finger domains, most likely
resulting in loss of function by impaired DNA binding, as also indicated by
structural modeling for several variants. Of note, the neurodevelopmental phenotype
in individuals with larger deletions encompassing CTCF is not markedly different or more severe than in individuals
with intragenic missense or LGD variants. This indicates that no other
dosage-sensitive genes relevant for neurodevelopment are located nearby and further
implies (functional) haploinsufficiency of CTCF
resulting from all kinds of pathogenic variants as the most likely disease
mechanism.

Considering the crucial and extremely broad role of CTCF in chromatin
organization and regulation it is still very surprising that its haploinsufficiency
or loss of function can result in such a relatively mild phenotype. Nevertheless,
transcriptome analysis showed a broad deregulation of genes. In line with a previous
report7 and with gene expression profiles in conditional
knockout mice,32 we detected more downregulated than upregulated
genes, further supporting a primarily activating role of CTCF for target genes
involved in the pathomechanism of CTCF-related
disorders. Differentially expressed genes were enriched for biological processes and
for general ribosomal and transcriptional processes. They were also enriched for
known NDD-associated genes, emphasizing the role of CTCF in neurodevelopmental
function and dysfunction. CTCF-deficient mice die in early implantation
stages,36 highlighting its essential role in embryonic
development. Conditional knockout in postmitotic projection neurons or in the
developing brain resulted in postnatal growth retardation, abnormal behavior,
dendritic arborization anomalies, and death within one month or in deficits in
neuroprogenitor differentiation resulting in microcephaly and perinatal death,
respectively.32,37 These observations support a crucial role of
CTCF in neurodevelopment, but the early lethality prevents investigating the role of
CTCF for learning and memory processes in vivo. We chose Drosophila as a model because existence of a viable hypomorphic
mutant and tissue-specific knockdown and overexpression could circumvent lethality.
In contrast to observations of reduced dendritic arborization and spine numbers in
mice,32,37 we did not observe alterations in Drosophila larval dendritic arborization neurons or
neuromuscular junctions upon knockdown of Ctcf
and only mildly significant changes of dendritic length upon overexpression. Such
discordant findings might be related to the fact that, in contrast to mammals,Drosophila possesses three other insulator
binding proteins next to Ctcf that could take over some of the Ctcf
functions.38 This might be the reason why Ctcf is less
crucial for setting up genome organization or global gene expression duringDrosophila embryogenesis and development,
despite its many binding sites throughout the fly genome.39,40 In accordance with a more important role in
adult flies39 we observed climbing deficits upon pan-neuronal
or motoneuronal knockdown and upon motoneuronal and glial overexpression. The marked
phenotype upon glial overexpression might point to a so-far underestimated role of
Ctcf in glia, but would require further experimental follow-up. In accordance with
cognitive deficits in humans with pathogenic CTCF
variants, we observed learning and memory deficits in the hypomorphic mutant line
and upon mushroom body–specific knockdown or overexpression. These observations
confirm the importance of proper Ctcf/CTCF dosage
for learning and memory processes.

In summary, our study extensively broadens the clinical and mutational
spectrum of CTCF-related NDDs. A high number of
deregulated genes from transcriptome analyses and gross neurological as well as
learning and memory deficits in Drosophila
melanogaster provide insights into the role of proper CTCF/Ctcf
dosage for postnatal neurological and cognitive function and dysfunction.

Gene Ontology http://geneontology.org/ Homologene https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/homologene OMIM https://www.omim.org/ PANTHER http://pantherdb.org/ Primer3 http://primer3.ut.ee/ SysID database https://sysid.cmbi.umcn.nl/ UCSC Genome Browser https://genome.ucsc.edu/


Supplementary File
Supplementary TableS1
Supplementary TableS2


Supplementary File

Supplementary TableS1

Supplementary TableS2