---
reference_id: "PMID:30240479"
title: "Whipple's disease: case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- De Francesco V
- Corsi F
- Pennella A
- Bellesia A
- Fiorini G
- Vaira D
- Zullo A
journal: J Gastrointestin Liver Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.15403/jgld.2014.1121.273.fra
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple's disease: case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** De Francesco V, Corsi F, Pennella A, Bellesia A, Fiorini G, Vaira D, Zullo A
**Journal:** J Gastrointestin Liver Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.15403/jgld.2014.1121.273.fra](https://doi.org/10.15403/jgld.2014.1121.273.fra)

## Content

1. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis. 2018 Sep;27(3):331-336. doi: 
10.15403/jgld.2014.1121.273.fra.

Whipple's disease: case report and review of the literature.

De Francesco V(1), Corsi F(2), Pennella A(2), Bellesia A(3), Fiorini G(4), Vaira 
D(4), Zullo A(5).

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medical Sciences, Foggia, 
Italy.vdefrancesco@ospedaliriunitifoggia.it.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy.
(3)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medical Sciences, Foggia, Italy.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.
(5)Gastroenterology and Digestive Endoscopy, 'Nuovo Regina Margherita' Hospital, 
Rome, Italy.

Whipple's disease (WD) is known as an infrequent, systemic, chronic infection 
caused by the actinomycete Tropherima whipplei (T. whipplei). The disease is 
frequently characterized by a long prodromal and protean extra-intestinal phase, 
which often causes misdiagnosis and inappropriate treatments. Herein, we 
describe the case a 62-year-old man with a histological diagnosis of WD 
established when oral steroid treatment was started due to rheumatic 
manifestations, triggering intestinal symptoms. Systematic review of the 
literature was performed to include studies where WD was eventually diagnosed on 
duodenal biopsies. Three patients' subgroups were identified according to the 
clinical presentation.

DOI: 10.15403/jgld.2014.1121.273.fra
PMID: 30240479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]