---
reference_id: "PMID:28933915"
title: "Airway Epithelial Barrier Dysfunction in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Role of Cigarette Smoke Exposure."
authors:
- Aghapour M
- Raee P
- Moghaddam SJ
- Hiemstra PS
- Heijink IH
journal: Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2017-0200TR
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Airway Epithelial Barrier Dysfunction in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Role of Cigarette Smoke Exposure.
**Authors:** Aghapour M, Raee P, Moghaddam SJ, Hiemstra PS, Heijink IH
**Journal:** Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1165/rcmb.2017-0200TR](https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2017-0200TR)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2018 Feb;58(2):157-169. doi: 
10.1165/rcmb.2017-0200TR.

Airway Epithelial Barrier Dysfunction in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: 
Role of Cigarette Smoke Exposure.

Aghapour M(1), Raee P(2), Moghaddam SJ(3), Hiemstra PS(4), Heijink IH(5).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Pathobiology and.
(2)2 Department of Basic Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Tabriz, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)3 Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Division of Internal Medicine, the 
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(4)4 Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the 
Netherlands; and.
(5)5 Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

The epithelial lining of the airway forms the first barrier against 
environmental insults, such as inhaled cigarette smoke, which is the primary 
risk factor for the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
The barrier is formed by airway epithelial junctions, which are interconnected 
structures that restrict permeability to inhaled pathogens and environmental 
stressors. Destruction of the epithelial barrier not only exposes subepithelial 
layers to hazardous agents in the inspired air, but also alters the normal 
function of epithelial cells, which may eventually contribute to the development 
of COPD. Of note, disruption of epithelial junctions may lead to modulation of 
signaling pathways involved in differentiation, repair, and proinflammatory 
responses. Epithelial barrier dysfunction may be particularly relevant in COPD, 
where repeated injury by cigarette smoke exposure, pathogens, inflammatory 
mediators, and impaired epithelial regeneration may compromise the barrier 
function. In the current review, we discuss recent advances in understanding the 
mechanisms of barrier dysfunction in COPD, as well as the molecular mechanisms 
that underlie the impaired repair response of the injured epithelium in COPD and 
its inability to redifferentiate into a functionally intact epithelium.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2017-0200TR
PMID: 28933915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]