---
reference_id: "PMID:30020718"
title: Auto-Brewery Syndrome.
authors:
- Painter K
- Cordell BJ
- Sticco KIL
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Auto-Brewery Syndrome.
**Authors:** Painter K, Cordell BJ, Sticco KIL

## Content

1. Auto-Brewery Syndrome.

Painter K, Cordell BJ(1), Sticco KIL(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2023 Jan 19.

Author information:
(1)Panola College
(2)Stony Brook University Hospital

Auto-brewery syndrome or gut fermentation syndrome is a condition in which 
ethanol is produced through endogenous fermentation by fungi or bacteria in the 
gastrointestinal system, oral cavity, or urinary system. Patients with 
auto-brewery syndrome present with many of the signs and symptoms of alcohol 
intoxication while denying an intake of alcohol and often report a high-sugar, 
high-carbohydrate diet. The production of endogenous ethanol occurs in minute 
quantities as part of normal digestion, but when fermenting yeast or bacteria 
becomes pathogenic, extreme blood alcohol levels may result. Auto-brewery 
syndrome is more prevalent in patients with co-morbidities such as diabetes, 
obesity, and Crohn disease  but can occur in otherwise healthy 
individuals. Several strains of fermenting yeasts and rare bacteria are 
identified as pathogens. While auto-brewery syndrome is rarely diagnosed, it is 
probably underdiagnosed. Even rarer are two cases of auto-brewery syndrome 
identified, one in the oral cavity  and one in the urinary bladder.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30020718

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Kelly Painter declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Barbara Cordell 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Kristin is Sticco declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.