---
reference_id: "PMID:34650635"
title: "Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: Skin manifestations and endocrine anomalies (Review)."
authors:
- Sandru F
- Petca A
- Dumitrascu MC
- Petca RC
- Carsote M
journal: Exp Ther Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10823
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: Skin manifestations and endocrine anomalies (Review).
**Authors:** Sandru F, Petca A, Dumitrascu MC, Petca RC, Carsote M
**Journal:** Exp Ther Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3892/etm.2021.10823](https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2021.10823)

## Content

1. Exp Ther Med. 2021 Dec;22(6):1387. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10823. Epub 2021 Sep 
29.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: Skin manifestations and endocrine anomalies (Review).

Sandru F(1)(2), Petca A(3)(4), Dumitrascu MC(3)(5), Petca RC(6)(7), Carsote 
M(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, 'Carol Davila' University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Dermatology, 'Elias' Emergency Hospital, 011461 Bucharest, 
Romania.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 'Carol Davila' University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, 050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 'Elias' Emergency Hospital, 022461 
Bucharest, Romania.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Emergency Hospital 
Bucharest, 050098 Bucharest, Romania.
(6)Department of Urology, 'Carol Davila' University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(7)Department of Urology, 'Prof. Dr. Theodor Burghele' Clinical Hospital, 061344 
Bucharest, Romania.
(8)Department of Endocrinology, 'Carol Davila' University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(9)Department of Endocrinology, 'C. I. Parhon' National Institute of 
Endocrinology, 011863 Bucharest, Romania.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS), a rare autosomal dominant serine/threonine kinase 
11 (STK11)/ liver kinase B1 (LKB1) gene-related genodermatosis, is characterized 
by oral hyperpigmentation (OHP); multiple gastro-intestinal mucosal benign 
hamartomatous polyps causing local bleeding, occlusion, intussusception, 
post-resection small bowel syndrome, associated increased risk of small 
intestinal cancer (incidence during the third decade); and 76% cumulative higher 
risk than the global population of developing non-gastrointestinal tumors 
(female predominance) including ovarian/testicular neoplasia, pancreatic and 
gynecologic (breast, uterus, ovarian) cancers. Suggestive PJS-associated OHP 
requires STK11 genetic testing. Abdominal pain in an OHP patient may be related 
to PJS-associated polyps. Other features include focal depigmentation followed 
by hyperpigmentation, and xeroderma pigmentosum-like lesions. The severity of 
the dermatological findings is correlated with gastrointestinal polyps. The 
STK11 gene is linked to reserve of primordial follicles, polycystic ovary 
syndrome, female fertility, and spermatogenesis. PJS is associated with 2 types 
of ovarian sex-cord stroma tumors (SCSTs): annular tubules (SCTATs) and pure 
Sertoli cell tumors. SCSTs accounts for 8% of ovarian cancer and SCTATs 
represents 2% of SCST, which may be associated with the overproduction of 
progesterone. PJS-SCTAT vs. non-PJS-SCTAT reveals bilateral/multifocal, small 
tumors with a benign behavior vs. a unique ovarian, large tumor with increased 
malignant/metastasis risk. Male precocious puberty is due to large cell 
calcifying Sertoli cell tumors (LCCSCTs). Notably, 30-40% of LCCSCTs are caused 
by PJS or Carney complex. PJS-LCCSCT is not aggressive, but it may be 
bilateral/multifocal, with the ultrasound hallmark being micro-calcifications. 
Testicular, intra-tubular large cell hyalinizing Sertoli cell tumor is the 
second testicle neoplasia in PJS. The skin and mucosal lesions are useful 
markers of PJS, assisting with the early identification of hamartomatouspolyps 
and initiation of serial surveillance of ovarian, or testicular neoplasia.

Copyright © 2020, Spandidos Publications.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.10823
PMCID: PMC8506952
PMID: 34650635

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.