---
reference_id: "PMID:31036340"
title: Akinetopsia on Driving.
authors:
- Maeda K
journal: J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2019.02.036
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Akinetopsia on Driving.
**Authors:** Maeda K
**Journal:** J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2019.02.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2019.02.036)

## Content

1. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2019 Jul;28(7):e102-e103. doi: 
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2019.02.036. Epub 2019 Apr 26.

Akinetopsia on Driving.

Maeda K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Higashi-ohmi General 
Medical Center, Higashi-ohmi, Shiga, Japan. Electronic address: 
maeda.kengo.sb@mail.hosp.go.jp.

Akinetopsia is a quite rare symptom. Two types of akinetopsia have been 
reported: one is cinematographic vision, and the other is invisibility of moving 
objects. These symptoms are thought to occur due to dysfunction of the MT/V5 
area at the occipitoparietal region. I herein describe a 54-year-old man who 
collided with a car parked on the left side of the road while driving. He 
complained that the parked car looked to be moving forwards and he could not 
stop his car when he noticed that it was parked. Magnetic resonance imaging 
disclosed the fresh infarction on the right temporoparietal region involving the 
MT/V5 area. His symptom during driving was considered cinematographic vision and 
it was the cause of the traffic accident. Akinetopsia resulted in illusory 
kinetopsia on driving and the traffic accident.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2019.02.036
PMID: 31036340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]