---
reference_id: "PMID:25652356"
title: Decreased frequency of FBN1 missense variants in Ghent criteria-positive Marfan syndrome and characterization of novel FBN1 variants.
authors:
- Baudhuin LM
- Kotzer KE
- Lagerstedt SA
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.10
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Decreased frequency of FBN1 missense variants in Ghent criteria-positive Marfan syndrome and characterization of novel FBN1 variants.
**Authors:** Baudhuin LM, Kotzer KE, Lagerstedt SA
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jhg.2015.10](https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2015.10)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2015 May;60(5):241-52. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.10. Epub 2015 Feb 5.

Decreased frequency of FBN1 missense variants in Ghent criteria-positive Marfan 
syndrome and characterization of novel FBN1 variants.

Baudhuin LM(1), Kotzer KE(1), Lagerstedt SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.

Comment in
    J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep;60(9):465-6. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.95.

The diagnosis of Marfan syndrome (MFS) remains challenging despite the 2010 
revision to Ghent nosology criteria, and there is a lack of published 
information regarding FBN1 genotype associations in patients since the update in 
Ghent criteria. Applying revised Ghent criteria, we reviewed consecutive proband 
cases (n=292) submitted for FBN1 sequencing. Testing yielded 207 pathogenic or 
likely pathogenic FBN1 variants, with 114/207 (55%) missense, 67/207 (32%) 
non-sense or frameshift, and 28/207 (13%) splicing. There were 130 novel FBN1 
variants predicted as pathogenic or likely pathogenic (n=109) or variant of 
undetermined significance (n=21). Of the 104 patients who met 2010 revised Ghent 
criteria, 87/104 (82%) had a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant. There was 
a significantly lower frequency of missense variants (41 vs 89%; P<0.0001) 
observed in the Ghent-positive (vs Ghent-negative) patients, and this 
association held true in age-based groupings. Previously described genotype 
associations with ectopia lentis and early onset/'neonatal' MFS were confirmed 
in our cohort. Overall, our study points to the imperfect nature of relying 
solely on clinical criteria to diagnose MFS as well as the potential importance 
of truncating/splicing variants in Ghent-positive cases. Furthermore, the 
description of numerous novel variants and associated clinical findings may be 
useful for future clinical interpretation of FBN1 genotype in patients with 
suspected MFS.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2015.10
PMID: 25652356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]