---
reference_id: "PMID:36243543"
title: Emergence of BRCA Reversion Mutations in Patients with Metastatic Castration-resistant Prostate Cancer After Treatment with Rucaparib.
authors:
- Loehr A
- Hussain A
- Patnaik A
- Bryce AH
- Castellano D
- Font A
- Shapiro J
- Zhang J
- Sautois B
- Vogelzang NJ
- Chatta G
- Courtney K
- Harzstark A
- Ricci F
- Despain D
- Watkins S
- King C
- Nguyen M
- Simmons AD
- Chowdhury S
- Abida W
journal: Eur Urol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2022.09.010
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Receptors, Androgen/genetics"
- Prostate-Specific Antigen
- Mutation
- Cell-Free Nucleic Acids
- Indoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emergence of BRCA Reversion Mutations in Patients with Metastatic Castration-resistant Prostate Cancer After Treatment with Rucaparib.
**Authors:** Loehr A, Hussain A, Patnaik A, Bryce AH, Castellano D, Font A, Shapiro J, Zhang J, Sautois B, Vogelzang NJ, Chatta G, Courtney K, Harzstark A, Ricci F, Despain D, Watkins S, King C, Nguyen M, Simmons AD, Chowdhury S, Abida W
**Journal:** Eur Urol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eururo.2022.09.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2022.09.010)

## Content

1. Eur Urol. 2023 Mar;83(3):200-209. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2022.09.010. Epub 2022
 Oct 13.

Emergence of BRCA Reversion Mutations in Patients with Metastatic
Castration-resistant Prostate Cancer After Treatment with Rucaparib.

Loehr A(1), Hussain A(2), Patnaik A(3), Bryce AH(4), Castellano D(5), Font A(6),
Shapiro J(7), Zhang J(8), Sautois B(9), Vogelzang NJ(10), Chatta G(11), Courtney
K(12), Harzstark A(13), Ricci F(14), Despain D(15), Watkins S(16), King C(17),
Nguyen M(1), Simmons AD(1), Chowdhury S(18), Abida W(19).

Author information:
(1)Translational Medicine, Clovis Oncology, Inc, Boulder, CO, USA.
(2)Greenebaum Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Maryland, Baltimore,
MD, USA.
(3)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Hematology/Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(5)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid,
Spain.
(6)Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Barcelona,
Spain.
(7)Medical Oncology, Cabrini Hospital, Malvern, VIC, Australia.
(8)Genitourinary Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
(9)Medical Oncology, CHU Sart Tilman, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(10)Medical Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Centers of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV,
USA.
(11)Medical Oncology, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY,
USA.
(12)Hematology/Oncology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(13)Hematology/Oncology, Kaiser Permanente Oncology Clinical Trials Program, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(14)Department of Drug Development and Innovation (D3i), Institut Curie, Paris,
France.
(15)Biostatistics, Clovis Oncology, Inc., Boulder, CO, USA.
(16)Clinical Development, Clovis Oncology UK Ltd, Cambridge, UK.
(17)Clinical Operations, Clovis Oncology, Inc, Boulder, CO, USA.
(18)Medical Oncology, Guy's Hospital, London, UK; Sarah Cannon Research
Institute, London, UK.
(19)Genitourinary Oncology Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY, USA. Electronic address: abidam@mskcc.org.

Comment in
    Eur Urol. 2023 Mar;83(3):210-211. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2022.09.031.
    Eur Urol. 2023 Mar;83(3):e76-e77. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2022.12.024.
    Eur Urol. 2023 Mar;83(3):e78. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2022.12.023.

BACKGROUND: Poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors are
approved in the USA for the treatment of patients with BRCA1 or BRCA2 (BRCA)
mutated (BRCA+) metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). BRCA
reversion mutations are a known mechanism of acquired resistance to PARP
inhibitors in multiple cancer types, although their impact and prevalence in
mCRPC remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the prevalence of BRCA reversion mutations in the plasma
of patients with BRCA+ mCRPC after progression on rucaparib.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Men with BRCA+ mCRPC enrolled in Trial of
Rucaparib in Prostate Indications 2 (TRITON2) were treated with rucaparib after
progressing on one to two lines of androgen receptor-directed and one
taxane-based therapy. Cell-free DNA from the plasma of 100 patients, collected
at the end of treatment after confirmed progression before May 5, 2020, was
queried for BRCA reversion mutations using next-generation sequencing (NGS).
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: The association of clinical
efficacy and postprogression genomics was measured in 100 patients with BRCA+
mCRPC treated with rucaparib.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: No baseline BRCA reversion mutations were observed in
100 BRCA+ patients. NGS identified somatic BRCA reversion mutations in 39%
(39/100) of patients after progression. Reversion rates were similar for BRCA2
and BRCA1, irrespective of germline or somatic status, but higher in samples
with a high tumor DNA fraction. Most patients with reversions (74%, 29/39) had
two or more reversion mutations occurring subclonally at lower allele
frequencies than the original BRCA mutations. The incidence of BRCA reversion
mutations increased with the duration of rucaparib treatment. The frequency of
reversion mutations was higher in patients with an objective (58%) or a
prostate-specific antigen (69%) response compared with those without either (39%
and 29%, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that BRCA reversion mutations are a
significant mechanism of acquired resistance to rucaparib in patients with BRCA+
mCRPC, with evidence of subclonal convergence promoting systemic resistance.
PATIENT SUMMARY: Men with BRCA mutated metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer enrolled in TRITON2 were treated with rucaparib after progressing on one
to two lines of androgen receptor-directed and one taxane-based therapy.
Cell-free DNA from the plasma of 100 patients, collected after radiographic or
prostate-specific antigen progression before May 5, 2020, was analyzed by
next-generation sequencing and queried for BRCA reversion mutations.

Copyright © 2022 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eururo.2022.09.010
PMCID: PMC10398818
PMID: 36243543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial disclosures: Wassim Abida certifies
that all conflicts of interest, including specific financial interests and
relationships and affiliations relevant to the subject matter or materials
discussed in the manuscript (eg, employment/affiliation, grants or funding,
consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony,
royalties, or patents filed, received, or pending), are the following: Dr. Loehr
reported being employed by Clovis Oncology and may own stock or have stock
options in that company. Dr. Hussain served as consultant for AstraZeneca,
Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, and Merck; has been on advisory boards for
AstraZeneca, and Aveo; and received support for sponsored clinical trials from
Clovis Oncology, Bayer, Calithera, Constellation, Roche, Pfizer, and Sotio. Dr.
Patnaik has served in a consulting or advisory role for Exelixis, Janssen, and
Jounce Therapeutics; has received honoraria from Clovis Oncology, Merck, Prime
Inc., and Roche; has received research funding from Clovis Oncology, Bristol
Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline, and Progenics; and has received clinical trial
support from AstraZeneca and Laekna. Dr. Bryce has received grants or contracts
from AstraZeneca, Gilead, and Janssen; has received consulting fees from Bayer
and Merck; and has received honoraria from Elsevier, Fallon Medica, Grand Rounds
in Urology, Horizon CME, MJH Life Sciences, PRIME Education, and Research to
Practice; and is a named inventor on patent application no. 15/735,289. Dr.
Castellano has consulting and advisory roles for Astellas, AstraZeneca, Bayer,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Ipsen, Janssen, Lilly, MSD Oncology,
Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre-Fabre, Roche, and Sanofi; received research funding
from Janssen; and received travel support from AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Roche, and Pfizer. Dr. Font has consulting and advisory roles for
Astellas, Eusa, Janssen, and Sanofi; and has received research funding from
AstraZeneca. Dr. Shapiro has no disclosures or conflicts. Dr. Zhang has received
consulting fees from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Dendreon, Myoant Sciences, and Pfizer;
and received speaker fees from AstraZeneca, Dendreon, and Sanofi. Dr. Sautois
has served in a consulting or advisory role for Clovis Oncology, Astellas,
Bristol Myers Squibb Belgium, and Janssen; and has received honoraria from
Janssen and Merck Sharp & Dohme. Dr. Vogelzang has served as a consultant for
Clovis Oncology and AstraZeneca on advisory boards and speakers’ bureaus. Dr.
Chatta has received grants or contracts from Astex Pharmaceuticals and the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Dr. Courtney has received research
funding from Astellas Pharma, and has received past honoraria from Exelixis,
Janssen, and Sanofi. Dr. Harzstark has no disclosures or conflicts. Dr. Ricci
has no disclosures or conflicts. Mr. Despain reported being employed by Clovis
Oncology and may own stock or have stock options in that company. Dr. Watkins
reported being employed by Clovis Oncology and may own stock or have stock
options in that company. Ms. King reported being employed by Clovis Oncology and
may own stock or have stock options in that company. Ms. Nguyen reported being
employed by Clovis Oncology and may own stock or have stock options in that
company. Dr. Simmons reported being employed by Clovis Oncology and may own
stock or have stock options in that company. Dr. Chowdhury has served as
consultant to Clovis Oncology, AstraZeneca, Athenex, Bayer, Beigene, Janssen
Oncology, and Novartis on advisory boards and on speakers’ bureaus; has received
honoraria from Beigene, Huma, Janssen, Remedy Bio, and Telix; owns stock of
Curve.Life, Huma, Remedy Bio; and has received research funding from Clovis
Oncology. Dr. Abida has received honoraria from Aptitude Health,
AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Clinical Education Alliance, Daiichi Sanyko, OncLive/MJH
Life Sciences, Janssen, ORIC Pharmaceuticals, Roche, and Medscape; and has
received research funding from Clovis Oncology, AstraZeneca, Epizyme, ORIC
Pharmaceuticals, and Zenith Epigenetics.
