---
reference_id: "PMID:35559635"
title: "Lung Cancer: Diagnosis, Treatment Principles, and Screening."
authors:
- Kim J
- Lee H
- Huang BW
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung Cancer: Diagnosis, Treatment Principles, and Screening.
**Authors:** Kim J, Lee H, Huang BW
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2022)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2022 May 1;105(5):487-494.

Lung Cancer: Diagnosis, Treatment Principles, and Screening.

Kim J(1), Lee H(1), Huang BW(1).

Author information:
(1)Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA, USA.

Lung cancer is the second most common cancer in men and women in the United 
States; however, it remains the leading cause of cancer-related death in the 
United States and worldwide. The most common but nonspecific symptom of lung 
cancer is cough. Associated symptoms, including hemoptysis or shortness of 
breath, or systemic symptoms, including anorexia or weight loss, greatly 
increase the likelihood of having lung cancer. Referral to a multidisciplinary 
lung cancer team, imaging, and confirmation through sputum cytology, 
thoracentesis, fine-needle aspiration, or mediastinoscopy are recommended. If 
lung cancer is confirmed, treatment options vary based on staging, histology, 
immunotherapy biomarker testing, and patient health status. Treatments include 
surgical resection, immunotherapy, chemotherapy, and/or radiotherapy. Family 
physicians should focus on primary prevention of lung cancer by encouraging 
tobacco cessation and early recognition by screening at-risk individuals and 
following guidelines for pulmonary nodules. As of 2021, the U.S. Preventive 
Services Task Force recommends annual lung cancer screening using low-dose 
computed tomography starting at 50 years of age in patients with a 20 pack-year 
history.

PMID: 35559635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]