---
reference_id: "PMID:34590432"
title: Primary mediastinal large B cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Yu Y
- Dong X
- Tu M
- Wang H
journal: Thorac Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.14155
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Large B-Cell, Diffuse/diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- "Mediastinal Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- Positron Emission Tomography Computed Tomography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary mediastinal large B cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Yu Y, Dong X, Tu M, Wang H
**Journal:** Thorac Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1759-7714.14155](https://doi.org/10.1111/1759-7714.14155)

## Content

1. Thorac Cancer. 2021 Nov;12(21):2831-2837. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.14155. Epub 
2021 Sep 29.

Primary mediastinal large B cell lymphoma.

Yu Y(#)(1), Dong X(#)(1), Tu M(2), Wang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, General Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, 
Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Lymphoma, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational 
Research (Ministry of Education/Beijing), Peking University Cancer Hospital & 
Institute, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Primary mediastinal large B cell lymphoma (PMBCL) is an aggressive large B cell 
lymphoma originating in the mediastinum, that mainly expresses B cell surface 
molecules, such as CD19, CD20, CD22, andCD79a. Clinically, they are 
characterized by rapidly increasing anterior mediastinal masses, which can cause 
compression of the surrounding tissues. The diagnosis of PMBCL mainly depends on 
the pathological features, imaging examination and clinical features. Currently, 
the most commonly used therapeutic regimens are R-CHOP and R-EPOCH. Radiotherapy 
is beneficial in some patients, but it can also lead to long-term toxicity. The 
research and development of novel therapies are ongoing, and some studies have 
achieved encouraging results, including those conducted on chimeric antigen 
receptor-modified T (CAR-T) cell therapy and anti-PD-1 drugs. However, 
randomized controlled trials with larger sample sizes are still needed. Positron 
emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) is mainly used to assess the 
curative effect after treatment and to guide the subsequent treatment strategy.

© 2021 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and 
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.14155
PMCID: PMC8563158
PMID: 34590432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.