---
reference_id: "PMID:29754886"
title: "Langerhans cell histiocytosis in children: Diagnosis, differential diagnosis, treatment, sequelae, and standardized follow-up."
authors:
- Krooks J
- Minkov M
- Weatherall AG
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2017.05.060
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- "Antigens, CD/genetics"
- "Biopsy, Needle"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Lectins, C-Type/genetics"
- Male
- Mannose-Binding Lectins/genetics
- Multimorbidity
- Rare Diseases
- Risk Assessment
- "Skin Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Langerhans cell histiocytosis in children: Diagnosis, differential diagnosis, treatment, sequelae, and standardized follow-up.
**Authors:** Krooks J, Minkov M, Weatherall AG
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2017.05.060](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2017.05.060)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018 Jun;78(6):1047-1056. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2017.05.060.

Langerhans cell histiocytosis in children: Diagnosis, differential diagnosis, 
treatment, sequelae, and standardized follow-up.

Krooks J(1), Minkov M(2), Weatherall AG(3).

Author information:
(1)Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, Boca 
Raton, Florida. Electronic address: joliekrooks@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Neonatology, and Adolescent Medicine, 
Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Teaching Hospital of the Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(3)ClearlyDerm Center for Dermatology, Department of Clinical Biomedical 
Science, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida.

A definitive diagnosis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) requires a 
combination of clinical presentation, histology, and immunohistochemistry. The 
inflammatory infiltrate contains various proportions of LCH cells, the disease 
hallmark, which are round and have characteristic "coffee-bean" cleaved nuclei 
and eosinophilic cytoplasm. Positive immunohistochemistry staining for CD1a and 
CD207 (langerin) are required for a definitive diagnosis. Isolated cutaneous 
disease should only be treated when symptomatic, because spontaneous resolution 
is common. Topical steroids are first-line treatment for localized disease of 
skin and bone. For multifocal single-system or multisystem disease, systemic 
treatment with steroids and vinblastine for 12 months is the standard first-line 
regimen. Current research is seeking more effective regimens because recurrence 
rates, which increase the risk of sequelae, are still high (30-50%) in patients 
with multisystem disease. An active area of research is the use of targeted 
therapy directed at the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. Adequate 
follow-up to monitor for disease progression, relapse, and sequelae is 
recommended in all patients.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2017.05.060
PMID: 29754886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]