---
reference_id: "PMID:21414908"
title: Protein misfolding and oxidative stress promote glial-mediated neurodegeneration in an Alexander disease model.
authors:
- Wang L
- Colodner KJ
- Feany MB
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3410-10.2011
keywords:
- "Alexander Disease/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Drosophila melanogaster
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Nerve Degeneration/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Neuroglia/pathology
- Oxidative Stress/genetics
- "Proteostasis Deficiencies/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein misfolding and oxidative stress promote glial-mediated neurodegeneration in an Alexander disease model.
**Authors:** Wang L, Colodner KJ, Feany MB
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3410-10.2011](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3410-10.2011)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2011 Feb 23;31(8):2868-77. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3410-10.2011.

Protein misfolding and oxidative stress promote glial-mediated neurodegeneration 
in an Alexander disease model.

Wang L(1), Colodner KJ, Feany MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Although alterations in glial structure and function commonly accompany death of 
neurons in neurodegenerative diseases, the role glia play in modulating neuronal 
loss is poorly understood. We have created a model of Alexander disease in 
Drosophila by expressing disease-linked mutant versions of glial fibrillary 
acidic protein (GFAP) in fly glia. We find aggregation of mutant human GFAP into 
inclusions bearing the hallmarks of authentic Rosenthal fibers. We also observe 
significant toxicity of mutant human GFAP to glia, which is mediated by protein 
aggregation and oxidative stress. Both protein aggregation and oxidative stress 
contribute to activation of a robust autophagic response in glia. Toxicity of 
mutant GFAP to glial cells induces a non-cell-autonomous stress response and 
subsequent apoptosis in neurons, which is dependent on glial glutamate 
transport. Our findings thus establish a simple genetic model of Alexander 
disease and further identify cellular pathways critical for glial-induced 
neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3410-10.2011
PMCID: PMC3082397
PMID: 21414908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]