---
reference_id: "PMID:28834452"
title: "Reminiscing on Remnants: Imaging of Meckel Diverticulum and Its Complications in Adults."
authors:
- Chatterjee A
- Harmath C
- Vendrami CL
- Hammond NA
- Mittal P
- Salem R
- Miller FH
journal: AJR Am J Roentgenol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2214/AJR.17.18088
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reminiscing on Remnants: Imaging of Meckel Diverticulum and Its Complications in Adults.
**Authors:** Chatterjee A, Harmath C, Vendrami CL, Hammond NA, Mittal P, Salem R, Miller FH
**Journal:** AJR Am J Roentgenol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2214/AJR.17.18088](https://doi.org/10.2214/AJR.17.18088)

## Content

1. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2017 Nov;209(5):W287-W296. doi: 10.2214/AJR.17.18088.
Epub  2017 Aug 23.

Reminiscing on Remnants: Imaging of Meckel Diverticulum and Its Complications in 
Adults.

Chatterjee A(1), Harmath C(1), Vendrami CL(1), Hammond NA(1), Mittal P(2), Salem 
R(1), Miller FH(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Radiology, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, 676 N St. Clair St, Ste 800, Chicago, IL 
60611.
(2)2 Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA.

OBJECTIVE: Meckel diverticulum may become symptomatic if it is complicated by 
hemorrhage, intestinal obstruction, diverticulitis, or tumor. Although 
classically described in children, it is often missed in adults because of lack 
of suspicion and difficulty in detection. The purpose of this article is to 
review the imaging findings and management of Meckel diverticulum and its 
complications.
CONCLUSION: Although it is infrequently encountered incidentally, Meckel 
diverticulum should be considered especially when interpreting examinations for 
abdominal pain, small-bowel obstruction, and gastrointestinal bleeding.

DOI: 10.2214/AJR.17.18088
PMID: 28834452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]