---
reference_id: "PMID:18240179"
title: A followup study of antiphospholipid antibodies and associated neuropsychiatric manifestations in 137 children with systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Avcin T
- Benseler SM
- Tyrrell PN
- Cucnik S
- Silverman ED
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/art.23334
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Antibodies, Anticardiolipin/blood"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chorea/epidemiology
- Cognition Disorders/epidemiology
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Headache/epidemiology
- Humans
- Lupus Coagulation Inhibitor/blood
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/epidemiology, immunology"
- Male
- Mood Disorders/epidemiology
- "Myelitis, Transverse/epidemiology"
- Psychotic Disorders/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Seizures/epidemiology
- Seroepidemiologic Studies
- beta 2-Glycoprotein I/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A followup study of antiphospholipid antibodies and associated neuropsychiatric manifestations in 137 children with systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Avcin T, Benseler SM, Tyrrell PN, Cucnik S, Silverman ED
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.23334](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.23334)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Feb 15;59(2):206-13. doi: 10.1002/art.23334.

A followup study of antiphospholipid antibodies and associated neuropsychiatric
manifestations in 137 children with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Avcin T(1), Benseler SM, Tyrrell PN, Cucnik S, Silverman ED.

Author information:
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of anticardiolipin antibodies (aCL),
anti-beta(2)-glycoprotein I (anti-beta(2)GPI) antibodies, and lupus
anticoagulant (LAC) in a large cohort of children with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), and to evaluate the associations with neuropsychiatric
manifestations.
METHODS: A single-center retrospective cohort study with longitudinal followup
of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) in 137 children with SLE (25 boys and 112
girls, mean age at diagnosis 13.0 years) was performed. Patients were followed
up for a mean of 31 months.
RESULTS: At the time of diagnosis, 65% of the children were aCL positive, 41%
had anti-beta(2)GPI antibodies, and 26% were LAC positive. Analysis of the
association between presence of aPL and individual neuropsychiatric
manifestations at diagnosis showed a statistically significant association of
positive LAC with cerebrovascular disease (5 patients; P = 0.015). A
persistently positive aCL was observed in 50%, anti-beta(2)GPI antibodies in
29%, and LAC in 16% of children over time. The prevalence of anti-beta(2)GPI
antibodies, but not aCL and LAC, was found to be statistically significantly
higher in children with neuropsychiatric disease compared with those without (P
= 0.02). Comparison for specific neuropsychiatric manifestations showed a
statistically significant association between a persistently positive LAC and
chorea (2 patients; P = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of anti-beta(2)GPI antibodies was found to be higher
in the group of SLE patients with neuropsychiatric disease compared with those
without. Our data suggest an association between LAC and cerebrovascular disease
at the time of SLE diagnosis and chorea over the disease course, but not between
aPL and other neuropsychiatric manifestations.

DOI: 10.1002/art.23334
PMID: 18240179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
