---
reference_id: "PMID:36396186"
title: Catheter Ablation for Ventricular Arrhythmias in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Subramanian M
- Atreya AR
- Yalagudri SD
- Shekar PV
- Saggu DK
- Narasimhan C
journal: Card Electrophysiol Clin
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccep.2022.08.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Catheter Ablation for Ventricular Arrhythmias in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Subramanian M, Atreya AR, Yalagudri SD, Shekar PV, Saggu DK, Narasimhan C
**Journal:** Card Electrophysiol Clin (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccep.2022.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccep.2022.08.005)

## Content

1. Card Electrophysiol Clin. 2022 Dec;14(4):693-699. doi: 
10.1016/j.ccep.2022.08.005.

Catheter Ablation for Ventricular Arrhythmias in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.

Subramanian M(1), Atreya AR(2), Yalagudri SD(1), Shekar PV(1), Saggu DK(1), 
Narasimhan C(3).

Author information:
(1)Electrophysiology Section, AIG Hospitals Institute of Cardiac Sciences and 
Research, Mindspace Road, Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500032, India.
(2)Electrophysiology Section, AIG Hospitals Institute of Cardiac Sciences and 
Research, Mindspace Road, Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500032, India; Division of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Electrophysiology Section, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(3)Electrophysiology Section, AIG Hospitals Institute of Cardiac Sciences and 
Research, Mindspace Road, Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500032, India. Electronic 
address: calambur1@gmail.com.

Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators are the mainstay of therapy for 
prevention of sudden cardiac death in high-risk patients with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy (HCM). Catheter ablation is a useful option for patients with 
recurrent, drug refractory monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT), and device 
therapy. Compared with other nonischemic substrates, there are limited data on 
the role and outcomes of catheter ablation in HCM. The challenges of VT ablation 
in HCM patients include deep intramural and epicardial substrates, suboptimal 
power delivery, and higher recurrence due to progression of disease. Patient 
selection, using cardiac MRI scar localization, and optimizing ablation 
techniques can improve outcomes in these patients.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccep.2022.08.005
PMID: 36396186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]