---
reference_id: "PMID:36458851"
title: "Hepatitis delta virus: Disease assessment and stratification."
authors:
- Koffas A
- Mak LY
- Kennedy PTF
journal: J Viral Hepat
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jvh.13777
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis delta virus: Disease assessment and stratification.
**Authors:** Koffas A, Mak LY, Kennedy PTF
**Journal:** J Viral Hepat (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jvh.13777](https://doi.org/10.1111/jvh.13777)

## Content

1. J Viral Hepat. 2023 Apr;30 Suppl 1:11-20. doi: 10.1111/jvh.13777. Epub 2023
Jan  4.

Hepatitis delta virus: Disease assessment and stratification.

Koffas A(1), Mak LY(1)(2), Kennedy PTF(1).

Author information:
(1)Barts Liver Centre, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, School of Clinical Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

Hepatitis D virus (HDV) causes one of the most severe forms of hepatitis in 
people with chronic hepatitis B (CHB) infection. Timely and accurate assessment 
of hepatitis delta virus (HDV) and disease stratification is mandatory for 
thorough pre-therapeutic evaluation for prioritizing treatment and outcome 
prediction. Viral biomarkers associated with HDV and hepatitis B virus (HBV) are 
crucial to aid in diagnosis, and monitoring of serum viral nucleic acids for 
both viruses is recommended. Liver biopsy remains the gold standard for staging 
of liver fibrosis and grading of histological activity and should remain central 
for diagnostic purposes, but is also of importance for research to enhance our 
understanding of HDV. The emergence of novel non-invasive tests for the 
assessment of liver fibrosis in HDV patients coupled with the well-recognized 
potential complications of liver biopsy has resulted in reduced utility of liver 
biopsy in clinical practice. Preliminary data suggest that these emerging 
non-invasive modalities appear to be reliable, and their use is supported, 
similar to other viral hepatitis. Nevertheless, further validation is required 
before their widespread adoption into clinical practice.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.13777
PMID: 36458851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]