---
reference_id: "PMID:34839263"
title: "Characterizing Long COVID: Deep Phenotype of a Complex Condition."
authors:
- Deer RR
- Rock MA
- Vasilevsky N
- Carmody L
- Rando H
- Anzalone AJ
- Basson MD
- Bennett TD
- Bergquist T
- Boudreau EA
- Bramante CT
- Byrd JB
- Callahan TJ
- Chan LE
- Chu H
- Chute CG
- Coleman BD
- Davis HE
- Gagnier J
- Greene CS
- Hillegass WB
- Kavuluru R
- Kimble WD
- Koraishy FM
- Köhler S
- Liang C
- Liu F
- Liu H
- Madhira V
- Madlock-Brown CR
- Matentzoglu N
- Mazzotti DR
- McMurry JA
- McNair DS
- Moffitt RA
- Monteith TS
- Parker AM
- Perry MA
- Pfaff E
- Reese JT
- Saltz J
- Schuff RA
- Solomonides AE
- Solway J
- Spratt H
- Stein GS
- Sule AA
- Topaloglu U
- Vavougios GD
- Wang L
- Haendel MA
- Robinson PN
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103722
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterizing Long COVID: Deep Phenotype of a Complex Condition.
**Authors:** Deer RR, Rock MA, Vasilevsky N, Carmody L, Rando H, Anzalone AJ, Basson MD, Bennett TD, Bergquist T, Boudreau EA, Bramante CT, Byrd JB, Callahan TJ, Chan LE, Chu H, Chute CG, Coleman BD, Davis HE, Gagnier J, Greene CS, Hillegass WB, Kavuluru R, Kimble WD, Koraishy FM, Köhler S, Liang C, Liu F, Liu H, Madhira V, Madlock-Brown CR, Matentzoglu N, Mazzotti DR, McMurry JA, McNair DS, Moffitt RA, Monteith TS, Parker AM, Perry MA, Pfaff E, Reese JT, Saltz J, Schuff RA, Solomonides AE, Solway J, Spratt H, Stein GS, Sule AA, Topaloglu U, Vavougios GD, Wang L, Haendel MA, Robinson PN
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103722](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103722)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2021 Dec;74:103722. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103722. Epub 2021 
Nov 25.

Characterizing Long COVID: Deep Phenotype of a Complex Condition.

Deer RR(1), Rock MA(2), Vasilevsky N(3), Carmody L(4), Rando H(5), Anzalone 
AJ(6), Basson MD(7), Bennett TD(8), Bergquist T(9), Boudreau EA(10), Bramante 
CT(11), Byrd JB(12), Callahan TJ(13), Chan LE(14), Chu H(15), Chute CG(16), 
Coleman BD(17), Davis HE(18), Gagnier J(19), Greene CS(5), Hillegass WB(20), 
Kavuluru R(21), Kimble WD(22), Koraishy FM(23), Köhler S(24), Liang C(25), Liu 
F(26), Liu H(27), Madhira V(28), Madlock-Brown CR(29), Matentzoglu N(30), 
Mazzotti DR(31), McMurry JA(3), McNair DS(32), Moffitt RA(33), Monteith TS(34), 
Parker AM(35), Perry MA(36), Pfaff E(37), Reese JT(38), Saltz J(39), Schuff 
RA(40), Solomonides AE(41), Solway J(42), Spratt H(2), Stein GS(43), Sule 
AA(44), Topaloglu U(45), Vavougios GD(46), Wang L(27), Haendel MA(47), Robinson 
PN(48).

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Electronic address: 
rrdeer@utmb.edu.
(2)University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(3)Center for Health AI, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, 
CO, USA; Monarch Initiative.
(4)Monarch Initiative; The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, 
CT, USA.
(5)Center for Health AI, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, 
CO, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of 
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Department of Neurological Sciences, College of Medicine, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(7)Department of Surgery, University of North Dakota School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences.
(8)Section of Informatics and Data Science, Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(9)Sage Bionetworks, Seattle, WA.
(10)Department of Neurology; Department of Medical Informatics & Clinical 
Epidemiology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239.
(11)Departments of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55455.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109.
(13)Center for Health AI, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(14)Monarch Initiative; College of Public Health and Human Sciences, Oregon 
State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.
(15)Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN USA.
(16)Johns Hopkins University, Schools of Medicine, Public Health, and Nursing, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(17)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA; Institute 
for Systems Genomics, University of Connecticut, Farmington, CT 06032, USA.
(18)Patient-Led Research Collaborative.
(19)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery & Epidemiology, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(20)University of Mississippi Medical Center, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson, MS, USA; Departments of Data Science and Medicine.
(21)Institute for Biomedical Informatics, University of Kentucky.
(22)West Virginia Clinical and Translational Science Institute, West Virginia 
University, Morgantown, WV, USA.
(23)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Stony Brook University.
(24)Monarch Initiative; Ada Health GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
(25)Arnold School of Public Health, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, 
USA.
(26)Department of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(27)Department of Artificial Intelligence and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, MN, USA.
(28)Palila Software LLC, Reno, NV, USA.
(29)Department of Diagnostic and Health Sciences, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, 920 Madison Ave. Suite 518N, Memphis TN 38613.
(30)Monarch Initiative; Semanticly Ltd; European Bioinformatics Institute 
(EMBL-EBI).
(31)Division of Medical Informatics, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Kansas Medical Center.
(32)Quantitative Sciences, Global Health Div., Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA 
98109, USA.
(33)Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.
(34)University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Fl 33136.
(35)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Schools of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(36)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(37)University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
(38)Monarch Initiative; Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
(39)Stony Brook University; Biomedical Informatics.
(40)OCHIN, Inc Portland, OR, USA.
(41)Outcomes Research Network, Research Institute, NorthShore University 
HealthSystem, Evanston, IL 60201, USA; Institute for Translational Medicine, 
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(42)Institute for Translational Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(43)University of Vermont Larner College of Medicine, Departments of 
Biochemistry and Surgery, Burlington, Vermont 05405.
(44)St Joseph Mercy Oakland, Pontiac, MI, USA.
(45)Wake Forest School of Medicine.
(46)Department of Computer Science and Telecommunications, University of 
Thessaly, Papasiopoulou 2 - 4, P.C.; 131 - Galaneika, Lamia, Greece; Department 
of Neurology, Athens Naval Hospital 70 Deinokratous Street, P.C. 115 21 Athens, 
Greece; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Thessaly, Biopolis, P.C. 41500 Larissa, Greece.
(47)Center for Health AI, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, USA; Monarch Initiative. Electronic address: melissa@tislab.org.
(48)Monarch Initiative; The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, 
CT, USA; Institute for Systems Genomics, University of Connecticut, Farmington, 
CT 06032, USA. Electronic address: peter.robinson@jax.org.

BACKGROUND: Numerous publications describe the clinical manifestations of 
post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 (PASC or "long COVID"), but they are difficult 
to integrate because of heterogeneous methods and the lack of a standard for 
denoting the many phenotypic manifestations. Patient-led studies are of 
particular importance for understanding the natural history of COVID-19, but 
integration is hampered because they often use different terms to describe the 
same symptom or condition. This significant disparity in patient versus clinical 
characterization motivated the proposed ontological approach to specifying 
manifestations, which will improve capture and integration of future long COVID 
studies.
METHODS: The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) is a widely used standard for 
exchange and analysis of phenotypic abnormalities in human disease but has not 
yet been applied to the analysis of COVID-19.
FUNDING: We identified 303 articles published before April 29, 2021, curated 59 
relevant manuscripts that described clinical manifestations in 81 cohorts three 
weeks or more following acute COVID-19, and mapped 287 unique clinical findings 
to HPO terms. We present layperson synonyms and definitions that can be used to 
link patient self-report questionnaires to standard medical terminology. Long 
COVID clinical manifestations are not assessed consistently across studies, and 
most manifestations have been reported with a wide range of synonyms by 
different authors. Across at least 10 cohorts, authors reported 31 unique 
clinical features corresponding to HPO terms; the most commonly reported feature 
was Fatigue (median 45.1%) and the least commonly reported was Nausea (median 
3.9%), but the reported percentages varied widely between studies.
INTERPRETATION: Translating long COVID manifestations into computable HPO terms 
will improve analysis, data capture, and classification of long COVID patients. 
If researchers, clinicians, and patients share a common language, then studies 
can be compared/pooled more effectively. Furthermore, mapping lay terminology to 
HPO will help patients assist clinicians and researchers in creating phenotypic 
characterizations that are computationally accessible, thereby improving the 
stratification, diagnosis, and treatment of long COVID.
FUNDING: U24TR002306; UL1TR001439; P30AG024832; GBMF4552; R01HG010067; 
UL1TR002535; K23HL128909; UL1TR002389; K99GM145411.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103722
PMCID: PMC8613500
PMID: 34839263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest RRD, TDB, JBB, 
CGC, WBH, JAM, AMP, ERP, HMR, JS, RAS, AES, JS, GS, MAH, PNR report funding from 
NIH. MAH and JAM are co-founders of Pryzm Health.