---
reference_id: "PMID:9046965"
title: Treatment of temporal lobe epilepsy.
authors:
- Ojemann GA
journal: Annu Rev Med
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.48.1.317
keywords:
- "Anticonvulsants/administration & dosage"
- Brain Mapping
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Electroencephalography
- "Epilepsy, Temporal Lobe/physiopathology, surgery"
- Humans
- Psychosurgery
- "Temporal Lobe/physiopathology, surgery"
- "Tomography, Emission-Computed"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of temporal lobe epilepsy.
**Authors:** Ojemann GA
**Journal:** Annu Rev Med (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.med.48.1.317](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.med.48.1.317)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Med. 1997;48:317-28. doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.48.1.317.

Treatment of temporal lobe epilepsy.

Ojemann GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle 98195,
USA.

Initial management of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy is with antiepileptic
drugs, but these control seizures in only half the patients. Patients refractory
to drugs should be evaluated for resective surgery. That evaluation requires
identification of a focus of onset of seizures, as well as establishing that the
focus is in an area of the brain that can be removed with a low risk of new
neurologic deficits. Techniques used in that evaluation, including
electroencephalography, imaging, recording form intracranial electrodes, use of
the intracarotid amobarbitol perfusion test, and the role of specialized studies
such as positron emission tomography, are reviewed, along with the correlation
of the findings on that evaluation to the control of seizures after surgery. The
different surgical techniques for temporal lobe resections are also reviewed,
along with the risks of surgery, particularly to recent memory, and the changes
in quality of life following surgery.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.med.48.1.317
PMID: 9046965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
