---
reference_id: "PMID:28973694"
title: "Editor's Highlight: Pregnancy Alters Aflatoxin B1 Metabolism and Increases DNA Damage in Mouse Liver."
authors:
- Sriwattanapong K
- Slocum SL
- Chawanthayatham S
- Fedeles BI
- Egner PA
- Groopman JD
- Satayavivad J
- Croy RG
- Essigmann JM
journal: Toxicol Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfx171
keywords:
- "Activation, Metabolic"
- "Aflatoxin B1/analogs & derivatives, metabolism, toxicity"
- Animals
- "Carcinogens/metabolism, toxicity"
- Cytochrome P-450 CYP1A2/metabolism
- Cytochrome P-450 CYP3A/metabolism
- DNA Adducts/metabolism
- DNA Damage
- Female
- Gestational Age
- Glutathione Transferase/metabolism
- "Guanine/analogs & derivatives, metabolism, toxicity"
- "Hepatocytes/drug effects, metabolism"
- Isoenzymes/metabolism
- "Liver/drug effects, metabolism"
- Maternal Exposure
- "Mice, Inbred C3H"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Pregnancy
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Editor's Highlight: Pregnancy Alters Aflatoxin B1 Metabolism and Increases DNA Damage in Mouse Liver.
**Authors:** Sriwattanapong K, Slocum SL, Chawanthayatham S, Fedeles BI, Egner PA, Groopman JD, Satayavivad J, Croy RG, Essigmann JM
**Journal:** Toxicol Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/toxsci/kfx171](https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfx171)

## Content

1. Toxicol Sci. 2017 Nov 1;160(1):173-179. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfx171.

Editor's Highlight: Pregnancy Alters Aflatoxin B1 Metabolism and Increases DNA
Damage in Mouse Liver.

Sriwattanapong K(1)(2), Slocum SL(1), Chawanthayatham S(1), Fedeles BI(1), Egner
PA(3), Groopman JD(3), Satayavivad J(2), Croy RG(1), Essigmann JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biological Engineering and Chemistry, and Center for
Environmental Health Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139.
(2)Graduate Program in Environmental Toxicology, Chulabhorn Graduate Institute,
Bangkok 10210, Thailand.
(3)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

Pregnancy is a complex physiological state, in which the metabolism of
endogenous as well as exogenous agents is ostensibly altered. One exogenous
agent of concern is the hepatocarcinogen aflatoxin B1 (AFB1), a foodborne fungal
toxin, that requires phase I metabolic oxidation for conversion to its toxic and
carcinogenic form, the AFB1-8,9-exo-epoxide. The epoxide interacts with cellular
targets causing toxicity and cell death; these targets include the covalent
modification of DNA leading to mutations that can initiate malignant
transformation. The main detoxification pathway of the AFB1-epoxide involves
phase II metabolic enzymes including the glutathione-S-transferase (GST) family.
Pregnancy can modulate both phase I and II metabolism and alter the biological
potency of AFB1. The present work investigated the impact of pregnancy on AFB1
exposure in mice. A single IP dose of 6 mg/kg AFB1 was administered to pregnant
C57BL/6 J mice at gestation day 14 and matched non-pregnant controls. Pregnant
mice accumulated 2-fold higher AFB1-N7-guanine DNA adducts in the liver when
compared with nonpregnant controls 6 h post-exposure. Enhanced DNA adduct
formation in pregnant animals paralleled elevated hepatic protein expression of
mouse CYP1A2 and mouse homologs of human CYP3A4, phase I enzymes capable of
bioactivating AFB1. Although phase II enzymes GSTA1/2 showed decreased protein
expression, GSTA3, the primary enzymatic protection against the AFB1-epoxide,
was unaffected at the protein level. Taken together, our results reveal that
pregnancy may constitute a critical window of susceptibility for maternal
health, and provide insight into the biochemical factors that could explain the
underlying risks.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society
of Toxicology.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfx171
PMCID: PMC5837592
PMID: 28973694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

In excess of 750 000 people die of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) each year, making HCC the
second leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide (Ferlay
et al., 2013). Major risk factors for HCC include chronic
infection with hepatitis B or C viruses and dietary exposures to aflatoxin B1
(AFB1) (WHO, 2013; Wild and Gong,
2010). Individual exposure to AFB1 or HBV results in a human liver cancer
risk enhancement of 3.4- and 7-fold, respectively (Kensler et al., 2011; Qian
et al., 1994); that risk rises to 60-fold when both factors are
present concurrently. The International Agency for Research on Cancer classifies
AFB1 as a Group 1 agent—known human carcinogen—based on evidence from studies of
AFB1-treated animals, epidemiological studies in exposed populations and studies
involving functional biomarkers that mechanistically predict disease (IARC, 1993).

The aflatoxins are a group of mycotoxins produced by the fungi Aspergillus
flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus (Moss, 1998) that readily contaminate many staple foods including
nuts, corn and cereals. Contamination occurs most frequently in developing countries with
tropical and subtropical climates, where food storage and quality control practices are
inadequate (Strosnider et al.,
2006). Up to 4.5 billion people are believed to be at risk of aflatoxin exposure
(Liu and Wu, 2010). Among the aflatoxins,
AFB1 is the most common and most toxic variant (Edwards et al., 1971; Wogan et al., 1971). Its primary mechanism of
toxicity and carcinogenicity is the bioactivation of AFB1 by phase I enzymes (ie,
cytochromes P450) to a highly reactive epoxide
(AFB1-8,9-exo-epoxide) that can covalently modify cellular
components, including DNA. Epidemiological studies have identified AFB1-DNA adducts
as biomarkers of AFB1 exposure, and predictors of HCC risk in humans (Egner et al., 2006; Groopman et al., 2008).

The B6C3F1 mouse remains a versatile and commonly deployed model for AFB1 exposure
and carcinogenicity (Vesselinovitch et
al., 1972). During the neonatal period, administration of a single dose of
AFB1 results in 90–100% incidence of liver cancer in male B6C3F1 mice, whereas
females have a 10% incidence (Chawanthayatham et al., 2015, 2017; Vesselinovitch
et al., 1972; Wattanawaraporn et al., 2012). The biological basis for the
differential AFB1 sensitivity between sexes is not completely understood. Previous
work shows that both male and female neonates form similar levels of the strongly mutagenic
AFB1-guanine adducts measured 6 h post-toxin administration, with both sexes
demonstrating similar levels of characteristic AFB1 mutations at 10 weeks after
dosing (Chawanthayatham et al.,
2015; Wattanawaraporn et al.,
2012; Woo et al.,
2011). Similarly, the 10-week mutation frequencies of male and female mice treated in
utero are identical (Chawanthayatham et
al., 2015). These data suggest that postpubescent sex-specific biochemical
factors may determine the differential sensitivity of males to AFB1-induced
HCC.

In humans, AFB1 is metabolized by cytochromes P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) and 1A2 (CYP1A2),
forming the AFB1-epoxide (Gallagher
et al., 1994). Reaction of the epoxide with DNA produces a
characteristic biomarker, the AFB1-N7-guanine adduct (Bennett et al., 1981; Croy and Wogan, 1981; Egner et al., 2006; Groopman et al., 1981). The AFB1-epoxide
can be detoxified by the glutathione-S-transferases (GSTs), via conjugation to glutathione
(GSH) (Figure 1) (Dohnal et al., 2014). The metabolic activation of
AFB1 has not been fully elucidated in mice; specifically, studies that examine
the particular P450 enzymes involved in bioactivation are lacking. Mice express an orthologue
of human Cyp1A2, which ostensibly can oxidize AFB1 into the
AFB1-epoxide, but they lack a direct orthologue of Cyp3A4. However, mice do have a
plethora of potential functional homologs among their many metabolic cytochromes (Nelson et al., 2004). Indeed, a
phylogenetic analysis reveals several members of the mouse CYP3A family that are closely
related to human CYP3A4 (Supplementary
Figure 1). The murine detoxification pathways for aflatoxin are better understood,
with mouse GSTA3 being primarily responsible for the detoxification of the
AFB1-epoxide (Ilic et al.,
2010; Kensler et al.,
2014). The initial period of sensitivity of neonatal mice to AFB1 is
rapidly overcome via increasing the expression of GSTA3 in the postnatal period (Ilic et al., 2010; Shupe and Sell, 2004).

Overview of AFB1 metabolism. AFB1 is metabolically activated by
phase I enzymes, including cytochromes P450 CYP1A2 or CYP3A family members to the reactive
AFB1 epoxide, which can damage DNA by forming the
AFB1-N7-guanine covalent adduct. The main pathway to detoxify the
epoxide involves the phase II enzymes GSTs, which chemically inactivate it by conjugation
to GSH (Kensler et al.,
2003).

Pregnancy alters the expression of metabolic enzymes, including cytochrome P450s and GSTs,
that process endogenous and exogenous chemicals (Koh
et al., 2011; Wen
et al., 2013; Zhang
et al., 2008). These metabolic changes may stem from
pregnancy-induced alterations in the levels of female sex hormones such as estradiol,
progesterone, and placental growth hormone (Selevan
et al., 2000; Zhang
et al., 2008). Therefore, in principle, pregnancy-associated
metabolic changes could enhance bioactivation, decrease detoxification of xenobiotics, and
thus compromise maternal health. To test that hypothesis, the present study evaluated the
effects of pregnancy as a susceptibility factor to the toxicological impact of AFB1 exposure.
We discovered that following single-dose AFB1 exposure, pregnant females
demonstrated higher levels of AFB1-epoxide damage to DNA. The increased levels of
DNA damage define pregnancy as a critical window of susceptibility to an important
environmental carcinogen. These data also open the possibility that the more susceptible
pregnant female may enable greater than expected levels of AFB1 exposure to the
fetus, potentially increasing its life-long risk of developing cancer due to early life
exposure.

AFB1 (≥98% purity) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO; ≥99.9%) were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (St Louis, Missouri). All other chemicals were at least of
ACS reagent grade and obtained from commercial suppliers.

Female C57BL/6 gpt delta transgenic mice (a gift from Dr Nohmi et al., 1996) were
mated with C3H/HeJ males purchased from the Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, Maine).
GPT mice were utilized in order to maintain congruency with previous studies within
the lab, as well as enable future mutagenesis assays. Pregnant mice (n = 8) were
administered AFB1 (6 mg/kg dissolved in 100 μl DMSO) on GD14 via IP
injection. Age-matched nonpregnant C57BL/6 gpt delta mice were
treated identically. Six hours after AFB1 administration, mice were
sacrificed via CO2 inhalation; their livers were surgically extracted, snap
frozen and stored at −80 °C. Liver tissue samples from AFB1-treated animals
were subsequently used for DNA adduct analysis. Liver tissue samples from age-matched
groups of pregnant and nonpregnant animals that were not treated with AFB1
were harvested similarly and used for transcript and protein analysis. All experiments
were conducted in accordance with protocols approved by the MIT Committee on Animal
Care.

DNA was isolated from liver tissue samples (n = 8) using previously described methods
(Woo et al., 2011).
AFB1-DNA adducts were released from DNA by hydrolysis in 1.0 N HCl at
95 °C for 15 min (Groopman et
al., 1981). 15N5-Guanine-derived
AFB1-adduct internal standards were added to the hydrolytically released
AFB1-N7-guanine adducts to permit quantitative analysis by
isotope dilution mass spectrometry. Prior to analysis by mass spectrometry,
AFB1-DNA adduct mixtures were separated by ultra-high performance liquid
chromatography (UPLC). The protonated parent ion of the
AFB1-N7-guanine adduct (m/z 480.1) was selected and subjected to
collision-induced fragmentation producing a m/z 152 product ion that was monitored to
quantify adduct levels (Egner et
al., 2006).

Liver tissue (n = 4) was homogenized in radio-immunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA,
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas Texas), which was supplemented with protease
inhibitors (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF; 10 mM) and Leupeptin, (0.01 mg/ml).
Laemmli buffer was added, followed by denaturation via boiling for 5 min. Proteins
were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred to an
Immobilon-P PVDF membrane (Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts). Membranes were
blocked with 5% BSA (Jackson Immuno-research, West Grove, Pennsylvania) in a
Tris-buffered saline solution containing 0.1% Tween 20 followed by treatment with a
primary antibody diluted in blocking solution. AntiGSTA3 was a kind gift from Dr John
D. Hayes, University of Dundee, UK. AntiGSTA1/2 (No. ABS1651) was from Millipore,
AntiCYP3A4 (No. 18227 1 AP0) was from Proteintech (Rosemont, Illinois). AntiCYP1A2
(No. AP11325c) was purchased from Abgent (San Diego, California). Antiβ-Actin (sc No.
69879) was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, and antiGAPDH (No. NB300-221) was from Novus
Biologicals (Littleton, Colorado). Immune complexes were allowed to react with the
appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (Cell Signaling
No. 7074 S, Danvers, Massachusetts) and were visualized with enhanced
chemiluminescence (Cell Signaling No. 6883P3).

Total RNA was extracted from snap frozen liver samples from untreated pregnant and
non-pregnant mice using Tri reagent (Sigma Aldrich) (n = 6). RNA was purified using
the RNeasy Mini Kit and treated with DNase to remove any potential genomic DNA
contamination (Qiagen, Germantown, Maryland). RNA quantity and quality was assessed
via spectrophotometric measurement at A260nm and
A260nm/A280nm. cDNA was synthesized from 1 µg of RNA using the
Quantitect reverse transcription kit (Qiagen). Primer sequences (see Supplementary Table 1) were
obtained from PrimerBank or custom designed and ordered from Integrated DNA
technologies (Coralville, Iowa) (Spandidos
et al., 2010). qRT-PCR reactions were run in quadruplicate
utilizing Quantitect SYBR green (Qiagen) on a Roche Light Cycler 480. The purity of
PCR products was assessed by melting temperature and size determined by agarose gel.
PCR efficiency was calculated by reference to a standard curve using serial sample
dilutions. Relative transcript levels were determined using the Pfaffl (2001) method.

Student’s 2-tailed t tests were used to determine the significance
of differences in DNA adduct levels, Western analyses of proteins and mRNA levels
assayed by RT-PCR between experimental groups.

We used the AFB1-N7-guanine adduct as a biomarker to investigate
the efficiency of both phase I and II metabolism of AFB1 in pregnant and
nonpregnant mice (Figure 1). Six hours post
AFB1 administration, mice were sacrificed and DNA was isolated from liver
tissue. Subsequently, the AFB1-N7-guanine adduct levels were
analyzed by quantitative isotope dilution mass spectrometry (Egner et al., 2006). We found that
AFB1-N7-guanine adduct levels were approximately 2-fold greater
in the livers of GD14 pregnant mice compared with adduct levels in nonpregnant mice
(19.2 ± 4.22 pmol adduct/mg DNA vs 8.61 ± 0.70 pmol adduct/mg DNA; p =
.027; Figure 2).

Pregnancy confers an elevated risk of AFB1-induced DNA damage.
AFB1-N7-Gua levels in liver DNA from nonpregnant (n = 8) and
C57BL/6 J pregnant mice (n = 8). Mice treated with 6 mg kg−1 of
AFB1 were sacrificed 6 h later for DNA adduct analysis.
(*denotes p < .05). Plotted data are mean ±
SEM.

Following the observation of a 2-fold increase in AFB1-N7-guanine
adducts in the livers of pregnant over nonpregnant mice, we examined the gene expression
of key metabolic enzymes in the aflatoxin activation and detoxification pathways. In
untreated animals, phase I proteins that have been shown to be responsible for the
bioactivation of AFB1 were found to have differentially increased expression
in pregnant versus nonpregnant mice. Specifically, murine CYP(s) recognized by the
antibody to human CYP3A4 showed a approximately 3-fold increase, and CYP1A2 showed a
5-fold increase (Figure 3). In our
experiments below, we cannot be certain that the human antibody used detects
specifically the corresponding mouse homolog; hence, we consider the murine response to
a given human antibody (eg, human CYP3A4 or CYP1A2) to be taken with the caveat that the
antibody may show unexpected crossreactivity. Given this operational definition, the
observed upregulation of these CYPs, CYP3A4, and CYP1A2, may be responsible for the
increased AFB1-N7-guanine adduct burden in pregnant mice. To
further probe the regulation of CYPs during pregnancy we determined transcript levels
via RT-PCR. No change was detected in the transcript levels of Cyp1a2
between the pregnant and nonpregnant mice (Figure
4). Because of uncertainty in the specificity of the human 3A4 antibody for
mouse CYP3A family proteins, we performed a Protein Blast that identified 8 mouse CYPs
having >70% homology to human CYP3A4. These CYP3A4
homologs were probed via RT-PCR, with Cyp3a57 showing a significant
increase, and Cyp3a16 and Cyp3a44 showing trends of increased
transcript expression in pregnant mice (Figure
4). GSTA3, the primary enzyme responsible for phase II metabolism of
AFB1 in mice (Kensler et
al., 2014; Van Ness
et al., 1998), showed no significant change in expression
between pregnant and nonpregnant animals at either protein (Figure 3) or transcript levels (Figure 3). However, we observed a 2-fold reduction in the
protein levels of GSTA1/2, (Figure 3), with
a concurrent reduction in transcript levels (Figure
4). This reduction in GSTA1/2 is consistent with a compromised ability to
mitigate oxidative and other stresses, and could increase the half-life of the genotoxic
AFB1 epoxide.

Pregnancy yields an increase in expression of bioactivating enzymes of
AFB1. Western blot analysis of representative phases I and II metabolic
enzymes in untreated nonpregnant and GD14 pregnant mice (biological replicates shown
for each condition). Fold change was measured via densitometry. Relative protein
levels were normalized to the levels of β-actin and GAPDH. *denoted
p < .05 (mean ± SEM; n = 4).

Pregnancy alters expression of Cyp450 genes in the mouse. A host of phase I and II
enzyme expression was analyzed via RT-PCR. A significant reduction in expression is
present in GSTA1 (p < .05), with trends of increased expression
for both Cyp3A13 and Cyp3A44. Relative transcript expression was normalized to GAPDH
levels. *denoted p < .05 Data shown are mean ± SEM;
n = 6.

Our study is consistent with the view that pregnancy can increase aflatoxin genotoxicity
(increased AFB1 DNA adducts) by enhancing the metabolic activation of the toxin
(Figure 5). In support of this notion, we
found that pregnancy, specifically at GD14, was associated with significantly elevated
AFB1 DNA adducts 6 h post-exposure. GD14 of pregnancy also demonstrated
increased protein levels of the phase I metabolism enzymes CYP1A2 and mouse homologs of
human CYP3A4, which are known to bioactivate AFB1. Additionally, pregnancy did
not affect the levels of GSTA3, the native powerful countermeasure to the AFB1
epoxide. As a result, it is possible that the increase in metabolic activation afforded by
the phase I enzymes shifts the equilibrium of AFB1 activation/detoxification in
favor of activation, yielding an increase in the levels of DNA adducts. Moreover, the
reduction in the protein levels of GSTA1/2 may further increase stress on the GSH peroxidase
pathway, yielding a reduction in the intracellular reduced GSH pool. In turn, the decreased
levels of reduced GSH may hinder the ability of GSTA3 to rapidly detoxify the
AFB1 epoxide. Furthermore, diminished levels of GSTA1/2 could lead to greater
susceptibility to other toxicological insults, including oxidative stress, altering cellular
homeostasis to the detriment of efficient AFB1 detoxification. More research,
however, is needed to fully understand the implications of decreased GSTA1/2 levels on the
toxicological impact of AFB1.

Pregnancy enhances the toxicological impact of AFB1. The observed increase
in phase I metabolic enzymes (CYP1A2, CYP3A) in pregnant mice leads to increased levels
of AFB1-epoxide, while amounts of the phase II detoxifying enzyme (GSTA3)
remain unchanged. This effect results in enhanced genotoxic stress as measured by the
levels of AFB1-N7-Gua adducts, a biomarker of AFB1
exposure.

AFB1 causes mutations in both male and female mice when administered either
prenatally or in the early life stage. This exposure, however, is better tolerated in female
mice, as demonstrated by lower rates of cancer incidence later in life when compared with
males. Both sexes are resistant to the effects of AFB1 after reaching adulthood,
withstanding doses of up to 60 mg/kg (Vesselinovitch
et al., 1972; Wogan,
1969). This effect is due to the induction of expression of GSTA3 approximately one
week after birth (Shupe and Sell, 2004).
Similarly to aflatoxin, the DNA ethylating agent N-nitrosodiethylamine is a potent inducer
of HCC in mice, with a sex bias that disproportionately favors female survival (Nakatani et al., 2001). Studies
from the DEN literature show that estrogens inhibit production of inflammatory cytokines,
such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) from Kupffer cells. Hence, in estrogen-producing females, a
reduction in IL-6 decreases the inflammatory response in the liver following toxin exposure
and thus could reduce liver cancer risk (Naugler
et al., 2007). By contrast, male mice have lower estrogen
levels, which translates to high levels of IL-6, which stimulates inflammation and leads to
cytotoxicity as evidenced by elevated serum aminotransferases and apoptosis (Naugler et al., 2007). The
proinflammatory environment acts as a tumor promoter, stimulating hepatocyte proliferation
and leading to an increased incidence of HCC (Naugler
et al., 2007). This phenotype may be mirrored in male mice
exposed to aflatoxin early in life.

This work did not directly investigate the mechanistic connection between the
pregnancy-related steroid hormones such as β-estradiol and progesterone and the genotoxic
effects of aflatoxin but our results suggest that such studies represent a logical next
step. The modulatory effects of pregnancy on metabolic enzymes have been examined
previously. Wen and co-workers have demonstrated that pregnancy leads to alterations in
phase II metabolism, specifically reductions in Uridine
5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferases at both the transcript and protein levels, as well as
reductions in GSTA1 and GSTA4 transcripts at GD14 (Wen et al., 2013). Contrary to our results, they did not observe
a reduction in GSTA1 protein levels.

Pregnancy-related hormones can act as transcriptional regulators of cytochrome P450
expression (Choi et al.,
2013). Inprimary human hepatocyte cultures, estradiol enhances the expression of
CYP3A4, CYP2A6, and CYP2B6, while progesterone induces the expression of CYP3A4, CYP2A6,
CYP2B6, CYP2C8, and CYP3A5 (Choi et
al., 2013). In mice, estradiol and glucocorticoid hormones can
potentiate the effects of growth hormones on induction of homologs of CYP3A4 (CYP3A41 and
CYP3A11) expression (Sakuma et al.,
2004). In fact, increased protein expression and activity of CYP3A family members
during pregnancy has been reported by several studies, with concurrent increased transcripts
of Cyp3a16, Cyp3a41, and Cyp3a44 (Isoherranen and
Thummel, 2013; Zhang et
al., 2008). With regard to CYP1A2, the literature precedent is less
definitive. One study, in which rats were exposed to estradiol, reported elevation of CYP1A2
expression, which is in agreement with the present study, and enhancement in the expression
of CYP2C (CYP2C6, CYP2C7, and CYP2C12) (Choi
et al., 2011). Other studies, which are at odds with ours, show
that the hormones produced during pregnancy, including estrogens, progesterone and growth
hormone, reduce the levels of CYP1A2 (Isoherranen and
Thummel, 2013; Koh et al.,
2011). Further work is needed to reconcile these divergent observations.

Pregnancy-dependent increased aflatoxin burden on the mother may have downstream
consequences to fetal health and development. Studies have demonstrated aflatoxin as a
transplacental xenobiotic both in mice (Chawanthayatham et al., 2015) and in humans (Abdulrazzaq et al., 2002; Denning et al., 1990; Hsieh and Hsieh, 1993). Although the exact method
of bioactivation and fetal transmission is not fully elucidated, the developing fetus
represents a critical window of susceptibility to AFB1. Our lab has demonstrated
that in utero exposure to AFB1 leads to an increase in mutations
(Chawanthayatham et al.,
2015), and others have shown that humans exposed to AFB1in
utero leads to reduced birthweight (Abdulrazzaq et al., 2002; Turner et al., 2007), alteration of methylation profiles of white
blood cells (Hernandez-Vargas et
al., 2015) and other effects.

In conclusion, our study establishes pregnancy as a risk factor for AFB1
genotoxicity; 6 h post-exposure to the toxin, the pregnant mice accumulate twice as many
AFB1-N7-guanine adducts as the nonpregnant control group. This
result may be partially explained by the increased levels of phase I metabolizing enzymes in
pregnant animals, coupled with the lack of a compensatory change in the phase II enzymes
(Figure 3). Further lines of research into the
effects of chronic AFB1 exposure throughout pregnancy may reveal significantly
greater impact on both maternal and fetal health.

Perhaps of greater importance is the revelation of pregnancy as a generalizable risk factor
for toxicological impact. The observed reduction in the expression of a representative phase
II enzyme, GSTA1/2, in pregnant animals versus nonpregnant controls suggests that pregnancy
may confer increased risk to a host of endogenous and exogenous toxicants, in addition to
AFB1. The genotoxic vulnerability conferred by pregnancy emphasizes the need
not only to protect susceptible prenatal life, but also to lessen the exposure of the mother
to environmental chemicals. Indeed, the knowledge of the need and subsequent interventions
to protect a more vulnerable mother may reasonably offer the secondary benefit of protection
to the fetus.


Supplementary data are available
at Toxicological Sciences online.

This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (T32-ES007020, P30-ES002109,
R01-ES016313, R01-CA080024, P30-CA006973).

Click here for additional data file.
