---
reference_id: "PMID:37962976"
title: Testosterone Replacement Therapy in Klinefelter Syndrome-Follow-up Study Associating Hemostasis and RNA Expression.
authors:
- Chang S
- Just J
- Skakkebæk A
- Johannsen EB
- Fedder J
- Gravholt CH
- Münster AB
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgad658
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Testosterone Replacement Therapy in Klinefelter Syndrome-Follow-up Study Associating Hemostasis and RNA Expression.
**Authors:** Chang S, Just J, Skakkebæk A, Johannsen EB, Fedder J, Gravholt CH, Münster AB
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgad658](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgad658)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2024 Mar 15;109(4):978-991. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgad658.

Testosterone Replacement Therapy in Klinefelter Syndrome-Follow-up Study 
Associating Hemostasis and RNA Expression.

Chang S(1)(2), Just J(3)(4), Skakkebæk A(3)(4)(5), Johannsen EB(3)(4), Fedder 
J(6), Gravholt CH(2)(3)(4), Münster AB(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit for Thrombosis Research, University Hospital of Southern Denmark, 6700 
Esbjerg, Denmark.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, 8200 Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, 8200 Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, 8200 Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(6)Centre of Andrology and Fertility Clinic, Odense University Hospital, 5000 
Odense, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Men with Klinefelter syndrome (KS) develop hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism, are in need of testosterone replacement therapy (TRT), and present 
with a more than 4-fold increased risk of thrombosis. TRT in KS has the 
potential to modify thrombotic risk, but data are scarce.
AIM: To assess effects of 18 months of TRT on hemostasis in KS and identify 
genes associated with the prothrombotic phenotype.
METHODS: Untreated and TRT-treated men with KS were included at baseline and 
matched to healthy controls. TRT was initiated in untreated KS and all groups 
were reassessed after 18 months of follow-up. Thrombin generation was evaluated 
with or without thrombomodulin, and fibrin clot lysis was evaluated by turbidity 
measurements. RNA expression was assessed in blood, fat, and muscle tissue of 
patients with TRT-treated KS and controls.
RESULTS: Thrombin generation with thrombomodulin was slightly increased in 
untreated KS, but overall KS was not associated with a hypercoagulable state. KS 
presented with fibrinolytic impairment associated with higher body fat and 
higher levels of fibrinogen. Eighteen months of TRT in KS was associated with a 
reduction in body fat and fibrinogen, attenuating the prothrombotic profile. The 
expression of ENPP4 was higher in men with KS and served as a key player among a 
group of genes associated with impaired fibrinolysis.
CONCLUSION: KS is associated with a specific expression profile contributing to 
fibrinolytic impairment and increased thrombotic risk in the patients. TRT in 
patients with KS has the potential for alleviating the prothrombotic phenotype, 
in particular by reducing body fat and fibrinogen.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgad658
PMID: 37962976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]