---
reference_id: "PMID:25143630"
title: SANDO syndrome in a cohort of 107 patients with CPEO and mitochondrial DNA deletions.
authors:
- Hanisch F
- Kornhuber M
- Alston CL
- Taylor RW
- Deschauer M
- Zierz S
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2013-306748
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Biopsy
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Polymerase gamma
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- DNA-Directed DNA Polymerase/genetics
- "Dysarthria/epidemiology, genetics"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- "Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- "Ophthalmoplegia/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Ophthalmoplegia, Chronic Progressive External/epidemiology, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SANDO syndrome in a cohort of 107 patients with CPEO and mitochondrial DNA deletions.
**Authors:** Hanisch F, Kornhuber M, Alston CL, Taylor RW, Deschauer M, Zierz S
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2013-306748](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2013-306748)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Jun;86(6):630-4. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2013-306748. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

SANDO syndrome in a cohort of 107 patients with CPEO and mitochondrial DNA 
deletions.

Hanisch F(1), Kornhuber M(1), Alston CL(2), Taylor RW(2), Deschauer M(1), Zierz 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle 
(Saale), Germany.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, The Medical School, 
Framlington Place, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The sensory ataxic neuropathy with dysarthria and ophthalmoparesis 
(SANDO) syndrome is a subgroup of mitochondrial chronic progressive external 
ophthalmoplegia (CPEO)-plus disorders associated with multiple mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA) deletions. There is no systematic survey on SANDO in patients with CPEO 
with either single or multiple large-scale mtDNA deletions.
METHODS: In this retrospective analysis, we characterised the frequency, the 
genetic and clinical phenotype of 107 index patients with mitochondrial CPEO 
(n=66 patients with single and n=41 patients with multiple mtDNA deletions) and 
assessed these for clinical evidence of a SANDO phenotype. Patients with 
multiple mtDNA deletions were additionally screened for mutations in the 
nuclear-encoded POLG, SLC25A4, PEO1 and RRM2B genes. The clinical, histological 
and genetic data of 11 patients with SANDO were further analysed.
RESULTS: None of the 66 patients with single, large-scale mtDNA deletions 
fulfilled the clinical criteria of SANDO syndrome. In contrast, 9 of 41 patients 
(22%) with multiple mtDNA deletions and two additional family members fulfilled 
the clinical criteria for SANDO. Within this subgroup, multiple mtDNA deletions 
were associated with the following nuclear mutations: POLG (n=6), PEO1 (n=2), 
unidentified (n=2). The combination of sensory ataxic neuropathy with 
ophthalmoparesis (SANO) was observed in 70% of patients with multiple mtDNA 
deletions but only in 4% with single deletions. The combination of CPEO and 
sensory ataxic neuropathy (SANO, incomplete SANDO) was found in 43% of patients 
with multiple mtDNA deletions but not in patients with single deletions.
CONCLUSION: The SANDO syndrome seems to indicate a cluster of symptoms within 
the wide range of multisystemic symptoms associated with mitochondrial CPEO. 
SANO seems to be the most frequent phenotype associated with multiple mtDNA 
deletions in our cohort but not or is rarely associated with single, large-scale 
mtDNA deletions.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2013-306748
PMID: 25143630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]