---
reference_id: "PMID:39859226"
title: IgG-NR2B-A Potentially Valuable Biomarker in the Management of Refractory Anti-NMDAR Encephalitis.
authors:
- Števková Z
- Krastev G
- Mako M
- Čierna Z
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijms26020513
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/metabolism, immunology"
- "Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis/therapy, diagnosis"
- "Teratoma/therapy, diagnosis"
- Biomarkers
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/pathology, complications"
- "Autoantibodies/immunology, blood"
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Adult
- Immunotherapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IgG-NR2B-A Potentially Valuable Biomarker in the Management of Refractory Anti-NMDAR Encephalitis.
**Authors:** Števková Z, Krastev G, Mako M, Čierna Z
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms26020513](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26020513)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 Jan 9;26(2):513. doi: 10.3390/ijms26020513.

IgG-NR2B-A Potentially Valuable Biomarker in the Management of Refractory 
Anti-NMDAR Encephalitis.

Števková Z(1)(2)(3), Krastev G(1)(2)(4), Mako M(1)(2), Čierna Z(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Neurology, Faculty Hospital Trnava, 917 02 Trnava, Slovakia.
(2)Clinic of Neurology in Trnava, Slovak Medical University, 833 03 Bratislava, 
Slovakia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University in Bratislava, 813 72 Bratislava, 
Slovakia.
(4)Jessenius Medical Faculty in Martin, Comenius University in Bratislava, 813 
72 Bratislava, Slovakia.
(5)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Health Care and Social Work, Trnava 
University and University Hospital, 917 02 Trnava, Slovakia.
(6)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University and 
University Hospital Bratislava, 811 08 Bratislava, Slovakia.

The autoantibodies against the NR1 subunit are well known in the pathomechanism 
of NMDAR encephalitis. The dysfunction of the NR2 subunit could be a critical 
factor in this neurological disorder due to its important role in the 
postsynaptic pathways that direct synaptic plasticity. We report a case of 
paraneoplastic anti-NMDAR encephalitis presented alongside very severe illness. 
Computed tomography (CT) of the brain, as well as FLAIR and T2-weighted MRI, was 
performed to rule out any other acute brain processes. A semi-quantitative 
method was applied to detect the presence of anti-NMDAR antibodies in the serum 
and CSF. A CT chest-abdomen-pelvis scan was performed that detected an ovarian 
teratoma. A histopathological examination was performed after a laparoscopic 
right-ovary cystectomy. Subsequent immunofluorescence immunohistochemical 
staining showed the expression of NMDA receptors of type NR2B. Treatment 
included first-line immunotherapy, second-line immunotherapy, tumor removal, and 
intrathecal injections with methotrexate and dexamethasone. The histological 
finding for our patient after tumor removal was ovarian teratoma. 
Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining revealed a characteristic spectrum of elements, 
including stratified squamous epithelium and fat tissue accompanied by 
neuroglial cells. Subsequent immunohistochemical staining showed an expression 
of NMDA receptors of type NR2B in different structures of the teratoma, 
including the neuroglial cells. The first-line immunotherapy following the tumor 
removal was insufficient in our patient. The paraneoplastic anti-NMDAR 
encephalitis with a coexpressed NR2B subunit on the neural cells of the ovarian 
teratoma may suggest a different inflammation process and could be the key 
factor in the pathomechanism and treatment of the refractory anti-NMDAR 
encephalitis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms26020513
PMCID: PMC11765159
PMID: 39859226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.