---
reference_id: "PMID:34440375"
title: "Intellectual Disability and Brain Creatine Deficit: Phenotyping of the Genetic Mouse Model for GAMT Deficiency."
authors:
- Rossi L
- Nardecchia F
- Pierigè F
- Ventura R
- Carducci C
- Leuzzi V
- Magnani M
- Cabib S
- Pascucci T
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12081201
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/metabolism
- Creatine/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Language Development Disorders/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Movement Disorders/congenital, genetics"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intellectual Disability and Brain Creatine Deficit: Phenotyping of the Genetic Mouse Model for GAMT Deficiency.
**Authors:** Rossi L, Nardecchia F, Pierigè F, Ventura R, Carducci C, Leuzzi V, Magnani M, Cabib S, Pascucci T
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12081201](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12081201)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Aug 2;12(8):1201. doi: 10.3390/genes12081201.

Intellectual Disability and Brain Creatine Deficit: Phenotyping of the Genetic
Mouse Model for GAMT Deficiency.

Rossi L(1)(2), Nardecchia F(3), Pierigè F(1), Ventura R(4)(5), Carducci C(6),
Leuzzi V(3), Magnani M(1)(2), Cabib S(4)(5), Pascucci T(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Urbino "Carlo Bo", 61029
Urbino, Italy.
(2)EryDel SpA, Via Sasso 36, 61029 Urbino, Italy.
(3)Division of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Department of Human Neuroscience,
Sapienza University, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Psychology and "Daniel Bovet" Center, Sapienza University,
00184 Rome, Italy.
(5)IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, 00142 Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency (GAMT-D) is one of three cerebral
creatine (Cr) deficiency syndromes due to pathogenic variants in the GAMT gene
(19p13.3). GAMT-D is characterized by the accumulation of guanidinoacetic acid
(GAA) and the depletion of Cr, which result in severe global developmental delay
(and intellectual disability), movement disorder, and epilepsy. The GAMT
knockout (KO) mouse model presents biochemical alterations in bodily fluids, the
brain, and muscles, including increased GAA and decreased Cr and creatinine
(Crn) levels, which are similar to those observed in humans. At the behavioral
level, only limited and mild alterations have been reported, with a large part
of analyzed behaviors being unaffected in GAMT KO as compared with wild-type
mice. At the cerebral level, decreased Cr and Crn and increased GAA and other
guanidine compound levels have been observed. Nevertheless, the effects of Cr
deficiency and GAA accumulation on many neurochemical, morphological, and
molecular processes have not yet been explored. In this review, we summarize
data regarding behavioral and cerebral GAMT KO phenotypes, and focus on
uncharted behavioral alterations that are comparable with the clinical symptoms
reported in GAMT-D patients, including intellectual disability, poor speech, and
autistic-like behaviors, as well as unexplored Cr-induced cerebral alterations.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12081201
PMCID: PMC8391262
PMID: 34440375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
