---
reference_id: "PMID:36223065"
title: "Frequency of hyperostosis frontalis interna in patients with active acromegaly: is there a possible role of GH excess or hyperprolactinemia in its etiopathogenesis?"
authors:
- Mutlu U
- Telci Caklili O
- Barburoglu M
- Yarman S
journal: Hormones (Athens)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s42000-022-00401-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of hyperostosis frontalis interna in patients with active acromegaly: is there a possible role of GH excess or hyperprolactinemia in its etiopathogenesis?
**Authors:** Mutlu U, Telci Caklili O, Barburoglu M, Yarman S
**Journal:** Hormones (Athens) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s42000-022-00401-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s42000-022-00401-x)

## Content

1. Hormones (Athens). 2023 Mar;22(1):25-32. doi: 10.1007/s42000-022-00401-x. Epub
 2022 Oct 12.

Frequency of hyperostosis frontalis interna in patients with active acromegaly: 
is there a possible role of GH excess or hyperprolactinemia in its 
etiopathogenesis?

Mutlu U(1), Telci Caklili O(2), Barburoglu M(3), Yarman S(2).

Author information:
(1)Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Istanbul University, Turgut Ozal Street, Capa, 
Sehremini, Fatih, Istanbul, Turkey. ukorkmaz18@gmail.com.
(2)Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Istanbul University, Turgut Ozal Street, Capa, 
Sehremini, Fatih, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Radiology, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.

PURPOSE: Acromegaly is characterized by bone changes due to excessive growth 
hormone (GH) secretion. Hyperostosis frontalis interna (HFI) is described as an 
overgrowth in the inner plate of the frontal bone. An increased incidence of HFI 
has been reported in patients with acromegaly. Since the etiology of HFI is 
poorly understood, we have analyzed whether there is a relationship between the 
hormonal and metabolic status of patients with acromegaly (with or without 
hyperprolactinemia) and the pathogenesis of HFI.
METHODS: Forty-five patients with acromegaly and two control groups consisting 
of 25 patients with prolactinoma (group 1) and 47 healthy subjects (group 2) 
were included in this retrospective study. Baseline hormonal data and cranial 
imaging were obtained from medical records and analyzed.
RESULTS: Mean frontal bone thickness was 6.75 mm in acromegaly, 4.85 mm in group 
1, and 5.1 mm in group 2 of controls (p < 0.001). The frequency of HFI was 
higher in acromegalic patients than in the controls (22%, 0%, and 2.2%, 
respectively). There was no difference between the HFI positive and negative 
acromegalic patients in basal GH, IGF-1, and PRL levels, IGF-1 index, diagnosis 
lag time, and insulin resistance. There was no difference between groups 
regarding parietal and occipital bone thickness.
CONCLUSION: Although the frequency of HFI is 22% in patients with acromegaly, 
neither excess GH nor hyperprolactinemia plays a role in its etiopathogenesis. 
Various genetic or epigenetic factors may contribute to its etiology.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Hellenic Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s42000-022-00401-x
PMID: 36223065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]