---
reference_id: "PMID:31675442"
title: "Topically applied treatments for external genital warts in nonimmunocompromised patients: a systematic review and network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Jung JM
- Jung CJ
- Lee WJ
- Won CH
- Lee MW
- Choi JH
- Chang SE
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.18638
keywords:
- "Administration, Topical"
- Aminoquinolines/therapeutic use
- Condylomata Acuminata/drug therapy
- Humans
- Imiquimod/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- Warts
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topically applied treatments for external genital warts in nonimmunocompromised patients: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Jung JM, Jung CJ, Lee WJ, Won CH, Lee MW, Choi JH, Chang SE
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.18638](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.18638)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2020 Jul;183(1):24-36. doi: 10.1111/bjd.18638. Epub 2019 Dec
13.

Topically applied treatments for external genital warts in nonimmunocompromised 
patients: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.

Jung JM(1), Jung CJ(1), Lee WJ(1), Won CH(1), Lee MW(1), Choi JH(1), Chang 
SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Asan Medical Centre, University of Ulsan College 
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2020 Jul;183(1):5-6. doi: 10.1111/bjd.19044.

Selecting a topical treatment from among the numerous topical agents for 
external genital warts remains challenging without clear evidence. Our aim was 
to evaluate comparatively the efficacy and safety of topical agents for external 
genital warts using a network meta-analysis. We included all randomized 
controlled trials that evaluated any topically applied treatment for external 
genital warts. Using the R package netmeta, network meta-analyses were performed 
with a frequentist approach. We identified 41 relevant studies comprising 6371 
patients. Among conventional agents, podophyllotoxin 0·5% solution (odds ratio 
1·94, 95% confidence interval 1·02-3·71) was significantly more efficacious than 
imiquimod 5% cream for lesion clearance; however, it was associated with a 
higher overall adverse event rate. Sinecatechins 15% ointment (odds ratio 0·21, 
95% confidence interval 0·12-0·34) was significantly less efficacious than 
imiquimod 5% cream. Idoxuridine, polyhexamethylene biguanide, cidofovir and 
SB206 showed comparable therapeutic efficacies with conventional therapies. None 
of the treatments were significantly different from each other with respect to 
recurrence, patients with severe adverse events, or patients who withdrew 
because of treatment-related adverse events. Conventional modalities were 
efficacious and well tolerated, although each of them had their advantages and 
disadvantages. Additional efficacy and safety studies are warranted for 
unconventional agents.

© 2019 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.18638
PMID: 31675442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]