---
reference_id: "PMID:23797140"
title: Familial amyloid polyneuropathy.
authors:
- Barreiros AP
- Galle PR
- Otto G
journal: Dig Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1159/000347214
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial amyloid polyneuropathy.
**Authors:** Barreiros AP, Galle PR, Otto G
**Journal:** Dig Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000347214](https://doi.org/10.1159/000347214)

## Content

1. Dig Dis. 2013;31(1):170-4. doi: 10.1159/000347214. Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Familial amyloid polyneuropathy.

Barreiros AP(1), Galle PR, Otto G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 
Mainz, Germany. barreiro@mail.uni-mainz.de

Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP; also known as familiar amyloidosis and 
hereditary amyloidosis) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease due to 
mutations of the transthyretin (TTR) gene coding for the corresponding protein, 
consisting of 127 amino acids. The gene is located on chromosome 18q. More than 
100 different mutations are known. Other mutant precursor proteins produced in 
the liver, such as apolipoprotein I and II, lysozyme and fibrinogen Aα, may be 
of etiological importance as well. Amyloidogenic mutations of the TTR gene lead 
to decreased stability of the corresponding protein and subsequently to 
extracellular deposition of amyloid in several tissues (peripheral and autonomic 
nerves, walls of the gastrointestinal tract, heart, etc.). The Val30Met mutation 
is the most prevalent cause of FAP worldwide. There are endemic regions in 
Portugal, Sweden and Japan. The onset of symptoms is usually between 25 and 35 
years of age, but late-onset families are also known. The most common clinical 
symptoms are polyneuropathy of the lower limbs, rhythmological disturbances and 
diarrhea/obstipation. TTR amyloid is predominantly produced in the liver; only 
as few as 5% are synthesized in the retina and choroid plexus. Therefore, liver 
transplantation has become widely accepted as the ultimate curative treatment of 
this disease in order to prevent the ultimately fatal outcome and ameliorate 
disabling symptoms. Because of shortage of donor grafts, livers of FAP patients 
are used for domino liver transplantation. Last year, a new therapeutic option 
was approved by the European Medical Authority (EMA) for therapy of early-stage 
FAP. The first results of a multicenter-controlled trial have been published and 
show a benefit in patients with an early stage of disease regarding neurological 
symptoms as well as modified BMI. There are several other pharmacologic 
approaches that have been reported in the last years which may lead to 
stabilization of the TTR tetramer. Therefore, this might be the beginning of new 
therapeutic options with pharmacological therapies in patients with FAP.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000347214
PMID: 23797140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]