---
reference_id: "PMID:20418887"
title: Slitrk5 deficiency impairs corticostriatal circuitry and leads to obsessive-compulsive-like behaviors in mice.
authors:
- Shmelkov SV
- Hormigo A
- Jing D
- Proenca CC
- Bath KG
- Milde T
- Shmelkov E
- Kushner JS
- Baljevic M
- Dincheva I
- Murphy AJ
- Valenzuela DM
- Gale NW
- Yancopoulos GD
- Ninan I
- Lee FS
- Rafii S
journal: Nat Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/nm.2125
keywords:
- Animals
- "Behavior, Animal"
- Compulsive Behavior/genetics
- Grooming
- "Membrane Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Neostriatum/physiopathology
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder/diagnosis
- Synapses
- Synaptic Transmission
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Slitrk5 deficiency impairs corticostriatal circuitry and leads to obsessive-compulsive-like behaviors in mice.
**Authors:** Shmelkov SV, Hormigo A, Jing D, Proenca CC, Bath KG, Milde T, Shmelkov E, Kushner JS, Baljevic M, Dincheva I, Murphy AJ, Valenzuela DM, Gale NW, Yancopoulos GD, Ninan I, Lee FS, Rafii S
**Journal:** Nat Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.2125](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2125)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2010 May;16(5):598-602, 1p following 602. doi: 10.1038/nm.2125. Epub 
2010 Apr 25.

Slitrk5 deficiency impairs corticostriatal circuitry and leads to 
obsessive-compulsive-like behaviors in mice.

Shmelkov SV(1), Hormigo A, Jing D, Proenca CC, Bath KG, Milde T, Shmelkov E, 
Kushner JS, Baljevic M, Dincheva I, Murphy AJ, Valenzuela DM, Gale NW, 
Yancopoulos GD, Ninan I, Lee FS, Rafii S.

Author information:
(1)[1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ansary Stem Cell Institute and 
Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New 
York, USA. [2] These authors contributed equally to this work.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2010 Oct;78(4):350-2. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01507.x.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a common psychiatric disorder defined by 
the presence of obsessive thoughts and repetitive compulsive actions, and it 
often encompasses anxiety and depressive symptoms. Recently, the corticostriatal 
circuitry has been implicated in the pathogenesis of OCD. However, the etiology, 
pathophysiology and molecular basis of OCD remain unknown. Several studies 
indicate that the pathogenesis of OCD has a genetic component. Here we 
demonstrate that loss of a neuron-specific transmembrane protein, SLIT and 
NTRK-like protein-5 (Slitrk5), leads to OCD-like behaviors in mice, which 
manifests as excessive self-grooming and increased anxiety-like behaviors, and 
is alleviated by the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine. 
Slitrk5(-/-) mice show selective overactivation of the orbitofrontal cortex, 
abnormalities in striatal anatomy and cell morphology and alterations in 
glutamate receptor composition, which contribute to deficient corticostriatal 
neurotransmission. Thus, our studies identify Slitrk5 as an essential molecule 
at corticostriatal synapses and provide a new mouse model of OCD-like behaviors.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.2125
PMCID: PMC2907076
PMID: 20418887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.