---
reference_id: "PMID:23505322"
title: High rate of mosaicism in individuals with Cornelia de Lange syndrome.
authors:
- Huisman SA
- Redeker EJ
- Maas SM
- Mannens MM
- Hennekam RC
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101477
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- De Lange Syndrome/genetics
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mosaicism
- Mouth Mucosa/cytology
- Proteins/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Structural Maintenance of Chromosome Protein 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High rate of mosaicism in individuals with Cornelia de Lange syndrome.
**Authors:** Huisman SA, Redeker EJ, Maas SM, Mannens MM, Hennekam RC
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101477](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101477)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2013 May;50(5):339-44. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101477. Epub
2013 Mar 15.

High rate of mosaicism in individuals with Cornelia de Lange syndrome.

Huisman SA(1), Redeker EJ, Maas SM, Mannens MM, Hennekam RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Room H7-237, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a well known malformation
syndrome for which five causative genes are known, accounting for ∼55-65% of
cases. In this study, we hypothesised that mosaicism might explain some of the
∼35-45% of cases without detectable mutation in DNA derived from lymphocytes; we
investigated the frequency of NIPBL mutations in buccal cells in individuals
negative for mutations in any of the five genes in lymphocytes; and we evaluated
the efficiency of obtaining DNA from buccal swabs and the best strategy for
optimal mutation detection in CdLS.
METHODS: Buccal swabs were obtained from eight mutation positive and 13 mutation
negative individuals with clinically diagnosed CdLS, following informed consent.
We then forwarded instructions and a single mouth swab to the families; if
subsequently insufficient DNA was obtained, we re-sent two mouth swabs. Buccal
cells were screened for NIPBL mutations using Sanger sequencing techniques.
RESULTS: Sufficient DNA for analysis was obtained in 21/22 individuals. In all
six tested individuals with a known NIPBL mutation and in two with a known SMC1A
mutation, the mutation was confirmed in buccal cells. In 10 of the 13 tested
individuals without detectable mutation in lymphocytes a NIPBL mutation could be
detected in buccal cells. Clinically there were no significant differences
between patients with a germline and mosaic NIPBL mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Somatic mosaicism for an NIPBL mutation is frequent (10/44; 23%)
clinically in reliably diagnosed CdLS individuals. Obtaining buccal swabs at the
time a blood sample is obtained will facilitate adequate molecular analysis of
clinically diagnosed CdLS patients.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101477
PMID: 23505322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
