---
reference_id: "PMID:33171185"
title: Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.
authors:
- Brischigliaro M
- Zeviani M
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Bioenerg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2020.148335
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/enzymology, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.
**Authors:** Brischigliaro M, Zeviani M
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Bioenerg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbabio.2020.148335](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbabio.2020.148335)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Bioenerg. 2021 Jan 1;1862(1):148335. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbabio.2020.148335. Epub 2020 Nov 7.

Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.

Brischigliaro M(1), Zeviani M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. Electronic 
address: massimo.zeviani@unipd.it.

Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency is characterized by a high degree of 
genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity, partly reflecting the extreme structural 
complexity, multiple post-translational modification, variable, tissue-specific 
composition, and the high number of and intricate connections among the assembly 
factors of this enzyme. In fact, decreased COX specific activity can manifest 
with different degrees of severity, affect the whole organism or specific 
tissues, and develop a wide spectrum of disease natural history, including 
disease onsets ranging from birth to late adulthood. More than 30 genes have 
been linked to COX deficiency, but the list is still incomplete and in fact 
constantly updated. We here discuss the current knowledge about COX in health 
and disease, focusing on genetic aetiology and link to clinical manifestations. 
In addition, information concerning either fundamental biological features of 
the enzymes or biochemical signatures of its defects have been provided by 
experimental in vivo models, including yeast, fly, mouse and fish, which 
expanded our knowledge on the functional features and the phenotypical 
consequences of different forms of COX deficiency.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2020.148335
PMID: 33171185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]