---
reference_id: "PMID:39046133"
title: Small airways disease in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Lazarinis N
- Fouka E
- Linden A
- Bossios A
journal: Expert Rev Respir Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/17476348.2024.2380070
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small airways disease in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Lazarinis N, Fouka E, Linden A, Bossios A
**Journal:** Expert Rev Respir Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17476348.2024.2380070](https://doi.org/10.1080/17476348.2024.2380070)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2024 Jul;18(7):539-552. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2024.2380070. Epub 2024 Jul 24.

Small airways disease in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Lazarinis N(1)(2), Fouka E(1)(3), Linden A(1)(2), Bossios A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Lung and Airway Research, Institute of Environmental Medicine, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Karolinska Severe COPD Center, Department of Respiratory Medicine and 
Allergy, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Pulmonary Department, Medical School, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
'G. Papanikolaou'' General Hospital, Exohi, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Karolinska Severe Asthma Center, Department of Respiratory Medicine and 
Allergy, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Small airway disease (SAD) represents a common and critical 
feature of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). Introduced in the '60s, 
SAD has gradually gained increasing interest as assessment methodologies have 
improved. Chronic exposure to smoking and noxious particles or gases induces 
inflammation and remodeling, leading to airway obstruction and SAD, eventually 
resulting in complete airway loss.
AREAS COVERED: A literature search up to June 2024 was performed in PubMed to 
identify articles on SAD and airway diseases mainly COPD, but also to the extent 
that it seemed relevant in the uncontrolled/severe asthma field, where SAD is 
better studied. We provide clinicians and translational scientists with a 
comprehensive analysis of the existing literature on SAD in COPD, concentrating 
on the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms, diagnostic techniques, and 
current pharmacological approaches targeting airflow obstruction in small 
airways.
EXPERT OPINION: Small airways are the primary site for the onset and progression 
of airflow obstruction in patients with COPD, with significant clinical 
consequences associated with poor lung function, hyperinflation, and impaired 
quality of life. The early identification of individuals with subclinical SAD 
may allow us to prevent its further progress from airway loss and potential 
development of emphysema and choose the appropriate therapeutic approach.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2024.2380070
PMID: 39046133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]