---
reference_id: "PMID:41026232"
title: "Novel Insights into the Clinical Features, Genetic Spectrum and Clonal Evolution of Patients Carrying NLRP3 Mosaicism."
authors:
- Bonet N
- Mascaro JM Jr
- Hurtado-Navarro L
- Angosto-Bazarra D
- Callejas-Rubio JL
- Clemente D
- Souto A
- Lima O
- Palmou-Fontana N
- Baselga E
- Jiménez-Treviño S
- Remesal A
- Andreu-Barasoain M
- Fernandez-Dominguez L
- Riera-Monroig J
- Aparicio M
- Garcia-Herrero J
- Pesqué D
- Sanchez-Calvin MT
- Lezana-Rosales JM
- Correyero-Plaza M
- Garcia-Villalba J
- Bolaño V
- Peiro S
- Diaz M
- Vlagea A
- Lorca D
- Fabregat V
- Anton MC
- Plaza S
- Gonzalez-Granado LI
- Postigo C
- de Morales JMG
- de la Fuente EG
- Iglesias E
- Gomez-Roman J
- Vázquez-Triñanes C
- Lopez-Robledillo JC
- Ortego-Centeno N
- Giménez-Arnau AM
- Campistol JM
- Laayouni H
- de Landazuri IO
- Yagüe J
- Gonzalez-Roca E
- Mensa-Vilaro A
- Fornas O
- Ramos E
- Pelegrin P
- Casals F
- Arostegui JI
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-025-01922-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Insights into the Clinical Features, Genetic Spectrum and Clonal Evolution of Patients Carrying NLRP3 Mosaicism.
**Authors:** Bonet N, Mascaro JM Jr, Hurtado-Navarro L, Angosto-Bazarra D, Callejas-Rubio JL, Clemente D, Souto A, Lima O, Palmou-Fontana N, Baselga E, Jiménez-Treviño S, Remesal A, Andreu-Barasoain M, Fernandez-Dominguez L, Riera-Monroig J, Aparicio M, Garcia-Herrero J, Pesqué D, Sanchez-Calvin MT, Lezana-Rosales JM, Correyero-Plaza M, Garcia-Villalba J, Bolaño V, Peiro S, Diaz M, Vlagea A, Lorca D, Fabregat V, Anton MC, Plaza S, Gonzalez-Granado LI, Postigo C, de Morales JMG, de la Fuente EG, Iglesias E, Gomez-Roman J, Vázquez-Triñanes C, Lopez-Robledillo JC, Ortego-Centeno N, Giménez-Arnau AM, Campistol JM, Laayouni H, de Landazuri IO, Yagüe J, Gonzalez-Roca E, Mensa-Vilaro A, Fornas O, Ramos E, Pelegrin P, Casals F, Arostegui JI
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-025-01922-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-025-01922-x)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2025 Sep 30;45(1):134. doi: 10.1007/s10875-025-01922-x.

Novel Insights into the Clinical Features, Genetic Spectrum and Clonal Evolution 
of Patients Carrying NLRP3 Mosaicism.

Bonet N(1), Mascaro JM Jr(2)(3)(4), Hurtado-Navarro L(5), Angosto-Bazarra D(5), 
Callejas-Rubio JL(6), Clemente D(7), Souto A(8), Lima O(9), Palmou-Fontana 
N(10), Baselga E(11), Jiménez-Treviño S(12), Remesal A(13), Andreu-Barasoain 
M(14), Fernandez-Dominguez L(15), Riera-Monroig J(2), Aparicio M(16), 
Garcia-Herrero J(17), Pesqué D(18)(19), Sanchez-Calvin MT(20), Lezana-Rosales 
JM(20), Correyero-Plaza M(21), Garcia-Villalba J(5), Bolaño V(22), Peiro S(22), 
Diaz M(22), Vlagea A(22), Lorca D(22), Fabregat V(22), Anton MC(22), Plaza 
S(22), Gonzalez-Granado LI(23), Postigo C(24), de Morales JMG(17), de la Fuente 
EG(25), Iglesias E(26), Gomez-Roman J(27), Vázquez-Triñanes C(28), 
Lopez-Robledillo JC(7), Ortego-Centeno N(29), Giménez-Arnau AM(18)(30), 
Campistol JM(3)(4)(31), Laayouni H(32)(33), de Landazuri IO(3)(22), Yagüe 
J(3)(4)(22), Gonzalez-Roca E(3)(22), Mensa-Vilaro A(3)(22), Fornas O(34), Ramos 
E(12), Pelegrin P(5), Casals F(35)(36)(37)(38), Arostegui JI(39)(40)(41).

Author information:
(1)Genomics Core Facility, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)School of Medicine, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Biomedical Research Institute of Murcia, University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Clinico Universitario San Cecilio, 
Granada, Spain.
(7)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Niño Jesus, 
Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de 
Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de 
Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain.
(10)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla, 
Santander, Spain.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, 
Oviedo, Spain.
(13)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, 
Spain.
(14)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Fundación Alcorcón, Alcorcón, Spain.
(15)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Santa María Nai, Ourense, Spain.
(16)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, 
Badalona, Spain.
(17)Department of Immunology, Complejo Asistencial Universitario de Leon, Leon, 
Spain.
(18)Department of Dermatology, Hospital del Mar Research Institute, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(19)Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(20)Department of Genetics, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(21)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, 
Spain.
(22)Department of Immunology (esc 4-pl 0), Hospital Clínic, Villarroel 170, 
Barcelona, 08036, Spain.
(23)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, 
Spain.
(24)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, 
Spain.
(25)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Universitario Ramon y Cajal, Madrid, 
Spain.
(26)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(27)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla, 
Santander, Spain.
(28)Department of Internal Medicine, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de 
Vigo, Vigo, Spain.
(29)Department of Medicine, University of Granada, Granada, Spain.
(30)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(31)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
(32)Department of Medicine and Life Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(33)Barcelona Beta Brain Research Center, Pasqual Maragall Foundation, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(34)Flow Cytometry Unit, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(35)Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Universitat of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(36)Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Universitat 
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(37)Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain.
(38)Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
(39)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain. jiaroste@clinic.cat.
(40)School of Medicine, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 
jiaroste@clinic.cat.
(41)Department of Immunology (esc 4-pl 0), Hospital Clínic, Villarroel 170, 
Barcelona, 08036, Spain. jiaroste@clinic.cat.

NLRP3 mosaicism is a well-established mechanism causing the monogenic 
autoinflammatory disease named cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes (CAPS). 
The number of reported patients with NLRP3 mosaicism is small, and the knowledge 
about the long-term disease behavior is limited. Herein we assembled the largest 
cohort of individuals with NLRP3 mosaicism reported to date to obtain additional 
evidence that strengthens the understanding of this disease. The novel genetic 
data were obtained by using Sanger and next-generation sequencing methods, 
whereas in vitro analyses determined the functional consequences of detected 
variants. A total of seventeen individuals with NLRP3 mosaicism were enrolled, 
with 16/17 experiencing different CAPS phenotypes. An overrepresentation of 
late-onset forms was detected (37.5%). Overall, clinical manifestations, 
analytical results, and outcomes of treatments were markedly similar to those 
detected in patients with germline variants. A large mutational diversity was 
identified, with 16 different variants among 17 individuals. Two main patterns 
of mosaicism (extended vs. myeloid-restricted) were detected, with the last one 
overrepresented in the late-onset group. The evaluation of mosaicism over time 
identified three different patterns, being the group with stable mosaicism the 
largest one. Collected evidence supports the marked similarities among patients 
carrying somatic or germline NLRP3 variants. The overrepresentation of NLRP3 
mosaicism in late-onset forms should be considered in patients with inflammatory 
manifestations starting in adulthood. Analysis of mosaicism at the biological 
level confirms the two known patterns of corporal distribution and reveals that 
mosaicism remains stable over time in most patients, but it may also vary during 
the course of the disease.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-025-01922-x
PMCID: PMC12484329
PMID: 41026232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics Approval: The Ethical 
Review Board of Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain approved the study (code 
HCB/2022/0855). All investigations were performed in accordance with the ethics 
standards of the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments. Consent 
to Participate: Written informed consent to participate in this study was 
obtained from all adult (> 18 years) individual participants or from the 
parents/legal guardians of those participants under 18 years-old. Consent to 
Publish: Written informed consent to publish the results of the different 
performed studies was obtained from all adult (> 18 years) individual 
participants or from the parents/legal guardians of those participants under 18 
years-old. Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests. 
Conflicts of interest: The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial 
interests to disclose.