---
reference_id: "PMID:12217961"
title: ALG12 mannosyltransferase defect in congenital disorder of glycosylation type lg.
authors:
- Grubenmann CE
- Frank CG
- Kjaergaard S
- Berger EG
- Aebi M
- Hennet T
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.19.2331
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Mannosyltransferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscle Hypertonia/genetics
- Phenotype
- Psychomotor Disorders/genetics
- Sequence Alignment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALG12 mannosyltransferase defect in congenital disorder of glycosylation type lg.
**Authors:** Grubenmann CE, Frank CG, Kjaergaard S, Berger EG, Aebi M, Hennet T
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/11.19.2331](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/11.19.2331)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Sep 15;11(19):2331-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.19.2331.

ALG12 mannosyltransferase defect in congenital disorder of glycosylation type 
lg.

Grubenmann CE(1), Frank CG, Kjaergaard S, Berger EG, Aebi M, Hennet T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 
Zürich, Switzerland.

In the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of eukaryotes, N-linked glycans are first 
assembled on the lipid carrier dolichyl pyrophosphate. The GlcNAc(2)Man(9)Glc(3) 
oligosaccharide is transferred to selected asparagine residues of nascent 
polypeptides. Defects along the biosynthetic pathway of N-glycans are associated 
with severe multisystemic syndromes called congenital disorders of 
glycosylation. Here, we describe a deficiency in the ALG12 ER 
alpha1,6-mannosyltransferase resulting in a novel type of glycosylation 
disorder. The severe disease was identified in a child presenting with 
psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, growth retardation, dysmorphic features and 
anorexia. In the patient's fibroblasts, the biosynthetic intermediate 
GlcNAc(2)Man(7) oligosaccharide was detected both on the lipid carrier dolichyl 
pyrophosphate and on newly synthesized glycoproteins, thus pointing to a defect 
in the dolichyl pyrophosphate-GlcNAc(2)Man(7)-dependent ALG12 alpha1,6 
mannosyltransferase. Analysis of the ALG12 cDNA in the CDG patient revealed 
compound heterozygosity for two point mutations that resulted in the amino acid 
substitutions T67M and R146Q, respectively. The impact of these mutations on 
ALG12 protein function was investigated in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae alg12 
glycosylation mutant by showing that the yeast ALG12 gene bearing the homologous 
mutations T61M and R161Q and the human mutant ALG12 cDNA alleles failed to 
normalize the growth defect phenotype of the alg12 yeast model, whereas 
expression of the normal ALG12 cDNA complemented the yeast mutation. The ALG12 
mannosyltransferase defect defines a new type of congenital disorder of 
glycosylation, designated CDG-Ig.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/11.19.2331
PMID: 12217961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]