---
reference_id: "PMID:32130903"
title: Microglial Homeostasis Requires Balanced CSF-1/CSF-2 Receptor Signaling.
authors:
- Chitu V
- Biundo F
- Shlager GGL
- Park ES
- Wang P
- Gulinello ME
- Gokhan Ş
- Ketchum HC
- Saha K
- DeTure MA
- Dickson DW
- Wszolek ZK
- Zheng D
- Croxford AL
- Becher B
- Sun D
- Mehler MF
- Stanley ER
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.028
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/metabolism
- Antioxidants/metabolism
- Atrophy
- "Depression/prevention & control"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Gliosis/pathology
- Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/metabolism
- Heterozygote
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Leukocytes/pathology
- "Leukoencephalopathies/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Microglia/metabolism, pathology"
- Motor Activity
- Myelin Sheath/pathology
- "Olfactory Bulb/pathology, physiopathology"
- Oxidative Stress
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/deficiency, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Spatial Memory
- Transcriptome/genetics
- "White Matter/pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglial Homeostasis Requires Balanced CSF-1/CSF-2 Receptor Signaling.
**Authors:** Chitu V, Biundo F, Shlager GGL, Park ES, Wang P, Gulinello ME, Gokhan Ş, Ketchum HC, Saha K, DeTure MA, Dickson DW, Wszolek ZK, Zheng D, Croxford AL, Becher B, Sun D, Mehler MF, Stanley ER
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.028)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2020 Mar 3;30(9):3004-3019.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.028.

Microglial Homeostasis Requires Balanced CSF-1/CSF-2 Receptor Signaling.

Chitu V(1), Biundo F(1), Shlager GGL(1), Park ES(1), Wang P(2), Gulinello ME(3), 
Gokhan Ş(4), Ketchum HC(1), Saha K(1), DeTure MA(5), Dickson DW(5), Wszolek 
ZK(6), Zheng D(7), Croxford AL(8), Becher B(9), Sun D(10), Mehler MF(4), Stanley 
ER(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, 
USA.
(3)Behavioral Core Facility, Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(4)Institute for Brain Disorders and Neural Regeneration, Departments of 
Neurology, Neuroscience, and Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(7)The Saul R. Korey Department of Neurology, Dominick P. Purpura Department of 
Neuroscience, and Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(8)Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Allschwil 4123, Switzerland.
(9)Institute of Experimental Immunology, University of Zurich, Zurich 8057, 
Switzerland.
(10)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461, USA.
(11)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. Electronic address: 
richard.stanley@einsteinmed.org.

CSF-1R haploinsufficiency causes adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with axonal 
spheroids and pigmented glia (ALSP). Previous studies in the Csf1r+/- mouse 
model of ALSP hypothesized a central role of elevated cerebral Csf2 expression. 
Here, we show that monoallelic deletion of Csf2 rescues most behavioral deficits 
and histopathological changes in Csf1r+/- mice by preventing microgliosis and 
eliminating most microglial transcriptomic alterations, including those 
indicative of oxidative stress and demyelination. We also show elevation of Csf2 
transcripts and of several CSF-2 downstream targets in the brains of ALSP 
patients, demonstrating that the mechanisms identified in the mouse model are 
functional in humans. Our data provide insights into the mechanisms underlying 
ALSP. Because increased CSF2 levels and decreased microglial Csf1r expression 
have also been reported in Alzheimer's disease and multiple sclerosis, we 
suggest that the unbalanced CSF-1R/CSF-2 signaling we describe in the present 
study may contribute to the pathogenesis of other neurodegenerative conditions.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.028
PMCID: PMC7370656
PMID: 32130903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.