---
reference_id: "PMID:21288981"
title: TRPV4 mutations and cytotoxic hypercalcemia in axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies.
authors:
- Klein CJ
- Shi Y
- Fecto F
- Donaghy M
- Nicholson G
- McEntagart ME
- Crosby AH
- Wu Y
- Lou H
- McEvoy KM
- Siddique T
- Deng HX
- Dyck PJ
journal: Neurology
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31820f2de3
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acids/genetics
- Animals
- Axons/pathology
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- Cell Survival
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Diaphragm/pathology
- Family Health
- Humans
- "Hypercalcemia/etiology, genetics"
- Intracellular Fluid/metabolism
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Ruthenium Red/pharmacology
- TRPV Cation Channels/genetics
- Transfection/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRPV4 mutations and cytotoxic hypercalcemia in axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies.
**Authors:** Klein CJ, Shi Y, Fecto F, Donaghy M, Nicholson G, McEntagart ME, Crosby AH, Wu Y, Lou H, McEvoy KM, Siddique T, Deng HX, Dyck PJ
**Journal:** Neurology (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e31820f2de3](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e31820f2de3)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2011 Mar 8;76(10):887-94. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31820f2de3. Epub 
2011 Feb 2.

TRPV4 mutations and cytotoxic hypercalcemia in axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
neuropathies.

Klein CJ(1), Shi Y, Fecto F, Donaghy M, Nicholson G, McEntagart ME, Crosby AH, 
Wu Y, Lou H, McEvoy KM, Siddique T, Deng HX, Dyck PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Division of Peripheral Nerve Diseases, Mayo 
Clinic Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. klein.christopher@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2011 Mar 8;76(10):856-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31820f2e9a.

OBJECTIVE: To improve understanding of TRPV4-associated axonal 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) neuropathy phenotypes and their debated pathologic 
mechanism.
METHODS: A total of 17 CMT2C phenotypic families with vocal cord and 
diaphragmatic involvement and 36 clinically undifferentiated CMT2 subjects 
underwent sequencing analysis of the coding region of TRPV4. Functional studies 
of mutant proteins were performed using transiently transfected cells for TRPV4 
subcellular localization, basal and stimulated Ca(2+) channel analysis, and cell 
viability assay with or without channel blockade.
RESULTS: Two TRPV4 mutations R232C and R316H from 17 CMT2C families were 
identified in the ankyrin repeat domains. The R316H is a novel de novo mutation 
found in a patient with CMT2C phenotype. The family with R232C mutation had 
individuals with and without vocal cord and diaphragm involvement. Both mutant 
TRPV4 proteins had normal subcellular localization in HEK293 and HeLa cells. 
Cells transfected with R232C and R316H displayed increased intracellular Ca(2+) 
levels and reversible cell death by the TRPV channel antagonist, ruthenium red.
CONCLUSION: TRPV4 ankyrin domain alterations including a novel de novo mutation 
cause axonal CMT2. Individuals with the same mutation may have nondistinct CMT2 
or have phenotypic CMT2C with vocal cord paresis. Reversible hypercalcemic 
gain-of-function of mutant TRPV4 instead of loss-of-function appears to be 
pathologically important. The reversibility of cell death by channel blockade 
provides an attractive area of investigation in consideration of treatable 
axonal degeneration.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31820f2de3
PMCID: PMC3059145
PMID: 21288981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]