---
reference_id: "PMID:25843230"
title: "Atypical aHUS: State of the art."
authors:
- Nester CM
- Barbour T
- de Cordoba SR
- Dragon-Durey MA
- Fremeaux-Bacchi V
- Goodship TH
- Kavanagh D
- Noris M
- Pickering M
- Sanchez-Corral P
- Skerka C
- Zipfel P
- Smith RJ
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.03.246
keywords:
- Adult
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/etiology, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Autoantibodies/biosynthesis
- Child
- "Communicable Diseases/complications, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Complement Activation
- "Complement C3b/genetics, immunology"
- "Complement C3b Inactivator Proteins/genetics, immunology"
- "Complement Factor H/genetics, immunology"
- Gene Expression Regulation/immunology
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Kidney/immunology, pathology"
- "Kidney Neoplasms/complications, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Kidney Transplantation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical aHUS: State of the art.
**Authors:** Nester CM, Barbour T, de Cordoba SR, Dragon-Durey MA, Fremeaux-Bacchi V, Goodship TH, Kavanagh D, Noris M, Pickering M, Sanchez-Corral P, Skerka C, Zipfel P, Smith RJ
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molimm.2015.03.246](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2015.03.246)

## Content

1. Mol Immunol. 2015 Sep;67(1):31-42. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.03.246. Epub
2015  Apr 3.

Atypical aHUS: State of the art.

Nester CM(1), Barbour T(2), de Cordoba SR(3), Dragon-Durey MA(4), 
Fremeaux-Bacchi V(4), Goodship TH(5), Kavanagh D(4), Noris M(6), Pickering M(2), 
Sanchez-Corral P(7), Skerka C(8), Zipfel P(9), Smith RJ(10).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Otolaryngology and Renal Research Laboratories, Carver College of 
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Division of Nephrology, Stead 
Family Department of Pediatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College 
of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(2)Centre for Complement and Inflammation Research, Department of Medicine, 
Imperial College, London W12 0NN, UK.
(3)Centro Investigaciones Biológicas and Ciber de Enfermedades Raras, Ramiro de 
Maeztu 9, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(4)Assistance Publique - Hopitaux de Paris, Service d'Immunologie Biologique, 
Hopital Europeen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France.
(5)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(6)IRCCS - Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche "Mario Negri", Clinical Research 
Center for Rare Diseases "Aldo e Cele Daccò", Ranica, Bergamo, Italy.
(7)Unidad de Investigación and Ciber de Enfermedades Raras, Hospital 
Universitario de La Paz_IdiPAZ, Paseo de la Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain.
(8)Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology, Jena, 
Germany.
(9)Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology, Jena, 
Germany; Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany.
(10)Molecular Otolaryngology and Renal Research Laboratories, Carver College of 
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Division of Nephrology, Stead 
Family Department of Pediatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College 
of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. Electronic address: 
richard-smith@uiowa.edu.

Tremendous advances in our understanding of the thrombotic microangiopathies 
(TMAs) have revealed distinct disease mechanisms within this heterogeneous group 
of diseases. As a direct result of this knowledge, both children and adults with 
complement-mediated TMA now enjoy higher expectations for long-term health. In 
this update on atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome, we review the clinical 
characteristics; the genetic and acquired drivers of disease; the broad spectrum 
of environmental triggers; and current diagnosis and treatment options. Many 
questions remain to be addressed if additional improvements in patient care and 
outcome are to be achieved in the coming decade.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.03.246
PMID: 25843230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]