---
reference_id: "PMID:33684394"
title: Leukemia Risk in a Cohort of 3.9 Million Children with and without Down Syndrome.
authors:
- Marlow EC
- Ducore J
- Kwan ML
- Cheng SY
- Bowles EJA
- Greenlee RT
- Pole JD
- Rahm AK
- Stout NK
- Weinmann S
- Smith-Bindman R
- Miglioretti DL
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.03.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leukemia Risk in a Cohort of 3.9 Million Children with and without Down Syndrome.
**Authors:** Marlow EC, Ducore J, Kwan ML, Cheng SY, Bowles EJA, Greenlee RT, Pole JD, Rahm AK, Stout NK, Weinmann S, Smith-Bindman R, Miglioretti DL
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.03.001)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2021 Jul;234:172-180.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.03.001. Epub
2021  Mar 6.

Leukemia Risk in a Cohort of 3.9 Million Children with and without Down 
Syndrome.

Marlow EC(1), Ducore J(2), Kwan ML(3), Cheng SY(4), Bowles EJA(5), Greenlee 
RT(6), Pole JD(7), Rahm AK(8), Stout NK(9), Weinmann S(10), Smith-Bindman R(11), 
Miglioretti DL(12).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Group in Epidemiology, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA; 
Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
CA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA.
(3)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland, CA.
(4)ICES, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute, Kaiser Permanente 
Washington, Salt Lake City, UT.
(6)Marshfield Clinic Research Institute, Marshfield Clinic Health System, 
Marshfield, WI.
(7)ICES, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Centre for Health Service Research, 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; Dalla Lana School of Public 
Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger, Forty Fort, PA.
(9)Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim 
Health Care Institute, Boston, MA.
(10)Center for Health Research, Kaiser Permanente Northwest, Portland, OR; 
Center for Integrated Health Care Research, Kaiser Permanente Hawaii, Honolulu, 
HI.
(11)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; Department of 
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA; Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(12)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California, Davis, 
Davis, CA; Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute, Kaiser 
Permanente Washington, Salt Lake City, UT. Electronic address: 
dmiglioretti@ucdavis.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To assess leukemia risks among children with Down syndrome in a 
large, contemporary cohort.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study including 3 905 399 children born 
1996-2016 in 7 US healthcare systems or Ontario, Canada, and followed from birth 
to cancer diagnosis, death, age 15 years, disenrollment, or December 30, 2016. 
Down syndrome was identified using International Classification of Diseases, 
Ninth and Tenth Revisions, diagnosis codes. Cancer diagnoses were identified 
through linkages to tumor registries. Incidence and hazard ratios (HRs) of 
leukemia were estimated for children with Down syndrome and other children 
adjusting for health system, child's age at diagnosis, birth year, and sex.
RESULTS: Leukemia was diagnosed in 124 of 4401 children with Down syndrome and 
1941 of 3 900 998 other children. In children with Down syndrome, the cumulative 
incidence of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) was 1405/100 000 (95% CI 1076-1806) at 
age 4 years and unchanged at age 14 years. The cumulative incidence of acute 
lymphoid leukemia in children with Down syndrome was 1059/100 000 (95% CI 
755-1451) at age 4 and 1714/100 000 (95% CI 1264-2276) at age 14 years. Children 
with Down syndrome had a greater risk of AML before age 5 years than other 
children (HR 399, 95% CI 281-566). Largest HRs were for megakaryoblastic 
leukemia before age 5 years (HR 1500, 95% CI 555-4070). Children with Down 
syndrome had a greater risk of acute lymphoid leukemia than other children 
regardless of age (<5 years: HR 28, 95% CI 20-40, ≥5 years HR 21, 95% CI 12-38).
CONCLUSIONS: Down syndrome remains a strong risk factor for childhood leukemia, 
and associations with AML are stronger than previously reported.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.03.001
PMCID: PMC8238875
PMID: 33684394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]