---
reference_id: "PMID:16807664"
title: Arsenic carcinogenesis in the skin.
authors:
- Yu HS
- Liao WT
- Chai CY
journal: J Biomed Sci
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s11373-006-9092-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic carcinogenesis in the skin.
**Authors:** Yu HS, Liao WT, Chai CY
**Journal:** J Biomed Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11373-006-9092-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11373-006-9092-8)

## Content

1. J Biomed Sci. 2006 Sep;13(5):657-66. doi: 10.1007/s11373-006-9092-8. Epub 2006
 Jun 29.

Arsenic carcinogenesis in the skin.

Yu HS(1), Liao WT, Chai CY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. dermyu@ha.mc.ntu.edu.tw

Chronic arsenic poisoning is a world public health issue. Long-term exposure to 
inorganic arsenic (As) from drinking water has been documented to induce cancers 
in lung, urinary bladder, kidney, liver and skin in a dose-response 
relationship. Oxidative stress, chromosomal abnormality and altered growth 
factors are possible modes of action in arsenic carcinogenesis. Arsenic tends to 
accumulate in the skin. Skin hyperpigmentation and hyperkeratosis have long been 
known to be the hallmark signs of chronic As exposure. There are significant 
associations between these dermatological lesions and risk of skin cancer. The 
most common arsenic-induced skin cancers are Bowen's disease (carcinoma in 
situ), basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). 
Arsenic-induced Bowen's disease (As-BD) is able to transform into invasive BCC 
and SCC. Individuals with As-BD are considered for more aggressive cancer 
screening in the lung and urinary bladder. As-BD provides an excellent model for 
studying the early stages of chemical carcinogenesis in human beings. Arsenic 
exposure is associated with G2/M cell cycle arrest and DNA aneuploidy in both 
cultured keratinocytes and As-BD lesions. These cellular abnormalities relate to 
the p53 dysfunction induced by arsenic. The characteristic clinical figures of 
arsenic-induced skin cancer are: (i) occurrence on sun-protected areas of the 
body; (ii) multiple and recrudescent lesions. Both As and UVB are able to induce 
skin cancer. Arsenic treatment enhances the cytotoxicity, mutagenicity and 
clastogenicity of UV in mammalian cells. Both As and UVB induce apoptosis in 
keratinocytes by caspase-9 and caspase-8 signaling, respectively. Combined UVB 
and As treatments resulted in the antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects by 
stimulating both caspase pathways in the keratinocytes. UVB irradiation 
inhibited mutant p53 and ki-67 expression, as well as increased in the number of 
apoptotic cells in As-BD lesions which resulted in an inhibitory effect on 
proliferation. As-UVB interaction provides a reasonable explanation for the rare 
occurrences of arsenical cancer in the sun-exposed skin. The multiple and 
recurrent skin lesions are associated with cellular immune dysfunction in 
chronic arsenism. A decrease in peripheral CD4+ cells was noticed in the 
inhabitants of arsenic exposure areas. There was a decrease in the number of 
Langerhans cells in As-BD lesion which results in an impaired immune function on 
the lesional sites. Since CD4+ cells are the target cell affected by As, the 
interaction between CD4+ cells and epidermal keratinocytes under As affection 
might be closely linked to the pathogenesis of multiple occurrence of 
arsenic-induced skin cancer. In this review, we provide and discuss the 
pathomechanisms of arsenic skin cancer and the relationship to its 
characteristic figures. Such information is critical for understanding the 
molecular mechanism for arsenic carcinogenesis in other internal organs.

DOI: 10.1007/s11373-006-9092-8
PMID: 16807664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]