---
reference_id: "PMID:34884967"
title: "Dystroglycanopathy: From Elucidation of Molecular and Pathological Mechanisms to Development of Treatment Methods."
authors:
- Kanagawa M
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms222313162
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dystroglycanopathy: From Elucidation of Molecular and Pathological Mechanisms to Development of Treatment Methods.
**Authors:** Kanagawa M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms222313162](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222313162)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Dec 6;22(23):13162. doi: 10.3390/ijms222313162.

Dystroglycanopathy: From Elucidation of Molecular and Pathological Mechanisms to 
Development of Treatment Methods.

Kanagawa M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Ehime University, 454 Shitsukawa, Toon 791-0295, Ehime, Japan.

Dystroglycanopathy is a collective term referring to muscular dystrophies with 
abnormal glycosylation of dystroglycan. At least 18 causative genes of 
dystroglycanopathy have been identified, and its clinical symptoms are diverse, 
ranging from severe congenital to adult-onset limb-girdle types. Moreover, some 
cases are associated with symptoms involving the central nervous system. In the 
2010s, the structure of sugar chains involved in the onset of dystroglycanopathy 
and the functions of its causative gene products began to be identified as if 
they were filling the missing pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. In parallel with these 
discoveries, various dystroglycanopathy model mice had been created, which led 
to the elucidation of its pathological mechanisms. Then, treatment strategies 
based on the molecular basis of glycosylation began to be proposed after the 
latter half of the 2010s. This review briefly explains the sugar chain structure 
of dystroglycan and the functions of the causative gene products of 
dystroglycanopathy, followed by introducing the pathological mechanisms involved 
as revealed from analyses of dystroglycanopathy model mice. Finally, potential 
therapeutic approaches based on the pathological mechanisms involved are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222313162
PMCID: PMC8658603
PMID: 34884967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.