---
reference_id: "PMID:32792659"
title: Angelman syndrome genotypes manifest varying degrees of clinical severity and developmental impairment.
authors:
- Keute M
- Miller MT
- Krishnan ML
- Sadhwani A
- Chamberlain S
- Thibert RL
- Tan WH
- Bird LM
- Hipp JF
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-020-0858-6
keywords:
- Angelman Syndrome/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- Genomic Imprinting/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angelman syndrome genotypes manifest varying degrees of clinical severity and developmental impairment.
**Authors:** Keute M, Miller MT, Krishnan ML, Sadhwani A, Chamberlain S, Thibert RL, Tan WH, Bird LM, Hipp JF
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-020-0858-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-020-0858-6)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2021 Jul;26(7):3625-3633. doi: 10.1038/s41380-020-0858-6. Epub
 2020 Aug 13.

Angelman syndrome genotypes manifest varying degrees of clinical severity and
developmental impairment.

Keute M(1)(2), Miller MT(1), Krishnan ML(1), Sadhwani A(3)(4), Chamberlain S(5),
Thibert RL(6), Tan WH(4)(7), Bird LM(8)(9), Hipp JF(10).

Author information:
(1)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases,
Roche Innovation Center Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Neurology, Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, University of Connecticut,
Farmington, CT, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Genetics/Dysmorphology, Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego,
CA, USA.
(10)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases,
Roche Innovation Center Basel, Basel, Switzerland. joerg.hipp@roche.com.

Angelman Syndrome (AS) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder due to impaired
expression of UBE3A in neurons. There are several genetic mechanisms that impair
UBE3A expression, but they differ in how neighboring genes on chromosome 15 at
15q11-q13 are affected. There is evidence that different genetic subtypes
present with different clinical severity, but a systematic quantitative
investigation is lacking. Here we analyze natural history data on a large sample
of individuals with AS (n = 250, 848 assessments), including clinical scales
that quantify development of motor, cognitive, and language skills (Bayley
Scales of Infant Development, Third Edition; Preschool Language Scale, Fourth
Edition), adaptive behavior (Vineland Adaptive Behavioral Scales, Second
Edition), and AS-specific symptoms (AS Clinical Severity Scale). We found that
clinical severity, as captured by these scales, differs between genetic
subtypes: individuals with UBE3A pathogenic variants and imprinting defects
(IPD) are less affected than individuals with uniparental paternal disomy (UPD);
of those with UBE3A pathogenic variants, individuals with truncating mutations
are more impaired than those with missense mutations. Individuals with a
deletion that encompasses UBE3A and other genes are most impaired, but in
contrast to previous work, we found little evidence for an influence of deletion
length (class I vs. II) on severity of manifestations. The results of this
systematic analysis highlight the relevance of genomic regions beyond UBE3A as
contributing factors in the AS phenotype, and provide important information for
the development of new therapies for AS. More generally, this work exemplifies
how increasing genetic irregularities are reflected in clinical severity.

© 2020. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-020-0858-6
PMCID: PMC8505254
PMID: 32792659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MLK and MTM are former, and JFH and MLK are
current full-time employees of F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd. WHT received a one-time
honorarium from Roche F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd. LMB has received funding from F.
Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd. MLK is a full-time employee and shareholder of AveXis
Inc. RLT, AS, and SC have no conflicts of interest to declare.
