---
reference_id: "PMID:38238511"
title: Age-dependent implications of left ventricular hypertrophy regression in patients with hypertension.
authors:
- Chu HW
- Hwang IC
- Kim HM
- Park J
- Choi H
- Choi HM
- Yoon YE
- Cho GY
journal: Hypertens Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41440-023-01571-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Age-dependent implications of left ventricular hypertrophy regression in patients with hypertension.
**Authors:** Chu HW, Hwang IC, Kim HM, Park J, Choi H, Choi HM, Yoon YE, Cho GY
**Journal:** Hypertens Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41440-023-01571-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41440-023-01571-w)

## Content

1. Hypertens Res. 2024 May;47(5):1144-1156. doi: 10.1038/s41440-023-01571-w. Epub
 2024 Jan 18.

Age-dependent implications of left ventricular hypertrophy regression in 
patients with hypertension.

Chu HW(1), Hwang IC(#)(2)(3), Kim HM(#)(4), Park J(1), Choi H(1), Choi HM(1)(5), 
Yoon YE(1)(5), Cho GY(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Center, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Gyeonggi, South Korea.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Center, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Gyeonggi, South Korea. inchang.hwang@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. inchang.hwang@gmail.com.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chung-Ang University 
Hospital, Seoul, South Korea. hmkimmd@cau.ac.kr.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Hypertens Res. 2024 May;47(5):1225-1226. doi: 10.1038/s41440-024-01634-6.

Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is a significant risk factor for 
cardiovascular mortality and morbidity in patients with hypertension. However, 
the effect of age on LVH regression or persistence and its differential 
prognostic value remain unclear. Therefore, we investigated the clinical 
implications of LVH regression in 1847 patients with hypertension and 
echocardiography data (at baseline and during antihypertensive treatment at an 
interval of 6-18 months) according to age. LVH was defined as a left ventricular 
mass index (LVMI) > 115 g/m2 and >95 g/m2 in men and women, respectively. LVH 
prevalence at baseline was not different according to age (age < 65 years: 
42.6%; age ≥65 years: 45.7%; p = 0.187), but LVH regression was more frequently 
observed in the younger group (36.4% vs. 27.5%; p = 0.008). Spline curves and 
multiple linear regression analysis showed a significant relationship between 
reductions in systolic blood pressure and LVMI in the younger group (β = 0.425; 
p < 0.001), but not the elderly group (β = 0.044; p = 0.308). LVH regression was 
associated with a lower risk of the study outcome (composite of cardiovascular 
death and hospitalization for heart failure) regardless of age. In conclusion, 
the association between the reduction in blood pressure and LVH regression was 
prominent in patients with age < 65 years, but not in those with age ≥65 years. 
However, an association between LVH regression and lower risk of cardiovascular 
death and hospitalization for heart failure was observed regardless of patient 
age, suggesting the prognostic value of the LVH regression not only in the 
younger patients but also in elderly patients.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Japanese Society of 
Hypertension.

DOI: 10.1038/s41440-023-01571-w
PMID: 38238511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]