---
reference_id: "PMID:24860126"
title: "The wide spectrum of tubulinopathies: what are the key features for the diagnosis?"
authors:
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Poirier K
- Fourniol F
- Saillour Y
- Valence S
- Lebrun N
- Hully M
- Bianco CF
- Boddaert N
- Elie C
- Lascelles K
- Souville I
- LIS-Tubulinopathies Consortium
- Beldjord C
- Chelly J
journal: Brain
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awu082
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Agenesis of Corpus Callosum/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Cerebellum/abnormalities
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Developmental Disabilities/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Lissencephaly/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Microcephaly/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Nervous System Malformations/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Tubulin/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The wide spectrum of tubulinopathies: what are the key features for the diagnosis?
**Authors:** Bahi-Buisson N, Poirier K, Fourniol F, Saillour Y, Valence S, Lebrun N, Hully M, Bianco CF, Boddaert N, Elie C, Lascelles K, Souville I, LIS-Tubulinopathies Consortium, Beldjord C, Chelly J
**Journal:** Brain (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awu082](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu082)

## Content

1. Brain. 2014 Jun;137(Pt 6):1676-700. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu082.

The wide spectrum of tubulinopathies: what are the key features for the 
diagnosis?

Bahi-Buisson N(1), Poirier K(2), Fourniol F(3), Saillour Y(2), Valence S(2), 
Lebrun N(2), Hully M(4), Bianco CF(5), Boddaert N(6), Elie C(7), Lascelles K(8), 
Souville I(9); LIS-Tubulinopathies Consortium; Beldjord C(9), Chelly J(2).

Collaborators: Amiel J, Addor MC, Andrini E, Attie-Bitach T, Barth M, Blesson S, 
Burglen L, Cabasson S, Cances C, Chapon F, Curie A, Datta A, Desguerre I, Dias 
P, Doray B, Gelot A, Genevieve D, Gilbert-Dussardier B, Guimiot F, Héron B, 
Héron D, Jacquemont ML, Jossic F, Jouk PS, Laquerrie A, Lebon S, Lepage JM, 
Lhermitte B, Loget P, Loeuillet L, Marcorelles P, Milh M, Moutard ML, Parent P, 
Passemard S, Pinson L, Quelin C, des Portes V, Razavi F, Revencu N, Rio M, 
Rivier F, Rouleau C, Roume J, Tardieu M.

Author information:
(1)1 Institut Cochin, Université Paris-Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, 
France2 Inserm, U1016, Paris, France3 Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris 
Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris, France4 INSERM UMR-1163, Embryology and genetics 
of congenital malformations, Paris, France5 Service de Neurologie pédiatrique, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), hôpital Necker, Paris, France 
nadia.bahi-buisson@nck.aphp.fr.
(2)1 Institut Cochin, Université Paris-Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, 
France2 Inserm, U1016, Paris, France.
(3)6 CRUK London Research Institute, London, UK.
(4)5 Service de Neurologie pédiatrique, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris 
(AP-HP), hôpital Necker, Paris, France.
(5)7 Université de Montreal-CHU Sainte Justine, Montreal (QC), Canada.
(6)8 Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, AP-HP, hôpital Necker, Paris, France9 
Inserm, U797-INSERM-CEA, Service Hospitalier Frédéric Joliot, CEA, 4, place du 
General Leclerc, 91406, Orsay, France.
(7)10 BioInformatic Department-AP-HP, hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, 
France.
(8)11 Evelina Children's Hospital, St Thomas Hospital, London, UK.
(9)12 Service de Biologie Moleculaire et Genetique, Pavillon Cassini AP-HP, 
Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.

Complex cortical malformations associated with mutations in tubulin genes: 
TUBA1A, TUBA8, TUBB2B, TUBB3, TUBB5 and TUBG1 commonly referred to as 
tubulinopathies, are a heterogeneous group of conditions with a wide spectrum of 
clinical severity. Among the 106 patients selected as having complex cortical 
malformations, 45 were found to carry mutations in TUBA1A (42.5%), 18 in TUBB2B 
(16.9%), 11 in TUBB3 (10.4%), three in TUBB5 (2.8%), and three in TUBG1 (2.8%). 
No mutations were identified in TUBA8. Systematic review of patients' 
neuroimaging and neuropathological data allowed us to distinguish at least five 
cortical malformation syndromes: (i) microlissencephaly (n = 12); (ii) 
lissencephaly (n = 19); (iii) central pachygyria and polymicrogyria-like 
cortical dysplasia (n = 24); (iv) generalized polymicrogyria-like cortical 
dysplasia (n = 6); and (v) a 'simplified' gyral pattern with area of focal 
polymicrogyria (n = 19). Dysmorphic basal ganglia are the hallmark of 
tubulinopathies (found in 75% of cases) and are present in 100% of central 
pachygyria and polymicrogyria-like cortical dysplasia and simplified gyral 
malformation syndromes. Tubulinopathies are also characterized by a high 
prevalence of corpus callosum agenesis (32/80; 40%), and mild to severe 
cerebellar hypoplasia and dysplasia (63/80; 78.7%). Foetal cases (n = 25) 
represent the severe end of the spectrum and show specific abnormalities that 
provide insights into the underlying pathophysiology. The overall complexity of 
tubulinopathies reflects the pleiotropic effects of tubulins and their specific 
spatio-temporal profiles of expression. In line with previous reports, this 
large cohort further clarifies overlapping phenotypes between tubulinopathies 
and although current structural data do not allow prediction of mutation-related 
phenotypes, within each mutated gene there is an associated predominant pattern 
of cortical dysgenesis allowing some phenotype-genotype correlation. The core 
phenotype of TUBA1A and TUBG1 tubulinopathies are lissencephalies and 
microlissencephalies, whereas TUBB2B tubulinopathies show in the majority, 
centrally predominant polymicrogyria-like cortical dysplasia. By contrast, TUBB3 
and TUBB5 mutations cause milder malformations with focal or multifocal 
polymicrogyria-like cortical dysplasia with abnormal and simplified gyral 
pattern.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu082
PMID: 24860126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]