---
reference_id: "PMID:29167021"
title: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Li S
- Young KH
- Medeiros LJ
journal: Pathology
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.pathol.2017.09.006
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis, genetics"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Germinal Center/pathology
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Large B-Cell, Diffuse/classification, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Precision Medicine
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Li S, Young KH, Medeiros LJ
**Journal:** Pathology (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pathol.2017.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pathol.2017.09.006)

## Content

1. Pathology. 2018 Jan;50(1):74-87. doi: 10.1016/j.pathol.2017.09.006. Epub 2017 
Nov 20.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Li S(1), Young KH(1), Medeiros LJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, United States.
(2)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, United States. Electronic address: 
ljmedeiros@mdanderson.org.

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common type of non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma worldwide, representing approximately 30-40% of all cases in different 
geographic regions. Patients most often present with a rapidly growing tumour 
mass in single or multiple, nodal or extranodal sites. The most common type of 
DLBCL, designated as not otherwise specified, represents 80-85% of all cases and 
is the focus of this review. There are also rare types of lymphoma composed of 
large B-cells, in aggregate about 15-20% of all neoplasms that are sufficiently 
distinctive to recognise separately. DLBCL not otherwise specified (referred to 
henceforth as DLBCL) is a heterogeneous entity in terms of clinical 
presentation, genetic findings, response to therapy, and prognosis. A major 
advance was the application of gene expression profiling (GEP) to the study of 
DLBCL which further clarified this heterogeneity and provided a rationale for 
subdividing cases into groups. The most popular system divides cases of DLBCL 
according to cell-of-origin into germinal centre B-cell like (GCB) and activated 
B-cell like (ABC) subtypes, with about 10-15% of cases being unclassifiable. 
Patients with the GCB subtype usually have better prognosis than patients with 
the ABC subtype. Although cell-of-origin is useful for predicting outcome, the 
GCB and ABC subtypes remain heterogeneous, with better and worse prognostic 
subsets within each group. Next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis of DLBCL 
has facilitated global identification of numerous and diverse genetic 
abnormalities in these neoplasms and has shown that GCB and ABC tumours have 
different mutation profiles. Although the therapy of patients with DLBCL is an 
active area of research, the current 5-year overall survival rate is 60-70% 
using standard-of-care frontline therapy. A precision medicine approach for the 
design of new therapies based on molecular findings in DLBCL is likely the best 
path forward. As pathologists, our role has expanded beyond diagnosis. We must 
perform a complete work-up of DLBCL cases. In addition to our traditional role 
in establishing the diagnosis, we need to analyse markers that provide 
information regarding prognosis and potential therapeutic targets. We also must 
ensure that adequate tissue is triaged for molecular studies which are essential 
for designing therapy regimens, particularly in the setting of disease relapse.

Copyright © 2017 Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pathol.2017.09.006
PMID: 29167021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]