---
reference_id: "PMID:2537532"
title: The human papilloma virus-16 E7 oncoprotein is able to bind to the retinoblastoma gene product.
authors:
- Dyson N
- Howley PM
- Münger K
- Harlow E
journal: Science
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1126/science.2537532
keywords:
- Adenovirus Early Proteins
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Antigens, Polyomavirus Transforming/genetics"
- Cell Line
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Eye Neoplasms/genetics
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Oncogene Proteins, Viral/genetics, metabolism"
- Papillomaviridae/genetics
- Phosphoproteins/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- Protein Biosynthesis
- Retinoblastoma/genetics
- Retinoblastoma Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The human papilloma virus-16 E7 oncoprotein is able to bind to the retinoblastoma gene product.
**Authors:** Dyson N, Howley PM, Münger K, Harlow E
**Journal:** Science (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.2537532](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.2537532)

## Content

1. Science. 1989 Feb 17;243(4893):934-7. doi: 10.1126/science.2537532.

The human papilloma virus-16 E7 oncoprotein is able to bind to the
retinoblastoma gene product.

Dyson N(1), Howley PM, Münger K, Harlow E.

Author information:
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY 11724.

Deletions or mutations of the retinoblastoma gene, RB1, are common features of
many tumors and tumor cell lines. Recently, the RB1 gene product, p105-RB, has
been shown to form stable protein/protein complexes with the oncoproteins of two
DNA tumor viruses, the adenovirus E1A proteins and the simian virus 40 (SV40)
large T antigen. Neither of these viruses is thought to be associated with human
cancer, but they can cause tumors in rodents. Binding between the RB
anti-oncoprotein and the adenovirus or SV40 oncoprotein can be recapitulated in
vitro with coimmunoprecipitation mixing assays. These assays have been used to
demonstrate that the E7 oncoprotein of the human papilloma virus type-16 can
form similar complexes with p105-RB. Human papilloma virus-16 is found
associated with approximately 50 percent of cervical carcinomas. These results
suggest that these three DNA viruses may utilize similar mechanisms in
transformation and implicate RB binding as a possible step in human papilloma
virus-associated carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1126/science.2537532
PMID: 2537532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
