---
reference_id: "PMID:17477095"
title: "[Diabetic neuropathy]."
authors:
- Chudzik W
- Kaczorowska B
- Przybyła M
- Chudzik B
- Gałka M
journal: Pol Merkur Lekarski
year: '2007'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Diabetic neuropathy].
**Authors:** Chudzik W, Kaczorowska B, Przybyła M, Chudzik B, Gałka M
**Journal:** Pol Merkur Lekarski (2007)

## Content

1. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2007 Jan;22(127):66-9.

[Diabetic neuropathy].

[Article in Polish]

Chudzik W(1), Kaczorowska B, Przybyła M, Chudzik B, Gałka M.

Author information:
(1)Departament of Neurology and Neurorehabilitation with Stroke Unit, Clinical 
Hospital in Lódź, Poland.

Diabetic neuropathy is most common chronic complication of diabetes mellitus. It 
is responsible for substantial morbidity, increased mortality and impaired 
quality of life. Patogenesis of diabetic neuropathy is complex. Chronic 
hyperglycemia is a major factor induces nerve fibers injury. High level of 
glucose stimulate the polyol pathway causing osmotic stress and enhance reactive 
oxygen species generation, as well as it play an important role in diabetic 
angiopathy development. Distal symmetric polineuropathy is most common type of 
diabetic neuropathy. Many patient may develop combinations of neuropathies 
concerning somatic and autonomic system. Early diagnosis and administered 
suitable treatment are necessary to reduce severe complication of diabetic 
neuropathy as well as strict glycemic control and risk factor increased.

PMID: 17477095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]