---
reference_id: "PMID:26048673"
title: "HBV cccDNA: viral persistence reservoir and key obstacle for a cure of chronic hepatitis B."
authors:
- Nassal M
journal: Gut
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309809
keywords:
- Animals
- DNA Repair
- "DNA, Circular/analysis, metabolism"
- "DNA, Viral/analysis"
- Hepatitis B virus/genetics
- "Hepatitis B, Chronic/drug therapy, genetics, virology"
- Humans
- Recurrence
- Virus Replication
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HBV cccDNA: viral persistence reservoir and key obstacle for a cure of chronic hepatitis B.
**Authors:** Nassal M
**Journal:** Gut (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309809](https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309809)

## Content

1. Gut. 2015 Dec;64(12):1972-84. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309809. Epub 2015 Jun
5.

HBV cccDNA: viral persistence reservoir and key obstacle for a cure of chronic 
hepatitis B.

Nassal M.

At least 250 million people worldwide are chronically infected with HBV, a small 
hepatotropic DNA virus that replicates through reverse transcription. Chronic 
infection greatly increases the risk for terminal liver disease. Current 
therapies rarely achieve a cure due to the refractory nature of an intracellular 
viral replication intermediate termed covalently closed circular (ccc) DNA. Upon 
infection, cccDNA is generated as a plasmid-like episome in the host cell 
nucleus from the protein-linked relaxed circular (RC) DNA genome in incoming 
virions. Its fundamental role is that as template for all viral RNAs, and in 
consequence new virions. Biosynthesis of RC-DNA by reverse transcription of the 
viral pregenomic RNA is now understood in considerable detail, yet conversion of 
RC-DNA to cccDNA is still obscure, foremostly due to the lack of feasible, 
cccDNA-dependent assay systems. Conceptual and recent experimental data link 
cccDNA formation to cellular DNA repair, which is increasingly appreciated as a 
critical interface between cells and viruses. Together with new in vitro HBV 
infection systems, based on the identification of the bile acid transporter 
sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide as an HBV entry receptor, this 
offers novel opportunities to decipher, and eventually interfere with, formation 
of the HBV persistence reservoir. After a brief overview of the role of cccDNA 
in the HBV infectious cycle, this review aims to summarise current knowledge on 
cccDNA molecular biology, to highlight the experimental restrictions that have 
hitherto hampered faster progress and to discuss cccDNA as target for new, 
potentially curative therapies of chronic hepatitis B.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309809
PMID: 26048673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]