---
reference_id: "PMID:17628126"
title: Management of eating disorders.
authors:
- Berkman ND
- Bulik CM
- Brownley KA
- Lohr KN
- Sedway JA
- Rooks A
- Gartlehner G
journal: Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep)
year: '2006'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Anorexia Nervosa/therapy
- Antidepressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Bulimia Nervosa/therapy
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/drug therapy, therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Psychotherapy
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of eating disorders.
**Authors:** Berkman ND, Bulik CM, Brownley KA, Lohr KN, Sedway JA, Rooks A, Gartlehner G
**Journal:** Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep) (2006)

## Content

1. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep). 2006 Apr;(135):1-166.

Management of eating disorders.

Berkman ND, Bulik CM, Brownley KA, Lohr KN, Sedway JA, Rooks A, Gartlehner G.

OBJECTIVES: The RTI International-University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Evidence-based Practice Center (RTI-UNC EPC) systematically reviewed evidence on
efficacy of treatment for anorexia nervosa (AN), bulimia nervosa (BN), and binge
eating disorder (BED), harms associated with treatments, factors associated with
the treatment efficacy and with outcomes of these conditions, and whether
treatment and outcomes for these conditions differ by sociodemographic
characteristics.
DATA SOURCES: We searched MEDLINE, the Cumulative Index to Nursing and Applied
Health (CINAHL), PSYCHINFO, the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC),
the National Agricultural Library (AGRICOLA), and Cochrane Collaboration
libraries.
REVIEW METHODS: We reviewed each study against a priori inclusion/exclusion
criteria. For included articles, a primary reviewer abstracted data directly
into evidence tables; a second senior reviewer confirmed accuracy. We included
studies published from 1980 to September 2005, in all languages. Studies had to
involve populations diagnosed primarily with AN, BN, or BED and report on
eating, psychiatric or psychological, or biomarker outcomes.
RESULTS: We report on 30 treatment studies for AN, 47 for BN, 25 for BED, and 34
outcome studies for AN, 13 for BN, 7 addressing both AN and BN, and 3 for BED.
The AN literature on medications was sparse and inconclusive. Some forms of
family therapy are efficacious in treating adolescents. Cognitive behavioral
therapy (CBT) may reduce relapse risk for adults after weight restoration. For
BN, fluoxetine (60 mg/day) reduces core bulimic symptoms (binge eating and
purging) and associated psychological features in the short term. Individual or
group CBT decreases core behavioral symptoms and psychological features in both
the short and long term. How best to treat individuals who do not respond to CBT
or fluoxetine remains unknown. In BED, individual or group CBT reduces binge
eating and improves abstinence rates for up to 4 months after treatment;
however, CBT is not associated with weight loss. Medications may play a role in
treating BED patients. Further research addressing how best to achieve both
abstinence from binge eating and weight loss in overweight patients is needed.
Higher levels of depression and compulsivity were associated with poorer
outcomes in AN; higher mortality was associated with concurrent alcohol and
substance use disorders. Only depression was consistently associated with poorer
outcomes in BN; BN was not associated with an increased risk of death. Because
of sparse data, we could reach no conclusions concerning BED outcomes. No or
only weak evidence addresses treatment or outcomes difference for these
disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: The literature regarding treatment efficacy and outcomes for AN,
BN, and BED is of highly variable quality. In future studies, researchers must
attend to issues of statistical power, research design, standardized outcome
measures, and sophistication and appropriateness of statistical methodology.

PMCID: PMC4780981
PMID: 17628126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
