---
reference_id: "PMID:32360228"
title: The gut microbiome in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.
authors:
- Myers B
- Brownstone N
- Reddy V
- Chan S
- Thibodeaux Q
- Truong A
- Bhutani T
- Chang HW
- Liao W
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2020.101494
keywords:
- "Arthritis, Psoriatic/microbiology"
- Dysbiosis
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Humans
- Microbiota
- Psoriasis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The gut microbiome in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.
**Authors:** Myers B, Brownstone N, Reddy V, Chan S, Thibodeaux Q, Truong A, Bhutani T, Chang HW, Liao W
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.berh.2020.101494](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2020.101494)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2019 Dec;33(6):101494. doi:
10.1016/j.berh.2020.101494. Epub 2020 Apr 29.

The gut microbiome in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

Myers B(1), Brownstone N(2), Reddy V(3), Chan S(4), Thibodeaux Q(5), Truong
A(6), Bhutani T(7), Chang HW(8), Liao W(9).

Author information:
(1)University of California San Francisco Department of Dermatology, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: Bridget.myers@ucsf.edu.
(2)University of California San Francisco Department of Dermatology, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: Nicholas.brownstone@ucsf.edu.
(3)University of California San Francisco Department of Dermatology, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: Vidhatha.reddy@ucsf.edu.
(4)University of California San Francisco Department of Dermatology, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: Stephanie.chan@ucsf.edu.
(5)University of California San Francisco Department of Dermatology, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: Quinn.thibodeaux@ucsf.edu.
(6)University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Electronic address:
Alexatruong13@berkeley.edu.
(7)University of California San Francisco Department of Dermatology, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: Tina.bhutani@ucsf.edu.
(8)University of California San Francisco Department of Dermatology, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: HsinWen.Chang@ucsf.edu.
(9)University of California San Francisco Department of Dermatology, San
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: wilson.liao@ucsf.edu.

This review summarizes existing research on the gut microbiome composition and
function in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, exploring potential roles in
disease pathogenesis, progression, and management. A strong relationship between
skin, joint, and gastrointestinal inflammation exists, as demonstrated by an
increased prevalence of psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and inflammatory bowel
disease co-occurring together; however, the link between them has not been fully
elucidated. Studies analyzing the gut microbiome in psoriasis and psoriatic
arthritis reveal a unique pattern of dysbiosis. With regard to the gut
microbiome's role in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis pathogenesis, we discuss
several theories including intestinal permeability, altered immune homeostasis,
and imbalance of short- and medium-chain fatty acid-producing bacteria. We also
discuss how the gut microbiome affects patient risk of psoriatic arthritis and
other serious comorbidities, and how fecal microbes could be used clinically as
therapeutic targets or markers of disease.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.berh.2020.101494
PMID: 32360228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have none to disclose.
