---
reference_id: "PMID:32042194"
title: "The Angiosarcoma Project: enabling genomic and clinical discoveries in a rare cancer through patient-partnered research."
authors:
- Painter CA
- Jain E
- Tomson BN
- Dunphy M
- Stoddard RE
- Thomas BS
- Damon AL
- Shah S
- Kim D
- Gómez Tejeda Zañudo J
- Hornick JL
- Chen YL
- Merriam P
- Raut CP
- Demetri GD
- Van Tine BA
- Lander ES
- Golub TR
- Wagle N
journal: Nat Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-019-0749-z
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Breast Neoplasms/genetics, therapy"
- Canada
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exome
- Female
- "Genome, Human"
- Genomics
- "Hemangiosarcoma/genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Patient Participation
- Program Development
- "Rare Diseases/genetics, therapy"
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- United States
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-2/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Angiosarcoma Project: enabling genomic and clinical discoveries in a rare cancer through patient-partnered research.
**Authors:** Painter CA, Jain E, Tomson BN, Dunphy M, Stoddard RE, Thomas BS, Damon AL, Shah S, Kim D, Gómez Tejeda Zañudo J, Hornick JL, Chen YL, Merriam P, Raut CP, Demetri GD, Van Tine BA, Lander ES, Golub TR, Wagle N
**Journal:** Nat Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-019-0749-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0749-z)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2020 Feb;26(2):181-187. doi: 10.1038/s41591-019-0749-z. Epub 2020 Feb
 10.

The Angiosarcoma Project: enabling genomic and clinical discoveries in a rare 
cancer through patient-partnered research.

Painter CA(#)(1)(2), Jain E(#)(1)(2)(3), Tomson BN(#)(1)(2), Dunphy M(1)(2), 
Stoddard RE(1)(2), Thomas BS(1)(2), Damon AL(1)(2), Shah S(1)(2), Kim 
D(1)(2)(3), Gómez Tejeda Zañudo J(2)(3), Hornick JL(4), Chen YL(5), Merriam 
P(3)(6), Raut CP(6)(7), Demetri GD(3)(6)(8), Van Tine BA(9), Lander 
ES(1)(2)(10)(11), Golub TR(1)(2)(12), Wagle N(13)(14)(15)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Count Me In, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(6)Center for Sarcoma and Bone Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Ludwig Center at Harvard, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Division of Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, 
St. Louis, MO, USA.
(10)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(11)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Count Me In, Cambridge, MA, USA. nikhil_wagle@dfci.harvard.edu.
(14)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
nikhil_wagle@dfci.harvard.edu.
(15)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. nikhil_wagle@dfci.harvard.edu.
(16)Center for Cancer Genomics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA. nikhil_wagle@dfci.harvard.edu.
(17)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA. nikhil_wagle@dfci.harvard.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2020 Apr;10(4):481-482. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2020-012.

Despite rare cancers accounting for 25% of adult tumors1, they are difficult to 
study due to the low disease incidence and geographically dispersed patient 
populations, which has resulted in significant unmet clinical needs for patients 
with rare cancers. We assessed whether a patient-partnered research approach 
using online engagement can overcome these challenges, focusing on angiosarcoma, 
a sarcoma with an annual incidence of 300 cases in the United States. Here we 
describe the development of the Angiosarcoma Project (ASCproject), an initiative 
enabling US and Canadian patients to remotely share their clinical information 
and biospecimens for research. The project generates and publicly releases 
clinically annotated genomic data on tumor and germline specimens on an ongoing 
basis. Over 18 months, 338 patients registered for the ASCproject, which 
comprises a large proportion of all patients with angiosarcoma. Whole-exome 
sequencing (WES) of 47 tumors revealed recurrently mutated genes that included 
KDR, TP53, and PIK3CA. PIK3CA-activating mutations were observed predominantly 
in primary breast angiosarcoma, which suggested a therapeutic rationale. 
Angiosarcoma of the head, neck, face and scalp (HNFS) was associated with a high 
tumor mutation burden (TMB) and a dominant ultraviolet damage mutational 
signature, which suggested that for the subset of patients with angiosarcoma of 
HNFS, ultraviolet damage may be a causative factor and that immune checkpoint 
inhibition may be beneficial. Medical record review revealed that two patients 
with HNFS angiosarcoma had received off-label therapeutic use of antibody to the 
programmed death-1 protein (anti-PD-1) and had experienced exceptional 
responses, which highlights immune checkpoint inhibition as a therapeutic avenue 
for HNFS angiosarcoma. This patient-partnered approach has catalyzed an 
opportunity to discover the etiology and potential therapies for patients with 
angiosarcoma. Collectively, this proof-of-concept study demonstrates that 
empowering patients to directly participate in research can overcome barriers in 
rare diseases and can enable discoveries.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-019-0749-z
PMID: 32042194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]