---
reference_id: "PMID:40967767"
title: Two randomised controlled phase 2 studies of the oral neutrophil elastase inhibitor alvelestat in alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Wells JM
- Titlestad IL
- Tanash H
- Turner AM
- Chapman KR
- Hatipoğlu UŞ
- Goldklang MP
- "D'Armiento JM"
- Pirozzi CS
- Drummond MB
- Barjaktarevic IZ
- Chatila WM
- Devine MS
- Strange C
- Sandhaus RA
- Parkin JM
- Westfall E
- Lin VY
- Parks R
- Kuo HC
- Ekue A
- Moffitt KL
- Inshaw J
- Aban I
- Dransfield MT
- Stockley RA
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1183/13993003.01019-2025
keywords:
- Humans
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/drug therapy
- Male
- Female
- Double-Blind Method
- Middle Aged
- "Leukocyte Elastase/antagonists & inhibitors, blood"
- Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- "Administration, Oral"
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two randomised controlled phase 2 studies of the oral neutrophil elastase inhibitor alvelestat in alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Wells JM, Titlestad IL, Tanash H, Turner AM, Chapman KR, Hatipoğlu UŞ, Goldklang MP, D'Armiento JM, Pirozzi CS, Drummond MB, Barjaktarevic IZ, Chatila WM, Devine MS, Strange C, Sandhaus RA, Parkin JM, Westfall E, Lin VY, Parks R, Kuo HC, Ekue A, Moffitt KL, Inshaw J, Aban I, Dransfield MT, Stockley RA
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1183/13993003.01019-2025](https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.01019-2025)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2025 Dec 18;66(6):2501019. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01019-2025.
Print  2025 Dec.

Two randomised controlled phase 2 studies of the oral neutrophil elastase
inhibitor alvelestat in alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Wells JM(1)(2)(3), Titlestad IL(4)(5), Tanash H(6), Turner AM(7), Chapman KR(8),
Hatipoğlu UŞ(9), Goldklang MP(10), D'Armiento JM(10), Pirozzi CS(11), Drummond
MB(12), Barjaktarevic IZ(13), Chatila WM(14), Devine MS(15), Strange C(16),
Sandhaus RA(17), Parkin JM(18), Westfall E(19)(2), Lin VY(19)(2), Parks R(20),
Kuo HC(20), Ekue A(18), Moffitt KL(21), Inshaw J(22), Aban I(20), Dransfield
MT(19)(2)(3)(23), Stockley RA(24)(23).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA jmwells@uabmc.edu.
(2)UAB Lung Health Center, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)Birmingham VA Healthcare System, Department of Veterans Affairs, Birmingham,
AL, USA.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark.
(5)Odin Respiratory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Research, University
of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(7)School of Health Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(9)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(10)Department of Anesthesiology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(11)Division of Respiratory, Critical Care, and Occupational Pulmonary Medicine,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(12)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care
Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(13)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep
Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(14)Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Lewis Katz School of Medicine,
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(15)UT Health Science Center Tyler, Tyler, TX, USA.
(16)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(17)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep
Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(18)Mereo BioPharma Group plc, London, UK.
(19)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(20)School of Public Health, Department of Biostatistics, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(21)ProAxsis Ltd, Belfast, UK.
(22)Exploristics Ltd, Belfast, UK.
(23)These authors contributed equally.
(24)University of Birmingham Research Laboratories, Queen Elizabeth Hospital
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2025 Dec 18;66(6):2502003. doi: 10.1183/13993003.02003-2025.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a genetic disorder that
causes emphysema from lack of the alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) serpin antiprotease,
leading to protease-antiprotease imbalance. Weekly intravenous AAT therapy
(augmentation) is the only specific treatment available. Alvelestat is an oral
inhibitor of neutrophil elastase (NE) in development as a novel approach to AATD
therapy. Here, we tested the safety and mechanistic efficacy of alvelestat in
severe AATD.
METHODS: We conducted two complementary, double-blind, randomised,
placebo-controlled, 12-week trials, incorporating two doses of alvelestat in
AATD. ATALANTa investigated 120 mg twice daily, including a subset of
participants also receiving augmentation; ASTRAEUS tested 120 and 240 mg twice
daily without augmentation. Primary and secondary end-points were the change in
blood NE (the putative target) and its activity in AATD (Aα-Val360 and
desmosine/isodesmosine) as well as safety and tolerability.
RESULTS: We enrolled 161 participants (63 in ATALANTa and 98 in ASTRAEUS). Blood
NE was significantly suppressed in both studies at both doses, with the greatest
effect (>90% suppression) at alvelestat 240 mg twice daily. There was no effect
of alvelestat 120 mg on disease activity biomarkers, while 240 mg demonstrated
significant reduction in Aα-Val360 and desmosine. The most common adverse event
was headache, particularly at the 240 mg dose. No safety signals of concern were
detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Alvelestat effectively suppressed NE and its activity at both
doses, but only the 240 mg twice-daily dose demonstrated relevant efficacy
compared to placebo on disease activity biomarkers with a favourable safety
profile. These findings support progression of the 240 mg twice-daily dose into
a clinical end-point study.

Copyright ©The authors 2025.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.01019-2025
PMCID: PMC12713387
PMID: 40967767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: J.M. Wells reports support
for the present study from NIH/NCATS and Mereo BioPharma plc, grants from
NIH/NHLBI, Department of Veteran Affairs, ARCUS-Med, Medscape, Verona Pharma,
Grifols, Alpha-1 Foundation, Inhibrx and American Lung Association, patents
planned, issued or pending with Mereo BioPharma (PCT/GB2021/050658),
participation on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board with
AstraZeneca, Takeda, GSK, Bavarian Nordic, Krystal Biotech, Sanofi and Verona
Pharma, stock or stock options with Alveolus Bio, and support for medical
writing from Takeda, GSK and Verona Pharma. A.M. Turner reports grants from CSL
Behring, Grifols, Vertex, Takeda, GSK and Chiesi, consultancy fees from CSL
Behring, AstraZeneca, Beam and AiRNA, payment or honoraria for lectures,
presentations, manuscript writing or educational events from GSK, AstraZeneca
and Takeda, and support for attending meetings from Grifols and CSL Behring.
K.R. Chapman reports support for the present study from Mereo BioPharma, grants
from Sanofi, GSK, Insmed, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bellus, Grifols,
Inhibrx, Novartis, Regeneron, Takeda and Vertex, consultancy fees from Amgen,
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, CSL Behring, GSK, Grifols, Inhibrx, Kamada,
Merck, Frosst, Novartis, Regeneron, Roche, Sanofi, Takeda and Valeo, payment or
honoraria for lectures, presentations, manuscript writing or educational events
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Grifols, GSK, Merck Frosst, Novartis,
Regeneron, Sanofi and Valeo, and a leadership role with AlphaNet Canada. U.Ş.
Hatipoğlu reports royalties or licences from UpToDate and consultancy fees from
CITI Pharma. M.P. Goldklang reports grants from Mereo, Takeda, Arrowhead, Vertex
and Inhibrx, consultancy fees from Sanofi, GSK and Bridge Bio, and participation
on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board with Korro Bio, Inhibrx and
Takeda. J.M. D'Armiento reports grants from Mereo, Takeda, Arrowhead, Vertex and
Inhibrx, consultancy fees from Sanofi and Bridge Bio, and participation on a
data safety monitoring board or advisory board with Sanofi and Takeda. C.S.
Pirozzi reports support for the present study from ATALANTa, grants from NIH,
Alpha-1 Foundation, Inhibrx Inc, Vertex and AstraZeneca, consultancy fees from
Takeda, and payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, manuscript writing
or educational events from Medscape, AKH Inc., Academy for Continued Healthcare
Learning (ACHL), Medscape Education, Cleveland Clinic and Alpha-1 Foundation.
M.B. Drummond reports support for the present study from NIH, grants from PCORI,
Vertex Pharma, Teva Pharmaceuticals, American Lung Association, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Midmark and NIH/NHLBI, consultancy fees from AstraZeneca, Verona,
Takeda, Becker Pharma, GSK, Stratos, Genentech and Amgen, participation on a
data safety monitoring board or advisory board with Chiesi and NIH, and
leadership roles with the COPD Foundation Medical and Scientific Advisory Board
and Alpha-1 Foundation Medical and Scientific Advisory Board. I.Z. Barjaktarevic
reports grants from Theravance, Viatris, Aerogen, Alpha-1 Foundation, Johnny
Carson's Foundation, Takeda and Amgen, consultancy fees from AstraZeneca,
Sanofi/Regeneron, Grifols, Verona Pharma, Inhibrx, Takeda, Genentech, Aerogen,
Theravance and Viatris, and payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations,
manuscript writing or educational events from AstraZeneca, Sanofi/Regeneron,
Grifols, Verona Pharma, Inhibrx, Takeda, Genentech, Aerogen, Theravance and
Viatris. W.M. Chatila reports support for the present study from the ATALANTa
trial and grants from NIH UG3/UH3 TR002450. C. Strange reports grants from
NIH/NHLBI UG3 TR002450 and Mereo BioPharma 4 Ltd, and a leadership role with
AlphaNet. R.A. Sandhaus reports funding for the present study from NIH, grants
from Inhibrx/Sanofi, NIH and Alpha-1 Foundation, consultancy fees from Grifols,
CSL Behring, Takeda, Korobio, Beam, Wave and Biomarin, support for meetings from
AlphaNet, a patent pending for analysis of chest CTs with National Jewish
Health, participation on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board with
Takeda and Beam, and leadership roles with Alpha-1 Foundation and AlphaNet. J.M.
Parkin reports support for the present study from Mereo BioPharma Group plc,
Alpha-1 Foundation (The Alpha-1 Project), Acadustri Ltd UK, NIH (NCATS), Syneos
Contract Research Organization, ProAxsis, University of Birmingham at Alabama,
University of Birmingham UK, University of Dundee and Exploristics, patents
planned, issued or pending (method of treatment using alvelestat in combination
with alpha-1 antitrypsin augmentation therapy) with Mereo BioPharma 4 Ltd and
University of Alabama at Birmingham, participation on a data safety monitoring
board or advisory board with ASTRAEUS, and stock (or stock options) with Mereo
BioPharma Group plc. V.Y. Lin reports support for the present study from NIH
(NCATS). A. Ekue reports support for the present study from Mereo BioPharma and
stock (or stock options) as an employee of Mereo BioPharma. K.L. Moffitt reports
support for the present study from ProAxsis Ltd. J. Inshaw is an employee of
Exploristics, a for-profit company providing statistical consultancy for Mereo
and assistance in manuscript review. I. Aban reports grants from Myasthenia
Gravis Foundation of America, Ra/UCB Pharmaceutical, Alexion, Argenx, Catalyst
and Verona Pharmaceutical, consultancy fees from Roche, and participation on a
data safety monitoring board or advisory board with NIH and Cleveland Clinic.
M.T. Dransfield reports support for the present study from NIH, grants from
Department of Defense, American Lung Association and NIH, royalties or licences
from UpToDate, consultancy fees from Aer Therapeutics, Apreo, AstraZeneca,
Genentech, GSK, Novartis, Pulmonx and Teva, support for attending meetings from
GSK, and a leadership role with the COPD Foundation. R.A. Stockley reports
grants from CSL Behring and Mereo BioPharma, consultancy fees from Mereo
BioPharma, CSL Behring, Vertex and Grifols, payment or honoraria for lectures,
presentations, manuscript writing or educational events from GSK, participation
on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board with Kamada and Aramata, and
a leadership role with GOLD Scientific Committee. The remaining authors have no
potential conflicts of interest to disclose.
