---
reference_id: "PMID:1497954"
title: "Pathogenesis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy: the calcium hypothesis revisited."
authors:
- Tay JS
- Lai PS
- Low PS
- Lee WL
- Gan GC
journal: J Paediatr Child Health
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1754.1992.tb02669.x
keywords:
- Calcium/metabolism
- Dystrophin/metabolism
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- Molecular Biology
- Muscles/physiopathology
- "Muscular Dystrophies/etiology, genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy: the calcium hypothesis revisited.
**Authors:** Tay JS, Lai PS, Low PS, Lee WL, Gan GC
**Journal:** J Paediatr Child Health (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1440-1754.1992.tb02669.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1754.1992.tb02669.x)

## Content

1. J Paediatr Child Health. 1992 Aug;28(4):291-3. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1754.1992.tb02669.x.

Pathogenesis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy: the calcium hypothesis revisited.

Tay JS(1), Lai PS, Low PS, Lee WL, Gan GC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, National University of Singapore.

Rapid advances in the molecular genetics of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD)
and the discovery and localization of the gene product dystrophin has brought
new hope that successful treatment for this disease may not be too far away.
Dystrophin has been postulated to have a mechanical function, helping to resist
stress associated with muscle contraction. The presence of dystrophin in low
concentrations in muscle cells, its expression in nervous tissue and the
observation that hypercontraction of the sarcomeres precedes membrane rupture
make the hypothesis unlikely. On the basis of an analogy with a cytoskeletal
protein ankyrin, which is associated with the sodium/potassium adenosine
triphosphatase (ATPase) in the kidney, it is possible that dystrophin deficiency
leads initially to an increased but inefficient calcium-ATPase activity, which
pumps calcium out of the cell. Partial failure of the pump would result in
intracellular accumulation of calcium, hypercontractions of the sarcomeres,
rupture of the cell membrane, massive influx of calcium and cell necrosis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1754.1992.tb02669.x
PMID: 1497954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
