---
reference_id: "PMID:33744078"
title: Clinical features of psoriatic arthritis.
authors:
- Kishimoto M
- Deshpande GA
- Fukuoka K
- Kawakami T
- Ikegaya N
- Kawashima S
- Komagata Y
- Kaname S
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2021.101670
keywords:
- "Arthritis, Psoriatic/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Comorbidity
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Quality of Life
- Sacroiliac Joint
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features of psoriatic arthritis.
**Authors:** Kishimoto M, Deshpande GA, Fukuoka K, Kawakami T, Ikegaya N, Kawashima S, Komagata Y, Kaname S
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.berh.2021.101670](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2021.101670)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2021 Jun;35(2):101670. doi:
10.1016/j.berh.2021.101670. Epub 2021 Mar 17.

Clinical features of psoriatic arthritis.

Kishimoto M(1), Deshpande GA(2), Fukuoka K(3), Kawakami T(3), Ikegaya N(3),
Kawashima S(3), Komagata Y(3), Kaname S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Kyorin University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: kishimotomi@gmail.com.
(2)Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Kyorin University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is associated with decreased quality of life. As
delayed diagnosis may lead to progressive joint destruction and long-term
disability, the key clinical features of PsA should be recognizable to a wide
range of clinicians to facilitate early diagnosis. In addition to assessment and
identification of skin and nail lesions, which occur in up to 85% of those with
musculoskeletal manifestations, clinicians should be aware of both the
peripheral and axial manifestations of musculoskeletal disease reviewed here.
Peripheral joint diseases include polyarticular, oligoarticular, distal, and
arthritis mutilans subtypes, and cognizance of these patterns of disease, as
well as periarticular manifestations, including dactylitis and enthesitis, is
useful for swift diagnosis of PsA. Axial psoriatic arthritis (axial PsA), also
known as the spondylitis subtype, may be limited to the spine and sacroiliac
joints, but may also affect peripheral structures. Meticulous history-taking and
physical examination and familiarity with appropriate imaging studies are often
necessary to distinguish axial-PsA from other differential diagnoses. Swift
diagnosis and treatment are necessary to both control PsA disease and mitigate
the risks of the many associate comorbidities that may accompany it.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.berh.2021.101670
PMID: 33744078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest MK: consulting
fees and/or honoraria from AbbVie, Amgen-Astellas BioPharma, Asahi-Kasei Pharma,
Astellas, Ayumi Pharma, BMS, Chugai, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Gilead,
Janssen, Kyowa Kirin, Novartis, Ono Pharma, Pfizer, Tanabe-Mitsubishi, Teijin
Pharma, and UCB Pharma. GD, KF, TK, NI, SK, YK, and SK: No conflict of interest.
