---
reference_id: "PMID:38702196"
title: Neuron-specific chromatin disruption at CpG islands and aging-related regions in Kabuki syndrome mice.
authors:
- Boukas L
- Luperchio TR
- Razi A
- Hansen KD
- Bjornsson HT
journal: Genome Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1101/gr.278416.123
keywords:
- Animals
- "Hematologic Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Face/abnormalities
- "Chromatin/metabolism, genetics"
- Vestibular Diseases/genetics
- CpG Islands
- Neurons/metabolism
- Aging/genetics
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- T-Lymphocytes/metabolism
- B-Lymphocytes/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuron-specific chromatin disruption at CpG islands and aging-related regions in Kabuki syndrome mice.
**Authors:** Boukas L, Luperchio TR, Razi A, Hansen KD, Bjornsson HT
**Journal:** Genome Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gr.278416.123](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.278416.123)

## Content

1. Genome Res. 2024 Jun 25;34(5):696-710. doi: 10.1101/gr.278416.123.

Neuron-specific chromatin disruption at CpG islands and aging-related regions in 
Kabuki syndrome mice.

Boukas L(#)(1)(2)(3), Luperchio TR(#)(2), Razi A(2), Hansen KD(4)(3)(5), 
Bjornsson HT(4)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC 20010, 
USA.
(2)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
(4)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA; khansen@jhsph.edu hbjorns1@jhmi.edu.
(5)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, 101 Reykjavík, Iceland.
(8)Landspitali University Hospital, 101 Reykjavík, Iceland.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Aug 03:2023.08.01.551456. doi: 10.1101/2023.08.01.551456.

Many Mendelian developmental disorders caused by coding variants in epigenetic 
regulators have now been discovered. Epigenetic regulators are broadly 
expressed, and each of these disorders typically shows phenotypic manifestations 
from many different organ systems. An open question is whether the chromatin 
disruption-the root of the pathogenesis-is similar in the different 
disease-relevant cell types. This is possible in principle, because all these 
cell types are subject to effects from the same causative gene, which has the 
same kind of function (e.g., methylates histones) and is disrupted by the same 
germline variant. We focus on mouse models for Kabuki syndrome types 1 and 2 and 
find that the chromatin accessibility changes in neurons are mostly distinct 
from changes in B or T cells. This is not because the neuronal accessibility 
changes occur at regulatory elements that are only active in neurons. Neurons, 
but not B or T cells, show preferential chromatin disruption at CpG islands and 
at regulatory elements linked to aging. A sensitive analysis reveals that 
regulatory elements disrupted in B/T cells do show chromatin accessibility 
changes in neurons, but these are very subtle and of uncertain functional 
significance. Finally, we are able to identify a small set of regulatory 
elements disrupted in all three cell types. Our findings reveal the 
cellular-context-specific effect of variants in epigenetic regulators and 
suggest that blood-derived episignatures, although useful diagnostically, may 
not be well suited for understanding the mechanistic basis of neurodevelopment 
in Mendelian disorders of the epigenetic machinery.

© 2024 Boukas et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.278416.123
PMCID: PMC11216309
PMID: 38702196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]