---
reference_id: "PMID:28202022"
title: Hematologic manifestations of babesiosis.
authors:
- Akel T
- Mobarakai N
journal: Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s12941-017-0179-z
keywords:
- Aged
- "Anemia, Hemolytic/parasitology, physiopathology"
- "Babesia/isolation & purification, pathogenicity"
- "Babesiosis/diagnosis, immunology, parasitology, physiopathology"
- Bone Marrow/parasitology
- Erythrocytes/parasitology
- Female
- "Fever/parasitology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Immunocompetence
- "Neutropenia/parasitology, physiopathology"
- New York City
- "Thrombocytopenia/parasitology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematologic manifestations of babesiosis.
**Authors:** Akel T, Mobarakai N
**Journal:** Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12941-017-0179-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12941-017-0179-z)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob. 2017 Feb 15;16(1):6. doi:
10.1186/s12941-017-0179-z.

Hematologic manifestations of babesiosis.

Akel T(1), Mobarakai N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Staten Island University Hospital, 475
Seaview Avenue, Staten Island, NY, 10305, USA. tamer.akel.88@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Staten Island University Hospital, 475
Seaview Avenue, Staten Island, NY, 10305, USA.

BACKGROUND: Babesiosis, a zoonotic parasitic infection transmitted by the Ixodes
tick, has become an emerging health problem in humans that is attracting
attention worldwide. Most cases of human babesiosis are reported in the United
States and Europe. The disease is caused by the protozoa of the genus Babesia,
which invade human erythrocytes and lyse them causing a febrile hemolytic
anemia. The infection is usually asymptomatic or self-limited in the
immunocompetent host, or follows a persistent, relapsing, and/or life
threatening course with multi-organ failure, mainly in the splenectomized or
immunosuppressed patients. Hematologic manifestations of the disease are common.
They can range from mild anemia, to severe pancytopenia, splenic rupture,
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC), or even hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH).
CASE PRESENTATION: A 70 year old immunocompetent female patient living in New
York City presented with a persistent fever, night sweats, and fatigue of 5 days
duration. Full evaluation showed a febrile hemolytic anemia along with
neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. Blood smear revealed intraerythrocytic
Babesia, which was confirmed by PCR. Bone marrow biopsy was remarkable for
dyserythropoiesis, suggesting possible HLH, supported by other blood workup
meeting HLH-2004 trial criteria.
CONCLUSION: Human babesiosis is an increasing healthcare problem in the United
States that is being diagnosed more often nowadays. We presented a case of HLH
triggered by Babesia microti that was treated successfully. Also, we presented
the hematologic manifestations of this disease along with their
pathophysiologies.

DOI: 10.1186/s12941-017-0179-z
PMCID: PMC5310009
PMID: 28202022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
