---
reference_id: "PMID:35191783"
title: "When and Why People Prefer Higher Educated Politicians: Ingroup Bias, Deference, and Resistance."
authors:
- van Noord J
- Kuppens T
- Spruyt B
- Spears R
journal: Pers Soc Psychol Bull
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/01461672221077794
keywords:
- Humans
- Politics
- Educational Status
- Choice Behavior
content_type: abstract_only
---

# When and Why People Prefer Higher Educated Politicians: Ingroup Bias, Deference, and Resistance.
**Authors:** van Noord J, Kuppens T, Spruyt B, Spears R
**Journal:** Pers Soc Psychol Bull (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/01461672221077794](https://doi.org/10.1177/01461672221077794)

## Content

1. Pers Soc Psychol Bull. 2023 Apr;49(4):585-599. doi: 10.1177/01461672221077794.
 Epub 2022 Feb 22.

When and Why People Prefer Higher Educated Politicians: Ingroup Bias, Deference, 
and Resistance.

van Noord J(1), Kuppens T(1), Spruyt B(2), Spears R(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium.

When choosing between political candidates of different educational levels, do 
voters show ingroup bias or base their vote choice on candidates' perceived 
competence? We aim to investigate how (fictional) political candidates of 
different educational levels are evaluated and voted for, how this is affected 
by voters' educational level, and the role of perceived (Study 1) and 
manipulated competence (Study 2). Higher educated participants preferred higher 
to less educated candidates over and above their level of competence, 
particularly when they identified strongly with their educational level. This 
reflects ingroup bias among the higher educated. Less educated participants 
preferred higher educated candidates in Study 1, but did not prefer higher 
educated candidates when competence was manipulated independently from education 
in Study 2. The less educated, unlike the higher educated, therefore, seem to 
show deference to the assumed competence of the higher educated, because it 
disappears when more reliable competence information is available.

DOI: 10.1177/01461672221077794
PMCID: PMC9989228
PMID: 35191783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.