---
reference_id: "PMID:35414440"
title: "Malignant Hyperthermia: A Killer If Ignored."
authors:
- Bin X
- Wang B
- Tang Z
journal: J Perianesth Nurs
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jopan.2021.08.018
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Caffeine
- China
- Halothane
- Humans
- "Malignant Hyperthermia/genetics, therapy"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant Hyperthermia: A Killer If Ignored.
**Authors:** Bin X, Wang B, Tang Z
**Journal:** J Perianesth Nurs (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jopan.2021.08.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jopan.2021.08.018)

## Content

1. J Perianesth Nurs. 2022 Aug;37(4):435-444. doi: 10.1016/j.jopan.2021.08.018. 
Epub 2022 Apr 10.

Malignant Hyperthermia: A Killer If Ignored.

Bin X(1), Wang B(2), Tang Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Department, Xiangya School of Stomatology, 
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Department, Xiangya Stomatology Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. Electronic address: 
victorwbs@163.com.
(3)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Department, Xiangya Stomatology Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. Electronic address: 
tangzhangui@aliyun.com.

Malignant hypothermia (MH) is a potentially fatal hypermetabolic reaction of 
skeletal muscle. It is an autosomal dominant disorder that generally occurs in 
people with RYR1, CACNA1S, or STAC3 mutations. And these genetic abnormalities 
often cause the imperfection of calcium release channels of skeletal muscle. The 
incidence of MH among different racial groups across the world ranges from 
approximately 1:5,000-1:250,000, but there is no national statistic MH incidence 
in China. It is not clear whether there are racial or regional differences in 
the incidence, but patients under 18 years old may be more affected. MH can be 
triggered by anesthetics, or other stimuli, such as strenuous exercise, 
heat-stroke, and emotional stress. While viral infection, statins, 
hyperglycemia, and muscle metabolic dysfunctions might accelerate the onset of 
MH. The onset of MH is insidious and rapid, with the preclinical stage 
characterized by rigidity of the masseter muscle, a high level of end-tidal 
carbon dioxide, and a sharp and persistent increase in body temperature. Medical 
history, family history, clinical presentation, in vitro caffeine-halothane 
contracture testing (IVCT/CHCT) and genetic testing are commonly diagnostic 
methods of MH. As soon as the onset of MH is suspected, immediate cessation of 
exposure to stimuli, call for professional support, and access to dantrolene are 
the highest priorities. For symptomatic treatment, "5C principles" were 
summarized as an algorithm to guide clinicians.

Copyright © 2021 American Society of PeriAnesthesia Nurses. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jopan.2021.08.018
PMID: 35414440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]