---
reference_id: "PMID:19961542"
title: "Multidrug efflux pumps: drug binding--gates or cavity?"
authors:
- Crowley E
- Callaghan R
journal: FEBS J
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07484.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multidrug efflux pumps: drug binding--gates or cavity?
**Authors:** Crowley E, Callaghan R
**Journal:** FEBS J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07484.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07484.x)

## Content

1. FEBS J. 2010 Feb;277(3):530-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07484.x. Epub
2009  Dec 3.

Multidrug efflux pumps: drug binding--gates or cavity?

Crowley E(1), Callaghan R.

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.

The role of the ATP-binding cassette ABCB1 in mediating the resistance to 
chemotherapy in many forms of cancer has been well established. The protein is 
also endogenously expressed in numerous barrier and excretory tissues, thereby 
regulating or impacting on drug pharmacokinetic profiles. Given these prominent 
roles in health and disease, a great deal of biochemical, structural and 
pharmacological research has been directed towards modulating its activity. 
Despite the effort, only a small handful of compounds have reached the later 
stages of clinical trials. What is responsible for this poor return on the heavy 
research investment? Perhaps the most significant factor is the lack of 
information on the location, physical features and chemical properties of the 
drug-binding site(s) in ABCB1. This minireview outlines the various strategies 
and outcomes of research efforts to pin-point the sites of interaction. The data 
may be assimilated into two working hypotheses to describe drug binding to 
ABCB1; (a) the central cavity and the (b) domain interface models.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07484.x
PMID: 19961542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]