---
reference_id: "PMID:36196047"
title: Epidemiology of inherited epidermolysis bullosa in Germany.
authors:
- Has C
- Hess M
- Anemüller W
- Blume-Peytavi U
- Emmert S
- Fölster-Holst R
- Frank J
- Giehl K
- Günther C
- Hammersen J
- Hillmann K
- Höflein B
- Hoeger PH
- Hotz A
- Mai TA
- Oji V
- Schneider H
- Süßmuth K
- Tantcheva-Póor I
- Thielking F
- Zirn B
- Fischer J
- Reimer-Taschenbrecker A
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.18637
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Humans
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Quality of Life
- Epidermolysis Bullosa/epidemiology
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa, Junctional"
- Skin
- Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica/genetics
- Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of inherited epidermolysis bullosa in Germany.
**Authors:** Has C, Hess M, Anemüller W, Blume-Peytavi U, Emmert S, Fölster-Holst R, Frank J, Giehl K, Günther C, Hammersen J, Hillmann K, Höflein B, Hoeger PH, Hotz A, Mai TA, Oji V, Schneider H, Süßmuth K, Tantcheva-Póor I, Thielking F, Zirn B, Fischer J, Reimer-Taschenbrecker A
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.18637](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.18637)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2023 Feb;37(2):402-410. doi: 10.1111/jdv.18637. 
Epub 2022 Nov 1.

Epidemiology of inherited epidermolysis bullosa in Germany.

Has C(1), Hess M(2), Anemüller W(3), Blume-Peytavi U(4), Emmert S(5), 
Fölster-Holst R(6), Frank J(7), Giehl K(8), Günther C(9), Hammersen J(10), 
Hillmann K(4), Höflein B(11), Hoeger PH(12), Hotz A(13), Mai TA(12), Oji V(14), 
Schneider H(10), Süßmuth K(14), Tantcheva-Póor I(15), Thielking F(6), Zirn 
B(16), Fischer J(13), Reimer-Taschenbrecker A(1)(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical Faculty and Medical Center, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Medical Faculty and Medical Center, Institute of Medical Biometry and 
Statistics, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Clinic and Policlinic for Dermatology and Venereology, University Medical 
Center Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University Hospital 
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University Hospital 
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(8)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University of Munich LMU, Munich, 
Germany.
(9)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital, Technical University Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, 
Germany.
(11)"Interessengemeinschaft Epidermolysis bullosa (IEB) e.V. Debra Deutschland", 
Biedenkopf, Germany.
(12)Fachbereich Pädiatrie und Pädiatrische Dermatologie/Allergologie, 
Katholisches Kinderkrankenhaus Wilhelmstift, Hamburg, Germany.
(13)Medical Faculty and Medical Center, Institute of Human Genetics, University 
of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(14)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(15)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(16)Genetikum® Stuttgart, Genetic Counselling and Diagnostics, Stuttgart, 
Germany.
(17)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

BACKGROUND: Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a rare genetic disorder manifesting 
with skin and mucosal membrane blistering in different degrees of severity.
OBJECTIVE: Epidemiological data from different countries have been published, 
but none are available from Germany.
METHODS: In this population-based cross-sectional study, people living with EB 
in Germany were identified using the following sources: academic hospitals, 
diagnostic laboratories and patient organization.
RESULTS: Our study indicates an overall EB incidence of 45 per million live 
births in Germany. With 14.23 per million live births for junctional EB, the 
incidence is higher than in other countries, possibly reflecting the 
availability of early molecular genetic diagnostics in severely affected 
neonates. Dystrophic EB was assessed at 15.58 cases per million live births. The 
relatively low incidence found for EB simplex, 14.93 per million live births, 
could be explained by late or missed diagnosis, but also by 33% of cases 
remaining not otherwise specified. Using log-linear models, we estimated a 
prevalence of 54 per million for all EB types, 2.44 for junctional EB, 12.16 for 
dystrophic EB and 28.44 per million for EB simplex. These figures are comparable 
to previously reported data from other countries.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, there are at least 2000 patients with EB in the German 
population. These results should support national policies and pharmaceutical 
companies in decision-making, allow more precise planning of drug development 
and clinical trials, and aid patient advocacy groups in their effort to improve 
quality of life of people with this orphan disease.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of 
Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.18637
PMID: 36196047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]