---
reference_id: "PMID:28680502"
title: "Pathophysiology and Diagnosis of Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency: A Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Lima Neto AC
- Bittar R
- Gattas GS
- Bor-Seng-Shu E
- Oliveira ML
- Monsanto RDC
- Bittar LF
journal: Int Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1055/s-0036-1593448
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology and Diagnosis of Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency: A Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Lima Neto AC, Bittar R, Gattas GS, Bor-Seng-Shu E, Oliveira ML, Monsanto RDC, Bittar LF
**Journal:** Int Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0036-1593448](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0036-1593448)

## Content

1. Int Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2017 Jul;21(3):302-307. doi:
10.1055/s-0036-1593448.  Epub 2016 Oct 26.

Pathophysiology and Diagnosis of Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency: A Review of the 
Literature.

Lima Neto AC(1)(2), Bittar R(2), Gattas GS(3), Bor-Seng-Shu E(4), Oliveira 
ML(4), Monsanto RDC(1), Bittar LF(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Banco de Olhos de Sorocaba Hospital, Sorocaba, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Otoneurology, School of Medicine, Universidade de São Paulo 
(USP), São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Radiology, School of Medicine, USP, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, USP, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Department of Engineering, School of Engineering, USP, São Paulo, Brazil.

Introduction  Vertebrobasilar insufficiency is defined as transitory ischemia of 
the vertebrobasilar circulation. Dizziness, vertigo, headaches, vomit, diplopia, 
blindness, ataxia, imbalance, and weakness in both sides of the body are the 
most common symptoms. Objective  To review the literature regarding the three 
available diagnostic testing in patients with dizziness complaints secondary to 
vertebrobasilar insufficiency (VBI): magnetic resonance angiography; 
transcranial Doppler ultrasound; and vertebrobasilar deprivation testing. Data 
Synthesis  We selected 28 studies that complied with our selection criteria for 
appraisal. The most frequent cause of the hemodynamic changes leading to VBI is 
atherosclerosis. The main clinical symptoms are dizziness, vertigo, headaches, 
vomit, diplopia, blindness, ataxia, imbalance, and weakness in both sides of the 
body. Even though arteriography is considered the most important exam to 
diagnose the disease, the inherent risks of this exam should be taken into 
consideration. The magnetic resonance angiography has been widely studied and is 
a good method to identify and localize any occlusions and stenosis in both neck 
and intracranial great vessels. Conclusion  Each patient with a suspected 
diagnosis of VBI should be individually evaluated and treated, taking in 
consideration the pros and cons of each diagnostic testing and treatment option.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0036-1593448
PMCID: PMC5495592
PMID: 28680502