---
reference_id: "PMID:17676033"
title: Dominant-negative mutations in the DNA-binding domain of STAT3 cause hyper-IgE syndrome.
authors:
- Minegishi Y
- Saito M
- Tsuchiya S
- Tsuge I
- Takada H
- Hara T
- Kawamura N
- Ariga T
- Pasic S
- Stojkovic O
- Metin A
- Karasuyama H
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/nature06096
keywords:
- Alleles
- Base Sequence
- Binding Sites
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cytokines/pharmacology
- DNA/metabolism
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin E/biosynthesis, immunology"
- Immunoglobulin M/metabolism
- Interferon-alpha/pharmacology
- Interleukin-10/pharmacology
- Interleukin-6/pharmacology
- Mutation/genetics
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "STAT3 Transcription Factor/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Syndrome
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dominant-negative mutations in the DNA-binding domain of STAT3 cause hyper-IgE syndrome.
**Authors:** Minegishi Y, Saito M, Tsuchiya S, Tsuge I, Takada H, Hara T, Kawamura N, Ariga T, Pasic S, Stojkovic O, Metin A, Karasuyama H
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature06096](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06096)

## Content

1. Nature. 2007 Aug 30;448(7157):1058-62. doi: 10.1038/nature06096. Epub 2007 Aug
 5.

Dominant-negative mutations in the DNA-binding domain of STAT3 cause hyper-IgE 
syndrome.

Minegishi Y(1), Saito M, Tsuchiya S, Tsuge I, Takada H, Hara T, Kawamura N, 
Ariga T, Pasic S, Stojkovic O, Metin A, Karasuyama H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immune Regulation, Tokyo Medical and Dental University Graduate 
School, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan. yminegishi.mbch@tmd.ac.jp

Hyper-immunoglobulin E syndrome (HIES) is a compound primary immunodeficiency 
characterized by a highly elevated serum IgE, recurrent staphylococcal skin 
abscesses and cyst-forming pneumonia, with disproportionately milder 
inflammatory responses, referred to as cold abscesses, and skeletal 
abnormalities. Although some cases of familial HIES with autosomal dominant or 
recessive inheritance have been reported, most cases of HIES are sporadic, and 
their pathogenesis has remained mysterious for a long time. Here we show that 
dominant-negative mutations in the human signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3 (STAT3) gene result in the classical multisystem HIES. We found 
that eight out of fifteen unrelated non-familial HIES patients had heterozygous 
STAT3 mutations, but their parents and siblings did not have the mutant STAT3 
alleles, suggesting that these were de novo mutations. Five different mutations 
were found, all of which were located in the STAT3 DNA-binding domain. The 
patients' peripheral blood cells showed defective responses to cytokines, 
including interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-10, and the DNA-binding ability of STAT3 in 
these cells was greatly diminished. All five mutants were non-functional by 
themselves and showed dominant-negative effects when co-expressed with wild-type 
STAT3. These results highlight the multiple roles played by STAT3 in humans, and 
underline the critical involvement of multiple cytokine pathways in the 
pathogenesis of HIES.

DOI: 10.1038/nature06096
PMID: 17676033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]