---
reference_id: "PMID:35634796"
title: "Prevalence of highly actionable mutations among Indian patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Raman R
- Ramamohan V
- Rathore A
- Jain D
- Mohan A
- Vashistha V
journal: Asia Pac J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/ajco.13802
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- Prevalence
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Mutation
- Adenocarcinoma/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of highly actionable mutations among Indian patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Raman R, Ramamohan V, Rathore A, Jain D, Mohan A, Vashistha V
**Journal:** Asia Pac J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ajco.13802](https://doi.org/10.1111/ajco.13802)

## Content

1. Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2023 Feb;19(1):158-171. doi: 10.1111/ajco.13802. Epub
2022 May 30.

Prevalence of highly actionable mutations among Indian patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Raman R(1)(2), Ramamohan V(3), Rathore A(1)(2), Jain D(4), Mohan A(5), Vashistha
V(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Excellence for Biopharmaceutical Technology, Indian Institute of
Technology, Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi,
India.
(3)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi,
India.
(4)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
India.
(5)Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, All Indian
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(6)Section of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, New Mexico
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.
(7)University of New Mexico Cancer Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains a leading cause of
cancer-related mortality in India. To clarify rates of actionable mutations, and
thereby identify opportunities to improve the delivery of best available care
for a large volume of patients, a comprehensive review of available data is
warranted.
METHODS: Studies that reported prevalence of any actionable gene variant among
adult Indian patients with advanced NSCLC were selected from three databases
(PubMed, EMBASE, and Cochrane Library). Ranges in actionable variant prevalence
were reported. Meta-analysis of proportions was completed among studies
specifically evaluating mutational prevalence within ALK or EGFR. Sensitivity
analyses were undertaken among populations sharing high heterogeneity.
RESULTS: Twenty-six studies were selected. Ranges in actionable mutational
prevalence among NSCLC patients were as follows: ALK: 4.1-21.4%, BRAF: 1.5-3.5%,
EGFR: 11.9-51.8%, HER2: 0-1.5%, KRAS: 4.5-6.4%, NTRK: 0-.7%, and ROS-1:
3.5-4.1%. Following sensitivity analysis, pooled ALK mutational prevalence rates
were 8.3% (95% CIs: 6.6-10.4%) and 4.01% (95% CIs: 2.3-7.0) for adenocarcinoma
and NSCLC patients, respectively. Pooled EGFR mutational prevalence rates were
28.7% (95% CIs: 23.5-34.6%) and 24.2% (95% CIs: 19.9-29.1%) for adenocarcinoma
and NSCLC patients, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Nearly 40% of Indian patients with advanced adenocarcinoma and 30%
with NSCLC share an actionable mutation in ALK or EGFR. Approximately one-half
of adenocarcinoma patients have an actionable variant. Efforts should be
directed toward efficiently identifying candidates for targeted agents and
delivering such treatments.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ajco.13802
PMID: 35634796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
