---
reference_id: "PMID:26843488"
title: "RPGR-associated retinopathy: clinical features, molecular genetics, animal models and therapeutic options."
authors:
- Tee JJ
- Smith AJ
- Hardcastle AJ
- Michaelides M
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307698
keywords:
- Animals
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Disease Management
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electroretinography
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RPGR-associated retinopathy: clinical features, molecular genetics, animal models and therapeutic options.
**Authors:** Tee JJ, Smith AJ, Hardcastle AJ, Michaelides M
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307698](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307698)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2016 Aug;100(8):1022-7. doi:
10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307698.  Epub 2016 Feb 3.

RPGR-associated retinopathy: clinical features, molecular genetics, animal 
models and therapeutic options.

Tee JJ(1), Smith AJ(1), Hardcastle AJ(1), Michaelides M(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK 
Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK.

Retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator (RPGR) gene sequence variants account for 
the vast majority of X linked retinitis pigmentosa (RP), which is one of the 
most severe forms of RP. Symptoms of nyctalopia typically begin in childhood, 
with increasing loss of peripheral visual field during teenage years, and 
progressive central visual loss during the second to fourth decade of life. 
There is however marked intrafamilial and interfamilial phenotypic heterogeneity 
in affected males and carrier females. There is now a far greater understanding 
of the range of phenotypes associated with variants in this gene; including 
rod-cone dystrophy, cone-rod dystrophy, cone dystrophy, macular dystrophy and 
non-ocular phenotypes. There are also increasingly established 
genotype-phenotype associations and structure-function correlations. RPGR is 
involved in ciliary function, with ciliary dysfunction now recognised as the 
mechanism underlying a large proportion of inherited retinal disease. There has 
been significant progress in identifying naturally occurring animal models and 
developing novel models to define the underlying disease mechanisms and to test 
gene replacement therapy, in addition to advances in human retinal imaging, 
culminating in completed and planned clinical trials. These significant 
developments will be discussed.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307698
PMID: 26843488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]