---
reference_id: "PMID:39950184"
title: "2-[(18)F] FDG PET/CT in Rapid Late-Onset Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency: A Case Report."
authors:
- Høj A
- Holm-Yildiz S
- Krag T
- Dejanovic D
- van Overeem Hansen T
- Dunø M
- Ørngreen MC
- Vissing J
- Løkken N
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12469
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2-[(18)F] FDG PET/CT in Rapid Late-Onset Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Høj A, Holm-Yildiz S, Krag T, Dejanovic D, van Overeem Hansen T, Dunø M, Ørngreen MC, Vissing J, Løkken N
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.12469](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.12469)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2025 Feb 12;66(2):e12469. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12469. eCollection 2025 
Mar.

2-[(18)F] FDG PET/CT in Rapid Late-Onset Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase 
Deficiency: A Case Report.

Høj A(1), Holm-Yildiz S(1), Krag T(1), Dejanovic D(2), van Overeem Hansen 
T(3)(4), Dunø M(3), Ørngreen MC(5), Vissing J(1), Løkken N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Copenhagen Neuromuscular Centre Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Rigshospitalet Copenhagen Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Physiology, Nuclear Medicine, and PET, Rigshospitalet 
University of Copenhagen Copenhagen Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Rigshospitalet 
University of Copenhagen Copenhagen Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine University of Copenhagen Copenhagen Denmark.
(5)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Rigshospitalet Copenhagen Denmark.

Multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD) is a rare inborn metabolic 
myopathy affecting fat and protein metabolism. Patients with late-onset MADD 
typically present with exercise intolerance and muscle weakness. We present a 
patient with an acute, very late-onset symptom debut at 52 years of age. Over 
5 months, the patient deteriorated from asymptomatic to almost complete loss of 
ambulation. He had a substantial weight loss, head-drop, progressive proximal 
limb and chewing weakness. Due to the rapid progression, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, myositis, myasthenia gravis and a paraneoplastic syndrome in relation 
to underlying malignancy were considered first. A 2-[18F] FDG PET/CT scan was 
performed to exclude a paraneoplastic syndrome. The scan revealed diffuse and 
symmetric, pathologically high 2-[18F] FDG-uptake in the patient's neck, 
shoulder, and paravertebral muscles, which was later suggested as a sign of a 
metabolic myopathy. Muscle biopsy (Oil Red O staining) and acylcarnitine profile 
(elevated C5-C18 acylcarnitines) findings suggested MADD, which was confirmed by 
genetic analysis showing biallelic variants in the ETFDH gene (c.1763A>G, 
p.(His588Arg); c.897G>A, p.(Leu299=)). After 1 month of dietary intervention and 
daily diet supplements (riboflavin 400 mg TID, levocarnitine 1 g TID, Q10 150 mg 
qD in two doses), the patient had almost recovered to his habitual level. A 
posttreatment muscle biopsy showed less disrupted ultrastructure of the 
myofibers. We learned from this case of rapid and late-onset MADD that 2-[18F] 
FDG PET/CT, with diffuse and symmetric 2-[18F] FDG-uptake in skeletal muscle, 
can be valuable in clarifying this rare diagnosis.

© 2025 The Author(s). JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12469
PMCID: PMC11821449
PMID: 39950184

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.