---
reference_id: "PMID:19781681"
title: PPIB mutations cause severe osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- van Dijk FS
- Nesbitt IM
- Zwikstra EH
- Nikkels PG
- Piersma SR
- Fratantoni SA
- Jimenez CR
- Huizer M
- Morsman AC
- Cobben JM
- van Roij MH
- Elting MW
- Verbeke JI
- Wijnaendts LC
- Shaw NJ
- Högler W
- McKeown C
- Sistermans EA
- Dalton A
- Meijers-Heijboer H
- Pals G
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.001
keywords:
- Catalysis
- Collagen/chemistry
- "Cyclophilins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Family Health
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- Mutation
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Pregnancy
- Procollagen-Proline Dioxygenase/metabolism
- Proline/chemistry
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PPIB mutations cause severe osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** van Dijk FS, Nesbitt IM, Zwikstra EH, Nikkels PG, Piersma SR, Fratantoni SA, Jimenez CR, Huizer M, Morsman AC, Cobben JM, van Roij MH, Elting MW, Verbeke JI, Wijnaendts LC, Shaw NJ, Högler W, McKeown C, Sistermans EA, Dalton A, Meijers-Heijboer H, Pals G
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.001)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Oct;85(4):521-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.001. Epub
2009  Sep 24.

PPIB mutations cause severe osteogenesis imperfecta.

van Dijk FS(1), Nesbitt IM, Zwikstra EH, Nikkels PG, Piersma SR, Fratantoni SA, 
Jimenez CR, Huizer M, Morsman AC, Cobben JM, van Roij MH, Elting MW, Verbeke JI, 
Wijnaendts LC, Shaw NJ, Högler W, McKeown C, Sistermans EA, Dalton A, 
Meijers-Heijboer H, Pals G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Centre, De Boelelaan 
1117, P.O. box 7057, 1007 MB Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Deficiency of cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP) or prolyl 3-hydroxylase 
1(P3H1) has been reported in autosomal-recessive lethal or severe osteogenesis 
imperfecta (OI). CRTAP, P3H1, and cyclophilin B (CyPB) form an intracellular 
collagen-modifying complex that 3-hydroxylates proline at position 986 (P986) in 
the alpha1 chains of collagen type I. This 3-prolyl hydroxylation is decreased 
in patients with CRTAP and P3H1 deficiency. It was suspected that mutations in 
the PPIB gene encoding CyPB would also cause OI with decreased collagen 3-prolyl 
hydroxylation. To our knowledge we present the first two families with recessive 
OI caused by PPIB gene mutations. The clinical phenotype is compatible with OI 
Sillence type II-B/III as seen with COL1A1/2, CRTAP, and LEPRE1 mutations. The 
percentage of 3-hydroxylated P986 residues in patients with PPIB mutations is 
decreased in comparison to normal, but it is higher than in patients with CRTAP 
and LEPRE1 mutations. This result and the fact that CyPB is demonstrable 
independent of CRTAP and P3H1, along with reported decreased 3-prolyl 
hydroxylation due to deficiency of CRTAP lacking the catalytic hydroxylation 
domain and the known function of CyPB as a cis-trans isomerase, suggest that 
recessive OI is caused by a dysfunctional P3H1/CRTAP/CyPB complex rather than by 
the lack of 3-prolyl hydroxylation of a single proline residue in the alpha1 
chains of collagen type I.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.001
PMCID: PMC2756556
PMID: 19781681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]