---
reference_id: "PMID:11964759"
title: Chronic obstructive lung diseases and occupational exposure.
authors:
- Viegi G
- Di Pede C
journal: Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1097/00130832-200204000-00006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic obstructive lung diseases and occupational exposure.
**Authors:** Viegi G, Di Pede C
**Journal:** Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00130832-200204000-00006](https://doi.org/10.1097/00130832-200204000-00006)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2002 Apr;2(2):115-21. doi: 
10.1097/00130832-200204000-00006.

Chronic obstructive lung diseases and occupational exposure.

Viegi G(1), Di Pede C.

Author information:
(1)Environmental Epidemiology Group, CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, Pisa, 
Italy. viegig@ifc.cnr.it

The scope of this review is to highlight important and interesting articles in 
the field of the epidemiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 
occupational exposure. Relevant information from the literature published within 
the past year, either on general population samples or on workplaces, indicates 
that a substantial proportion of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
diseases are work related. Methods of investigation include self-reported or 
interview-obtained questionnaires, job title and job exposure matrix, as well as 
voluntary or mandatory notifications. Furthermore, data on lung function and 
immunological tests are available. Specific settings and agents are quoted that 
have been indicated or confirmed as being linked to chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. In conclusion, occupational exposure to dusts, chemicals and 
gases will be considered an established, or supported by good evidence, risk 
factor for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The implications of this 
substantial occupational contribution to asthma and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease must be considered in research planning, in public policy 
decision-making, and in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1097/00130832-200204000-00006
PMID: 11964759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]