---
reference_id: "PMID:38447795"
title: "BiPSTP: Sequence feature encoding method for identifying different RNA modifications with bidirectional position-specific trinucleotides propensities."
authors:
- Wang M
- Ali H
- Xu Y
- Xie J
- Xu S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107140
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BiPSTP: Sequence feature encoding method for identifying different RNA modifications with bidirectional position-specific trinucleotides propensities.
**Authors:** Wang M, Ali H, Xu Y, Xie J, Xu S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107140](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107140)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2024 Apr;300(4):107140. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107140. Epub 2024
 Mar 5.

BiPSTP: Sequence feature encoding method for identifying different RNA 
modifications with bidirectional position-specific trinucleotides propensities.

Wang M(1), Ali H(1), Xu Y(2), Xie J(3), Xu S(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, China.
(2)School of Computer Science, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, China; College 
of Life Sciences, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, China.
(3)School of Computer Science, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, China. 
Electronic address: xiejuany@snnu.edu.cn.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, China. Electronic 
address: xushengquan@snnu.edu.cn.

RNA modification, a posttranscriptional regulatory mechanism, significantly 
influences RNA biogenesis and function. The accurate identification of 
modification sites is paramount for investigating their biological implications. 
Methods for encoding RNA sequence into numerical data play a crucial role in 
developing robust models for predicting modification sites. However, existing 
techniques suffer from limitations, including inadequate information 
representation, challenges in effectively integrating positional and sequential 
information, and the generation of irrelevant or redundant features when 
combining multiple approaches. These deficiencies hinder the effectiveness of 
machine learning models in addressing the performance challenges associated with 
predicting RNA modification sites. Here, we introduce a novel RNA sequence 
feature representation method, named BiPSTP, which utilizes bidirectional 
trinucleotide position-specific propensities. We employ the parameter ξ to 
denote the interval between the current nucleotide and its adjacent forward or 
backward dinucleotide, enabling the extraction of positional and sequential 
information from RNA sequences. Leveraging the BiPSTP method, we have developed 
the prediction model mRNAPred using support vector machine classifier to 
identify multiple types of RNA modification sites. We evaluate the performance 
of our BiPSTP method and mRNAPred model across 12 distinct RNA modification 
types. Our experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the mRNAPred 
model compared to state-of-art models in the domain of RNA modification sites 
identification. Importantly, our BiPSTP method enhances the robustness and 
generalization performance of prediction models. Notably, it can be applied to 
feature extraction from DNA sequences to predict other biological modification 
sites.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107140
PMCID: PMC10997841
PMID: 38447795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.