---
reference_id: "PMID:37700152"
title: Gys1 Antisense Therapy Prevents Disease-Driving Aggregates and Epileptiform Discharges in a Lafora Disease Mouse Model.
authors:
- Donohue KJ
- Fitzsimmons B
- Bruntz RC
- Markussen KH
- Young LEA
- Clarke HA
- Coburn PT
- Griffith LE
- Sanders W
- Klier J
- Burke SN
- Maurer AP
- Minassian BA
- Sun RC
- Kordasiewisz HB
- Gentry MS
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-023-01434-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- "Lafora Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- Glycogen Synthase/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mutation
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use"
- Glycogen/metabolism
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gys1 Antisense Therapy Prevents Disease-Driving Aggregates and Epileptiform Discharges in a Lafora Disease Mouse Model.
**Authors:** Donohue KJ, Fitzsimmons B, Bruntz RC, Markussen KH, Young LEA, Clarke HA, Coburn PT, Griffith LE, Sanders W, Klier J, Burke SN, Maurer AP, Minassian BA, Sun RC, Kordasiewisz HB, Gentry MS
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-023-01434-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-023-01434-9)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2023 Oct;20(6):1808-1819. doi: 10.1007/s13311-023-01434-9. 
Epub 2023 Sep 12.

Gys1 Antisense Therapy Prevents Disease-Driving Aggregates and Epileptiform 
Discharges in a Lafora Disease Mouse Model.

Donohue KJ(1), Fitzsimmons B(2), Bruntz RC(1), Markussen KH(1), Young LEA(1), 
Clarke HA(3), Coburn PT(1), Griffith LE(1), Sanders W(1), Klier J(1), Burke 
SN(4), Maurer AP(4), Minassian BA(5), Sun RC(3), Kordasiewisz HB(2), Gentry 
MS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, 40506, USA.
(2)Department of Antisense Drug Discovery, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA, 
92010, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, 32610, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience and Center for Cognitive Aging and Memory, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32610, USA.
(5)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, 32610, USA. matthew.gentry@ufl.edu.

Patients with Lafora disease have a mutation in EPM2A or EPM2B, resulting in 
dysregulation of glycogen metabolism throughout the body and aberrant glycogen 
molecules that aggregate into Lafora bodies. Lafora bodies are particularly 
damaging in the brain, where the aggregation drives seizures with increasing 
severity and frequency, coupled with neurodegeneration. Previous work employed 
mouse genetic models to reduce glycogen synthesis by approximately 50%, and this 
strategy significantly reduced Lafora body formation and disease phenotypes. 
Therefore, an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) was developed to reduce glycogen 
synthesis in the brain by targeting glycogen synthase 1 (Gys1). To test the 
distribution and efficacy of this drug, the Gys1-ASO was administered to 
Epm2b-/- mice via intracerebroventricular administration at 4, 7, and 10 months. 
The mice were then sacrificed at 13 months and their brains analyzed for Gys1 
expression, glycogen aggregation, and neuronal excitability. The mice treated 
with Gys1-ASO exhibited decreased Gys1 protein levels, decreased glycogen 
aggregation, and reduced epileptiform discharges compared to untreated Epm2b-/- 
mice. This work provides proof of concept that a Gys1-ASO halts disease 
progression of EPM2B mutations of Lafora disease.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-023-01434-9
PMCID: PMC10684475
PMID: 37700152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.S.G. has research support and research 
compounds from Maze Therapeutics, Valerion Therapeutics, and Ionis 
Pharmaceuticals. M.S.G. and R.C.S. have provided consulting services to Maze 
Therapeutics. M.S.G. also provided consulting service to PTC Therapeutics, Aro 
Biotherapeutics, Valerion Therapeutics, Enable Therapeutics, Chelsea’s Hope, and 
the Glut1-Deficiency Syndrome Foundation. M.S.G. and R.C.S. are co-founders of 
Atterogen LLC. H.B.K. and B.F. are employees and shareholders of Ionis 
Pharmaceuticals.