---
reference_id: "PMID:34628456"
title: "Frequency and risk factor analyses of bone erosion of the distal interphalangeal joint in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Ikemura S
- Hagio S
- Akasaki Y
- Fujiwara T
- Tsushima H
- Nakashima Y
journal: Acta Reumatol Port
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency and risk factor analyses of bone erosion of the distal interphalangeal joint in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Ikemura S, Hagio S, Akasaki Y, Fujiwara T, Tsushima H, Nakashima Y
**Journal:** Acta Reumatol Port (2021)

## Content

1. Acta Reumatol Port. 2021 Jul-Sep;46(3):239-245.

Frequency and risk factor analyses of bone erosion of the distal interphalangeal 
joint in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a cross-sectional study.

[Article in English]

Ikemura S(1), Hagio S(1), Akasaki Y(1), Fujiwara T(1), Tsushima H(1), Nakashima 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Orthopaedic Surgery, Kyushu University.

AIMS: Few reports have focused on the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The purposes of this study were to 
evaluate the frequency of bone erosion of the DIP joint, and to determine the 
factors associated with its deformity.
METHODS: This study reviewed 204 patients with RA in whom radiographs of hands 
were obtained. According to the presence/absence of bone erosion of the DIP 
joint, patients were divided into two groups (DIP-positive and DIP-negative 
groups). Additionally, wrist, metacarpal phalangeal (MP), thumb interphalangeal 
(IP), and proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints were evaluated. Clinical 
variables such as age, sex, body mass index, disease duration, disease activity 
(DAS28-CRP), and drug use were investigated.
RESULTS: Regarding the radiological findings of the DIP joint, 32 patients 
(15.7%) were allocated to the DIP-positive group and 172 patients (84.3%) to the 
DIP-negative group. The mean age, disease duration, DAS28-CRP, and the rate of 
corticosteroids usage were significantly higher in the DIP-positive than in the 
DIP-negative group (p = 0.0031, 0.0062, 0.0342, and 0.0011, respectively). 
Radiologically, concomitant bone erosions of the wrist, MP, thumb IP, and PIP 
joints were significantly more common in the DIP-positive than in the 
DIP-negative group (p < 0.01 for all four joints). Multivariate analysis 
demonstrated that advanced age, long disease duration, and the presence of 
radiological bone erosion of the PIP joint were independently associated with 
bone erosion of the DIP joint (p = 0.0480, 0.0307, and 0.0021, respectively). 
Accordingly, in patients with DIP erosions, mean DAS28-CRP was significantly 
higher in patients with <5 years (n = 10) than in those with ≥5 years of disease 
duration (n = 22, p = 0.0088).
CONCLUSIONS: Bone erosion can be observed at the DIP joint in patients with RA, 
and these cases frequently shows bone erosions of other finger joints, such as 
PIP joint. In addition, bone erosion can be observed soon after the onset of RA 
caused by uncontrolled disease activity in some patients with RA.

PMID: 34628456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]