---
reference_id: "PMID:32567016"
title: "Testosterone treatment in male patients with Klinefelter syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Pizzocaro A
- Vena W
- Condorelli R
- Radicioni A
- Rastrelli G
- Pasquali D
- Selice R
- Ferlin A
- Foresta C
- Jannini EA
- Maggi M
- Lenzi A
- Pivonello R
- Isidori AM
- Garolla A
- Francavilla S
- Corona G
- King, Klinefelter ItaliaN Group
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s40618-020-01299-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Testosterone treatment in male patients with Klinefelter syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Pizzocaro A, Vena W, Condorelli R, Radicioni A, Rastrelli G, Pasquali D, Selice R, Ferlin A, Foresta C, Jannini EA, Maggi M, Lenzi A, Pivonello R, Isidori AM, Garolla A, Francavilla S, Corona G, King, Klinefelter ItaliaN Group
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40618-020-01299-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40618-020-01299-1)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2020 Dec;43(12):1675-1687. doi:
10.1007/s40618-020-01299-1.  Epub 2020 Jun 21.

Testosterone treatment in male patients with Klinefelter syndrome: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Pizzocaro A(1), Vena W(1), Condorelli R(2), Radicioni A(3), Rastrelli G(4), 
Pasquali D(5), Selice R(6), Ferlin A(7), Foresta C(6), Jannini EA(8), Maggi 
M(4), Lenzi A(3), Pivonello R(9)(10), Isidori AM(3), Garolla A(6), Francavilla 
S(11), Corona G(12); King, Klinefelter ItaliaN Group.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Medical Andrology, IRCSS, Humanitas 
Research Hospital, Rozzano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Unit of Andrology and Endocrinology, University Teaching Hospital 
"Policlinico-Vittorio Emanuele", Department of Clinical and Experimental 
Medicine, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome - 
Policlinico Umberto I Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(4)Careggi Hospital, Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Science, University of Campania 
"Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(6)Centre for Klinefelter Syndrome, Unit of Andrology and Reproductive Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Via Gustavo Modena 9, 35121, 
Padua, Italy.
(7)Endocrine and Metabolic Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental 
Sciences, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(8)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(9)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Sezione di Endocrinologia, 
Unità di Andrologia e Medicina della Riproduzione e della Sessualità Maschile e 
Femminile, Università Federico II di Napoli, Naples, Italy.
(10)Staff of UNESCO Chair for Health Education and Sustainable Development, 
Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(11)Unit of Medical Andrology, Departments of Life, Health and Environmental 
Sciences, San Salvatore Hospital, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(12)Endocrinology Unit, Medical Department, Azienda Usl Bologna 
Maggiore-Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy. jocorona@libero.it.

PURPOSE: Low testosterone (T) in Klinefelter's syndrome (KS) can contribute to 
typical features of the syndrome such as reduced bone mineral density, obesity, 
metabolic disturbances and increased cardiovascular risk. The aim of the present 
study is to review and meta-analyze all available information regarding possible 
differences in metabolic and bone homeostasis profile between T treated (TRT) or 
untreated KS and age-matched controls.
METHODS: We conducted a random effect meta-analysis considering all the 
available data from observational or randomized controlled studies comparing 
TRT-treated and untreated KS and age-matched controls. Data were derived from an 
extensive MEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane search.
RESULTS: Out of 799 retrieved articles, 21 observational and 22 interventional 
studies were included in the study. Retrieved trials included 1144 KS subjects 
and 1284 healthy controls. Not-treated KS patients showed worse metabolic 
profiles (including higher fasting glycemia and HOMA index as well as reduced 
HDL-cholesterol and higher LDL-cholesterol) and body composition (higher body 
mass index and waist circumference) and reduced bone mineral density (BMD) when 
compared to age-matched controls. TRT in hypogonadal KS subjects was able to 
improve body composition and BMD at spinal levels but it was ineffective in 
ameliorating lipid and glycemic profile. Accordingly, TRT-treated KS subjects 
still present worse metabolic parameters when compared to age-matched controls.
CONCLUSION: TRT outcomes observed in KS regarding BMD, body composition and 
glyco-metabolic control, are similar to those observed in male with hypogonadism 
not related to KS. Moreover, body composition and BMD are better in treated than 
untreated hypogonadal KS. Larger and longer randomized placebo-controlled trials 
are advisable to better confirm the present data, mainly derived from 
observational studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-020-01299-1
PMID: 32567016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]