---
reference_id: "PMID:25393721"
title: ECHS1 mutations cause combined respiratory chain deficiency resulting in Leigh syndrome.
authors:
- Sakai C
- Yamaguchi S
- Sasaki M
- Miyamoto Y
- Matsushima Y
- Goto Y
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22730
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Enoyl-CoA Hydratase/deficiency, genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Leigh Disease/genetics
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# ECHS1 mutations cause combined respiratory chain deficiency resulting in Leigh syndrome.
**Authors:** Sakai C, Yamaguchi S, Sasaki M, Miyamoto Y, Matsushima Y, Goto Y
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22730](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22730)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2015 Feb;36(2):232-9. doi: 10.1002/humu.22730.

ECHS1 mutations cause combined respiratory chain deficiency resulting in Leigh 
syndrome.

Sakai C(1), Yamaguchi S, Sasaki M, Miyamoto Y, Matsushima Y, Goto Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National 
Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, 
Tokyo, Japan.

The human ECHS1 gene encodes the short-chain enoyl coenzyme A hydratase, the 
enzyme that catalyzes the second step of β-oxidation of fatty acids in the 
mitochondrial matrix. We report on a boy with ECHS1 deficiency who was diagnosed 
with Leigh syndrome at 21 months of age. The patient presented with hypotonia, 
metabolic acidosis, and developmental delay. A combined respiratory chain 
deficiency was also observed. Targeted exome sequencing of 776 
mitochondria-associated genes encoded by nuclear DNA identified compound 
heterozygous mutations in ECHS1. ECHS1 protein expression was severely depleted 
in the patient's skeletal muscle and patient-derived myoblasts; a marked 
decrease in enzyme activity was also evident in patient-derived myoblasts. 
Immortalized patient-derived myoblasts that expressed exogenous wild-type ECHS1 
exhibited the recovery of the ECHS1 activity, indicating that the gene defect 
was pathogenic. Mitochondrial respiratory complex activity was also mostly 
restored in these cells, suggesting that there was an unidentified link between 
deficiency of ECHS1 and respiratory chain. Here, we describe the patient with 
ECHS1 deficiency; these findings will advance our understanding not only the 
pathology of mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation disorders, but also the 
regulation of mitochondrial metabolism.

© 2014 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22730
PMID: 25393721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]