---
reference_id: "PMID:24942692"
title: "IL-15: a central regulator of celiac disease immunopathology."
authors:
- Abadie V
- Jabri B
journal: Immunol Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/imr.12191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IL-15: a central regulator of celiac disease immunopathology.
**Authors:** Abadie V, Jabri B
**Journal:** Immunol Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imr.12191](https://doi.org/10.1111/imr.12191)

## Content

1. Immunol Rev. 2014 Jul;260(1):221-34. doi: 10.1111/imr.12191.

IL-15: a central regulator of celiac disease immunopathology.

Abadie V(1), Jabri B.

Author information:
(1)Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Center, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada.

Interleukin-15 (IL-15) exerts many biological functions essential for the 
maintenance and function of multiple cell types. Although its expression is 
tightly regulated, IL-15 upregulation has been reported in many organ-specific 
autoimmune disorders. In celiac disease, an intestinal inflammatory disorder 
driven by gluten exposure, the upregulation of IL-15 expression in the 
intestinal mucosa has become a hallmark of the disease. Interestingly, because 
it is overexpressed both in the gut epithelium and in the lamina propria, IL-15 
acts on distinct cell types and impacts distinct immune components and pathways 
to disrupt intestinal immune homeostasis. In this article, we review our current 
knowledge of the multifaceted roles of IL-15 with regard to the main 
immunological processes involved in the pathogenesis of celiac disease.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.12191
PMCID: PMC4066219
PMID: 24942692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.