---
reference_id: "PMID:25584525"
title: Problems in defining post-exertional malaise.
authors:
- Jason LA
- Evans M
- So S
- Scott J
- Brown A
journal: J Prev Interv Community
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1080/10852352.2014.973239
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Problems in defining post-exertional malaise.
**Authors:** Jason LA, Evans M, So S, Scott J, Brown A
**Journal:** J Prev Interv Community (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10852352.2014.973239](https://doi.org/10.1080/10852352.2014.973239)

## Content

1. J Prev Interv Community. 2015;43(1):20-31. doi: 10.1080/10852352.2014.973239.

Problems in defining post-exertional malaise.

Jason LA(1), Evans M, So S, Scott J, Brown A.

Author information:
(1)a Center for Community Research, DePaul University , Chicago , Illinois , 
USA.

Post-exertional malaise (PEM) is a cardinal symptom of the illnesses referred to 
as Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME), Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome (ME/CFS), and chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). PEM is reported to occur 
in many of these patients, and with several criteria (e.g., ME and ME/CFS), this 
symptom is mandatory (Carruthers et al., 2003 , 2011 ). In the present study, 32 
participants diagnosed with CFS (Fukuda et al., 1994 ) were examined on their 
responses to self-report items that were developed to capture the 
characteristics and patterns of PEM. As shown in the results, the slight 
differences in wording for various items may affect whether one is determined to 
have PEM according to currently used self-report criteria to assess CFS. Better 
understanding of how this symptom is assessed might help improve the diagnostic 
reliability and validity of ME, ME/CFS, and CFS.

DOI: 10.1080/10852352.2014.973239
PMCID: PMC4295644
PMID: 25584525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]