---
reference_id: "PMID:9768538"
title: The role of GABA(A) receptors in the acute and chronic effects of ethanol.
authors:
- Grobin AC
- Matthews DB
- Devaud LL
- Morrow AL
journal: Psychopharmacology (Berl)
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1007/s002130050685
keywords:
- Alcohol Drinking/metabolism
- Alcoholism/metabolism
- Animals
- Ethanol/pharmacology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Rats
- "Receptors, GABA-A/biosynthesis, metabolism"
- Sex Characteristics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of GABA(A) receptors in the acute and chronic effects of ethanol.
**Authors:** Grobin AC, Matthews DB, Devaud LL, Morrow AL
**Journal:** Psychopharmacology (Berl) (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s002130050685](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002130050685)

## Content

1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1998 Sep;139(1-2):2-19. doi: 10.1007/s002130050685.

The role of GABA(A) receptors in the acute and chronic effects of ethanol.

Grobin AC(1), Matthews DB, Devaud LL, Morrow AL.

Author information:
(1)Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill 27599-7178, USA.

GABA(A) receptors are sensitive to ethanol in distinct brain regions and are 
clearly involved in the acute actions of ethanol, ethanol tolerance, ethanol 
dependence and ethanol self-administration. Data from a variety of perspectives 
such as molecular, cellular and behavioral analysis have elucidated the role of 
GABA(A) receptors in these processes. GABA(A) receptor activation mediates many 
of the behavioral effects of ethanol including motor incoordination, anxiolysis 
and sedation. The actions of ethanol at GABA(A) receptors are influenced by 
endogenous modulators such as the neuroactive steroids. Sensitization to these 
compounds influences ethanol dependence and withdrawal and may explain gender 
differences in the molecular effects of ethanol. Furthermore, GABA(A) receptors 
may also play a role in ethanol self-administration via the mesolimbic reward 
system. Ethanol tolerance and dependence may be explained, in part, by changes 
in the function of GABA(A) receptors. We have proposed that alterations in 
native GABA(A) receptor subunit assembly could alter the functional properties 
of these receptors. However, post-translational modifications or other 
post-synaptic mechanisms may also explain changes in GABA(A) receptor function. 
Genetic animal models of ethanol dependence have also identified GABA(A) 
receptor genes as likely mediators of the behavioral adaptations associated with 
ethanol dependence and withdrawal. A better understanding of the effects of 
ethanol at GABA(A) receptors has highlighted important potential mechanisms 
involved in the development of alcoholism.

DOI: 10.1007/s002130050685
PMID: 9768538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]