---
reference_id: "PMID:34537763"
title: "Hospital-Acquired Acute Kidney Injury in Older Patients: Clinical Characteristics and Drug Analysis."
authors:
- Liu W
- Lian XJ
- Chen YH
- Zou YP
- Lin JS
- Wu YH
- Yu F
- Hu WX
- Hao WK
journal: Gerontology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000518938
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Aged
- Creatinine
- Hospital Mortality
- Hospitalization
- Hospitals
- Humans
- Incidence
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hospital-Acquired Acute Kidney Injury in Older Patients: Clinical Characteristics and Drug Analysis.
**Authors:** Liu W, Lian XJ, Chen YH, Zou YP, Lin JS, Wu YH, Yu F, Hu WX, Hao WK
**Journal:** Gerontology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000518938](https://doi.org/10.1159/000518938)

## Content

1. Gerontology. 2022;68(7):763-770. doi: 10.1159/000518938. Epub 2021 Sep 17.

Hospital-Acquired Acute Kidney Injury in Older Patients: Clinical 
Characteristics and Drug Analysis.

Liu W(1), Lian XJ(2)(3), Chen YH(2), Zou YP(3), Lin JS(2)(3), Wu YH(2), Yu F(2), 
Hu WX(2), Hao WK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangdong Provincial Geriatrics Institute, 
Guangzhou, China, drweiliu@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangdong Provincial Geriatrics Institute, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, China.

BACKGROUND: Information on older patients with hospital-acquired acute kidney 
injury (HA-AKI) and use of drugs is limited.
AIM: This study aimed to assess the clinical characteristics, drug uses, and 
in-hospital outcomes of hospitalized older patients with HA-AKI.
METHODS: Patients aged ≥65 years who were hospitalized in medical wards were 
retrospectively analyzed. The study patients were divided into the HA-AKI and 
non-AKI groups based on the changes in serum creatinine. Disease incidence, risk 
factors, drug uses, and in-hospital outcomes were compared between the groups.
RESULTS: Of 26,710 older patients in medical wards, 4,491 (16.8%) developed 
HA-AKI. Older patients with HA-AKI had higher rates of multiple comorbidities 
and Charlson Comorbidity Index score than those without AKI (p < 0.001). In the 
HA-AKI group, the proportion of patients with prior use of drugs with possible 
nephrotoxicity was higher than that of patients with prior use of drugs with 
identified nephrotoxicity (p < 0.05). The proportions of patients with critical 
illness, use of nephrotoxic drugs, and the requirements of intensive care unit 
treatment, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and dialysis as well as in-hospital 
mortality and hospitalization duration and costs were higher in the HA-AKI than 
the non-AKI group; these increased with HA-AKI severity (all p for trend 
<0.001). With the increase in the number of patients with continued use of drugs 
with possible nephrotoxicity after HA-AKI, the clinical outcomes showed a 
tendency to worsen (p < 0.001). Moreover, HA-AKI incidence (adjusted odds ratio 
[OR], 10.26; 95% confidence interval (CI), 8.27-12.74; p < 0.001), and 
nephrotoxic drugs exposure (adjusted OR, 1.76; 95% CI, 1.63-1.91; p < 0.001) had 
an association with an increased in-hospital mortality risk.
CONCLUSION: AKI incidence was high among hospitalized older patients. Older 
patients with HA-AKI had worse in-hospital outcomes and higher resource 
utilization. Nephrotoxic drug exposure and HA-AKI incidence were associated with 
an increased in-hospital mortality risk.

© 2021 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000518938
PMID: 34537763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]