---
reference_id: "PMID:8783505"
title: "Mechanism of action of cholera toxin & other toxins."
authors:
- Ganguly NK
- Kaur T
journal: Indian J Med Res
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of action of cholera toxin & other toxins.
**Authors:** Ganguly NK, Kaur T
**Journal:** Indian J Med Res (1996)

## Content

1. Indian J Med Res. 1996 Jul;104:28-37.

Mechanism of action of cholera toxin & other toxins.

Ganguly NK(1), Kaur T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine & Biotechnology, Postgraduate Institute 
of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh.

Vibrio cholerae produce a variety of extracellular products that have 
deleterious effects on eukaryotic cells. The massive diarrhoea produced by V. 
cholerae is caused by cholera toxin (CT). CT is composed of 1A and 5B units. CT 
causes a significant amount of fluid secretion and haemorrhage in the ligated 
rabbit ileal loops. Its action involves the role of various biochemical 
pathways. CT acts by activation of adenylate cyclase-cAMP system located at the 
basolateral membrane of intestinal epithelial cells. The increase in cyclic AMP 
levels is mainly responsible for the altered transport of Na+ and Cl-. Besides 
activating cAMP, CT is also known to act through release of prostaglandins and 
involvement of intramural nerves. Besides CT, other bacterial toxins like 
Escherichia coli LT, Salmonella toxin, Shigella toxin and Campylobacter toxin 
also possess A-B structure. The structure and function of E. coli LT resembles 
closely that of CT. Most of the bacterial toxins exert their effect through 
involvement of ADP-ribosylating proteins whereas other toxins involve guanylate 
cyclase system, calcium and protein kinases for their ultimate action.

PMID: 8783505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]