---
reference_id: "PMID:37603207"
title: "The efficacy and safety of selective RET inhibitors in RET fusion-positive non-small cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Ke JY
- Huang S
- Jing ZT
- Duan MC
journal: Invest New Drugs
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10637-023-01390-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Piperidines/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Pyrazoles/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Pyrimidines/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Pyridines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The efficacy and safety of selective RET inhibitors in RET fusion-positive non-small cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Ke JY, Huang S, Jing ZT, Duan MC
**Journal:** Invest New Drugs (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10637-023-01390-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10637-023-01390-3)

## Content

1. Invest New Drugs. 2023 Oct;41(5):768-776. doi: 10.1007/s10637-023-01390-3.
Epub  2023 Aug 21.

The efficacy and safety of selective RET inhibitors in RET fusion-positive
non-small cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis.

Ke JY(1)(2), Huang S(1)(3), Jing ZT(1), Duan MC(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Wuming Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, People's Republic of China.
(4)Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, People's Republic of China.
731321667@qq.com.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, People's Republic of China. 731321667@qq.com.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Wuming Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, People's Republic of China. 731321667@qq.com.

Rearranged during transfection (RET) fusion-positive occurs in approximately 2%
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). This mutation often predicts metastasis
risk and poor prognosis, and current mainstream therapies provide limited
patient benefit. Selective RET inhibitors Pralsetinib and Selpercatinib are
targeted drugs approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for treating
RET-mutated tumors. The phase I/II clinical trial results of their treatment of
NSCLC have been published. However, the clinical effect of selective RET
inhibitors on RET fusion-positive NSCLC remains controversial. Purpose
Meta-analysis was performed to investigate the efficacy and safety of selective
RET inhibitors in treating RET fusion-positive NSCLC. Methods Qualified
literature was searched in Pubmed, Cochrane Library, Embase, and Web of Science.
Outcomes included objective response rate (ORR), median progression-free
survival (mPFS), disease control rate (DCR), intracranial ORR, and adverse
events. Stata 15.1 software was used to analyze the data. Results A total of 8
studies were included in this meta-analysis. The combined results showed that
the ORR of patients treated with selective RET inhibitors was 67% (95%
confidence interval:0.64 to 0.70, P < 0.01), DCR was 92% (95%CI: 0.91-0.94,
P < 0.01), the mPFS was 16.09 months (95%CI: 11.66-20.52, P < 0.01). In treated
patients with RET mutation, the intracranial ORR was 86% (95%CI:0.74 ~ 0.96,
P < 0.01). ORR in untreated patients was more effective than untreated patients
[HR = 0.44 (95%CI: 0.35-0.56, P < 0.01)]. The major adverse events (grade 3-4)
are neutropenia (13%) and anaemia (13%). Conclusions Selective RET inhibitors
Pralsetinib and Selpercatinib have shown a good effect on RET fusion-positive
NSCLC, with a low incidence of adverse events.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-023-01390-3
PMCID: PMC10560178
PMID: 37603207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or
non-financial interests to disclose.
