---
reference_id: "PMID:24341803"
title: Mutations in human lipoyltransferase gene LIPT1 cause a Leigh disease with secondary deficiency for pyruvate and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase.
authors:
- Soreze Y
- Boutron A
- Habarou F
- Barnerias C
- Nonnenmacher L
- Delpech H
- Mamoune A
- Chrétien D
- Hubert L
- Bole-Feysot C
- Nitschke P
- Correia I
- Sardet C
- Boddaert N
- Hamel Y
- Delahodde A
- Ottolenghi C
- de Lonlay P
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-192
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in human lipoyltransferase gene LIPT1 cause a Leigh disease with secondary deficiency for pyruvate and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase.
**Authors:** Soreze Y, Boutron A, Habarou F, Barnerias C, Nonnenmacher L, Delpech H, Mamoune A, Chrétien D, Hubert L, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschke P, Correia I, Sardet C, Boddaert N, Hamel Y, Delahodde A, Ottolenghi C, de Lonlay P
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-8-192](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-8-192)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Dec 17;8:192. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-192.

Mutations in human lipoyltransferase gene LIPT1 cause a Leigh disease with 
secondary deficiency for pyruvate and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase.

Soreze Y, Boutron A, Habarou F, Barnerias C, Nonnenmacher L, Delpech H, Mamoune 
A, Chrétien D, Hubert L, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschke P, Correia I, Sardet C, 
Boddaert N, Hamel Y, Delahodde A, Ottolenghi C, de Lonlay P(1).

Author information:
(1)Reference Center of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Imagine Institute, 
University Paris Descartes, Hospital Necker Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, 
France. pascale.delonlay@nck.aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: Synthesis and apoenzyme attachment of lipoic acid have emerged as a 
new complex metabolic pathway. Mutations in several genes involved in the lipoic 
acid de novo pathway have recently been described (i.e., LIAS, NFU1, BOLA3, 
IBA57), but no mutation was found so far in genes involved in the specific 
process of attachment of lipoic acid to apoenzymes pyruvate dehydrogenase 
(PDHc), α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (α-KGDHc) and branched chain α-keto acid 
dehydrogenase (BCKDHc) complexes.
METHODS: Exome capture was performed in a boy who developed Leigh disease 
following a gastroenteritis and had combined PDH and α-KGDH deficiency with a 
unique amino acid profile that partly ressembled E3 subunit (dihydrolipoamide 
dehydrogenase / DLD) deficiency. Functional studies on patient fibroblasts were 
performed. Lipoic acid administration was tested on the LIPT1 ortholog lip3 
deletion strain yeast and on patient fibroblasts.
RESULTS: Exome sequencing identified two heterozygous mutations (c.875C > G and 
c.535A > G) in the LIPT1 gene that encodes a mitochondrial lipoyltransferase 
which is thought to catalyze the attachment of lipoic acid on PDHc, α-KGDHc, and 
BCKDHc. Anti-lipoic acid antibodies revealed absent expression of PDH E2, BCKDH 
E2 and α-KGDH E2 subunits. Accordingly, the production of 14CO2 by patient 
fibroblasts after incubation with 14Cglucose, 14Cbutyrate or 14C3OHbutyrate was 
very low compared to controls. cDNA transfection experiments on patient 
fibroblasts rescued PDH and α-KGDH activities and normalized the levels of 
pyruvate and 3OHbutyrate in cell supernatants. The yeast lip3 deletion strain 
showed improved growth on ethanol medium after lipoic acid supplementation and 
incubation of the patient fibroblasts with lipoic acid decreased lactate level 
in cell supernatants.
CONCLUSION: We report here a putative case of impaired free or H protein-derived 
lipoic acid attachment due to LIPT1 mutations as a cause of PDH and α-KGDH 
deficiencies. Our study calls for renewed efforts to understand the mechanisms 
of pathology of lipoic acid-related defects and their heterogeneous biochemical 
expression, in order to devise efficient diagnostic procedures and possible 
therapies.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-192
PMCID: PMC3905285
PMID: 24341803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]