---
reference_id: "PMID:20301516"
title: Cockayne Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Laugel V
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cockayne Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Laugel V

## Content

1. Cockayne Syndrome.

Laugel V(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Dec 28 [updated 2024 Aug 29].

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Strasbourg, France

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Cockayne syndrome (referred to as CS in this 
GeneReview) spans a continuous phenotypic spectrum that includes CS type I, the 
"classic" or "moderate" form; CS type II, a more severe form with symptoms 
present at birth (this form overlaps with cerebrooculofacioskeletal [COFS] 
syndrome); CS type III, a milder and later-onset form; and COFS syndrome, a 
fetal form of CS. CS type I is characterized by normal prenatal growth with the 
onset of growth and developmental abnormalities in the first two years. By the 
time the disease has become fully manifest, height, weight, and head 
circumference are far below the fifth percentile. Progressive impairment of 
vision, hearing, and central and peripheral nervous system function leads to 
severe disability; death typically occurs in the first or second decade. CS type 
II is characterized by growth failure at birth, with little or no postnatal 
neurologic development. Congenital cataracts or other structural anomalies of 
the eye may be present. Affected children have early postnatal contractures of 
the spine (kyphosis, scoliosis) and joints. Death usually occurs by age five 
years. CS type III is a phenotype in which major clinical features associated 
with CS only become apparent after age two years; growth and/or cognition 
exceeds the expectations for CS type I. COFS syndrome is characterized by very 
severe prenatal developmental anomalies (arthrogryposis and microphthalmia).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Cockayne syndrome is established in a 
proband with biallelic pathogenic variants in ERCC6 or ERCC8 identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Feeding gastrostomy tube placement as 
needed; individualized educational programs for developmental delay; medications 
for tremor and spasticity as needed; physical therapy to prevent contractures; 
use of sunglasses for lens/retina protection; treatment of cataracts and other 
ophthalmologic complications, hearing loss, hypertension, and gastroesophageal 
reflux as in the general population; aggressive dental care to minimize dental 
caries; use of sunscreens and limitation of sun exposure for cutaneous 
photosensitivity. Surveillance: Biannual assessment of diet, nervous system, and 
ophthalmologic status; yearly assessment for complications such as hearing loss, 
hepatic or renal dysfunction, and hypertension. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Excessive sun exposure and use of metronidazole. Extra vigilance is needed for 
opioid and sedative use. Use of growth hormone treatment is not recommended in 
those with CS.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Cockayne syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a CS-related pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance 
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the CS-causing pathogenic variants 
have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301516