---
reference_id: "PMID:16331052"
title: Keratitis associated with multiple endocrine deficiency.
authors:
- Mohammadpour M
- Javadi MA
journal: Cornea
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1097/01.ico.0000179928.20522.3a
keywords:
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- Calcium/therapeutic use
- Child
- Cornea/pathology
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Fludrocortisone/therapeutic use
- Hormone Replacement Therapy
- Humans
- "Keratitis/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- "Photophobia/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Visual Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Keratitis associated with multiple endocrine deficiency.
**Authors:** Mohammadpour M, Javadi MA
**Journal:** Cornea (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.ico.0000179928.20522.3a](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.ico.0000179928.20522.3a)

## Content

1. Cornea. 2006 Jan;25(1):112-4. doi: 10.1097/01.ico.0000179928.20522.3a.

Keratitis associated with multiple endocrine deficiency.

Mohammadpour M(1), Javadi MA.

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmic Research Center, Labbafinejad Medical Center, Shaheed Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

PURPOSE: To report an 8-year-old girl with bilateral progressive visual loss and 
photophobia secondary to stem cell deficiency as a result of multiple endocrine 
deficiency.
METHODS: A case report and review of medical literature.
RESULTS: The patient suffered from severe photophobia and decreased visual 
acuity since May 2000. Despite multiple outpatient visits, no definite cause was 
found, and conservative treatments failed. On slit-lamp examination severe 
meibomian gland dysfunction, loss of eyelashes, decreased tear meniscus, diffuse 
corneal vascularization, and delayed punctate fluorescein staining of corneal 
epithelium were detected. She had also episodes of hypotension, oral 
candidiasis, and seizures. Her systemic work up revealed multiple endocrine 
deficiency (Addison disease and hypoparathyroidism). Hormone replacement therapy 
with fludrocortisone and oral calcium accompanied by punctual occlusion led to 
significant clinical recovery.
CONCLUSION: In a pediatric patient with diffuse corneal vascularization and no 
definite cause, systemic workup should be done to rule out multiple endocrine 
deficiencies. Treatment consists of hormone replacement therapy and management 
of the dry eye.

DOI: 10.1097/01.ico.0000179928.20522.3a
PMID: 16331052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]