---
reference_id: "PMID:32493486"
title: Alveolar lipids in pulmonary disease. A review.
authors:
- Agudelo CW
- Samaha G
- Garcia-Arcos I
journal: Lipids Health Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12944-020-01278-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alveolar lipids in pulmonary disease. A review.
**Authors:** Agudelo CW, Samaha G, Garcia-Arcos I
**Journal:** Lipids Health Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12944-020-01278-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12944-020-01278-8)

## Content

1. Lipids Health Dis. 2020 Jun 3;19(1):122. doi: 10.1186/s12944-020-01278-8.

Alveolar lipids in pulmonary disease. A review.

Agudelo CW(1), Samaha G(1), Garcia-Arcos I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University, Brooklyn, 
NY, 11203, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University, Brooklyn, 
NY, 11203, USA. Itsaso.Garcia-Arcos@downstate.edu.

Lung lipid metabolism participates both in infant and adult pulmonary disease. 
The lung is composed by multiple cell types with specialized functions and 
coordinately acting to meet specific physiologic requirements. The alveoli are 
the niche of the most active lipid metabolic cell in the lung, the type 2 cell 
(T2C). T2C synthesize surfactant lipids that are an absolute requirement for 
respiration, including dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine. After its synthesis and 
secretion into the alveoli, surfactant is recycled by the T2C or degraded by the 
alveolar macrophages (AM). Surfactant biosynthesis and recycling is tightly 
regulated, and dysregulation of this pathway occurs in many pulmonary disease 
processes. Alveolar lipids can participate in the development of pulmonary 
disease from their extracellular location in the lumen of the alveoli, and from 
their intracellular location in T2C or AM. External insults like smoke and 
pollution can disturb surfactant homeostasis and result in either surfactant 
insufficiency or accumulation. But disruption of surfactant homeostasis is also 
observed in many chronic adult diseases, including chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), and others. Sustained damage to the T2C is one of the postulated 
causes of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), and surfactant homeostasis is 
disrupted during fibrotic conditions. Similarly, surfactant homeostasis is 
impacted during acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and infections. 
Bioactive lipids like eicosanoids and sphingolipids also participate in chronic 
lung disease and in respiratory infections. We review the most recent knowledge 
on alveolar lipids and their essential metabolic and signaling functions during 
homeostasis and during some of the most commonly observed pulmonary diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s12944-020-01278-8
PMCID: PMC7268969
PMID: 32493486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.