---
reference_id: "PMID:33142349"
title: "Imaging in gynecological disease (22): clinical and ultrasound characteristics of ovarian embryonal carcinomas, non-gestational choriocarcinomas and malignant mixed germ cell tumors."
authors:
- Moro F
- Castellano LM
- Franchi D
- Epstein E
- Fischerova D
- Froyman W
- Timmerman D
- Zannoni GF
- Scambia G
- Valentin L
- Testa AC
- Mascilini F
journal: Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/uog.23529
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Carcinoma, Embryonal/diagnostic imaging"
- "Choriocarcinoma, Non-gestational/diagnostic imaging"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Female
- Humans
- Italy
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/diagnostic imaging"
- Ovarian Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging
- Retrospective Studies
- Ultrasonography
- "Women's Health Services"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging in gynecological disease (22): clinical and ultrasound characteristics of ovarian embryonal carcinomas, non-gestational choriocarcinomas and malignant mixed germ cell tumors.
**Authors:** Moro F, Castellano LM, Franchi D, Epstein E, Fischerova D, Froyman W, Timmerman D, Zannoni GF, Scambia G, Valentin L, Testa AC, Mascilini F
**Journal:** Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/uog.23529](https://doi.org/10.1002/uog.23529)

## Content

1. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2021 Jun;57(6):987-994. doi: 10.1002/uog.23529.

Imaging in gynecological disease (22): clinical and ultrasound characteristics 
of ovarian embryonal carcinomas, non-gestational choriocarcinomas and malignant 
mixed germ cell tumors.

Moro F(1), Castellano LM(1)(2), Franchi D(3), Epstein E(4), Fischerova D(5), 
Froyman W(6), Timmerman D(6), Zannoni GF(1)(7), Scambia G(1)(7), Valentin 
L(8)(9), Testa AC(1)(7), Mascilini F(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento Scienze della Salute della Donna, del Bambino e di Sanità 
Pubblica, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli, IRCCS, Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Milan, Italy.
(3)Preventive Gynecology Unit, Division of Gynecology, European Institute of 
Oncology, IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Karolinska Institutet and 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sodersjukhuset, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Gynecological Oncology Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(7)Dipartimento Scienze della Vita e Sanità Pubblica, Università Cattolica del 
Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(8)Skåne University Hospital Malmö, Malmö, Sweden.
(9)Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical and ultrasound characteristics of three 
types of rare malignant ovarian germ cell tumor: embryonal carcinoma, 
non-gestational choriocarcinoma and malignant mixed germ cell tumor.
METHODS: This was a retrospective multicenter study. From the International 
Ovarian Tumor Analysis (IOTA) database, we identified patients with a 
histological diagnosis of ovarian embryonal carcinoma, non-gestational 
choriocarcinoma or malignant mixed germ cell tumor, who had undergone 
preoperative ultrasound examination by an experienced ultrasound examiner 
between 2000 and 2020. Additional patients with the same histology were 
identified from the databases of the departments of gynecological oncology in 
the participating centers. All tumors were described using IOTA terminology. 
Three examiners reviewed all available ultrasound images and described them 
using pattern recognition.
RESULTS: One patient with embryonal carcinoma, five patients with 
non-gestational ovarian choriocarcinoma and seven patients with ovarian 
malignant mixed germ cell tumor (six primary tumors and one recurrence) were 
identified. Seven patients were included in the IOTA studies and six patients 
were examined outside of the IOTA studies. The median age at diagnosis was 26 
(range, 14-77) years. Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin levels were highest in 
non-gestational choriocarcinomas and alpha-fetoprotein levels were highest in 
malignant mixed germ cell tumors. Most tumors were International Federation of 
Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) Stage I (9/12 (75.0%)). All tumors were 
unilateral, and the median largest diameter was 129 (range, 38-216) mm. Of the 
tumors, 11/13 (84.6%) were solid and 2/13 (15.4%) were multilocular-solid; 9/13 
(69.2%) manifested abundant vascularization on color Doppler examination. Using 
pattern recognition, the typical ultrasound appearance was a large solid tumor 
with inhomogeneous echogenicity of the solid tissue and often dispersed cysts 
which, in most cases, were small and irregular. Some tumors had smooth contours 
while others had irregular contours.
CONCLUSIONS: A unilateral, large solid tumor with inhomogeneous echogenicity of 
the solid tissue and with dispersed small cystic areas in a young woman should 
raise the suspicion of a rare malignant germ cell tumor. This suspicion can 
guide the clinician to test tumor markers specific for malignant germ cell 
tumors. © 2020 International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology.

© 2020 International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology.

DOI: 10.1002/uog.23529
PMID: 33142349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]