---
reference_id: "PMID:34786243"
title: Lyme Borreliosis as a Trigger for Autoimmune Disease.
authors:
- Yehudina Y
- Trypilka S
journal: Cureus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.18648
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lyme Borreliosis as a Trigger for Autoimmune Disease.
**Authors:** Yehudina Y, Trypilka S
**Journal:** Cureus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.18648](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.18648)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 10;13(10):e18648. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18648. eCollection 2021
 Oct.

Lyme Borreliosis as a Trigger for Autoimmune Disease.

Yehudina Y(1), Trypilka S(2).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology, Institute of rheumatology, Kyiv, UKR.
(2)Rheumatologist Policlinic, Communal Non-Commercial Enterprise of Kharkov 
Regional Council "Regional Clinical Hospital", Kharkiv, UKR.

Lyme disease (LD), also known as Lyme borreliosis, is a zoonotic disease caused 
by the Gram-negative bacteria Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato belonging to the 
Spirochaetaceae family. Differentiating LD from other systemic disorders that 
present with musculoskeletal symptoms is challenging, and the presence of 
antibodies to borrelia in the general population may contribute to misdiagnosis. 
Moreover, long-term exposure of the host's immune system to spirochetes can 
contribute to the development of chronic autoimmune disease de novo. We report a 
35-year-old woman with a combination of LD and systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE), and in this case, LD was the most likely trigger for SLE. We also 
performed a literature review and summarized the previously reported cases with 
a combination of LD and autoimmune disease.

Copyright © 2021, Yehudina et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18648
PMCID: PMC8578812
PMID: 34786243

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.