---
reference_id: "PMID:32269945"
title: "Clinical characteristics and epilepsy in genomic imprinting disorders: Angelman syndrome and Prader-Willi syndrome."
authors:
- Wang TS
- Tsai WH
- Tsai LP
- Wong SB
journal: Tzu Chi Med J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4103/tcmj.tcmj_103_19
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics and epilepsy in genomic imprinting disorders: Angelman syndrome and Prader-Willi syndrome.
**Authors:** Wang TS, Tsai WH, Tsai LP, Wong SB
**Journal:** Tzu Chi Med J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4103/tcmj.tcmj_103_19](https://doi.org/10.4103/tcmj.tcmj_103_19)

## Content

1. Tzu Chi Med J. 2019 Oct 31;32(2):137-144. doi: 10.4103/tcmj.tcmj_103_19.
eCollection 2020 Apr-Jun.

Clinical characteristics and epilepsy in genomic imprinting disorders: Angelman
syndrome and Prader-Willi syndrome.

Wang TS(1), Tsai WH(2)(3), Tsai LP(2)(3), Wong SB(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Taipei Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical
Foundation, New Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Taipei Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical
Foundation, New Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.

Angelman syndrome (AS) and Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) are considered sister
imprinting disorders. Although both AS and PWS congenital neurodevelopmental
disorders have chromosome 15q11.3-q13 dysfunction, their molecular mechanisms
differ owing to genomic imprinting, which results in different
parent-of-the-origin gene expressions. Recently, several randomized controlled
trials have been proceeded to treat specific symptoms of AS and PWS. Due to the
advance of clinical management, early diagnosis for patients with AS and PWS is
important. PWS is induced by multiple paternal gene dysfunctions, including
those in MKRN3, MAGEL2, NDN, SNURF-SNPRPN, NPAP1, and a cluster of small
nucleolar RNA genes. PWS patients exhibit characteristic facial features,
endocrinological, and behavioral phenotypes, including short and obese figures,
hyperphagia, growth hormone deficiency, hypogonadism, autism, or obsessive-
compulsive-like behaviors. In addition, hypotonia, poor feeding, failure to
thrive, and typical facial features are major factors for early diagnosis of
PWS. For PWS patients, epilepsy is not common and easy to treat. Conversely, AS
is a single-gene disorder induced by ubiquitin-protein ligase E3A dysfunction,
which only expresses from a maternal allele. AS patients develop epilepsy in
their early lives and their seizures are difficult to control. The distinctive
gait pattern, excessive laughter, and characteristic electroencephalography
features, which contain anterior-dominated, high-voltage triphasic delta waves
intermixed with epileptic spikes, result in early suspicion of AS. Often,
polytherapy, including the combination of valproate, levetiracetam, lamotrigine,
and benzodiazepines, is required for controlling seizures of AS patients.
Notably, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and vigabatrin should be avoided, since
these may induce nonconvulsive status epilepticus. AS and PWS presented with
distinct clinical manifestations according to specific molecular defects due to
genomic imprinting. Early diagnosis and teamwork intervention, including
geneticists, neurologists, rehabilitation physicians, and pulmonologists, are
important. Epilepsy is common in patients with AS, and after proper treatment,
seizures could be effectively controlled in late childhood or early adulthood
for both AS and PWS patients.

Copyright: © 2019 Tzu Chi Medical Journal.

DOI: 10.4103/tcmj.tcmj_103_19
PMCID: PMC7137370
PMID: 32269945

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.
