---
reference_id: "PMID:36809082"
title: Gastrointestinal Bleeding in the Setting of Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome Due to SMAD4 Mutation.
authors:
- Smith PM
- Tan MC
journal: Am Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/00031348231157898
keywords:
- Adult
- Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage/etiology
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Intestinal Polyposis/complications, diagnosis, genetics, congenital"
- Female
- Humans
- Smad4 Protein/genetics
- Intestinal Polyps
- Mutation
- "Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal Bleeding in the Setting of Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome Due to SMAD4 Mutation.
**Authors:** Smith PM, Tan MC
**Journal:** Am Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00031348231157898](https://doi.org/10.1177/00031348231157898)

## Content

1. Am Surg. 2023 Jul;89(7):3328-3330. doi: 10.1177/00031348231157898. Epub 2023
Feb  21.

Gastrointestinal Bleeding in the Setting of Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome Due to 
SMAD4 Mutation.

Smith PM(1), Tan MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Section of Surgical Sciences, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

A 27-year-old female presented at 13 weeks' gestation with epigastric pain and 
anemia requiring blood and iron transfusions but no family history of 
gastrointestinal malignancy. Upper endoscopy revealed a giant circumferential 
polyp and associated hyperplastic-appearing polyps in the proximal stomach. 
Biopsies revealed hyperplasia with lamina propria eosinophils. She was supported 
with intermittent transfusions until labor was induced at 34 weeks' gestation. 
Total gastrectomy was performed at seven weeks post-partum. Final pathology 
revealed multiple hamartomatous polyps without malignancy. Her anemia resolved 
postoperatively. Genetic testing revealed mutation of the SMAD4 gene and 
Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome. JPS is caused by germline mutations in the SMAD4 or 
BMPR1A genes and is characterized by hamartomatous polyps in the 
gastrointestinal tract. While most polyps are benign, malignant transformation 
can occur. One should have low threshold to send patients for genetic screening 
when multiple polyps are found in a young patient, even without family history.

DOI: 10.1177/00031348231157898
PMID: 36809082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]