---
reference_id: "PMID:27590999"
title: Prognostic significance of platelet count in SLE patients.
authors:
- Abdel Galil SM
- Edrees AM
- Ajeeb AK
- Aldoobi GS
- El-Boshy M
- Hussain W
journal: Platelets
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/09537104.2016.1214253
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic significance of platelet count in SLE patients.
**Authors:** Abdel Galil SM, Edrees AM, Ajeeb AK, Aldoobi GS, El-Boshy M, Hussain W
**Journal:** Platelets (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09537104.2016.1214253](https://doi.org/10.1080/09537104.2016.1214253)

## Content

1. Platelets. 2017 Mar;28(2):203-207. doi: 10.1080/09537104.2016.1214253. Epub
2016  Sep 2.

Prognostic significance of platelet count in SLE patients.

Abdel Galil SM(1)(2), Edrees AM(1), Ajeeb AK(1), Aldoobi GS(1), El-Boshy M(3), 
Hussain W(4).

Author information:
(1)a Medicine Department, Faculty of Medicine , Umm Alqura University , Makkah , 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(2)b Rheumatology and Rehabilitation Department , Faculty of Medicine, Zagazig 
university , Egypt.
(3)c Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Applied Medical Science , Umm 
Al-Qura University , Makkah , Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(4)d Head of Rheumatology Unit , Hera'a General Hospital , Makkah , Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia.

Hematological abnormalities, especially thrombocytopenia (TCP), are highly 
prevalent among patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and at the same 
time it has been reported as a significant prognostic factor of SLE course. We 
further investigate the correlation between platelet count and the clinical 
manifestations and disease activity of SLE, in a cohort of Saudi Arabian female 
patients. A retrospective analysis was done for the medical records of 100 SLE 
female patients, selected from all patients diagnosed and treated for SLE at the 
Rheumatology outpatient clinics in Hera'a General Hospital, Holly Makkah, Saudi 
Arabia. The data collected from every patient's file included laboratory 
investigations (complete blood count, platelet parameters, ESR, 
anti-double-stranded DNA antibody, ANA), clinical manifestations, as well as SLE 
disease activity index (SLEDAI-2k) scores throughout a period of six sequential 
follow-up visits. Patients were divided into three groups according to the 
SLEDAI-2k: mild, moderate, and high-activity group. We found that, out of 100 
patients, TCP was the most prevalent hematological abnormality evident in 15%, 
more than leucopenia (14%) and anemia (2%). TCP was acute in onset and 
associated with arthritis, neurologic manifestations, and nephritis. Platelet 
count showed a significant negative correlation with disease activity, in all of 
the three groups of patients. We concluded that platelet count has a negative 
correlation with disease activity in SLE patients, whatever the associated 
manifestations, and it should be considered as a prognostic factor, identifying 
patients with aggressive disease course.

DOI: 10.1080/09537104.2016.1214253
PMID: 27590999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]