---
reference_id: "PMID:29038287"
title: Genetic Complexity of Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney and Liver Diseases.
authors:
- Cornec-Le Gall E
- Torres VE
- Harris PC
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2017050483
keywords:
- Alleles
- Calcium-Binding Proteins
- "Cysts/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Genetic Testing
- Glucosidases/genetics
- Glucosyltransferases/genetics
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- "Liver Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-5/genetics
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Chaperones
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Dominant/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Prognosis
- RNA-Binding Proteins
- SEC Translocation Channels/genetics
- TRPP Cation Channels/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Complexity of Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney and Liver Diseases.
**Authors:** Cornec-Le Gall E, Torres VE, Harris PC
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2017050483](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2017050483)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018 Jan;29(1):13-23. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2017050483. Epub 2017
 Oct 16.

Genetic Complexity of Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney and Liver Diseases.

Cornec-Le Gall E(1)(2), Torres VE(1), Harris PC(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota;
and.
(2)Department of Nephrology, University Hospital, European University of
Brittany, and National Institute of Health and Medical Sciences, INSERM U1078,
Brest, France.
(3)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota;
and harris.peter@mayo.edu.

Data indicate significant phenotypic and genotypic overlap, plus a common
pathogenesis, between two groups of inherited disorders, autosomal dominant
polycystic kidney diseases (ADPKD), a significant cause of ESRD, and autosomal
dominant polycystic liver diseases (ADPLD), which result in significant PLD with
minimal PKD. Eight genes have been associated with ADPKD (PKD1 and PKD2), ADPLD
(PRKCSH, SEC63, LRP5, ALG8, and SEC61B), or both (GANAB). Although genetics is
only infrequently used for diagnosing these diseases and prognosing the
associated outcomes, its value is beginning to be appreciated, and the genomics
revolution promises more reliable and less expensive molecular diagnostic tools
for these diseases. We therefore propose categorization of patients with a
phenotypic and genotypic descriptor that will clarify etiology, provide
prognostic information, and better describe atypical cases. In genetically
defined cases, the designation would include the disease and gene names, with
allelic (truncating/nontruncating) information included for PKD1 Recent data
have shown that biallelic disease including at least one weak ADPKD allele is a
significant cause of symptomatic, very early onset ADPKD. Including a genic (and
allelic) descriptor with the disease name will provide outcome clues, guide
treatment, and aid prevalence estimates.

Copyright © 2018 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2017050483
PMCID: PMC5748917
PMID: 29038287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
