---
reference_id: "PMID:18076102"
title: Prenatal and postnatal presentation of severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) due to the FGFR3 Lys650Met mutation.
authors:
- Zankl A
- Elakis G
- Susman RD
- Inglis G
- Gardener G
- Buckley MF
- Roscioli T
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32085
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal and postnatal presentation of severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) due to the FGFR3 Lys650Met mutation.
**Authors:** Zankl A, Elakis G, Susman RD, Inglis G, Gardener G, Buckley MF, Roscioli T
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.32085](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32085)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Jan 15;146A(2):212-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32085.

Prenatal and postnatal presentation of severe achondroplasia with developmental 
delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) due to the FGFR3 Lys650Met mutation.

Zankl A(1), Elakis G, Susman RD, Inglis G, Gardener G, Buckley MF, Roscioli T.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Children's Hospital, Brisbane, Australia. 
andreas.zankl@gmail.com

We present prenatal and postnatal features of a patient with severe 
achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN). 
Mutation analysis confirmed the clinical diagnosis by detecting the FGFR3 
Lys650Met mutation. This case, one of only six with molecular analysis reported 
in the literature, confirms the severe morbidity and adds to the reports with 
early mortality associated with SADDAN. Clinical-radiological characteristics of 
all reported cases of SADDAN are reviewed and discussed.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32085
PMID: 18076102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]