---
reference_id: "PMID:1490695"
title: Diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy. Generalized vascular damage in insulin-dependent diabetic patients.
authors:
- Jensen T
- Deckert T
journal: Horm Metab Res Suppl
year: '1992'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy. Generalized vascular damage in insulin-dependent diabetic patients.
**Authors:** Jensen T, Deckert T
**Journal:** Horm Metab Res Suppl (1992)

## Content

1. Horm Metab Res Suppl. 1992;26:68-70.

Diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy. Generalized vascular damage in 
insulin-dependent diabetic patients.

Jensen T(1), Deckert T.

Author information:
(1)Steno Memorial Hospital, Gentofte, Denmark.

The most serious complication of diabetes mellitus is clinical nephropathy. The 
development of persistent proteinuria (urinary excretion of more than 300 mg 
albumin/24 hours) implies an extremely high risk of early death. Renal failure 
is the most frequent cause of death but the mortality of cardiovascular diseases 
is also increased. Besides the link between albuminuria (nephropathy) and 
atherosclerosis in coronary arteries, albuminuria is also a predictor of 
microangiopathy in other organs than the kidneys. The annual incidence of 
proliferative retinopathy in early nephropathy is 10-15% compared to only 1% in 
patients without nephropathy. Also signs of cardiomyopathy have been 
demonstrated in early nephropathy. Further we have described markers of 
universal endothelial damage in these patients, and we hypothesize that 
albuminuria not only is a predictor of renal disease but also of widespread 
vascular disease. Long-term improvement of metabolic control by use of insulin 
infusion pumps and early antihypertensive treatment seem to stop the further 
progression of early diabetic nephropathy and to significantly improve the 
prognosis of clinical nephropathy.

PMID: 1490695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]