---
reference_id: "PMID:36190439"
title: Peripheral neuropathies associated with DNA repair disorders.
authors:
- Maguina M
- Kang PB
- Tsai AC
- Pacak CA
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mus.27721
keywords:
- Humans
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/genetics, complications"
- DNA Repair/genetics
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum/genetics
- "Cockayne Syndrome/genetics, complications"
- Polyneuropathies/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripheral neuropathies associated with DNA repair disorders.
**Authors:** Maguina M, Kang PB, Tsai AC, Pacak CA
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.27721](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.27721)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2023 Feb;67(2):101-110. doi: 10.1002/mus.27721. Epub 2022 Oct 3.

Peripheral neuropathies associated with DNA repair disorders.

Maguina M(1), Kang PB(2)(3), Tsai AC(4), Pacak CA(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Education Program, Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, 
Florida.
(2)Department of Neurology, Paul and Sheila Wellstone Muscular Dystrophy Center, 
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(3)Institute for Translational Neuroscience, University of Minnesota Medical 
School, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, Florida.

Repair of genomic DNA is a fundamental housekeeping process that quietly 
maintains the health of our genomes. The consequences of a genetic defect 
affecting a component of this delicate mechanism are quite harmful, 
characterized by a cascade of premature aging that injures a variety of organs, 
including the nervous system. One part of the nervous system that is impaired in 
certain DNA repair disorders is the peripheral nerve. Chronic motor, sensory, 
and sensorimotor polyneuropathies have all been observed in affected 
individuals, with specific physiologies associated with different categories of 
DNA repair disorders. Cockayne syndrome has classically been linked to 
demyelinating polyneuropathies, whereas xeroderma pigmentosum has long been 
associated with axonal polyneuropathies. Three additional recessive DNA repair 
disorders are associated with neuropathies, including trichothiodystrophy, 
Werner syndrome, and ataxia-telangiectasia. Although plausible biological 
explanations exist for why the peripheral nerves are specifically vulnerable to 
impairments of DNA repair, specific mechanisms such as oxidative stress remain 
largely unexplored in this context, and bear further study. It is also unclear 
why different DNA repair disorders manifest with different types of neuropathy, 
and why neuropathy is not universally present in those diseases. Longitudinal 
physiological monitoring of these neuropathies with serial electrodiagnostic 
studies may provide valuable noninvasive outcome data in the context of future 
natural history studies, and thus the responses of these neuropathies may become 
sentinel outcome measures for future clinical trials of treatments currently in 
development such as adeno-associated virus gene replacement therapies.

© 2022 The Authors. Muscle & Nerve published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.27721
PMCID: PMC10075233
PMID: 36190439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflict of 
interest.