---
reference_id: "PMID:39606500"
title: Pathognomonic Features of Olmesartan-Induced Collagenous Sprue Resulting in Severe Small Bowel Malabsorption.
authors:
- Goshgarian MA
- Laczek J
- Lustberg M
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.72571
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathognomonic Features of Olmesartan-Induced Collagenous Sprue Resulting in Severe Small Bowel Malabsorption.
**Authors:** Goshgarian MA, Laczek J, Lustberg M
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.72571](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.72571)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Oct 28;16(10):e72571. doi: 10.7759/cureus.72571. eCollection 2024
 Oct.

Pathognomonic Features of Olmesartan-Induced Collagenous Sprue Resulting in 
Severe Small Bowel Malabsorption.

Goshgarian MA(1), Laczek J(2), Lustberg M(3).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 
Bethesda, USA.
(2)Gastroenterology, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, 
USA.
(3)Gastroenterology, Sutter Santa Rosa Regional Hospital, Santa Rosa, USA.

Collagenous sprue (CS) is a rare autoimmune gastrointestinal disorder 
characterized by specific histologic changes in the small intestine. It often 
presents with more severe symptoms and a worse prognosis compared to celiac 
disease, including significant malabsorption, weight loss, and nutrient 
deficiencies. Despite treatment with a gluten-free diet, symptom improvement is 
limited, with only a small fraction of patients responding positively. This case 
report highlights the diagnostic challenges and clinical features of CS in a 
74-year-old woman, whose symptoms resolved following cessation of olmesartan. 
The case emphasizes the importance of recognizing medication-induced forms of 
the disease and outlines the need for targeted management strategies to improve 
patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2024, Goshgarian et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.72571
PMCID: PMC11602205
PMID: 39606500

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all 
authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared 
that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted 
work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no 
financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.