---
reference_id: "PMID:21559216"
title: "The molecular pathogenesis of osteosarcoma: a review."
authors:
- Broadhead ML
- Clark JC
- Myers DE
- Dass CR
- Choong PF
journal: Sarcoma
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1155/2011/959248
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The molecular pathogenesis of osteosarcoma: a review.
**Authors:** Broadhead ML, Clark JC, Myers DE, Dass CR, Choong PF
**Journal:** Sarcoma (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2011/959248](https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/959248)

## Content

1. Sarcoma. 2011;2011:959248. doi: 10.1155/2011/959248. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

The molecular pathogenesis of osteosarcoma: a review.

Broadhead ML(1), Clark JC, Myers DE, Dass CR, Choong PF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Department of Surgery, University of Melbourne,
St. Vincent's Hospital, SVHM, L3, Daly Wing, 35 Victoria Parade, Fitzroy VIC
3065, Australia.

Osteosarcoma is the most common primary malignancy of bone. It arises in bone
during periods of rapid growth and primarily affects adolescents and young
adults. The 5-year survival rate for osteosarcoma is 60%-70%, with no
significant improvements in prognosis since the advent of multiagent
chemotherapy. Diagnosis, staging, and surgical management of osteosarcoma remain
focused on our anatomical understanding of the disease. As our knowledge of the
molecular pathogenesis of osteosarcoma expands, potential therapeutic targets
are being identified. A comprehensive understanding of these mechanisms is
essential if we are to improve the prognosis of patients with osteosarcoma
through tumour-targeted therapies. This paper will outline the pathogenic
mechanisms of osteosarcoma oncogenesis and progression and will discuss some of
the more frontline translational studies performed to date in search of novel,
safer, and more targeted drugs for disease management.

DOI: 10.1155/2011/959248
PMCID: PMC3087974
PMID: 21559216
