---
reference_id: "PMID:19773341"
title: Skeletal dysplasias due to filamin A mutations result from a gain-of-function mechanism distinct from allelic neurological disorders.
authors:
- Clark AR
- Sawyer GM
- Robertson SP
- Sutherland-Smith AJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp442
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Adhesion/genetics
- Cell Movement/genetics
- "Contractile Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Ear Ossicles/abnormalities
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, physiology"
- Filamins
- Fingers/abnormalities
- Humans
- Male
- "Microfilament Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nervous System Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Palate/abnormalities
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Syndrome
- Toes/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skeletal dysplasias due to filamin A mutations result from a gain-of-function mechanism distinct from allelic neurological disorders.
**Authors:** Clark AR, Sawyer GM, Robertson SP, Sutherland-Smith AJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp442](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp442)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Dec 15;18(24):4791-800. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp442. Epub 2009
 Sep 22.

Skeletal dysplasias due to filamin A mutations result from a gain-of-function 
mechanism distinct from allelic neurological disorders.

Clark AR(1), Sawyer GM, Robertson SP, Sutherland-Smith AJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular BioSciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New 
Zealand.

Filamin A (FLNA) crosslinks F-actin and binds proteins consistent with roles 
integrating cell signalling and the cytoskeleton. FLNA missense mutations are 
associated with the otopalatodigital syndrome (OPD) spectrum of skeletal 
disorders, clustering in discrete domains. One cluster is found in the second 
calponin homology domain of the FLNA actin-binding domain (ABD), implicating 
this region as essential for mediating correct function. Here we show that OPD 
(FLNA E254K) fibroblast lysates have equivalent concentrations of FLNA compared 
with controls and that recombinant FLNA E254K ABD has increased in vitro F-actin 
binding (K(d) 13 microm) compared with wild type (WT; K(d) 48 microm). These 
observations are consistent with a gain-of-function mechanism for OPD. We have 
determined the crystal structures of the WT and E254K FLNA ABDs at 2.3 A 
resolution, revealing that they adopt similar closed conformations. The E254K 
mutation removes a conserved salt bridge but does not disrupt the ABD structure. 
The solution structures are also equivalent as determined by circular dichroism 
spectroscopy, but differential scanning fluorimetry denaturation showed reduced 
stability (decreased T(m) of 5.6 degrees C) for E254K relative to WT. Ex vivo 
characterization of E254K OPD patient fibroblasts revealed they have similar 
motility and adhesion as control cells, implying that many core functions 
mediated by FLNA are unaffected, consistent with OPD only affecting specific 
tissues despite FLNA being widely expressed. These data provide the first 
biochemical evidence for a gain-of-function mechanism for the OPD disorders, and 
mechanistically distinguishes them from the loss-of-function phenotypes that 
manifest as disorders of neuronal migration.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp442
PMID: 19773341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]