---
reference_id: "PMID:34754855"
title: "Ultrasound features of primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the palatine tonsil: A case report."
authors:
- Jiang R
- Zhang HM
- Wang LY
- Pian LP
- Cui XW
journal: World J Clin Cases
year: '2021'
doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v9.i28.8470
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ultrasound features of primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the palatine tonsil: A case report.
**Authors:** Jiang R, Zhang HM, Wang LY, Pian LP, Cui XW
**Journal:** World J Clin Cases (2021)
**DOI:** [10.12998/wjcc.v9.i28.8470](https://doi.org/10.12998/wjcc.v9.i28.8470)

## Content

1. World J Clin Cases. 2021 Oct 6;9(28):8470-8475. doi:
10.12998/wjcc.v9.i28.8470.

Ultrasound features of primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the palatine tonsil: A 
case report.

Jiang R(1), Zhang HM(1), Wang LY(2), Pian LP(3), Cui XW(4).

Author information:
(1)The Third Clinical Medical College of Henan University of Chinese Medicine, 
Henan University of Chinese Medicine, Zhengzhou 450000, Henan Province, China.
(2)Department of Ultrasound, The First Affiliated Hospital of Henan University 
of Chinese Medicine, Zhengzhou 450000, Henan Province, China.
(3)Department of Ultrasound, The First Affiliated Hospital of Henan University 
of Chinese Medicine, Zhengzhou 450000, Henan Province, China. plp932@163.com.
(4)Department of Medical Ultrasound, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College of 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei Province, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Lymphomas are the second most common malignancy of the head and 
neck. In this region, the vast majority of extranodal lymphomas are located in 
the palatine tonsil, accounting for about 51%. Tonsillar lymphomas are 
aggressive tumors with intermediate- or high-grade histology. We here report a 
case of primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the palatine tonsil and analyze its 
ultrasound features.
CASE SUMMARY: A 40-year-old man presented with right palatine tonsil swelling 
for 2 mo after a cold, accompanied by dysphagia, snoring, and suffocation. He 
had no sore throat, fever, or history of upper respiratory tract infection or 
tuberculosis. The patient was generally in good health and denied other 
diseases. He was diagnosed with acute tonsillitis initially and treated with 
antibiotics for 7 d. However, there was no improvement with the treatment. 
Tonsil biopsy and ultrasound-guided biopsy of the biggest lymph node of the 
right neck showed the typical pathology of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
CONCLUSION: Primary lymphoma of the tonsils is rare, and its diagnosis is 
challenging. Ultrasound is a useful modality in diagnosing oropharyngeal 
diseases, and can clearly show the features of this tumor, but the final 
diagnosis should be established by histology.

©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v9.i28.8470
PMCID: PMC8554430
PMID: 34754855

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest to report.