---
reference_id: "PMID:37579203"
title: "Direct-Acting Antiviral Therapy for Treatment of Acute and Recent Hepatitis C Virus Infection: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Martinello M
- Naggie S
- Rockstroh JK
- Matthews GV
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciad344
keywords:
- Humans
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Hepacivirus/genetics
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/drug therapy"
- Sofosbuvir/therapeutic use
- Hepatitis C/drug therapy
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Genotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Direct-Acting Antiviral Therapy for Treatment of Acute and Recent Hepatitis C Virus Infection: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Martinello M, Naggie S, Rockstroh JK, Matthews GV
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciad344](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciad344)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2023 Aug 14;77(Suppl 3):S238-S244. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciad344.

Direct-Acting Antiviral Therapy for Treatment of Acute and Recent Hepatitis C
Virus Infection: A Narrative Review.

Martinello M(1)(2), Naggie S(3)(4), Rockstroh JK(5), Matthews GV(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales (UNSW Sydney), Sydney,
Australia.
(2)Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(3)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(4)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(5)University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(6)St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

Following the discovery of hepatitis C virus (HCV) in 1989, 3 decades of basic,
translational, and clinical research culminated in the development of
direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapy-curative oral treatment for HCV infection.
The availability of DAA therapy revolutionized HCV clinical management,
including acute (duration of infection <6 mo) and recent (duration of infection
<12 mo) infection. Several DAA regimens, including the contemporary
pan-genotypic combinations of sofosbuvir-velpatasvir and
glecaprevir-pibrentasvir, have been shown to be safe and effective among people
with acute and recent HCV infection, highlighting their potential in an HCV
controlled human infection model. This article describes the natural history and
management of acute and recent HCV infection in the era of DAA therapy and
outlines a strategy for use of DAA therapies in the setting of an HCV controlled
human infection model.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciad344
PMID: 37579203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. M. M. and G. V.
M. are supported by the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council
(NHMRC). M. M. reports salary support from the Australian NHMRC Early Career
Fellowship. S. N. reports research funding from Gilead and AbbVie; consulting
fees from Pardse Biosciences and Silverback; participation in a Data and Safety
Monitoring Board (DSMB) with Vir Biotechnology; and stocks with Vir
Biotechnology. J. K. R. reports consulting fees from Boehringer and speaker
payments from Gilead, Janssen, Merck, and ViiV; DSMB participation with Abivax
and Galapagos; and participation on the European AIDS Clinical Society (EACS)
Governing Board. G. V. M. reports research funding, advisory board payments, and
speaker payments from Gilead, Janssen, AstraZeneca, AbbVie, and ViiV, and
research funding and speaker payments from Janssen. All authors have submitted
the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that
the editors consider relevant to the content of the manuscript have been
disclosed.
