---
reference_id: "PMID:39644025"
title: "Through thick and thin: confronting the aggressive cutaneous T-cell lymphomas."
authors:
- Stuver R
- Horwitz SM
journal: Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1182/hematology.2024000529
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Janus Kinase 2/genetics
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous/pathology, therapy"
- "Mycosis Fungoides/therapy, pathology"
- "Sezary Syndrome/therapy, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Through thick and thin: confronting the aggressive cutaneous T-cell lymphomas.
**Authors:** Stuver R, Horwitz SM
**Journal:** Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1182/hematology.2024000529](https://doi.org/10.1182/hematology.2024000529)

## Content

1. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2024 Dec 6;2024(1):62-68. doi: 
10.1182/hematology.2024000529.

Through thick and thin: confronting the aggressive cutaneous T-cell lymphomas.

Stuver R(1), Horwitz SM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Lymphoma Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY.
(2)Cellular Therapy Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY.

The cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCLs) comprise a diverse set of diseases with 
equally diverse presentations ranging from asymptomatic solitary lesions to 
highly aggressive diseases with propensity for visceral spread. The more 
aggressive CTCLs, which herein we consider as certain cases of advanced-stage 
mycosis fungoides/Sézary syndrome (MF/SS), primary cutaneous CD8+ aggressive 
epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma (PCAETCL), and primary cutaneous gamma 
delta T-cell lymphoma (PCGDTCL), require systemic therapy. Over the last 5 
years, treatment options for MF/SS have expanded with biological insights 
leading to new therapeutic options and increasingly unique management 
strategies. An enhanced appreciation of the compartmental efficacy of these 
agents (skin, blood, lymph nodes, visceral organs) is incorporated in current 
management strategies in MF/SS. In addition, approaches that combine modalities 
in attempts to increase depth and durability of responses across multiple 
compartments are being trialed. In contrast to MF/SS, PCAETCL and PCGDTCL remain 
diseases with few prospective studies to guide treatment. However, recent 
genomic insights on these diseases, such as the presence of JAK2 fusions in 
PCAETCL and cell of origin findings in PCGDTCL, have created options for new 
biomarker-driven strategies.

Copyright © 2024 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/hematology.2024000529
PMCID: PMC11665522
PMID: 39644025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Robert Stuver has research funding from Pfizer 
(all paid to the institution). Steven M. Horwitz has served as a consultant for 
Affimed, Abcuro, Corvus, Daiichi Sankyo, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, ONO Pharmaceuticals, 
Seagen, SecuraBio, Takeda, and Yingli. Steven M. Horwitz has research funding 
from ADC Therapeutics, Affimed, C4, Celgene, Crispr Therapeutics, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Dren Bio, Kyowa Kirin, Millennium /Takeda, Seagen, and SecuraBio (all 
paid to the institution).