---
reference_id: "PMID:20301738"
title: Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate Synthetase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- de Brouwer APM
- Christodoulou J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate Synthetase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, de Brouwer APM, Christodoulou J

## Content

1. Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate Synthetase Deficiency.

de Brouwer APM(1), Christodoulou J(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2008 Oct 21 [updated 2023 Jun 8].

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University, Nijmegen Medical Center,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands
(2)Director and Genomic Medicine Theme and Group Co-Leader, Brain and
Mitochondrial Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute;, Chair of
Genomic Medicine, Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRS)
deficiency, an X-linked disorder, is a phenotypic continuum comprising three
disorders previously thought to be clinically distinct: Arts syndrome,
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy X type 5 (CMTX5), and X-linked nonsyndromic
sensorineural hearing loss (DFNX1). In affected males, the PRS deficiency
phenotypic spectrum ranges from severe congenital profound sensorineural hearing
loss, intellectual disability, delayed motor development, and progressive
ophthalmologic involvement (retinal dystrophy and optic atrophy) to normal
cognitive abilities and relatively later-onset, somewhat milder manifestations,
such as mild sensorineural hearing loss, peripheral neuropathy, and gait ataxia.
Heterozygous females can show isolated and/or milder manifestations in the PRS
deficiency spectrum. To date, 40 families with PRS deficiency have been
reported.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PRS deficiency is established in a male
proband with suggestive findings and a hemizygous pathogenic variant in PRPS1
identified by molecular genetic testing. The diagnosis of PRS deficiency is
usually established in a female proband with suggestive findings and a
heterozygous pathogenic variant in PRPS1 identified by molecular genetic
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: There is no cure for PRS deficiency.
Supportive care to improve quality of life, maximize function, and reduce
complications can include multidisciplinary care by specialists in neurology,
physiatry, physical therapy, occupational therapy, audiology, otolaryngology,
ophthalmology and low vision services, education, and medical genetics.
Surveillance: Monitoring existing manifestations, the individual's response to
supportive care, and the emergence of new manifestations involves scheduled
follow up with the treating specialists.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PRS deficiency is inherited in an X-linked manner. If the
mother of the proband has a PRPS1 pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting
it in each pregnancy is 50%; if the father of the proband has a PRPS1 pathogenic
variant, he will transmit it to all his daughters and none of his sons. Males
who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected. Females who inherit the
pathogenic variant will be heterozygotes and will be asymptomatic or show
manifestations of PRS deficiency that are typically isolated and/or milder than
manifestations in hemizygous males with the same pathogenic variant. The ratio
of X-chromosome inactivation adds an additional variable in predicting clinical
outcome in females who inherit a PRPS1 pathogenic variant. Once the PRPS1
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member,
heterozygote testing for at-risk female relatives and prenatal and
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301738
