---
reference_id: "PMID:36785993"
title: "The application of artificial intelligence in the detection of basal cell carcinoma: A systematic review."
authors:
- Widaatalla Y
- Wolswijk T
- Adan F
- Hillen LM
- Woodruff HC
- Halilaj I
- Ibrahim A
- Lambin P
- Mosterd K
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.18963
keywords:
- Humans
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Artificial Intelligence
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Dermoscopy/methods
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- "Microscopy, Confocal/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The application of artificial intelligence in the detection of basal cell carcinoma: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Widaatalla Y, Wolswijk T, Adan F, Hillen LM, Woodruff HC, Halilaj I, Ibrahim A, Lambin P, Mosterd K
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.18963](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.18963)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2023 Jun;37(6):1160-1167. doi:
10.1111/jdv.18963.  Epub 2023 Feb 28.

The application of artificial intelligence in the detection of basal cell
carcinoma: A systematic review.

Widaatalla Y(1), Wolswijk T(2), Adan F(2), Hillen LM(3), Woodruff HC(1)(4),
Halilaj I(1), Ibrahim A(5), Lambin P(1)(4), Mosterd K(2).

Author information:
(1)The D-Lab, Department of Precision Medicine, GROW School for Oncology and
Reproduction, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Dermatology, GROW School for Oncology and Reproduction,
Maastricht University Medical Center+, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, GROW School for Oncology and Reproduction,
Maastricht University Medical Center+, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Maastricht University Medical
Center+, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Radiology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York,
New York, USA.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is one of the most common types of cancer. The
growing incidence worldwide and the need for fast, reliable and less invasive
diagnostic techniques make a strong case for the application of different
artificial intelligence techniques for detecting and classifying BCC and its
subtypes. We report on the current evidence regarding the application of
handcrafted and deep radiomics models used for the detection and classification
of BCC in dermoscopy, optical coherence tomography and reflectance confocal
microscopy. We reviewed all the articles that were published in the last
10 years in PubMed, Web of Science and EMBASE, and we found 15 articles that met
the inclusion criteria. We included articles that are original, written in
English, focussing on automated BCC detection in our target modalities and
published within the last 10 years in the field of dermatology. The outcomes
from the selected publications are presented in three categories depending on
the imaging modality and to allow for comparison. The majority of articles
(n = 12) presented different AI solutions for the detection and/or
classification of BCC in dermoscopy images. The rest of the publications
presented AI solutions in OCT images (n = 2) and RCM (n = 1). In addition, we
provide future directions for the application of these techniques for the
detection of BCC. In conclusion, the reviewed publications demonstrate the
potential benefit of AI in the detection of BCC in dermoscopy, OCT and RCM.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and
Venereology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of
Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.18963
PMID: 36785993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
