---
reference_id: "PMID:38768074"
title: Susceptibility to innate immune activation in genetically mediated myocarditis.
authors:
- Selgrade DF
- Fullenkamp DE
- Chychula IA
- Li B
- Dellefave-Castillo L
- Dubash AD
- Ohiri J
- Monroe TO
- Blancard M
- Tomar G
- Holgren C
- Burridge PW
- George AL Jr
- Demonbreun AR
- Puckelwartz MJ
- George SA
- Efimov IR
- Green KJ
- McNally EM
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI180254
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myocarditis/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- "Immunity, Innate/genetics"
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, immunology"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Susceptibility to innate immune activation in genetically mediated myocarditis.
**Authors:** Selgrade DF, Fullenkamp DE, Chychula IA, Li B, Dellefave-Castillo L, Dubash AD, Ohiri J, Monroe TO, Blancard M, Tomar G, Holgren C, Burridge PW, George AL Jr, Demonbreun AR, Puckelwartz MJ, George SA, Efimov IR, Green KJ, McNally EM
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI180254](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI180254)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 May 16;134(13):e180254. doi: 10.1172/JCI180254.

Susceptibility to innate immune activation in genetically mediated myocarditis.

Selgrade DF(1), Fullenkamp DE(1)(2), Chychula IA(1), Li B(3), Dellefave-Castillo
L(1)(2), Dubash AD(4)(5), Ohiri J(1), Monroe TO(1), Blancard M(6), Tomar G(1),
Holgren C(1), Burridge PW(6), George AL Jr(6), Demonbreun AR(1)(6), Puckelwartz
MJ(1)(6), George SA(3), Efimov IR(3), Green KJ(5)(7)(8), McNally EM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genetic Medicine and.
(2)Bluhm Cardiovascular Institute, Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, Furman University, Greenville, South Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology.
(6)Department of Pharmacology.
(7)Department of Dermatology, and.
(8)R.H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Myocarditis is clinically characterized by chest pain, arrhythmias, and heart
failure, and treatment is often supportive. Mutations in DSP, a gene encoding
the desmosomal protein desmoplakin, have been increasingly implicated in
myocarditis. To model DSP-associated myocarditis and assess the role of innate
immunity, we generated engineered heart tissues (EHTs) using human induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) from patients with
heterozygous DSP truncating variants (DSPtvs) and a gene-edited homozygous
deletion cell line (DSP-/-). At baseline, DSP-/- EHTs displayed a transcriptomic
signature of innate immune activation, which was mirrored by cytokine release.
Importantly, DSP-/- EHTs were hypersensitive to Toll-like receptor (TLR)
stimulation, demonstrating more contractile dysfunction compared with isogenic
controls. Relative to DSP-/- EHTs, heterozygous DSPtv EHTs had less functional
impairment. DSPtv EHTs displayed heightened sensitivity to TLR stimulation, and
when subjected to strain, DSPtv EHTs developed functional deficits, indicating
reduced contractile reserve compared with healthy controls. Colchicine or NF-κB
inhibitors improved strain-induced force deficits in DSPtv EHTs. Genomic
correction of DSP p.R1951X using adenine base editing reduced inflammatory
biomarker release from EHTs. Thus, EHTs replicate electrical and contractile
phenotypes seen in human myocarditis, implicating cytokine release as a key part
of the myogenic susceptibility to inflammation. The heightened innate immune
activation and sensitivity are targets for clinical intervention.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI180254
PMCID: PMC11213508
PMID: 38768074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: EMM is a consultant for
Amgen, Cytokinetics, PepGen, and Tenaya Therapeutics and is the founder of
Ikaika Therapeutics. JO is currently an employee of AbbVie. ALG receives
research support from Biohaven Pharmaceutical, Praxis Precision Medicines, and
Neurocrine Biosciences and has served as a consultant to Amgen. KJC has
consulted for Nuevocor. PWB has ownership interests in Clever Carnivore and
Defined Bioscience and receives royalty payments from Stanford University.
