---
reference_id: "PMID:25675982"
title: "Recurrent gain-of-function USP8 mutations in Cushing's disease."
authors:
- Ma ZY
- Song ZJ
- Chen JH
- Wang YF
- Li SQ
- Zhou LF
- Mao Y
- Li YM
- Hu RG
- Zhang ZY
- Ye HY
- Shen M
- Shou XF
- Li ZQ
- Peng H
- Wang QZ
- Zhou DZ
- Qin XL
- Ji J
- Zheng J
- Chen H
- Wang Y
- Geng DY
- Tang WJ
- Fu CW
- Shi ZF
- Zhang YC
- Ye Z
- He WQ
- Zhang QL
- Tang QS
- Xie R
- Shen JW
- Wen ZJ
- Zhou J
- Wang T
- Huang S
- Qiu HJ
- Qiao ND
- Zhang Y
- Pan L
- Bao WM
- Liu YC
- Huang CX
- Shi YY
- Zhao Y
journal: Cell Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/cr.2015.20
keywords:
- 14-3-3 Proteins/metabolism
- "ACTH-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/genetics, therapy"
- Adolescent
- Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/metabolism
- Adult
- Base Sequence
- Cushing Syndrome/genetics
- "Endopeptidases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Endosomal Sorting Complexes Required for Transport/genetics, metabolism"
- "ErbB Receptors/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Gefitinib
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pro-Opiomelanocortin/metabolism
- Protein Binding/genetics
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Quinazolines/pharmacology
- RNA Interference
- "RNA, Small Interfering"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Ubiquitin Thiolesterase/genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent gain-of-function USP8 mutations in Cushing's disease.
**Authors:** Ma ZY, Song ZJ, Chen JH, Wang YF, Li SQ, Zhou LF, Mao Y, Li YM, Hu RG, Zhang ZY, Ye HY, Shen M, Shou XF, Li ZQ, Peng H, Wang QZ, Zhou DZ, Qin XL, Ji J, Zheng J, Chen H, Wang Y, Geng DY, Tang WJ, Fu CW, Shi ZF, Zhang YC, Ye Z, He WQ, Zhang QL, Tang QS, Xie R, Shen JW, Wen ZJ, Zhou J, Wang T, Huang S, Qiu HJ, Qiao ND, Zhang Y, Pan L, Bao WM, Liu YC, Huang CX, Shi YY, Zhao Y
**Journal:** Cell Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cr.2015.20](https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2015.20)

## Content

1. Cell Res. 2015 Mar;25(3):306-17. doi: 10.1038/cr.2015.20. Epub 2015 Feb 13.

Recurrent gain-of-function USP8 mutations in Cushing's disease.

Ma ZY(1), Song ZJ(2), Chen JH(3), Wang YF(1), Li SQ(1), Zhou LF(1), Mao Y(1), Li
YM(4), Hu RG(5), Zhang ZY(4), Ye HY(4), Shen M(1), Shou XF(1), Li ZQ(2), Peng
H(5), Wang QZ(2), Zhou DZ(2), Qin XL(2), Ji J(2), Zheng J(2), Chen H(6), Wang
Y(6), Geng DY(7), Tang WJ(7), Fu CW(8), Shi ZF(1), Zhang YC(1), Ye Z(1), He
WQ(1), Zhang QL(1), Tang QS(1), Xie R(1), Shen JW(2), Wen ZJ(2), Zhou J(2), Wang
T(9), Huang S(9), Qiu HJ(1), Qiao ND(1), Zhang Y(1), Pan L(1), Bao WM(1), Liu
YC(10), Huang CX(11), Shi YY(12), Zhao Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shanghai Pituitary Tumor Center, Huashan
Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China.
(2)Bio-X Institutes, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Genetics of
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Institute of Social Cognitive and
Behavioral Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China.
(3)1] Bio-X Institutes, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Genetics of
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Institute of Social Cognitive and
Behavioral Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China [2]
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200030, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(6)Department of Neuropathology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China.
(7)Department of Radiology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200040, China.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, China.
(9)Department of Neurosurgery, Shanghai 5th People's Hospital, Shanghai 200240,
China.
(10)Department of Neurosurgery, Provincial hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong 250021, China.
(11)Shanghai Institute of Immunology & Department of Immunobiology and
Microbiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025,
China.
(12)1] Bio-X Institutes, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Genetics
of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Institute of Social Cognitive
and Behavioral Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China
[2] Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Metabolic Disease, the Affiliated
Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong 266003, China.

Cushing's disease, also known as adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-secreting
pituitary adenomas (PAs) that cause excess cortisol production, accounts for up
to 85% of corticotrophin-dependent Cushing's syndrome cases. However, the
genetic alterations in this disease are unclear. Here, we performed whole-exome
sequencing of DNA derived from 12 ACTH-secreting PAs and matched blood samples,
which revealed three types of somatic mutations in a candidate gene, USP8
(encoding ubiquitin-specific protease 8), exclusively in exon 14 in 8 of 12
ACTH-secreting PAs. We further evaluated somatic USP8 mutations in additional
258 PAs by Sanger sequencing. Targeted sequencing further identified a total of
17 types of USP8 variants in 67 of 108 ACTH-secreting PAs (62.04%). However,
none of these mutations was detected in other types of PAs (n = 150). These
mutations aggregate within the 14-3-3 binding motif of USP8 and disrupt the
interaction between USP8 and 14-3-3 protein, resulting in an elevated capacity
to protect EGFR from lysosomal degradation. Accordingly, PAs with mutated USP8
display a higher incidence of EGFR expression, elevated EGFR protein abundance
and mRNA expression levels of POMC, which encodes the precursor of ACTH. PAs
with mutated USP8 are significantly smaller in size and have higher ACTH
production than wild-type PAs. In surgically resected primary USP8-mutated tumor
cells, USP8 knockdown or blocking EGFR effectively attenuates ACTH secretion.
Taken together, somatic gain-of-function USP8 mutations are common and
contribute to ACTH overproduction in Cushing's disease. Inhibition of USP8 or
EGFR is promising for treating USP8-mutated corticotrophin adenoma. Our study
highlights the potentially functional mutated gene in Cushing's disease and
provides insights into the therapeutics of this disease.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2015.20
PMCID: PMC4349249
PMID: 25675982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
