---
reference_id: "PMID:25758373"
title: "Bone health in phenylketonuria: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Demirdas S
- Coakley KE
- Bisschop PH
- Hollak CE
- Bosch AM
- Singh RH
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0232-y
keywords:
- Aging
- Bone Density/physiology
- "Fractures, Bone"
- Humans
- Phenylketonurias/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone health in phenylketonuria: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Demirdas S, Coakley KE, Bisschop PH, Hollak CE, Bosch AM, Singh RH
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-015-0232-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-015-0232-y)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Feb 15;10:17. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0232-y.

Bone health in phenylketonuria: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Demirdas S(1), Coakley KE(2), Bisschop PH(3), Hollak CE(4), Bosch AM(5), Singh
RH(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. s.demirdas@amc.uva.nl.
(2)Nutrition and Health Sciences and Molecules to Mankind Programs, Laney
Graduate School and Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA,
USA. kcoakle@emory.edu.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
p.h.bisschop@amc.uva.nl.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
c.e.hollak@amc.uva.nl.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. a.m.bosch@amc.uva.nl.
(6)Metabolic Nutrition and Genetics Program Department of Human Genetics, Emory
University Atlanta GA United States, Atlanta, GA, USA. rsingh@emory.edu.

Patients with Phenylketonuria (PKU) reportedly have decreased bone mineral
density (BMD). The primary aim of this study was to perform a systematic review
and meta-analysis to determine the extent and significance of low BMD in early
treated patients with PKU. Secondary aims were to assess other bone status
indicators including bone turnover markers (BTM) and to define areas for future
research. Two research teams (Amsterdam, Netherlands and Atlanta, USA) performed
literature searches for articles reporting data on BMD, osteopenia and
osteoporosis, BTM or other bone indicators in patients with PKU. Included
articles were compared between research teams and assessed for quality and risk
of bias. A total of 13 unique articles were included; 11/13 articles reported
BMD including a total of 360 patients. Ten out of 11 articles found BMD was
significantly lower in patients with PKU. Meta-analyses for total BMD (TBMD; 3
studies; n = 133), lumbar spine BMD (LBMD; 7 studies; n = 247), and femoral neck
BMD (FBMD; 2 studies; n = 78) Z-scores were performed. Overall effect sizes
were: TBMD -0.45 (95% CI -0.61, -0.28); LBMD -0.70 (95% CI -0.82, -0.57); FBMD
-0.96 (95% CI -1.42, -0.49). Definitions of osteopenia and osteoporosis were
highly heterogeneous between studies and did not align with World Health
Organization standards and the International Society for Clinical Densitometry
positions on BMD measurement. Despite individual study findings of low BMD
indicating higher risk of osteoporosis, pooled available data suggest reduction
in BMD is not clinically important when using standard definitions of low BMD.
Results from studies evaluating BTM are inconclusive. Phenylalanine
concentration, vitamin D, PTH, and nutrient intake do not correlate with BMD or
BTM. We recommend forthcoming studies use standard definitions of low BMD to
determine clinical implications of BMD Z-scores below 0, explore cause of low
BMD in the subset of patients with low BMD for chronological age (Z-score < -2)
and assess fracture risk in patients with PKU.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-015-0232-y
PMCID: PMC4340652
PMID: 25758373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
