---
reference_id: "PMID:36221413"
title: "Probiotics and rifaximin for the prevention of travelers' diarrhea: A systematic review and network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Fan H
- Gao L
- Yin Z
- Ye S
- Zhao H
- Peng Q
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000030921
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Probiotics and rifaximin for the prevention of travelers' diarrhea: A systematic review and network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Fan H, Gao L, Yin Z, Ye S, Zhao H, Peng Q
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000030921](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000030921)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Oct 7;101(40):e30921. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000030921.

Probiotics and rifaximin for the prevention of travelers' diarrhea: A systematic 
review and network meta-analysis.

Fan H(1)(2), Gao L(3), Yin Z(2), Ye S(4), Zhao H(5), Peng Q(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Tourism and Service Management, Chongqing University of Education, 
Chongqing, China.
(2)College of Humanities and Social Sciences, Yuan Ze University, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan.
(3)School of Culture and Tourism, Chongqing City Management College, Chongqing, 
China.
(4)Chongqing Geomatics and Remote Sensing Center, Chongqing, China.
(5)School of Foreign Languages, Sichuan Normal University, Chengdu, China.
(6)Department of Endoscopy, Longmatan District People's Hospital, Luzhou City, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Probiotics and rifaximin are treatments for gut microbiota dysbiosis 
in patients with traveler's diarrhea (TD), and they both proved beneficial for 
the prevention of TD. However, comparative effectiveness research between them 
has not been performed. A systematic review and network meta-analysis are to be 
performed to clarify which of them is more effective in the prevention of TD.
METHODS: Literature concerning the effectiveness of probiotics or rifaximin in 
the prevention of TD was searched in Medline, Embase, the Cochrane Central 
Register of Controlled Trials, and clinical registries for randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs) from inception of these databases to November 30, 2021 without any 
language restrictions. The primary efficacy outcome was the incidence of TD, and 
the safety outcome was the incidence of adverse events. The effect size of 
probiotics was measured by using relative ratio (RR), and the network 
meta-analysis was performed by using a frequentist approach and a random-effect 
model.
RESULTS: Totally 17 RCTs after screening 1119 retrieved records were included in 
analysis and 9 RCTs were with low risk of bias. Compared with placebo, both 
probiotics and rifaximin were associated with lower incidence of TD (probiotics, 
RR 0.85, 95% CI 0.76-0.95; rifaximin, RR 0.47, 95% CI 0.35-0.63), and rifaximin 
was more effective than probiotics (RR 0.56, 95% CI 0.4-0.78). Further analysis 
showed that sodium butyrate, rifaximin and L. acidophilus + L. 
bulgaricus + Bifido.bifidum + Strept. Thermophilus were the three most effective 
treatments for TD.
CONCLUSIONS: Both rifaximin and probiotics are superior over placebo, and 
rifaximin has better treatment effect than probiotics in reducing the incidence 
of TD. Different types of probiotics have heterogeneous treatment effects.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000030921
PMCID: PMC9542755
PMID: 36221413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.