---
reference_id: "PMID:28168409"
title: Worldwide prevalence and incidence of osteoporotic vertebral fractures.
authors:
- Ballane G
- Cauley JA
- Luckey MM
- El-Hajj Fuleihan G
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-017-3909-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Worldwide prevalence and incidence of osteoporotic vertebral fractures.
**Authors:** Ballane G, Cauley JA, Luckey MM, El-Hajj Fuleihan G
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-017-3909-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-017-3909-3)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2017 May;28(5):1531-1542. doi: 10.1007/s00198-017-3909-3. Epub
 2017 Feb 6.

Worldwide prevalence and incidence of osteoporotic vertebral fractures.

Ballane G(1), Cauley JA(2), Luckey MM(3), El-Hajj Fuleihan G(4).

Author information:
(1)Calcium Metabolism and Osteoporosis Program, WHO Collaborating Center for 
Metabolic Bone Disorders, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, American 
University of Beirut Medical Center, Bliss Street, Beirut, 113-6044, Lebanon.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Barnabas Health Osteoporosis Center, Livingston, NJ, USA.
(4)Calcium Metabolism and Osteoporosis Program, WHO Collaborating Center for 
Metabolic Bone Disorders, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, American 
University of Beirut Medical Center, Bliss Street, Beirut, 113-6044, Lebanon. 
gf01@aub.edu.lb.

We investigated the prevalence and incidence of vertebral fractures worldwide. 
We used a systematic Medline search current to 2015 and updated as per authors' 
libraries. A total of 62 articles of fair to good quality and comparable methods 
for vertebral fracture identification were considered. The prevalence of 
morphometric vertebral fractures in European women is highest in Scandinavia 
(26%) and lowest in Eastern Europe (18%). Prevalence rates in North America (NA) 
for White women ≥50 are 20-24%, with a White/Black ratio of 1.6. Rates in women 
≥50 years in Latin America are overall lower than Europe and NA (11-19%). In 
Asia, rates in women above ≥65 are highest in Japan (24%), lowest in Indonesia 
(9%), and in the Middle East, Lebanon, rates are 20%. The highest-lowest ratio 
between countries, within and across continents, varied from 1.4-2.6. Incidence 
data is less abundant and more heterogeneous. Age-standardized rates in studies 
combining hospitalized and ambulatory vertebral fractures are highest in South 
Korea, USA, and Hong Kong and lowest in the UK. Neither a North-South gradient 
nor a relation to urbanization is evident. Conversely, the incidence of 
hospitalized vertebral fractures in European patients ≥50 shows a North-South 
gradient with 3-3.7-fold variability. In the USA, rates in Whites are 
approximately 4-fold higher than in Blacks. Vertebral fractures variation 
worldwide is lower than observed with hip fractures, and some of highest rates 
are unexpectedly from Asia. Better quality representative studies are needed. We 
investigate the occurrence of vertebral fractures, worldwide, using published 
data current until the present. Worldwide, the variation in vertebral fractures 
is lower than observed for hip fractures. Some of the highest rates are from 
North America and unexpectedly Asia. The highest-lowest ratio between countries, 
within and across continents, varied from 1.4-2.6. Better quality representative 
data is needed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-017-3909-3
PMID: 28168409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]