---
reference_id: "PMID:36128655"
title: "Liver transplantation in rare late-onset ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency with central nervous system injury: A case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Jin X
- Zeng X
- Zhao D
- Jiang N
journal: Brain Behav
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/brb3.2765
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver transplantation in rare late-onset ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency with central nervous system injury: A case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Jin X, Zeng X, Zhao D, Jiang N
**Journal:** Brain Behav (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/brb3.2765](https://doi.org/10.1002/brb3.2765)

## Content

1. Brain Behav. 2022 Oct;12(10):e2765. doi: 10.1002/brb3.2765. Epub 2022 Sep 20.

Liver transplantation in rare late-onset ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency 
with central nervous system injury: A case report and review of the literature.

Jin X(1), Zeng X(1), Zhao D(1), Jiang N(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Liver Surgery and Organ Transplantation Center, Shenzhen Third 
People's Hospital, Second Affiliated Hospital of Southern University of Science 
and Technology, National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Disease, 
Shenzhen, China.

BACKGROUND: Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD) is a genetic metabolic 
disease. Its clinical manifestations are mainly central nervous system 
dysfunction caused by high blood ammonia. Late-onset OTCD combined with central 
nervous system injury has a poor therapeutic response, which is one of the main 
factors affecting the prognosis and quality of life of patients. liver 
transplantation (LT) has gradually become a radical treatment for OTCD, which 
has achieved good results. However, there is no consensus on the timing of LT 
and problems of nervous system damage and repair.
METHODS: We report the development of late-onset OTCD with central nervous 
system injury in an 11-year-old child who received liver transplantation at our 
transplant center. His first symptoms were nonprojectile vomiting, followed by 
irritability and disturbance of consciousness, after which the disease 
progressed rapidly and finally resulted in a coma. After liver transplantation, 
the child's consciousness returned to normal, muscle strength of the limbs 
gradually recovered from grade 0 to grade 4, and muscle tone gradually recovered 
from grade 4 to grade 1, suggesting that the motor nerves had gradually 
recovered. However, the child is currently mentally retarded, and the language 
center has not yet fully recovered.At the same time, we made a literature review 
of OTCD.
CONCLUSION: For OTCD patients with central nervous system injury, liver 
transplantation can fundamentally solve the problem of ammonia metabolism in the 
liver and avoids further damage to the central nervous system caused by 
hyperammonemia. At the same time, children's nervous systems are in the 
developmental stage when neuroplasticity is greatest. If liver transplantation 
is performed as soon as possible, nerve repair is still possible.

© 2022 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.2765
PMCID: PMC9575608
PMID: 36128655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]