---
reference_id: "PMID:38831459"
title: "Whole genome sequencing of HER2-positive metastatic extramammary Paget's disease: a case report."
authors:
- Lim BY
- Guo Z
- Lim JQ
- Ko TK
- Lee ECY
- Kannan B
- Lee JY
- Lim AH
- Li Z
- Ng CC
- Busmanis I
- Chan JY
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03169-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Paget Disease, Extramammary/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Whole Genome Sequencing
- Male
- "Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Aged
- DNA Copy Number Variations/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole genome sequencing of HER2-positive metastatic extramammary Paget's disease: a case report.
**Authors:** Lim BY, Guo Z, Lim JQ, Ko TK, Lee ECY, Kannan B, Lee JY, Lim AH, Li Z, Ng CC, Busmanis I, Chan JY
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03169-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03169-y)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Jun 3;19(1):223. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03169-y.

Whole genome sequencing of HER2-positive metastatic extramammary Paget's 
disease: a case report.

Lim BY(1), Guo Z(1), Lim JQ(2)(3), Ko TK(1), Lee ECY(1), Kannan B(1), Lee JY(1), 
Lim AH(1), Li Z(1), Ng CC(1), Busmanis I(4), Chan JY(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Discovery Hub, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Division of Cellular and Molecular Research, National Cancer Centre 
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(5)Cancer Discovery Hub, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 
jasoncys@live.com.sg.
(6)Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. jasoncys@live.com.sg.
(7)Divison of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore. jasoncys@live.com.sg.

BACKGROUND: Extramammary Paget's disease (EMPD) is a rare cancer that occurs 
within the epithelium of the skin, arising predominantly in areas with high 
apocrine gland concentration such as the vulva, scrotum, penis and perianal 
regions. Here, we aim to integrate clinicopathological data with genomic 
analysis of aggressive, rapidly-progressing de novo metastatic EMPD responding 
to HER2-directed treatment in combination with other agents, to attain a more 
comprehensive understanding of the disease landscape.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining on the scrotal wall tumor and bone marrow 
metastasis demonstrated HER2 overexpression. Whole genome sequencing of the 
tumor and matched blood was performed.
RESULTS: Notable copy number gains (log2FC > 0.9) on chromosomes 7 and 8 were 
detected (n = 81), with 92.6% of these unique genes specifically located on 
chromosome 8. Prominent cancer-associated genes include ZNF703, HOOK3, DDHD2, 
LSM1, NSD3, ADAM9, BRF2, KAT6A and FGFR1. Interestingly, ERBB2 gene did not 
exhibit high copy number gain (log2FC = 0.4) although 90% of tumor cells stained 
HER2-positive. Enrichment in pathways associated with transforming growth 
factor-beta (TGFβ) (FDR = 0.0376, Enrichment Ratio = 8.12) and fibroblast growth 
factor receptor (FGFR1) signaling (FDR = 0.0082, Enrichment Ratio = 2.3) was 
detected. Amplicon structure analysis revealed that this was a simple-linear 
amplification event.
CONCLUSION: Whole genome sequencing revealed the underlying copy number 
variation landscape in HER2-positive metastatic EMPD. The presence of 
alternative signalling pathways and genetic variants suggests potential 
interactions with HER2 signalling, which possibly contributed to the HER2 
overexpression and observed response to HER2-directed therapy combined with 
other agents in a comprehensive treatment regimen.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03169-y
PMCID: PMC11149212
PMID: 38831459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.