---
reference_id: "PMID:25362229"
title: Imiquimod for anogenital warts in non-immunocompromised adults.
authors:
- Grillo-Ardila CF
- Angel-Müller E
- Salazar-Díaz LC
- Gaitán HG
- Ruiz-Parra AI
- Lethaby A
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010389.pub2
keywords:
- Adult
- "Aminoquinolines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Anus Diseases/drug therapy, virology"
- Female
- "Genital Diseases, Female/drug therapy, virology"
- "Genital Diseases, Male/drug therapy, virology"
- Humans
- Imiquimod
- Immunocompetence
- "Interferon Inducers/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Keratolytic Agents/therapeutic use
- Male
- Podophyllin/therapeutic use
- Podophyllotoxin/therapeutic use
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Recurrence
- Self Administration
- Warts/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imiquimod for anogenital warts in non-immunocompromised adults.
**Authors:** Grillo-Ardila CF, Angel-Müller E, Salazar-Díaz LC, Gaitán HG, Ruiz-Parra AI, Lethaby A
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD010389.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010389.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 Nov 1;2014(11):CD010389. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD010389.pub2.

Imiquimod for anogenital warts in non-immunocompromised adults.

Grillo-Ardila CF(1), Angel-Müller E, Salazar-Díaz LC, Gaitán HG, Ruiz-Parra AI, 
Lethaby A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Clinical Research Institute, 
Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Carrera 30 No 45-03, 
Bogota, Colombia.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010389.

BACKGROUND: 30% of people with anogenital warts (AGW) have spontaneous 
regression of lesions but there is no way to determine whether a specific lesion 
will remain. There are a wide range of options available for treating people 
with AGW and selection is based on clinician's experience, patient preferences 
and adverse effects. The imiquimod could offer the advantages of patient-applied 
therapies without incurring the limitations of provider-administered treatments.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness and safety of imiquimod for the 
treatment of AGW in non-immunocompromised adults.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Sexually Transmitted Infections Group 
Specialized Register (15 April 2014), CENTRAL (1991 to 15 April 2014), MEDLINE 
(1946 to 15 April 2014), EMBASE (1947 to 15 April 2014), LILACS (1982 to 15 
April 2014), World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry 
(ICTRP) (15 April 2014), ClinicalTrials.gov (15 April 2014), Web of Science 
(2001 to 15 April 2014) and OpenGrey (15 April 2014). We also handsearched 
conference proceedings, contacted trial authors and reviewed the reference lists 
of retrieved studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing the use of 
imiquimod with placebo, any other patient-applied or any other 
provider-administered treatment (excluding interferon and 5-fluorouracil which 
are assessed in other Cochrane Reviews) for the treatment of AGW in 
non-immunocompromised adults.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three review authors independently assessed trials 
for inclusion, extracted data and assessed risk of bias. We resolved any 
disagreements through consensus. The quality of the evidence was assessed using 
the GRADE approach.
MAIN RESULTS: Ten RCTs (1734 participants) met our inclusion criteria of which 
six were funded by industry. We judged the risk of bias of the included trials 
as high. Six trials (1294 participants) compared the use of imiquimod versus 
placebo. There was very low quality evidence that imiquimod was superior to 
placebo in achieving complete and partial regression (RR 4.03, 95% CI 2.03 to 
7.99; RR 2.56, 95% CI 2.05 to 3.20, respectively). When compared with placebo, 
the effects of imiquimod on recurrence (RR 2.76, 95% CI 0.70 to 10.91), 
appearance of new warts (RR 0.76, 95% CI 0.58 to 1.00) and frequency of systemic 
adverse reactions (RR 0.91, 95% CI 0.63 to 1.32) were imprecise. We downgraded 
the quality of evidence to low or very low. There was low quality evidence that 
imiquimod led to more local adverse reactions (RR 1.73, 95% CI 1.18 to 2.53) and 
pain (RR 11.84, 95% CI 3.36 to 41.63).Two trials (105 participants) compared the 
use of imiquimod versus any other patient-applied treatment (podophyllotoxin and 
podophyllin). The estimated effects of imiquimod on complete regression (RR 
1.09, 95% CI 0.80 to 1.48), partial regression (RR 0.77, 95% CI 0.40 to 1.47), 
recurrence (RR 0.49, 95% CI 0.21 to 1.11) or the presence of local adverse 
reactions (RR 1.24, 95% CI 1.00 to 1.54) were imprecise (very low quality 
evidence). There was low quality evidence that systemic adverse reactions were 
less frequent with imiquimod (RR 0.30, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.98).Finally, two trials 
(335 participants) compared imiquimod with any other provider-administered 
treatment (ablative methods and cryotherapy). There was very low quality of 
evidence that imiquimod did not have a lower frequency of complete regression 
(RR 0.84, 95% CI 0.56 to 1.28). There was very low quality evidence that 
imiquimod led to a lower rate of recurrence during six-month follow-up (RR 0.24, 
95% CI 0.10 to 0.56) but this did not translate in to a lower recurrence from 
six to 12 months (RR 0.71, 95% CI 0.40 to 1.25; very low quality evidence). 
There was very low quality evidence that imiquimod was associated with less pain 
(RR 0.30, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.54) and fewer local reactions (RR 0.55, 95% CI 0.40 
to 0.74).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The benefits and harms of imiquimod compared with placebo 
should be regarded with caution due to the risk of bias, imprecision and 
inconsistency for many of the outcomes we assessed in this Cochrane Review. The 
evidence for many of the outcomes that show imiquimod and patient-applied 
treatment (podophyllotoxin or podophyllin) confer similar benefits but fewer 
systematic reactions with the Imiquimod, is of low or very low quality. The 
quality of evidence for the outcomes assessing imiquimod and other 
provider-administered treatment were of very low quality.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010389.pub2
PMCID: PMC10777270
PMID: 25362229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the review authors had studies that were 
included in this Cochrane Review. Salazar‐Díaz LC received financial support 
from the Colombian Department for Science, Technology and Innovation Colciencias 
as part of a program named "Young researchers" (Grant No: 566/2012). This 
systematic review was developed independently by the review author team and this 
entity was not part of the development process.