---
reference_id: "PMID:35935971"
title: "Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte Antigen 4 Haploinsufficiency Presenting As Refractory Celiac-Like Disease: Case Report."
authors:
- Collen LV
- Salgado CA
- Bao B
- Janssen E
- Weir D
- Goldsmith J
- Leichtner A
- Sabery Khavari N
- Gernez Y
- Snapper SB
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.894648
keywords:
- Autoimmunity
- CTLA-4 Antigen/genetics
- "Celiac Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diet, Gluten-Free"
- Haploinsufficiency
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte Antigen 4 Haploinsufficiency Presenting As Refractory Celiac-Like Disease: Case Report.
**Authors:** Collen LV, Salgado CA, Bao B, Janssen E, Weir D, Goldsmith J, Leichtner A, Sabery Khavari N, Gernez Y, Snapper SB
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.894648](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.894648)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jul 22;13:894648. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.894648.
eCollection 2022.

Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte Antigen 4 Haploinsufficiency Presenting As Refractory
Celiac-Like Disease: Case Report.

Collen LV(1), Salgado CA(2), Bao B(1), Janssen E(3), Weir D(1), Goldsmith J(4),
Leichtner A(1), Sabery Khavari N(5), Gernez Y(2), Snapper SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Department of
Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
United States.
(2)Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States.
(3)Division of Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(4)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, United States.
(5)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States.

Primary immunodeficiency may present with treatment-refractory enteropathy. We
present two patients with celiac/celiac-like disease diagnosed in early
childhood and refractory to the gluten-free diet. One patient had features of
multi-system autoimmunity, whereas the other had celiac-like disease as an
isolated clinical finding. Both patients underwent genetic testing given disease
refractoriness and were ultimately diagnosed with cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen
4 (CTLA4) haploinsufficiency. They are both now in complete clinical and
endoscopic remission on abatacept. CTLA4 haploinsufficiency has incomplete
penetrance and significant phenotypic heterogeneity but should be considered in
the differential diagnosis of refractory celiac/celiac-like disease, as
treatment implications are significant.

Copyright © 2022 Collen, Salgado, Bao, Janssen, Weir, Goldsmith, Leichtner,
Sabery Khavari, Gernez and Snapper.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.894648
PMCID: PMC9352891
PMID: 35935971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SS declares the following interests: scientific
advisory board participation for Pfizer, BMS, Lilly, IFM Therapeutics, Merck,
and Pandion Inc; grant support from Pfizer, Novartis, and Takeda; consulting for
Hoffman La Roche, Takeda, and Amgen. The remaining authors declare that the
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
