---
reference_id: "PMID:29714718"
title: "Factors that affect error potentials during a grasping task: toward a hybrid natural movement decoding BCI."
authors:
- Omedes J
- Schwarz A
- Müller-Putz GR
- Montesano L
journal: J Neural Eng
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aac1a1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors that affect error potentials during a grasping task: toward a hybrid natural movement decoding BCI.
**Authors:** Omedes J, Schwarz A, Müller-Putz GR, Montesano L
**Journal:** J Neural Eng (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1088/1741-2552/aac1a1](https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/aac1a1)

## Content

1. J Neural Eng. 2018 Aug;15(4):046023. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aac1a1. Epub 2018 
May 1.

Factors that affect error potentials during a grasping task: toward a hybrid 
natural movement decoding BCI.

Omedes J(1), Schwarz A, Müller-Putz GR, Montesano L.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigación en Ingeniería de Aragón (I3A), Edificio I+D+i, 
Mariano Esquillor, E-50018 Zaragoza, Spain. Departamento de Informática e 
Ingeniería de Sistemas (DIIS), University of Zaragoza, Maria de Luna 1, E-50018 
Zaragoza, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: In this manuscript, we consider factors that may affect the design of 
a hybrid brain-computer interface (BCI). We combine neural correlates of natural 
movements and interaction error-related potentials (ErrP) to perform a 3D 
reaching task, focusing on the impact that such factors have on the evoked ErrP 
signatures and in their classification.
APPROACH: Users attempted to control a 3D virtual interface that simulated their 
own hand, to reach and grasp two different objects. Three factors of interest 
were modulated during the experimentation: (1) execution speed of the grasping, 
(2) type of grasping and (3) mental strategy (motor imagery or real motion) used 
to produce motor commands. Thirteen healthy subjects carried out the protocol. 
The peaks and latencies of the ErrP were analyzed for the different factors as 
well as the classification performance.
MAIN RESULTS: ErrP are evoked for erroneous commands decoded from neural 
correlates of natural movements. The analysis of variance (ANOVA) analyses 
revealed that latency and magnitude of the most characteristic ErrP peaks were 
significantly influenced by the speed at which the grasping was executed, but 
not the type of grasp. This resulted in an greater accuracy of single-trial 
decoding of errors for fast movements (75.65%) compared to slow ones (68.99%).
SIGNIFICANCE: Understanding the effects of combining paradigms is a first step 
to design hybrid BCI that optimize decoding accuracy and can be deployed in 
motor substitution and neuro-rehabilitation applications.

DOI: 10.1088/1741-2552/aac1a1
PMID: 29714718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]