---
reference_id: "PMID:35225118"
title: "Collagen misfolding mutations: the contribution of the unfolded protein response to the molecular pathology."
authors:
- Bateman JF
- Shoulders MD
- Lamandé SR
journal: Connect Tissue Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/03008207.2022.2036735
keywords:
- Collagen/genetics
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- Mutation
- "Pathology, Molecular"
- Unfolded Protein Response
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Collagen misfolding mutations: the contribution of the unfolded protein response to the molecular pathology.
**Authors:** Bateman JF, Shoulders MD, Lamandé SR
**Journal:** Connect Tissue Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03008207.2022.2036735](https://doi.org/10.1080/03008207.2022.2036735)

## Content

1. Connect Tissue Res. 2022 May;63(3):210-227. doi:
10.1080/03008207.2022.2036735.  Epub 2022 Feb 26.

Collagen misfolding mutations: the contribution of the unfolded protein response 
to the molecular pathology.

Bateman JF(1)(2), Shoulders MD(3), Lamandé SR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Musculoskeletal Research, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA.

Mutations in collagen genes cause a broad range of connective tissue 
pathologies. Structural mutations that impact procollagen assembly or triple 
helix formation and stability are a common and important mutation class. How 
misfolded procollagens engage with the cellular proteostasis machinery and 
whether they can elicit a cytotoxic unfolded protein response (UPR) is a topic 
of considerable research interest. Such interest is well justified since 
modulating the UPR could offer a new approach to treat collagenopathies for 
which there are no current disease mechanism-targeting therapies. This review 
scrutinizes the evidence underpinning the view that endoplasmic reticulum stress 
and chronic UPR activation contributes significantly to the pathophysiology of 
the collagenopathies. While there is strong evidence that the UPR contributes to 
the pathology for collagen X misfolding mutations, the evidence that misfolding 
mutations in other collagen types induce a canonical, cytotoxic UPR is 
incomplete. To gain a more comprehensive understanding about how the UPR 
amplifies to pathology, and thus what types of manipulations of the UPR might 
have therapeutic relevance, much more information is needed about how specific 
misfolding mutation types engage differentially with the UPR and downstream 
signaling responses. Most importantly, since the capacity of the proteostasis 
machinery to respond to collagen misfolding is likely to vary between cell 
types, reflecting their functional roles in collagen and extracellular matrix 
biosynthesis, detailed studies on the UPR should focus as much as possible on 
the actual target cells involved in the collagen pathologies.

DOI: 10.1080/03008207.2022.2036735
PMCID: PMC8977234
PMID: 35225118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests. The authors declare no 
competing interests