---
reference_id: "PMID:18775955"
title: Infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia and mitochondrial recessive ataxia syndrome are associated with neuronal complex I defect and mtDNA depletion.
authors:
- Hakonen AH
- Goffart S
- Marjavaara S
- Paetau A
- Cooper H
- Mattila K
- Lampinen M
- Sajantila A
- Lönnqvist T
- Spelbrink JN
- Suomalainen A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn280
keywords:
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Brain/metabolism
- "DNA Helicases/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics, metabolism"
- "Electron Transport Complex I/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mitochondria/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Mitochondrial Proteins
- Mutation
- Neurons/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- Protein Transport
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia and mitochondrial recessive ataxia syndrome are associated with neuronal complex I defect and mtDNA depletion.
**Authors:** Hakonen AH, Goffart S, Marjavaara S, Paetau A, Cooper H, Mattila K, Lampinen M, Sajantila A, Lönnqvist T, Spelbrink JN, Suomalainen A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddn280](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddn280)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Dec 1;17(23):3822-35. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn280. Epub 2008
Sep  5.

Infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia and mitochondrial recessive ataxia 
syndrome are associated with neuronal complex I defect and mtDNA depletion.

Hakonen AH(1), Goffart S, Marjavaara S, Paetau A, Cooper H, Mattila K, Lampinen 
M, Sajantila A, Lönnqvist T, Spelbrink JN, Suomalainen A.

Author information:
(1)Research Program of Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland.

Infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA) is a severe neurodegenerative 
disorder caused by the recessive mutation in PEO1, leading to an Y508C change in 
the mitochondrial helicase Twinkle, in its helicase domain. However, no 
mitochondrial dysfunction has been found in this disease. We studied here the 
consequences of IOSCA for the central nervous system, as well as the in vitro 
performance of the IOSCA mutant protein. The results of the mtDNA analyses were 
compared to findings in a similar juvenile or adult-onset ataxia syndrome, 
mitochondrial recessive ataxia syndrome (MIRAS), caused by the W748S mutation in 
the mitochondrial DNA polymerase (POLG). We show here that IOSCA brain does not 
harbor mtDNA deletions or increased amount of mtDNA point mutations, whereas 
MIRAS brain shows multiple deletions of mtDNA. However, IOSCA, and to a lesser 
extent also MIRAS, show mtDNA depletion in the brain and the liver. In both 
diseases, especially large neurons show respiratory chain complex I (CI) 
deficiency, but also CIV is decreased in IOSCA. Helicase activity, 
hexamerization and nucleoid structure of the IOSCA mutant were, however, 
unaffected. The lack of in vitro helicase defect or cell culture phenotype 
suggest that Twinkle-Y508C dysfunction affects mtDNA maintenance in a highly 
context and cell-type specific manner. Our results indicate that IOSCA is a new 
member of the mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn280
PMID: 18775955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]