---
reference_id: "PMID:37873837"
title: "Acute Presentation and Long-Term Rehabilitation Follow-Up of Ischemic Myelopathy Due to Clinically Suspected Fibrocartilaginous Embolism in an Adolescent Male: A Case Report and Review."
authors:
- Berla E
- Kerzhner O
- Caspi T
- Shaklai S
- Michaeli D
journal: Neurol Int
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/neurolint15040080
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Presentation and Long-Term Rehabilitation Follow-Up of Ischemic Myelopathy Due to Clinically Suspected Fibrocartilaginous Embolism in an Adolescent Male: A Case Report and Review.
**Authors:** Berla E, Kerzhner O, Caspi T, Shaklai S, Michaeli D
**Journal:** Neurol Int (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/neurolint15040080](https://doi.org/10.3390/neurolint15040080)

## Content

1. Neurol Int. 2023 Oct 19;15(4):1273-1289. doi: 10.3390/neurolint15040080.

Acute Presentation and Long-Term Rehabilitation Follow-Up of Ischemic Myelopathy 
Due to Clinically Suspected Fibrocartilaginous Embolism in an Adolescent Male: A 
Case Report and Review.

Berla E(1), Kerzhner O(2), Caspi T(2), Shaklai S(2)(3)(4), Michaeli D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Israel Defense Forces Medical Corps, Ramat Gan 02149, Israel.
(2)Loewenstein Rehabilitation Medical Center, Ra'anana 43100, Israel.
(3)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 39040, Israel.
(4)Pediatric Rehabilitation Unit, Department of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, Loewenstein Rehabilitation Medical Center, Ra'anana 43100, 
Israel.

Ischemic myelopathy is uncommon in the pediatric population, with 
fibrocartilaginous embolism (FCE) being one of its rarest causes. We present the 
case of an otherwise healthy 17-year-old student who experienced sudden onset of 
severe low-back pain amidst intensive physical training, which rapidly 
deteriorated to complete sensory-motor paralysis of his lower limbs. He was 
treated with IV Methylprednisolone and anticoagulation after the initial work-up 
suggested spinal cord infarction. After eight days, sufficient 
clinical-radiological correlation was achieved to support FCE diagnosis as the 
most likely cause of infarction. He subsequently received inpatient 
rehabilitation treatment for four months, after which he was followed as an 
outpatient for a total period of 16 months. While significant neurological and 
functional gains were achieved during this period, he also experienced some 
worsening. This case highlights the importance both of performing a thorough 
assessment and being familiar with FCE as a possible differential diagnosis of 
spinal cord infarction in children, to facilitate its timely identification and 
proper acute and long-term management. This case report was prepared following 
CARE guidelines after obtaining the patient's written informed consent.

DOI: 10.3390/neurolint15040080
PMCID: PMC10594434
PMID: 37873837

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.