---
reference_id: "PMID:15365985"
title: The role of tau (MAPT) in frontotemporal dementia and related tauopathies.
authors:
- Rademakers R
- Cruts M
- van Broeckhoven C
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20086
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of tau (MAPT) in frontotemporal dementia and related tauopathies.
**Authors:** Rademakers R, Cruts M, van Broeckhoven C
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20086](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20086)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2004 Oct;24(4):277-95. doi: 10.1002/humu.20086.

The role of tau (MAPT) in frontotemporal dementia and related tauopathies.

Rademakers R(1), Cruts M, van Broeckhoven C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Neurogenetics Group, Flanders 
Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology, University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, 
Belgium.

Tau is a multifunctional protein that was originally identified as a 
microtubule-associated protein. In patients diagnosed with frontotemporal 
dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, mutations in the gene 
encoding tau (MAPT) have been identified that disrupt the normal binding of tau 
to tubulin resulting in pathological deposits of hyperphosphorylated tau. 
Abnormal filamentous tau deposits have been reported as a pathological 
characteristic in several other neurodegenerative diseases, including 
frontotemporal dementia, Pick Disease, Alzheimer disease, argyrophilic grain 
disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, and corticobasal degeneration. In the 
last five years, extensive research has identified 34 different pathogenic MAPT 
mutations in 101 families worldwide. In vitro, cell-free and transfected cell 
studies have provided valuable information on tau dysfunction and transgenic 
mice carrying human MAPT mutations are being generated to study the influence of 
MAPT mutations in vivo. This mutation update describes the considerable 
differences in clinical and pathological presentation of patients with MAPT 
mutations and summarizes the effect of the different mutations on tau 
functioning. In addition, the role of tau as a genetic susceptibility factor is 
discussed, together with the genetic evidence for additional causal genes for 
tau-positive as well as tau-negative dementia.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20086
PMID: 15365985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]