---
reference_id: "PMID:36429009"
title: Cortical Pathology in Vanishing White Matter.
authors:
- Man JHK
- van Gelder CAGH
- Breur M
- Okkes D
- Molenaar D
- van der Sluis S
- Abbink T
- Altelaar M
- van der Knaap MS
- Bugiani M
journal: Cells
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cells11223581
keywords:
- Humans
- White Matter/pathology
- Leukoencephalopathies/genetics
- Astrocytes/metabolism
- Proteomics
- Mitochondria/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cortical Pathology in Vanishing White Matter.
**Authors:** Man JHK, van Gelder CAGH, Breur M, Okkes D, Molenaar D, van der Sluis S, Abbink T, Altelaar M, van der Knaap MS, Bugiani M
**Journal:** Cells (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells11223581](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11223581)

## Content

1. Cells. 2022 Nov 12;11(22):3581. doi: 10.3390/cells11223581.

Cortical Pathology in Vanishing White Matter.

Man JHK(1)(2)(3), van Gelder CAGH(4)(5), Breur M(1)(2)(3), Okkes D(1)(2)(3), 
Molenaar D(6), van der Sluis S(7), Abbink T(1)(2)(3), Altelaar M(4)(5), van der 
Knaap MS(1)(2)(3)(8), Bugiani M(2)(3)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Neurology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centers, VU University Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam 
University Medical Centers, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 1081 HV Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for 
Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Utrecht, 3584 CS Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Netherlands Proteomics Center, 3584 CS Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Systems Bioinformatics, VU University Amsterdam, 1081 HV 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychology and Psychiatry, Complex Trait 
Genetics, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU University Medical Center, 1081 HV 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Integrative Neurophysiology, Center for Neurogenomics and 
Cognitive Research, VU University Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, 1081 HV 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Vanishing white matter (VWM) is classified as a leukodystrophy with astrocytes 
as primary drivers in its pathogenesis. Magnetic resonance imaging has 
documented the progressive thinning of cortices in long-surviving patients. 
Routine histopathological analyses, however, have not yet pointed to cortical 
involvement in VWM. Here, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the VWM cortex. 
We employed high-resolution-mass-spectrometry-based proteomics and 
immunohistochemistry to gain insight into possible molecular disease mechanisms 
in the cortices of VWM patients. The proteome analysis revealed 268 
differentially expressed proteins in the VWM cortices compared to the controls. 
A majority of these proteins formed a major protein interaction network. A 
subsequent gene ontology analysis identified enrichment for terms such as 
cellular metabolism, particularly mitochondrial activity. Importantly, some of 
the proteins with the most prominent changes in expression were found in 
astrocytes, indicating cortical astrocytic involvement. Indeed, we confirmed 
that VWM cortical astrocytes exhibit morphological changes and are less complex 
in structure than control cells. Our findings also suggest that these astrocytes 
are immature and not reactive. Taken together, we provide insights into cortical 
involvement in VWM, which has to be taken into account when developing 
therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11223581
PMCID: PMC9688115
PMID: 36429009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.