---
reference_id: "PMID:29345160"
title: "Inherited forms of bladder cancer: a review of Lynch syndrome and other inherited conditions."
authors:
- Phelan A
- Lopez-Beltran A
- Montironi R
- Zhang S
- Raspollini MR
- Cheng M
- Kaimakliotis HZ
- Koch MO
- Cheng L
journal: Future Oncol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2217/fon-2017-0346
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited forms of bladder cancer: a review of Lynch syndrome and other inherited conditions.
**Authors:** Phelan A, Lopez-Beltran A, Montironi R, Zhang S, Raspollini MR, Cheng M, Kaimakliotis HZ, Koch MO, Cheng L
**Journal:** Future Oncol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fon-2017-0346](https://doi.org/10.2217/fon-2017-0346)

## Content

1. Future Oncol. 2018 Feb;14(3):277-290. doi: 10.2217/fon-2017-0346. Epub 2018
Jan  18.

Inherited forms of bladder cancer: a review of Lynch syndrome and other 
inherited conditions.

Phelan A(1), Lopez-Beltran A(2), Montironi R(3), Zhang S(1), Raspollini MR(4), 
Cheng M(1), Kaimakliotis HZ(5), Koch MO(5), Cheng L(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN 46202, USA.
(2)Unit of Anatomical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Cordoba, Spain & 
Champalimaud Clinical Center, Lisbon 1400038, Portugal.
(3)Institute of Pathological Anatomy & Histopathology, School of Medicine, 
Polytechnic University of the Marche Region (Ancona), United Hospitals, Ancona 
60126, Italy.
(4)Histopathology & Molecular Diagnostics, University Hospital Careggi, Florence 
50134, Italy.
(5)Department of Urology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN 46202, USA.

Environmental factors that play a role in the urothelial carcinogenesis have 
been well characterized. Current research is continuously exploring potential 
heritable forms of bladder cancer. Lynch syndrome is a well-known inheritable 
disease that increases the risk for a variety of cancers, including urothelial 
carcinomas. Screening of patients with known Lynch syndrome is important to 
evaluate for development of new primary tumors. Further study may provide more 
information on what level of follow-up each patient needs. Recent data suggest 
that mismatch repair mutations confer a greater risk for urothelial cancer. 
Additional large patient series as well as advancement of molecular testing may 
provide triage for Lynch syndrome patients in regards to the frequency and type 
of screening best suited for individual patient.

DOI: 10.2217/fon-2017-0346
PMID: 29345160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]