---
reference_id: "PMID:33645194"
title: Sarcoidosis Presenting as Fatigue and Weakness.
authors:
- Zubair SM
- Rashid NH
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2021'
doi: 10.29271/jcpsp.2021.02.218
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcoidosis Presenting as Fatigue and Weakness.
**Authors:** Zubair SM, Rashid NH
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2021)
**DOI:** [10.29271/jcpsp.2021.02.218](https://doi.org/10.29271/jcpsp.2021.02.218)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2021 Feb;31(2):218-220. doi: 
10.29271/jcpsp.2021.02.218.

Sarcoidosis Presenting as Fatigue and Weakness.

Zubair SM(1), Rashid NH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, The Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, 
Pakistan.

Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disorder of unknown cause that occurs in 
both men and women of all races. It typically presents in patients after 20 
years of age. Sarcoidosis most frequently involves the lung, but up to 30 
percent of patients present with extra-thoracic manifestations. It can involve 
multiple organs to a variable extent and degree. In areas, where tuberculosis is 
endemic, the diagnosis of sarcoidosis may be overlooked and misdiagnosed because 
of clinical and radiographic resemblance. Herein, we present a case of a 
middle-aged man who visited multiple physicians with constitutional symptoms and 
was treated symptomatically but did not improve. He later developed skin lesions 
which were biopsied and led to correct diagnosis of sarcoidosis. Hence, a 
clinician should be aware of all the spectrums of presentations of rare diseases 
like sarcoidosis and always keep it as a differential when treating common 
diseases like tuberculosis. Key Words: Sarcoidosis, Skin lesions, Fatigue.

DOI: 10.29271/jcpsp.2021.02.218
PMID: 33645194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]