---
reference_id: "PMID:20186815"
title: Molecular and phenotypic aspects of CHD7 mutation in CHARGE syndrome.
authors:
- Zentner GE
- Layman WS
- Martin DM
- Scacheri PC
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33323
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Animals
- Coloboma/genetics
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Ear, Inner/abnormalities"
- Facial Paralysis/genetics
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
- Urogenital System
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and phenotypic aspects of CHD7 mutation in CHARGE syndrome.
**Authors:** Zentner GE, Layman WS, Martin DM, Scacheri PC
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.33323](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.33323)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Mar;152A(3):674-86. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33323.

Molecular and phenotypic aspects of CHD7 mutation in CHARGE syndrome.

Zentner GE(1), Layman WS, Martin DM, Scacheri PC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.

CHARGE syndrome [coloboma of the eye, heart defects, atresia of the choanae, 
retardation of growth and/or development, genital and/or urinary abnormalities, 
and ear abnormalities (including deafness)] is a genetic disorder characterized 
by a specific and a recognizable pattern of anomalies. De novo mutations in the 
gene encoding chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 7 (CHD7) are the major 
cause of CHARGE syndrome. Here, we review the clinical features of 379 CHARGE 
patients who tested positive or negative for mutations in CHD7. We found that 
CHARGE individuals with CHD7 mutations more commonly have ocular colobomas, 
temporal bone anomalies (semicircular canal hypoplasia/dysplasia), and facial 
nerve paralysis compared with mutation negative individuals. We also highlight 
recent genetic and genomic studies that have provided functional insights into 
CHD7 and the pathogenesis of CHARGE syndrome.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33323
PMCID: PMC2918278
PMID: 20186815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]