---
reference_id: "PMID:24509242"
title: "Factors that affect risk for pancreatic disease in the general population: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies."
authors:
- Alsamarrai A
- Das SL
- Windsor JA
- Petrov MS
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2014.01.038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors that affect risk for pancreatic disease in the general population: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies.
**Authors:** Alsamarrai A, Das SL, Windsor JA, Petrov MS
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cgh.2014.01.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2014.01.038)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Oct;12(10):1635-44.e5; quiz e103. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2014.01.038. Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Factors that affect risk for pancreatic disease in the general population: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies.

Alsamarrai A(1), Das SL(1), Windsor JA(1), Petrov MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. 
Electronic address: max.petrov@gmail.com.

Comment in
    Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Oct;12(10):1645-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2014.02.032.
    Rev Prat. 2014 Dec;64(10):1361.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Pancreatic diseases place significant burdens on health care 
systems worldwide. However, there is lack of agreement about which factors 
increase or reduce risk for pancreatic disease. We reviewed high-quality studies 
of factors that affect risk for pancreatic diseases in the general population.
METHODS: We searched 3 databases (Medline, Embase, and Scopus) for prospective 
cohort studies of modifiable risk and/or protective factors for acute 
pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis, and pancreatic cancer in adult populations. 
Factors that were investigated in 2 or more studies were assessed by 
meta-analysis if the required data were available. Subgroup analyses were 
performed when appropriate. Outcome measures were relative risk (RR) and 95% 
confidence interval (CI).
RESULTS: Our analysis included 51 population-based studies with more than 3 
million individuals and nearly 11,000 patients with pancreatic diseases. A total 
of 31 different factors were investigated. Current tobacco use was the single 
most important risk factor for pancreatic diseases (RR, 1.87; 95% CI, 
1.54-2.27), followed by obesity (RR, 1.48; 95% CI, 1.15-1.92) and heavy use of 
alcohol (RR, 1.37; 95% CI, 1.19-1.58). Tobacco and heavy use of alcohol had 
bigger effects on risk of acute pancreatitis and chronic pancreatitis than 
pancreatic cancer. Vegetable consumption (RR, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.57-0.88) and fruit 
consumption (RR, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.60-0.90) provided the greatest degree of 
protection against pancreatic diseases on the basis of meta-analyses. Vegetable 
consumption had stronger association with protection against acute pancreatitis 
and fruit consumption with protection against pancreatic cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of systematic review and meta-analysis, current 
tobacco use, obesity, and heavy use of alcohol are associated with significant 
increases in risk for pancreatic diseases. Vegetables and fruit consumption are 
associated with reduced risk for pancreatic diseases. Prevention strategies for 
acute pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis, and pancreatic cancer should consider 
these factors.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2014.01.038
PMID: 24509242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]