---
reference_id: "PMID:25318967"
title: "Characteristics of pleural effusions in systemic lupus erythematosus: differential diagnosis of lupus pleuritis."
authors:
- Choi BY
- Yoon MJ
- Shin K
- Lee YJ
- Song YW
journal: Lupus
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1177/0961203314555171
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics of pleural effusions in systemic lupus erythematosus: differential diagnosis of lupus pleuritis.
**Authors:** Choi BY, Yoon MJ, Shin K, Lee YJ, Song YW
**Journal:** Lupus (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0961203314555171](https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203314555171)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2015 Mar;24(3):321-6. doi: 10.1177/0961203314555171. Epub 2014 Oct 15.

Characteristics of pleural effusions in systemic lupus erythematosus: 
differential diagnosis of lupus pleuritis.

Choi BY(1), Yoon MJ(1), Shin K(2), Lee YJ(3), Song YW(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, 
Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Borame Medical 
Center, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam-si, Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, 
Korea Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Medical 
Research Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea 
ysong@snu.ac.kr.

We investigated the clinical characteristics of pleural effusion in systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE). A prospective analysis of 17 SLE patients with 
pleural effusion (seven lupus pleuritis, eight transudative effusions and two 
parapneumonic effusions) was performed. Thirty non-SLE patients with pleural 
effusion were recruited as controls. A pleural fluid ANA titer ≥1:160 was found 
in 8/17 (47.1%) SLE patients and none of the 30 non-SLE patients (p = 0.0001). 
Pleural fluid to serum C3 ratios were significantly lower in SLE than in non-SLE 
(median (minimum-maximum) 0.29 (0.03-0.43) versus 0.52 (0.26-0.73), p = 0.0002). 
Among SLE patients, pleural fluid ANA titers ≥1:160 were more frequently found 
in patients with lupus pleuritis than in those with pleural effusion from causes 
other than lupus itself (85.7% versus 20.0%, p = 0.0152). Serum CRP levels were 
significantly increased in patients with lupus pleuritis compared with SLE 
patients with transudative pleural effusion (2.30 (0.30-5.66) versus 0.7 
(0.12-1.47) mg/dl, p = 0.0062). In conclusion, pleural fluid ANA titer and serum 
CRP levels are significantly increased in lupus pleuritis.

© The Author(s) 2015 Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203314555171
PMID: 25318967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]