---
reference_id: "PMID:21060110"
title: A lifespan analysis of intraneocortical connections and gene expression in the mouse I.
authors:
- Dye CA
- El Shawa H
- Huffman KJ
journal: Cereb Cortex
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhq212
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Amino Acids/metabolism
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Brain Mapping
- "COUP Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cadherins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cerebral Cortex/cytology, embryology, growth & development"
- "Embryo, Mammalian"
- "Ephrin-A5/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Gene Expression/physiology
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/physiology"
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Inhibitor of Differentiation Protein 2/genetics, metabolism"
- LIM-Homeodomain Proteins
- Mice
- "Neural Pathways/embryology, growth & development, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Receptor Subfamily 1, Group F, Member 2/genetics, metabolism"
- Pregnancy
- Pyridinium Compounds/metabolism
- "Receptor, EphA7/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A lifespan analysis of intraneocortical connections and gene expression in the mouse I.
**Authors:** Dye CA, El Shawa H, Huffman KJ
**Journal:** Cereb Cortex (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cercor/bhq212](https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhq212)

## Content

1. Cereb Cortex. 2011 Jun;21(6):1311-30. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhq212. Epub 2010
Nov  8.

A lifespan analysis of intraneocortical connections and gene expression in the 
mouse I.

Dye CA(1), El Shawa H, Huffman KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, 
University of California-Riverside, 900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA 92521, 
USA.

A hallmark of mammalian evolution is the structural and functional complexity of 
the cerebral cortex. Within the cerebral cortex, the neocortex, or isocortex, is 
a 6-layered complexly organized structure that is comprised of multiple 
interconnected sensory and motor areas. These areas and their precise patterns 
of connections arise during development, through a process termed arealization. 
Intrinsic, activity-independent and extrinsic, activity-dependent mechanisms are 
involved in the development of neocortical areas and their connections. The 
intrinsic molecular mechanisms involved in the establishment of this 
sophisticated network are not fully understood. In this report (I) and the 
companion report (II), we present the first lifespan analysis of ipsilateral 
intraneocortical connections (INCs) among multiple sensory and motor regions, 
from the embryonic period to adulthood in the mouse. Additionally, we 
characterize the neocortical expression patterns of several developmentally 
regulated genes that are of central importance to studies investigating the 
molecular control of arealization from embryonic day 13.5 to postnatal day (P) 3 
(I) and P6 to 50 (II). In this analysis, we utilize novel methods to correlate 
the boundaries of gene expression with INCs and developing areal boundaries, in 
order to better understand the nature of gene-areal relationships during 
development.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhq212
PMCID: PMC3140180
PMID: 21060110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]