---
reference_id: "PMID:39925576"
title: Assessment of Microcirculatory Changes in Patients With Cervical Spinal Cord Injuries and Neurogenic Shock During the Acute Phase Using Near-Infrared Spectroscopy.
authors:
- Boontoterm P
- Sakoolnamarka S
- Urasyanandana K
- Naklaor P
- Fuengfoo P
journal: Cureus
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.77232
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of Microcirculatory Changes in Patients With Cervical Spinal Cord Injuries and Neurogenic Shock During the Acute Phase Using Near-Infrared Spectroscopy.
**Authors:** Boontoterm P, Sakoolnamarka S, Urasyanandana K, Naklaor P, Fuengfoo P
**Journal:** Cureus (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.77232](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.77232)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2025 Jan 10;17(1):e77232. doi: 10.7759/cureus.77232. eCollection 2025
Jan.

Assessment of Microcirculatory Changes in Patients With Cervical Spinal Cord
Injuries and Neurogenic Shock During the Acute Phase Using Near-Infrared
Spectroscopy.

Boontoterm P(1), Sakoolnamarka S(1), Urasyanandana K(1), Naklaor P(1), Fuengfoo
P(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurological Surgery, Phramongkutklao Hospital, Bangkok, THA.
(2)Surgery, Phramongkutklao Hospital, Bangkok, THA.

Background Cervical spinal cord injury (SCI) is a severe condition that can lead
to neurogenic shock, a life-threatening complication. Neurogenic shock is
characterized by a sudden impairment of sympathetic tone, resulting in
vasodilation, hypotension, and bradycardia. This disruption can significantly
affect blood flow dynamics, particularly in the microcirculation. Near-infrared
spectroscopy (NIRS) is a device that enables the monitoring of tissue
oxygenation and the assessment of microcirculatory status. This study aimed to
apply NIRS in conjunction with the vascular occlusion test (VOT) to evaluate
microcirculatory function in SCI patients with neurogenic shock and analyze its
association with in-hospital mortality. Methods This prospective study included
cervical SCI patients with neurogenic shock on whom NIRS was performed
along with VOT within 24 hours after admission in the ICU (T0). Follow-up
measurements were taken at the time of the acute phase (D0), and on days 3, 5,
and 7. The de-oxygenation (DeO2) slope, re-oxygenation (ReO2) slope, and the
reperfusion area were recorded. The prevalence of microcirculatory dysfunction,
and mortality rate were primary outcomes of this study. Results The prevalence
of microcirculatory alterations was 239 (92%), with 122 (47%) of patients still
exhibiting alterations at day 7 (D7). Survivors had higher NIRS parameters at D0
compared to non-survivors. The ReO2 slope at D0 was significantly decreased in
patients who developed new-onset kidney injury and nosocomial infections.
Conclusion The prevalence of microcirculatory disturbance was high in patients
with an SCI and neurogenic shock, and it was linked to in-hospital mortality and
complications.

Copyright © 2025, Boontoterm et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.77232
PMCID: PMC11807380
PMID: 39925576

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. The
Institutional Review Board of the Royal Thai Army Medical Department issued
approval IRBRTA 1818/2564. This prospective observational study was approved by
the Institutional Review Board of the Royal Thai Army Medical Department on
December 15, 2021 (research no. S069h/64). The study adhered to the guidelines
set by the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS,
2012) and the Good Clinical Practice guidelines of the International Conference
on Harmonization (ICH), in accordance with IRBRTA 1818/2564. Animal subjects:
All authors have confirmed that this study did not involve animal subjects or
tissue. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure
form, all authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have
declared that no financial support was received from any organization for the
submitted work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they
have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years
with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
