---
reference_id: "PMID:11027211"
title: Abnormal GABAA receptor-mediated currents in dorsal root ganglion neurons isolated from Na-K-2Cl cotransporter null mice.
authors:
- Sung KW
- Kirby M
- McDonald MP
- Lovinger DM
- Delpire E
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-20-07531.2000
keywords:
- Animals
- "Behavior, Animal"
- Bumetanide/pharmacology
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chlorides/metabolism
- Contraindications
- Female
- GABA Antagonists/pharmacology
- GABA-A Receptor Antagonists
- "Gait Disorders, Neurologic/genetics"
- "Ganglia, Spinal/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- Gramicidin/pharmacology
- Male
- Membrane Potentials/drug effects
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Neurons/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- Pain Measurement
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- Picrotoxin/pharmacology
- Potassium/metabolism
- "Receptors, GABA-A/metabolism"
- Sodium-Potassium-Chloride Symporters
- "gamma-Aminobutyric Acid/metabolism, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal GABAA receptor-mediated currents in dorsal root ganglion neurons isolated from Na-K-2Cl cotransporter null mice.
**Authors:** Sung KW, Kirby M, McDonald MP, Lovinger DM, Delpire E
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-20-07531.2000](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-20-07531.2000)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2000 Oct 15;20(20):7531-8. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-20-07531.2000.

Abnormal GABAA receptor-mediated currents in dorsal root ganglion neurons 
isolated from Na-K-2Cl cotransporter null mice.

Sung KW(1), Kirby M, McDonald MP, Lovinger DM, Delpire E.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Anesthesiology, Center for Molecular Neuroscience, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennesse, USA.

We have recently disrupted Slc12a2, the gene encoding the secretory Na-K-2Cl 
cotransporter in mice (NKCC1) (Delpire et al., 1999). Gramicidin 
perforated-patch and whole-cell recordings were performed to study GABA-induced 
currents in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons isolated from wild-type and 
homozygote NKCC1 knock-out mice. In wild-type DRG neurons, strong GABA-evoked 
inward current was observed at the resting membrane potential, suggesting active 
accumulation of Cl(-) in these cells. This GABA-induced current was blocked by 
picrotoxin, a GABA(A) receptor blocker. The strong Cl(-) accumulation that gives 
rise to depolarizing GABA responses is caused by Na-K-2Cl cotransport because 
reduction of external Cl(-) or application of bumetanide induced a decrease in 
[Cl(-)](i), whereas an increase in external K(+) caused an apparent [Cl(-)](i) 
accumulation. In contrast to control neurons, little or no net current was 
observed at the resting membrane potential in homozygote NKCC1 mutant DRG 
neurons. E(GABA) was significantly more negative, demonstrating the absence of 
Cl(-) accumulation in these cells. Application of bumetanide induced a positive 
shift of E(GABA), suggesting the presence of an outward Cl(-) transport 
mechanism. In agreement with an absence of GABA depolarization in DRG neurons, 
behavioral analysis revealed significant alterations in locomotion and pain 
perception in the knock-out mouse. Our results clearly demonstrate that the 
Na-K-2Cl cotransporter is responsible for [Cl(-)](i) accumulation in DRG neurons 
and that via regulation of intracellular Cl(-), the Na-K-2Cl cotransporter 
participates in the modulation of GABA neurotransmission and sensory perception.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-20-07531.2000
PMCID: PMC6772871
PMID: 11027211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]