---
reference_id: "PMID:29907092"
title: "Mosaicism of the UDP-Galactose transporter SLC35A2 in a female causing a congenital disorder of glycosylation: a case report."
authors:
- Westenfield K
- Sarafoglou K
- Speltz LC
- Pierpont EI
- Steyermark J
- Nascene D
- Bower M
- Pierpont ME
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0617-6
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/genetics
- Mosaicism
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Prognosis
- UDP-Galactose Translocators
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mosaicism of the UDP-Galactose transporter SLC35A2 in a female causing a congenital disorder of glycosylation: a case report.
**Authors:** Westenfield K, Sarafoglou K, Speltz LC, Pierpont EI, Steyermark J, Nascene D, Bower M, Pierpont ME
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-018-0617-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-018-0617-6)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2018 Jun 15;19(1):100. doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0617-6.

Mosaicism of the UDP-Galactose transporter SLC35A2 in a female causing a 
congenital disorder of glycosylation: a case report.

Westenfield K(1), Sarafoglou K(2), Speltz LC(3), Pierpont EI(4), Steyermark 
J(5), Nascene D(6), Bower M(7), Pierpont ME(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, 2450 Riverside Avenue, 
Minneapolis, MN, 55454, USA.
(2)Divisions of Endocrinology, Genetics & Metabolism, University of Minnesota, 
2450 Riverside Avenue, Minneapolis, MN, 55454, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Gillette Children's Hospital, 200 University Avenue 
East, St. Paul, MN, 55101, USA.
(4)Division of Clinical Behavioral Neuroscience, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street SE, Minneapolis, MN, 55455-0392, 
USA.
(5)University of Minnesota Masonic Children's Hospital, 2450 Riverside Avenue, 
Minneapolis, MN, 55454, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware St. SE, 
Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA.
(7)Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, University of Minnesota Medical Center, 420 
Delaware St SE, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA.
(8)Division of Genetics & Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics and 
Ophthalmology, 2450 Riverside Avenue, Minneapolis, MN, 55454, USA. 
pierp001@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Congenital disorders of glycosylation are rare conditions caused by 
genetic defects in glycan synthesis, processing or transport. Most congenital 
disorders of glycosylation involve defects in the formation or transfer of the 
lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor of N-linked glycans. SLC35A2-CDG 
(previously CDG-IIm) is caused by hemizygous or heterozygous mutations in the 
X-linked gene SLC35A2 that encodes a UDP-galactose transporter. To date there 
have only been 10 reported patients with SLC35A2 mutations. Importantly, the 
patient presented here was not identified in infancy by transferrin isoform 
analysis, the most common testing to identify patients with a congenital 
disorder of glycosylation.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 27 month old girl with developmental delay, central 
hypotonia, cerebral atrophy, and failure to thrive with growth retardation was 
identified by whole exome sequencing to have a mosaic missense variant in 
SLC35A2 (c.991G > A). This particular variant has been previously reported in a 
male as a mutation. Comparison of all clinical findings and new information on 
growth pattern, growth hormone testing and neurodevelopmental evaluation are 
detailed on the patient presented.
CONCLUSION: This patient report increases the clinical and scientific knowledge 
of SLC35A2-CDG, a rare condition. New information on reduced growth, growth 
hormone sufficiency, lack of seizures, and neurodevelopmental status are 
presented. This new information will be helpful to clinicians caring for 
individuals with SLC35A2-CDG. This report also alerts clinicians that 
transferrin isoform measurements do not identify all patients with congenital 
disorders of glycosylation.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-018-0617-6
PMCID: PMC6003163
PMID: 29907092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Ethics approval for a single case report is not required at the authors’ 
University. We have a letter of confirmation from the IRB of the University of 
Minnesota that this case study does not meet the federal definition of human 
subjects’ research and does not require IRB review and approval. CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: A consent form has been signed by the parent of the patient in this 
report that included consent for medical data and an image taken in a clinical 
setting. This form is available as needed. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.