---
reference_id: "PMID:36332796"
title: "Gut microbiome and Parkinson's disease: Perspective on pathogenesis and treatment."
authors:
- Salim S
- Ahmad F
- Banu A
- Mohammad F
journal: J Adv Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2022.10.013
keywords:
- Humans
- "Parkinson Disease/therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome/physiology
- Inflammation/metabolism
- Probiotics/therapeutic use
- Diet
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gut microbiome and Parkinson's disease: Perspective on pathogenesis and treatment.
**Authors:** Salim S, Ahmad F, Banu A, Mohammad F
**Journal:** J Adv Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jare.2022.10.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2022.10.013)

## Content

1. J Adv Res. 2023 Aug;50:83-105. doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2022.10.013. Epub 2022 Nov
1.

Gut microbiome and Parkinson's disease: Perspective on pathogenesis and
treatment.

Salim S(1), Ahmad F(1), Banu A(1), Mohammad F(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological and Biomedical Sciences (BBS), College of Health &
Life Sciences (CHLS), Hamad Bin Khalifa University (HBKU), Doha 34110, Qatar.
(2)Division of Biological and Biomedical Sciences (BBS), College of Health &
Life Sciences (CHLS), Hamad Bin Khalifa University (HBKU), Doha 34110, Qatar.
Electronic address: mohammadfarhan@hbku.edu.qa.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a disease of ⍺-synuclein
aggregation-mediated dopaminergic neuronal loss in the substantia nigra pars
compacta, which leads to motor and non-motor symptoms. Through the last two
decades of research, there has been growing consensus that inflammation-mediated
oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and cytokine-induced toxicity are
mainly involved in neuronal damage and loss associated with PD. However, it
remains unclear how these mechanisms relate to sporadic PD, a more common form
of PD. Both enteric and central nervous systems have been implicated in the
pathogenesis of sporadic PD, thus highlighting the crosstalk between the gut and
brain.
AIM: of Review: In this review, we summarize how alterations in the gut
microbiome can affect PD pathogenesis. We highlight various mechanisms
increasing/decreasing the risk of PD development. Based on the previous
supporting evidence, we suggest how early interventions could protect against PD
development and how controlling specific factors, including our diet, could
modify our perspective on disease mechanisms and therapeutics. We explain the
strong relationship between the gut microbiota and the brain in PD subjects, by
delineating the multiple mechanisms involved inneuroinflammation and oxidative
stress. We conclude that the neurodetrimental effects of western diet (WD) and
the neuroprotective effects of Mediterranean diets should be further exploredin
humans through clinical trials. Key Scientific Concepts of Review: Alterations
in the gut microbiome and associated metabolites may contribute to pathogenesis
in PD. In some studies, probiotics have been shown to exert anti-oxidative
effects in PD via improved mitochondrial dynamics and homeostasis, thus reducing
PD-related consequences. However, there is a significant unmet need for
randomized clinical trials to investigate the effectiveness of microbial
products, probiotic-based supplementation, and dietary intervention in reversing
gut microbial dysbiosis in PD.

Copyright © 2023. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jare.2022.10.013
PMCID: PMC10403695
PMID: 36332796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
