---
reference_id: "PMID:30982611"
title: Pathogenic Variants in GPC4 Cause Keipert Syndrome.
authors:
- Amor DJ
- Stephenson SEM
- Mustapha M
- Mensah MA
- Ockeloen CW
- Lee WS
- Tankard RM
- Phelan DG
- Shinawi M
- de Brouwer APM
- Pfundt R
- Dowling C
- Toler TL
- Sutton VR
- Agolini E
- Rinelli M
- Capolino R
- Martinelli D
- Zampino G
- Dumić M
- Reardon W
- Shaw-Smith C
- Leventer RJ
- Delatycki MB
- Kleefstra T
- Mundlos S
- Mortier G
- Bahlo M
- Allen NJ
- Lockhart PJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.02.026
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Deafness/congenital, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, pathology"
- Genetic Variation
- Glypicans/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Lower Extremity Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic Variants in GPC4 Cause Keipert Syndrome.
**Authors:** Amor DJ, Stephenson SEM, Mustapha M, Mensah MA, Ockeloen CW, Lee WS, Tankard RM, Phelan DG, Shinawi M, de Brouwer APM, Pfundt R, Dowling C, Toler TL, Sutton VR, Agolini E, Rinelli M, Capolino R, Martinelli D, Zampino G, Dumić M, Reardon W, Shaw-Smith C, Leventer RJ, Delatycki MB, Kleefstra T, Mundlos S, Mortier G, Bahlo M, Allen NJ, Lockhart PJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.02.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.02.026)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2019 May 2;104(5):914-924. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.02.026.
Epub  2019 Apr 11.

Pathogenic Variants in GPC4 Cause Keipert Syndrome.

Amor DJ(1), Stephenson SEM(1), Mustapha M(2), Mensah MA(3), Ockeloen CW(4), Lee 
WS(1), Tankard RM(5), Phelan DG(1), Shinawi M(6), de Brouwer APM(7), Pfundt 
R(4), Dowling C(8), Toler TL(6), Sutton VR(9), Agolini E(10), Rinelli M(10), 
Capolino R(11), Martinelli D(12), Zampino G(13), Dumić M(14), Reardon W(15), 
Shaw-Smith C(16), Leventer RJ(17), Delatycki MB(1), Kleefstra T(7), Mundlos 
S(3), Mortier G(18), Bahlo M(5), Allen NJ(8), Lockhart PJ(19).

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 
3052, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Royal 
Children's Hospital, Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(3)Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Augustenburger Platz 1, Berlin 13353, Germany.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen 
6500 HB, the Netherlands.
(5)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Parade, 
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University 
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, 6500HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(9)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(10)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Department of Laboratories, IRCCS Bambino 
Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome 00165, Italy.
(11)Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, Rome 00165, Italy.
(12)Division of Metabolism, Department of Pediatric Subspecialties, IRCCS 
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital Rome 00165, Italy.
(13)Center for Rare Disease and Congenital Defects, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario A. Gemelli, Catholic University, Rome 00168, Italy.
(14)Department of Pediatrics Rebro, University of Zagreb Medical School, 
Kispaticeva 12, 10 000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(15)Department of Clinical Genetics, Our Lady's Children Hospital Crumlin, 
Dublin, D12, V004, Ireland.
(16)Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter National Health 
Service Foundation Trust, Exeter EX1 2ED, UK.
(17)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 
3052, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Royal 
Children's Hospital, Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; 
Department of Neurology, Royal Children's Hospital, Flemington Road, Parkville, 
Victoria 3052, Australia.
(18)Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital and University 
of Antwerp, B-2650 Antwerp (Edegem), Belgium.
(19)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 
3052, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Royal 
Children's Hospital, Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. 
Electronic address: paul.lockhart@mcri.edu.au.

Glypicans are a family of cell-surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans that 
regulate growth-factor signaling during development and are thought to play a 
role in the regulation of morphogenesis. Whole-exome sequencing of the 
Australian family that defined Keipert syndrome (nasodigitoacoustic syndrome) 
identified a hemizygous truncating variant in the gene encoding glypican 4 
(GPC4). This variant, located in the final exon of GPC4, results in premature 
termination of the protein 51 amino acid residues prior to the stop codon, and 
in concomitant loss of functionally important N-linked glycosylation (Asn514) 
and glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor (Ser529) sites. We subsequently 
identified seven affected males from five additional kindreds with novel and 
predicted pathogenic variants in GPC4. Segregation analysis and X-inactivation 
studies in carrier females provided supportive evidence that the GPC4 variants 
caused the condition. Furthermore, functional studies of recombinant protein 
suggested that the truncated proteins p.Gln506∗ and p.Glu496∗ were less stable 
than the wild type. Clinical features of Keipert syndrome included a prominent 
forehead, a flat midface, hypertelorism, a broad nose, downturned corners of 
mouth, and digital abnormalities, whereas cognitive impairment and deafness were 
variable features. Studies of Gpc4 knockout mice showed evidence of the two 
primary features of Keipert syndrome: craniofacial abnormalities and digital 
abnormalities. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that GPC4 is most closely 
related to GPC6, which is associated with a bone dysplasia that has a phenotypic 
overlap with Keipert syndrome. Overall, we have shown that pathogenic variants 
in GPC4 cause a loss of function that results in Keipert syndrome, making GPC4 
the third human glypican to be linked to a genetic syndrome.

Crown Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.02.026
PMCID: PMC6507040
PMID: 30982611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]