---
reference_id: "PMID:34485975"
title: Mitochondrial Dynamics in Drug-Induced Liver Injury.
authors:
- Ramachandran A
- Umbaugh DS
- Jaeschke H
journal: Livers
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/livers1030010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial Dynamics in Drug-Induced Liver Injury.
**Authors:** Ramachandran A, Umbaugh DS, Jaeschke H
**Journal:** Livers (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/livers1030010](https://doi.org/10.3390/livers1030010)

## Content

1. Livers. 2021;1(3):102-115. doi: 10.3390/livers1030010. Epub 2021 Jun 23.

Mitochondrial Dynamics in Drug-Induced Liver Injury.

Ramachandran A(1), Umbaugh DS(1), Jaeschke H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology & Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Mitochondria have been studied for decades from the standpoint of metabolism and 
ATP generation. However, in recent years mitochondrial dynamics and its 
influence on bioenergetics and cellular homeostasis is also being appreciated. 
Mitochondria undergo regular cycles of fusion and fission regulated by various 
cues including cellular energy requirements and pathophysiological stimuli, and 
the network of critical proteins and membrane lipids involved in mitochondrial 
dynamics is being revealed. Hepatocytes are highly metabolic cells which have 
abundant mitochondria suggesting a biologically relevant role for mitochondrial 
dynamics in hepatocyte injury and recovery. Here we review information on 
molecular mediators of mitochondrial dynamics and their alteration in 
drug-induced liver injury. Based on current information, it is evident that 
changes in mitochondrial fusion and fission are hallmarks of liver 
pathophysiology ranging from acetaminophen-induced or cholestatic liver injury 
to chronic liver diseases. These alterations in mitochondrial dynamics influence 
multiple related mitochondrial responses such as mitophagy and mitochondrial 
biogenesis, which are important adaptive responses facilitating liver recovery 
in several contexts, including drug-induced liver injury. The current focus on 
characterization of molecular mechanisms of mitochondrial dynamics is of immense 
relevance to liver pathophysiology and have the potential to provide significant 
insight into mechanisms of liver recovery and regeneration after injury.

DOI: 10.3390/livers1030010
PMCID: PMC8412145
PMID: 34485975

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.