---
reference_id: "PMID:34946827"
title: "Next Generation Sequencing Identifies the HLA-DQA1*03:03 Allele in the Type 1 Diabetes Risk-Associated HLA-DQ8 Serotype."
authors:
- Enczmann J
- Balz V
- Hoffmann M
- Kummer S
- Reinauer C
- Döing C
- Förtsch K
- Welters A
- Mayatepek E
- Meissner T
- Jacobsen M
- Seyfarth J
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12121879
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Next Generation Sequencing Identifies the HLA-DQA1*03:03 Allele in the Type 1 Diabetes Risk-Associated HLA-DQ8 Serotype.
**Authors:** Enczmann J, Balz V, Hoffmann M, Kummer S, Reinauer C, Döing C, Förtsch K, Welters A, Mayatepek E, Meissner T, Jacobsen M, Seyfarth J
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12121879](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12121879)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Nov 25;12(12):1879. doi: 10.3390/genes12121879.

Next Generation Sequencing Identifies the HLA-DQA1*03:03 Allele in the Type 1 
Diabetes Risk-Associated HLA-DQ8 Serotype.

Enczmann J(1), Balz V(1), Hoffmann M(2), Kummer S(2), Reinauer C(2), Döing C(2), 
Förtsch K(2), Welters A(2), Mayatepek E(2), Meissner T(2), Jacobsen M(2), 
Seyfarth J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics, Medical 
Faculty, University Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, 40225 
Duesseldorf, Germany.
(2)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology, 
Medical Faculty, University Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, 
40225 Duesseldorf, Germany.

The highest genetic type 1 diabetes risk is conferred by HLA class II haplotypes 
defined by alleles at the HLA-DR and -DQ loci. The combination of HLA-DQA1*03:01 
and DQB1*03:02 alleles (summarized as 'HLA-DQ8') is reported to be among the two 
most prevalent HLA class II haplotypes in Caucasian type 1 diabetes patients. 
This classification is based on conventional genotyping of exon 2 of the DQ gene 
locus and excludes exon 3. In this study, HLA genotyping on the type 1 diabetes 
susceptibility loci HLA-DRB1, DQA1 and DQB1 was performed using a 
high-resolution next generation sequencing method. In addition to the routinely 
examined exon 2, exon 3 was also sequenced. Samples from 229 children with type 
1 diabetes were included and compared to a cohort of 9,786 controls. In addition 
to previously described HLA-DQ haplotypes in type 1 diabetes patients, we found 
that as well as HLA-DQA1*03:01,HLA-DQA1*03:03 also contributed to HLA-DQ8. 
HLA-DQA1*03:03 differs from HLA-DQA1*03:01 by one nucleotide substitution in 
exon 3 at position 160, leading to a single amino acid replacement. DRB1*04:05 
was exclusively associated with DQA1*03:03 whereas the DRB1*04:01 haplotype 
comprised either DQA1*03:01 or DQA1*03:03. Significantly increased type 1 
diabetes risk was confirmed for all these haplotypes with only minor differences 
between DQA1*03:01 and DQA1*03:03 alleles. This study identified the 
HLA-DQA1*03:03 allele as an addition to the already known type 1 diabetes risk 
haplotypes, and can contribute to more precise HLA genotyping approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12121879
PMCID: PMC8701008
PMID: 34946827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.