---
reference_id: "PMID:38345154"
title: "Prurigo nodularis: new insights into pathogenesis and novel therapeutics."
authors:
- Liao V
- Cornman HL
- Ma E
- Kwatra SG
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae052
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prurigo nodularis: new insights into pathogenesis and novel therapeutics.
**Authors:** Liao V, Cornman HL, Ma E, Kwatra SG
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bjd/ljae052](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljae052)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2024 May 17;190(6):798-810. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae052.

Prurigo nodularis: new insights into pathogenesis and novel therapeutics.

Liao V(1), Cornman HL(1), Ma E(1), Kwatra SG(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology.
(3)Maryland Itch Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.

Prurigo nodularis (PN) is an inflammatory skin condition characterized by 
intensely pruritic nodules on the skin. Patients with PN suffer from an 
intractable itch-scratch cycle leading to impaired sleep, psychosocial distress 
and a significant disruption in quality of life. The pathogenesis of PN is 
associated with immune and neural dysregulation, mediated by inflammatory 
cytokines [such as interleukin (IL)-4, -13, -17, -22 and -31] and neuropeptides 
(such as substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide). There is a role for 
type 2 inflammation in PN in addition to T-helper (Th)17 and Th22-mediated 
inflammation. The neuroimmune feedback loop in PN involves neuropeptides 
released from nerve fibres that cause vasodilation and further recruitment of 
inflammatory cells. Inflammatory cells, particularly mast cells and eosinophils, 
degranulate and release neurotoxins, as well as nerve growth factor, which may 
contribute to the neuronal hyperplasia seen in the dermis of patients with PN 
and neural sensitization. Recent studies have also indicated underlying genetic 
susceptibility to PN in addition to environmental factors, the existence of 
various disease endotypes centred around degrees of type 2 inflammation or 
underlying myelopathy or spinal disc disease, and significant race and 
ethnicity-based differences, with African Americans having densely fibrotic skin 
lesions. Dupilumab became the first US Food and Drug Administration-approved 
therapeutic for PN, and there are several other agents currently in development. 
The anti-IL-31 receptor A inhibitor nemolizumab is in late-stage development 
with positive phase III data reported. In addition, the oral Janus kinase (JAK) 
1 inhibitors, abrocitinib and povorcitinib, are in phase II trials while a 
topical JAK1/2 inhibitor, ruxolitinib, is in phase III studies.

Plain Language Summary: Prurigo nodularis (PN) is a chronic skin condition 
featuring extremely itchy nodules on the skin of the legs, arms and trunk of the 
body. PN affects approximately 72 per 100 000 people and the severe itch 
associated with the condition can negatively impact a person’s sleep, work and 
social life. However, the cause of PN remains unclear. Current understanding of 
PN is based on imbalances in the immune system leading to widespread 
inflammation as well as dysregulation of the nerves in the skin. Immune 
molecules released from T cells [such as interleukin (IL)-4, -13, -31, -17, -22 
and -31] increase systemic inflammation and are elevated in people with PN. 
Activated inflammatory cells (such as mast cells or eosinophils) may also 
release factors that promote inflammation, itch and neural changes within the 
skin. Neural dysregulation in PN features a lower density of itch-sensing nerve 
fibres in the epidermis (upper layer of the skin) and a higher density of 
itch-sensing nerve fibres in the dermis (lower layer of the skin). Because the 
pathogenesis of PN is not fully understood, the therapies available for PN have 
had limited success in reducing itch and nodules. The only drug currently 
approved for PN in the USA and Europe is dupilumab, an IL-4Rα inhibitor that 
blocks signalling through IL-4 and IL-13, which is undergoing post-marketing 
surveillance. Other new drugs are being assessed in various phases of clinical 
trials, including nemolizumab, vixarelimab, barzolvolimab, ruxolitinib, 
abrocitinib, povorcitinib and nalbuphine.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British 
Association of Dermatologists. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, 
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bjd/ljae052
PMCID: PMC11099982
PMID: 38345154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest S.G.K. is an advisory 
board member/consultant for AbbVie, Amgen, Arcutis Biotherapeutics, Aslan 
Pharmaceuticals, Cara Therapeutics, Castle Biosciences, Celldex Therapeutics, 
Galderma, Genzada Pharmaceuticals, Incyte Corporation, Johnson & Johnson, LEO 
Pharma, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Pfizer, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals 
and Sanofi, and has served as an investigator for Galderma, Incyte, Pfizer and 
Sanofi. Specifically to prurigo nodularis, S.G.K. has received honoraria for 
serving as a consultant and advisory board member for the following relevant 
conflicts of interest: Sanofi-Regeneron, which has developed dupilumab for the 
treatment of prurigo nodularis (PN); Galderma, which is developing nemolizumab 
for the treatment of PN; Incyte, which is developing topical ruxolitinib and 
povorcitinib for the treatment of PN; and Celldex therapeutics, which is 
developing barzolvolimab for PN.