---
reference_id: "PMID:31004178"
title: A high-cholesterol diet promotes steatohepatitis and liver tumorigenesis in HCV core gene transgenic mice.
authors:
- Wang X
- Tanaka N
- Hu X
- Kimura T
- Lu Y
- Jia F
- Sato Y
- Nakayama J
- Moriya K
- Koike K
- Aoyama T
journal: Arch Toxicol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00204-019-02440-7
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Cholesterol, Dietary/toxicity"
- Diet
- "Genes, Viral/genetics"
- Hepatitis C/genetics
- Hepatocytes/drug effects
- "Liver Cirrhosis/chemically induced, pathology"
- Liver Function Tests
- "Liver Neoplasms, Experimental/chemically induced, genetics"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/chemically induced, genetics"
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A high-cholesterol diet promotes steatohepatitis and liver tumorigenesis in HCV core gene transgenic mice.
**Authors:** Wang X, Tanaka N, Hu X, Kimura T, Lu Y, Jia F, Sato Y, Nakayama J, Moriya K, Koike K, Aoyama T
**Journal:** Arch Toxicol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00204-019-02440-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-019-02440-7)

## Content

1. Arch Toxicol. 2019 Jun;93(6):1713-1725. doi: 10.1007/s00204-019-02440-7. Epub
2019 Apr 19.

A high-cholesterol diet promotes steatohepatitis and liver tumorigenesis in HCV
core gene transgenic mice.

Wang X(1)(2), Tanaka N(3)(4), Hu X(1)(5), Kimura T(6), Lu Y(1), Jia F(1), Sato
Y(7), Nakayama J(7), Moriya K(8), Koike K(9), Aoyama T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Regulation, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, 390-8621, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Lishui Hospital, Zhejiang University School
of Medicine, Lishui, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Metabolic Regulation, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, 390-8621, Japan. naopi@shinshu-u.ac.jp.
(4)Research Center for Social Systems, Shinshu University, Matsumoto, Japan.
naopi@shinshu-u.ac.jp.
(5)Department of Pathophysiology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang,
People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan.
(7)Department of Molecular Pathology, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan.
(8)Department of Infection Control and Prevention, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Erratum in
    Arch Toxicol. 2019 Jun;93(6):1727-1728. doi: 10.1007/s00204-019-02491-w.

Previous epidemiological studies have suggested a link between high-cholesterol
intake and liver disease progression, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
However, the precise mechanism of hepatotoxicity and hepatocarcinogenesis caused
by excessive cholesterol consumption remains unclear. We aimed to investigate
the impact of dietary cholesterol using hepatitis C virus core gene transgenic
(HCVcpTg) mice, which spontaneously developed HCC with age. Male HCVcpTg mice
were treated for 15 months with either a control diet or an isocaloric diet
containing 1.5% cholesterol, and liver phenotypes and tumor-associated signaling
pathways were evaluated. The high-cholesterol diet-fed HCVcpTg mice exhibited a
significantly higher incidence of liver tumors compared with the control diet
mice (100% vs. 41%, P < 0.001). The diet induced steatohepatitis with
pericellular fibrosis and evoked higher mRNA expression of pro-inflammatory and
pro-fibrotic mediators along with enhanced hepatocyte proliferation and greater
oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress in the liver. Moreover, long-term
consumption of cholesterol-rich diet activated nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB)
and p62/sequestosome 1 (Sqstm1)-nuclear factor erythroid 2 (NRF2) axis, enhanced
fibrogenesis, and consequently accelerated hepatic tumorigenesis. In conclusion,
these results demonstrate that a high-cholesterol diet facilitates liver
tumorigenesis by inducing steatohepatitis, promoting hepatocyte division, and
up-regulating cellular stress and pro-inflammatory NF-κB and detoxifying
p62/Sqstm1-NRF2 signals. Therefore, high dietary cholesterol should be avoided
in HCV-infected patients to prevent development of steatohepatitis, liver
fibrosis, and HCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-019-02440-7
PMID: 31004178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
