---
reference_id: "PMID:34560743"
title: Bilateral Petrous Apex Cephalocele Associated with a Wide Sella.
authors:
- Doğan E
- Özgür E
journal: J Craniofac Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000008171
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bilateral Petrous Apex Cephalocele Associated with a Wide Sella.
**Authors:** Doğan E, Özgür E
**Journal:** J Craniofac Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SCS.0000000000008171](https://doi.org/10.1097/SCS.0000000000008171)

## Content

1. J Craniofac Surg. 2022 May 1;33(3):e303-e305. doi:
10.1097/SCS.0000000000008171.  Epub 2021 Sep 23.

Bilateral Petrous Apex Cephalocele Associated with a Wide Sella.

Doğan E(1), Özgür E(2).

Author information:
(1)Muğla Sitki Koçman University, Faculty of Medicine, Radiology.
(2)Muğla Sitki Koçman University, Faculty of Medicine, ENT, Mugla, Turkey.

Petrous apex cephalocele (PAC) is a rare type of cephalocele. It is usually 
asymptomatic. It can be unilateral or bilateral. Bilateral cases are less 
common. They are etiologically and clinically different entities from unilateral 
ones. A 56-year-old female patient presented to the hospital with the complaint 
of a severe nonspecific headache. She has been examined in ear nose throat, 
ophthalmology, and finally neurology clinics. Bilateral PAC was incidentally 
found in magnetic resonance imaging (MRi) examination. Headache was associated 
with PAC because no additional pathology could explain the clinical 
symptomatology. There is a proven relationship between empty sella and PAC. 
Regarding PAC less than 50 cases are known. Our paper aims to contribute to the 
literature by exhibiting etiologic and clinic differences between unilateral and 
bilateral PAC. It highlights the relationship between PAC and broad sella that 
is a different entity from empty sella and shows this remarkable radiological 
appearance. The authors presented our case accompanied by clinical and MRi 
findings.

Copyright © 2021 by Mutaz B. Habal, MD.

DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000008171
PMID: 34560743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.