---
reference_id: "PMID:39758816"
title: TBC1D24 interacts with the v-ATPase and regulates intraorganellar pH in neurons.
authors:
- Pepe S
- Aprile D
- Castroflorio E
- Marte A
- Giubbolini S
- Hopestone S
- Parsons A
- Soares T
- Benfenati F
- Oliver PL
- Fassio A
journal: iScience
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2024.111515
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TBC1D24 interacts with the v-ATPase and regulates intraorganellar pH in neurons.
**Authors:** Pepe S, Aprile D, Castroflorio E, Marte A, Giubbolini S, Hopestone S, Parsons A, Soares T, Benfenati F, Oliver PL, Fassio A
**Journal:** iScience (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.isci.2024.111515](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2024.111515)

## Content

1. iScience. 2024 Dec 1;28(1):111515. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2024.111515.
eCollection  2025 Jan 17.

TBC1D24 interacts with the v-ATPase and regulates intraorganellar pH in neurons.

Pepe S(1)(2), Aprile D(1)(3), Castroflorio E(4), Marte A(1), Giubbolini S(1), 
Hopestone S(4), Parsons A(4), Soares T(4), Benfenati F(2)(5), Oliver PL(4), 
Fassio A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Genova, Viale Benedetto 
XV/3, 16132 Genoa, Italy.
(2)IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132 Genova, 
Italy.
(3)Human Technopole, Viale Rita Levi-Montalcini 1, 20157 Milan, Italy.
(4)MRC Mammalian Genetics Unit, MRC Harwell Institute, Harwell Campus, Didcot, 
OX11 0RD, UK.
(5)Center for Synaptic Neuroscience and Technology, Istituto Italiano di 
Tecnologia, Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132 Genoa, Italy.

The vacuolar ATPase (v-ATPase) is essential for acidification of intracellular 
organelles, including synaptic vesicles. Its activity is controlled by cycles of 
association and dissociation of the ATP hydrolysis (V1) and proton transport 
(V0) multi-protein subunits. Mutations in genes coding for both v-ATPase 
subunits and TBC1D24 cause neurodevelopmental disorders with overlapping 
syndromes; therefore, it is important to investigate their potentially 
interrelated functions. Here, we reveal that TBC1D24 interacts with the v-ATPase 
in the brain. Using a constitutive Tbc1d24 knockout mouse model, we observed 
accumulation of lysosomes and non-degraded lipid materials in neuronal tissue. 
In Tbc1d24 knockout neurons, we detected V1 mis-localization with increased pH 
at endo-lysosomal compartments and autophagy impairment. Furthermore, synaptic 
vesicles endocytosis and reacidification were impaired. Thus, we demonstrate 
that TBC1D24 is a positive regulator of v-ATPase activity in neurons suggesting 
that alteration of pH homeostasis could underlie disorders associated with 
TBC1D24 and the v-ATPase.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2024.111515
PMCID: PMC11699390
PMID: 39758816

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.