---
reference_id: "PMID:28735431"
title: "A systematic review of primary Sjögren's syndrome in male and paediatric populations."
authors:
- Virdee S
- Greenan-Barrett J
- Ciurtin C
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-017-3745-z
keywords:
- Adult
- Autoantibodies
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
- Rheumatoid Factor
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Sjogren's Syndrome/blood, diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review of primary Sjögren's syndrome in male and paediatric populations.
**Authors:** Virdee S, Greenan-Barrett J, Ciurtin C
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-017-3745-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-017-3745-z)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2017 Oct;36(10):2225-2236. doi: 10.1007/s10067-017-3745-z.
Epub  2017 Jul 22.

A systematic review of primary Sjögren's syndrome in male and paediatric 
populations.

Virdee S(1), Greenan-Barrett J(1), Ciurtin C(2).

Author information:
(1)University College London Medical School, London, UK.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, University College London, 250 Euston Road, 
London, NW1 2PG, UK. c.ciurtin@ucl.ac.uk.

Primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS) is a chronic multisystem autoimmune rheumatic 
disease characterised by female predominance. Although the disease is rare in 
the male and paediatric populations, it has been suggested that it may have a 
different disease phenotype, which has not been investigated before using a 
systematic approach. A systematic literature search of PubMed databases (updated 
to December 2016) was performed to identify all published data on the 
epidemiological, clinical and laboratory manifestations of pSS in the male and 
paediatric populations. The literature search of the male and paediatric pSS 
studies identified 2025 and 186 citations, respectively, out of which 7 and 5 
fulfilled our inclusion criteria and were analysed further. The range of age at 
disease onset was 9.4-10.7 years for children and 39.4-56.9 years at diagnosis 
for male patients. We identified a prevalence of extra-glandular manifestations 
between 52.6-92.3% in the male population and 50.0-84.6% in children, while 
abnormal sialometry was only reported in the paediatric population, with a 
prevalence between 71.4 and 81.8%. There was a significant variation of positive 
serological markers, with anti-Ro antibodies reported between 15.7-75.0% and 
36.4-84.6%, and anti-La antibodies between 5.6-51.7% and 27.3-65.4%, in the male 
and paediatric populations, respectively. The characteristics of pSS in the male 
and paediatric populations varied according to different studies. When compared 
to data available from pSS adult populations, children diagnosed with pSS 
reported less dryness and had a higher prevalence of parotitis, lymphadenopathy 
and systemic symptoms and male patients were younger at the time of diagnosis. 
This systematic review contributes to a better understanding of the epidemiology 
of pSS in rare populations. Large longitudinal cohort studies comparing male 
with female patients and adult with paediatric patients are needed.

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-017-3745-z
PMCID: PMC5596040
PMID: 28735431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.