---
reference_id: "PMID:24106209"
title: Gene therapy on the move.
authors:
- Kaufmann KB
- Büning H
- Galy A
- Schambach A
- Grez M
journal: EMBO Mol Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/emmm.201202287
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene therapy on the move.
**Authors:** Kaufmann KB, Büning H, Galy A, Schambach A, Grez M
**Journal:** EMBO Mol Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/emmm.201202287](https://doi.org/10.1002/emmm.201202287)

## Content

1. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Nov;5(11):1642-61. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201202287. Epub 2013
Sep  17.

Gene therapy on the move.

Kaufmann KB(1), Büning H, Galy A, Schambach A, Grez M.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Frankfurt, Germany.

The first gene therapy clinical trials were initiated more than two decades ago. 
In the early days, gene therapy shared the fate of many experimental medicine 
approaches and was impeded by the occurrence of severe side effects in a few 
treated patients. The understanding of the molecular and cellular mechanisms 
leading to treatment- and/or vector-associated setbacks has resulted in the 
development of highly sophisticated gene transfer tools with improved safety and 
therapeutic efficacy. Employing these advanced tools, a series of Phase I/II 
trials were started in the past few years with excellent clinical results and no 
side effects reported so far. Moreover, highly efficient gene targeting 
strategies and site-directed gene editing technologies have been developed and 
applied clinically. With more than 1900 clinical trials to date, gene therapy 
has moved from a vision to clinical reality. This review focuses on the 
application of gene therapy for the correction of inherited diseases, the 
limitations and drawbacks encountered in some of the early clinical trials and 
the revival of gene therapy as a powerful treatment option for the correction of 
monogenic disorders.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of EMBO.

DOI: 10.1002/emmm.201202287
PMCID: PMC3840483
PMID: 24106209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]