---
reference_id: "PMID:37386011"
title: Imprinting disorders.
authors:
- Eggermann T
- Monk D
- de Nanclares GP
- Kagami M
- Giabicani E
- Riccio A
- Tümer Z
- Kalish JM
- Tauber M
- Duis J
- Weksberg R
- Maher ER
- Begemann M
- Elbracht M
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-023-00443-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imprinting disorders.
**Authors:** Eggermann T, Monk D, de Nanclares GP, Kagami M, Giabicani E, Riccio A, Tümer Z, Kalish JM, Tauber M, Duis J, Weksberg R, Maher ER, Begemann M, Elbracht M
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-023-00443-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-023-00443-4)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2023 Jun 29;9(1):33. doi: 10.1038/s41572-023-00443-4.

Imprinting disorders.

Eggermann T(1), Monk D(2), de Nanclares GP(3), Kagami M(4), Giabicani E(5), 
Riccio A(6)(7), Tümer Z(8)(9), Kalish JM(10), Tauber M(11)(12), Duis J(13), 
Weksberg R(14)(15), Maher ER(16), Begemann M(17), Elbracht M(17).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Medical Faculty, RWTH 
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. teggermann@ukaachen.de.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(3)Rare Diseases Research Group, Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, Bioaraba 
Research Health Institute, Araba University Hospital-Txagorritxu, 
Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain.
(4)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, APHP, Hôpital 
Armand Trousseau, Endocrinologie Moléculaire et Pathologies d'Empreinte, Paris, 
France.
(6)Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and 
Technologies, Università della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Caserta, Italy.
(7)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, Naples, Italy.
(8)Kennedy Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)Division of Human Genetics and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the Departments of Pediatrics and 
Genetics at the Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(11)Centre de Référence Maladies Rares PRADORT (syndrome de PRADer-Willi et 
autres Obésités Rares avec Troubles du comportement alimentaire), Hôpital des 
Enfants, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(12)Institut Toulousain des Maladies Infectieuses et Inflammatoires (Infinity) 
INSERM UMR1291 - CNRS UMR5051 - Université Toulouse III, Toulouse, France.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Colorado, University of 
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(14)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics and 
Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(15)Institute of Medical Sciences and Department of Molecular Genetics, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(16)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(17)Institute for Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Medical Faculty, RWTH 
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.

Imprinting disorders (ImpDis) are congenital conditions that are characterized 
by disturbances of genomic imprinting. The most common individual ImpDis are 
Prader-Willi syndrome, Angelman syndrome and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. 
Individual ImpDis have similar clinical features, such as growth disturbances 
and developmental delay, but the disorders are heterogeneous and the key 
clinical manifestations are often non-specific, rendering diagnosis difficult. 
Four types of genomic and imprinting defect (ImpDef) affecting differentially 
methylated regions (DMRs) can cause ImpDis. These defects affect the monoallelic 
and parent-of-origin-specific expression of imprinted genes. The regulation 
within DMRs as well as their functional consequences are mainly unknown, but 
functional cross-talk between imprinted genes and functional pathways has been 
identified, giving insight into the pathophysiology of ImpDefs. Treatment of 
ImpDis is symptomatic. Targeted therapies are lacking owing to the rarity of 
these disorders; however, personalized treatments are in development. 
Understanding the underlying mechanisms of ImpDis, and improving diagnosis and 
treatment of these disorders, requires a multidisciplinary approach with input 
from patient representatives.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-023-00443-4
PMID: 37386011