---
reference_id: "PMID:41236167"
title: Lived Experience Perspectives on the Development of Anorexia Nervosa.
authors:
- Malcolm AC
- Phillipou A
journal: Eur Eat Disord Rev
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1002/erv.70058
keywords:
- Humans
- Anorexia Nervosa/psychology
- Female
- Adult
- Young Adult
- Qualitative Research
- Self Concept
- Adolescent
- Psychological Distress
- "Adaptation, Psychological"
- Emotional Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lived Experience Perspectives on the Development of Anorexia Nervosa.
**Authors:** Malcolm AC, Phillipou A
**Journal:** Eur Eat Disord Rev (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1002/erv.70058](https://doi.org/10.1002/erv.70058)

## Content

1. Eur Eat Disord Rev. 2026 May;34(3):612-626. doi: 10.1002/erv.70058. Epub 2025
Nov 14.

Lived Experience Perspectives on the Development of Anorexia Nervosa.

Malcolm AC(1)(2), Phillipou A(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Orygen, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Centre for Youth Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia.
(3)Orygen Specialist Program, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Department of Psychological Sciences, Swinburne University of Technology,
Melbourne, Australia.
(5)Department of Mental Health, St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Department of Mental Health, Austin Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: This research aimed to explore what women with lived experience of
anorexia nervosa (AN) perceive as causal or contributing factors involved in the
development of their AN.
METHOD: Sixteen participants were interviewed about their perceptions of the
development of their AN. Interviews were analysed using thematic analysis.
RESULTS: Participants described a strong role of relational factors in the
perceived development of AN, including perception of unmet emotional needs,
feelings of non-belonging, or significant emotional-relational injury, social
difficulties, and exposure to conditional worth messaging about the body or
eating. Relational factors were described in connection with internal factors of
poor self-worth, disrupted emotion regulation ability, and emotional distress,
which further linked to AN's development as an emotional coping strategy.
Moreover, participants identified that experiences of prolonged or severe
emotional distress had preceded AN symptoms, but opportunities for early
prevention/intervention were missed.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings highlight relational factors, internal factors and
emotional distress as potential targets for prevention and early intervention in
AN, via improved screening for at-risk individuals, early intervention for
emotional distress, and better support for families in building healthy emotion
regulation skills. Additionally, the data indicates that working with emotional
and relational wounds may be important treatment targets.

© 2025 Eating Disorders Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/erv.70058
PMID: 41236167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
