---
reference_id: "PMID:30026775"
title: "A Novel Mutation of Beta-ketothiolase Deficiency: The First Report from Iran and Review of Literature."
authors:
- Vakili R
- Hashemian S
journal: Iran J Child Neurol
year: '2018'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Mutation of Beta-ketothiolase Deficiency: The First Report from Iran and Review of Literature.
**Authors:** Vakili R, Hashemian S
**Journal:** Iran J Child Neurol (2018)

## Content

1. Iran J Child Neurol. 2018 Summer;12(3):113-121.

A Novel Mutation of Beta-ketothiolase Deficiency: The First Report from Iran and 
Review of Literature.

Vakili R(1)(2), Hashemian S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Imam Reza Hospital, 
Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Medical Genetic Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran.

Beta-ketothiolase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by an inborn error of isoleucine catabolism and affecting ketone 
body metabolism. Clinical features characterized by intermittent keto acidotic 
episodes are associated with clinical signs and symptoms of toxic encephalopathy 
such as lethargy, hypotonia, vomiting, tachypnea, and coma in some patients, 
with an onset during infancy or toddler-hood. A two months old girl presented to 
pediatric ward of Imam Reza Hospital in Mashhad City, Northwestern Iran in 
October 2016, with acute episode of fever and toxic encephalopathy with attack 
of vomiting, hypotonia, lethargy, tonic-clonic seizures and then a day in coma, 
few days after vaccination. After then similar episodes happened until 7 months 
age. Bio chemical tests that suggested diagnose of beta ketothiolase deficiency 
were attacks of ketoacidosis with urinary exertion of 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyric 
acid 2-methyl aceto acetic acid tiglylglycine. In genetic assessment, we 
detected a novel homozygous mutation c.664A> C (p. Ser 222 Arg) in ACAT gene. 
This is the first report of beta ketothiolase deficiency confirmed by molecular 
analysis from Iran. We report on a homozygous variant in the ACAT1 gene and that 
is a novel mutation. We recommended carrier testing for all informative family 
members to recognize mutations in asymptomatic family members.

PMCID: PMC6045933
PMID: 30026775

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.