---
reference_id: "PMID:27649704"
title: "The Sooner, the Better? The Importance of Optimal Timing of Cholecystectomy in Acute Cholecystitis: Data from the National Swedish Registry for Gallstone Surgery, GallRiks."
authors:
- Blohm M
- Österberg J
- Sandblom G
- Lundell L
- Hedberg M
- Enochsson L
journal: J Gastrointest Surg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s11605-016-3223-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Sooner, the Better? The Importance of Optimal Timing of Cholecystectomy in Acute Cholecystitis: Data from the National Swedish Registry for Gallstone Surgery, GallRiks.
**Authors:** Blohm M, Österberg J, Sandblom G, Lundell L, Hedberg M, Enochsson L
**Journal:** J Gastrointest Surg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11605-016-3223-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11605-016-3223-y)

## Content

1. J Gastrointest Surg. 2017 Jan;21(1):33-40. doi: 10.1007/s11605-016-3223-y.
Epub  2016 Sep 20.

The Sooner, the Better? The Importance of Optimal Timing of Cholecystectomy in 
Acute Cholecystitis: Data from the National Swedish Registry for Gallstone 
Surgery, GallRiks.

Blohm M(1)(2), Österberg J(3), Sandblom G(4)(5), Lundell L(5), Hedberg M(3), 
Enochsson L(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and 
Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. my.blohm@ltdalarna.se.
(2)Department of Surgery, Mora Hospital, 792 85, Mora, Sweden. 
my.blohm@ltdalarna.se.
(3)Department of Surgery, Mora Hospital, 792 85, Mora, Sweden.
(4)Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and 
Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Center for Digestive Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, 141 86, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and 
Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. lars.enochsson@ki.se.
(7)Center for Digestive Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, 141 86, 
Stockholm, Sweden. lars.enochsson@ki.se.

Up-front cholecystectomy is the recommended therapy for acute cholecystitis 
(AC). However, the scientific basis for the definition of the optimal timing for 
surgery is scarce. The aim of this study was to analyze how the timing of 
surgery, after the admission to hospital for AC, affects the intra- and 
postoperative outcomes. Within the national Swedish Registry for Gallstone 
Surgery and Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (GallRiks), all 
patients undergoing cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis between January 2006 
and December 2014 were identified. Data regarding patient characteristics, 
intra- and postoperative adverse events (AEs), bile duct injuries, and 30- and 
90-day mortality risk were captured, and the correlation between the surgical 
timing and these parameters was analyzed. In total, data on 87,108 
cholecystectomies were analyzed of which 15,760 (18.1 %) were performed due to 
AC. Bile duct injury, 30- and 90-day mortality risk, and intra- and 
postoperative AEs were significantly higher if the time from admission to 
surgery exceeded 4 days. The time course between surgery and complication risks 
seemed to be optimal if surgery was done within 2 days after hospital admission. 
Although AC patients operated on the day of hospital admission had a slightly 
increased AE rate as well as 30- and 90-day mortality rates than those operated 
during the interval of 1-2 days after admission, the bile duct injury and 
conversion rates were, in fact, significantly lower. The optimal timing of 
cholecystectomy for patients with AC seems to be within 2 days after admission. 
However, the somewhat higher frequency of AE on admission day may emphasize the 
importance of optimizing the patient before surgery as well as ensuring that 
adequate surgical resources are available.

DOI: 10.1007/s11605-016-3223-y
PMCID: PMC5187360
PMID: 27649704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with Ethical StandardsConflict of 
InterestThe authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.Author 
contributionsMB, JÖ, GS, and LE conceived of the study and design the study. MB 
and LE performed the data acquisition. MB, JÖ, GS, MH, LL, and LE performed the 
quality control of data and algorithms. MB, JÖ, MH, and LE performed the data 
analysis and interpretation, GS and LE performed the statistical analysis. MB, 
JÖ, GS, LL, MH, and LE prepared, edited, and reviewed the manuscript. All 
authors have approved of the final draft submitted.