---
reference_id: "PMID:12593727"
title: "A C/T single-nucleotide polymorphism in the region of the CD40 gene is associated with Graves' disease."
authors:
- Tomer Y
- Concepcion E
- Greenberg DA
journal: Thyroid
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1089/105072502321085234
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A C/T single-nucleotide polymorphism in the region of the CD40 gene is associated with Graves' disease.
**Authors:** Tomer Y, Concepcion E, Greenberg DA
**Journal:** Thyroid (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1089/105072502321085234](https://doi.org/10.1089/105072502321085234)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2002 Dec;12(12):1129-35. doi: 10.1089/105072502321085234.

A C/T single-nucleotide polymorphism in the region of the CD40 gene is 
associated with Graves' disease.

Tomer Y(1), Concepcion E, Greenberg DA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Bone Diseases, Department of 
Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA. 
Yaron.Tomer@mssm.edu

Graves' disease (GD) develops as a result of an interaction between 
susceptibility genes and environmental factors. We have previously mapped a 
susceptibility locus for GD on chromosome 20q11 (GD-2), which has recently been 
independently replicated. Among the genes mapped to 20q11 was the CD40 gene, an 
important costimulatory molecule and a good positional candidate gene for GD. We 
investigated whether the CD40 gene was the GD susceptibility gene on 20q11. 
Linkage analysis in a subset of Caucasian families showed a maximum multipoint 
logarithm of odds (LOD) score of 3.3 at the CD40 locus. We then sequenced all 9 
exons of the CD40 gene in 8 probands and 10 controls and identified a new C/T 
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the Kozak sequence of the CD40 gene at 
position -1. Case control association analysis of the CD40 C/T(-1) SNP in 154 
Caucasian patients with GD and 118 Caucasian controls showed an association 
between the CC genotype and GD (p = 0.048, relative risk [RR] = 1.6). 
Furthermore, the association was stronger when only the probands from the linked 
families (n = 20) were used (p = 0.009, RR = 4.8). Transmission disequilibrium 
test (TDT) analysis also showed preferential transmission of the C allele of the 
CD40 C/T(-1) SNP to affected individuals (p = 0.02). In conclusion, our results 
suggested that the CD40 gene was a new susceptibility gene for GD within certain 
families because it was both linked and associated with GD.

DOI: 10.1089/105072502321085234
PMID: 12593727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]