---
reference_id: "PMID:30930396"
title: "[Research in Motor Neuron Diseases Caused by Natural Substances: Focus on Pathological Mechanisms of Neurolathyrism]."
authors:
- Kusama-Eguchi K
journal: Yakugaku Zasshi
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1248/yakushi.18-00202
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Death/drug effects
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Fabaceae/adverse effects, chemistry"
- Humans
- "Lathyrism/etiology, pathology"
- "Lathyrus/adverse effects, chemistry"
- "Motor Neuron Disease/etiology, pathology"
- Motor Neurons/pathology
- Rats
- alpha-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic Acid
- "beta-Alanine/analogs & derivatives, isolation & purification, toxicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Research in Motor Neuron Diseases Caused by Natural Substances: Focus on Pathological Mechanisms of Neurolathyrism].
**Authors:** Kusama-Eguchi K
**Journal:** Yakugaku Zasshi (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1248/yakushi.18-00202](https://doi.org/10.1248/yakushi.18-00202)

## Content

1. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2019;139(4):609-615. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.18-00202.

[Research in Motor Neuron Diseases Caused by Natural Substances: Focus on 
Pathological Mechanisms of Neurolathyrism].

[Article in Japanese]

Kusama-Eguchi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University.

Diseases of the motor-conducting system that cause moving disability affect 
socio-economic activity as well as human dignity. Neurolathyrism, konzo, and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism-dementia complex (ALS-PDC) have 
attracted researchers to study the pathology of motor neuron (MN) diseases such 
as ALS. I have been studying neurolathyrism, which is caused by overconsumption 
of a legume grass pea (Lathyrys sativus L.). Among people who consume the legume 
as a food staple, many developed life-long paraparesis in their legs. 
β-N-oxalyl-l-α,β- diaminopropionic (l-β-ODAP; BOAA), contained in this plant, is 
a neurotoxic analog of l-glutamic acid. We have clarified that in addition to 
the causal involvement of α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
(AMPA) type glutamatergic receptor in MN death, a toxic role of group I 
metabotropic glutamate receptors as well as transient receptor potential 
channels were involved in the MN insult by l-β-ODAP using primary MN culture. We 
have also established a neurolathyrism rat model by repeated, peripheral 
l-β-ODAP treatment to newborn rats under mild stress. Rats showing hind-leg 
paraparesis with an incidence rate of around 25% were useful to study the in 
vivo pathology of MN disease. MNs of these rats were greatly decreased at their 
lumbo/sacral segments at various ages. Intra-parenchymal hemorrhage was 
consistently observed in paraparetic rats but not in cripple-free, treated rats. 
MN were depleted even at an acute period around bleeding spots, suggesting 
catastrophic neuro-vascular-glial interaction in this MN disease. Summaries of 
konzo and ALS-PDCs studies are also introduced.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.18-00202
PMID: 30930396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]