---
reference_id: "PMID:21357605"
title: SYCP3 mutation may not be associated with recurrent miscarriage caused by aneuploidy.
authors:
- Mizutani E
- Suzumori N
- Ozaki Y
- Oseto K
- Yamada-Namikawa C
- Nakanishi M
- Sugiura-Ogasawara M
journal: Hum Reprod
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/humrep/der035
keywords:
- "Abortion, Habitual/genetics"
- Adult
- Aneuploidy
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Female
- Humans
- Karyotyping
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Point Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SYCP3 mutation may not be associated with recurrent miscarriage caused by aneuploidy.
**Authors:** Mizutani E, Suzumori N, Ozaki Y, Oseto K, Yamada-Namikawa C, Nakanishi M, Sugiura-Ogasawara M
**Journal:** Hum Reprod (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/humrep/der035](https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/der035)

## Content

1. Hum Reprod. 2011 May;26(5):1259-66. doi: 10.1093/humrep/der035. Epub 2011 Feb 
26.

SYCP3 mutation may not be associated with recurrent miscarriage caused by 
aneuploidy.

Mizutani E(1), Suzumori N, Ozaki Y, Oseto K, Yamada-Namikawa C, Nakanishi M, 
Sugiura-Ogasawara M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Nagoya City University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan.

BACKGROUND: SYCP3 mutations have been shown to generate an aberrant synaptonemal 
complex in a dominant-negative manner and to contribute to abnormal chromosomal 
behavior that might lead to recurrent miscarriage. We examined whether SYCP3 
mutation is associated with recurrent miscarriage caused by embryonic 
aneuploidy.
METHODS: The SYCP3 657T>C mutation was examined using PCR and sequencing in 101 
patients with a history of three or more unexplained recurrent miscarriages and 
82 fertile controls with no history of miscarriage. The embryonic karyotype in 
the aborted conceptus was analyzed.
RESULTS: The 657T>C mutation of SYCP3 was identified in one patient with a 
history of six recurrent miscarriages with embryonic euploidy and one fertile 
woman in the control group. Patients with abnormal and normal chromosome were 
found to repeat miscarriage with abnormal and normal chromosome, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The 657T>C mutation of SYCP3 may not be associated with recurrent 
miscarriage caused by aneuploidy. We found no clinical significance of routine 
examination of the SYCP3 mutation because only one benign mutation was 
ascertained in 101 patients.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/der035
PMID: 21357605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]