---
reference_id: "PMID:22019273"
title: Ciliopathies with skeletal anomalies and renal insufficiency due to mutations in the IFT-A gene WDR19.
authors:
- Bredrup C
- Saunier S
- Oud MM
- Fiskerstrand T
- Hoischen A
- Brackman D
- Leh SM
- Midtbø M
- Filhol E
- Bole-Feysot C
- Nitschké P
- Gilissen C
- Haugen OH
- Sanders JS
- Stolte-Dijkstra I
- Mans DA
- Steenbergen EJ
- Hamel BC
- Matignon M
- Pfundt R
- Jeanpierre C
- Boman H
- Rødahl E
- Veltman JA
- Knappskog PM
- Knoers NV
- Roepman R
- Arts HH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.10.001
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Cilia/genetics, pathology"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- "Flagella/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Morocco
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Netherlands
- Norway
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Pedigree
- "Polycystic Kidney Diseases/congenital, genetics"
- Proteins/genetics
- Short Rib-Polydactyly Syndrome/genetics
- Thoracic Diseases/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ciliopathies with skeletal anomalies and renal insufficiency due to mutations in the IFT-A gene WDR19.
**Authors:** Bredrup C, Saunier S, Oud MM, Fiskerstrand T, Hoischen A, Brackman D, Leh SM, Midtbø M, Filhol E, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschké P, Gilissen C, Haugen OH, Sanders JS, Stolte-Dijkstra I, Mans DA, Steenbergen EJ, Hamel BC, Matignon M, Pfundt R, Jeanpierre C, Boman H, Rødahl E, Veltman JA, Knappskog PM, Knoers NV, Roepman R, Arts HH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.10.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.10.001)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Nov 11;89(5):634-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.10.001.
Epub  2011 Oct 20.

Ciliopathies with skeletal anomalies and renal insufficiency due to mutations in 
the IFT-A gene WDR19.

Bredrup C(1), Saunier S, Oud MM, Fiskerstrand T, Hoischen A, Brackman D, Leh SM, 
Midtbø M, Filhol E, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschké P, Gilissen C, Haugen OH, Sanders 
JS, Stolte-Dijkstra I, Mans DA, Steenbergen EJ, Hamel BC, Matignon M, Pfundt R, 
Jeanpierre C, Boman H, Rødahl E, Veltman JA, Knappskog PM, Knoers NV, Roepman R, 
Arts HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, 
Norway.

A subset of ciliopathies, including Sensenbrenner, Jeune, and short-rib 
polydactyly syndromes are characterized by skeletal anomalies accompanied by 
multiorgan defects such as chronic renal failure and retinitis pigmentosa. 
Through exome sequencing we identified compound heterozygous mutations in WDR19 
in a Norwegian family with Sensenbrenner syndrome. In a Dutch family with the 
clinically overlapping Jeune syndrome, a homozygous missense mutation in the 
same gene was found. Both families displayed a nephronophthisis-like 
nephropathy. Independently, we also identified compound heterozygous WDR19 
mutations by exome sequencing in a Moroccan family with isolated 
nephronophthisis. WDR19 encodes IFT144, a member of the intraflagellar transport 
(IFT) complex A that drives retrograde ciliary transport. We show that IFT144 is 
absent from the cilia of fibroblasts from one of the Sensenbrenner patients and 
that ciliary abundance and morphology is perturbed, demonstrating the ciliary 
pathogenesis. Our results suggest that isolated nephronophthisis, Jeune, and 
Sensenbrenner syndromes are clinically overlapping disorders that can result 
from a similar molecular cause.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.10.001
PMCID: PMC3213394
PMID: 22019273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]