---
reference_id: "PMID:25816855"
title: "Pityriasis Lichenoides in Childhood: Review of Clinical Presentation and Treatment Options."
authors:
- Geller L
- Antonov NK
- Lauren CT
- Morel KD
- Garzon MC
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/pde.12581
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Factors
- "Biopsy, Needle"
- Child
- "Clindamycin/administration & dosage"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Prognosis
- Risk Assessment
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sex Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Ultraviolet Therapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis Lichenoides in Childhood: Review of Clinical Presentation and Treatment Options.
**Authors:** Geller L, Antonov NK, Lauren CT, Morel KD, Garzon MC
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.12581](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.12581)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2015 Sep-Oct;32(5):579-92. doi: 10.1111/pde.12581. Epub 2015
 Mar 26.

Pityriasis Lichenoides in Childhood: Review of Clinical Presentation and
Treatment Options.

Geller L(1)(2), Antonov NK(3), Lauren CT(4)(5), Morel KD(4)(5), Garzon MC(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York.
(3)College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York, New York.

Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) is a skin condition of unclear etiology that occurs
not uncommonly in childhood. It is often classified into the acute form,
pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA), and the chronic form,
pityriasis lichenoides chronica (PLC). We performed a comprehensive review of
the English-language literature using the PubMed database of all cases of
childhood PL reported from 1962 to 2014 and summarized the epidemiology,
clinical features, treatment options, and prognosis of this condition in
children. The proposed etiologies are discussed, including its association with
infectious agents, medications, and immunizations and evidence for PL as a
lymphoproliferative disorder. We found an average age of PL onset of 6.5 years,
with a slight (61%) male predominance. We also found that PLEVA and PLC tend to
occur with equal frequency and that, in many cases, there is clinical and
histopathologic overlap between the two phenotypes. When systemic therapy is
indicated, we propose that oral erythromycin and narrowband ultraviolet B
phototherapy should be first-line treatment options for children with PL since
they have been shown to be effective and well tolerated. In most cases, PL
follows a benign course with no greater risk of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma,
although given the rare case reports of transformation, long-term follow-up of
these patients is recommended.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.12581
PMID: 25816855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
