---
reference_id: "PMID:32914578"
title: ALX1-related frontonasal dysplasia results from defective neural crest cell development and migration.
authors:
- Pini J
- Kueper J
- Hu YD
- Kawasaki K
- Yeung P
- Tsimbal C
- Yoon B
- Carmichael N
- Maas RL
- Cotney J
- Grinblat Y
- Liao EC
journal: EMBO Mol Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.15252/emmm.202012013
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Movement
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Face/abnormalities
- Humans
- Neural Crest
- Zebrafish
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALX1-related frontonasal dysplasia results from defective neural crest cell development and migration.
**Authors:** Pini J, Kueper J, Hu YD, Kawasaki K, Yeung P, Tsimbal C, Yoon B, Carmichael N, Maas RL, Cotney J, Grinblat Y, Liao EC
**Journal:** EMBO Mol Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.15252/emmm.202012013](https://doi.org/10.15252/emmm.202012013)

## Content

1. EMBO Mol Med. 2020 Oct 7;12(10):e12013. doi: 10.15252/emmm.202012013. Epub
2020  Sep 11.

ALX1-related frontonasal dysplasia results from defective neural crest cell 
development and migration.

Pini J(#)(1)(2), Kueper J(#)(1)(2)(3), Hu YD(1)(2), Kawasaki K(1)(2), Yeung 
P(1)(2), Tsimbal C(1)(2), Yoon B(4), Carmichael N(5), Maas RL(5), Cotney J(6), 
Grinblat Y(4), Liao EC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Shriners Hospital for Children, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(4)Departments of Integrative Biology, Neuroscience, and Genetics Ph.D. Training 
Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Genetics and Genome Sciences, UConn Health, Farmington, CT, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2022 Jul 7;14(7):e16289. doi: 10.15252/emmm.202216289.

A pedigree of subjects presented with frontonasal dysplasia (FND). Genome 
sequencing and analysis identified a p.L165F missense variant in the homeodomain 
of the transcription factor ALX1 which was imputed to be pathogenic. Induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) were derived from the subjects and differentiated 
to neural crest cells (NCC). NCC derived from ALX1L165F/L165F iPSC were more 
sensitive to apoptosis, showed an elevated expression of several neural crest 
progenitor state markers, and exhibited impaired migration compared to wild-type 
controls. NCC migration was evaluated in vivo using lineage tracing in a 
zebrafish model, which revealed defective migration of the anterior NCC stream 
that contributes to the median portion of the anterior neurocranium, 
phenocopying the clinical presentation. Analysis of human NCC culture media 
revealed a change in the level of bone morphogenic proteins (BMP), with a low 
level of BMP2 and a high level of BMP9. Soluble BMP2 and BMP9 antagonist 
treatments were able to rescue the defective migration phenotype. Taken 
together, these results demonstrate a mechanistic requirement of ALX1 in NCC 
development and migration.

© 2020 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/emmm.202012013
PMCID: PMC7539331
PMID: 32914578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that he has no conflict of 
interest.