---
reference_id: "PMID:22206729"
title: Inversin, Wnt signaling and primary cilia.
authors:
- Lienkamp S
- Ganner A
- Walz G
journal: Differentiation
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.11.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inversin, Wnt signaling and primary cilia.
**Authors:** Lienkamp S, Ganner A, Walz G
**Journal:** Differentiation (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diff.2011.11.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diff.2011.11.012)

## Content

1. Differentiation. 2012 Feb;83(2):S49-55. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.11.012. Epub 
2011 Dec 27.

Inversin, Wnt signaling and primary cilia.

Lienkamp S(1), Ganner A, Walz G.

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, University Freiburg Medical School, Hugstetter Street 55, 
79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Mutations of the ankyrin-repeat protein Inversin, a member of a diverse family 
of more than 12 proteins, cause nephronophthisis (NPH), an autosomal recessive 
cystic kidney disease associated with extra-renal manifestations such as 
retinitis pigmentosa, cerebellar aplasia and situs inversus. Most NPH gene 
products (NPHPs) localize to the cilium, and appear to control the transport of 
cargo protein to the cilium by forming functional networks. Inversin interacts 
with NPHP1 and NPHP3, and shares with NPHP4 the ability to antagonize 
Dishevelled-stimulated canonical Wnt signaling, potentially through recruitment 
of the Anaphase Promoting Complex (APC/C). However, Dishevelled antagonism may 
be confined towards the basal body, thereby polarizing motile cilia on the cells 
of the ventral node and respiratory tract. Inversin is essential for recruiting 
Dishevelled to the plasma membrane in response to activated Frizzled, a crucial 
step in planar cell polarity signaling. During vertebrate pronephros 
development, the Inversin-mediated translocation of Dishevelled appears to 
orchestrate the migration of cells and differentiation of segments that 
correspond to the mammalian loop of Henle. Thus, defective tubule migration and 
elongation may contribute to concentration defects and cause cyst formation in 
patients with NPH.

Copyright © 2011 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.11.012
PMID: 22206729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]