---
reference_id: "PMID:27268913"
title: "Malignant melanoma: diagnosis, treatment and cancer stem cells."
authors:
- Kozovska Z
- Gabrisova V
- Kucerova L
journal: Neoplasma
year: '2016'
doi: 10.4149/neo_2016_403
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant melanoma: diagnosis, treatment and cancer stem cells.
**Authors:** Kozovska Z, Gabrisova V, Kucerova L
**Journal:** Neoplasma (2016)
**DOI:** [10.4149/neo_2016_403](https://doi.org/10.4149/neo_2016_403)

## Content

1. Neoplasma. 2016;63(4):510-7. doi: 10.4149/neo_2016_403.

Malignant melanoma: diagnosis, treatment and cancer stem cells.

Kozovska Z, Gabrisova V, Kucerova L.

Malignant melanoma represents a neoplasm stemming from melanocytes or the cells 
that develop from melanocytes. Melanocytes, pigment-producing cells, arise from 
the neural crest and migrate to their final destinations in the skin, uveal 
tract, meninges, and mucosa. Most melanocytes are found at the epidermal-dermal 
junction of the skin, and the vast majority of melanocytes arise from cutaneous 
sites. Cancerous growths develop when unrepaired DNA damage to skin cells (most 
often caused by ultraviolet radiation from sunshine or tanning beds) triggers 
mutations (genetic defects) that lead the skin cells to multiply rapidly and 
form malignant tumours. Malignant tumours consist of heterogeneous populations 
of tumour cells. Cancer stem cells (CSC) represent a population of cells within 
a tumour with highly tumorigenic and chemoresistant properties. These cells may 
be identified by the expression of CSC markers and also by functional assays as 
tumour-initiating properties in vivo, high aldehyde dehydrogenase activity 
tested by Aldefluor assay. There are several key stem cells markers specified 
for malignant melanoma: CD20, CD133, ABCB5, CD271 and ALDH1A. The review 
provides a detailed overview of risk factors, diagnosis, treatment possibilities 
and specific properties of cancer stem cells in malignant melanoma.

DOI: 10.4149/neo_2016_403
PMID: 27268913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]