---
reference_id: "PMID:19589177"
title: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) mutations and haemoglobinuria syndrome in the Vietnamese population.
authors:
- Hue NT
- Charlieu JP
- Chau TT
- Day N
- Farrar JJ
- Hien TT
- Dunstan SJ
journal: Malar J
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-8-152
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) mutations and haemoglobinuria syndrome in the Vietnamese population.
**Authors:** Hue NT, Charlieu JP, Chau TT, Day N, Farrar JJ, Hien TT, Dunstan SJ
**Journal:** Malar J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1475-2875-8-152](https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2875-8-152)

## Content

1. Malar J. 2009 Jul 10;8:152. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-8-152.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) mutations and haemoglobinuria syndrome 
in the Vietnamese population.

Hue NT(1), Charlieu JP, Chau TT, Day N, Farrar JJ, Hien TT, Dunstan SJ.

Author information:
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Hospital for Tropical Diseases, 190 
Ben Ham Tu, District 5, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. nthue@hcmiu.edu.vn

BACKGROUND: In Vietnam the blackwater fever syndrome (BWF) has been associated 
with malaria infection, quinine ingestion and G6PD deficiency. The G6PD variants 
within the Vietnamese Kinh contributing to the disease risk in this population, 
and more generally to haemoglobinuria, are currently unknown.
METHOD: Eighty-two haemoglobinuria patients and 524 healthy controls were 
screened for G6PD deficiency using either the methylene blue reduction test, the 
G-6-PDH kit or the micro-methaemoglobin reduction test. The G6PD gene variants 
were screened using SSCP combined with DNA sequencing in 82 patients with 
haemoglobinuria, and in 59 healthy controls found to be G6PD deficient.
RESULTS: This study confirmed that G6PD deficiency is strongly associated with 
haemoglobinuria (OR = 15, 95% CI [7.7 to 28.9], P < 0.0001). Six G6PD variants 
were identified in the Vietnamese population, of which two are novel (Vietnam1 
[Glu3Lys] and Vietnam2 [Phe66Cys]). G6PD Viangchan [Val291Met], common 
throughout south-east Asia, accounted for 77% of the variants detected and was 
significantly associated with haemoglobinuria within G6PD-deficient ethnic Kinh 
Vietnamese (OR = 5.8 95% CI [114-55.4], P = 0.022).
CONCLUSION: The primary frequency of several G6PD mutations, including novel 
mutations, in the Vietnamese Kinh population are reported and the contribution 
of G6PD mutations to the development of haemoglobinuria are investigated.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-8-152
PMCID: PMC2717975
PMID: 19589177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]