---
reference_id: "PMID:17289548"
title: Autoantibody responses to melanocytes in the depigmenting skin disease vitiligo.
authors:
- Kemp EH
- Gavalas NG
- Gawkrodger DJ
- Weetman AP
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2006.09.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoantibody responses to melanocytes in the depigmenting skin disease vitiligo.
**Authors:** Kemp EH, Gavalas NG, Gawkrodger DJ, Weetman AP
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2006.09.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2006.09.010)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2007 Jan;6(3):138-42. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2006.09.010. Epub 
2006 Oct 2.

Autoantibody responses to melanocytes in the depigmenting skin disease vitiligo.

Kemp EH(1), Gavalas NG, Gawkrodger DJ, Weetman AP.

Author information:
(1)Section of Endocrinology and Reproduction, School of Medicine and Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. e.h.kemp@sheffield.ac.uk

Vitiligo is an acquired hypomelanotic disorder characterised by circumscribed 
depigmented macules in the skin resulting from the loss of functional 
melanocytes. Population surveys have shown a prevalence ranging from 0.38 to 
1.13%. The frequent association of vitiligo with autoimmune diseases, together 
with studies demonstrating that vitiligo patients can have autoantibodies and 
autoreactive T lymphocytes against pigment cells supports the theory that there 
is an autoimmune involvement in the aetiology of the disease. Although the 
pathogenic mechanisms of T cells have recently been well studied in vitiligo, 
the role of autoantibodies in the disease remains obscure. However, even if 
antibodies to melanocytes are not an agent of the disease, identifying their 
target antigens could provide for the development of diagnostic tests that are 
not yet available for vitiligo and could serve as markers for important T cell 
responses in patients with the disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2006.09.010
PMID: 17289548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]