---
reference_id: "PMID:33882302"
title: Cytoplasmic polyadenylation by TENT5A is required for proper bone formation.
authors:
- Gewartowska O
- Aranaz-Novaliches G
- Krawczyk PS
- Mroczek S
- Kusio-Kobiałka M
- Tarkowski B
- Spoutil F
- Benada O
- Kofroňová O
- Szwedziak P
- Cysewski D
- Gruchota J
- Szpila M
- Chlebowski A
- Sedlacek R
- Prochazka J
- Dziembowski A
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109015
keywords:
- Animals
- "Calcification, Physiologic/genetics"
- Cell Differentiation
- "Collagen Type I/genetics, metabolism"
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nerve Growth Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nucleotidyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Osteoblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- Osteogenesis/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Osteonectin/genetics, metabolism"
- Polyadenylation
- "Polynucleotide Adenylyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Isoforms/deficiency, genetics"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- "Serpins/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytoplasmic polyadenylation by TENT5A is required for proper bone formation.
**Authors:** Gewartowska O, Aranaz-Novaliches G, Krawczyk PS, Mroczek S, Kusio-Kobiałka M, Tarkowski B, Spoutil F, Benada O, Kofroňová O, Szwedziak P, Cysewski D, Gruchota J, Szpila M, Chlebowski A, Sedlacek R, Prochazka J, Dziembowski A
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109015)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2021 Apr 20;35(3):109015. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109015.

Cytoplasmic polyadenylation by TENT5A is required for proper bone formation.

Gewartowska O(1), Aranaz-Novaliches G(2), Krawczyk PS(3), Mroczek S(4), 
Kusio-Kobiałka M(1), Tarkowski B(3), Spoutil F(5), Benada O(6), Kofroňová O(6), 
Szwedziak P(7), Cysewski D(8), Gruchota J(3), Szpila M(3), Chlebowski A(8), 
Sedlacek R(5), Prochazka J(5), Dziembowski A(9).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of RNA Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell 
Biology in Warsaw, Trojdena 4, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland; Institute of Biochemistry 
and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Pawinskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, 
Poland; Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University 
of Warsaw, Pawinskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics 
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, v.v.i., 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.
(3)Laboratory of RNA Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell 
Biology in Warsaw, Trojdena 4, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland; Institute of Biochemistry 
and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Pawinskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, 
Poland.
(4)Laboratory of RNA Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell 
Biology in Warsaw, Trojdena 4, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland; Institute of Genetics and 
Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, Pawinskiego 5a, 02-106 
Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics 
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, v.v.i., 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic; Czech 
Centre for Phenogenomics, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the CAS, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(6)Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, v.v.i., 142 20 
Prague 4, Czech Republic.
(7)Laboratory of Structural Cell Biology, Centre of New Technologies, University 
of Warsaw, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland; ReMedy-International Research Agenda Unit, 
Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland.
(8)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Pawinskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.
(9)Laboratory of RNA Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell 
Biology in Warsaw, Trojdena 4, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland; Institute of Biochemistry 
and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Pawinskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, 
Poland; Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University 
of Warsaw, Pawinskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: 
adziembowski@iimcb.gov.pl.

Osteoblasts orchestrate bone formation through the secretion of type I collagen 
and other constituents of the matrix on which hydroxyapatite crystals 
mineralize. Here, we show that TENT5A, whose mutations were found in congenital 
bone disease osteogenesis imperfecta patients, is a cytoplasmic poly(A) 
polymerase playing a crucial role in regulating bone mineralization. Direct RNA 
sequencing revealed that TENT5A is induced during osteoblast differentiation and 
polyadenylates mRNAs encoding Col1α1, Col1α2, and other secreted proteins 
involved in osteogenesis, increasing their expression. We postulate that TENT5A, 
possibly together with its paralog TENT5C, is responsible for the wave of 
cytoplasmic polyadenylation of mRNAs encoding secreted proteins occurring during 
bone mineralization. Importantly, the Tent5a knockout (KO) mouse line displays 
bone fragility and skeletal hypomineralization phenotype resulting from 
quantitative and qualitative collagen defects. Thus, we report a biologically 
relevant posttranscriptional regulator of collagen production and, more 
generally, bone formation.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109015
PMID: 33882302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.