---
reference_id: "PMID:12486434"
title: "A novel lamin A/C mutation in a family with dilated cardiomyopathy, prominent conduction system disease, and need for permanent pacemaker implantation."
authors:
- Hershberger RE
- Hanson EL
- Jakobs PM
- Keegan H
- Coates K
- Bousman S
- Litt M
journal: Am Heart J
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1067/mhj.2002.126737
keywords:
- Adult
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/complications, genetics, surgery"
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/complications, genetics, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Lamin Type A/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Pacemaker, Artificial"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel lamin A/C mutation in a family with dilated cardiomyopathy, prominent conduction system disease, and need for permanent pacemaker implantation.
**Authors:** Hershberger RE, Hanson EL, Jakobs PM, Keegan H, Coates K, Bousman S, Litt M
**Journal:** Am Heart J (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1067/mhj.2002.126737](https://doi.org/10.1067/mhj.2002.126737)

## Content

1. Am Heart J. 2002 Dec;144(6):1081-6. doi: 10.1067/mhj.2002.126737.

A novel lamin A/C mutation in a family with dilated cardiomyopathy, prominent
conduction system disease, and need for permanent pacemaker implantation.

Hershberger RE(1), Hanson EL, Jakobs PM, Keegan H, Coates K, Bousman S, Litt M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Ore
97201, USA. hershber@ohsu.edu

Comment in
    Am Heart J. 2002 Dec;144(6):938-40. doi: 10.1067/mhj.2002.126738.

BACKGROUND: The LMNA gene, which encodes the nuclear envelope protein lamin A/C,
is thought to be the most common of 8 autosomal disease genes implicated in
familial dilated cardiomyopathy (FDC). Each family reported to date has a unique
mutation and variable degrees of cardiac conduction system, dilated
cardiomyopathy, or skeletal muscle disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Coding regions of the LMNA gene were screened in 12
biological members of a family with dilated cardiomyopathy and conduction system
disease. A novel missense mutation (Leu215Pro) in exon 4 was identified in 8
subjects. Disease was manifested as brady- and tachyarrhythmias, often
necessitating permanent pacemaker implantation, and later onset of dilated
cardiomyopathy and heart failure. No features of skeletal muscle disease were
noted. The high percentage of affected individuals who needed pacemaker therapy
(88%) was a unique characteristic of this family compared with other FDC
families with LMNA mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Careful examination of clinical data in families with FDC and LMNA
mutations may reveal subtle genotype-phenotype correlations. Knowledge of such
correlations may help to further define the mechanisms of disease in
LMNA-associated FDC and can assist in the monitoring of disease for at-risk
family members.

DOI: 10.1067/mhj.2002.126737
PMID: 12486434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
