---
reference_id: "PMID:31839552"
title: "Voice patterns in schizophrenia: A systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis."
authors:
- Parola A
- Simonsen A
- Bliksted V
- Fusaroli R
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.11.031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Voice patterns in schizophrenia: A systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Parola A, Simonsen A, Bliksted V, Fusaroli R
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2019.11.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2019.11.031)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2020 Feb;216:24-40. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.11.031. Epub
2019  Dec 13.

Voice patterns in schizophrenia: A systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis.

Parola A(1), Simonsen A(2), Bliksted V(2), Fusaroli R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Turin, Italy. Electronic address: 
alparola@unito.it.
(2)Psychosis Research Unit - Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, 
Denmark; The Interacting Minds Center - School of Culture and Society, Aarhus 
University, Denmark.
(3)The Interacting Minds Center - School of Culture and Society, Aarhus 
University, Denmark; Department of Linguistics, Semiotics and Cognitive Science 
- School of Communication and Culture, Aarhus University, Denmark.

Voice atypicalities have been a characteristic feature of schizophrenia since 
its first definitions. They are often associated with core negative symptoms 
such as flat affect and alogia, and with the social impairments seen in the 
disorder. This suggests that voice atypicalities may represent a marker of 
clinical features and social functioning in schizophrenia. We systematically 
reviewed and meta-analyzed the evidence for distinctive acoustic patterns in 
schizophrenia, as well as their relation to clinical features. We identified 46 
articles, including 55 studies with a total of 1254 patients with schizophrenia 
and 699 healthy controls. Summary effect sizes (Hedges'g and Pearson's r) 
estimates were calculated using multilevel Bayesian modeling. We identified weak 
atypicalities in pitch variability (g = -0.55) related to flat affect, and 
stronger atypicalities in proportion of spoken time, speech rate, and pauses 
(g's between -0.75 and -1.89) related to alogia and flat affect. However, the 
effects were mostly modest (with the important exception of pause duration) 
compared to perceptual and clinical judgments, and characterized by large 
heterogeneity between studies. Moderator analyses revealed that tasks with a 
more demanding cognitive and social component showed larger effects both in 
contrasting patients and controls and in assessing symptomatology. In 
conclusion, studies of acoustic patterns are a promising but, yet unsystematic 
avenue for establishing markers of schizophrenia. We outline recommendations 
towards more cumulative, open, and theory-driven research.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.11.031
PMID: 31839552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Riccardo 
Fusaroli is currently a consultant for F. Hoffmann-La Roche on related but not 
overlapping topics. The other authors have no real or potential conflicts of 
interest that could have had influenced the research.