---
reference_id: "PMID:37525202"
title: "Clinicopathological features of dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor: a case series."
authors:
- Rahim S
- Ud Din N
- Abdul-Ghafar J
- Chundriger Q
- Khan P
- Ahmad Z
journal: J Med Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13256-023-04062-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- "Brain Neoplasms/complications, surgery, diagnosis"
- Epilepsy
- Glioma
- "Neoplasms, Neuroepithelial/complications, surgery"
- Seizures/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathological features of dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor: a case series.
**Authors:** Rahim S, Ud Din N, Abdul-Ghafar J, Chundriger Q, Khan P, Ahmad Z
**Journal:** J Med Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13256-023-04062-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13256-023-04062-1)

## Content

1. J Med Case Rep. 2023 Aug 1;17(1):327. doi: 10.1186/s13256-023-04062-1.

Clinicopathological features of dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor: a 
case series.

Rahim S(1), Ud Din N(1), Abdul-Ghafar J(2), Chundriger Q(1), Khan P(3), Ahmad 
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Aga Khan University 
Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Pathology and Clinical Laboratory, French Medical Institute for 
Mothers and Children (FMIC), Kabul, Afghanistan. jamshid.jalal@fmic.org.af.
(3)Department of Radiology, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors are rare benign 
supratentotrial epilepsy-associated glioneuronal tumors of children and young 
adults. Patients have a long history of seizures. Proper surgical resection 
achieves long term seizure control. We describe the clinicopathological features 
of dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor cases reported in our practice and 
review the published literature.
METHODS: All cases of Pakistani ethnicity were diagnosed between 2015 and 2021 
were included. Slides were reviewed and clinicopathological features were 
recorded. Follow-up was obtained. Extensive literature review was conducted.
RESULTS: Fourteen cases were reported. There were 12 males and 2 females. Age 
range was 9-45 years (mean 19 years). Majority were located in the temporal and 
frontal lobes. Duration of seizures prior to resection ranged from 2 months to 
9 years with mean and median duration of 3.2 and 3 years, respectively. 
Histologically, all cases demonstrated a multinodular pattern, specific 
glioneuronal component, and floating neurons. Simple and complex forms comprised 
seven cases each. No significant nuclear atypia, mitotic activity, or necrosis 
was seen. Ki-67 proliferative index was very low. Cortical dysplasia was noted 
in adjacent glial tissue in four cases. Follow-up ranged from 20 to 94 months. 
Seizures continued following resection in all but one case but were reduced in 
frequency and intensity. In one case, seizures stopped completely following 
surgery.
CONCLUSION: Clinicopathological features were similar to those in published 
literature. However, a marked male predominance was noted in our series. 
Seizures continued following resection in all but one case but were reduced in 
frequency and intensity. This series will help raise awareness among clinicians 
and pathologists in our part of the world about this seizure-associated tumor of 
children and young adults.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-023-04062-1
PMCID: PMC10391907
PMID: 37525202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: It is declared that all authors have no conflict 
of interest.