---
reference_id: "PMID:20301303"
title: Noonan Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Roberts AE
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noonan Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Roberts AE

## Content

1. Noonan Syndrome.

Roberts AE(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Nov 15 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)Co-Director, Center for Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Cardiology and 
Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Noonan syndrome (NS) is characterized by 
characteristic facies, short stature, congenital heart defect, and developmental 
delay of variable degree. Other findings can include broad or webbed neck, 
unusual chest shape with superior pectus carinatum and inferior pectus 
excavatum, cryptorchidism, varied coagulation defects, lymphatic dysplasias, and 
ocular abnormalities. Although birth length is usually normal, final adult 
height approaches the lower limit of normal. Congenital heart disease occurs in 
50%-80% of individuals. Pulmonary valve stenosis, often with dysplasia, is the 
most common heart defect and is found in 20%-50% of individuals. Hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, found in 20%-30% of individuals, may be present at birth or 
develop in infancy or childhood. Other structural defects include atrial and 
ventricular septal defects, branch pulmonary artery stenosis, and tetralogy of 
Fallot. Up to one fourth of affected individuals have mild intellectual 
disability, and language impairments in general are more common in NS than in 
the general population.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Noonan is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRAF, KRAS, MAP2K1, 
MRAS, NRAS, PTPN11, RAF1, RASA2, RIT1, RRAS2, SOS1, or SOS2 or either a 
heterozygous variant or biallelic pathogenic variants in LZTR1 identified by 
molecular genetic testing. Several additional genes associated with a Noonan 
syndrome-like phenotype in fewer than ten individuals have been identified.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Cardiovascular anomalies in NS are 
usually treated as in the general population. Developmental disabilities are 
addressed by early intervention programs and individualized education 
strategies. Treatment for serious bleeding is guided by knowledge of the 
specific factor deficiency or platelet aggregation anomaly. Growth hormone (GH) 
treatment increases growth velocity. Standard treatment for juvenile 
myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) and other malignancies, feeding difficulties, 
ADHD, behavioral problems, cryptorchidism in males, renal anomalies / 
hydronephrosis, strabismus, hearing loss, and Chiari malformation. Surveillance: 
At each visit: measurement of growth parameters; evaluation of nutritional 
status in infants and toddlers; monitor for evidence of new neurologic 
manifestations (chronic headache, neck pain, changes in tone, dizziness, or 
obstructive sleep apnea); monitor developmental progress; assessment of 
behavioral issues, as age appropriate; skin examination. Annually in childhood 
or as clinically indicated: ophthalmology and audiology evaluations. In children 
age <5 years: if initial cardiac evaluation is normal, at least annual cardiac 
evaluations until age 5 years. In children age >5 years through adulthood, 
cardiac evaluation at least every 5 years, or as clinically indicated. Prior to 
any surgical procedure or in those with clinical bleeding: assessment of 
bleeding history, CBC with differential, and consideration of measurement of 
coagulation factors. For those with pathogenic PTPN11 or KRAS variants: consider 
physical examination with assessment of spleen size & CBC every 3-6 months until 
age 5 years to assess for concerns about JMML/malignancy. Agents/circumstances 
to avoid: Aspirin therapy should be avoided because it may exacerbate a bleeding 
diathesis. Pregnancy management: Consider referral to an adult congenital heart 
program for peripartum evaluation and management; consider a hematology referral 
if the affected pregnant woman has a history of bleeding abnormalities and/or 
has not undergone previous screening for coagulopathy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: NS is most often inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
While many individuals with autosomal dominant NS have a de novo pathogenic 
variant, an affected parent is recognized in 30%-75% of families. The risk to 
sibs of a proband with autosomal dominant NS depends on the genetic status of 
the parents: if a parent is affected, the risk is 50%; when the parents are 
clinically unaffected, the risk to the sibs of a proband appears to be low 
(<1%). Each child of an individual with autosomal dominant NS has a 50% chance 
of inheriting the pathogenic variant. NS caused by pathogenic variants in LZTR1 
can be inherited in either an autosomal dominant or an autosomal recessive 
manner. The parents of an individual with autosomal recessive NS are typically 
heterozygotes (i.e., have one LZTR1 pathogenic variant), and may either be 
asymptomatic or have mild features of NS. If both parents are heterozygous for 
one LZTR1 pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at 
conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of having one LZTR1 
pathogenic variant (which can be associated with mild NS features), and a 25% 
chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Prenatal testing and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible if the NS-related pathogenic 
variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301303