---
reference_id: "PMID:20624953"
title: Increased activity of Diaphanous homolog 3 (DIAPH3)/diaphanous causes hearing defects in humans with auditory neuropathy and in Drosophila.
authors:
- Schoen CJ
- Emery SB
- Thorne MC
- Ammana HR
- Sliwerska E
- Arnett J
- Hortsch M
- Hannan F
- Burmeister M
- Lesperance MM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1003027107
keywords:
- "5' Untranslated Regions/genetics"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- "Deafness/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Drosophila Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- "Drosophila melanogaster/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Evoked Potentials/physiology
- Female
- Formins
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- "Luciferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid"
- Sound
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased activity of Diaphanous homolog 3 (DIAPH3)/diaphanous causes hearing defects in humans with auditory neuropathy and in Drosophila.
**Authors:** Schoen CJ, Emery SB, Thorne MC, Ammana HR, Sliwerska E, Arnett J, Hortsch M, Hannan F, Burmeister M, Lesperance MM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1003027107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1003027107)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 27;107(30):13396-401. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1003027107. Epub 2010 Jul 12.

Increased activity of Diaphanous homolog 3 (DIAPH3)/diaphanous causes hearing 
defects in humans with auditory neuropathy and in Drosophila.

Schoen CJ(1), Emery SB, Thorne MC, Ammana HR, Sliwerska E, Arnett J, Hortsch M, 
Hannan F, Burmeister M, Lesperance MM.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, Molecular & Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, 
Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck 
Surgery, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Auditory neuropathy is a rare form of deafness characterized by an absent or 
abnormal auditory brainstem response with preservation of outer hair cell 
function. We have identified Diaphanous homolog 3 (DIAPH3) as the gene 
responsible for autosomal dominant nonsyndromic auditory neuropathy (AUNA1), 
which we previously mapped to chromosome 13q21-q24. Genotyping of additional 
family members narrowed the interval to an 11-Mb, 3.28-cM gene-poor region 
containing only four genes, including DIAPH3. DNA sequencing of DIAPH3 revealed 
a c.-172G>A, g. 48G>A mutation in a highly conserved region of the 5' UTR. The 
c.-172G>A mutation occurs within a GC box sequence element and was not found in 
379 controls. Using genome-wide expression arrays and quantitative RT-PCR, we 
demonstrate a 2- to 3-fold overexpression of DIAPH3 mRNA in lymphoblastoid cell 
lines from affected individuals. Likewise, a significant increase (approximately 
1.5-fold) in DIAPH3 protein was found by quantitative immunoblotting of lysates 
from lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from affected individuals in comparison 
with controls. In addition, the c.-172G>A mutation is sufficient to drive 
overexpression of a luciferase reporter. Finally, the expression of a 
constitutively active form of diaphanous protein in the auditory organ of 
Drosophila melanogaster recapitulates the phenotype of impaired response to 
sound. To date, only two genes, the otoferlin gene OTOF and the pejvakin gene 
PJVK, are known to underlie nonsyndromic auditory neuropathy. Genetic testing 
for DIAPH3 may be useful for individuals with recessive as well as dominant 
inheritance of nonsyndromic auditory neuropathy.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1003027107
PMCID: PMC2922180
PMID: 20624953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.