---
reference_id: "PMID:38110260"
title: The 'pulmonary diseases spectrum' in HIV infected children.
authors:
- Lala MM
journal: Indian J Tuberc
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijtb.2023.09.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 'pulmonary diseases spectrum' in HIV infected children.
**Authors:** Lala MM
**Journal:** Indian J Tuberc (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijtb.2023.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijtb.2023.09.002)

## Content

1. Indian J Tuberc. 2023;70 Suppl 1:S49-S58. doi: 10.1016/j.ijtb.2023.09.002.
Epub  2023 Sep 9.

The 'pulmonary diseases spectrum' in HIV infected children.

Lala MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, KB Bhabha Hospital, Bandra West, D-9, Park Bay, 
295, Vidyanagari Road, Kalina, Santacruz [E], Mumbai, 400098, Maharashtra, 
India. Electronic address: mamathalala@gmail.com.

Despite advances in diagnostic, therapeutic and preventive strategies for HIV, 
pulmonary diseases continue to be the major cause of morbidity and mortality in 
infants and children infected with HIV. With effective programs to prevent 
perinatal HIV-1 transmission to early diagnosis in infants, we have seen a 
substantial decline in paediatric HIV incidence. Early initiation of Highly 
Active Anti-Retroviral Therapy (HAART) in all HIV infected children coupled with 
consistent use of Pneumocystis prophylaxis in all HIV exposed/infected children 
under 5 years of age has considerably reduced associated infections overall and 
respiratory infections in particular. In developing countries already burdened 
with poverty, malnutrition, suboptimal immunization coverage and limited access 
to health care and treatment, acute and chronic HIV-associated respiratory 
disease remain a major cause for concern. Prevention of severe respiratory 
infections in advanced HIV disease among children consists mostly of rapid and 
optimal HAART initiation & continuation, preventing severe TB disease with BCG 
and TB preventive treatment, preventing Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia with 
cotrimoxazole prophylaxis and administering age-appropriate vaccinations and 
catch-up vaccines as per National Immunization schedule.

Copyright © 2023 Tuberculosis Association of India. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijtb.2023.09.002
PMID: 38110260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The author has none to 
declare.