---
reference_id: "PMID:35882966"
title: Deep learning to distinguish Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) from adult-onset vitelliform macular degeneration (AVMD).
authors:
- Crincoli E
- Zhao Z
- Querques G
- Sacconi R
- Carlà MM
- Giannuzzi F
- Ferrara S
- Ribarich N
- "L'Abbate G"
- Rizzo S
- Souied EH
- Miere A
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-16980-z
keywords:
- Adult
- Bestrophins/genetics
- Deep Learning
- Humans
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Visual Acuity
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep learning to distinguish Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) from adult-onset vitelliform macular degeneration (AVMD).
**Authors:** Crincoli E, Zhao Z, Querques G, Sacconi R, Carlà MM, Giannuzzi F, Ferrara S, Ribarich N, L'Abbate G, Rizzo S, Souied EH, Miere A
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-022-16980-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-16980-z)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2022 Jul 26;12(1):12745. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-16980-z.

Deep learning to distinguish Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) from
adult-onset vitelliform macular degeneration (AVMD).

Crincoli E(1)(2)(3), Zhao Z(1), Querques G(4), Sacconi R(4), Carlà MM(2)(3),
Giannuzzi F(2)(3), Ferrara S(2)(3), Ribarich N(4), L'Abbate G(4), Rizzo S(2)(3),
Souied EH(1)(5), Miere A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Créteil, 40,
avenue de Verdun, 94100, Créteil, France.
(2)Ophthalmology Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS,
Largo Agostino Gemelli 8, 00166, Rome, Italy.
(3)Catholic University of "Sacro Cuore", Largo Francesco Vito 1, 00166, Rome,
Italy.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology University Vita-Salute IRCCS San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina, 60, 20132, Milan, Italy.
(5)Ethics Committee of the Federation France Macula, 2018-27, 40 Av. de Verdun,
94010, Créteil, France.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Créteil, 40,
avenue de Verdun, 94100, Créteil, France. alexandramiere@gmail.com.

Initial stages of Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) and adult
vitelliform macular dystrophy (AVMD) harbor similar blue autofluorescence (BAF)
and optical coherence tomography (OCT) features. Nevertheless, BVMD is
characterized by a worse final stage visual acuity (VA) and an earlier onset of
critical VA loss. Currently, differential diagnosis requires an invasive and
time-consuming process including genetic testing, electrooculography (EOG), full
field electroretinogram (ERG), and visual field testing. The aim of our study
was to automatically classify OCT and BAF images from stage II BVMD and AVMD
eyes using a deep learning algorithm and to identify an image processing method
to facilitate human-based clinical diagnosis based on non-invasive tests like
BAF and OCT without the use of machine-learning technology. After the
application of a customized image processing method, OCT images were
characterized by a dark appearance of the vitelliform deposit in the case of
BVMD and a lighter inhomogeneous appearance in the case of AVMD. By contrast, a
customized method for processing of BAF images revealed that BVMD and AVMD were
characterized respectively by the presence or absence of a hypo-autofluorescent
region of retina encircling the central hyperautofluorescent foveal lesion. The
human-based evaluation of both BAF and OCT images showed significantly higher
correspondence to ground truth reference when performed on processed images. The
deep learning classifiers based on BAF and OCT images showed around 90% accuracy
of classification with both processed and unprocessed images, which was
significantly higher than human performance on both processed and unprocessed
images. The ability to differentiate between the two entities without recurring
to invasive and expensive tests may offer a valuable clinical tool in the
management of the two diseases.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-16980-z
PMCID: PMC9325755
PMID: 35882966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
