---
reference_id: "PMID:39366068"
title: Mechanism of action and impact of thiol homeostasis on efficacy of an enzyme replacement therapy for classical homocystinuria.
authors:
- Philipp TM
- Bottiglieri T
- Clapper W
- Liu K
- Rodems S
- Szabo C
- Majtan T
journal: Redox Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2024.103383
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of action and impact of thiol homeostasis on efficacy of an enzyme replacement therapy for classical homocystinuria.
**Authors:** Philipp TM, Bottiglieri T, Clapper W, Liu K, Rodems S, Szabo C, Majtan T
**Journal:** Redox Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.redox.2024.103383](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2024.103383)

## Content

1. Redox Biol. 2024 Nov;77:103383. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2024.103383. Epub 2024
Oct  2.

Mechanism of action and impact of thiol homeostasis on efficacy of an enzyme 
replacement therapy for classical homocystinuria.

Philipp TM(1), Bottiglieri T(2), Clapper W(3), Liu K(3), Rodems S(3), Szabo 
C(1), Majtan T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Fribourg, Faculty of Science and 
Medicine, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)Center of Metabolomics, Institute of Metabolic Disease, Baylor Scott & White 
Research Institute, Dallas, TX, 75204, USA.
(3)Travere Therapeutics, Inc., San Diego, CA, 92130, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Fribourg, Faculty of Science and 
Medicine, Fribourg, Switzerland. Electronic address: tomas.majtan@unifr.ch.

Homocystinuria (HCU) due to cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) deficiency is 
characterized by elevated plasma and tissue homocysteine levels. There is no 
cure, but HCU is typically managed by methionine/protein restriction and vitamin 
B6 supplementation. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) based on human CBS has been 
developed and has shown significant efficacy correcting HCU phenotype in several 
mouse models by bringing plasma total homocysteine below the clinically relevant 
100 μM threshold. As the reactive nature of homocysteine promotes disulfide 
formation and protein binding, and ERT is unable to normalize plasma total 
homocysteine levels, the mechanism of action of ERT in HCU remains to be further 
characterized. Here we showed that only a reduced homocysteine serves as a 
substrate for CBS and its availability restricts the homocysteine-degrading 
capacity of CBS. We also demonstrated that cells export homocysteine in its 
reduced form, which is efficiently metabolized by CBS in the culture medium. 
Availability of serine, a CBS co-substrate, was not a limiting factor in our 
cell-based model. Biological reductants, such as N-acetylcysteine, MESNA or 
cysteamine, increased the availability of the reduced homocysteine and thus 
promoted its subsequent CBS-based elimination. In a transgenic I278T mouse model 
of HCU, administration of biological reductants significantly increased the 
proportion of protein-unbound homocysteine in plasma, which improved the 
efficacy of the co-administered CBS-based ERT, as evidenced by significantly 
lower plasma total homocysteine levels. These results clarify the mechanism of 
action of CBS-based ERT and unveil novel pharmacological approaches to further 
increase its efficacy.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2024.103383
PMCID: PMC11489331
PMID: 39366068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest TM is an 
inventor on patents related to pegtibatinase, provides ad-hoc consulting to 
Travere Therapeutics and receives research support from Travere Therapeutics. TB 
receives compensation for metabolomic analyses from Travere Therapeutics. WC, KL 
and SR are current or former employees and stockholders of Travere Therapeutics, 
which clinically develops pegtibatinase as an enzyme replacement therapy for 
classical homocystinuria. TMP and CS declare no conflicting interests.