---
reference_id: "PMID:38240591"
title: Enterovirus D68 3C protease antagonizes type I interferon signaling by cleaving signal transducer and activator of transcription 1.
authors:
- Li X
- Guo H
- Yang J
- Liu X
- Li H
- Yang W
- Zhang L
- Li Y
- Wei W
journal: J Virol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.01994-23
keywords:
- Humans
- 3C Viral Proteases/metabolism
- "Antigens, Viral/metabolism"
- Antiviral Agents/pharmacology
- Cysteine Endopeptidases/metabolism
- "Enterovirus D, Human/physiology"
- Host-Pathogen Interactions
- Immune Evasion
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Interferon Type I/metabolism
- Peptide Hydrolases/metabolism
- Proteolysis
- Signal Transduction
- STAT1 Transcription Factor/metabolism
- Viral Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enterovirus D68 3C protease antagonizes type I interferon signaling by cleaving signal transducer and activator of transcription 1.
**Authors:** Li X, Guo H, Yang J, Liu X, Li H, Yang W, Zhang L, Li Y, Wei W
**Journal:** J Virol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.01994-23](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.01994-23)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2024 Feb 20;98(2):e0199423. doi: 10.1128/jvi.01994-23. Epub 2024 Jan
19.

Enterovirus D68 3C protease antagonizes type I interferon signaling by cleaving
signal transducer and activator of transcription 1.

Li X(1), Guo H(1), Yang J(1), Liu X(1), Li H(1), Yang W(1), Zhang L(1), Li Y(1),
Wei W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology and AIDS Research, First Hospital, Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration and Transplantation of Ministry of
Education, Institute of Translational Medicine, First Hospital, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin, China.

Following the successful control of poliovirus, the re-emergence of respiratory
enterovirus D68 (EV-D68), a prominent non-polio enterovirus, has become a
serious public health concern worldwide. Host innate immune responses are the
primary defense against EV-D68 invasion; however, the mechanism underlying viral
evasion of the antiviral activity of interferons (IFN) remains unclear. In this
study, we found that EV-D68 inhibited type I IFN signaling by cleaving signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), a crucial factor in
cellular responses to interferons and other cytokines. We observed that the
prototype and circulating EV-D68 strains conserved their ability to induce STAT1
cleavage and attenuate IFN signal transduction. Further investigation revealed
that EV-D68 3C protease cleaves STAT1 at the 131Q residue. Interestingly, not
all enterovirus-encoded 3C proteases exhibited this ability. EV-D68 and
poliovirus 3C proteases efficiently induced STAT1 cleavage; whereas, 3C
proteases from EV-A71, coxsackievirus A16, and echoviruses did not. STAT1
cleavage also abolished the nuclear translocation capacity of STAT1 in response
to IFN stimulation to activate downstream signaling elements. Overall, these
results suggest that STAT1, targeted by viral protease 3C, is utilized by EV-D68
to subvert the host's innate immune response.IMPORTANCEEnterovirus D68 (EV-D68)
has significantly transformed over the past decade, evolving from a rare
pathogen to a potential pandemic pathogen. The interferon (IFN) signaling
pathway is an important defense mechanism and therapeutic target for the host to
resist viral invasion. Previous studies have reported that the EV-D68 virus
blocks or weakens immune recognition and IFN production in host cells through
diverse strategies; however, the mechanisms of EV-D68 resistance to IFN
signaling have not been fully elucidated. Our study revealed that EV-D68 relies
on its own encoded protease, 3C, to directly cleave signal transducer and
activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), a pivotal transduction component in the
IFN signaling pathway, disrupting the IFN-mediated antiviral response. Previous
studies on human enteroviruses have not documented direct cleavage of the STAT1
protein to evade cellular immune defenses. However, not all enteroviral 3C
proteins can cleave STAT1. These findings highlight the diverse evolutionary
strategies different human enteroviruses employ to evade host immunity.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.01994-23
PMCID: PMC10878094
PMID: 38240591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
