---
reference_id: "PMID:21217753"
title: Mutations in SMAD3 cause a syndromic form of aortic aneurysms and dissections with early-onset osteoarthritis.
authors:
- van de Laar IM
- Oldenburg RA
- Pals G
- Roos-Hesselink JW
- de Graaf BM
- Verhagen JM
- Hoedemaekers YM
- Willemsen R
- Severijnen LA
- Venselaar H
- Vriend G
- Pattynama PM
- Collée M
- Majoor-Krakauer D
- Poldermans D
- Frohn-Mulder IM
- Micha D
- Timmermans J
- Hilhorst-Hofstee Y
- Bierma-Zeinstra SM
- Willems PJ
- Kros JM
- Oei EH
- Oostra BA
- Wessels MW
- Bertoli-Avella AM
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/ng.744
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in SMAD3 cause a syndromic form of aortic aneurysms and dissections with early-onset osteoarthritis.
**Authors:** van de Laar IM, Oldenburg RA, Pals G, Roos-Hesselink JW, de Graaf BM, Verhagen JM, Hoedemaekers YM, Willemsen R, Severijnen LA, Venselaar H, Vriend G, Pattynama PM, Collée M, Majoor-Krakauer D, Poldermans D, Frohn-Mulder IM, Micha D, Timmermans J, Hilhorst-Hofstee Y, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, Willems PJ, Kros JM, Oei EH, Oostra BA, Wessels MW, Bertoli-Avella AM
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.744](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.744)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2011 Feb;43(2):121-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.744. Epub 2011 Jan 9.

Mutations in SMAD3 cause a syndromic form of aortic aneurysms and dissections 
with early-onset osteoarthritis.

van de Laar IM(1), Oldenburg RA, Pals G, Roos-Hesselink JW, de Graaf BM, 
Verhagen JM, Hoedemaekers YM, Willemsen R, Severijnen LA, Venselaar H, Vriend G, 
Pattynama PM, Collée M, Majoor-Krakauer D, Poldermans D, Frohn-Mulder IM, Micha 
D, Timmermans J, Hilhorst-Hofstee Y, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, Willems PJ, Kros JM, 
Oei EH, Oostra BA, Wessels MW, Bertoli-Avella AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2011 Jun;79(6):510-1. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01666.x.

Thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections are a main feature of connective 
tissue disorders, such as Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome. We 
delineated a new syndrome presenting with aneurysms, dissections and tortuosity 
throughout the arterial tree in association with mild craniofacial features and 
skeletal and cutaneous anomalies. In contrast with other aneurysm syndromes, 
most of these affected individuals presented with early-onset osteoarthritis. We 
mapped the genetic locus to chromosome 15q22.2-24.2 and show that the disease is 
caused by mutations in SMAD3. This gene encodes a member of the TGF-β pathway 
that is essential for TGF-β signal transmission. SMAD3 mutations lead to 
increased aortic expression of several key players in the TGF-β pathway, 
including SMAD3. Molecular diagnosis will allow early and reliable 
identification of cases and relatives at risk for major cardiovascular 
complications. Our findings endorse the TGF-β pathway as the primary 
pharmacological target for the development of new treatments for aortic 
aneurysms and osteoarthritis.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.744
PMID: 21217753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]