---
reference_id: "PMID:35258128"
title: "Child with a mild CHIME syndrome phenotype and carrying a novel p.(Asp52Asn) PIGL pathogenic variant in association with the previously reported p.(Leu167Pro) variant: A case report."
authors:
- Rolland M
- Dubourg C
- Cospain A
- Droitcourt C
- Pasquier L
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/pde.14969
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Child with a mild CHIME syndrome phenotype and carrying a novel p.(Asp52Asn) PIGL pathogenic variant in association with the previously reported p.(Leu167Pro) variant: A case report.
**Authors:** Rolland M, Dubourg C, Cospain A, Droitcourt C, Pasquier L
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.14969](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.14969)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2022 May;39(3):434-437. doi: 10.1111/pde.14969. Epub 2022
Mar  8.

Child with a mild CHIME syndrome phenotype and carrying a novel p.(Asp52Asn) 
PIGL pathogenic variant in association with the previously reported 
p.(Leu167Pro) variant: A case report.

Rolland M(1), Dubourg C(2)(3), Cospain A(2)(4), Droitcourt C(1)(5), Pasquier 
L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Genomics, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France.
(3)UMR 6290, IGDR, CNRS, University of Rennes, Rennes, France.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Referral Centre for Developmental anomalies 
and malformation syndromes, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France.
(5)UMR_S 1085, Irset (Institut de recherche en santé, environnement et travail), 
EHESP, Inserm, University of Rennes, Rennes, France.

Coloboma, congenital heart disease, ichthyosiform dermatosis, mental 
retardation, and ear anomalies (CHIME) syndrome is a very rare autosomal 
recessive neuroectodermal disorder related to PIGL gene mutations. Here, we 
report a patient who showed an initial delay in psychomotor development and skin 
abnormalities consistent with CHIME syndrome but with atypical clinical features 
and laboratory findings. In line with our clinical suspicion, the c.500T>C, 
p.(Leu167Pro) variant (found in all the previously described cases of CHIME 
syndrome) was found on the paternal allele. A novel "likely pathogenic" PIGL 
missense variant (c.154G>A, p.(Asp52Asn)) was detected on the maternal allele. 
This case provides new insights into the clinical spectrum of CHIME syndrome and 
highlights the potential for phenotypic/genotypic variations.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.14969
PMCID: PMC10286643
PMID: 35258128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.