---
reference_id: "PMID:23877544"
title: "Balloon dilatation of anastomotic strictures secondary to surgical repair of oesophageal atresia: a systematic review."
authors:
- Thyoka M
- Timmis A
- Mhango T
- Roebuck DJ
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-013-2693-2
keywords:
- "Angioplasty, Balloon"
- Catheterization/mortality
- Causality
- Comorbidity
- Dilatation/mortality
- "Esophageal Atresia/mortality, surgery"
- "Esophageal Perforation/diagnostic imaging, mortality"
- "Esophageal Stenosis/mortality, surgery"
- Humans
- Postoperative Complications/mortality
- Prevalence
- Radiography
- Risk Factors
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Balloon dilatation of anastomotic strictures secondary to surgical repair of oesophageal atresia: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Thyoka M, Timmis A, Mhango T, Roebuck DJ
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-013-2693-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-013-2693-2)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2013 Aug;43(8):898-901; quiz 896-7. doi:
10.1007/s00247-013-2693-2. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Balloon dilatation of anastomotic strictures secondary to surgical repair of
oesophageal atresia: a systematic review.

Thyoka M(1), Timmis A, Mhango T, Roebuck DJ.

Author information:
(1)Surgery Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N
1EH, UK. m.thyoka@ucl.ac.uk

Surgical repair of oesophageal atresia may result in anastomotic strictures.
These strictures are often treated by balloon dilatation (BD) and currently
balloon dilatation (fluoroscopic or endoscopic) is the preferred primary
treatment method. Here we review the current evidence of the outcomes of balloon
dilatation of anastomotic strictures secondary to surgical repair of oesophageal
atresia. We searched the standard databases (January, 1960-May, 2012) to
identify all studies that reported outcomes of balloon dilatation of anastomotic
strictures secondary to surgical repair of oesophageal atresia in children.
Data, reported as median (range), were analysed and compared. Outcomes were
success of BD, number of BD sessions, number of oesophageal perforations, need
for other surgical interventions and mortality. Five studies were found to be
relevant (n = 139; 81 [58%] male children). The total number of dilatation
sessions was 401 (2.9 dilatations per child patient). General anaesthesia was
used in two (40%) studies; sedation in a further two (40%) studies and one (20%)
study used a combination of both. The size of balloon catheter ranged from 4 mm
to 22 mm. Seven perforations were reported (1.8% per dilatation session), of
which only one (14%) required surgery. No deaths were recorded. Balloon
dilatation for anastomotic strictures post-EA repair is safe, and associated
with a low perforation and mortality rates. Most perforations are amenable to
conservative management.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-013-2693-2
PMID: 23877544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
