---
reference_id: "PMID:20301722"
title: Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Nelson A
- Myers K
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Nelson A, Myers K

## Content

1. Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome.

Nelson A(1), Myers K(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2008 Jul 17 [updated 2024 Sep 19].

Author information:
(1)Director, Bone Marrow Transplant and Cellular Therapy, Kids Cancer Centre,
Sydney Children's Hospital, Sydney, Australia
(2)Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Blood and Marrow
Transplantation and Immune Deficiency, The Cancer and Blood Diseases Institute,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS) is characterized by
exocrine pancreatic dysfunction with malabsorption, malnutrition, and growth
failure; hematologic abnormalities with single- or multilineage cytopenias and
susceptibility to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML); and bone abnormalities. In almost all affected children, persistent or
intermittent neutropenia is an early finding. Short stature and recurrent
infections are common.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SDS is established in a proband with the
classic clinical findings of exocrine pancreatic dysfunction and bone marrow
dysfunction and/or biallelic pathogenic variants in DNAJC21, EFL1, or SBDS or a
heterozygous pathogenic variant in SRP54 identified by molecular genetic
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Care by a multidisciplinary team is
highly recommended. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is treated with oral
pancreatic enzymes and fat-soluble vitamin supplementation. Blood and/or
platelet transfusions may be considered for anemia and thrombocytopenia. If
recurrent infections are severe and absolute neutrophil counts are persistently
≤500/mm3, treatment with granulocyte-colony stimulation factor (G-CSF) can be
considered and may be especially helpful when interventions such as complex
dental procedures or orthopedic surgery are being considered. Hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation (HSCT) should be considered for treatment of severe bone
marrow failure, MDS, or AML. Early pulmonary and orthopedic referral is
essential for treatment of thoracic dystrophy; orthopedic management of other
skeletal manifestations including skeletal dysplasia, asymmetric growth, and
joint deformities. Multidisciplinary team management of liver disease;
neuropsychological testing, developmental services, and educational support;
referral to endocrinology for pubertal delay and other endocrine manifestations;
dental care for oral manifestations. Surveillance: Assessment of nutritional
status and measurement of serum concentration of fat-soluble vitamins every six
months. Complete blood count with white blood cell differential and platelet
count at least every three to six months; bone marrow examination every one to
three years or more frequently if bone marrow changes are observed. Monitor for
orthopedic complications with radiographs of the hips and knees during the most
rapid growth stages. Bone densitometry before puberty, during puberty, and
thereafter based on individual findings. Development assessment every six months
from birth to age six years; neuropsychological screening in children ages six
to eight years, eleven to 13 years, and 15 to 17 years. Clinical examination for
skin and dental manifestations and assessment for recurrent urinary tract
infections at each visit. Dental visits to monitor tooth development, assess
oral health, and screen for mouth ulcers and gingivitis every 12 months or more
frequently as needed. Assess growth and for clinical signs and symptoms of
additional endocrine manifestations every six months. Agents/circumstances to
avoid: Prolonged use of cytokine and hematopoietic growth factors (e.g., G-CSF)
should be considered with caution. Some drugs used in standard HSCT preparative
regimens (e.g., cyclophosphamide and busulfan) may not be suitable because of
possible cardiac toxicity. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to
evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify those who
will benefit from treatment and preventive measures as soon as possible. It is
essential to evaluate any potential related donor for SDS to avoid using an
asymptomatic relative with SDS as an HSCT donor. Pregnancy management: High-risk
pregnancy care including consultation with a hematologist.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SDS is inherited in an autosomal recessive (most commonly)
or an autosomal dominant manner. Autosomal recessive SDS: SDS caused by
pathogenic variants in DNAJC21, EFL1, or SBDS is inherited in an autosomal
recessive manner. Most parents of children with autosomal recessive SDS are
heterozygotes (carriers of one pathogenic variant); however, de novo pathogenic
variants have been reported. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an
autosomal recessive SDS-related pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected
individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of
being a clinically asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected
and not a carrier. Carrier testing for relatives at risk is possible if both
pathogenic variants in a family are known. Autosomal dominant SDS: SDS caused by
pathogenic variants in SRP54 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most
individuals diagnosed with SRP54-related SDS have the disorder as the result of
a de novo pathogenic variant. Once the SDS-related pathogenic variant(s) have
been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301722
