---
reference_id: "PMID:38762356"
title: Seroprotection against tetanus in the Italian general population.
authors:
- Bagordo F
- Grassi T
- Rota MC
- Castiglia P
- Baldovin T
- Della Polla G
- Panico A
- Ogliastro M
- Marchi S
- Vicentini C
- Immordino P
- Savio M
- Gabutti G
- Sero-epidemiological Study Group
journal: Vaccine
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2024.05.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seroprotection against tetanus in the Italian general population.
**Authors:** Bagordo F, Grassi T, Rota MC, Castiglia P, Baldovin T, Della Polla G, Panico A, Ogliastro M, Marchi S, Vicentini C, Immordino P, Savio M, Gabutti G, Sero-epidemiological Study Group
**Journal:** Vaccine (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2024.05.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2024.05.015)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2024 Jul 25;42(19):4040-4045. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2024.05.015.
Epub  2024 May 18.

Seroprotection against tetanus in the Italian general population.

Bagordo F(1), Grassi T(2), Rota MC(3), Castiglia P(4), Baldovin T(5), Della 
Polla G(6), Panico A(7), Ogliastro M(8), Marchi S(9), Vicentini C(10), Immordino 
P(11), Savio M(12), Gabutti G(13); Sero-epidemiological Study Group.

Collaborators: Bordino V(14), Garlasco J(14), Memoli G(14), Giandomenico A(15), 
Greco F(15), Manini I(16), Montomoli E(16), Trombetta CM(16), Baldo V(17), De 
Fino M(18), Marandola M(19), Giberti I(20), Orsi A(20), Barrocci S(21), La Porta 
R(21), Arghittu A(22), Dettori M(22), Boni M(23), Ghisellini S(23), Maida 
CM(24), Tramuto F(24), Vitale F(24), Gamper A(25), Robatscher E(25), Guido 
M(26), Idolo A(26), Angelillo IF(6), Napolitano F(6).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Pharmacy-Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Bari Aldo Moro, 
Bari, Italy.
(2)Dept. of Experimental Medicine, University of Salento, Lecce, Italy. 
Electronic address: tiziana.grassi@unisalento.it.
(3)Dept. of Infectious Diseases, Italian Institute of Health (ISS), Roma, Italy.
(4)Dept. of Medicine, Surgery and Pharmacy, University of Sassari, Sassari, 
Italy.
(5)Dept. of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public Health, Hygiene and 
Public Health Unit, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(6)Dept. of Experimental Medicine, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 
Naples, Italy.
(7)Dept. of Experimental Medicine, University of Salento, Lecce, Italy.
(8)Dept. of Health Sciences, University of Genova, Genova, Italy.
(9)Dept. of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, Siena, 
Italy.
(10)Department of Public Health and Paediatrics, University of Turin, Turin, 
Italy.
(11)Dept. of Health Promotion, Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine and 
Medical Specialties "G. D'Alessandro", University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(12)Dept. of Public Health, OU of Hygiene, LHU Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(13)National Coordinator of the Working Group "Vaccines and Immunization 
Policies", Italian Society of Hygiene, Preventive Medicine and Public Health, 
Italy.
(14)Dept. of Public Health and Pediatrics, University of Turin, Italy.
(15)Unit of Microbiology and Virology, "Annunziata" Hospital, Cosenza, Italy.
(16)Dept. of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, Italy.
(17)Dept. of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public Health, Unit of 
Hygiene and Public Health, University of Padova, Italy.
(18)General Manager of Umbria2 LHA, former Manager of Healthcare District of 
Lauria, Terni, Potenza, Italy.
(19)Unit of Hygiene and Public Health, Potenza LHA, Italy.
(20)Dept. of Health Sciences, University of Genoa, Italy.
(21)Unit of Clinical Pathology, Area Vasta 1, Clinical Laboratory of "S. Maria 
della Misericordia" Hospital, Urbino, Italy.
(22)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Pharmacy, University of Sassari, Italy.
(23)UOC Provincial Laboratory, University Hospital of Ferrara, Italy.
(24)Dept. PROMISE, University of Palermo.
(25)Microbiology and Virology Laboratory, Health District of Bolzano, Alto Adige 
Health Authority, Italy.
(26)Dept. of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Technologies, University 
of Salento, Lecce, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Tetanus is a non-communicable disease, preventable with vaccination. 
Despite the implemented vaccination strategy, a certain number of tetanus cases 
per year continue to occur. The aim of the study was to evaluate the 
seroprevalence of anti-tetanus antibodies in the Italian population by age, sex 
and geographical area.
METHODS: To determine the level of tetanus-specific antibodies, an 
immunoenzymatic assay was used.
RESULTS: A total of 3,821 serum samples were collected in the years 2019-20 from 
healthy subjects aged 6-90 years residing in 13 Italian regions. Overall, 85 % 
of the tested subjects resulted positive. The rate of subjects protected against 
tetanus showed a gradual decrease from the younger age groups to the older ones 
(6-12 years: 93.6 %, 13-24 years: 91.8 %, 25-39 years: 91.0 %, 40-64 years: 
78.2 %, ≥ 65 years: 45.3 %); this is particularly evident in the Southern 
regions and Islands. Moreover, the prevalence of subjects with low protection 
(<0.1 IU/ml) was significantly higher in the ≥ 65 age group (10.3 %). Males and 
females' prevalence showed a significant difference only in the oldest age group 
(M: 60.8 %, F: 30.4 %). In general, a higher prevalence was observed for 
Northern (90.8 %) and Central regions (87.3 %) than Southern regions and Islands 
(80.0 %).
CONCLUSION: These data, compared with epidemiological ones which showed a high 
number of cases in the elderly, confirmed that the population with lower 
protection has a greater risk of contracting the disease, demonstrating the need 
for adequate immunization through both primary vaccination and boosters for all 
ages and both sexes, in order to provide lifelong protection.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2024.05.015
PMID: 38762356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Giovanni Gabutti reports a 
relationship with Emergent BioSolutions, the GSK group of companies, Merck Sharp 
& Dohme, Pfizer, Sanofi Pasteur Italy, Novavax, Viatris, Moderna and Seqirus 
that includes: board membership, consulting or advisory, and speaking and 
lecture fees. The other authors declare that they have no known competing 
financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.