---
reference_id: "PMID:7894480"
title: Identification of a novel X-linked gene responsible for Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Bione S
- Maestrini E
- Rivella S
- Mancini M
- Regis S
- Romeo G
- Toniolo D
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1038/ng1294-323
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA, Complementary"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscular Dystrophies/genetics
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss"
- Nuclear Proteins
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Thymopoietins/genetics
- X Chromosome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a novel X-linked gene responsible for Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Bione S, Maestrini E, Rivella S, Mancini M, Regis S, Romeo G, Toniolo D
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1294-323](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1294-323)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1994 Dec;8(4):323-7. doi: 10.1038/ng1294-323.

Identification of a novel X-linked gene responsible for Emery-Dreifuss muscular 
dystrophy.

Bione S(1), Maestrini E, Rivella S, Mancini M, Regis S, Romeo G, Toniolo D.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Genetica Biochimica ed Evoluzionistica CNR, Pavia, Italy.

Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is an X-linked recessive disorder 
characterized by slowly progressing contractures, wasting of skeletal muscle and 
cardiomyopathy. Heart block is a frequent cause of death. The disease gene has 
been mapped to distal Xq28. Among many genes in this region, we selected eight 
transcripts expressed at high levels in skeletal muscle, heart and/or brain as 
the best candidates for the disease. We now report, in all five patients 
studied, unique mutations in one of the genes, STA: these mutations result in 
the loss of all or part of the protein. The EDMD gene encodes a novel 
serine-rich protein termed emerin, which contains a 20 amino acid hydrophobic 
domain at the C terminus, similar to that described for many membrane proteins 
of the secretory pathway involved in vesicular transport.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1294-323
PMID: 7894480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]