---
reference_id: "PMID:19292878"
title: Acute intermittent porphyria--impact of mutations found in the hydroxymethylbilane synthase gene on biochemical and enzymatic protein properties.
authors:
- Ulbrichova D
- Hrdinka M
- Saudek V
- Martasek P
journal: FEBS J
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06946.x
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Base Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Escherichia coli/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Hydroxymethylbilane Synthase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics"
- Protein Conformation
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute intermittent porphyria--impact of mutations found in the hydroxymethylbilane synthase gene on biochemical and enzymatic protein properties.
**Authors:** Ulbrichova D, Hrdinka M, Saudek V, Martasek P
**Journal:** FEBS J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06946.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06946.x)

## Content

1. FEBS J. 2009 Apr;276(7):2106-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06946.x.

Acute intermittent porphyria--impact of mutations found in the
hydroxymethylbilane synthase gene on biochemical and enzymatic protein
properties.

Ulbrichova D(1), Hrdinka M, Saudek V, Martasek P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, First School of Medicine, Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic.

Acute intermittent porphyria is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder,
classified as acute hepatic porphyria, caused by a deficiency of
hydroxymethylbilane synthase (EC 2.5.1.61, EC 4.3.1.8, also known as
porphobilinogen deaminase, uroporphyrinogen I synthase), the third enzyme in
heme biosynthesis. Clinical features include autonomous, central, motor or
sensory symptoms, but the most common clinical presentation is abdominal pain
caused by neurovisceral crises. A diagnosis of acute intermittent porphyria is
crucial to prevent life-threatening acute attacks. Detection of DNA variations
by molecular techniques allows a diagnosis of acute intermittent porphyria in
situations where the measurement of porphyrins and precursors in urine and
faeces and erythrocyte hydroxymethylbilane synthase activity is inconclusive. In
the present study, we identified gene defects in six Czech patients with acute
intermittent porphyria, as diagnosed based on biochemical findings, and members
of their families to confirm the diagnosis at the molecular level and/or to
provide genetic counselling. Molecular analyses of the hydroxymethylbilane
synthase gene revealed seven mutations. Four were previously reported: c.76C>T,
c.77G>A, c.518G>A, c.771 + 1G>T (p.Arg26Cys, p.Arg26His, p.Arg173Gln). Three
were novel mutations: c.610C>A, c.675delA, c.750A>T (p.Gln204Lys,
p.Ala226ProfsX28, p.Glu250Asp). Of particular interest, one patient had two
mutations (c.518G>A; c.610C>A), both located in exon 10 of the same allele. To
establish the effects of the mutations on enzyme function, biochemical
characterization of the expressed normal recombinant and mutated proteins was
performed. Prokaryotic expression of the mutant alleles of the
hydroxymethylbilane synthase gene revealed that, with the exception of the
p.Gln204Lys mutation, all mutations resulted in little, if any, enzymatic
activity. Moreover, the 3D structure of the Escherichia coli and human protein
was used to interpret structure-function relationships for the mutations in the
human isoform.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06946.x
PMID: 19292878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
