---
reference_id: "PMID:17701896"
title: Arts syndrome is caused by loss-of-function mutations in PRPS1.
authors:
- de Brouwer AP
- Williams KL
- Duley JA
- van Kuilenburg AB
- Nabuurs SB
- Egmont-Petersen M
- Lugtenberg D
- Zoetekouw L
- Banning MJ
- Roeffen M
- Hamel BC
- Weaving L
- Ouvrier RA
- Donald JA
- Wevers RA
- Christodoulou J
- van Bokhoven H
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/520706
keywords:
- Ataxia/genetics
- Cell Line
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- Erythrocytes/enzymology
- Female
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- Genetic Linkage
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Optic Atrophies, Hereditary/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Protein Conformation
- Purines/biosynthesis
- "Ribose-Phosphate Pyrophosphokinase/analysis, chemistry, genetics"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arts syndrome is caused by loss-of-function mutations in PRPS1.
**Authors:** de Brouwer AP, Williams KL, Duley JA, van Kuilenburg AB, Nabuurs SB, Egmont-Petersen M, Lugtenberg D, Zoetekouw L, Banning MJ, Roeffen M, Hamel BC, Weaving L, Ouvrier RA, Donald JA, Wevers RA, Christodoulou J, van Bokhoven H
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/520706](https://doi.org/10.1086/520706)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Sep;81(3):507-18. doi: 10.1086/520706. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

Arts syndrome is caused by loss-of-function mutations in PRPS1.

de Brouwer AP(1), Williams KL, Duley JA, van Kuilenburg AB, Nabuurs SB,
Egmont-Petersen M, Lugtenberg D, Zoetekouw L, Banning MJ, Roeffen M, Hamel BC,
Weaving L, Ouvrier RA, Donald JA, Wevers RA, Christodoulou J, van Bokhoven H.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. A.debrouwer@antrg.umcn.nl

Arts syndrome is an X-linked disorder characterized by mental retardation,
early-onset hypotonia, ataxia, delayed motor development, hearing impairment,
and optic atrophy. Linkage analysis in a Dutch family and an Australian family
suggested that the candidate gene maps to Xq22.1-q24. Oligonucleotide microarray
expression profiling of fibroblasts from two probands of the Dutch family
revealed reduced expression levels of the phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate
synthetase 1 gene (PRPS1). Subsequent sequencing of PRPS1 led to the
identification of two different missense mutations, c.455T-->C (p.L152P) in the
Dutch family and c.398A-->C (p.Q133P) in the Australian family. Both mutations
result in a loss of phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase 1 activity, as was
shown in silico by molecular modeling and was shown in vitro by phosphoribosyl
pyrophosphate synthetase activity assays in erythrocytes and fibroblasts from
patients. This is in contrast to the gain-of-function mutations in PRPS1 that
were identified previously in PRPS-related gout. The loss-of-function mutations
of PRPS1 likely result in impaired purine biosynthesis, which is supported by
the undetectable hypoxanthine in urine and the reduced uric acid levels in serum
from patients. To replenish low levels of purines, treatment with
S-adenosylmethionine theoretically could have therapeutic efficacy, and a
clinical trial involving the two affected Australian brothers is currently
underway.

DOI: 10.1086/520706
PMCID: PMC1950830
PMID: 17701896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
