---
reference_id: "PMID:27221964"
title: NF-κB deregulation in Hodgkin lymphoma.
authors:
- Weniger MA
- Küppers R
journal: Semin Cancer Biol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.05.001
keywords:
- Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/metabolism
- "Hodgkin Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology, virology"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "NF-kappa B/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NF-κB deregulation in Hodgkin lymphoma.
**Authors:** Weniger MA, Küppers R
**Journal:** Semin Cancer Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.05.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.05.001)

## Content

1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2016 Aug;39:32-9. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.05.001.
Epub  2016 May 21.

NF-κB deregulation in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Weniger MA(1), Küppers R(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), Medical Faculty, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Virchowstr. 173, 45122 Essen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), Medical Faculty, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Virchowstr. 173, 45122 Essen, Germany. Electronic address:
ralf.kueppers@uk-essen.de.

Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg (HRS) cells in classical Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) show
constitutive activity of both the canonical and non-canonical NF-κB signaling
pathways. The central pathogenetic role of this activity is indicated from
studies with HL cell lines, which undergo apoptosis upon NF-κB inhibition.
Multiple factors contribute to the strong NF-κB activity of HRS cells. This
includes interaction with other cells in the lymphoma microenvironment through
CD30, CD40, BCMA and other receptors, but also recurrent somatic genetic lesions
in various factors of the NF-κB pathway, including destructive mutations in
negative regulators of NF-κB signaling (e.g. TNFAIP3, NFKBIA), and copy number
gains of genes encoding positive regulators (e.g. REL, MAP3K14). In Epstein-Barr
virus-positive cases of classical HL, the virus-encoded latent membrane protein
1 causes NF-κB activation by mimicking an active CD40 receptor. NF-κB activity
is also seen in the tumor cells of the rare nodular lymphocyte predominant form
of HL, but the causes for this activity are largely unclear.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.05.001
PMID: 27221964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
