---
reference_id: "PMID:28057640"
title: Murine systemic thrombophilia and hemolytic uremic syndrome from a factor H point mutation.
authors:
- Ueda Y
- Mohammed I
- Song D
- Gullipalli D
- Zhou L
- Sato S
- Wang Y
- Gupta S
- Cheng Z
- Wang H
- Bao J
- Mao Y
- Brass L
- Zheng XL
- Miwa T
- Palmer M
- Dunaief J
- Song WC
journal: Blood
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-07-728253
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- Complement Factor H/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Point Mutation
- Thrombophilia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Murine systemic thrombophilia and hemolytic uremic syndrome from a factor H point mutation.
**Authors:** Ueda Y, Mohammed I, Song D, Gullipalli D, Zhou L, Sato S, Wang Y, Gupta S, Cheng Z, Wang H, Bao J, Mao Y, Brass L, Zheng XL, Miwa T, Palmer M, Dunaief J, Song WC
**Journal:** Blood (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2016-07-728253](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2016-07-728253)

## Content

1. Blood. 2017 Mar 2;129(9):1184-1196. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-07-728253. Epub
2017  Jan 5.

Murine systemic thrombophilia and hemolytic uremic syndrome from a factor H
point mutation.

Ueda Y(1), Mohammed I(1), Song D(2), Gullipalli D(1), Zhou L(1), Sato S(1), Wang
Y(1), Gupta S(3), Cheng Z(4), Wang H(4), Bao J(5), Mao Y(5), Brass L(3), Zheng
XL(5)(6), Miwa T(1), Palmer M(7), Dunaief J(2), Song WC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, and.
(3)Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.
(6)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Department of Pathology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL; and.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2017 Mar;13(3):136. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2017.3.
    Blood. 2017 Mar 2;129(9):1065-1066. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-01-761528.

Complement plays a key role in host defense, but its dysregulation can cause
autologous tissue injury. Complement activation is normally controlled by
regulatory proteins, including factor H (FH) in plasma and membrane cofactor
protein (MCP) on the cell surface. Mutations in FH and MCP are linked to
atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome, a type of thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA)
that causes renal failure. We describe here that disruption of FH function on
the cell surface can also lead to disseminated complement-dependent
macrovascular thrombosis. By gene targeting, we introduced a point mutation
(W1206R) into murine FH that impaired its interaction with host cells but did
not affect its plasma complement-regulating activity. Homozygous mutant mice
carrying this mutation developed renal TMA as well as systemic thrombophilia
involving large blood vessels in multiple organs, including liver, lung, spleen,
and kidney. Approximately 30% of mutant mice displayed symptoms of stroke and
ischemic retinopathy, and 48% died prematurely. Genetic deficiency of complement
C3 and factor D prevented both the systemic thrombophilia and renal TMA
phenotypes. These results demonstrate a causal relationship between complement
dysregulation and systemic angiopathy and suggest that complement activation may
contribute to various human thrombotic disorders involving both the micro- and
macrovasculature.

© 2017 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2016-07-728253
PMCID: PMC5374733
PMID: 28057640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
