---
reference_id: "PMID:39362713"
title: Pathogenesis of Alcohol-Associated Liver Disease.
authors:
- Mandrekar P
- Mandal A
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2024.06.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of Alcohol-Associated Liver Disease.
**Authors:** Mandrekar P, Mandal A
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2024.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2024.06.005)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2024 Nov;28(4):647-661. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2024.06.005. Epub 
2024 Jul 23.

Pathogenesis of Alcohol-Associated Liver Disease.

Mandrekar P(1), Mandal A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, 364 
Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. Electronic address: 
pranoti.mandrekar@umassmed.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, 364 
Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The pathogenesis of alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD) is complex and 
multifactorial. Several intracellular, intrahepatic, and extrahepatic factors 
influence development of early fatty liver injury leading to inflammation and 
fibrosis. Alcohol metabolism, cellular stress, and gut-derived factors 
contribute to hepatocyte and immune cell injury leading to cytokine and 
chemokine production. The pathogenesis of alcohol-associated hepatitis (AH), an 
advanced form of acute-on-chronic liver failure due to excessive chronic intake 
in patients with underlying liver disease, is not well understood. While 
pathogenic mechanisms in early ALD are studied, the pathogenesis of AH requires 
further investigation to help design effective drugs for patients.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2024.06.005
PMCID: PMC12086950
PMID: 39362713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors have nothing to 
disclose.This work was supported by R01 grants (to P.M.) R01 AA17986-01A1 and 
R01 AA25289-01 from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 
United States (NIAAA), National Institute of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA