---
reference_id: "PMID:19682046"
title: "From rolandic epilepsy to continuous spike-and-waves during sleep and Landau-Kleffner syndromes: insights into possible genetic factors."
authors:
- Rudolf G
- Valenti MP
- Hirsch E
- Szepetowski P
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02214.x
keywords:
- Cognition Disorders/genetics
- Electroencephalography
- "Epilepsies, Partial/genetics"
- "Epilepsy, Rolandic/genetics"
- Humans
- Landau-Kleffner Syndrome/genetics
- Membrane Proteins
- Neoplasm Proteins
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Prognosis
- Sleep/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From rolandic epilepsy to continuous spike-and-waves during sleep and Landau-Kleffner syndromes: insights into possible genetic factors.
**Authors:** Rudolf G, Valenti MP, Hirsch E, Szepetowski P
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02214.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02214.x)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2009 Aug;50 Suppl 7:25-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02214.x.

From rolandic epilepsy to continuous spike-and-waves during sleep and
Landau-Kleffner syndromes: insights into possible genetic factors.

Rudolf G(1), Valenti MP, Hirsch E, Szepetowski P.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 1 place de
l'Hôpital BP 426, Strasbourg cedex, France. Gabrielle.Rudolf@chrustrasbourg.fr

Epilepsy is a frequent neurologic disease in childhood, characterized by
recurrent seizures and sometimes with major effects on social, behavioral, and
cognitive development. Childhood focal epilepsies particularly are age-related
diseases mainly occurring during developmental critical periods. A complex
interplay between brain development and maturation processes and susceptibility
genes may contribute to the development of various childhood epileptic syndromes
associated with language and cognitive deficits. Indeed, the Landau-Kleffner
syndrome (LKS), the continuous spike-and-waves during sleep syndrome (CSWS), and
the benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BCECTS) or benign
rolandic epilepsy, are different entities that are considered as part of a
single continuous spectrum of disorders. Genetic predisposition with simple to
complex modes of inheritance has long been suspected for this wide group of
childhood focal epilepsies. Recent reports on the involvement of the SRPX2 and
ELP4 genes with possible roles in cell motility, migration, and adhesion have
provided first insights into the complex molecular bases of childhood focal
epilepsies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02214.x
PMID: 19682046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
