---
reference_id: "PMID:34121213"
title: Japanese guidelines for the management of palmoplantar keratoderma.
authors:
- Yoneda K
- Kubo A
- Nomura T
- Ishida-Yamamoto A
- Suga Y
- Akiyama M
- Kanazawa N
- Hashimoto T
- Committee on Guidelines for the Management of PPKs
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.15850
keywords:
- Humans
- Japan
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Japanese guidelines for the management of palmoplantar keratoderma.
**Authors:** Yoneda K, Kubo A, Nomura T, Ishida-Yamamoto A, Suga Y, Akiyama M, Kanazawa N, Hashimoto T, Committee on Guidelines for the Management of PPKs
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.15850](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.15850)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2021 Aug;48(8):e353-e367. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.15850. Epub 2021 
Jun 13.

Japanese guidelines for the management of palmoplantar keratoderma.

Yoneda K(1), Kubo A(2), Nomura T(3), Ishida-Yamamoto A(4), Suga Y(5), Akiyama 
M(6), Kanazawa N(7), Hashimoto T(8); Committee on Guidelines for the Management 
of PPKs.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Osaka Ohtani 
University, Tondabayashi, Japan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Keio University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Tsukuba University, Tsukuba, Japan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, Japan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital, Urayasu, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya, Japan.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan.

Palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) is a collective term for keratinizing disorders 
in which the main clinical symptom is hyperkeratosis on the palms and soles. To 
establish the first Japanese guidelines approved by the Japanese Dermatological 
Association for the management of PPKs, the Committee for the Management of PPKs 
was founded as part of the Study Group for Rare Intractable Diseases. These 
guidelines aim to provide current information for the management of PPKs in 
Japan. Based on evidence, they summarize the clinical manifestations, 
pathophysiologies, diagnostic criteria, disease severity determination criteria, 
treatment, and treatment recommendations. Because of the rarity of PPKs, there 
are only few clinical studies with a high degree of evidence. Therefore, several 
parts of these guidelines were established based on the opinions of the 
committee. To further optimize the guidelines, periodic revision in line with 
new evidence is necessary.

© 2021 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.15850
PMID: 34121213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]