---
reference_id: PMID:19019343
title: "[Bardet-Biedl syndrome]."
authors:
- Rooryck C
- Lacombe D
journal: Ann Endocrinol (Paris)
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2008.10.001
keywords:
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Genetic Counseling
- Humans
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Bardet-Biedl syndrome].
**Authors:** Rooryck C, Lacombe D
**Journal:** Ann Endocrinol (Paris) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ando.2008.10.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ando.2008.10.001)

## Content

1. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2008 Dec;69(6):463-71. doi:
10.1016/j.ando.2008.10.001.  Epub 2008 Nov 18.

[Bardet-Biedl syndrome].

[Article in French]

Rooryck C(1), Lacombe D.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine, Université Victor-Segalen, Bordeaux cedex, 
France. Caroline.rooryck-thambo@chu-bordeaux.fr

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a ciliopathy causing multivisceral abnormalities. 
Its prevalence in Europe is from 1/125,000 to 1/175,000. This disorder is 
defined by a combination of clinical signs: obesity, pigmentary retinopathy, 
post-axial polydactyly, polycystic kidneys, hypogenitalism, and learning 
disabilities, many of which appearing after several years of evolution. 
Individual clinical phenotype is highly variable. Most signs are present in a 
majority of patients but only pigmentary retinopathy is constant after infancy. 
There are many other associated minor clinical signs including diabetes, blood 
hypertension, congenital cardiopathy or Hirschsprung disease. This broad 
clinical spectrum is associated to a great genetic heterogeneity, with mainly an 
autosomal recessive transmission and, sometimes cases of oligogenism. To date, 
mutations in 12 different genes (BBS1 to BBS12) are responsible for this 
phenotype. These genes code for proteins involved in the development and 
function of primary cilia. Absent or non functional BBS proteins affect cilia in 
certain organs such as kidney or eye. However, some symptoms are still not 
clearly related to cilia dysfunction. BB syndrome has to be recognized because a 
molecular diagnosis is possible and will lead to familial genetic counseling and 
possibly prenatal diagnosis. Patients with BBS will need a multidisciplinary 
medical care. The renal abnormalities are the main life-threatening features 
because they can lead to end-stage renal failure and renal transplantation. 
Retinal dystrophy leading to progressive vision loss, moderate mental 
retardation, and obesity will affect social life of these patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ando.2008.10.001
PMID: 19019343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]