---
reference_id: "PMID:32119349"
title: Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD).
authors:
- Goosenberg E
- Vadakekut ES
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD).
**Authors:** Goosenberg E, Vadakekut ES

## Content

1. Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD).

Goosenberg E(1), Vadakekut ES(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026
Jan–.
2025 Jul 6.

Author information:
(1)Temple University School of Medicine
(2)American College of Osteopathic Obstetricians and Gynecologists

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a condition in which retrograde flow
of stomach contents into the esophagus or beyond into other regions, eg, oral
cavity, larynx, or the lungs, occurs, primarily resulting in inflammation of the
esophageal mucosa. This condition is considered one of the most common diseases
encountered by gastroenterologists and primary care clinicians. The American
College of Gastroenterology (ACG) defines GERD as chronic symptoms or mucosal
damage incurred by the abnormal reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus
and beyond. Reflux esophagitis secondary to GERD is typically classified as
nonerosive reflux disease (NERD) with symptoms or symptomatic disease with
esophageal erosions, termed erosive reflux disease. Although reflux esophagitis
is generally more common in men, NERD is more prevalent in women. In Western
countries, the prevalence of GERD is approximately 10% to 20%, and
severe disease is observed in 6% of the population; in Asian countries, the
prevalence is approximately 5%.  Esophageal reflux may result in complications,
including esophagitis, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, anemia, esophageal
stricturing, dysphagia, and Barrett esophagus. While GERD alone has been
associated with an increased incidence of laryngeal and esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma without a definite causal link , Barrett's esophagus is well-known to
increase the risk of distal esophageal adenocarcinoma. GERD may also result in
extra-gastrointestinal complications, including dental erosions, laryngitis,
cough, asthma, sinusitis, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The most common
symptoms of GERD are heartburn, regurgitation, and noncardiac chest pain. The
diagnosis of GERD is primarily based on clinical features and patient response
to proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). GERD can be presumptively diagnosed in most
patients presenting with typical symptoms of heartburn and regurgitation.
Additionally, several risk factors contribute to the development of GERD;
recognition of these high-risk patients is critical to the timely initiation of
preventative and mitigation strategies. Unless alarm symptoms, eg, dysphagia,
odynophagia, anemia, weight loss, and hematemesis or melena are concurrent, most
patients can be initiated on empiric therapy with PPIs without diagnostic
evaluation. However, long-term pharmacologic treatment is indicated if atypical
or alarm symptoms are present. The international Lyon Consensus recommends
performing diagnostic confirmation of GERD in symptomatic patients before
initiating long-term treatment for GERD. In patients who do not improve after
taking PPIs, further diagnostic studies, eg, upper endoscopy and
ambulatory wireless distal esophageal pH testing, should be performed to confirm
GERD and exclude differential diagnoses.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32119349

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Eric Goosenberg declares no relevant
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Elsa Vadakekut
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
