---
reference_id: "PMID:18232329"
title: "[Juvenile muscular atrophy of unilateral upper extremity (Hirayama disease)--half-century progress and establishment since its discovery]."
authors:
- Hirayama K
journal: Brain Nerve
year: '2008'
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Arm/physiopathology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "History, 20th Century"
- Humans
- Japan/epidemiology
- Male
- Neck
- Orthopedic Equipment
- Orthopedic Procedures
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Spinal Cord Compression/etiology, history, therapy"
- "Spinal Muscular Atrophies of Childhood/diagnosis, history, pathology, therapy"
- "Vitamin B 12/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Juvenile muscular atrophy of unilateral upper extremity (Hirayama disease)--half-century progress and establishment since its discovery].
**Authors:** Hirayama K
**Journal:** Brain Nerve (2008)

## Content

1. Brain Nerve. 2008 Jan;60(1):17-29.

[Juvenile muscular atrophy of unilateral upper extremity (Hirayama 
disease)--half-century progress and establishment since its discovery].

[Article in Japanese]

Hirayama K(1).

Author information:
(1)Hirayama Memorial Kita Neurology Clinic Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

This disease occurs in adolescence, predominatly in male. The main clinical 
features include predominantly unilateral muscular weakness and wasting of the 
hand and forearm (the brachioradialis is spared: oblique amyotrophy). The 
clinical course is incidious onset and slowly progressive, followed by a 
spontaneous arrest within several years. Twelve patients with this disease were 
first reported by Hirayama and his associates in 1959, who clinically 
distinguished this disorder from previously known degenerative and progressive 
motor neuron diseases. The clinical features had been further clarified by the 
report on 20 patients in 1963, and completed in the report on 38 patients in 
1972. A quarter of a century had passed without pathological confirmation, 
primarily due to the benign course of the disease. The first autopsy case was 
obtained in 1982. The neuropathological findings were reported by Hirayama and 
his associates in 1985 in Japanese, then in 1987 in English. The spinal cord 
showed anteroposterior flattening and ischemic necrotic changes of the anterior 
horns of the cervical cord at C5-T1, mostly severe at C7 and C8, predominantly 
on the left (the patient had bilateral muscular atrophy, predominantly on the 
left). These findings suggested a circulatory insufficiency of the lower 
cerivical cord, but the intra- and extra-medullary vessels were normal. The 
pathologic evidence prompted neuroradiologic (CT, MRI) studies in the late 
1980s. Our studies of 73 patients revealed that dynamic compression of the lower 
cervical cord due to forward displacement of the cervical dural sac (especially 
posterior segment) and spinal cord on neck flexion was confined to an early and 
progressive stage of the disease. An absence of forward displacement in a later 
and non-progressive stage of the disease suggested that the dynamic compression 
had pathogenic significance. The pathologic findings and results of radiological 
studies suggest that sustained or repeated neck flexion might cause an anterior 
shift of the cervical dural sac, then the compressed cervical cord at the 
segments induce an increased intramedullary pressure, resulting in 
microcirculatory disturbance in the anterior horn, the most vulnerable structure 
to ischemia in the spinal cord. Based on this hypothesis, we tried cervical 
collar therapy for patients when they may have sustained or repeated neck 
flexion, and reported these data in 1991, 1992 and 2001. No one showed further 
progression of signs and symptoms. This favorable effect supports our pathogenic 
hypothesis described above. The author proposes that the etiology of this 
disease is disproportionate growth between the vertebral column and the contents 
of the spinal canal especially the dural sac during the juvenile growth. The 
nationwide epidemiological study in Japan was carried out from 1996 to 1998, 
identified 333 cases of the disease. There were fewer case reports from other 
countries than from Japan. As the number of patients is exceedingly large in 
Japan, there might be an ethnic factor in this disorder.

PMID: 18232329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]