---
reference_id: "PMID:25794055"
title: "Patient-centered prenatal counseling: aligning obstetric healthcare professionals with needs of pregnant women."
authors:
- Farrell RM
- Nutter B
- Agatisa PK
journal: Women Health
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1080/03630242.2014.996724
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient-centered prenatal counseling: aligning obstetric healthcare professionals with needs of pregnant women.
**Authors:** Farrell RM, Nutter B, Agatisa PK
**Journal:** Women Health (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03630242.2014.996724](https://doi.org/10.1080/03630242.2014.996724)

## Content

1. Women Health. 2015;55(3):280-96. doi: 10.1080/03630242.2014.996724. Epub 2015 
Mar 20.

Patient-centered prenatal counseling: aligning obstetric healthcare 
professionals with needs of pregnant women.

Farrell RM(1), Nutter B, Agatisa PK.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology , Cleveland Clinic , Cleveland , 
Ohio , USA.

The first trimester aneuploidy screen (FTS) continues to be a leading approach 
to identify the risk of fetal aneuploidy. This study evaluated how obstetric 
(OB) professionals counsel women about FTS as one of a growing number of options 
to assess fetal health. A survey was completed by OB professionals 
(board-certified obstetrician/gynecologists and certified nurse midwives) 
between February and March 2011: (1) to identify knowledge and practice patterns 
with regard to FTS, and (2) to compare pregnant women's educational needs and 
decision-making preferences with clinicians' perceptions of these factors. A 
total of 216 surveys (11 percent) were completed by OB professionals and 
analyzed. Several barriers to effective patient counseling were identified, 
including gaps in obstetric professionals' mastery of the screening test 
characteristics and variable approaches to discuss concepts of aneuploidy risk. 
OB participants reported limited confidence in discussing patient-valued topics, 
specifically post-screen options and pregnancy termination. Discordance was 
identified between OB professionals' perceptions of pregnant women's educational 
needs and decision-making preferences specific to FTS and historical data 
recently collected from 139 pregnant women who underwent the FTS. Study findings 
illustrate the need for clinician-targeted strategies to support pregnant women 
as they formulate informed decisions about the tests that may have a salient 
impact on their prenatal care decisions.

DOI: 10.1080/03630242.2014.996724
PMID: 25794055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]