---
reference_id: "PMID:26569571"
title: "Exercise Training in Group 2 Pulmonary Hypertension: Which Intensity and What Modality."
authors:
- Arena R
- Lavie CJ
- Borghi-Silva A
- Daugherty J
- Bond S
- Phillips SA
- Guazzi M
journal: Prog Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2015.11.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exercise Training in Group 2 Pulmonary Hypertension: Which Intensity and What Modality.
**Authors:** Arena R, Lavie CJ, Borghi-Silva A, Daugherty J, Bond S, Phillips SA, Guazzi M
**Journal:** Prog Cardiovasc Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pcad.2015.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcad.2015.11.005)

## Content

1. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2016 Jul-Aug;59(1):87-94. doi:
10.1016/j.pcad.2015.11.005.  Epub 2015 Nov 10.

Exercise Training in Group 2 Pulmonary Hypertension: Which Intensity and What 
Modality.

Arena R(1), Lavie CJ(2), Borghi-Silva A(3), Daugherty J(4), Bond S(4), Phillips 
SA(5), Guazzi M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy and Integrative Physiology Laboratory, College 
of Applied Health Sciences, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. 
Electronic address: raarena@uic.edu.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, John Ochsner Heart and Vascular 
Institute, Ochsner Clinical School - The University of Queensland School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(3)Cardiopulmonary Physiotherapy Laboratory, Federal University of São Carlos, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Health Information Sciences, College of Applied 
Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Department of Physical Therapy and Integrative Physiology Laboratory, College 
of Applied Health Sciences, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Cardiology, I.R.C.C.S. Policlinico San Donato, University of Milano, San 
Donato Milanese, Milano, Italy.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) due to left-sided heart disease (LSHD) is a common 
and disconcerting occurrence. For example, both heart failure (HF) with 
preserved and reduced ejection fraction (HFpEF and HFrEF) often lead to PH as a 
consequence of a chronic elevation in left atrial filling pressure. A wealth of 
literature demonstrates the value of exercise training (ET) in patients with 
LSHD, which is particularly robust in patients with HFrEF and growing in 
patients with HFpEF. While the effects of ET have not been specifically explored 
in the LSHD-PH phenotype (i.e., composite pathophysiologic characteristics of 
patients in this advanced disease state), the overall body of evidence supports 
clinical application in this subgroup. Moderate intensity aerobic ET 
significantly improves peak oxygen consumption, quality of life and prognosis in 
patients with HF. Resistance ET significantly improves muscle strength and 
endurance in patients with HF, which further enhance functional capacity. When 
warranted, inspiratory muscle training and neuromuscular electrical stimulation 
are becoming recognized as important components of a comprehensive 
rehabilitation program. This review will provide a detailed account of ET 
programing considerations in patients with LSHD with a particular focus on those 
concomitantly diagnosed with PH.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcad.2015.11.005
PMID: 26569571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]