---
reference_id: "PMID:38114648"
title: "Huntington disease-like 2: insight into neurodegeneration from an African disease."
authors:
- Krause A
- Anderson DG
- Ferreira-Correia A
- Dawson J
- Baine-Savanhu F
- Li PP
- Margolis RL
journal: Nat Rev Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41582-023-00906-y
keywords:
- Cognition Disorders/pathology
- "Chorea/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Dementia/genetics
- "Heredodegenerative Disorders, Nervous System"
- Huntington Disease/metabolism
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington disease-like 2: insight into neurodegeneration from an African disease.
**Authors:** Krause A, Anderson DG, Ferreira-Correia A, Dawson J, Baine-Savanhu F, Li PP, Margolis RL
**Journal:** Nat Rev Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41582-023-00906-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-023-00906-y)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Neurol. 2024 Jan;20(1):36-49. doi: 10.1038/s41582-023-00906-y. Epub
2023  Dec 19.

Huntington disease-like 2: insight into neurodegeneration from an African
disease.

Krause A(1), Anderson DG(2)(3), Ferreira-Correia A(4), Dawson J(2)(5),
Baine-Savanhu F(2), Li PP(6), Margolis RL(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Service and School of
Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa. amanda.krause@wits.ac.za.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Service and School of
Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa.
(3)University of Glasgow, Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological
Sciences, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, UK.
(4)Department of Psychology, School of Human and Community Development, Faculty
of Humanities, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(5)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Department of Medical
Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Division of Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Huntington disease (HD)-like 2 (HDL2) is a rare genetic disease caused by an
expanded trinucleotide repeat in the JPH3 gene (encoding junctophilin 3) that
shows remarkable clinical similarity to HD. To date, HDL2 has been reported
only in patients with definite or probable African ancestry. A single haplotype
background is shared by patients with HDL2 from different populations,
supporting a common African origin for the expansion mutation. Nevertheless,
outside South Africa, reports of patients with HDL2 in Africa are scarce,
probably owing to limited clinical services across the continent. Systematic
comparisons of HDL2 and HD have revealed closely overlapping motor, cognitive
and psychiatric features and similar patterns of cerebral and striatal atrophy.
The pathogenesis of HDL2 remains unclear but it is proposed to occur through
several mechanisms, including loss of protein function and RNA and/or protein
toxicity. This Review summarizes our current knowledge of this African-specific
HD phenocopy and highlights key areas of overlap between HDL2 and HD. Given the
aforementioned similarities in clinical phenotype and pathology, an improved
understanding of HDL2 could provide novel insights into HD and other
neurodegenerative and/or trinucleotide repeat expansion disorders.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41582-023-00906-y
PMID: 38114648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
