---
reference_id: "PMID:8619548"
title: Immune attack on the Schwann cell surface in acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.
authors:
- Hafer-Macko CE
- Sheikh KA
- Li CY
- Ho TW
- Cornblath DR
- McKhann GM
- Asbury AK
- Griffin JW
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1002/ana.410390512
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune attack on the Schwann cell surface in acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.
**Authors:** Hafer-Macko CE, Sheikh KA, Li CY, Ho TW, Cornblath DR, McKhann GM, Asbury AK, Griffin JW
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.410390512](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410390512)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 1996 May;39(5):625-35. doi: 10.1002/ana.410390512.

Immune attack on the Schwann cell surface in acute inflammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy.

Hafer-Macko CE(1), Sheikh KA, Li CY, Ho TW, Cornblath DR, McKhann GM, Asbury AK, 
Griffin JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

The localization, mode of action, and roles of complement in the Guillain-Barre 
syndrome have been controversial. We used high-resolution immunocytochemistry to 
localize complement activation products in early stages of the acute 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) pattern of Guillain-Barre 
syndrome. Three AIDP subjects who were autopsied had had symptoms for 3 to 9 
days at the time of death. Immunocytochemistry was performed on etched, epoxy 
resin-embedded sections, and the next thin section was compared by electron 
microscopy (thick/thin sections). Many fibers had a rim of the complement 
activation marker C3d and the terminal complement complex neoantigen C5b-9 along 
the outer surface of the Schwann cells. Ultrastructural analysis of these 
C3d-positive fibers showed mild vesicular changes of the outermost myelin 
lamellae. Vesicular degeneration was seen before the invasion of macrophages 
into the myelin, and was the predominant change in the subject with symptoms for 
3 days. C3d staining was not found on myelin membranes. The results suggest that 
at least some forms of AIDP are complement mediated. We speculate that 
complement is activated by antibody bound to epitopes on the outer surface of 
the Schwann cell and that the resulting complement activation initiates the 
vesiculation of myelin.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410390512
PMID: 8619548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]