---
reference_id: "PMID:23453666"
title: Whole-exome sequencing identifies mutated c12orf57 in recessive corpus callosum hypoplasia.
authors:
- Akizu N
- Shembesh NM
- Ben-Omran T
- Bastaki L
- Al-Tawari A
- Zaki MS
- Koul R
- Spencer E
- Rosti RO
- Scott E
- Nickerson E
- Gabriel S
- da Gente G
- Li J
- Deardorff MA
- Conlin LK
- Horton MA
- Zackai EH
- Sherr EH
- Gleeson JG
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.004
keywords:
- Agenesis of Corpus Callosum/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cerebral Cortex/metabolism
- Codon/genetics
- Corpus Callosum/metabolism
- Exome
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Methionine/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-exome sequencing identifies mutated c12orf57 in recessive corpus callosum hypoplasia.
**Authors:** Akizu N, Shembesh NM, Ben-Omran T, Bastaki L, Al-Tawari A, Zaki MS, Koul R, Spencer E, Rosti RO, Scott E, Nickerson E, Gabriel S, da Gente G, Li J, Deardorff MA, Conlin LK, Horton MA, Zackai EH, Sherr EH, Gleeson JG
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.004)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Mar 7;92(3):392-400. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.004.
Epub  2013 Feb 28.

Whole-exome sequencing identifies mutated c12orf57 in recessive corpus callosum 
hypoplasia.

Akizu N(1), Shembesh NM, Ben-Omran T, Bastaki L, Al-Tawari A, Zaki MS, Koul R, 
Spencer E, Rosti RO, Scott E, Nickerson E, Gabriel S, da Gente G, Li J, 
Deardorff MA, Conlin LK, Horton MA, Zackai EH, Sherr EH, Gleeson JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences and Pediatrics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.

The corpus callosum is the principal cerebral commissure connecting the right 
and left hemispheres. The development of the corpus callosum is under tight 
genetic control, as demonstrated by abnormalities in its development in more 
than 1,000 genetic syndromes. We recruited more than 25 families in which 
members affected with corpus callosum hypoplasia (CCH) lacked syndromic features 
and had consanguineous parents, suggesting recessive causes. Exome sequence 
analysis identified C12orf57 mutations at the initiator methionine codon in four 
different families. C12orf57 is ubiquitously expressed and encodes a poorly 
annotated 126 amino acid protein of unknown function. This protein is without 
significant paralogs but has been tightly conserved across evolution. Our data 
suggest that this conserved gene is required for development of the human corpus 
callosum.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.004
PMCID: PMC3591854
PMID: 23453666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]