---
reference_id: "PMID:37784084"
title: "A novel CACNA1S gene variant in a child with hypokalemic periodic paralysis: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Zhou W
- Zhao P
- Gao J
- Zhang Y
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-023-04326-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Child
- "Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis/diagnosis, genetics, complications"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Muscle Weakness
- Family
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel CACNA1S gene variant in a child with hypokalemic periodic paralysis: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Zhou W, Zhao P, Gao J, Zhang Y
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-023-04326-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-023-04326-1)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2023 Oct 2;23(1):500. doi: 10.1186/s12887-023-04326-1.

A novel CACNA1S gene variant in a child with hypokalemic periodic paralysis: a
case report and literature review.

Zhou W(1), Zhao P(1), Gao J(1), Zhang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, People's Hospital of Jinping Miao, Yao and Dai
Autonomous County, Honghe Prefecture, Yunnan Province, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, National Children's Medical Center, Children's
Hospital of Fudan University, 399 Wanyuan Road, Minhang District, Shanghai,
201102, China. zhangyunjian2008@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: The CACNA1S gene encodes the alpha 1 S-subunit of the voltage-gated
calcium channel, which is primarily expressed in the skeletal muscle cells.
Pathogenic variants of CACNA1S can cause hypokalemic periodic paralysis
(HypoPP), malignant hyperthermia susceptibility, and congenital myopathy. We
aimed to study the clinical and molecular features of a male child with a
CACNA1S variant and depict the molecular sub-regional characteristics of
different phenotypes associated with CACNA1S variants.
CASE PRESENTATION: We presented a case of HypoPP with recurrent muscle weakness
and hypokalemia. Genetic analyses of the family members revealed that the
proband had a novel c.497 C > A (p.Ala166Asp) variant of CACNA1S, which was
inherited from his father. The diagnosis of HypoPP was established in the
proband as he met the consensus diagnostic criteria. The patient and his parents
were informed to avoid the classical triggers of HypoPP. The attacks of the
patient are prevented by lifestyle changes and nutritional counseling. We also
showed the molecular sub-regional location of the variants of CACNA1S which was
associated with different phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identified a new variant of CACNA1S and expanded the
spectrum of variants associated with HypoPP. Early genetic diagnosis can help
avoid diagnostic delays, perform genetic counseling, provide proper treatment,
and reduce morbidity and mortality.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-023-04326-1
PMCID: PMC10544472
PMID: 37784084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
