---
reference_id: "PMID:20301746"
title: "Infantile-Onset Spinocerebellar Ataxia – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Lönnqvist T
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infantile-Onset Spinocerebellar Ataxia – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Lönnqvist T

## Content

1. Infantile-Onset Spinocerebellar Ataxia – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY.

Lönnqvist T(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2009 Jan 27 [updated 2018 Apr 19].

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor, Department of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital, 
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA) is a 
severe, progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by normal 
development until age one year, followed by onset of ataxia, muscle hypotonia, 
loss of deep-tendon reflexes, and athetosis. Ophthalmoplegia and sensorineural 
deafness develop by age seven years. By adolescence, affected individuals are 
profoundly deaf and no longer ambulatory; sensory axonal neuropathy, optic 
atrophy, autonomic nervous system dysfunction, and hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism in females become evident. Epilepsy can develop into a serious and 
often fatal encephalopathy: myoclonic jerks or focal clonic seizures that 
progress to epilepsia partialis continua followed by status epilepticus with 
loss of consciousness.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of IOSCA is established in a proband with 
typical clinical findings and identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in 
TWNK by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Hearing loss, sensory axonal 
neuropathy, ataxia, psychotic behavior, and severe depression are treated in the 
usual manner. Conventional antiepileptic drugs (phenytoin and phenobarbital) are 
ineffective in most affected individuals. Surveillance: Small children: 
neurologic, audiologic, and ophthalmologic evaluations every six to 12 months; 
neurophysiologic studies when indicated; brain MRI every three to five years. 
Adolescents and adults: neurologic examination yearly; audiologic and 
ophthalmologic examinations every one to two years; EEG and brain MRI at least 
during status epilepticus. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Valproate, which can 
cause significant elevation of serum concentration of bilirubin and liver 
enzymes.
GENETIC COUNSELING: IOSCA is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and 
prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk are possible if the 
pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301746