---
reference_id: "PMID:37659411"
title: High morbidity and mortality in children with untreated congenital deficiency of leptin or its receptor.
authors:
- Saeed S
- Khanam R
- Janjua QM
- Manzoor J
- Ning L
- Hanook S
- Canouil M
- Ali M
- Ayesha H
- Khan WI
- Farooqi IS
- Yeo GSH
- "O'Rahilly S"
- Bonnefond A
- Butt TA
- Arslan M
- Froguel P
journal: Cell Rep Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.101187
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Leptin
- Morbidity
- "Obesity, Morbid"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Receptors, Leptin"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High morbidity and mortality in children with untreated congenital deficiency of leptin or its receptor.
**Authors:** Saeed S, Khanam R, Janjua QM, Manzoor J, Ning L, Hanook S, Canouil M, Ali M, Ayesha H, Khan WI, Farooqi IS, Yeo GSH, O'Rahilly S, Bonnefond A, Butt TA, Arslan M, Froguel P
**Journal:** Cell Rep Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.101187](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.101187)

## Content

1. Cell Rep Med. 2023 Sep 19;4(9):101187. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.101187. Epub
2023 Sep 1.

High morbidity and mortality in children with untreated congenital deficiency of
leptin or its receptor.

Saeed S(1), Khanam R(2), Janjua QM(3), Manzoor J(4), Ning L(5), Hanook S(6),
Canouil M(5), Ali M(7), Ayesha H(8), Khan WI(9), Farooqi IS(10), Yeo GSH(10),
O'Rahilly S(10), Bonnefond A(11), Butt TA(12), Arslan M(13), Froguel P(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, Imperial College
London, London, UK; INSERM UMR 1283, CNRS UMR 8199, European Genomic Institute
for Diabetes (EGID), Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France; University of
Lille, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France. Electronic address:
s.saaed08@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)KAM School of Life Sciences, Forman Christian College, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine and Health
Sciences, National University of Science and Technology, Sohar, Oman.
(4)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Children's Hospital, Lahore,
Pakistan.
(5)INSERM UMR 1283, CNRS UMR 8199, European Genomic Institute for Diabetes
(EGID), Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France; University of Lille, Lille
University Hospital, Lille, France.
(6)Department of Statistics, Forman Christian College, Lahore, Pakistan.
(7)Paediatric Endocrinology, Mayo Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, Punjab Medical College, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(9)The Children Hospital and the Institute of Child Health, Multan, Pakistan.
(10)Medical Research Council Metabolic Diseases Unit, Wellcome-MRC Institute of
Metabolic Science - Metabolic Research Laboratories, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.
(11)Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, Imperial College
London, London, UK; INSERM UMR 1283, CNRS UMR 8199, European Genomic Institute
for Diabetes (EGID), Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France; University of
Lille, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Fatima Memorial Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan.
(13)KAM School of Life Sciences, Forman Christian College, Lahore, Pakistan.
Electronic address: muhammadarslan@fccollege.edu.pk.
(14)Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, Imperial College
London, London, UK; INSERM UMR 1283, CNRS UMR 8199, European Genomic Institute
for Diabetes (EGID), Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France; University of
Lille, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France. Electronic address:
p.froguel@imperial.ac.uk.

The long-term clinical outcomes of severe obesity due to leptin signaling
deficiency are unknown. We carry out a retrospective cross-sectional
investigation of a large cohort of children with leptin (LEP), LEP receptor
(LEPR), or melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) deficiency (n = 145) to evaluate the
progression of the disease. The affected individuals undergo physical, clinical,
and metabolic evaluations. We report a very high mortality in children with LEP
(26%) or LEPR deficiency (9%), mainly due to severe pulmonary and
gastrointestinal infections. In addition, 40% of surviving children with LEP or
LEPR deficiency experience life-threatening episodes of lung or gastrointestinal
infections. Although precision drugs are currently available for LEP and LEPR
deficiencies, as yet, they are not accessible in Pakistan. An appreciation of
the severe impact of LEP or LEPR deficiency on morbidity and early mortality,
educational attainment, and the attendant stigmatization should spur efforts to
deliver the available life-saving drugs to these children as a matter of
urgency.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.101187
PMCID: PMC10518629
PMID: 37659411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
