---
reference_id: "PMID:36824156"
title: Acute Disseminated Panniculitis Associated with Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
authors:
- Murinello AG
- Sá Damásio H
- Guedes P
- de Figueiredo AM
- Santos A
- Serrano A
journal: Case Rep Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000526156
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Disseminated Panniculitis Associated with Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Murinello AG, Sá Damásio H, Guedes P, de Figueiredo AM, Santos A, Serrano A
**Journal:** Case Rep Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000526156](https://doi.org/10.1159/000526156)

## Content

1. Case Rep Dermatol. 2022 Oct 6;14(3):283-290. doi: 10.1159/000526156.
eCollection  2022 Sep-Dec.

Acute Disseminated Panniculitis Associated with Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.

Murinello AG(1), Sá Damásio H(1), Guedes P(1), de Figueiredo AM(1), Santos A(1), 
Serrano A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 1, Curry Cabral Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, although one of the most common genetic 
diseases, is a very rare and often undiagnosed cause of panniculitis. The 
authors present a case characterized by an acute involvement of several areas in 
the thorax, abdomen, and limbs, occurring after repetitive trauma of the 
perineal area caused by a long period of cycling. After performing the 
differential diagnosis and establishing etiology, the patient was started on 
augmentation therapy with plasma-derived synthetic human alpha-1 proteinase 
inhibitor and the disease has been under control since then. We recommend 
lifelong treatment with this medication. At the end of a 10-year follow-up, 
there has been no evidence of pulmonary emphysema or liver disease. The authors 
perform a concise review of the genetic and pathogenic mechanisms behind this 
disease, with a special focus on panniculitis and its treatment.

Copyright © 2022 by The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000526156
PMCID: PMC9941762
PMID: 36824156

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.