---
reference_id: "PMID:34547955"
title: "Expending the Phenotypic Spectrum of Encephalocraniocutaneous Lipomatosis: About a Prenatal Case With Complete Autopsy."
authors:
- Cattin J
- Formet J
- Sartelet H
- Lenoir M
- Riethmuller D
- Collardeau-Frachon S
journal: Pediatr Dev Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/10935266211040802
keywords:
- Autopsy
- Eye Diseases
- Female
- Humans
- "Lipoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Lipomatosis
- "Neurocutaneous Syndromes/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Nevus
- Pregnancy
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expending the Phenotypic Spectrum of Encephalocraniocutaneous Lipomatosis: About a Prenatal Case With Complete Autopsy.
**Authors:** Cattin J, Formet J, Sartelet H, Lenoir M, Riethmuller D, Collardeau-Frachon S
**Journal:** Pediatr Dev Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10935266211040802](https://doi.org/10.1177/10935266211040802)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2022 Mar-Apr;25(2):180-185. doi:
10.1177/10935266211040802.  Epub 2021 Sep 22.

Expending the Phenotypic Spectrum of Encephalocraniocutaneous Lipomatosis: About 
a Prenatal Case With Complete Autopsy.

Cattin J(1), Formet J(1), Sartelet H(2), Lenoir M(3), Riethmuller D(1), 
Collardeau-Frachon S(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, University Medical Center, Besançon, 
France.
(2)Institute of Biology and Pathology, Department of Pathology, University 
Medical Center, Grenoble, France.
(3)Radiology Department, University Medical Center, Besançon, France.
(4)Institute of Pathology, Hôpital Femme-Mère-Enfant, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 
Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France.
(5)SOFFOET, Société Française de Foetopathologie Paris, France.

Encephalocraniocutaneous lipomatosis (ECCL) or Haberland syndrome (MIM #613001) 
is a rare congenital neurocutaneous disorder. It is characterized by unilateral 
ocular, cutaneous and central nervous system anomalies. Key clinical features 
include hairless fatty tissue nevus of the scalp, choristoma of the eye and 
intraspinal and intracerebral lipomas. We report one of the first cases 
diagnosed after termination of pregnancy at 35 WG, including antenatal and 
post-mortem imaging, complete autopsy and genetic analysis. Prenatal ultrasound 
and MRI of the third trimester showed multifocal spinal lesions and left lateral 
cerebral ventriculomegaly with cerebral atrophy. Diagnosis of ECCL was suggested 
at complete autopsy which revealed nevus psiloliparus of the scalp, facial 
hamartomas and intracranial and spinal lipomas. In addition, our case also 
exhibited a cardiac rhabdomyoma and a multicystic dysplastic kidney, both never 
reported to date in this syndrome. ECCL was confirmed by the identification of a 
postzygotic FGFR1 mutation. We reviewed the literature and discuss the 
pathogenesis of this syndrome.

DOI: 10.1177/10935266211040802
PMID: 34547955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]