---
reference_id: "PMID:35269543"
title: Comprehensive Research on Past and Future Therapeutic Strategies Devoted to Treatment of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
authors:
- Sever B
- Ciftci H
- DeMirci H
- Sever H
- Ocak F
- Yulug B
- Tateishi H
- Tateishi T
- Otsuka M
- Fujita M
- Başak AN
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23052400
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive Research on Past and Future Therapeutic Strategies Devoted to Treatment of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Sever B, Ciftci H, DeMirci H, Sever H, Ocak F, Yulug B, Tateishi H, Tateishi T, Otsuka M, Fujita M, Başak AN
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23052400](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23052400)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Feb 22;23(5):2400. doi: 10.3390/ijms23052400.

Comprehensive Research on Past and Future Therapeutic Strategies Devoted to 
Treatment of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.

Sever B(1)(2), Ciftci H(2)(3)(4), DeMirci H(4), Sever H(5), Ocak F(6), Yulug 
B(7), Tateishi H(2), Tateishi T(8), Otsuka M(2)(3), Fujita M(2), Başak AN(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Anadolu 
University, Eskisehir 26470, Turkey.
(2)Medicinal and Biological Chemistry Science Farm Joint Research Laboratory, 
Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.
(3)Department of Drug Discovery, Science Farm Ltd., Kumamoto 862-0976, Japan.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Koc University, Istanbul 34450, 
Turkey.
(5)Ministry of Health, Istanbul Training and Research Hospital, Physical 
Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinic, Istanbul 34098, Turkey.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli University, Kocaeli 41001, Turkey.
(7)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Alaaddin 
Keykubat University, Alanya 07425, Turkey.
(8)Division of Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, 
Kurume University School of Medicine, Fukuoka 830-0011, Japan.
(9)Suna and İnan Kıraç Foundation, Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory 
(KUTTAM-NDAL), Koc University, Istanbul 34450, Turkey.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rapidly debilitating fatal 
neurodegenerative disorder, causing muscle atrophy and weakness, which leads to 
paralysis and eventual death. ALS has a multifaceted nature affected by many 
pathological mechanisms, including oxidative stress (also via protein 
aggregation), mitochondrial dysfunction, glutamate-induced excitotoxicity, 
apoptosis, neuroinflammation, axonal degeneration, skeletal muscle deterioration 
and viruses. This complexity is a major obstacle in defeating ALS. At present, 
riluzole and edaravone are the only drugs that have passed clinical trials for 
the treatment of ALS, notwithstanding that they showed modest benefits in a 
limited population of ALS. A dextromethorphan hydrobromide and quinidine sulfate 
combination was also approved to treat pseudobulbar affect (PBA) in the course 
of ALS. Globally, there is a struggle to prevent or alleviate the symptoms of 
this neurodegenerative disease, including implementation of antisense 
oligonucleotides (ASOs), induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), CRISPR-9/Cas 
technique, non-invasive brain stimulation (NIBS) or ALS-on-a-chip technology. 
Additionally, researchers have synthesized and screened new compounds to be 
effective in ALS beyond the drug repurposing strategy. Despite all these 
efforts, ALS treatment is largely limited to palliative care, and there is a 
strong need for new therapeutics to be developed. This review focuses on and 
discusses which therapeutic strategies have been followed so far and what can be 
done in the future for the treatment of ALS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23052400
PMCID: PMC8910198
PMID: 35269543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.