---
reference_id: "PMID:30643292"
title: "ALS-implicated protein TDP-43 sustains levels of STMN2, a mediator of motor neuron growth and repair."
authors:
- Klim JR
- Williams LA
- Limone F
- Guerra San Juan I
- Davis-Dusenbery BN
- Mordes DA
- Burberry A
- Steinbaugh MJ
- Gamage KK
- Kirchner R
- Moccia R
- Cassel SH
- Chen K
- Wainger BJ
- Woolf CJ
- Eggan K
journal: Nat Neurosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41593-018-0300-4
keywords:
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/metabolism
- Axons/metabolism
- Cell Line
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Down-Regulation
- Female
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Motor Neurons/metabolism
- Spinal Cord/metabolism
- Stathmin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALS-implicated protein TDP-43 sustains levels of STMN2, a mediator of motor neuron growth and repair.
**Authors:** Klim JR, Williams LA, Limone F, Guerra San Juan I, Davis-Dusenbery BN, Mordes DA, Burberry A, Steinbaugh MJ, Gamage KK, Kirchner R, Moccia R, Cassel SH, Chen K, Wainger BJ, Woolf CJ, Eggan K
**Journal:** Nat Neurosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41593-018-0300-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0300-4)

## Content

1. Nat Neurosci. 2019 Feb;22(2):167-179. doi: 10.1038/s41593-018-0300-4. Epub
2019  Jan 14.

ALS-implicated protein TDP-43 sustains levels of STMN2, a mediator of motor
neuron growth and repair.

Klim JR(1)(2)(3)(4), Williams LA(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Limone F(1)(2)(3)(4)(6), Guerra
San Juan I(1)(2)(3)(4)(7), Davis-Dusenbery BN(1)(2)(3)(4)(8), Mordes
DA(1)(2)(3)(4)(9), Burberry A(1)(2)(3)(4), Steinbaugh MJ(10), Gamage
KK(1)(2)(3)(4)(11), Kirchner R(10), Moccia R(1)(2)(3)(4)(12), Cassel
SH(1)(2)(3)(4)(13)(14), Chen K(15), Wainger BJ(15)(16), Woolf CJ(15), Eggan
K(17)(18)(19)(20).

Author information:
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA, USA.
(3)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Q-State Biosciences, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(6)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Royal
Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Functional Genomics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive
Research, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Seven Bridges Genomics, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(10)Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Amgen Research, Amgen, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(12)Pfizer, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(13)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Medical Scientist Training Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(15)FM Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of
Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(16)Massachusetts General Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(17)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA. eggan@mcb.harvard.edu.
(18)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA, USA. eggan@mcb.harvard.edu.
(19)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
eggan@mcb.harvard.edu.
(20)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA. eggan@mcb.harvard.edu.

The findings that amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients almost
universally display pathological mislocalization of the RNA-binding protein
TDP-43 and that mutations in its gene cause familial ALS have nominated altered
RNA metabolism as a disease mechanism. However, the RNAs regulated by TDP-43 in
motor neurons and their connection to neuropathy remain to be identified. Here
we report transcripts whose abundances in human motor neurons are sensitive to
TDP-43 depletion. Notably, expression of STMN2, which encodes a microtubule
regulator, declined after TDP-43 knockdown and TDP-43 mislocalization as well as
in patient-specific motor neurons and postmortem patient spinal cord. STMN2 loss
upon reduced TDP-43 function was due to altered splicing, which is functionally
important, as we show STMN2 is necessary for normal axonal outgrowth and
regeneration. Notably, post-translational stabilization of STMN2 rescued neurite
outgrowth and axon regeneration deficits induced by TDP-43 depletion. We propose
that restoring STMN2 expression warrants examination as a therapeutic strategy
for ALS.

DOI: 10.1038/s41593-018-0300-4
PMCID: PMC7153761
PMID: 30643292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Financial Interests The authors have
no competing financial interests.
