---
reference_id: "PMID:18498245"
title: "Transaldolase deficiency influences the pentose phosphate pathway, mitochondrial homoeostasis and apoptosis signal processing."
authors:
- Qian Y
- Banerjee S
- Grossman CE
- Amidon W
- Nagy G
- Barcza M
- Niland B
- Karp DR
- Middleton FA
- Banki K
- Perl A
journal: Biochem J
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1042/BJ20080722
keywords:
- Apoptosis/physiology
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Female
- Glucose-6-Phosphate/metabolism
- Homeostasis/physiology
- Humans
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Mitochondria/physiology
- Pentose Phosphate Pathway/physiology
- Signal Transduction
- Sugar Phosphates/metabolism
- "Transaldolase/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transaldolase deficiency influences the pentose phosphate pathway, mitochondrial homoeostasis and apoptosis signal processing.
**Authors:** Qian Y, Banerjee S, Grossman CE, Amidon W, Nagy G, Barcza M, Niland B, Karp DR, Middleton FA, Banki K, Perl A
**Journal:** Biochem J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20080722](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20080722)

## Content

1. Biochem J. 2008 Oct 1;415(1):123-34. doi: 10.1042/BJ20080722.

Transaldolase deficiency influences the pentose phosphate pathway, mitochondrial
homoeostasis and apoptosis signal processing.

Qian Y(1), Banerjee S, Grossman CE, Amidon W, Nagy G, Barcza M, Niland B, Karp
DR, Middleton FA, Banki K, Perl A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210,
USA.

TAL (transaldolase) was originally described in the yeast as an enzyme of the
PPP (pentose phosphate pathway). However, certain organisms and mammalian
tissues lack TAL, and the overall reason for its existence is unclear. Recently,
deletion of Ser(171) (TALDeltaS171) was found in five patients causing
inactivation, proteasome-mediated degradation and complete deficiency of TAL. In
the present study, microarray and follow-up Western-blot, enzyme-activity and
metabolic studies of TALDeltaS171 TD (TAL-deficient) lymphoblasts revealed
co-ordinated changes in the expression of genes involved in the PPP,
mitochondrial biogenesis, oxidative stress, and Ca(2+) fluxing. Sedoheptulose
7-phosphate was accumulated, whereas G6P (glucose 6-phosphate) was depleted,
indicating a failure to recycle G6P for the oxidative branch of the PPP.
Nucleotide analysis showed depletion of NADPH and NAD(+) and accumulation of
ADP-ribose. TD cells have diminished Deltapsi(m) (mitochondrial transmembrane
potential) and increased mitochondrial mass associated with increased production
of nitric oxide and ATP. TAL deficiency resulted in enhanced spontaneous and
H(2)O(2)-induced apoptosis. TD lymphoblasts showed increased expression of CD38,
which hydrolyses NAD(+) into ADP-ribose, a trigger of Ca(2+) release from the
endoplasmic reticulum that, in turn, facilitated CD20-induced apoptosis. By
contrast, TD cells were resistant to CD95/Fas-induced apoptosis, owing to a
dependence of caspase activity on redox-sensitive cysteine residues.
Normalization of TAL activity by adeno-associated-virus-mediated gene transfer
reversed the elevated CD38 expression, ATP and Ca(2+) levels, suppressed
H(2)O(2)- and CD20-induced apoptosis and enhanced Fas-induced cell death. The
present study identified the TAL deficiency as a modulator of mitochondrial
homoeostasis, Ca(2+) fluxing and apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20080722
PMID: 18498245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
