---
reference_id: "PMID:39788453"
title: A family with an atypical presentation of TBX3-related disorder.
authors:
- Osman K
- Asaly A
- Halloun R
- Paperna T
- Pollack S
- Magen D
- Tiosano D
- Weiss K
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2025.104994
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Heterozygote
- "Hypogonadism/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- Ulna/abnormalities
- "Upper Extremity Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- "Urinary Bladder/abnormalities, pathology"
- Breast Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A family with an atypical presentation of TBX3-related disorder.
**Authors:** Osman K, Asaly A, Halloun R, Paperna T, Pollack S, Magen D, Tiosano D, Weiss K
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2025.104994](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2025.104994)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2025 Feb;73:104994. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2025.104994. Epub
2025  Jan 7.

A family with an atypical presentation of TBX3-related disorder.

Osman K(1), Asaly A(2), Halloun R(2), Paperna T(1), Pollack S(3), Magen D(3), 
Tiosano D(4), Weiss K(5).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ruth Rappaport Children's Hospital, 
Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(3)Pediatric Nephrology Institute, Ruth Rappaport Children's Hospital, Rambam 
Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel; The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of 
Medicine, The Technion, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ruth Rappaport Children's Hospital, 
Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel; The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty 
of Medicine, The Technion, Haifa, Israel.
(5)Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel; The Ruth and 
Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, The Technion, Haifa, Israel. Electronic 
address: K_weiss@rmc.gov.il.

BACKGROUND: Ulnar mammary syndrome (UMS) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the T-box transcription factor 3 
(TBX3) gene. The phenotype is classically characterized by upper limb defects 
and apocrine/mammary gland hypoplasia. Endocrine abnormalities include 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH), partial growth hormone deficiency and 
dysmorphic features, while ectopic pituitary gland and various congenital 
anomalies have also been described. Here, we report a family with a unique 
clinical presentation.
METHODS: Exome sequencing was performed for twin siblings with micropenis, 
neonatal hypogonadism, and congenital giant bladder diverticula.
RESULTS: We identified a novel likely pathogenic heterozygous TBX3 variant 
c.844G>T; p.(Gly282Cys) inherited from the apparently unaffected mother. Reverse 
phenotyping confirmed that the mother and the twins had features suggestive of 
UMS spectrum. The mother had been diagnosed as having HH, with an hypoplastic 
pituitary gland. The physical examination revealed a bifid nasal tip and a 
bi-lobulated tongue tip typical for UMS with no apparent limb or mammary 
defects.
DISCUSSION: This report extends the phenotype of the TBX3-related disorder to 
include HH and bladder anomalies without significant limb or mammary 
manifestations.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2025.104994
PMID: 39788453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We declare 
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.