---
reference_id: "PMID:37083955"
title: PRDM1 DNA-binding zinc finger domain is required for normal limb development and is disrupted in split hand/foot malformation.
authors:
- Truong BT
- Shull LC
- Lencer E
- Bend EG
- Field M
- Blue EE
- Bamshad MJ
- Skinner C
- Everman D
- Schwartz CE
- Flanagan-Steet H
- Artinger KB
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.049977
keywords:
- Animals
- DNA
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Positive Regulatory Domain I-Binding Factor 1
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Zebrafish/genetics
- Zinc Fingers
- Zebrafish Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PRDM1 DNA-binding zinc finger domain is required for normal limb development and is disrupted in split hand/foot malformation.
**Authors:** Truong BT, Shull LC, Lencer E, Bend EG, Field M, Blue EE, Bamshad MJ, Skinner C, Everman D, Schwartz CE, Flanagan-Steet H, Artinger KB
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.049977](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.049977)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2023 Apr 1;16(4):dmm049977. doi: 10.1242/dmm.049977. Epub 2023
 Apr 21.

PRDM1 DNA-binding zinc finger domain is required for normal limb development and 
is disrupted in split hand/foot malformation.

Truong BT(1)(2), Shull LC(2), Lencer E(3), Bend EG(4), Field M(5), Blue 
EE(6)(7), Bamshad MJ(7)(8), Skinner C(4), Everman D(4), Schwartz CE(4), 
Flanagan-Steet H(4), Artinger KB(2).

Author information:
(1)Human Medical Genetics & Genomics Graduate Program, University of Colorado 
Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Denver Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(3)Biology Department, Lafayette College, Easton, PA 18042, USA.
(4)Greenwood Genetics Center, Greenwood, SC 29646, USA.
(5)Genetics of Learning Disability Service, Hunter Genetics, Waratah, NSW 2298, 
AUS.
(6)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(7)Brotman-Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(8)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is a rare limb abnormality with clefting of 
the fingers and/or toes. For many individuals, the genetic etiology is unknown. 
Through whole-exome and targeted sequencing, we detected three novel variants in 
a gene encoding a transcription factor, PRDM1, that arose de novo in families 
with SHFM or segregated with the phenotype. PRDM1 is required for limb 
development; however, its role is not well understood and it is unclear how the 
PRDM1 variants affect protein function. Using transient and stable 
overexpression rescue experiments in zebrafish, we show that the variants 
disrupt the proline/serine-rich and DNA-binding zinc finger domains, resulting 
in a dominant-negative effect. Through gene expression assays, RNA sequencing, 
and CUT&RUN in isolated pectoral fin cells, we demonstrate that Prdm1a directly 
binds to and regulates genes required for fin induction, outgrowth and 
anterior/posterior patterning, such as fgfr1a, dlx5a, dlx6a and smo. Taken 
together, these results improve our understanding of the role of PRDM1 in the 
limb gene regulatory network and identified novel PRDM1 variants that link to 
SHFM in humans.

© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.049977
PMCID: PMC10151829
PMID: 37083955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.