---
reference_id: "PMID:30564629"
title: Evolution of the Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptors in Vertebrates.
authors:
- Pedersen JE
- Bergqvist CA
- Larhammar D
journal: eNeuro
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0340-18.2018
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Phylogeny
- "Receptor, Muscarinic M1/metabolism"
- "Receptor, Muscarinic M3/metabolism"
- "Receptor, Muscarinic M4/metabolism"
- "Receptors, Cholinergic/metabolism"
- "Receptors, Muscarinic/metabolism"
- Vertebrates/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolution of the Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptors in Vertebrates.
**Authors:** Pedersen JE, Bergqvist CA, Larhammar D
**Journal:** eNeuro (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1523/ENEURO.0340-18.2018](https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0340-18.2018)

## Content

1. eNeuro. 2018 Nov 8;5(5):ENEURO.0340-18.2018. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0340-18.2018.
 eCollection 2018 Sep-Oct.

Evolution of the Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptors in Vertebrates.

Pedersen JE(1), Bergqvist CA(1), Larhammar D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Unit of Pharmacology, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE-751 24, Sweden.

The family of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (mAChRs) consists of five 
members in mammals, encoded by the CHRM1-5 genes. The mAChRs are 
G-protein-coupled receptors, which can be divided into the following two 
subfamilies: M2 and M4 receptors coupling to Gi/o; and M1, M3, and M5 receptors 
coupling to Gq/11. However, despite the fundamental roles played by these 
receptors, their evolution in vertebrates has not yet been fully described. We 
have combined sequence-based phylogenetic analyses with comparisons of 
exon-intron organization and conserved synteny in order to deduce the evolution 
of the mAChR receptors. Our analyses verify the existence of two ancestral genes 
prior to the two vertebrate tetraploidizations (1R and 2R). After these events, 
one gene had duplicated, resulting in CHRM2 and CHRM4; and the other had 
triplicated, forming the CHRM1, CHRM3, and CHRM5 subfamily. All five genes are 
still present in all vertebrate groups investigated except the CHRM1 gene, which 
has not been identified in some of the teleosts or in chicken or any other 
birds. Interestingly, the third tetraploidization (3R) that took place in the 
teleost predecessor resulted in duplicates of all five mAChR genes of which all 
10 are present in zebrafish. One of the copies of the CHRM2 and CHRM3 genes and 
both CHRM4 copies have gained introns in teleosts. Not a single separate 
(nontetraploidization) duplicate has been identified in any vertebrate species. 
These results clarify the evolution of the vertebrate mAChR family and reveal a 
doubled repertoire in zebrafish, inviting studies of gene neofunctionalization 
and subfunctionalization.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0340-18.2018
PMCID: PMC6298421
PMID: 30564629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]