---
reference_id: "PMID:20102305"
title: "Inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a review."
authors:
- Telenga ED
- Kerstjens HA
- Postma DS
- Ten Hacken NH
- van den Berge M
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1517/14656560903510628
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a review.
**Authors:** Telenga ED, Kerstjens HA, Postma DS, Ten Hacken NH, van den Berge M
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1517/14656560903510628](https://doi.org/10.1517/14656560903510628)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010 Feb;11(3):405-21. doi:
10.1517/14656560903510628.

Inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a review.

Telenga ED(1), Kerstjens HA, Postma DS, Ten Hacken NH, van den Berge M.

Author information:
(1)University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Department of 
Pulmonology PO Box 30.001, 9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands. 
e.d.telenga@int.umcg.nl

IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a 
disease characterized by chronic airflow obstruction and a progressive lung 
function decline. Although widely used, the efficacy of inhaled corticosteroids 
(ICS) in the treatment of COPD remains a matter of debate.
AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: This article reviews the evidence about the 
effects of inhaled corticosteroids in the treatment of COPD.
WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: Short-term treatment with ICS improves lung function 
and quality of life; in addition, several studies with longer follow-up have 
shown less decline over time in quality of life, and fewer exacerbations. By 
contrast, long-term studies have been unable to show substantial improvement in 
the decline of lung function in COPD. Based on these findings, it was concluded 
that the use of ICS did not influence the natural course of COPD. However, this 
conclusion has been challenged by two subsequent studies, TORCH and GLUCOLD, 
which both showed a reduction in lung-function decline over time with the use of 
ICS. These two studies indicate that ICS might indeed influence the natural 
course of the disease, at least in a subgroup of COPD patients.
TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Further studies are needed to identify which individuals have 
a favorable short- and long-term response to ICS treatment.

DOI: 10.1517/14656560903510628
PMID: 20102305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]