---
reference_id: "PMID:35240815"
title: Cross immunity protection and antibody-dependent enhancement in a distributed delay dynamic model.
authors:
- Steindorf V
- Oliva S
- Wu J
journal: Math Biosci Eng
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3934/mbe.2022136
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cross immunity protection and antibody-dependent enhancement in a distributed delay dynamic model.
**Authors:** Steindorf V, Oliva S, Wu J
**Journal:** Math Biosci Eng (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3934/mbe.2022136](https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2022136)

## Content

1. Math Biosci Eng. 2022 Jan 17;19(3):2950-2984. doi: 10.3934/mbe.2022136.

Cross immunity protection and antibody-dependent enhancement in a distributed 
delay dynamic model.

Steindorf V(1), Oliva S(2), Wu J(3).

Author information:
(1)Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Group, Basque Center for Applied 
Mathematics, BCAM, Bilbao, Spain.
(2)Applied Mathematics Department, Institute of Mathematics and Statistics, 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Department of Mathematics 
and Statistics, Faculty of Science and Engineering, York University, Toronto, 
Canada.

Dengue fever is endemic in tropical and subtropical countries, and certain 
important features of the spread of dengue fever continue to pose challenges for 
mathematical modelling. Here we propose a system of integro-differential 
equations (IDE) to study the disease transmission dynamics that involve 
multi-serotypes and cross immunity. Our main objective is to incorporate and 
analyze the effect of a general time delay term describing acquired cross 
immunity protection and the effect of antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE), both 
characteristics of Dengue fever. We perform qualitative analysis of the model 
and obtain results to show the stability of the epidemiologically important 
steady solutions that are completely determined by the basic reproduction number 
and the invasion reproduction number. We establish the global dynamics by 
constructing a suitable Lyapunov functional. We also conduct some numerical 
experiments to illustrate bifurcation structures, indicating the occurrence of 
periodic oscillations for a specific range of values of a key parameter 
representing ADE.

DOI: 10.3934/mbe.2022136
PMID: 35240815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]