---
reference_id: "PMID:35312150"
title: "Systematic analysis of physical examination characteristics of 94 individuals with Joubert syndrome: Keys to suspecting the diagnosis."
authors:
- Forsyth R
- Parisi MA
- Altintas B
- Malicdan MC
- Vilboux T
- Knoll J
- Brooks BP
- Zein WM
- Gahl WA
- Toro C
- Gunay-Aygun M
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31966
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic analysis of physical examination characteristics of 94 individuals with Joubert syndrome: Keys to suspecting the diagnosis.
**Authors:** Forsyth R, Parisi MA, Altintas B, Malicdan MC, Vilboux T, Knoll J, Brooks BP, Zein WM, Gahl WA, Toro C, Gunay-Aygun M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31966](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31966)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2022 Mar;190(1):121-130. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31966. Epub 2022 Mar 21.

Systematic analysis of physical examination characteristics of 94 individuals 
with Joubert syndrome: Keys to suspecting the diagnosis.

Forsyth R(1), Parisi MA(2), Altintas B(3), Malicdan MC(4), Vilboux T(5)(6), 
Knoll J(7), Brooks BP(8), Zein WM(8), Gahl WA(4)(6), Toro C(9), Gunay-Aygun 
M(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and McKusick-Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine, 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Intellectual & Developmental Disabilities Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(4)National Institutes of Health Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, 
Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Inova Functional Laboratory, Inova Health System, Fairfax, Virginia, USA.
(6)Section of Human Biochemical Genetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(7)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(9)Undiagnosed Disease Network, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by 
hypotonia and developmental delay, as well as the obligatory molar tooth sign on 
brain imaging. Since hypotonia and developmental delay are nonspecific features, 
there must be a high level of clinical suspicion of JS so that the diagnostic 
brain imaging and/or molecular testing for the >38 genes associated with JS 
is/are obtained. The goal of this study was to analyze clinical photographs of a 
cohort of patients with JS to define a list of physical examination features 
that should prompt investigation for JS. Analysis of photographs from 94 
individuals with JS revealed that there is a recognizable pattern of facial 
features in JS that changes over time as individuals age. Macrocephaly, head 
tilting even when looking straight ahead, eye movement abnormalities (oculomotor 
apraxia, nystagmus, strabismus), and ptosis are common in those with JS. 
Distinctive features in younger children include triangular-shaped open mouth 
with tongue protrusion; in older children and adults, mandibular prognathia and 
prominent nasal bridge are common.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC. This article has been contributed to by U.S. 
Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31966
PMCID: PMC9117497
PMID: 35312150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]