---
reference_id: "PMID:34305922"
title: "The Effect of Tetanus-Diphtheria-Acellular-Pertussis Immunization During Pregnancy on Infant Antibody Responses: Individual-Participant Data Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Abu-Raya B
- Maertens K
- Munoz FM
- Zimmermann P
- Curtis N
- Halperin SA
- Rots N
- Barug D
- Holder B
- Kampmann B
- Leuridan E
- Sadarangani M
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.689394
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Effect of Tetanus-Diphtheria-Acellular-Pertussis Immunization During Pregnancy on Infant Antibody Responses: Individual-Participant Data Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Abu-Raya B, Maertens K, Munoz FM, Zimmermann P, Curtis N, Halperin SA, Rots N, Barug D, Holder B, Kampmann B, Leuridan E, Sadarangani M
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.689394](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.689394)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Jul 6;12:689394. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.689394.
eCollection  2021.

The Effect of Tetanus-Diphtheria-Acellular-Pertussis Immunization During 
Pregnancy on Infant Antibody Responses: Individual-Participant Data 
Meta-Analysis.

Abu-Raya B(1)(2), Maertens K(3), Munoz FM(4), Zimmermann P(5)(6), Curtis N(5), 
Halperin SA(7), Rots N(8), Barug D(8), Holder B(9)(10), Kampmann B(11)(12), 
Leuridan E(3), Sadarangani M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Vaccine Evaluation Center, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(3)Centre for the Evaluation of Vaccination, Vaccine and Infectious Diseases 
Institute, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne and Infectious 
Diseases Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's 
Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Fribourg Hospital HFR and Faculty of Science and 
Medicine, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(7)Canadian Center for Vaccinology, Departments of Pediatrics and Microbiology 
and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Izaak Walton Killam Health Centre, and 
Nova Scotia Health Authority, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(8)Centre for Infectious Disease Control, National Institute for Public Health 
and the Environment, Bilthoven, Netherlands.
(9)Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, Institute of 
Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Imperial College, London, United 
Kingdom.
(10)Section of Paediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of 
Medicine, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.
(11)Vaccines and Immunity Theme, Medical Research Council Unit The Gambia at the 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Fajara, Gambia.
(12)The Vaccine Centre, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London 
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Immunization with tetanus-diphtheria-acellular pertussis (Tdap) 
vaccine in pregnancy is increasingly recommended. We determined the effect of 
Tdap immunization in pregnancy on infants' vaccine responses.
METHODS: Individual-participant data meta-analysis of ten studies (n=1884) 
investigating infants' antibody response to routine immunizations following Tdap 
immunization in pregnancy was performed. Geometric mean ratios (GMRs) of 
antigen-specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels were calculated using 
mixed-effects models. Seroprotection rates were compared using chi-squared 
tests.
RESULTS: Infants of Tdap-immunized women had significantly lower IgG against 
pertussis toxin (GMR 0.65; 95%CI 0.57-0.74), filamentous haemagglutinin (FHA) 
(0.68; 0.53-0.87), pertactin (0.65; 0.58-0.72) and fimbria 2/3 (FIM2/3) (0.41; 
0.32-0.52) after primary immunization, compared with infants of unimmunized 
women. These lower levels persisted after booster immunization for FHA (0.72; 
0.61-0.84) and FIM2/3 (0.53; 0.29-0.96). After primary immunization, infants of 
Tdap-immunized women had lower seroprotection rates against diphtheria (90% 
[843/973] vs 98% [566/579]; p<0.001) and invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD) 
caused by 5 Streptococcus pneumoniae (SPN) serotypes (SPN5, SPN6B, SPN9V, 
SPN19A, SPN23F), and higher seroprotection rates against Haemophilus influenzae 
type b (short-term and long-term seroprotection rates, 86%[471/547] vs 
76%[188/247] and 62%[337/547] vs 49%(121/247), respectively, all p=0.001). After 
booster immunization, seroprotection rates against diphtheria and tetanus were 
99% (286/288) and (618/619) in infants of Tdap-immunized women, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Infants of Tdap-immunized women in pregnancy had lower IgG levels 
against pertussis, diphtheria and some SPN serotypes after their immunization 
compared with infants of unimmunized women. Enhanced surveillance of pertussis, 
diphtheria and IPD in infants is needed to determine the clinical significance 
of these findings.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: CRD42017079171.

Copyright © 2021 Abu-Raya, Maertens, Munoz, Zimmermann, Curtis, Halperin, Rots, 
Barug, Holder, Kampmann, Leuridan and Sadarangani.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.689394
PMCID: PMC8299947
PMID: 34305922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BA-R is supported by the Canadian Health and 
Research Institute Vanier Canada Graduate scholarship. KM is the beneficiary of 
a postdoctoral mandate fellowship from the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders 
(FWO 12R5819). MS is supported via salary awards from the BC Children’s Hospital 
Foundation, the Canadian Child Health Clinician Scientist Program and the 
Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research. MS has been an investigator on 
projects funded by GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Pfizer, Sanofi Pasteur, Seqirus, 
Symvivo and VBI Vaccines. All funds have been paid to his institute, and he has 
not received any personal payments. SH has been an investigator on projects 
funded by GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Pfizer, Sanofi-Pasteur, and CanSino; all funds 
have been paid to his University. SH has also served on ad hoc advisory boards 
for GSK, Sanofi, Pfizer, AsraZeneca, Merck, and IMV. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.