---
reference_id: "PMID:23188196"
title: "Kawasaki disease: basic and pathological findings."
authors:
- Takahashi K
- Oharaseki T
- Yokouchi Y
- Naoe S
- Saji T
journal: Clin Exp Nephrol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s10157-012-0734-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease: basic and pathological findings.
**Authors:** Takahashi K, Oharaseki T, Yokouchi Y, Naoe S, Saji T
**Journal:** Clin Exp Nephrol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10157-012-0734-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10157-012-0734-z)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2013 Oct;17(5):690-693. doi: 10.1007/s10157-012-0734-z. Epub
 2012 Nov 28.

Kawasaki disease: basic and pathological findings.

Takahashi K(1), Oharaseki T(2), Yokouchi Y(2), Naoe S(3), Saji T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Toho University Ohashi Medical Center, 2-17-6 
Ohashi, Meguro, Tokyo, 153-8515, Japan. keitak@oha.toho-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pathology, Toho University Ohashi Medical Center, 2-17-6 
Ohashi, Meguro, Tokyo, 153-8515, Japan.
(3)Biomedical Engineering Center, Toin University of Yokohama, 2201 Tetsu-machi, 
Aoba, Yokohama, 225-0025, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Toho University Omori Medical Center, 6-11-1 
Omori-nishi, Ohta, Tokyo, 143-8541, Japan.

Kawasaki disease (KD) is considered to be a kind of systemic vasculitis 
syndrome. It most frequently affects infants and young children and primarily 
invades medium-sized muscular arteries, including the coronary arteries. The 
etiology of KD is unknown, but epidemiological data suggest involvement of 
infectious agents, such as bacteria and viruses, in the onset of KD. In 
addition, host genetics underlie the disease's pathogenesis. Histologically, 
coronary arteritis begins 6-8 days after KD onset, and inflammation of all 
layers of the artery rapidly ensues. The inflammation spreads completely around 
the artery, resulting in severe damage to structural components. Then, the 
artery begins to dilate. KD arteritis is characterized by inflammation 
consisting of marked accumulation of monocytes/macrophages. Aberrant activation 
of monocytes/macrophages is thought to be involved in the formation of vascular 
lesions. Inflammatory-cell infiltration persists until about the 25th day of the 
disease, after which the inflammatory cells gradually decrease in number. 
Lesions in all arteries are relatively synchronous, as they evolve from acute to 
chronic injury. If a giant aneurysm remains or vessel recanalization occurs 
after thrombotic occlusion of an aneurysm, remodeling of the vascular structure, 
sometimes including even reocclusion, continues even in the remote stage.

DOI: 10.1007/s10157-012-0734-z
PMID: 23188196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]