---
reference_id: "PMID:27145721"
title: "The Fanconi anaemia pathway: new players and new functions."
authors:
- Ceccaldi R
- Sarangi P
- "D'Andrea AD"
journal: Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nrm.2016.48
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Fanconi anaemia pathway: new players and new functions.
**Authors:** Ceccaldi R, Sarangi P, D'Andrea AD
**Journal:** Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrm.2016.48](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm.2016.48)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2016 Jun;17(6):337-49. doi: 10.1038/nrm.2016.48. Epub 
2016 May 5.

The Fanconi anaemia pathway: new players and new functions.

Ceccaldi R(1), Sarangi P(1), D'Andrea AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology and Center for DNA Damage and Repair, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02215, USA.

The Fanconi anaemia pathway repairs DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) in the 
genome. Our understanding of this complex pathway is still evolving, as new 
components continue to be identified and new biochemical systems are used to 
elucidate the molecular steps of repair. The Fanconi anaemia pathway uses 
components of other known DNA repair processes to achieve proper repair of ICLs. 
Moreover, Fanconi anaemia proteins have functions in genome maintenance beyond 
their canonical roles of repairing ICLs. Such functions include the 
stabilization of replication forks and the regulation of cytokinesis. Thus, 
Fanconi anaemia proteins are emerging as master regulators of genomic integrity 
that coordinate several repair processes. Here, we summarize our current 
understanding of the functions of the Fanconi anaemia pathway in ICL repair, 
together with an overview of its connections with other repair pathways and its 
emerging roles in genome maintenance.

DOI: 10.1038/nrm.2016.48
PMID: 27145721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]