---
reference_id: "PMID:28138907"
title: Sialidosis Type 1 with a Novel Mutation in the Neuraminidase-1 (NEU1) Gene.
authors:
- Gowda VK
- Srinivasan VM
- Benakappa N
- Benakappa A
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s12098-016-2286-9
keywords:
- Child
- Consanguinity
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mucolipidoses/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Neuraminidase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sialidosis Type 1 with a Novel Mutation in the Neuraminidase-1 (NEU1) Gene.
**Authors:** Gowda VK, Srinivasan VM, Benakappa N, Benakappa A
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12098-016-2286-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-016-2286-9)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2017 May;84(5):403-404. doi: 10.1007/s12098-016-2286-9. Epub
 2017 Jan 31.

Sialidosis Type 1 with a Novel Mutation in the Neuraminidase-1 (NEU1) Gene.

Gowda VK(1)(2), Srinivasan VM(3), Benakappa N(3), Benakappa A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health, Bangalore,
Karnataka, India. drknvraju@hotmail.com.
(2)Bangalore Child Neurology and Rehabilitation Center, No 8/A, First Cross,
First Main, Near Adhichunchanagiri Choultry, Vijayanagar, Bangalore, Karnataka,
560104, India. drknvraju@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health, Bangalore,
Karnataka, India.

A patient with Sialidosis type 1 with a novel variation in neuraminidase-1
(NEU1) is described. The patient developed ataxia and myoclonus at 9 y of age.
He was born to a second degree consanguineous marriage couple. On examination
child had cerebellar signs and bilateral macular cherry-red spots. MRI of the
brain and electroencephalogram were normal. The enzyme analysis revealed
deficiency of neuraminidase. Genetic analysis identified novel homozygous
missense mutation c.742G > T (p.G248C) in exon 4 of NEU1 gene. At 13 y of age,
the ataxia and had myoclonus progressed.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-016-2286-9
PMID: 28138907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
