---
reference_id: "PMID:34541533"
title: "Clinical progression of progressive supranuclear palsy: impact of trials bias and phenotype variants."
authors:
- Street D
- Malpetti M
- Rittman T
- Ghosh BCP
- Murley AG
- Coyle-Gilchrist I
- Passamonti L
- Rowe JB
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab206
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical progression of progressive supranuclear palsy: impact of trials bias and phenotype variants.
**Authors:** Street D, Malpetti M, Rittman T, Ghosh BCP, Murley AG, Coyle-Gilchrist I, Passamonti L, Rowe JB
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcab206](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcab206)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2021 Sep 2;3(3):fcab206. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab206. 
eCollection 2021.

Clinical progression of progressive supranuclear palsy: impact of trials bias 
and phenotype variants.

Street D(1), Malpetti M(1), Rittman T(1), Ghosh BCP(1)(2), Murley AG(1), 
Coyle-Gilchrist I(1)(3), Passamonti L(1)(4), Rowe JB(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS 
Trust, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK.
(2)Wessex Neurological Centre, University Hospitals Southampton NHS Foundation 
Trust, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
(3)Norfolk and Norwich NHS Foundation Trust, Norwich NR4 7UY, UK.
(4)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Istituto di Bioimmagini e 
Fisiologia Molecolare (IBFM), Milano, 20090 Segrate (MI), Italy.
(5)Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 7EF, UK.

Progressive supranuclear palsy causes diverse clinical presentations, including 
classical Richardson's syndrome and several variant phenotypes. Clinical trials 
of disease-modifying therapies have recently been completed, with more planned 
for the next 2 years. However, many people with progressive supranuclear palsy 
do not meet eligibility criteria for these clinical trials. Understanding 
clinical progression with different phenotypes would improve trial design and 
enhance the accuracy of risk-benefit and cost-benefit assessments of new 
treatments for progressive supranuclear palsy. We set out to determine rates of 
motor and cognitive progression of possible, probable and definite progressive 
supranuclear palsy, with different phenotypes, from a representative cohort in a 
regional UK healthcare service. Longitudinal clinical data from people with 
Richardson's syndrome and variant phenotypes were analysed using linear 
mixed-modelling, using both the full and modified versions of the Progressive 
Supranuclear Palsy Rating Scale, Mini-Mental State Examination and the revised 
Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination. Subgroup analyses considered patients 
meeting recent Phase II trial entry criteria and patients with neuropathological 
confirmation. Two hundred and twenty-seven patients [male = 59%, mean age 
(±standard deviation), 71.8 (±7.0) years] were followed for a mean 21.6 (±15.6) 
months. One hundred and seventy-four (77%) had Richardson's syndrome at the 
outset, 25 had cortical variant presentations (13%, frontal, corticobasal, 
speech and language variants) and 28 had subcortical variant presentations (14%, 
parkinsonism, postural instability and gait freezing variants). Across all 
participants, annual progression in Richardson's syndrome was faster than 
variant phenotypes on the Mini-Mental State Examination (-1.8 versus -0.9/year, 
P = 0.005) and revised Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination (-5.3 versus 
-3.0/year, P = 0.01) but not the Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Rating Scale 
(9.0 versus 7.1/year, P = 0.2) nor the modified Progressive Supranuclear Palsy 
Rating Scale (2.7 versus 2.3/year, P = 0.4). However, for those with more than 1 
years' follow-up, a significant difference was observed between Richardson's 
syndrome and variant phenotypes in Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Rating Scale 
(8.7 versus 6.3/year, P = 0.04). Survival was longer in variant phenotypes than 
Richardson's syndrome [7.3 (±3.9) versus 5.6 (±2.0) years, P = 0.02]. 
Pathologically confirmed cases (n = 49) supported these findings. Patients 
meeting basic trial-eligibility criteria (n = 129) progressed faster on the 
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Rating Scale than trial-not-eligible patients 
(10.1 versus 6.1/year, P = 0.001). In conclusion, phenotypes other than 
Richardson's syndrome show slower progression and longer survival. Trial 
criteria do not select representative progressive supranuclear palsy cases. This 
has implications for trial design, and application of trial results to 
clinically more diverse patient populations.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab206
PMCID: PMC8445397
PMID: 34541533