---
reference_id: "PMID:29429572"
title: Mutations in the BAF-Complex Subunit DPF2 Are Associated with Coffin-Siris Syndrome.
authors:
- Vasileiou G
- Vergarajauregui S
- Endele S
- Popp B
- Büttner C
- Ekici AB
- Gerard M
- Bramswig NC
- Albrecht B
- Clayton-Smith J
- Morton J
- Tomkins S
- Low K
- Weber A
- Wenzel M
- Altmüller J
- Li Y
- Wollnik B
- Hoganson G
- Plona MR
- Cho MT
- Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study
- Thiel CT
- Lüdecke HJ
- Strom TM
- Calpena E
- Wilkie AOM
- Wieczorek D
- Engel FB
- Reis A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.01.014
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- COS Cells
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Face/abnormalities
- Facies
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Micrognathism/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Neck/abnormalities
- Phenotype
- Protein Subunits/genetics
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the BAF-Complex Subunit DPF2 Are Associated with Coffin-Siris Syndrome.
**Authors:** Vasileiou G, Vergarajauregui S, Endele S, Popp B, Büttner C, Ekici AB, Gerard M, Bramswig NC, Albrecht B, Clayton-Smith J, Morton J, Tomkins S, Low K, Weber A, Wenzel M, Altmüller J, Li Y, Wollnik B, Hoganson G, Plona MR, Cho MT, Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study, Thiel CT, Lüdecke HJ, Strom TM, Calpena E, Wilkie AOM, Wieczorek D, Engel FB, Reis A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.01.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.01.014)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2018 Mar 1;102(3):468-479. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.01.014.
Epub  2018 Feb 8.

Mutations in the BAF-Complex Subunit DPF2 Are Associated with Coffin-Siris 
Syndrome.

Vasileiou G(1), Vergarajauregui S(2), Endele S(1), Popp B(1), Büttner C(1), 
Ekici AB(1), Gerard M(3), Bramswig NC(4), Albrecht B(4), Clayton-Smith J(5), 
Morton J(6), Tomkins S(7), Low K(7), Weber A(8), Wenzel M(9), Altmüller J(10), 
Li Y(11), Wollnik B(11), Hoganson G(12), Plona MR(12), Cho MT(13); Deciphering 
Developmental Disorders Study(14); Thiel CT(1), Lüdecke HJ(15), Strom TM(16), 
Calpena E(17), Wilkie AOM(17), Wieczorek D(15), Engel FB(2), Reis A(18).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Experimental Renal and Cardiovascular Research, Institute of Pathology, 
Department of Nephropathology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Génétique Clinique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Caen, Caen 14000, 
France.
(4)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany.
(5)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, 
Manchester M13 9WL, UK.
(6)West Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birmingham Health 
Partners, Birmingham Women's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham B15 2TG, 
UK.
(7)Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospitals of Bristol NHS Foundation 
Trust, Bristol BS2 8HW, UK.
(8)Merseyside and Cheshire Clinical Genetics Service, Liverpool Women's NHS 
Foundation Hospital Trust, Liverpool L8 7SS, UK.
(9)Genetikum Neu-Ulm, 89231 Neu-Ulm, Germany.
(10)Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.
(11)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, 37073 
Göttingen, Germany.
(12)Pediatric Genetics, University of Illinois Hospital, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
(13)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD 20877, USA.
(14)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK.
(15)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany; Institut für Humangenetik, 
Universitätsklinikum Düsseldorf, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, 40225 Düsseldorf, 
Germany.
(16)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg 85764, 
Germany.
(17)Clinical Genetics Group, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.
(18)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address: 
andre.reis@uk-erlangen.de.

Variants affecting the function of different subunits of the BAF 
chromatin-remodelling complex lead to various neurodevelopmental syndromes, 
including Coffin-Siris syndrome. Furthermore, variants in proteins containing 
PHD fingers, motifs recognizing specific histone tail modifications, have been 
associated with several neurological and developmental-delay disorders. Here, we 
report eight heterozygous de novo variants (one frameshift, two splice site, and 
five missense) in the gene encoding the BAF complex subunit double plant 
homeodomain finger 2 (DPF2). Affected individuals share common clinical features 
described in individuals with Coffin-Siris syndrome, including coarse facial 
features, global developmental delay, intellectual disability, speech 
impairment, and hypoplasia of fingernails and toenails. All variants occur 
within the highly conserved PHD1 and PHD2 motifs. Moreover, missense variants 
are situated close to zinc binding sites and are predicted to disrupt these 
sites. Pull-down assays of recombinant proteins and histone peptides revealed 
that a subset of the identified missense variants abolish or impaire DPF2 
binding to unmodified and modified H3 histone tails. These results suggest an 
impairment of PHD finger structural integrity and cohesion and most likely an 
aberrant recognition of histone modifications. Furthermore, the overexpression 
of these variants in HEK293 and COS7 cell lines was associated with the 
formation of nuclear aggregates and the recruitment of both wild-type DPF2 and 
BRG1 to these aggregates. Expression analysis of truncating variants found in 
the affected individuals indicated that the aberrant transcripts escape 
nonsense-mediated decay. Altogether, we provide compelling evidence that de novo 
variants in DPF2 cause Coffin-Siris syndrome and propose a dominant-negative 
mechanism of pathogenicity.

Copyright © 2018 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.01.014
PMCID: PMC5985265
PMID: 29429572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]