---
reference_id: "PMID:31633898"
title: Schmid Metaphyseal Chondrodysplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Richmond CM
- Savarirayan R
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schmid Metaphyseal Chondrodysplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Richmond CM, Savarirayan R

## Content

1. Schmid Metaphyseal Chondrodysplasia.

Richmond CM(1)(2), Savarirayan R(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2019 Oct 21 [updated 2024 May 9].

Author information:
(1)Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane & Women's Hospital, Herston, 
Queensland, Australia
(2)School of Medicine, Griffith University, Southport, Queensland, Australia
(3)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (SMCD) is 
characterized by progressive short stature that develops by age two years. The 
clinical and radiographic features are usually not present at birth, but 
manifest in early childhood with short limbs, genu varum, and waddling gait. 
Facial features and head size are normal. Radiographs show metaphyseal 
irregularities of the long bones (e.g., splaying, flaring, cupping); shortening 
of the tubular bones; widened growth plates; coxa vara; and anterior cupping, 
sclerosis, and splaying of the ribs. Mild hand involvement often includes 
shortening of the tubular bones and metaphyseal cupping of the metacarpals and 
proximal phalanges. Platyspondyly and vertebral end plate irregularities are 
less common. Hand and vertebral involvement can resolve with age. Early motor 
milestones may be delayed due to orthopedic complications. Intelligence is 
normal. Joint pain in the knees and hips is common and may limit physical 
activity. Adult height is typically more than 3.5 standard deviations below the 
mean, although a wide spectrum that overlaps normal height has been reported. 
There are no extraskeletal manifestations.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SMCD is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical and radiographic features and/or identification of a 
heterozygous pathogenic variant in COL10A1 by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management of orthopedic complications 
by an orthopedist, physiotherapist, occupational therapist, and pain specialist 
as indicated; joint-friendly exercise, weight management; mobility device as 
needed; corrective osteotomy by guided growth surgery or valgus osteotomy may be 
considered in late childhood / adolescence in those with progressive or 
symptomatic varus deformity, significant coxa vara, triangular fragment in the 
interior femoral neck, or poor or deteriorating function; exercise and support 
from nutritionist to maintain healthy weight; psychosocial support; 
environmental or occupational modifications as needed for short stature with 
recommendations from occupational therapist as needed. Surveillance: Annual 
growth assessment; clinical evaluation for orthopedic manifestations; 
psychosocial evaluation. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Obesity; physical 
activities that cause excessive joint strain.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SMCD is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
Approximately half of individuals diagnosed with SMCD have an affected parent 
(the heterozygous parent almost always exhibits features of the condition; 
however, considerable intrafamilial phenotypic variability is observed). 
Approximately half of individuals diagnosed with SMCD have the disorder as the 
result of a de novo COL10A1 pathogenic variant. Each child of an individual with 
SMCD has a 50% chance of inheriting the COL10A1 pathogenic variant. If the 
proband and the proband's reproductive partner are affected with different 
dominantly inherited skeletal dysplasias, genetic counseling becomes more 
complicated because of the risk of inheriting two dominantly inherited bone 
growth disorders. Once the COL10A1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an 
affected family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk for 
SMCD and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 31633898