---
reference_id: "PMID:40879304"
title: "GAA-FGF14 Expansions and CACNA1A Variants: Phenotypic Overlap and Diagnostic Implications."
authors:
- Indelicato E
- Fleszar Z
- Pellerin D
- Nachbauer W
- Zuchner S
- Traschütz A
- Amprosi M
- Schöls L
- Haack TB
- Brais B
- Boesch S
- Synofzik M
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/mds.30328
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Adult
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/genetics
- Phenotype
- Aged
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GAA-FGF14 Expansions and CACNA1A Variants: Phenotypic Overlap and Diagnostic Implications.
**Authors:** Indelicato E, Fleszar Z, Pellerin D, Nachbauer W, Zuchner S, Traschütz A, Amprosi M, Schöls L, Haack TB, Brais B, Boesch S, Synofzik M
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.30328](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.30328)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2025 Oct;40(10):2262-2268. doi: 10.1002/mds.30328. Epub 2025 Aug
19.

GAA-FGF14 Expansions and CACNA1A Variants: Phenotypic Overlap and Diagnostic
Implications.

Indelicato E(1), Fleszar Z(2)(3), Pellerin D(4)(5), Nachbauer W(1), Zuchner
S(5), Traschütz A(3)(6), Amprosi M(1), Schöls L(2)(3), Haack TB(7), Brais B(4),
Boesch S(1), Synofzik M(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Rare Movement Disorders Innsbruck, Department of Neurology,
Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain
Research, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics and John P.
Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA.
(6)Division Translational Genomics of Neurodegenerative Diseases,
Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research and Center of Neurology, University
of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(7)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: An intronic (GAA)•(TTC) repeat expansion in FGF14 was recently
identified as the cause of spinocerebellar ataxia 27B (SCA27B), a disorder
presenting with both chronic cerebellar ataxia and episodic symptoms. The
phenotype of SCA27B overlaps with that of CACNA1A spectrum disorders.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this work was to investigate the prevalence of
GAA-FGF14 repeat expansions in patients with ataxia so far considered to be
related to underlying CACNA1A variants.
METHODS: This is a cross-sectional multicenter study.
RESULTS: GAA-FGF14 testing showed pathogenic expansions (≥250 repeats) in 6/67
(9%) patients carrying CACNA1A variants. All patients with a pathogenic
GAA-FGF14 expansion had a disease onset >40 years and carried variants of
uncertain significance (VUSs) in CACNA1A. Genetic reevaluation led to the
reclassification of CACNA1A VUSs as likely benign in four of six patients, who
were ultimately diagnosed with SCA27B.
CONCLUSIONS: Late-onset ataxia cases previously considered as CACNA1A-related
disorder should be reevaluated and tested for SCA27B, particularly if related to
a VUS in CACNA1A. © 2025 The Author(s). Movement Disorders published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder
Society.

© 2025 The Author(s). Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on
behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.30328
PMCID: PMC12553994
PMID: 40879304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
