---
reference_id: "PMID:33875584"
title: Human retroviral antisense mRNAs are retained in the nuclei of infected cells for viral persistence.
authors:
- Ma G
- Yasunaga JI
- Shimura K
- Takemoto K
- Watanabe M
- Amano M
- Nakata H
- Liu B
- Zuo X
- Matsuoka M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2014783118
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human retroviral antisense mRNAs are retained in the nuclei of infected cells for viral persistence.
**Authors:** Ma G, Yasunaga JI, Shimura K, Takemoto K, Watanabe M, Amano M, Nakata H, Liu B, Zuo X, Matsuoka M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2014783118](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2014783118)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Apr 27;118(17):e2014783118. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2014783118.

Human retroviral antisense mRNAs are retained in the nuclei of infected cells 
for viral persistence.

Ma G(1)(2), Yasunaga JI(2)(3), Shimura K(2), Takemoto K(2), Watanabe M(3), Amano 
M(3), Nakata H(3), Liu B(4), Zuo X(4), Matsuoka M(5)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 
210009, China; gma@cpu.edu.cn mamatsu@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 
606-8507, Japan.
(3)Department of Hematology, Rheumatology and Infectious Diseases, Kumamoto 
University School of Medicine, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.
(4)Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 
210009, China.
(5)Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 
606-8507, Japan; gma@cpu.edu.cn mamatsu@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Human retroviruses, including human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) and 
HIV type 1 (HIV-1), encode an antisense gene in the negative strand of the 
provirus. Besides coding for proteins, the messenger RNAs (mRNAs) of retroviral 
antisense genes have also been found to regulate transcription directly. Thus, 
it has been proposed that retroviruses likely localize their antisense mRNAs to 
the nucleus in order to regulate nuclear events; however, this opposes the 
coding function of retroviral antisense mRNAs that requires a cytoplasmic 
localization for protein translation. Here, we provide direct evidence that 
retroviral antisense mRNAs are localized predominantly in the nuclei of infected 
cells. The retroviral 3' LTR induces inefficient polyadenylation and nuclear 
retention of antisense mRNA. We further reveal that retroviral antisense RNAs 
retained in the nucleus associate with chromatin and have transcriptional 
regulatory function. While HTLV-1 antisense mRNA is recruited to the promoter of 
C-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CCR4) and enhances transcription from it to 
support the proliferation of HTLV-1-infected cells, HIV-1 antisense mRNA is 
recruited to the viral LTR and inhibits sense mRNA expression to maintain the 
latency of HIV-1 infection. In summary, retroviral antisense mRNAs are retained 
in nucleus, act like long noncoding RNAs instead of mRNAs, and contribute to 
viral persistence.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2014783118
PMCID: PMC8092383
PMID: 33875584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.