---
reference_id: "PMID:20871226"
title: Diffuse abnormal layering of small intestinal smooth muscle is present in patients with FLNA mutations and x-linked intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
authors:
- Kapur RP
- Robertson SP
- Hannibal MC
- Finn LS
- Morgan T
- van Kogelenberg M
- Loren DJ
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181f0ae47
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Contractile Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Filamins
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Intestinal Pseudo-Obstruction/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Intestine, Large/pathology"
- "Intestine, Small/abnormalities, metabolism"
- Male
- "Microfilament Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mucous Membrane/abnormalities, metabolism"
- "Muscle, Smooth/abnormalities, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Myocytes, Smooth Muscle/metabolism, pathology"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diffuse abnormal layering of small intestinal smooth muscle is present in patients with FLNA mutations and x-linked intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
**Authors:** Kapur RP, Robertson SP, Hannibal MC, Finn LS, Morgan T, van Kogelenberg M, Loren DJ
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181f0ae47](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181f0ae47)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Oct;34(10):1528-43. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181f0ae47.

Diffuse abnormal layering of small intestinal smooth muscle is present in 
patients with FLNA mutations and x-linked intestinal pseudo-obstruction.

Kapur RP(1), Robertson SP, Hannibal MC, Finn LS, Morgan T, van Kogelenberg M, 
Loren DJ.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pathology, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of 
Washington, WA, USA. raj.kapur@seattlechildrens.org

X-linked intestinal pseudo-obstruction, a rare disorder caused by mutations in 
FLNA, the gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein filamin A, has been regarded as 
a hereditary enteric neuropathy largely on the basis of sparse and incomplete 
pathologic studies. Diffuse abnormal layering of small intestinal smooth muscle 
(DAL) is a rare malformation, which has only been described in 4 patients (all 
male, 3 in the same family) with intestinal pseudo-obstruction. We report DAL in 
5 male patients (2 families) with intestinal pseudo-obstruction and mutations in 
FLNA. Light microscopic, ultrastructural, and immunohistochemical studies showed 
abnormal lamination of the small intestinal muscularis propria with associated 
absent or severely reduced FLNA immunoreactivity. Intestinal samples from the 
oldest patient in the series, a teenager, showed multinucleate myocytes in small 
and large intestine, along the submucosal surface of the muscularis propria. As 
neither DAL nor the pattern of myocyte multinucleation observed in our patients 
have been described outside the context of X-linked intestinal 
pseudo-obstruction, these histopathologic features may be specific for this 
hereditary disorder and suggest an underlying myopathic basis for dysmotility in 
affected patients.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181f0ae47
PMID: 20871226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]