---
reference_id: "PMID:32388832"
title: Gadolinium enhancement on cranial MRI in multiple sclerosis is age dependent.
authors:
- Koch MW
- Mostert J
- Greenfield J
- Liu WQ
- Metz L
journal: J Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-020-09895-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gadolinium enhancement on cranial MRI in multiple sclerosis is age dependent.
**Authors:** Koch MW, Mostert J, Greenfield J, Liu WQ, Metz L
**Journal:** J Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-020-09895-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-020-09895-0)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2020 Sep;267(9):2619-2624. doi: 10.1007/s00415-020-09895-0. Epub
2020  May 9.

Gadolinium enhancement on cranial MRI in multiple sclerosis is age dependent.

Koch MW(1)(2), Mostert J(3), Greenfield J(4), Liu WQ(4), Metz L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada. 
mwkoch@ucalgary.ca.
(2)Department of Community Health Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Canada. mwkoch@ucalgary.ca.
(3)Department of Neurology, Rijnstate Hospital, Arnhem, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological, pathological and radiological studies suggest that 
inflammatory demyelination in MS is an age-dependent process, and that the 
formation of focal inflammatory demyelinating lesions decreases with age. 
Gadolinium-enhancing lesions are a biomarker of inflammatory disease activity in 
MS, but little is known about the relation of age and gadolinium enhancement on 
cranial MRI scans in people with MS. In this study, we investigated the 
association of age and other risk factors with gadolinium enhancement on cranial 
MRI in a retrospective cross-sectional clinical MS cohort.
METHODS: In a cohort including 1543 people with CIS and MS, we investigated the 
association of the risk factors age, sex, disease course, immunomodulatory drug 
(IMD) treatment, and disability with gadolinium enhancement on cranial MRI scans 
using a binary logistic regression model.
RESULTS: Age was the most important factor associated with gadolinium 
enhancement, with the odds of gadolinium enhancement decreasing with advancing 
age. Participants with CIS had lower odds of gadolinium enhancement (odds ratio 
of 0.42, 95% confidence interval of 0.24-0.72 compared to RRMS). Sex, disease 
course and IMD treatment were not significantly associated with gadolinium 
enhancement in our cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Our investigation shows that gadolinium enhancement is strongly 
associated with age. Since gadolinium enhancement is a marker of inflammatory 
disease activity, our findings suggest that inflammatory disease activity 
declines with age, and that IMD treatment may be more beneficial in younger and 
less useful in older people with MS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-020-09895-0
PMID: 32388832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]