---
reference_id: "PMID:3266362"
title: What is seronegative rheumatoid arthritis?
authors:
- Husby G
- Gran JT
journal: Scand J Rheumatol Suppl
year: '1988'
doi: 10.3109/03009748809096776
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What is seronegative rheumatoid arthritis?
**Authors:** Husby G, Gran JT
**Journal:** Scand J Rheumatol Suppl (1988)
**DOI:** [10.3109/03009748809096776](https://doi.org/10.3109/03009748809096776)

## Content

1. Scand J Rheumatol Suppl. 1988;75:269-71. doi: 10.3109/03009748809096776.

What is seronegative rheumatoid arthritis?

Husby G(1), Gran JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital of Tromsø, Norway.

Between classical, erosive, seropositive rheumatoid arthritis (RA) on one hand, 
and typical, axial ankylosing spondylitis (AS) on the other, there is a variety 
of seronegative polyarthritides, which are often difficult to diagnose, classify 
and also to distinguish from each other. During our studies of HLA antigens and 
their associations with rheumatic diseases, and particularly that of DR4 with 
RA, we became increasingly concerned with the problem of defining properly 
patients with seronegative RA. Both the statement of seronegativity with regard 
to rheumatoid factors (RF), the diagnosis of RA, and particularly the exclusion 
of cases of seronegative arthritis other than RA were difficult. We felt that 
such problems might explain the conflicting opinions as to the association 
between RF and HLA-DR4 in patients with RA. As a basis for discussing these 
problems, a set of criteria for RF seronegative RA are presented.

DOI: 10.3109/03009748809096776
PMID: 3266362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]