---
reference_id: "PMID:26185144"
title: "Mutations in COQ4, an essential component of coenzyme Q biosynthesis, cause lethal neonatal mitochondrial encephalomyopathy."
authors:
- Chung WK
- Martin K
- Jalas C
- Braddock SR
- Juusola J
- Monaghan KG
- Warner B
- Franks S
- Yudkoff M
- Lulis L
- Rhodes RH
- Prasad V
- Torti E
- Cho MT
- Shinawi M
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103140
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Jews
- "Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies/genetics, mortality, physiopathology"
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pregnancy
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Ubiquinone/biosynthesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in COQ4, an essential component of coenzyme Q biosynthesis, cause lethal neonatal mitochondrial encephalomyopathy.
**Authors:** Chung WK, Martin K, Jalas C, Braddock SR, Juusola J, Monaghan KG, Warner B, Franks S, Yudkoff M, Lulis L, Rhodes RH, Prasad V, Torti E, Cho MT, Shinawi M
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103140](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103140)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2015 Sep;52(9):627-35. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103140. Epub 
2015 Jul 16.

Mutations in COQ4, an essential component of coenzyme Q biosynthesis, cause 
lethal neonatal mitochondrial encephalomyopathy.

Chung WK(1), Martin K(2), Jalas C(3), Braddock SR(2), Juusola J(4), Monaghan 
KG(4), Warner B(5), Franks S(6), Yudkoff M(7), Lulis L(7), Rhodes RH(8), Prasad 
V(9), Torti E(2), Cho MT(4), Shinawi M(10).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, New York, USA.
(2)Genetics Division, Department of Pediatrics, Saint Louis University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Bonei Olam, Center for Rare Jewish Genetic Disorders, Brooklyn, New York, 
USA.
(4)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(6)Departments of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(7)Division of Metabolism, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(8)Department of Pathology, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers 
University, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(10)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

BACKGROUND: The identification of the molecular basis of mitochondrial disorders 
continues to be challenging and expensive. The increasing usage of 
next-generation sequencing is facilitating the discovery of the genetic 
aetiology of heterogeneous phenotypes associated with these conditions. Coenzyme 
Q(10) (CoQ(10)) is an essential cofactor for mitochondrial respiratory chain 
complexes and other biochemical pathways. Mutations in genes involved in CoQ(10) 
biosynthesis cause primary CoQ(10) deficiency syndromes that can be treated with 
oral supplementation of ubiquinone.
METHODS: We used whole exome sequencing to evaluate six probands from four 
unrelated families with clinical findings suggestive of a mitochondrial 
disorder. Clinical data were obtained by chart review, parental interviews, 
direct patient assessment and biochemical and pathological evaluation.
RESULTS: We identified five recessive missense mutations in COQ4 segregating 
with disease in all four families. One mutation was found in a homozygous state 
in two unrelated Ashkenazi Jewish probands. All patients were female, and 
presented on the first day of life, and died in the neonatal period or early 
infancy. Clinical findings included hypotonia (6/6), encephalopathy with EEG 
abnormalities (4/4), neonatal seizures (3/6), cerebellar atrophy (4/5), 
cardiomyopathy (5/6) and lactic acidosis (4/6). Autopsy findings in two patients 
revealed neuron loss and reactive astrocytosis or cerebellar and brainstem 
hypoplasia and microdysgenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in COQ4 cause an autosomal recessive lethal neonatal 
mitochondrial encephalomyopathy associated with a founder mutation in the 
Ashkenazi Jewish population. The early mortality in our cohort suggests that 
COQ4 is an essential component of the multisubunit complex required for CoQ(10) 
biosynthesis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103140
PMID: 26185144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]