---
reference_id: "PMID:37563454"
title: "Valvular heart disease and cardiomyopathy: reappraisal of their interplay."
authors:
- Ajmone Marsan N
- Graziani F
- Meucci MC
- Wu HW
- Lillo R
- Bax JJ
- Burzotta F
- Massetti M
- Jukema JW
- Crea F
journal: Nat Rev Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41569-023-00911-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Valvular heart disease and cardiomyopathy: reappraisal of their interplay.
**Authors:** Ajmone Marsan N, Graziani F, Meucci MC, Wu HW, Lillo R, Bax JJ, Burzotta F, Massetti M, Jukema JW, Crea F
**Journal:** Nat Rev Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41569-023-00911-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41569-023-00911-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2024 Jan;21(1):37-50. doi: 10.1038/s41569-023-00911-0. Epub 
2023 Aug 10.

Valvular heart disease and cardiomyopathy: reappraisal of their interplay.

Ajmone Marsan N(#)(1), Graziani F(#)(2), Meucci MC(3)(2), Wu HW(3), Lillo 
R(2)(4), Bax JJ(3)(5), Burzotta F(2)(4), Massetti M(2)(4), Jukema JW(3)(6), Crea 
F(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands. n.ajmone@lumc.nl.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Science, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. 
Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(5)Heart Center, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, Turku, 
Finland.
(6)Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

Cardiomyopathies and valvular heart diseases are typically considered distinct 
diagnostic categories with dedicated guidelines for their management. However, 
the interplay between these conditions is increasingly being recognized and they 
frequently coexist, as in the paradigmatic examples of dilated cardiomyopathy 
and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which are often complicated by the occurrence 
of mitral regurgitation. Moreover, cardiomyopathies and valvular heart diseases 
can have a shared aetiology because several genetic or acquired diseases can 
affect both the cardiac valves and the myocardium. In addition, the association 
between cardiomyopathies and valvular heart diseases has important prognostic 
and therapeutic implications. Therefore, a better understanding of their shared 
pathophysiological mechanisms, as well as of the prevalence and predisposing 
factors to their association, might lead to a different approach in the risk 
stratification and management of these diseases. In this Review, we discuss the 
different scenarios in which valvular heart diseases and cardiomyopathies 
coexist, highlighting the need for an improved classification and clustering of 
these diseases with potential repercussions in the clinical management and, 
particularly, personalized therapeutic approaches.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41569-023-00911-0
PMID: 37563454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]