---
reference_id: "PMID:36765380"
title: The genetic basis of multiple system atrophy.
authors:
- Tseng FS
- Foo JQX
- Mai AS
- Tan EK
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-023-03905-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetic basis of multiple system atrophy.
**Authors:** Tseng FS, Foo JQX, Mai AS, Tan EK
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-023-03905-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-023-03905-1)

## Content

Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a heterogenous, uniformly fatal neurodegenerative ɑ-synucleinopathy. Patients present with varying degrees of dysautonomia, parkinsonism, cerebellar dysfunction, and corticospinal degeneration. The underlying pathophysiology is postulated to arise from aberrant ɑ-synuclein deposition, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress and neuroinflammation. Although MSA is regarded as a primarily sporadic disease, there is a possible genetic component that is poorly understood. This review summarizes current literature on genetic risk factors and potential pathogenic genes and loci linked to both sporadic and familial MSA, and underlines the biological mechanisms that support the role of genetics in MSA. We discuss a broad range of genes that have been associated with MSA including genes related to Parkinson's disease (PD), oxidative stress, inflammation, and tandem gene repeat expansions, among several others. Furthermore, we highlight various genetic polymorphisms that modulate MSA risk, including complex gene-gene and gene-environment interactions, which influence the disease phenotype and have clinical significance in both presentation and prognosis. Deciphering the exact mechanism of how MSA can result from genetic aberrations in both experimental and clinical models will facilitate the identification of novel pathophysiologic clues, and pave the way for translational research into the development of disease-modifying therapeutic targets.

PMID: 36765380
