---
reference_id: "PMID:1483666"
title: Splenic hyperkinetic state and splenic artery aneurysm in portal hypertension.
authors:
- Ohta M
- Hashizume M
- Tanoue K
- Kitano S
- Sugimachi K
- Yasumori K
journal: Hepatogastroenterology
year: '1992'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aneurysm/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, etiology, physiopathology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Portal/complications, diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Radiography
- "Splenic Artery/diagnostic imaging, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Splenic hyperkinetic state and splenic artery aneurysm in portal hypertension.
**Authors:** Ohta M, Hashizume M, Tanoue K, Kitano S, Sugimachi K, Yasumori K
**Journal:** Hepatogastroenterology (1992)

## Content

1. Hepatogastroenterology. 1992 Dec;39(6):529-32.

Splenic hyperkinetic state and splenic artery aneurysm in portal hypertension.

Ohta M(1), Hashizume M, Tanoue K, Kitano S, Sugimachi K, Yasumori K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery II, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 
Japan.

Forty-eight out of six hundred and thirty patients with portal hypertension 
undergoing a celiac angiography series were diagnosed as cases of splenic artery 
aneurysm during the period 1977-1988. The case-control study of patients with 
portal hypertension with splenic artery aneurysms and those without was designed 
to characterize the angiological features. The splenic arterial flow was 
assessed by measuring the radii of the splenic arteries on celiac arteriograms. 
In the portal hypertensive patients with splenic artery aneurysms, the splenic 
artery was larger (p < 0.05) and the splenic arterial flow greater (p < 0.05), 
and these patients were in a more hyperkinetic state, than were those with no 
splenic artery aneurysm. The study suggests that splenic artery aneurysms in 
cases of portal hypertension may be the consequence of a hyperkinetic state in 
the spleen.

PMID: 1483666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]