---
reference_id: "PMID:24239741"
title: Usher protein functions in hair cells and photoreceptors.
authors:
- Cosgrove D
- Zallocchi M
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2013.11.001
keywords:
- Animals
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Hair Cells, Auditory/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Usher Syndromes/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Usher protein functions in hair cells and photoreceptors.
**Authors:** Cosgrove D, Zallocchi M
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2013.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2013.11.001)

## Content

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Jan;46:80-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2013.11.001. 
Epub 2013 Nov 12.

Usher protein functions in hair cells and photoreceptors.

Cosgrove D(1), Zallocchi M(2).

Author information:
(1)Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, NE, USA. Electronic address: 
Dominic.cosgrove@boystown.org.
(2)Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, NE, USA.

The 10 different genes associated with the deaf/blind disorder, Usher syndrome, 
encode a number of structurally and functionally distinct proteins, most 
expressed as multiple isoforms/protein variants. Functional characterization of 
these proteins suggests a role in stereocilia development in cochlear hair 
cells, likely owing to adhesive interactions in hair bundles. In mature hair 
cells, homodimers of the Usher cadherins, cadherin 23 and protocadherin 15, 
interact to form a structural fiber, the tip link, and the linkages that anchor 
the taller stereocilia's actin cytoskeleton core to the shorter adjacent 
stereocilia and the elusive mechanotransduction channels, explaining the 
deafness phenotype when these molecular interactions are perturbed. The 
conundrum is that photoreceptors lack a synonymous mechanotransduction 
apparatus, and so a common theory for Usher protein function in the two 
neurosensory cell types affected in Usher syndrome is lacking. Recent evidence 
linking photoreceptor cell dysfunction in the shaker 1 mouse model for Usher 
syndrome to light-induced protein translocation defects, combined with 
localization of an Usher protein interactome at the periciliary region of the 
photoreceptors suggests Usher proteins might regulate protein trafficking 
between the inner and outer segments of photoreceptors. A distinct Usher protein 
complex is trafficked to the ribbon synapses of hair cells, and synaptic defects 
have been reported in Usher mutants in both hair cells and photoreceptors. This 
review aims to clarify what is known about Usher protein function at the 
synaptic and apical poles of hair cells and photoreceptors and the prospects for 
identifying a unifying pathobiological mechanism to explain deaf/blindness in 
Usher syndrome.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2013.11.001
PMCID: PMC3971483
PMID: 24239741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]