---
reference_id: "PMID:31536183"
title: Mucopolysaccharidosis Type III.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Wagner VF
- Northrup H
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucopolysaccharidosis Type III.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Wagner VF, Northrup H

## Content

1. Mucopolysaccharidosis Type III.

Wagner VF(1), Northrup H(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2019 Sep 19.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics Division of Medical Genetics McGovern Medical School
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston Houston, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Mucopolysaccharidosis type III (MPS III) is a
multisystem lysosomal storage disease characterized by progressive central
nervous system degeneration manifest as severe intellectual disability (ID),
developmental regression, and other neurologic manifestations including autism
spectrum disorder (ASD), behavioral problems, and sleep disturbances. Disease
onset is typically before age ten years. Disease course may be rapidly or slowly
progressive; some individuals with an extremely attenuated disease course
present in mid-to-late adulthood with early-onset dementia with or without a
history of ID. Systemic manifestations can include musculoskeletal problems
(joint stiffness, contractures, scoliosis, and hip dysplasia), hearing loss,
respiratory tract and sinopulmonary infections, and cardiac disease (valvular
thickening, defects in the cardiac conduction system). Neurologic decline is
seen in all affected individuals; however, clinical severity varies within and
among the four MPS III subtypes (defined by the enzyme involved) and even among
members of the same family. Death usually occurs in the second or third decade
of life secondary to neurologic regression or respiratory tract infections.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MPS III is established in a proband with
suggestive clinical and laboratory findings in whom either biallelic pathogenic
variants in one of four genes (GNS, HGSNAT, NAGLU, and SGSH) or deficiency of
the respective lysosomal enzyme has been identified.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Supportive therapies for
neurodevelopmental delays, hearing loss, and visual impairment; medications
(rather than behavioral therapy) for psychiatric/behavioral issues; physical
therapy and/or orthopedic management of musculoskeletal manifestations; and
management as prescribed by consulting specialists for seizures, cardiac
involvement, sleep disorders, feeding difficulties. Surveillance: Routine
monitoring of: developmental capabilities and educational needs, destructive or
disruptive behaviors; musculoskeletal involvement; hearing; cardiac involvement.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Procedures requiring anesthesia in centers
ill-equipped or inexperienced in caring for patients with complex
airway-management issues; hip surgery (due to high risk of osteonecrosis of the
femoral head); environments not adapted to minimize risk from unpredictable
behaviors. Therapies under investigation: Despite ongoing research for a variety
of therapeutic options, no treatments are currently clinically available for
treatment of the primary manifestations of MPS III.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MPS III is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of
being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the MPS III-causing pathogenic variants
have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk
relatives, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 31536183
