---
reference_id: "PMID:24707174"
title: The role of microparticles in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Takahashi T
- Kubo H
journal: Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.2147/COPD.S38931
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of microparticles in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Takahashi T, Kubo H
**Journal:** Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.2147/COPD.S38931](https://doi.org/10.2147/COPD.S38931)

## Content

1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Mar 27;9:303-14. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S38931.  eCollection 2014.

The role of microparticles in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Takahashi T(1), Kubo H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Preventive Medicine for Infectious Disease, Tohoku 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan ; Cellular and molecular 
lung biology research units, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal 
(IRCM), Montreal, Quebec, Canada ; Department of Anesthesiology, Tohoku 
University Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Advanced Preventive Medicine for Infectious Disease, Tohoku 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

Accumulating evidence suggests that cell injury in lung tissues is closely 
connected to disease progression in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD). Microparticles (MPs) are shed membrane vesicles that are released from 
platelets, leukocytes, red blood cells, and endothelial cells when these cells 
are activated or undergo apoptosis under inflammatory conditions. Based on 
increasing evidence that endothelial injury in the pulmonary capillary 
vasculature leads to lung destruction, and because cardiovascular diseases are 
the main cause of death among individuals with COPD, endothelial MPs (EMPs) are 
now receiving attention as potential biomarkers for COPD. There are eight types 
of EMPs which are defined by the presence of different endothelial markers on 
the cell membrane: vascular endothelial-cadherin; platelet endothelial cell 
adhesion molecule; melanoma cell adhesion molecule; E-selectin; CD51; CD105; von 
Willebrand factor; and CD143 EMPs. Vascular endothelial-cadherin, platelet 
endothelial cell adhesion molecule, and E-selectin EMPs are increased in 
patients with stable COPD and are further increased in patients with exacerbated 
COPD compared to non-COPD patients. In addition, the levels of these three EMPs 
in patients with stable COPD are significantly correlated with lung destruction 
and airflow limitation. These results indicate that endothelial injury is 
closely connected to the pathophysiology of COPD. Interestingly, the variations 
in the levels of the eight EMP subtypes were not identical with changes in 
patient condition. Although the clinical significance of the differences in 
these eight EMP subtypes remains unclear, evaluating the expression pattern of 
endothelial antigens on circulating MPs might predict the presence and degree of 
endothelial injury in COPD patients. In addition, circulating MPs are proposed 
to have several physiological functions in vivo, such as intercellular 
crosstalk; the increase in EMPs in COPD seems to play a role in the 
pathophysiology of this disease.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S38931
PMCID: PMC3971913
PMID: 24707174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]