---
reference_id: "PMID:32531978"
title: Tracking of Infused Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Injured Pulmonary Tissue in Atm-Deficient Mice.
authors:
- Baer PC
- Sann J
- Duecker RP
- Ullrich E
- Geiger H
- Bader P
- Zielen S
- Schubert R
journal: Cells
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/cells9061444
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/complications, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Lung Diseases/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Lung Injury/etiology, physiopathology"
- Mesenchymal Stem Cells/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tracking of Infused Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Injured Pulmonary Tissue in Atm-Deficient Mice.
**Authors:** Baer PC, Sann J, Duecker RP, Ullrich E, Geiger H, Bader P, Zielen S, Schubert R
**Journal:** Cells (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells9061444](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells9061444)

## Content

1. Cells. 2020 Jun 10;9(6):1444. doi: 10.3390/cells9061444.

Tracking of Infused Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Injured Pulmonary Tissue in
Atm-Deficient Mice.

Baer PC(1), Sann J(1), Duecker RP(2), Ullrich E(3)(4)(5), Geiger H(1), Bader
P(3), Zielen S(2), Schubert R(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University
Hospital, Goethe-University, 60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Division for Allergy, Pneumology and Cystic Fibrosis, Department for Children
and Adolescents, University Hospital, Goethe-University, 60596 Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.
(3)Division of Pediatric Stem Cell Transplantation and Immunology, Department
for Children and Adolescents Medicine, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe
University, 60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(4)Experimental Immunology, Department for Children and Adolescents Medicine,
University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University, 60596 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.
(5)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) partner site Frankfurt/Mainz, 60596 Frankfurt
am Main, Germany.

Pulmonary failure is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in the human
chromosomal instability syndrome Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). Major phenotypes
include recurrent respiratory tract infections and bronchiectasis, aspiration,
respiratory muscle abnormalities, interstitial lung disease, and pulmonary
fibrosis. At present, no effective pulmonary therapy for A-T exists. Cell
therapy using adipose-derived mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (ASCs) might be a
promising approach for tissue regeneration. The aim of the present project was
to investigate whether ASCs migrate into the injured lung parenchyma of
Atm-deficient mice as an indication of incipient tissue damage during A-T.
Therefore, ASCs isolated from luciferase transgenic mice (mASCs) were
intravenously transplanted into Atm-deficient and wild-type mice. Retention
kinetics of the cells were monitored using in vivo bioluminescence imaging (BLI)
and completed by subsequent verification using quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (qRT-PCR). The in vivo imaging and the qPCR results demonstrated
migration accompanied by a significantly longer retention time of transplanted
mASCs in the lung parenchyma of Atm-deficient mice compared to wild type mice.
In conclusion, our study suggests incipient damage in the lung parenchyma of
Atm-deficient mice. In addition, our data further demonstrate that a combination
of luciferase-based PCR together with BLI is a pivotal tool for tracking mASCs
after transplantation in models of inflammatory lung diseases such as A-T.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9061444
PMCID: PMC7349119
PMID: 32531978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
