---
reference_id: "PMID:23251221"
title: Interferon regulatory factor 5 in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Cham CM
- Ko K
- Niewold TB
journal: Clin Dev Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1155/2012/780436
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interferon regulatory factor 5 in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Cham CM, Ko K, Niewold TB
**Journal:** Clin Dev Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2012/780436](https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/780436)

## Content

1. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012;2012:780436. doi: 10.1155/2012/780436. Epub 2012 Nov 1.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Cham CM(1), Ko K, Niewold TB.

Author information:
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Gwen Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research, 
The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease characterized by 
multiple genetic risk factors, high levels of interferon alpha (IFN-α), and the 
production of autoantibodies against components of the cell nucleus. Interferon 
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is a transcription factor which induces the 
transcription of IFN-α and other cytokines, and genetic variants of IRF5 have 
been strongly linked to SLE pathogenesis. IRF5 functions downstream of Toll-like 
receptors and other microbial pattern-recognition receptors, and immune 
complexes made up of SLE-associated autoantibodies seem to function as a chronic 
endogenous stimulus to this pathway. In this paper, we discuss the physiologic 
role of IRF5 in immune defense and the ways in which IRF5 variants may 
contribute to the pathogenesis of human SLE. Recent data regarding the role of 
IRF5 in both serologic autoimmunity and the overproduction of IFN-α in human SLE 
are summarized. These data support a model in which SLE-risk variants of IRF5 
participate in a "feed-forward" mechanism, predisposing to SLE-associated 
autoantibody formation, and subsequently facilitating IFN-α production 
downstream of Toll-like receptors stimulated by immune complexes composed of 
these autoantibodies.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/780436
PMCID: PMC3509422
PMID: 23251221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]