---
reference_id: "PMID:40225406"
title: The precise molecular diagnosis of novel GLDC compound heterozygous variants highlights the benefits for a Chinese family with nonketotic hyperglycinemia.
authors:
- Yuan F
- Song X
- Yin R
- Lan X
- Sun J
- Tang X
- Xu W
- Hu S
- Xiao M
- Zhang H
- Weng W
- Zhang Y
- Wu S
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101209
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The precise molecular diagnosis of novel GLDC compound heterozygous variants highlights the benefits for a Chinese family with nonketotic hyperglycinemia.
**Authors:** Yuan F, Song X, Yin R, Lan X, Sun J, Tang X, Xu W, Hu S, Xiao M, Zhang H, Weng W, Zhang Y, Wu S
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101209](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101209)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2025 Mar 25;43:101209. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101209. 
eCollection 2025 Jun.

The precise molecular diagnosis of novel GLDC compound heterozygous variants 
highlights the benefits for a Chinese family with nonketotic hyperglycinemia.

Yuan F(1), Song X(2)(3)(4), Yin R(1), Lan X(2)(3)(4), Sun J(5), Tang X(2)(3)(4), 
Xu W(2)(3)(4), Hu S(2)(3)(4), Xiao M(2)(3)(4), Zhang H(2)(3)(4), Weng 
W(2)(3)(4), Zhang Y(1), Wu S(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Children's Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Children's Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Institute of Pediatric Infection, Immunity, and Critical Care Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Faculty of Medical Laboratory Science, College of Health Science and 
Technology, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Neonatology, Shanghai Children's Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Glycine encephalopathy, also known as nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NHK), is a 
rare inherited disease caused by an inborn error of glycine metabolism, 
resulting in elevated glycine concentration in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid. 
Clinical manifestations mainly include varying degrees of hypotonia, apneic 
episodes, epilepsy, psychomotor delay during the neonatal period or early 
infancy. Biallelic variants in GLDC account for up to 80 % of classical NKH 
cases. Here we describe the clinical, biochemical, and molecular characteristics 
of two Chinese siblings with severe NHK. Their phenotypes included severe 
symptoms in neonatal period, seizures, and psychomotor delay. The siblings carry 
novel compound heterozygous variants in GLDC, c.1740C > G (p.His580Gln) and 
c.1023G > A (p.Val341=). Based on previous literature reports and pathogenicity 
prediction, the c.1740C > G (p.His580Gln) variant is classified as likely 
pathogenic. By minigene analysis, we confirmed the synonymous mutation 
c.1023G > A (p.Val341=) led to abnormal splicing, with 38 bp missing in exon 7 
in the GLDC gene. These findings highlight the pathogenic nature of a novel 
synonymous mutation c.1023G > A, expand the genetic spectrum of GLDC and provide 
crucial guidance for both the patient's clinical management and family's 
reproductive genetic counseling.

© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101209
PMCID: PMC11986487
PMID: 40225406

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.