---
reference_id: "PMID:29235676"
title: "Diagnostic criteria, severity classification and guidelines of eosinophilic fasciitis."
authors:
- Jinnin M
- Yamamoto T
- Asano Y
- Ishikawa O
- Sato S
- Takehara K
- Hasegawa M
- Fujimoto M
- Ihn H
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.14160
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Biopsy
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Eosinophilia/blood, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- "Fasciitis/blood, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Phototherapy/methods
- "Scleroderma, Systemic/diagnosis"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic criteria, severity classification and guidelines of eosinophilic fasciitis.
**Authors:** Jinnin M, Yamamoto T, Asano Y, Ishikawa O, Sato S, Takehara K, Hasegawa M, Fujimoto M, Ihn H
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.14160](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.14160)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2018 Aug;45(8):881-890. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.14160. Epub 2017
Dec  13.

Diagnostic criteria, severity classification and guidelines of eosinophilic 
fasciitis.

Jinnin M(1), Yamamoto T(2), Asano Y(3), Ishikawa O(4), Sato S(3), Takehara K(5), 
Hasegawa M(6), Fujimoto M(7), Ihn H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Plastic Surgery, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University, 
Fukushima, Japan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Gunma University, 
Gunma, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Pathology of Skin, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of 
Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Dermatology Division, Division of Medicine, Faculty of Medical 
Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Japan.

We established diagnostic criteria and severity classification of eosinophilic 
fasciitis because there is no established diagnostic criteria or widely accepted 
severity classification of the disease. Also, there has been no clinical 
guideline for eosinophilic fasciitis, so we established its clinical guideline 
ahead of all over the world. In particular, the clinical guideline was 
established by clinical questions based on evidence-based medicine according to 
the New Minds Clinical Practice Guideline Creation Manual (version 1.0). We 
aimed to make the guideline easy to use and reliable based on the newest 
evidence, and to present guidance as specific as possible for various clinical 
problems in treatment of eosinophilic fasciitis.

© 2017 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.14160
PMID: 29235676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]