---
reference_id: "PMID:29092859"
title: "Urinary bladder hypertrophy characteristic of male ROMK Bartter's mice does not occur in female mice."
authors:
- Kim JM
- Xu S
- Guo X
- Hu H
- Dong K
- Wang T
journal: Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00315.2017
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bartter Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Hydronephrosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Hypertrophy
- Male
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Muscle, Smooth/metabolism, pathology"
- Organ Size
- Phenotype
- "Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Sex Factors
- "Ureter/metabolism, pathology"
- "Urethra/metabolism, pathology"
- "Urinary Bladder/metabolism, pathology"
- "Urothelium/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urinary bladder hypertrophy characteristic of male ROMK Bartter's mice does not occur in female mice.
**Authors:** Kim JM, Xu S, Guo X, Hu H, Dong K, Wang T
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpregu.00315.2017](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00315.2017)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2018 Mar 1;314(3):R334-R341. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00315.2017. Epub 2017 Nov 1.

Urinary bladder hypertrophy characteristic of male ROMK Bartter's mice does not
occur in female mice.

Kim JM(1), Xu S(1), Guo X(1), Hu H(1), Dong K(1), Wang T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University, School of
Medicine , New Haven, Connecticut.

The renal outer medullary potassium channel (ROMK; Kir1.1) plays an important
role in Na+ and K+ homeostasis. ROMK knockout (KO) mice show a similar phenotype
to Bartter's syndrome of salt wasting and dehydration due to reduced
Na-2Cl-K-cotransporter activity but not in ROMK1 KO mice. ROMK KO mice also show
hydronephrosis; however, the mechanism of this phenotype has not been
understood. We have previously demonstrated a gender-sex difference in
hydronephrosis and PGE2 production in ROMK KO mice. In this study we compared
the gender-sex difference in bladder hypertrophy and hydronephrosis in ROMK KO
mice. The bladder weight, bladder capacity, and the thickness of urothelium in
male ROMK KO showed average increased two to approximately fourfold greater than
wild-type (WT) mice, but there was no difference in either female or ROMK1 KO
mice. The thickness of the urothelium was 648.8 ± 33.2 µm vs. 302.7 ± 16.5 µm (
P < 0.001) and the detrusor muscle 1,940.7 ± 98.9 µm vs. 1,308.2 ± 102.1 µm ( P
= 0.013), respectively, in 12-mo male ROMK KO mice compared with the same age WT
mice. Western blotting detected ROMK expression at 45~48 kDa, and both ROMK1 and
ROMK2 mRNA were detected by quantitative PCR in the bladder. Immunofluorescence
staining showed ROMK stained in the bladder, ureter, and urethra in WT but not
in KO. In addition, there was a correlation between the severity of
hydronephrosis and the bladder weight in male but not in female ROMK KO mice. In
conclusion, ROMK expressed in the urinary tract at both protein and mRNA levels;
significant enlargement and hypertrophy of the bladder may contribute to
hydronephrosis in male ROMK KO mice.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.00315.2017
PMCID: PMC5899254
PMID: 29092859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
