---
reference_id: "PMID:16987083"
title: "Inflammatory bowel disease genetics: Nod2."
authors:
- Cho JH
- Abraham C
journal: Annu Rev Med
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.58.061705.145024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammatory bowel disease genetics: Nod2.
**Authors:** Cho JH, Abraham C
**Journal:** Annu Rev Med (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.med.58.061705.145024](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.med.58.061705.145024)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Med. 2007;58:401-16. doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.58.061705.145024.

Inflammatory bowel disease genetics: Nod2.

Cho JH(1), Abraham C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA. 
judy.cho@yale.edu

The inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) are comprised of two major subphenotypes, 
Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). A significant role for genetic 
factors in IBD was established from epidemiologic studies and, more recently, 
the identification of well-established disease associations, notably the 
association of Nod2 (CARD15) polymorphisms with CD. The mapping to CD of Nod2 
variants that alter protein function represents one of the earliest, most 
well-established, associations in complex genetic disorders. Since the initial 
discovery, genotype-phenotype correlations, definition of Nod2 expression and 
signaling pathways, association studies in other, related disorders, and 
features of Nod2 deficiency in murine models have been reported. Taken together, 
the Nod2 association to CD provides an illustrative model of the role of single 
gene variants in disease pathogenesis for common, complex multigenic disorders. 
Here we review general aspects of IBD genetics with particular focus on the role 
of Nod2 in CD.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.med.58.061705.145024
PMID: 16987083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]