---
reference_id: "PMID:30725718"
title: Campylobacter Infection.
authors:
- Fischer GH
- Hashmi MF
- Paterek E
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Campylobacter Infection.
**Authors:** Fischer GH, Hashmi MF, Paterek E

## Content

1. Campylobacter Infection.

Fischer GH(1), Hashmi MF(2), Paterek E(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2024 Jan 10.

Author information:
(1)Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine at Seton Hill
(2)National Health Service
(3)Jefferson Northeast

Campylobacter species represent one of the most common causes of bacterial 
diarrheal illness worldwide. According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), 
there are about 1.3 million cases of Campylobacter infection each year in the 
United States alone. This leads to an economic cost between $1.3 to $6.8 billion 
annually in the United States.  Campylobacter infection is associated with 
consuming raw milk, undercooked poultry, and contaminated water. Patients 
typically experience a self-limited diarrheal illness lasting 5 to 7 days. 
Immunocompromised and elderly patients are at the highest risk for morbidity, 
mortality, and prolonged illness. There has been a dramatic increase in cases in 
developed and developing regions of the world despite having effective treatment 
and eradication modalities in animal reservoirs. The major Campylobacter species 
considered human pathogens include C. jejuni, C. coli, C. fetus, and C. lari. 
These species and others can cause bacteremia and systemic illness. C. 
jejuni infection causes serious bacteremic conditions in patients with acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Most other reported cases of 
bacteremia are from C. fetus infection. Campylobacter hyointestinalis, with 
biochemical characteristics similar to those of C. fetus, causes occasional 
bacteremia in immunocompromised patients. Campylobacter upsaliensis can cause 
diarrhea or bacteremia.  Campylobacter organisms are also a significant cause of 
traveler's diarrhea, particularly in Thailand and other areas of Southeast Asia. 
In an observational study conducted on American military personnel deployed in 
Thailand, over half of those with diarrhea were observed to be infected 
with Campylobacter species. Healthy seagulls harbor C. lari, which is reported 
to cause mild recurrent diarrhea in children.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30725718

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Greg Fischer declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Muhammad Hashmi 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Elizabeth Paterek declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.