---
reference_id: "PMID:15120218"
title: "Association between Cowden syndrome and Lhermitte-Duclos disease: report of two cases and review of the literature."
authors:
- Derrey S
- Proust F
- Debono B
- Langlois O
- Layet A
- Layet V
- Longy M
- Fréger P
- Laquerrière A
journal: Surg Neurol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/S0090-3019(03)00576-7
keywords:
- Adult
- "Cerebellar Neoplasms/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- "Ganglioneuroma/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Gene Expression/genetics
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/complications, pathology"
- Humans
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between Cowden syndrome and Lhermitte-Duclos disease: report of two cases and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Derrey S, Proust F, Debono B, Langlois O, Layet A, Layet V, Longy M, Fréger P, Laquerrière A
**Journal:** Surg Neurol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0090-3019(03)00576-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0090-3019(03)00576-7)

## Content

1. Surg Neurol. 2004 May;61(5):447-54; discussion 454. doi: 
10.1016/S0090-3019(03)00576-7.

Association between Cowden syndrome and Lhermitte-Duclos disease: report of two 
cases and review of the literature.

Derrey S(1), Proust F, Debono B, Langlois O, Layet A, Layet V, Longy M, Fréger 
P, Laquerrière A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen Cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: The authors describe 2 cases of dysplasic gangliocytoma of the 
cerebellum or Lhermitte-Duclos disease revealing Cowden disease or multiple 
hamartoma neoplasia syndrome. Cowden disease is a rare autosomal dominant 
disorder, now considered as a phakomatosis. Nevertheless, relationships between 
both conditions still remain unclear, since Lhermitte-Duclos disease can also be 
sporadic.
CASE REPORTS: Two patients, 25 and 27 years old, were admitted to the emergency 
department for an acute intracranial hypertension. In both cases, magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed a mass in the cerebellar hemisphere. 
Pathological examination of surgical resection specimens concluded 
Lhermitte-Duclos disease. Because of the patients' previous personal and 
familial medical history, Cowden disease was suspected and confirmed by 
mutational analysis of the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) gene. In the 
first case, a nonsense punctual mutation in exon 8 was found. In the second one, 
a mutation was revealed in the exon 5, a mutational hot spot encoding the 
phosphatase catalytic core motif.
CONCLUSION: Lhermitte-Duclos disease and Cowden disease can be associated. 
Germline mutations of PTEN gene are known to be implicated in Cowden disease. 
This gene, located at chromosome 10q23-3, is a tumor suppressor gene that 
encodes a protein with phosphatase activity. To date, more than 80 mutations 
have been reported in Cowden disease. When the diagnosis of either one of these 
two disorders is established, it is imperative to search for the other one to 
detect early malignant lesions that occur in Cowden disease. Finally, a 
long-term follow up of the patient is required and a thorough familial screening 
is necessary.

DOI: 10.1016/S0090-3019(03)00576-7
PMID: 15120218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]