---
reference_id: "PMID:39206282"
title: Natural history and outcome of nonketotic hyperglycinemia in China.
authors:
- Zhou Z
- Cai Y
- Li X
- Liu Z
- Peng M
- Lin Y
- Mao X
- Zeng C
- Liu L
- Zhang W
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1440883
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history and outcome of nonketotic hyperglycinemia in China.
**Authors:** Zhou Z, Cai Y, Li X, Liu Z, Peng M, Lin Y, Mao X, Zeng C, Liu L, Zhang W
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2024.1440883](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2024.1440883)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2024 Aug 14;15:1440883. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1440883. 
eCollection 2024.

Natural history and outcome of nonketotic hyperglycinemia in China.

Zhou Z(1), Cai Y(1), Li X(1), Liu Z(1), Peng M(1), Lin Y(1), Mao X(1), Zeng 
C(1), Liu L(1), Zhang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Endocrinology, Guangzhou Women and Children's 
Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

INTRODUCTION: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is a rare, life-threatening 
genetic disorder. The patients usually show heterogeneous and nonspecific 
symptoms, resulting in diagnosis challenges using conventional approaches. Here, 
the clinical presentation and genetic features of 20 Chinese patients were 
examined and reported in order to clarify the natural history and prognosis of 
NKH in China.
METHODS: The Human Gene Mutation Database and literature regarding NKH in China 
were reviewed. Age of onset, clinical characteristics, genetic analysis, cranial 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalography (EEG) examinations, 
and outcome of the patients were analyzed. Natural history experiences and 
follow-up assays for five patients who were followed in our center were 
described.
RESULTS: Among all 20 NKH patients, 17 (85%) had the neonatal type and 3 (15%) 
had the infantile type, no late-onset cases were detected. Patients showed up 
for admission with a history of seizures (15/20), lethargy (14/20), hypotonia 
(11/20), apnea (9/20), and feeble sobbing (4/20). Brain MRI findings included 
abnormal signals in the internal capsule, cerebellum, or brainstem (6/14), 
dysplasia of the corpus callosum (5/14), and white matter abnormalities (3/14). 
EEG evaluations showed anomalies such as burst suppression (4/8) and 
hypsarrhythmia and/or epileptic activity (6/8). Median values of cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) glycine levels, plasma glycine levels and CSF/plasma glycine ratios 
were135.2 (range, 6.3-546.3) μmol/L, 998.2 (range,75-3,084) μmol/L, 0.16 (range, 
0.03-0.60) respectively. Genetic analyses revealed four new variations and GLDC, 
AMT gene abnormalities in 13 (65%), 7 (35%) case, respectively. Prognosis 
information was available for 18 cases: nine patients died, eight in the 
neonatal period. Among the nine survivors, varying developmental disorders were 
observed.
DISCUSSION: Different disease processes and outcomes were found in Chinese NKH 
patients, according to this study. The initial clinical presentations, CSF 
glycine levels and CSF to plasma glycine ratios do not reliably predict 
prognosis, while MRI and EEG abnormalities may indicate a poor outlook. NKH 
diagnosis should be considered for neonates presenting specific symptoms. The 
present survey provides clinical data that support the development of a 
standardized protocol for diagnosing and treating NKH in China.

Copyright © 2024 Zhou, Cai, Li, Liu, Peng, Lin, Mao, Zeng, Liu and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1440883
PMCID: PMC11351275
PMID: 39206282

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.