---
reference_id: "PMID:15835282"
title: "Huntington's disease like-2: review and update."
authors:
- Margolis RL
- Rudnicki DD
- Holmes SE
journal: Acta Neurol Taiwan
year: '2005'
keywords:
- Humans
- "Huntington Disease/epidemiology, etiology, genetics"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington's disease like-2: review and update.
**Authors:** Margolis RL, Rudnicki DD, Holmes SE
**Journal:** Acta Neurol Taiwan (2005)

## Content

1. Acta Neurol Taiwan. 2005 Mar;14(1):1-8.

Huntington's disease like-2: review and update.

Margolis RL(1), Rudnicki DD, Holmes SE.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Neurobiology, Division of Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA.
rmargoli@jhmi.edu

Huntington's Disease-like 2 (HDL2), like Huntington's disease (HD), is an adult
onset, progressive, neurodegenerative autosomal dominant disorder clinically
characterized by abnormal movements, dementia, and psychiatric syndromes. Like
HD, the neuropathology of HDL2 features prominent cortical and striatal atrophy
and intranuclear inclusions. HDL2 is generally rare, accounting for only a few
percent of HD-like cases in which the HD mutation has already been excluded.
However, the rate is considerably higher among individuals of African ancestry,
and is almost as common as HD in Black South Africans. The disorder is caused by
a CTG/CAG expansion mutation on chromosome 16q24.3, with normal and expanded
repeat ranges similar to HD, and a correlation between repeat length and onset
age very similar to HD. Surprisingly, the available evidence suggests that HDL2
is not a polyglutamine disease. Rather, the repeat expansion is located within
Junctophilin-3 in the CTG orientation. The phenotypic similarities between HD
and HDL2 suggest that understanding the pathobiology of HDL2 may shed new light
on the pathogenesis of HD and other disorders of striatal neurodegeneration.

PMID: 15835282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
