---
reference_id: "PMID:39918792"
title: "Paediatric Renal Tumors: A State-of-the-Art Review."
authors:
- Salzillo C
- Cazzato G
- Serio G
- Marzullo A
journal: Curr Oncol Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s11912-025-01644-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/therapy, diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology"
- Child
- "Wilms Tumor/therapy, diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/therapy, diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paediatric Renal Tumors: A State-of-the-Art Review.
**Authors:** Salzillo C, Cazzato G, Serio G, Marzullo A
**Journal:** Curr Oncol Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11912-025-01644-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11912-025-01644-8)

## Content

1. Curr Oncol Rep. 2025 Mar;27(3):211-224. doi: 10.1007/s11912-025-01644-8. Epub 
2025 Feb 7.

Paediatric Renal Tumors: A State-of-the-Art Review.

Salzillo C(1)(2), Cazzato G(3), Serio G(3), Marzullo A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Precision and Regenerative Medicine and Ionian Area, Pathology 
Unit, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Piazza Giulio Cesare 11, 70121, Bari, 
Italy. cecilia.salzillo@unicampania.it.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, PhD Course in Public Health, University 
of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Luciano Armanni 5, 80138, Naples, Italy. 
cecilia.salzillo@unicampania.it.
(3)Department of Precision and Regenerative Medicine and Ionian Area, Pathology 
Unit, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Piazza Giulio Cesare 11, 70121, Bari, 
Italy.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Pediatric renal tumors comprise a wide range of conditions, 
both malignant and benign, that affect children and require a multidisciplinary 
approach for optimal diagnosis and treatment. This review offers an in-depth 
analysis of the epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment options, outcomes, and 
survival of major pediatric renal tumors.
RECENT FINDINGS: Wilms tumor, or nephroblastoma, is the most common form of 
renal tumor in children, characterized by growth from primitive renal cells. 
Standard treatment involves a combination of surgery, chemotherapy and, in some 
cases, radiation therapy, with the aim of removing the tumor, preventing 
recurrence and maximizing the chances of long-term recovery. Less common 
pediatric renal tumors, such as renal clear cell sarcoma, renal cell carcinoma, 
mesoblastic nephroma, and malignant rhabdoid tumor, require similarly careful 
and individualized management. Therapeutic strategies, which depend on the 
characteristics of the tumor, the stage of the disease and the individual 
response to therapy, may include surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy and, in 
some cases, molecular targeted therapies, immunotherapies and genetic and 
epigenetic therapies. The management of pediatric kidney tumors requires the 
involvement of a multidisciplinary team of specialists to ensure accurate 
evaluation, optimal treatments and long-term follow-up. The aim is to maximize 
the prospects for recovery and improve the quality of life of patients and their 
families. Advances in innovative, personalized therapies represent an important 
opportunity to further improve clinical outcomes in these patients.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11912-025-01644-8
PMCID: PMC11958499
PMID: 39918792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Institutional Review Board 
Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent: Not applicable. Competing 
Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.