---
reference_id: "PMID:24443998"
title: Epigenetic mechanisms in the pathogenesis of Lynch syndrome.
authors:
- Peltomäki P
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12349
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic mechanisms in the pathogenesis of Lynch syndrome.
**Authors:** Peltomäki P
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12349](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12349)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2014 May;85(5):403-12. doi: 10.1111/cge.12349. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Epigenetic mechanisms in the pathogenesis of Lynch syndrome.

Peltomäki P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2014 May;85(5):413-6. doi: 10.1111/cge.12369.

Inherited defects in the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) system, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and 
PMS2 genes, underlie Lynch syndrome, one of the most prevalent cancer syndromes 
in man. The syndrome offers a model for cancers arising through MMR defects and 
microsatellite instability, which applies to ~ 15% of all colorectal, 
endometrial, and other cancers. Lynch syndrome also illustrates the significance 
of the epigenetic component in cancer development. Inactivation of tumor 
suppressor genes by epigenetic mechanisms is an acquired property of many tumors 
developing in Lynch syndrome. Furthermore, constitutional epimutations of MMR 
genes may explain a proportion of mutation-negative families lacking MLH1 or 
MSH2 protein expression in tumor tissue. This review provides an update of the 
molecular basis of Lynch syndrome by focusing on the role of epigenetic 
mechanisms in the pathogenesis of the disease.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12349
PMID: 24443998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]