---
reference_id: "PMID:37415984"
title: "Tofacitinib, a suppressor of NOD2 expression, is a potential treatment for Blau syndrome."
authors:
- Ueki Y
- Takimoto-Ito R
- Saito MK
- Tanizaki H
- Kambe N
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1211240
keywords:
- "Uveitis/drug therapy, genetics"
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Interferon-gamma
- "Sarcoidosis/drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- "Arthritis/drug therapy, genetics"
- Piperidines
- Pyrimidines
- Synovitis
- Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tofacitinib, a suppressor of NOD2 expression, is a potential treatment for Blau syndrome.
**Authors:** Ueki Y, Takimoto-Ito R, Saito MK, Tanizaki H, Kambe N
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1211240](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1211240)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jun 21;14:1211240. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1211240. 
eCollection 2023.

Tofacitinib, a suppressor of NOD2 expression, is a potential treatment for Blau 
syndrome.

Ueki Y(1), Takimoto-Ito R(2), Saito MK(3), Tanizaki H(1), Kambe N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kansai Medical University, Hirakata, Japan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Application, Center for iPS Cell Research and 
Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Blau syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant autoinflammatory 
granulomatous disease caused by a mutation in the NOD2 gene. It is characterized 
by a clinical trial of granulomatous dermatitis, arthritis, and uveitis. 
Tofacitinib is a pan Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor used for treatment of Blau 
syndrome and idiopathic sarcoidosis. Here, we evaluated its effect on 
inflammatory pathways associated with Blau syndrome. The effect of tofacitinib 
on downstream pathways regulated by mutant NOD2 was analyzed using luciferase 
assays with overexpression of NOD2 mutants.
METHODS: The effect of tofacitinib on the upstream pathway for the induction of 
NOD2 expression and proinflammatory cytokine production was assessed using 
monocytic cell lines differentiated from Blau syndrome patient-derived induced 
pluripotent stem cells.
RESULTS: Tofacitinib did not suppress the increased spontaneous transcriptional 
activity of NF-κB by mutant NOD2. In addition, mutant NOD2 was not involved in 
the transcription of ISRE and GAS, which are activated by type 1 and type 2 
interferons (IFN), respectively. On the other hand, IFNγ induced the expression 
of NOD2, which led to the production of inflammatory cytokines by an 
autoinflammatory mechanism only in cells with mutant NOD2.
DISCUSSION: Tofacitinib suppressed the induction of NOD2 by IFNγ, thereby 
inhibiting the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Thus, tofacitinib 
showed anti-inflammatory effects through suppression of NOD2 expression. The JAK 
inhibitor tofacitinib is a potential therapeutic agent for Blau syndrome because 
it suppresses the autoinflammation seen in Blau syndrome by inhibiting the 
expression of NOD2.

Copyright © 2023 Ueki, Takimoto-Ito, Saito, Tanizaki and Kambe.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1211240
PMCID: PMC10321295
PMID: 37415984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.