---
reference_id: "PMID:23773921"
title: Differentiating the roles of STAT5B and STAT5A in human CD4+ T cells.
authors:
- Jenks JA
- Seki S
- Kanai T
- Huang J
- Morgan AA
- Scalco RC
- Nath R
- Bucayu R
- Wit JM
- Al-Herz W
- Ramadan D
- Jorge AA
- Bacchetta R
- Hwa V
- Rosenfeld R
- Nadeau KC
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2013.04.014
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Autoimmune Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Female
- "Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation/physiology
- Humans
- "Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Interleukin-2/genetics, metabolism"
- "STAT5 Transcription Factor/genetics, physiology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/physiology"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Young Adult
- "bcl-X Protein/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differentiating the roles of STAT5B and STAT5A in human CD4+ T cells.
**Authors:** Jenks JA, Seki S, Kanai T, Huang J, Morgan AA, Scalco RC, Nath R, Bucayu R, Wit JM, Al-Herz W, Ramadan D, Jorge AA, Bacchetta R, Hwa V, Rosenfeld R, Nadeau KC
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2013.04.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2013.04.014)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2013 Aug;148(2):227-36. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2013.04.014. Epub
2013  May 5.

Differentiating the roles of STAT5B and STAT5A in human CD4+ T cells.

Jenks JA(1), Seki S, Kanai T, Huang J, Morgan AA, Scalco RC, Nath R, Bucayu R,
Wit JM, Al-Herz W, Ramadan D, Jorge AA, Bacchetta R, Hwa V, Rosenfeld R, Nadeau
KC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA.

STAT5A and STAT5B are highly homologous proteins whose distinctive roles in
human immunity remain unclear. However, STAT5A sufficiency cannot compensate for
STAT5B defects, and human STAT5B deficiency, a rare autosomal recessive primary
immunodeficiency, is characterized by chronic lung disease, growth failure and
autoimmunity associated with regulatory T cell (Treg) reduction. We therefore
hypothesized that STAT5A and STAT5B play unique roles in CD4(+) T cells. Upon
knocking down STAT5A or STAT5B in human primary T cells, we found differentially
regulated expression of FOXP3 and IL-2R in STAT5B knockdown T cells and
down-regulated Bcl-X only in STAT5A knockdown T cells. Functional ex vivo
studies in homozygous STAT5B-deficient patients showed reduced FOXP3 expression
with impaired regulatory function of STAT5B-null Treg cells, also of increased
memory phenotype. These results indicate that STAT5B and STAT5A act partly as
non-redundant transcription factors and that STAT5B is more critical for Treg
maintenance and function in humans.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2013.04.014
PMCID: PMC4169138
PMID: 23773921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
