---
reference_id: "PMID:35294811"
title: Valoctocogene Roxaparvovec Gene Therapy for Hemophilia A.
authors:
- Ozelo MC
- Mahlangu J
- Pasi KJ
- Giermasz A
- Leavitt AD
- Laffan M
- Symington E
- Quon DV
- Wang JD
- Peerlinck K
- Pipe SW
- Madan B
- Key NS
- Pierce GF
- "O'Mahony B"
- Kaczmarek R
- Henshaw J
- Lawal A
- Jayaram K
- Huang M
- Yang X
- Wong WY
- Kim B
- GENEr8-1 Trial Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2113708
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Valoctocogene Roxaparvovec Gene Therapy for Hemophilia A.
**Authors:** Ozelo MC, Mahlangu J, Pasi KJ, Giermasz A, Leavitt AD, Laffan M, Symington E, Quon DV, Wang JD, Peerlinck K, Pipe SW, Madan B, Key NS, Pierce GF, O'Mahony B, Kaczmarek R, Henshaw J, Lawal A, Jayaram K, Huang M, Yang X, Wong WY, Kim B, GENEr8-1 Trial Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2113708](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2113708)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2022 Mar 17;386(11):1013-1025. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2113708.

Valoctocogene Roxaparvovec Gene Therapy for Hemophilia A.

Ozelo MC(1), Mahlangu J(1), Pasi KJ(1), Giermasz A(1), Leavitt AD(1), Laffan 
M(1), Symington E(1), Quon DV(1), Wang JD(1), Peerlinck K(1), Pipe SW(1), Madan 
B(1), Key NS(1), Pierce GF(1), O'Mahony B(1), Kaczmarek R(1), Henshaw J(1), 
Lawal A(1), Jayaram K(1), Huang M(1), Yang X(1), Wong WY(1), Kim B(1); GENEr8-1 
Trial Group.

Collaborators: Mason J, Rowell J, Khoo TL, P'ng S, Pepperell D, Tran H, Tan CW, 
McRae S, Peerlinck K, Ozelo MC, Prezotti ANL, Villaça PR, Cerqueira MH, 
Lorenzato CS, Chambost H, Susen S, Rauch A, Klamroth R, Oldenburg J, Peyvandi F, 
Park YS, Mahlangu J, Lopez Fernandez MF, Nunez R, Mingot Castellano E, Chou SC, 
Shen MC, Chiou SS, Wang JD, Chen YC, Laffan M, Lester W, Lowe G, Percy C, 
Symington E, Madan B, Tait R, Bagot C, Pasi J, Kazmi R, Rangarajan S, Shapiro S, 
Thompson A, Dunn A, Leavitt A, Pipe S, Callaghan M, Majerus E, Giermasz A, Quon 
D, Sharma V, Mazepa M, Reding M, Wang M, Cockrell E, Key N, Von Drygalski A.

Author information:
(1)From Hemocentro UNICAMP, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medical 
Sciences, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil (M.C.O.); the Hemophilia 
Comprehensive Care Center, Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital, 
University of the Witwatersrand and NHLS, Johannesburg (J.M.); Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry (K.J.P.), the Centre for Haematology, 
Imperial College London (M.L.), and Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust 
(B.M.), London, and Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Cambridge (E.S.) - all in the United Kingdom; the Hemophilia Treatment Center, 
University of California, Davis, Sacramento (A.G.), the University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco (A.D.L.), the Orthopedic Hemophilia 
Treatment Center, Los Angeles (D.V.Q.), independent consultant, La Jolla 
(G.F.P.), and BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Novato (J.H., A.L., K.J., M.H., X.Y., 
W.Y.W., B.K.) - all in California; the Center for Rare Disease and Hemophilia, 
Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan (J.-D.W.); the Department 
of Vascular Medicine and Hemostasis and Hemophilia Center, University Hospitals 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium (K.P.); the Departments of Pediatrics and Pathology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (S.W.P.); the UNC Blood Research Center, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill (N.S.K.); the Irish Haemophilia 
Society and Trinity College, Dublin (B.O.); the Department of Pediatrics, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, IUPUI-Wells Center for Pediatric 
Research, Indianapolis (R.K.); and the Laboratory of Glycobiology, Hirszfeld 
Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Wroclaw, Poland (R.K.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Mar 17;386(11):1081-1082. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2200878.
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Jun 9;386(23):2247. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2204934.

BACKGROUND: Valoctocogene roxaparvovec (AAV5-hFVIII-SQ) is an adeno-associated 
virus 5 (AAV5)-based gene-therapy vector containing a coagulation factor VIII 
complementary DNA driven by a liver-selective promoter. The efficacy and safety 
of the therapy were previously evaluated in men with severe hemophilia A in a 
phase 1-2 dose-escalation study.
METHODS: We conducted an open-label, single-group, multicenter, phase 3 study to 
evaluate the efficacy and safety of valoctocogene roxaparvovec in men with 
severe hemophilia A, defined as a factor VIII level of 1 IU per deciliter or 
lower. Participants who were at least 18 years of age and did not have 
preexisting anti-AAV5 antibodies or a history of development of factor VIII 
inhibitors and who had been receiving prophylaxis with factor VIII concentrate 
received a single infusion of 6×1013 vector genomes of valoctocogene 
roxaparvovec per kilogram of body weight. The primary end point was the change 
from baseline in factor VIII activity (measured with a chromogenic substrate 
assay) during weeks 49 through 52 after infusion. Secondary end points included 
the change in annualized factor VIII concentrate use and bleeding rates. Safety 
was assessed as adverse events and laboratory test results.
RESULTS: Overall, 134 participants received an infusion and completed more than 
51 weeks of follow-up. Among the 132 human immunodeficiency virus-negative 
participants, the mean factor VIII activity level at weeks 49 through 52 had 
increased by 41.9 IU per deciliter (95% confidence interval [CI], 34.1 to 49.7; 
P<0.001; median change, 22.9 IU per deciliter; interquartile range, 10.9 to 
61.3). Among the 112 participants enrolled from a prospective noninterventional 
study, the mean annualized rates of factor VIII concentrate use and treated 
bleeding after week 4 had decreased after infusion by 98.6% and 83.8%, 
respectively (P<0.001 for both comparisons). All the participants had at least 
one adverse event; 22 of 134 (16.4%) reported serious adverse events. Elevations 
in alanine aminotransferase levels occurred in 115 of 134 participants (85.8%) 
and were managed with immune suppressants. The other most common adverse events 
were headache (38.1%), nausea (37.3%), and elevations in aspartate 
aminotransferase levels (35.1%). No development of factor VIII inhibitors or 
thrombosis occurred in any of the participants.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with severe hemophilia A, valoctocogene roxaparvovec 
treatment provided endogenous factor VIII production and significantly reduced 
bleeding and factor VIII concentrate use relative to factor VIII prophylaxis. 
(Funded by BioMarin Pharmaceutical; GENEr8-1 ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT03370913.).

Copyright © 2022 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2113708
PMID: 35294811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]