---
reference_id: PMID:27242349
title: Pneumocystis jirovecii Pneumonia in the Non-HIV-Infected Population.
authors:
- Avino LJ
- Naylor SM
- Roecker AM
journal: Ann Pharmacother
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1177/1060028016650107
keywords:
- CD4 Lymphocyte Count
- Humans
- Immunocompromised Host
- Immunosuppressive Agents/adverse effects
- "Opportunistic Infections/blood, immunology, microbiology, prevention & control"
- "Pneumocystis carinii/drug effects, isolation & purification"
- "Pneumonia, Pneumocystis/blood, immunology, microbiology, prevention & control"
- Risk Factors
- "Trimethoprim, Sulfamethoxazole Drug Combination/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pneumocystis jirovecii Pneumonia in the Non-HIV-Infected Population.
**Authors:** Avino LJ, Naylor SM, Roecker AM
**Journal:** Ann Pharmacother (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1060028016650107](https://doi.org/10.1177/1060028016650107)

## Content

1. Ann Pharmacother. 2016 Aug;50(8):673-9. doi: 10.1177/1060028016650107. Epub
2016  May 30.

Pneumocystis jirovecii Pneumonia in the Non-HIV-Infected Population.

Avino LJ(1), Naylor SM(1), Roecker AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Ohio Northern University, Ada, OH, USA.
(2)Ohio Northern University, Ada, OH, USA a-roecker@onu.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Summarize data on the pathophysiology, treatment, and prevention 
options for non-AIDS immunocompromised patients who have Pneumocystis jirovecii 
pneumonia (PJP); review the epidemiology of patients presenting with PJP; and 
discuss the first and second-line pharmacological options for treatment and 
prophylaxis of PJP in this population.
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE (1989-February 2016) searched. Terms searched included 
combinations of Pneumocystis jirovecii, Pneumocystis carinii, non-HIV, infected, 
patients, prevention, prophylaxis, Bactrim, treatment, AIDS, opportunistic, 
immunocompromised, cancer, and pathophysiology
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Articles included had the most relevant 
information on PJP pathophysiology, and first-/second-line treatment and 
prophylactic options. Inclusion criteria were met and evaluated with 43 sources.
DATA SYNTHESIS: P jirovecii has a complicated life-cycle; it seeks to find 
compromised immune systems in order to replicate, causing life-threatening 
complications. With immunosuppressive medications coming to market for 
immunomodulating diseases, PJP has become a prevalent opportunistic infection in 
the non-HIV population. CD4+ lymphocyte count <200 cells/µL is the primary risk 
factor for PJP presentation in these patients. With data from clinical trials, 
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) has become the primary treatment and 
prophylaxis of PJP in the non-HIV population, although second-line options are 
available.
CONCLUSION: PJP is a health problem that may result in an increased concern as 
more immunomodulating medications to treat various disease states are developed. 
Patients on these drugs or those with immunosuppressive diseases should have 
their CD4+ count monitored. Health care providers should continue to use TMP/SMX 
as the primary option in non-HIV, immunocompromised patients for treatment and 
prophylaxis of PJP.

© The Author(s) 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028016650107
PMID: 27242349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]