---
reference_id: "PMID:16304397"
title: Biology and management of histologic transformation of indolent lymphoma.
authors:
- Freedman AS
journal: Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1182/asheducation-2005.1.314
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biology and management of histologic transformation of indolent lymphoma.
**Authors:** Freedman AS
**Journal:** Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1182/asheducation-2005.1.314](https://doi.org/10.1182/asheducation-2005.1.314)

## Content

1. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2005:314-20. doi: 
10.1182/asheducation-2005.1.314.

Biology and management of histologic transformation of indolent lymphoma.

Freedman AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 
02115, USA. arnold_freedman@dfci.harvard.edu

The evolution of indolent lymphomas to aggressive histologies, known as 
histologic transformation (HT), is a frequent occurrence for all subtypes of low 
grade B cell lymphoproliferative disorders. The risk of developing HT is 
approximately 3% per year for patients with indolent lymphoma. Clinically these 
present with a rapid change in the behavior of the disease, with evidence of a 
highly proliferative malignancy with a propensity to involve extranodal sites. 
The prognosis of patients following transformation is generally poor, with 
median survival of about 12 months. Recent studies suggest that the development 
of HT is very complex with the acquisition of multiple cytogenetic abnormalities 
in the low-grade lymphoma cells prior to HT. To date, there are no biologic or 
genetic parameters predictive of the development of HT. A myriad of genetic 
lesions have been identified in HT, and provide insight into its pathogenesis. 
These include genes regulating proliferation (C-MYC and C-MYC-regulated genes); 
control of the cell cycle (CDKN2a and CDKN2B); and programmed cell death (TP53, 
C-MYC, and BCL2). Gene expression profiling has been applied to the study of HT 
and has increased our understanding of the transformation process. There has 
been limited progress in the treatment of patients with HT. Conventional 
chemotherapy is generally of limited benefit, although a subset of patients are 
long-term survivors following high-dose therapy and autologous stem cell 
transplantation. The use of radioimmunotherapy and new agents targeting specific 
lesions or aberrant pathways may impact on the management of these aggressive 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1182/asheducation-2005.1.314
PMID: 16304397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]