---
reference_id: "PMID:18773462"
title: "Collagen fibrillogenesis in tendon development: current models and regulation of fibril assembly."
authors:
- Banos CC
- Thomas AH
- Kuo CK
journal: Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/bdrc.20130
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Collagen fibrillogenesis in tendon development: current models and regulation of fibril assembly.
**Authors:** Banos CC, Thomas AH, Kuo CK
**Journal:** Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bdrc.20130](https://doi.org/10.1002/bdrc.20130)

## Content

1. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2008 Sep;84(3):228-44. doi: 
10.1002/bdrc.20130.

Collagen fibrillogenesis in tendon development: current models and regulation of 
fibril assembly.

Banos CC(1), Thomas AH, Kuo CK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, 
Massachusetts 02155, USA.

Tendons are collagen-based fibrous tissues that connect and transmit forces from 
muscle to bone. These tissues, which are high in collagen type I content, have 
been studied extensively to understand collagen fibrillogenesis. Although the 
mechanisms have not been fully elucidated, our understanding has continued to 
progress. Here, we review two prevailing models of collagen fibrillogenesis and 
discuss the regulation of the process by candidate cellular and extracellular 
matrix molecules. Although numerous molecules have been implicated in the 
regulation of collagen fibrillogenesis, we focus on those that have been 
suggested to be particularly relevant to collagen type I fibril formation during 
tendon development, including members of the collagen and small leucine-rich 
proteoglycan families, as well as other molecules, including scleraxis, 
cartilage oligomeric matrix protein, and cytoskeletal proteins.

DOI: 10.1002/bdrc.20130
PMID: 18773462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]