---
reference_id: "PMID:28286641"
title: "Supporting communication in semantic dementia: clinical consensus from expert practitioners."
authors:
- Kindell J
- Sage K
- Cruice M
journal: Qual Ageing Older Adults
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1108/QAOA-08-2014-0016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Supporting communication in semantic dementia: clinical consensus from expert practitioners.
**Authors:** Kindell J, Sage K, Cruice M
**Journal:** Qual Ageing Older Adults (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1108/QAOA-08-2014-0016](https://doi.org/10.1108/QAOA-08-2014-0016)

## Content

1. Qual Ageing Older Adults. 2015 Sep 14;16(3):153-164. doi: 
10.1108/QAOA-08-2014-0016.

Supporting communication in semantic dementia: clinical consensus from expert 
practitioners.

Kindell J(1), Sage K(2), Cruice M(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, Social Work and Midwifery, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(2)Department of Health and Applied Sciences, University of the West of England, 
Bristol, UK.
(3)School of Health Sciences, City University London, London, UK.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this paper is to gain consensus regarding the clinical 
priorities and tasks required in supporting communication needs in those living 
with semantic dementia and their families, by specialist speech and language 
therapists (SLTs), working in clinical practice within dementia care settings in 
the UK.
DESIGN/METHODOLOGY/APPROACH: A nominal group technique was used, followed by 
further exploration and refinement of issues using a modified Delphi technique 
with a group of six SLTs who specialised in dementia care and who had experience 
of working with individuals with semantic dementia and their families.
FINDINGS: The findings in the study demonstrate a broader scope of practice than 
is evident within the research literature with this client group. Therapists 
identified a range of psychosocial issues for both the person with semantic 
dementia and their family, in particular finding ways to support activity and 
participation in conversation and explore barriers and facilitators within the 
communication environment.
ORIGINALITY/VALUE: This represents the first study to explore everyday practice 
in this rarer dementia and the information gathered here will be of use to a 
variety of health and social care professions interested in supporting those 
with semantic dementia and their families.

DOI: 10.1108/QAOA-08-2014-0016
PMCID: PMC5341763
PMID: 28286641