---
reference_id: "PMID:34390335"
title: D-Dimer Combined With CRP Can Improve the Differential Value of Bacterial Meningitis and Tuberculous Meningitis.
authors:
- Lu L
- Qi Y
- Chen H
- Hu Z
- Yang S
- Qin S
- Zhang L
- Chen M
- Qin X
journal: Lab Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/labmed/lmab005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# D-Dimer Combined With CRP Can Improve the Differential Value of Bacterial Meningitis and Tuberculous Meningitis.
**Authors:** Lu L, Qi Y, Chen H, Hu Z, Yang S, Qin S, Zhang L, Chen M, Qin X
**Journal:** Lab Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/labmed/lmab005](https://doi.org/10.1093/labmed/lmab005)

## Content

1. Lab Med. 2021 Nov 2;52(6):603-608. doi: 10.1093/labmed/lmab005.

D-Dimer Combined With CRP Can Improve the Differential Value of Bacterial 
Meningitis and Tuberculous Meningitis.

Lu L(1), Qi Y(1), Chen H(1), Hu Z(1), Yang S(1), Qin S(1), Zhang L(1), Chen 
M(1), Qin X(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Laboratory Department, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the diagnostic value of the coagulation marker D-dimer and 
its combination with the traditional marker C-reactive protein (CRP) in 
distinguishing bacterial meningitis (BM) from tuberculous meningitis (TM).
METHODS: We performed a retrospective study on specimens from 173 patients with 
meningitis who were hospitalized at the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Guangxi, China, from 2012 through 2020. The patient records 
were divided into the BM group and the TM group, and hematological parameters 
D-dimer and CRP were evaluated for the 2 groups.
RESULTS: The levels of D-dimer and CRP in the BM group were significantly higher 
than those levels in the TM group (P ˂.001 for each), and the sensitivity and 
specificity of the combined detection of the 2 markers was 86.3% to 100%; the 
area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve reached 0.983 (95% 
confidence interval [CI], 0.966-0.999).
CONCLUSION: D-dimer testing has high specificity in distinguishing between BM 
and TM; CRP testing also has high sensitivity. The combined diagnosis of the 2 
biomarkers helps to distinguish TM from BM.

© American Society for Clinical Pathology, 2021. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/labmed/lmab005
PMID: 34390335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]