---
reference_id: "PMID:22355247"
title: Phenotype-genotype correlations in patients with TGFBI-linked corneal dystrophies in Taiwan.
authors:
- Hou YC
- Wang IJ
- Hsiao CH
- Chen WL
- Hu FR
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2012'
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/genetics, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Taiwan
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics
- betaIG-H3 Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype-genotype correlations in patients with TGFBI-linked corneal dystrophies in Taiwan.
**Authors:** Hou YC, Wang IJ, Hsiao CH, Chen WL, Hu FR
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2012)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2012;18:362-71. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Phenotype-genotype correlations in patients with TGFBI-linked corneal 
dystrophies in Taiwan.

Hou YC(1), Wang IJ, Hsiao CH, Chen WL, Hu FR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of 
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. ychou51@ntu.edu.tw

PURPOSE: To determine the phenotype-genotype correlations in patients with 
corneal dystrophies associated with human transforming growth factor-β-induced 
(TGFBI) mutations at the National Taiwan University Hospital.
METHODS: Twenty-five affected patients from 15 families with corneal dystrophies 
were recruited. They underwent slit-lamp biomicroscopy and visual acuity 
examinations. Genomic DNA was extracted from their peripheral blood, and the 
exons amplified from TGFBI were sequenced.
RESULTS: Eleven patients from 9 families with granular corneal dystrophy (GCD) 
presented with a wide spectrum of dot or fleck opacities and shared some similar 
clinical features. Genetic studies revealed an R124H mutation in 5 families and 
an R555W mutation in 4 families. A patient with GCD type 2 and an R124H mutation 
showed a marked increase in opacities in the laser-assisted in situ 
keratomileusis (LASIK) flap interface. Six patients from 3 families with 
superficial honeycomb opacities had an R555Q mutation. Of the 4 patients from 3 
families with variant lattice line opacities, 3 from 2 families had an R124C 
mutation, whereas 1 from the third family had an A546D mutation. Spontaneous 
mutations were detected in 2 families: an R124C mutation in 1 family with 
lattice corneal dystrophy (LCD) type I and an A546D mutation in the other with 
atypical LCD.
CONCLUSIONS: In most cases, TGFBI-linked corneal dystrophies had good 
phenotype-genotype correlations; however, some phenotypic variation was present. 
The most common mutations in Taiwan were R124H in GCD type 2 and R555W in GCD 
type 1. The R555Q mutation in Thiel-Behnke corneal dystrophy is not as rare in 
Taiwan as it is in other Asian countries. Sequencing of TGFBI can aid in the 
precise classification of these corneal dystrophies.

PMCID: PMC3283208
PMID: 22355247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]