---
reference_id: "PMID:36522349"
title: Burkitt lymphoma.
authors:
- López C
- Burkhardt B
- Chan JKC
- Leoncini L
- Mbulaiteye SM
- Ogwang MD
- Orem J
- Rochford R
- Roschewski M
- Siebert R
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-022-00404-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Burkitt lymphoma.
**Authors:** López C, Burkhardt B, Chan JKC, Leoncini L, Mbulaiteye SM, Ogwang MD, Orem J, Rochford R, Roschewski M, Siebert R
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-022-00404-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-022-00404-3)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2022 Dec 15;8(1):78. doi: 10.1038/s41572-022-00404-3.

Burkitt lymphoma.

López C(1)(2), Burkhardt B(3), Chan JKC(4), Leoncini L(5), Mbulaiteye SM(6), 
Ogwang MD(7), Orem J(8), Rochford R(9), Roschewski M(10), Siebert R(11).

Author information:
(1)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm University and Ulm University Medical 
Center, Ulm, Germany.
(3)Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Berlin-Frankfurt-Münster (NHL-BFM) Study Center and 
Paediatric Hematology, Oncology and BMT, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(5)Section of Pathology, Department of Medical Biotechnology, University of 
Siena, Siena, Italy.
(6)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health and Human Services, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)EMBLEM Study, St. Mary's Hospital, Lacor, Gulu, Uganda.
(8)Uganda Cancer Institute, Kampala, Uganda.
(9)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(10)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(11)Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm University and Ulm University Medical 
Center, Ulm, Germany. reiner.siebert@uni-ulm.de.

Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is an aggressive form of B cell lymphoma that can affect 
children and adults. The study of BL led to the identification of the first 
recurrent chromosomal aberration in lymphoma, t(8;14)(q24;q32), and subsequent 
discovery of the central role of MYC and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in 
tumorigenesis. Most patients with BL are cured with chemotherapy but those with 
relapsed or refractory disease usually die of lymphoma. Historically, endemic 
BL, non-endemic sporadic BL and the immunodeficiency-associated BL have been 
recognized, but differentiation of these epidemiological variants is confounded 
by the frequency of EBV positivity. Subtyping into EBV+ and EBV- BL might better 
describe the biological heterogeneity of the disease. Phenotypically resembling 
germinal centre B cells, all types of BL are characterized by dysregulation of 
MYC due to enhancer activation via juxtaposition with one of the three 
immunoglobulin loci. Additional molecular changes commonly affect B cell 
receptor and sphingosine-1-phosphate signalling, proliferation, survival and 
SWI-SNF chromatin remodelling. BL is diagnosed on the basis of morphology and 
high expression of MYC. BL can be effectively treated in children and 
adolescents with short durations of high dose-intensity multiagent chemotherapy 
regimens. Adults are more susceptible to toxic effects but are effectively 
treated with chemotherapy, including modified versions of paediatric regimens. 
The outcomes in patients with BL are good in high-income countries with low 
mortality and few late effects, but in low-income and middle-income countries, 
BL is diagnosed late and is usually treated with less-effective regimens 
affecting the overall good outcomes in patients with this lymphoma.

© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-022-00404-3
PMID: 36522349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]