---
reference_id: "PMID:28129811"
title: "Diagnosis of Cystic Fibrosis: Consensus Guidelines from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation."
authors:
- Farrell PM
- White TB
- Ren CL
- Hempstead SE
- Accurso F
- Derichs N
- Howenstine M
- McColley SA
- Rock M
- Rosenfeld M
- Sermet-Gaudelus I
- Southern KW
- Marshall BC
- Sosnay PR
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.09.064
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of Cystic Fibrosis: Consensus Guidelines from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
**Authors:** Farrell PM, White TB, Ren CL, Hempstead SE, Accurso F, Derichs N, Howenstine M, McColley SA, Rock M, Rosenfeld M, Sermet-Gaudelus I, Southern KW, Marshall BC, Sosnay PR
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.09.064](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.09.064)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2017 Feb;181S:S4-S15.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.09.064.

Diagnosis of Cystic Fibrosis: Consensus Guidelines from the Cystic Fibrosis 
Foundation.

Farrell PM(1), White TB(2), Ren CL(3), Hempstead SE(2), Accurso F(4), Derichs 
N(5), Howenstine M(3), McColley SA(6), Rock M(1), Rosenfeld M(7), 
Sermet-Gaudelus I(8), Southern KW(9), Marshall BC(2), Sosnay PR(10).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Population Health Sciences, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI.
(2)Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, MD.
(3)Section of Pediatric Pulmonology, Allergy, and Sleep Medicine, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Riley Hospital for Children, Indianapolis, IN.
(4)Section of Pediatric Pulmonology, Colorado School of Public Health, 
University of Colorado School of Medicine and Children's Hospital Colorado, 
Aurora, CO.
(5)CFTR Biomarker Center and Translational CF Research Group, CF Center, 
Pediatric Pulmonology and Immunology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, and Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's 
Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(7)Seattle Children's Research Institute and Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA.
(8)Centres de Ressources et de Compétences pour la Mucoviscidose, Institut 
Necker Enfants Malades/INSERM U1151, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, 
France.
(9)Department of Women's and Children's Health, University of Liverpool, 
Institute in the Park, Alder Hey Children's Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(10)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.

Erratum in
    J Pediatr. 2017 May;184:243. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.02.028.

OBJECTIVE: Cystic fibrosis (CF), caused by mutations in the CF transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, continues to present diagnostic challenges. 
Newborn screening and an evolving understanding of CF genetics have prompted a 
reconsideration of the diagnosis criteria.
STUDY DESIGN: To improve diagnosis and achieve standardized definitions 
worldwide, the CF Foundation convened a committee of 32 experts in CF diagnosis 
from 9 countries to develop clear and actionable consensus guidelines on the 
diagnosis of CF and to clarify diagnostic criteria and terminology for other 
disorders associated with CFTR mutations. An a priori threshold of ≥80% 
affirmative votes was required for acceptance of each recommendation statement.
RESULTS: After reviewing relevant literature, the committee convened to review 
evidence and cases. Following the conference, consensus statements were 
developed by an executive subcommittee. The entire consensus committee voted and 
approved 27 of 28 statements, 7 of which needed revisions and a second round of 
voting.
CONCLUSIONS: It is recommended that diagnoses associated with CFTR mutations in 
all individuals, from newborn to adult, be established by evaluation of CFTR 
function with a sweat chloride test. The latest mutation classifications 
annotated in the Clinical and Functional Translation of CFTR project 
(http://www.cftr2.org/index.php) should be used to aid in diagnosis. Newborns 
with a high immunoreactive trypsinogen level and inconclusive CFTR functional 
and genetic testing may be designated CFTR-related metabolic syndrome or CF 
screen positive, inconclusive diagnosis; these terms are now merged and 
equivalent, and CFTR-related metabolic syndrome/CF screen positive, inconclusive 
diagnosis may be used. International Statistical Classification of Diseases and 
Related Health Problems, 10th Revision codes for use in diagnoses associated 
with CFTR mutations are included.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.09.064
PMID: 28129811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]