---
reference_id: "PMID:37218670"
title: "Hemochromatosis as a secondary condition to systemic lupus erythematosus: A case report."
authors:
- Liu J
- Zeng J
- Li P
- Li L
- Gao X
journal: Int J Rheum Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.14736
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemochromatosis as a secondary condition to systemic lupus erythematosus: A case report.
**Authors:** Liu J, Zeng J, Li P, Li L, Gao X
**Journal:** Int J Rheum Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1756-185X.14736](https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-185X.14736)

## Content

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2023 Nov;26(11):2297-2300. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.14736. Epub
 2023 May 23.

Hemochromatosis as a secondary condition to systemic lupus erythematosus: A case 
report.

Liu J(1), Zeng J(1), Li P(1), Li L(1), Gao X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, The Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou 
Medical University, Guiyang, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, The 2nd Hospital Affiliated to 
Guizhou University of Chinese Traditional Medicine, Guiyang, China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder that affects 
multiple organs and systems, including joints, the cardiovascular system, lungs, 
skin, kidneys, the nervous system, and blood. The clinical presentations of SLE 
are diverse and vary widely. In this report, we present a case of a patient 
whose SLE was complicated by hemochromatosis to enhance clinicians' 
comprehension of this infrequent or rare complication of SLE. We aim to provide 
insights into the diagnosis and treatment processes of this condition.

© 2023 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1756-185X.14736
PMID: 37218670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]