---
reference_id: "PMID:31226251"
title: "Impact of population displacement and forced movements on the transmission and outbreaks of Aedes-borne viral diseases: Dengue as a model."
authors:
- Abdul-Ghani R
- Mahdy MAK
- Al-Eryani SMA
- Fouque F
- Lenhart AE
- Alkwri A
- Al-Mikhlafi AM
- Wilke ABB
- Thabet AAQ
- Beier JC
journal: Acta Trop
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105066
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of population displacement and forced movements on the transmission and outbreaks of Aedes-borne viral diseases: Dengue as a model.
**Authors:** Abdul-Ghani R, Mahdy MAK, Al-Eryani SMA, Fouque F, Lenhart AE, Alkwri A, Al-Mikhlafi AM, Wilke ABB, Thabet AAQ, Beier JC
**Journal:** Acta Trop (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105066](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105066)

## Content

1. Acta Trop. 2019 Sep;197:105066. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105066. Epub 
2019 Jun 18.

Impact of population displacement and forced movements on the transmission and 
outbreaks of Aedes-borne viral diseases: Dengue as a model.

Abdul-Ghani R(1), Mahdy MAK(2), Al-Eryani SMA(3), Fouque F(4), Lenhart AE(5), 
Alkwri A(6), Al-Mikhlafi AM(3), Wilke ABB(7), Thabet AAQ(8), Beier JC(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sana'a 
University, Sana'a, Yemen; Tropical Disease Research Center, Faculty of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Science and Technology, Sana'a, Yemen. 
Electronic address: rashadqb@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sana'a 
University, Sana'a, Yemen; Tropical Disease Research Center, Faculty of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Science and Technology, Sana'a, Yemen.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sana'a 
University, Sana'a, Yemen.
(4)UNICEF/UNDP/World Bank/WHO Special Programme for Research and Training in 
Tropical Diseases (TDR), World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(5)Center for Global Health/Division of Parasitic Diseases and 
Malaria/Entomology Branch, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(6)Integrated Vector Management Unit, National Malaria Control Programme, 
Ministry of Public Health and Population, Sana'a, Yemen.
(7)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(8)Neglected Tropical Diseases and Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Department, 
WHO Office, Sana'a, Yemen.

Population displacement and other forced movement patterns following natural 
disasters, armed conflicts or due to socioeconomic reasons contribute to the 
global emergence of Aedes-borne viral disease epidemics. In particular, dengue 
epidemiology is critically affected by situations of displacement and forced 
movement patterns, particularly within and across borders. In this respect, 
waves of human movements have been a major driver for the changing epidemiology 
and outbreaks of the disease on local, regional and global scales. Both emerging 
dengue autochthonous transmission and outbreaks in countries known to be 
non-endemic and co-circulation and hyperendemicity with multiple dengue virus 
serotypes have led to the emergence of severe disease forms such as dengue 
hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome. This paper reviews the emergence of 
dengue outbreaks driven by population displacement and forced movements 
following natural disasters and conflicts within the context of regional and 
sub-regional groupings.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105066
PMID: 31226251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]