---
reference_id: "PMID:28292540"
title: Reactive Arthritis.
authors:
- Schmitt SK
journal: Infect Dis Clin North Am
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.idc.2017.01.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reactive Arthritis.
**Authors:** Schmitt SK
**Journal:** Infect Dis Clin North Am (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.idc.2017.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idc.2017.01.002)

## Content

1. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2017 Jun;31(2):265-277. doi: 
10.1016/j.idc.2017.01.002. Epub 2017 Mar 11.

Reactive Arthritis.

Schmitt SK(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Bone and Joint Infections, Department of Infectious Disease, 
Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Cleveland 
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Desk G-21, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic 
address: schmits@ccf.org.

Reactive arthritis is classified as a spondyloarthropathy. Current concepts of 
disease suggest an infectious trigger, followed by inflammatory arthritis. 
Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the interaction of host 
susceptibility and microorganism. Diagnosis relies on a compatible clinical 
syndrome and microbiologic confirmation of the pathogen. Antibiotic therapy 
seems useful in Chlamydia-triggered arthritis. The role of antibiotics in 
arthritis triggered by enteric pathogens is less clear. The role of tumor 
necrosis factor alpha inhibitors in therapy is evolving. Many patients have a 
course limited to a few months, but others experience extraarticular disease and 
more prolonged courses.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idc.2017.01.002
PMID: 28292540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]