---
reference_id: "PMID:29478599"
title: Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Tawil R
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64076-5.00035-1
keywords:
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Microsatellite Repeats/genetics
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/genetics, physiopathology"
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Tawil R
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-64076-5.00035-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-64076-5.00035-1)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2018;148:541-548. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64076-5.00035-1.

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.

Tawil R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
NY, United States. Electronic address: Rabi_Tawil@URMC.Rochester.edu.

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is one of the most common forms of
muscular dystrophy with a distinctive pattern of skeletal muscle weakness and a
wide spectrum of disease severity. The pathophysiologic consequences of the
genetic lesion, the loss of a critical number of macrosatellite repeats (D4Z4)
in the subtelomeric region of chromosome 4q35, remained unexplained for almost
two decades. Recent studies demonstrate that contraction in the number of D4Z4
repeats results in chromatin relaxation and transcriptional de-repression of
DUX4, a gene normally expressed only in the germline. In about 5% of individuals
with phenotypic FSHD, there is no contraction in the D4Z4 repeats and yet
similar chromatin changes are present, resulting in the inappropriate expression
of the DUX4 gene. The chromatin changes in this form of FSHD (FSHD2) are the
result, in most cases, of mutations in SMCHD1, a gene on chromosome 18 involved
in chromatin regulation. The recent identification of aberrant activation of
DUX4 transcription in FSHD as the root cause of FSHD now allows for a targeted
approach to therapeutic development.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64076-5.00035-1
PMID: 29478599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
