---
reference_id: "PMID:39812834"
title: "Biomarkers in Ataxia-Telangiectasia: a Systematic Review."
authors:
- Tiet MY
- Guțu BI
- Springall-Jeggo P
- Coman D
- Willemsen M
- Van Os N
- Doria M
- Donath H
- Schubert R
- Dineen RA
- Biagiotti S
- Prayle AP
- Group ATBW
- Hensiek AE
- Horvath R
journal: J Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12766-7
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/diagnosis, metabolism, therapy"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers in Ataxia-Telangiectasia: a Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Tiet MY, Guțu BI, Springall-Jeggo P, Coman D, Willemsen M, Van Os N, Doria M, Donath H, Schubert R, Dineen RA, Biagiotti S, Prayle AP, Group ATBW, Hensiek AE, Horvath R
**Journal:** J Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-024-12766-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-024-12766-7)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2025 Jan 15;272(2):110. doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12766-7.

Biomarkers in Ataxia-Telangiectasia: a Systematic Review.

Tiet MY(1), Guțu BI(1), Springall-Jeggo P(2), Coman D(3), Willemsen M(4), Van Os 
N(4), Doria M(5), Donath H(6), Schubert R(6), Dineen RA(7)(8), Biagiotti S(9), 
Prayle AP(8)(10), Group ATBW, Hensiek AE(1), Horvath R(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, 
University of Cambridge, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0PY, UK.
(2)Ataxia Telangiectasia Society, Harpenden, UK.
(3)Queensland Children's Hospital, 501 Stanley Street, South Brisbane, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Neurology, Radboud University Medical 
Centre, Amalia Children's Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(5)Primary Immunodeficiency Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(6)Division of Pneumology, Allergology, Infectiology and Gastroenterology, 
Department of Children and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital, Goethe 
University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(7)Mental Health and Clinical Neuroscience, School of Medicine, University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(8)NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Nottingham, UK.
(9)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Urbino, Urbino, Italy.
(10)Division of Child Health, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(11)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Van Geest Centre for Brain 
Repair, University of Cambridge, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0PY, UK. 
rh732@medschl.cam.ac.uk.

Ataxia-Telangiectasia (A-T) is a very rare multisystem disease of DNA repair, 
associated with progressive disabling neurological symptoms, respiratory 
failure, immunodeficiency and cancer predisposition, leading to premature death. 
There are no curative treatments available for A-T but clinical trials have 
begun. A major limiting factor in effectively evaluating therapies for A-T is 
the lack of suitable outcome measures and biomarkers. We have performed a 
systematic review to collect the information currently available on biomarkers 
for A-T both in patients and preclinical studies. We have identified 56 reports 
discussing potential A-T biomarkers in both pre-clinical models and patients. 
These studies report on diagnostic biomarkers but prognostic biomarkers and 
responsive markers of clinical status are currently lacking. Some biomarkers of 
neurodegeneration in A-T show promise, including non-invasive neuroimaging 
biomarkers. Some biomarkers of oxidative stress and responsive markers to 
radiotherapy and steroid treatment have potential value in clinical trials. The 
formation of the A-T biomarker working group with international experts is an 
important step forward to facilitate the sharing of materials, data and 
expertise with the common goal of finding effective biomarkers for A-T.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-024-12766-7
PMCID: PMC11735505
PMID: 39812834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
have no conflict of interest.