---
reference_id: "PMID:40702280"
title: "Comparing the efficacy and safety of cyclophosphamide, infliximab and methotrexate in neurosarcoidosis: a multicenter retrospective study."
authors:
- Gomez H
- Noël N
- Schmidt J
- Aouba A
- Bourre B
- Langlois V
- Avenel M
- Benhamou Y
- Leclercq M
journal: J Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-025-13242-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Methotrexate/adverse effects, therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Sarcoidosis/drug therapy
- Retrospective Studies
- Female
- Male
- "Infliximab/adverse effects, therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- "Cyclophosphamide/adverse effects, therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Central Nervous System Diseases/drug therapy
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Aged
- Treatment Outcome
- Follow-Up Studies
- Recurrence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparing the efficacy and safety of cyclophosphamide, infliximab and methotrexate in neurosarcoidosis: a multicenter retrospective study.
**Authors:** Gomez H, Noël N, Schmidt J, Aouba A, Bourre B, Langlois V, Avenel M, Benhamou Y, Leclercq M
**Journal:** J Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-025-13242-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-025-13242-6)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2025 Jul 24;272(8):531. doi: 10.1007/s00415-025-13242-6.

Comparing the efficacy and safety of cyclophosphamide, infliximab and
methotrexate in neurosarcoidosis: a multicenter retrospective study.

Gomez H(1), Noël N(2), Schmidt J(3), Aouba A(4), Bourre B(5), Langlois V(6),
Avenel M(7), Benhamou Y(8), Leclercq M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Charles Nicolle, 76 000,
Rouen, France. Helene.gomez@chu-rouen.fr.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
University Hospital Paris Sud, 94 275, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Amiens-Picardie, 60 000,
Amiens, France.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Caen-Normandie, 14 000,
Caen, France.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Charles Nicolle, 76 000, Rouen,
France.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Jacques Monod, 76 600, Le Havre,
France.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Intercommunal Hospital Elbeuf-Louviers-Val
de Reuil, 76 500, Elbeuf, France.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Charles Nicolle, 76 000,
Rouen, France.

INTRODUCTION: Neurosarcoidosis is a granulomatous disease affecting 10% of
patients with sarcoidosis. In lack of standardized guidelines, various
therapeutic strategies exist. Beyond corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide,
infliximab, or methotrexate are available options. This study compared the
efficacy and safety of these agents as firstline therapy.
METHODS: This multicenter, retrospective, study included patients with definite
or probable neurosarcoidosis (1999-2022). Primary endpoint was relapse rate at
the end of follow-up, after first-line therapy with cyclophosphamide, infliximab
or methotrexate. Relapse was defined as a≥1-point increase in the Extrapulmonary
Organ Severity Tool score following initial improvement.
RESULTS: Fifty-two patients were included: 18 (34.6%) received cyclophosphamide,
10 (19.2%) infliximab and 24 (46.2%) methotrexate. Multivisceral impairment was
observed in 63% of patients, and neurological involvement at diagnosis in 67% of
patients. Main neurological localizations were the brain (60%), meninges (48%)
and cranial nerves (46%). Sixteen patients (30.7%) relapsed: 56% with
cyclophosphamide, 6% with infliximab and 38% with methotrexate (p = 0.06).
Median relapse-free survival was 48 months in patients treated with
cyclophosphamide, and not estimable for infliximab or methotrexate (p = 0.07).
Relapse was associated with brain involvement (p = 0.006) and younger age
(p = 0.04). At 12 months, response rate was 100% for infliximab-treated
patients, 89% for cyclophosphamide and 87% for methotrexate. All treatments
demonstrated a corticosteroid-sparing effect, with infliximab achieving the
highest proportion of patients (80%) reaching ≤ 5 mg/day at 12 months
(p = 0.07). Infections were more frequent with cyclophosphamide (p = 0.01),
however two deadly infections occured with methotrexate.
CONCLUSION: Infliximab and methotrexate appear as effective and safe options for
relapse prevention in neurosarcoidosis.

© 2025. Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-025-13242-6
PMID: 40702280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors
did not receive support from any organization for the submitted work. The
authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose. The
data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.
