---
reference_id: "PMID:38841163"
title: A comprehensive review of current knowledge on penile squamous cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Thumma N
- Pitla N
- Gorantla V
- du Plessis M
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1375882
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A comprehensive review of current knowledge on penile squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Thumma N, Pitla N, Gorantla V, du Plessis M
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2024.1375882](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2024.1375882)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2024 May 22;14:1375882. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1375882.
eCollection  2024.

A comprehensive review of current knowledge on penile squamous cell carcinoma.

Thumma N(#)(1), Pitla N(#)(1), Gorantla V(1), du Plessis M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, St George's 
University, True Blue, Grenada.
(#)Contributed equally

Neoplasm of the penis is relatively rare in most regions representing 0-2% of 
cancers worldwide. While the penis can be affected by sarcomas, basal cell 
carcinomas or even melanoma, Penile Squamous Cell Carcinoma (PSCC) represents 
approximately 95% of all penile neoplasms. Despite its rarity and most common 
presentation at later decades of life most individuals diagnosed with PSCC are 
faced with significant decrease in quality of life. The prevalence and incidence 
vary among different regions and populations, but a common trend is for 
diagnosis to occur late (stage 4). Underdeveloped countries are traditionally 
reported to have higher incidence rates; however, rates may vary significantly 
between urban and rural areas even in developed countries. Age adjusted rates 
are on the rise in some countries that used to have incidence rates of 1:100 000 
or less. The list of associated risk factors is long and includes among others, 
lack of neonatal circumcision, poor genital hygiene, socioeconomic status, 
history of human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and penile intraepithelial 
neoplasia (PeIN). Many risk factors are widely debated among experts however HPV 
and PeIN are indisputable risk factors, and both also form part of the 
classification system for PSCC. Both conditions may have occurred in the past or 
be present at the time of diagnosis and identifying them plays a major role in 
management strategies. For such a rare condition PSCC can present in many 
different forms clinically making diagnosis no easy feat. Diagnosis of PSCC is 
done through clinical examination, including lymph node palpation, followed by a 
biopsy, which is essential for the classification. Lymph node involvement is a 
common finding at first presentation and investigation of spread to deep nodes 
is important and can be done with the aid of PET-CT. Treatment options for PSCC 
include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. Surgical removal of the 
tumor is considered the most effective however can lead to severe decrease of 
quality of life. Chemotherapy is used in the case of fixed or bulky lymph nodes, 
where surgery is not indicated, and for distant metastasis. Radiation therapy is 
particularly effective in the case of HPV-positive PSCC.

Copyright © 2024 Thumma, Pitla, Gorantla and du Plessis.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1375882
PMCID: PMC11150677
PMID: 38841163

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.