---
reference_id: "PMID:35730652"
title: "The MAP3K7 gene: Further delineation of clinical characteristics and genotype/phenotype correlations."
authors:
- van Woerden GM
- Senden R
- de Konink C
- Trezza RA
- Baban A
- Bassetti JA
- van Bever Y
- Bird LM
- van Bon BW
- Brooks AS
- Guan Q
- Klee EW
- Marcelis C
- Rosado JM
- Schimmenti LA
- Shikany AR
- Terhal PA
- Nicole Weaver K
- Wessels MW
- van Wieringen H
- Hurst AC
- Gooch CF
- Steindl K
- Joset P
- Rauch A
- Tartaglia M
- Niceta M
- Elgersma Y
- Demirdas S
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24425
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Genotype
- "Hearing Loss, Bilateral"
- Humans
- Mitral Valve Insufficiency
- Mutation
- Noonan Syndrome/genetics
- Osteosclerosis
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The MAP3K7 gene: Further delineation of clinical characteristics and genotype/phenotype correlations.
**Authors:** van Woerden GM, Senden R, de Konink C, Trezza RA, Baban A, Bassetti JA, van Bever Y, Bird LM, van Bon BW, Brooks AS, Guan Q, Klee EW, Marcelis C, Rosado JM, Schimmenti LA, Shikany AR, Terhal PA, Nicole Weaver K, Wessels MW, van Wieringen H, Hurst AC, Gooch CF, Steindl K, Joset P, Rauch A, Tartaglia M, Niceta M, Elgersma Y, Demirdas S
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24425](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24425)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2022 Oct;43(10):1377-1395. doi: 10.1002/humu.24425. Epub 2022 Jul
29.

The MAP3K7 gene: Further delineation of clinical characteristics and 
genotype/phenotype correlations.

van Woerden GM(1)(2)(3), Senden R(2), de Konink C(1)(3), Trezza RA(1)(3), Baban 
A(4), Bassetti JA(5), van Bever Y(2)(3), Bird LM(6)(7), van Bon BW(8), Brooks 
AS(2)(3), Guan Q(9)(10), Klee EW(11)(12), Marcelis C(8), Rosado JM(11)(12)(13), 
Schimmenti LA(14), Shikany AR(15), Terhal PA(16), Nicole Weaver K(9)(10), 
Wessels MW(2), van Wieringen H(17), Hurst AC(18), Gooch CF(18), Steindl K(19), 
Joset P(20), Rauch A(19), Tartaglia M(21), Niceta M(21)(22), Elgersma Y(2)(3), 
Demirdas S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, The ENCORE Expertise Center for 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiac Arrhythmias Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(5)Division of Medical Genetics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York City, New 
York, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
California, USA.
(7)Division of Genetics/Dysmorphology, Rady Children's Hospital San Diego, San 
Diego, California, USA.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(9)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(11)Division of Computational Biology, Department of Quantitative Health 
Sciences, Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(12)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(13)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(14)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Ophthalmology, 
Clinical Genomics, and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(15)The Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(16)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, St. Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The 
Netherlands.
(18)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, USA.
(19)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zürich, Schlieren, Switzerland.
(20)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, 
University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(21)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Mitogen-activated protein 3 kinase 7 (MAP3K7) encodes the ubiquitously expressed 
transforming growth factor β-activated kinase 1, which plays a crucial role in 
many cellular processes. Mutationsin the MAP3K7 gene have been linked to two 
distinct disorders: frontometaphyseal dysplasia type 2 (FMD2) and 
cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome (CSCF). The fact that different mutations can 
induce two distinct phenotypes suggests a phenotype/genotype correlation, but no 
side-by-side comparison has been done thus far to confirm this. Here, we 
significantly expand the cohort and the description of clinical phenotypes for 
patients with CSCF and FMD2 who carry mutations in MAP3K7. Our findings support 
that in contrast to FMD2-causing mutations, CSCF-causing mutations in MAP3K7 
have a loss-of-function effect. Additionally, patients with pathogenic mutations 
in MAP3K7 are at risk for (severe) cardiac disease, have symptoms associated 
with connective tissue disease, and we show overlap in clinical phenotypes of 
CSCF with Noonan syndrome (NS). Together, we confirm a molecular fingerprint of 
FMD2- versus CSCF-causing MAP3K7 mutations and conclude that mutations in MAP3K7 
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients with syndromic 
congenital cardiac defects and/or cardiomyopathy, syndromic connective tissue 
disorders, and in the differential diagnosis of NS.

© 2022 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24425
PMCID: PMC9544731
PMID: 35730652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.