---
reference_id: "PMID:12970316"
title: Agenesis of human pancreas due to decreased half-life of insulin promoter factor 1.
authors:
- Schwitzgebel VM
- Mamin A
- Brun T
- Ritz-Laser B
- Zaiko M
- Maret A
- Jornayvaz FR
- Theintz GE
- Michielin O
- Melloul D
- Philippe J
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2003-030046
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cricetinae
- DNA/genetics
- Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay
- "Genes, Reporter/genetics"
- Glucose Tolerance Test
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- Half-Life
- Homeodomain Proteins
- Humans
- Isotope Labeling
- "Luminescent Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutagenesis
- Mutation/physiology
- "Pancreas/abnormalities, growth & development"
- Plasmids/genetics
- Precipitin Tests
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Trans-Activators/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Transcriptional Activation/genetics
- Transfection
- "Translocation, Genetic/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Agenesis of human pancreas due to decreased half-life of insulin promoter factor 1.
**Authors:** Schwitzgebel VM, Mamin A, Brun T, Ritz-Laser B, Zaiko M, Maret A, Jornayvaz FR, Theintz GE, Michielin O, Melloul D, Philippe J
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2003-030046](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2003-030046)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Sep;88(9):4398-406. doi: 10.1210/jc.2003-030046.

Agenesis of human pancreas due to decreased half-life of insulin promoter factor 
1.

Schwitzgebel VM(1), Mamin A, Brun T, Ritz-Laser B, Zaiko M, Maret A, Jornayvaz 
FR, Theintz GE, Michielin O, Melloul D, Philippe J.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, Geneva University Hospital, CH-1211 
Geneva, Switzerland. valerie.schwitzgebel@medcli.unige.ch

Neonatal diabetes mellitus can be transient or permanent. The severe form of 
permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus can be associated with pancreas agenesis. 
Normal pancreas development is controlled by a cascade of transcription factors, 
where insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF1) plays a crucial role. Here, we describe 
two novel mutations in the IPF1 gene leading to pancreas agenesis. Direct 
sequence analysis of exons 1 and 2 of the IPF1 gene revealed two point mutations 
within the homeobox in exon 2. Genetic analysis of the parents showed that each 
mutation was inherited from one parent. Mutations localized in helices 1 and 2, 
respectively, of the homeodomain, decreased the protein half-life significantly, 
leading to intracellular IPF1 levels of 36% and 27% of wild-type levels. Both 
mutant forms of IPF1 were normally translocated to the nucleus, and their DNA 
binding activity on different known target promoters was similar to that of the 
wild-type protein. However, transcriptional activity of both mutant IPF1 
proteins, alone or in combination with HNF3 beta/Foxa2, Pbx1, or the heterodimer 
E47-beta 2 was reduced, findings accounted for by decreased IPF1 steady state 
levels and not by impaired protein-protein interactions. We conclude that the 
IPF1 level is critical for human pancreas formation.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2003-030046
PMID: 12970316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]