---
reference_id: PMID:40088708
title: "Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease (MOGAD): Insights into pathogenesis and biomarkers of prognosis."
authors:
- Andersen J
- Brilot F
journal: Semin Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2025.101944
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Biomarkers
- Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein Antibody-Associated Disease
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/immunology
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease (MOGAD): Insights into pathogenesis and biomarkers of prognosis.
**Authors:** Andersen J, Brilot F
**Journal:** Semin Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.smim.2025.101944](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smim.2025.101944)

## Content

1. Semin Immunol. 2025 Jun;78:101944. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2025.101944. Epub 2025 
Mar 14.

Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease (MOGAD): 
Insights into pathogenesis and biomarkers of prognosis.

Andersen J(1), Brilot F(2).

Author information:
(1)Kids Neuroscience Centre, Kids Research at the Children's Hospital at 
Westmead, Sydney, Australia; The University of Sydney, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health, School of Medical Sciences, Sydney, Australia.
(2)Kids Neuroscience Centre, Kids Research at the Children's Hospital at 
Westmead, Sydney, Australia; Brain and Mind Centre, The University of Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia; The University of Sydney, Faculty of Medicine and Health, 
School of Medical Sciences, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: 
fabienne.brilot@sydney.edu.au.

MOG antibody-associated disease (MOGAD), an inflammatory demyelinating 
pathology, is typically associated with the clinical phenotypes acute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), optic neuritis (ON), or transverse 
myelitis (TM). The mainstay of diagnosis is detection of antibodies targeting 
oligodendrocyte-expressed MOG (MOG-IgG). MOG-IgG-mediated demyelination occurs 
via complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC), antibody-dependent cellular 
cytotoxicity (ADCC), enhanced cognate T-cell CNS infiltration and activation, 
and oligodendrocyte cytoskeleton disruption, but the exact role of the immune 
system in MOGAD is still poorly understood. The disease course is either 
monophasic or relapsing, with relapsing course affecting approximately 
two-thirds of individuals. Neurological disability accumulates with relapse and 
may manifest as visual, motor, sensory, and cognitive deficits. Thus, accurate 
disease course prediction is of paramount importance. Prognostic biomarkers, 
implemented at a global scale, have the potential to guide timely therapeutic 
decisions to limit relapse-associated disability accrual while simultaneously 
avoiding unnecessary immunosuppression in monophasic individuals. This review 
explores recent insights in the understanding of MOGAD pathogenesis as well as 
advances in prognostic biomarkers of relapsing course and disease activity.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2025.101944
PMID: 40088708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest JA and FB have 
no competing interest.