---
reference_id: "PMID:35946357"
title: Clinical history analysis of Japanese melanoma cases and characteristics of melanoma with childhood onset.
authors:
- Minagawa A
- Uhara H
- Ashida A
- Koga H
- Okuyama R
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16545
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical history analysis of Japanese melanoma cases and characteristics of melanoma with childhood onset.
**Authors:** Minagawa A, Uhara H, Ashida A, Koga H, Okuyama R
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.16545](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.16545)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2022 Dec;49(12):1334-1337. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16545. Epub 2022
 Aug 10.

Clinical history analysis of Japanese melanoma cases and characteristics of 
melanoma with childhood onset.

Minagawa A(1), Uhara H(1)(2), Ashida A(1), Koga H(1), Okuyama R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, 
Sapporo, Japan.

It remains debatable whether melanoma with a clinical history of early childhood 
onset truly arises from a nevus. To clarify the clinical and genetic 
characteristics of melanoma detected at birth or several years afterwards, 249 
melanoma cases seen at Shinshu University Hospital between 2006 and 2015 were 
retrospectively analyzed. Ten (4.0%) cases (median age 39.5 years, range 
19-70 years; male/female 2/8; lesion site, 6 extremities, 2 trunk, 1 head, 1 
face; cumulative sun damage [CSD] skin, 9 low-CSD, 1 high-CSD; detection at 
birth 3) had recorded early childhood onset. Median Breslow's tumor thickness in 
those cases was 6.0 mm (range: 0.4-17.5 mm). The frequency of lesions detected 
at <20 years of age was significantly higher for low-CSD melanoma (17.5%) than 
for high-CSD (3.3%) and acral (0.8%) melanoma. Although melanoma with a history 
of early childhood onset is rare, the characteristics of such cases should be 
established since most have progressed to an advanced stage at the initial 
visit.

© 2022 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.16545
PMID: 35946357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]