---
reference_id: "PMID:30957405"
title: "Association between PTPN22-1123G/C and susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Wu X
- Yang HJ
- Jung Kim M
- Zhang T
- Qiu JY
- Park S
journal: Int J Rheum Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.13535
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between PTPN22-1123G/C and susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Wu X, Yang HJ, Jung Kim M, Zhang T, Qiu JY, Park S
**Journal:** Int J Rheum Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1756-185X.13535](https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-185X.13535)

## Content

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2019 May;22(5):769-780. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.13535. Epub
2019  Apr 7.

Association between PTPN22-1123G/C and susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Wu X(1), Yang HJ(2), Jung Kim M(2), Zhang T(1), Qiu JY(1), Park S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Obesity/Diabetes Research Center, Hoseo 
University, Asan, South Korea.
(2)Food Functional Research Division, Korean Food Research Institutes, Wanjoo, 
Korea.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) varies greatly among 
different ethnic groups, suggesting genetic susceptibility. The several genetic 
variants of protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22-1123G/C, 
rs2488457) have been widely examined. We systematically evaluated the 
association of PTPN22-1123 and RA risk by pooling the related studies conducted 
in different races.
METHODS: Literature was searched using PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, Korean 
scientific database, Chinese medical databases, and the Indian medical database 
to identify eligible studies for determining the association of PTPN22-1123 and 
RA risk. The association was assessed in five genetic random effects models 
including the allelic (AG), recessive (RG), dominant (DG), homozygous (HMG), and 
heterozygous (HTG) genetic models. Subgroup analyses stratified by ethnicity 
(Asians and non-Asians) were assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 10 articles were selected that met the criteria including 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Subjects included 14 186 healthy controls and 5735 
with RA. The AG, RG, DG, and HMG genetic models showed no heterogeneity, but the 
HTG model showed heterogeneity. AG and RG did not exhibit publication bias in 
any of the studies including Asian and non-Asian subgroups. The overall effect 
of PTPN22-1123 on RA risk in all genetic random models showed significant 
positive associations (AG: odds ratio [OR]: 1.24; CI: 1.08-1.42; P = 0.002; RG: 
OR: 1.35; CI: 1.15-1.59; P = 0.0003; DG: OR: 1.42; CI: 1.09-1.85; P = 0.009; 
HMG: OR: 1.69; CI: 1.22-2.34; P = 0.002). A significant association when pooling 
the studies was only revealed in non-Asians (P < 0.05), but no significant 
relationship was shown in Asians.
CONCLUSIONS: People with C allele in PTPN22-1123 increased the risk of RA only 
in non-Asians.

© 2019 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1756-185X.13535
PMID: 30957405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]