---
reference_id: "PMID:32554361"
title: "Pitfalls in the diagnosis of Jeavons syndrome: a study of 32 cases and review of the literature."
authors:
- Reyhani A
- Özkara Ç
journal: Epileptic Disord
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1684/epd.2020.1162
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pitfalls in the diagnosis of Jeavons syndrome: a study of 32 cases and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Reyhani A, Özkara Ç
**Journal:** Epileptic Disord (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1684/epd.2020.1162](https://doi.org/10.1684/epd.2020.1162)

## Content

1. Epileptic Disord. 2020 Jun 1;22(3):281-290. doi: 10.1684/epd.2020.1162.

Pitfalls in the diagnosis of Jeavons syndrome: a study of 32 cases and review of 
the literature.

Reyhani A(1), Özkara Ç(2).

Author information:
(1)Health Sciences University, Fatih Sultan Mehmet Education and Research 
Hospital, Department of Neurology, Istanbul.
(2)Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Neurology, 
Istanbul, Turkey.

Jeavons syndrome (JS) is mainly characterized by eyelid myoclonia with or 
without absences. It is thought to be underdiagnosed rather than have a rare 
prevalence. We aimed to investigate the electroclinical features of JS to 
determine possible factors influencing the diagnosis. We retrospectively 
identified the medical records of 32 cases (0.55%) from 5,796 patients with 
epilepsy. The inclusion criteria were: (1) eyelid myoclonia with or without 
absences; (2) generalized paroxysmal activity on EEG; and (3) discharges 
triggered by eyelid closure and/or intermittent photic stimulation. Eighteen 
(56.2%) of the patients were female. The mean age at seizure onset was 8.7±5.3 
years and the mean age at admission to hospital was 17.8±10.7 years. A family 
history of epilepsy was present in 15 (46.8%) patients. Eyelid myoclonias were 
noticed in six (18.7%) patients by themselves. Based on the analysis of 
video-EEG recordings, 26 (81.2%) patients were sensitive to eye closure, 22 
(68.7%) had photoparoxysmal responses, and 16 (50%) presented with absence 
seizures. Ten (31.2%) patients had focal epileptic discharges. Eight (25%) 
patients were on monotherapy. Seven (21.8%) patients achieved seizure freedom. 
Three patients underwent ketogenic diet therapy, which was effective in two 
patients. A vagus nerve stimulator was implanted into three patients, one of 
whom reported seizure reduction. Eyelid myoclonias are the main seizure type of 
JS but are usually overlooked. The time interval between seizure onset and 
clinical diagnosis suggests that this syndrome continues to be under-recognized. 
The genetic heterogeneity and phenotypic variability are likely to be more 
extensive than currently recognized, making the diagnosis more phalangine. 
[Published with video sequence].

DOI: 10.1684/epd.2020.1162
PMID: 32554361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]