---
reference_id: "PMID:31809500"
title: "Inferring reaction network structure from single-cell, multiplex data, using toric systems theory."
authors:
- Wang S
- Lin JR
- Sontag ED
- Sorger PK
journal: PLoS Comput Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007311
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inferring reaction network structure from single-cell, multiplex data, using toric systems theory.
**Authors:** Wang S, Lin JR, Sontag ED, Sorger PK
**Journal:** PLoS Comput Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007311](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007311)

## Content

1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2019 Dec 6;15(12):e1007311. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007311.  eCollection 2019 Dec.

Inferring reaction network structure from single-cell, multiplex data, using 
toric systems theory.

Wang S(1)(2), Lin JR(1), Sontag ED(1)(3), Sorger PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Department of Systems Biology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Harvard Graduate Program in Biophysics, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering and of Bioengineering, 
Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The goal of many single-cell studies on eukaryotic cells is to gain insight into 
the biochemical reactions that control cell fate and state. In this paper we 
introduce the concept of Effective Stoichiometric Spaces (ESS) to guide the 
reconstruction of biochemical networks from multiplexed, fixed time-point, 
single-cell data. In contrast to methods based solely on statistical models of 
data, the ESS method leverages the power of the geometric theory of toric 
varieties to begin unraveling the structure of chemical reaction networks (CRN). 
This application of toric theory enables a data-driven mapping of covariance 
relationships in single-cell measurements into stoichiometric information, one 
in which each cell subpopulation has its associated ESS interpreted in terms of 
CRN theory. In the development of ESS we reframe certain aspects of the theory 
of CRN to better match data analysis. As an application of our approach we 
process cytomery- and image-based single-cell datasets and identify differences 
in cells treated with kinase inhibitors. Our approach is directly applicable to 
data acquired using readily accessible experimental methods such as Fluorescence 
Activated Cell Sorting (FACS) and multiplex immunofluorescence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007311
PMCID: PMC6919632
PMID: 31809500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: PKS is a member of 
the SAB or Board of Directors of Merrimack Pharmaceutical, Glencoe Software, 
Applied Biomath, and RareCyte and has received research funding from Novartis 
and Merck. PKS declares that none of these relationships are directly or 
indirectly related to the content of this manuscript.