---
reference_id: "PMID:36649687"
title: "Adrenal Insufficiency in Peroxisomal Disorders: A Single Institution Case Series."
authors:
- Gagnon C
- Hurst ACE
- Ashraf AP
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000529126
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adrenal Insufficiency in Peroxisomal Disorders: A Single Institution Case Series.
**Authors:** Gagnon C, Hurst ACE, Ashraf AP
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000529126](https://doi.org/10.1159/000529126)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2023;96(4):439-445. doi: 10.1159/000529126. Epub 2023 Jan
17.

Adrenal Insufficiency in Peroxisomal Disorders: A Single Institution Case 
Series.

Gagnon C(1), Hurst ACE(2), Ashraf AP(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Alabama at Birmingham Marnix E. Heersink School of Medicine, 
Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

INTRODUCTION: There are two major categories of peroxisomal disorders (PDs): 
peroxisomal biogenesis disorders (PBDs) due to defects in peroxisomal (PEX) 
genes and deficiency of other peroxisomal enzymes (such as D-bifunctional enzyme 
deficiency due to HSD17B4). PDs are characterized by abnormal elevations of 
very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA). We aimed to evaluate the clinical phenotype 
of adrenal insufficiency in patients with PD and to assess any 
genotype-phenotype correlations with adrenal insufficiency.
CASE PRESENTATION: We performed a retrospective electronic medical record review 
at a single university medical center, of data over 12 years and identified 7 
patients with PD. Of the 7 patients identified, 6 patients had a diagnosis of 
PBD and one had a single peroxisomal enzyme deficiency, HSD17B4. The average age 
of the patients at diagnosis were 0.61 ± 0.66 years. Four patients (66.7%) had 
primary adrenal insufficiency: 3, out of the 4, patients had elevated baseline 
ACTH. Three patients failed to have increased response after the Cortrosyn™ 
stimulation test. Three patients were on daily hydrocortisone replacement, and 1 
patient was on stress-dose hydrocortisone only as needed. Specific genetic 
variant analysis revealed that all the 3 patients with PBD and adrenal 
insufficiency who were on steroid supplementation had the compound heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in exon 13 of PEX1 c.2097dupT (p.Ile700Tyrfs*42) and 
c.2528G>A (p.Gly843Asp), while the 1 patient with peroxisomal enzyme deficiency 
and adrenal insufficiency had compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in 
HSD17B4 c.1369A>T (p.Asn457Tyr) and c.1210 - 1G>A (splice acceptor). Two of 
these patients with PEX1 variants also required mineralocorticoid 
supplementation. The 3 PBD patients without adrenal insufficiency did not have a 
PEX1 variant.
DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION: Primary adrenal insufficiency is common in patients with 
PD. Based on our data, patients with the compound heterozygous PEX1 pathogenic 
variants of exon 13 (c.2097dupT and c.2528G>A) tend to have adrenal 
insufficiency. Aldosterone deficiency, though rare, can occur in PD.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000529126
PMID: 36649687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]