---
reference_id: "PMID:23181788"
title: "HLA-DQ strikes again: genome-wide association study further confirms HLA-DQ in the diagnosis of asthma among adults."
authors:
- Lasky-Su J
- Himes BE
- Raby BA
- Klanderman BJ
- Sylvia JS
- Lange C
- Melen E
- Martinez FD
- Israel E
- Gauderman J
- Gilliland F
- Sleiman P
- Hakonarson H
- Celedón JC
- Soto-Quiros M
- Avila L
- Lima JJ
- Irvin CG
- Peters SP
- Boushey H
- Chinchilli VM
- Mauger D
- Tantisira K
- Weiss ST
- SHARP investigators
journal: Clin Exp Allergy
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/cea.12000
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA-DQ strikes again: genome-wide association study further confirms HLA-DQ in the diagnosis of asthma among adults.
**Authors:** Lasky-Su J, Himes BE, Raby BA, Klanderman BJ, Sylvia JS, Lange C, Melen E, Martinez FD, Israel E, Gauderman J, Gilliland F, Sleiman P, Hakonarson H, Celedón JC, Soto-Quiros M, Avila L, Lima JJ, Irvin CG, Peters SP, Boushey H, Chinchilli VM, Mauger D, Tantisira K, Weiss ST, SHARP investigators
**Journal:** Clin Exp Allergy (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cea.12000](https://doi.org/10.1111/cea.12000)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Allergy. 2012 Dec;42(12):1724-33. doi: 10.1111/cea.12000.

HLA-DQ strikes again: genome-wide association study further confirms HLA-DQ in 
the diagnosis of asthma among adults.

Lasky-Su J(1), Himes BE, Raby BA, Klanderman BJ, Sylvia JS, Lange C, Melen E, 
Martinez FD, Israel E, Gauderman J, Gilliland F, Sleiman P, Hakonarson H, 
Celedón JC, Soto-Quiros M, Avila L, Lima JJ, Irvin CG, Peters SP, Boushey H, 
Chinchilli VM, Mauger D, Tantisira K, Weiss ST; SHARP investigators.

Author information:
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a common chronic respiratory disease in children and 
adults. An important genetic component to asthma susceptibility has long been 
recognized, most recently through the identification of several genes (e.g., 
ORMDL3, PDE4D, HLA-DQ, and TLE4) via genome-wide association studies.
OBJECTIVE: To identify genetic variants associated with asthma affection status 
using genome-wide association data.
METHODS: We describe results from a genome-wide association study on asthma 
performed in 3855 subjects using a panel of 455 089 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs).
RESULT: The genome-wide association study resulted in the prioritization of 33 
variants for immediate follow-up in a multi-staged replication effort. Of these, 
a common polymorphism (rs9272346) localizing to within 1 Kb of HLA-DQA1 
(chromosome 6p21.3) was associated with asthma in adults (P-value = 2.2E-08) 
with consistent evidence in the more heterogeneous group of adults and children 
(P-value = 1.0E-04). Moreover, some genes identified in prior asthma GWAS were 
nominally associated with asthma in our populations.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our findings further replicate the HLA-DQ region in the 
pathogenesis of asthma. HLA-DQA1 is the fourth member of the HLA family found to 
be associated with asthma, in addition to the previously identified HLA-DRA, 
HLA-DQB1 and HLA-DQA2.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cea.12000
PMCID: PMC6343489
PMID: 23181788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests: Charles Irvin’s work was 
funded by a grant from the American Lung Association. Stephen Peters has been a 
member of the NHLBI’s ACRN since its creation in 1993. Homer Boushey received 
funding from the NIH for his participation in the research of the Inner City 
Asthma Consortium, from Genentech for research on the airway microbiome of 
severe asthma, and from GlaxoSmithKline for research on bronchial epithelial 
cell susceptibility to viral infection. He has served as an ad-hoc consultant or 
advisory board member for Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Kalobios, Pharmaxis, Merck 
and Johnson & Johnson. Vernon Chinchilli, Blanca Himes, Scott Weiss, Juan 
Celedon, Barbara Klanderman, Erik Melen, Hakon Hakonarson, Lydiana Avila, 
Benjamin Raby, Kelan Tantisira, David Mauger, Patrick Sleiman, Fernando 
Martinez, W. James Gauderman, Frank Gilliland, John Lima, Elliot Israel, 
Christoph Lange, Jody Senter Sylvia, Manuel Soto Quiros and Jessica Lasky-Su 
have no conflict of interests to declare