---
reference_id: "PMID:39529965"
title: Clinical characteristics and treatment efficacy in patients with primary severe IGF-1 deficiency treated with recombinant IGF-1.
authors:
- Denaite D
- Navardauskaite R
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1461163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics and treatment efficacy in patients with primary severe IGF-1 deficiency treated with recombinant IGF-1.
**Authors:** Denaite D, Navardauskaite R
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1461163](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1461163)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Oct 28;12:1461163. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1461163. 
eCollection 2024.

Clinical characteristics and treatment efficacy in patients with primary severe 
IGF-1 deficiency treated with recombinant IGF-1.

Denaite D(1), Navardauskaite R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Medical Academy, Lithuanian University of Health 
Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.

AIM OF THE STUDY: To evaluate the clinical characteristics and treatment 
efficacy of patients with severe primary IGF-1 deficiency (PSIGFD) using a 
recombinant IGF-1 (rhIGF-1).
OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY: To examine the clinical characteristics of patients 
with PSIGFD before starting treatment with a rIGF-1. To assess the height 
changes in patients with PSIGFD, before and after treatment with a rhIGF-1. To 
analyze the clinical characteristics, side effect frequency, and treatment 
efficacy with a rhIGF-1 analog in patients with PSIGFD.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted on patients with PSIGFD treated 
with the rhIGF-1 (mecasermin). Data were collected from patients' medical 
records, focusing on the impact of treatment on their growth and monitoring any 
side effects.
RESULTS: The study showed that treatment with rhIGF-1 positively affects growth 
rate, especially in the first years of treatment. However, the growth rate 
decreases over time. The change in height from the beginning to the end of the 
treatment was 0.76 ± 0.64 SD, with the first quartile at 0.29 SD and the third 
quartile at 1.14 SD. During the treatment period, patients' average body mass 
increased by 0.37 ± 1.35 SD, with the first quartile at -0.33 SD and the third 
quartile at 0.92 SD. Side effects occurred in 50% of patients, with 40% of 
patients treated with rhIGF-1 experiencing hypoglycemia during treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with rhIGF-1 is effective in treating patients with 
PSIGFD, causing significant improvement in growth, but requires continuous 
monitoring and treatment adjustment.

© 2024 Denaite and Navardauskaite.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1461163
PMCID: PMC11550965
PMID: 39529965

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.