---
reference_id: "PMID:15703192"
title: "A diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (SLC26A2) mutant mouse: morphological and biochemical characterization of the resulting chondrodysplasia phenotype."
authors:
- Forlino A
- Piazza R
- Tiveron C
- Della Torre S
- Tatangelo L
- Bonafè L
- Gualeni B
- Romano A
- Pecora F
- Superti-Furga A
- Cetta G
- Rossi A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi079
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (SLC26A2) mutant mouse: morphological and biochemical characterization of the resulting chondrodysplasia phenotype.
**Authors:** Forlino A, Piazza R, Tiveron C, Della Torre S, Tatangelo L, Bonafè L, Gualeni B, Romano A, Pecora F, Superti-Furga A, Cetta G, Rossi A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddi079](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddi079)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Mar 15;14(6):859-71. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi079. Epub 2005
Feb  9.

A diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (SLC26A2) mutant mouse: 
morphological and biochemical characterization of the resulting chondrodysplasia 
phenotype.

Forlino A(1), Piazza R, Tiveron C, Della Torre S, Tatangelo L, Bonafè L, Gualeni 
B, Romano A, Pecora F, Superti-Furga A, Cetta G, Rossi A.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica Alessandro Castellani, Università di Pavia, Italy.

Mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (DTDST or SLC26A2) 
cause a family of recessively inherited chondrodysplasias including, in order of 
decreasing severity, achondrogenesis 1B, atelosteogenesis 2, diastrophic 
dysplasia (DTD) and recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. The gene encodes a 
widely distributed sulfate/chloride antiporter of the cell membrane whose 
function is crucial for the uptake of inorganic sulfate, which is needed for 
proteoglycan sulfation. To provide new insights in the pathogenetic mechanisms 
leading to skeletal and connective tissue dysplasia and to obtain an in vivo 
model for therapeutic approaches to DTD, we generated a Dtdst knock-in mouse 
with a partial loss of function of the sulfate transporter. In addition, the 
intronic neomycine cassette in the mutant allele contributed to the hypomorphic 
phenotype by inducing abnormal splicing. Homozygous mutant mice were 
characterized by growth retardation, skeletal dysplasia and joint contractures, 
thereby recapitulating essential aspects of the DTD phenotype in man. The 
skeletal phenotype included reduced toluidine blue staining of cartilage, 
chondrocytes of irregular size, delay in the formation of the secondary 
ossification center and osteoporosis of long bones. Impaired sulfate uptake was 
demonstrated in chondrocytes, osteoblasts and fibroblasts. In spite of the 
generalized nature of the sulfate uptake defect, significant proteoglycan 
undersulfation was detected only in cartilage. Chondrocyte proliferation and 
apoptosis studies suggested that reduced proliferation and/or lack of terminal 
chondrocyte differentiation might contribute to reduced bone growth. The 
similarity with human DTD makes this mouse strain a useful model to explore 
pathogenetic and therapeutic aspects of DTDST-related disorders.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi079
PMID: 15703192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]