---
reference_id: "PMID:31554630"
title: For Women, Lynch Syndrome Is About More than Colon Cancer.
authors:
- Parker WM
- Hennig K
- Burton-Chase AM
journal: Cancer Prev Res (Phila)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-19-0069
content_type: abstract_only
---

# For Women, Lynch Syndrome Is About More than Colon Cancer.
**Authors:** Parker WM, Hennig K, Burton-Chase AM
**Journal:** Cancer Prev Res (Phila) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-19-0069](https://doi.org/10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-19-0069)

## Content

1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2019 Dec;12(12):831-836. doi: 
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-19-0069. Epub 2019 Sep 25.

For Women, Lynch Syndrome Is About More than Colon Cancer.

Parker WM(1), Hennig K(2), Burton-Chase AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health Sciences, Albany College of Pharmacy and 
Health Sciences, Albany, New York. wendy.parker@acphs.edu.
(2)Department of Population Health Sciences, Albany College of Pharmacy and 
Health Sciences, Albany, New York.

Lynch syndrome, also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, has 
historically been characterized by a predisposition to colorectal cancer; 
however, for women with Lynch syndrome, the risks for gynecologic cancers pose 
an equal or greater risk than colorectal cancer. In addition, the gynecologic 
cancer is often the first cancer that presents in these patients. Also of 
importance to women with Lynch syndrome is the efficacy of gynecologic cancer 
screening being significantly lower than colorectal cancer screening, leading to 
inconsistency in provider recommendations for gynecologic screening and 
surveillance. We had the chance to listen to women with Lynch syndrome, in their 
own words, discuss their health care experiences as they relate to gynecologic 
cancer risk, and identified several important themes. They describe feeling 
confused about their screening and surveillance options while also being heavily 
reliant on their health care providers for guidance. In addition, women with 
Lynch syndrome discuss attempting to balance medical management of Lynch 
syndrome with their reproductive choices. Finally, they believe that increased 
awareness by women and their providers about the gynecologic cancer risks 
associated with Lynch syndrome should be a higher priority. We view the words of 
these women as a call to action for Lynch syndrome patients, clinicians, 
researchers, and advocates.

©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-19-0069
PMID: 31554630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]