---
reference_id: "PMID:39609713"
title: Long-read sequencing enables comprehensive molecular genetic diagnosis of Fabry disease.
authors:
- Yao F
- Hao N
- Li D
- Zhang W
- Zhou J
- Qiu Z
- Mao A
- Meng W
- Liu J
journal: Hum Genomics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40246-024-00697-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-read sequencing enables comprehensive molecular genetic diagnosis of Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Yao F, Hao N, Li D, Zhang W, Zhou J, Qiu Z, Mao A, Meng W, Liu J
**Journal:** Hum Genomics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40246-024-00697-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40246-024-00697-3)

## Content

1. Hum Genomics. 2024 Nov 28;18(1):133. doi: 10.1186/s40246-024-00697-3.

Long-read sequencing enables comprehensive molecular genetic diagnosis of Fabry 
disease.

Yao F(#)(1), Hao N(#)(2), Li D(#)(3), Zhang W(1), Zhou J(2), Qiu Z(4), Mao A(3), 
Meng W(3), Liu J(5).

Author information:
(1)The Laboratory of Clinical Genetics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College 
Hospital, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Research and Development, Berry Genomics Corporation, Beijing, 
China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union 
Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College 
Hospital, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China. liujt@pumch.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The clinical diagnosis of Fabry Disease (FD) can be challenging due 
to the clinical heterogeneity, especially in females. Patients with FD often 
experience a prolonged interval between the onset of symptoms and receiving a 
diagnosis. Genetic testing is the gold standard for precise diagnosis of FD, 
however conventional genetic testing could miss deep intronic variants and large 
deletions or duplications. Although next-generation sequencing, which analyzes 
numerous genes, has been successfully used for FD diagnosis and can detect 
complex variants, an effective and rapid tool for identifying a wide range of 
variants is imminent, contributing to decrease the diagnostic delay.
METHODS: The comprehensive Analysis of FD (CAFD) assay was developed for FD 
genetic diagnosis, employing long-range PCR coupled with long-read sequencing to 
target the full-length GLA gene and its flanking regions. Its clinical 
performance was assessed through a comparative analysis with Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: Genetic testing was performed on 82 individuals, including 48 probands 
and 34 relatives. The CAFD assay additionally identified variants in two 
probands: one had a novel and de novo pathogenic variant with a 1715 bp 
insertion in intron 4, and the other carried two deep intronic VUS variants in 
cis-configuration also in intron 4. In total, CAFD identified 47 different 
variants among 48 probands. Of these, 42 (89.36%, 42/47) were pathogenic, while 
5 (10.64%, 5/47) were VUS. Sixteen (34.04%, 16/47) of the variants were novel, 
including 15 SNV/Indels and one large intronic insertion. Pedigree analysis of 
21 probands identified four de novo disease-causing variants. Hence, FD exhibits 
not only variable clinical presentations but also a wide spectrum of variants. 
Utilizing a comprehensive testing algorithm for diagnosing FD, which includes 
enzyme activity, clinical features, and genetic testing, the diagnostic yield of 
CAFD is 97.92% (47/48), which is higher than that of conventional Sanger 
sequencing, at 95.83% (46/48).
CONCLUSION: The duration between initial clinical presentation and diagnosis 
remains long and winding. CAFD provides precise diagnosis for a wide spectrum of 
GLA variants, promoting timely diagnosis and appropriate treatment for FD 
patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40246-024-00697-3
PMCID: PMC11603755
PMID: 39609713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital. The participants provided their written informed 
consent to participate in this study. Competing interests: The authors declare 
no competing interests.