---
reference_id: "PMID:32566742"
title: Characterization of amyloid β fibril formation under microgravity conditions.
authors:
- Yagi-Utsumi M
- Yanaka S
- Song C
- Satoh T
- Yamazaki C
- Kasahara H
- Shimazu T
- Murata K
- Kato K
journal: NPJ Microgravity
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41526-020-0107-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of amyloid β fibril formation under microgravity conditions.
**Authors:** Yagi-Utsumi M, Yanaka S, Song C, Satoh T, Yamazaki C, Kasahara H, Shimazu T, Murata K, Kato K
**Journal:** NPJ Microgravity (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41526-020-0107-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-020-0107-y)

## Content

1. NPJ Microgravity. 2020 Jun 12;6:17. doi: 10.1038/s41526-020-0107-y.
eCollection  2020.

Characterization of amyloid β fibril formation under microgravity conditions.

Yagi-Utsumi M(1)(2)(3), Yanaka S(1)(2)(3), Song C(4), Satoh T(3), Yamazaki C(5), 
Kasahara H(6), Shimazu T(7), Murata K(4), Kato K(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Exploratory Research Center on Life and Living Systems (ExCELLS), National 
Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi 
444-8787 Japan.
(2)Institute for Molecular Science (IMS), National Institutes of Natural 
Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787 Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1 
Tanabe-dori, Mizuho, Nagoya, Aichi 467-8603 Japan.
(4)National Institute for Physiological Sciences, National Institutes of Natural 
Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787 Japan.
(5)JEM Mission Operations and Integration Center, Human Spaceflight Technology 
Directorate, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, 2-1-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 
305-8505 Japan.
(6)Kibo Utilization Center, Human Spaceflight Technology Directorate, Japan 
Aerospace Exploration Agency, 2-1-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8505 Japan.
(7)Technology and Research Promotion Department, Japan Space Forum, 3-2-1 
Otemachi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0004 Japan.

Amyloid fibrils are self-assembled and ordered proteinaceous supramolecules 
structurally characterized by the cross-β spine. Amyloid formation is known to 
be related to various diseases typified by neurogenerative disorders and 
involved in a variety of functional roles. Whereas common mechanisms for amyloid 
formation have been postulated across diverse systems, the mesoscopic morphology 
of the fibrils is significantly affected by the type of solution condition in 
which it grows. Amyloid formation is also thought to share a phenomenological 
similarity with protein crystallization. Although many studies have demonstrated 
the effect of gravity on protein crystallization, its effect on amyloid 
formation has not been reported. In this study, we conducted an experiment at 
the International Space Station (ISS) to characterize fibril formation of 
40-residue amyloid β (Aβ(1-40)) under microgravity conditions. Our comparative 
analyses revealed that the Aβ(1-40) fibrilization progresses much more slowly on 
the ISS than on the ground, similarly to protein crystallization. Furthermore, 
microgravity promoted the formation of distinct morphologies of Aβ(1-40) 
fibrils. Our findings demonstrate that the ISS provides an ideal experimental 
environment for detailed investigations of amyloid formation mechanisms by 
eliminating the conventionally uncontrollable factors derived from gravity.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1038/s41526-020-0107-y
PMCID: PMC7293247
PMID: 32566742

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing interests.