---
reference_id: PMID:28753627
title: Nuclear/cytoplasmic transport defects in BBS6 underlie congenital heart disease through perturbation of a chromatin remodeling protein.
authors:
- Scott CA
- Marsden AN
- Rebagliati MR
- Zhang Q
- Chamling X
- Searby CC
- Baye LM
- Sheffield VC
- Slusarski DC
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006936
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Active Transport, Cell Nucleus/genetics"
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified/genetics"
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Chromatin/genetics
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly/genetics
- "Cilia/metabolism, pathology"
- Cytoplasm/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Group II Chaperonins/genetics
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Hydrocolpos/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Polydactyly/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Protein Transport/genetics
- "Transcription Factors/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Uterine Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Zebrafish/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nuclear/cytoplasmic transport defects in BBS6 underlie congenital heart disease through perturbation of a chromatin remodeling protein.
**Authors:** Scott CA, Marsden AN, Rebagliati MR, Zhang Q, Chamling X, Searby CC, Baye LM, Sheffield VC, Slusarski DC
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1006936](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1006936)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Jul 28;13(7):e1006936. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006936. 
eCollection 2017 Jul.

Nuclear/cytoplasmic transport defects in BBS6 underlie congenital heart disease 
through perturbation of a chromatin remodeling protein.

Scott CA(1), Marsden AN(1)(2), Rebagliati MR(1), Zhang Q(3), Chamling X(3), 
Searby CC(3), Baye LM(1), Sheffield VC(3)(4), Slusarski DC(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of 
America.
(2)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetics, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Ophthalmology, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of America.
(4)Wynn Institute for Vision Research University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, 
United States of America.

Mutations in BBS6 cause two clinically distinct syndromes, Bardet-Biedl syndrome 
(BBS), a syndrome caused by defects in cilia transport and function, as well as 
McKusick-Kaufman syndrome, a genetic disorder characterized by congenital heart 
defects. Congenital heart defects are rare in BBS, and McKusick-Kaufman syndrome 
patients do not develop retinitis pigmentosa. Therefore, the McKusick-Kaufman 
syndrome allele may highlight cellular functions of BBS6 distinct from the 
presently understood functions in the cilia. In support, we find that the 
McKusick-Kaufman syndrome disease-associated allele, BBS6H84Y; A242S, maintains 
cilia function. We demonstrate that BBS6 is actively transported between the 
cytoplasm and nucleus, and that BBS6H84Y; A242S, is defective in this transport. 
We developed a transgenic zebrafish with inducible bbs6 to identify novel 
binding partners of BBS6, and we find interaction with the SWI/SNF chromatin 
remodeling protein Smarcc1a (SMARCC1 in humans). We demonstrate that through 
this interaction, BBS6 modulates the sub-cellular localization of SMARCC1 and 
find, by transcriptional profiling, similar transcriptional changes following 
smarcc1a and bbs6 manipulation. Our work identifies a new function for BBS6 in 
nuclear-cytoplasmic transport, and provides insight into the disease mechanism 
underlying the congenital heart defects in McKusick-Kaufman syndrome patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006936
PMCID: PMC5550010
PMID: 28753627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.