---
reference_id: "PMID:27768891"
title: Cross-Neutralizing and Protective Human Antibody Specificities to Poxvirus Infections.
authors:
- Gilchuk I
- Gilchuk P
- Sapparapu G
- Lampley R
- Singh V
- Kose N
- Blum DL
- Hughes LJ
- Satheshkumar PS
- Townsend MB
- Kondas AV
- Reed Z
- Weiner Z
- Olson VA
- Hammarlund E
- Raue HP
- Slifka MK
- Slaughter JC
- Graham BS
- Edwards KM
- Eisenberg RJ
- Cohen GH
- Joyce S
- Crowe JE Jr
journal: Cell
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.049
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cross-Neutralizing and Protective Human Antibody Specificities to Poxvirus Infections.
**Authors:** Gilchuk I, Gilchuk P, Sapparapu G, Lampley R, Singh V, Kose N, Blum DL, Hughes LJ, Satheshkumar PS, Townsend MB, Kondas AV, Reed Z, Weiner Z, Olson VA, Hammarlund E, Raue HP, Slifka MK, Slaughter JC, Graham BS, Edwards KM, Eisenberg RJ, Cohen GH, Joyce S, Crowe JE Jr
**Journal:** Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.049](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.049)

## Content

1. Cell. 2016 Oct 20;167(3):684-694.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.049.

Cross-Neutralizing and Protective Human Antibody Specificities to Poxvirus 
Infections.

Gilchuk I(1), Gilchuk P(2), Sapparapu G(3), Lampley R(1), Singh V(1), Kose N(1), 
Blum DL(1), Hughes LJ(4), Satheshkumar PS(4), Townsend MB(4), Kondas AV(4), Reed 
Z(5), Weiner Z(6), Olson VA(4), Hammarlund E(7), Raue HP(7), Slifka MK(7), 
Slaughter JC(8), Graham BS(9), Edwards KM(10), Eisenberg RJ(11), Cohen GH(12), 
Joyce S(2), Crowe JE Jr(13).

Author information:
(1)The Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Veterans Administration Tennessee 
Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 37332, USA.
(3)The Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(4)Poxvirus and Rabies Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.
(5)Poxvirus and Rabies Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA; Laboratory Leadership Service, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.
(6)Laboratory Leadership Service, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.
(7)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Beaverton, 
OR 97006, USA.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN 37232, USA.
(9)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN 37232, USA.
(11)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(12)Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(13)The Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of 
Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. 
Electronic address: james.crowe@vanderbilt.edu.

Monkeypox (MPXV) and cowpox (CPXV) are emerging agents that cause severe human 
infections on an intermittent basis, and variola virus (VARV) has potential for 
use as an agent of bioterror. Vaccinia immune globulin (VIG) has been used 
therapeutically to treat severe orthopoxvirus infections but is in short supply. 
We generated a large panel of orthopoxvirus-specific human monoclonal antibodies 
(Abs) from immune subjects to investigate the molecular basis of broadly 
neutralizing antibody responses for diverse orthopoxviruses. Detailed analysis 
revealed the principal neutralizing antibody specificities that are 
cross-reactive for VACV, CPXV, MPXV, and VARV and that are determinants of 
protection in murine challenge models. Optimal protection following respiratory 
or systemic infection required a mixture of Abs that targeted several membrane 
proteins, including proteins on enveloped and mature virion forms of virus. This 
work reveals orthopoxvirus targets for human Abs that mediate cross-protective 
immunity and identifies new candidate Ab therapeutic mixtures to replace VIG.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.049
PMCID: PMC5093772
PMID: 27768891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]