---
reference_id: "PMID:33609476"
title: "Safety and efficacy of tilavonemab in progressive supranuclear palsy: a phase 2, randomised, placebo-controlled trial."
authors:
- Höglinger GU
- Litvan I
- Mendonca N
- Wang D
- Zheng H
- Rendenbach-Mueller B
- Lon HK
- Jin Z
- Fisseha N
- Budur K
- Gold M
- Ryman D
- Florian H
- Arise Investigators
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(20)30489-0
keywords:
- "Administration, Intravenous"
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive/drug therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
- tau Proteins/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and efficacy of tilavonemab in progressive supranuclear palsy: a phase 2, randomised, placebo-controlled trial.
**Authors:** Höglinger GU, Litvan I, Mendonca N, Wang D, Zheng H, Rendenbach-Mueller B, Lon HK, Jin Z, Fisseha N, Budur K, Gold M, Ryman D, Florian H, Arise Investigators
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(20)30489-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(20)30489-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2021 Mar;20(3):182-192. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(20)30489-0.

Safety and efficacy of tilavonemab in progressive supranuclear palsy: a phase 2, 
randomised, placebo-controlled trial.

Höglinger GU(1), Litvan I(2), Mendonca N(3), Wang D(4), Zheng H(4), 
Rendenbach-Mueller B(5), Lon HK(6), Jin Z(4), Fisseha N(3), Budur K(3), Gold 
M(3), Ryman D(3), Florian H(3); Arise Investigators.

Collaborators: Ahmed A, Aiba I, Albanese A, Bertram K, Bordelon Y, Bower J, 
Brosch J, Claassen D, Colosimo C, Corvol JC, Cudia P, Daniele A, Defebvre L, 
Driver-Dunckley E, Duquette A, Eleopra R, Eusebio A, Fung V, Geldmacher D, Golbe 
L, Grandas F, Hall D, Hatano T, Höglinger GU, Honig L, Hui J, Kerwin D, Kikuchi 
A, Kimber T, Kimura T, Kumar R, Litvan I, Ljubenkov P, Lorenzl S, Ludolph A, 
Mari Z, McFarland N, Meissner W, Mir Rivera P, Mochizuki H, Morgan J, Munhoz R, 
Nishikawa N, O Sullivan J, Oeda T, Oizumi H, Onodera O, Ory-Magne F, Peckham E, 
Postuma R, Quattrone A, Quinn J, Ruggieri S, Sarna J, Schulz PE, Slevin J, 
Tagliati M, Wile D, Wszolek Z, Xie T, Zesiewicz T.

Author information:
(1)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Munich, Germany; Department of 
Neurology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany; Department of 
Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: 
hoeglinger.guenter@mh-hannover.de.
(2)Parkinson and Other Movement Disorders Center, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Neuroscience, AbbVie Inc, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Data and Statistical Sciences, AbbVie Inc, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Neuroscience, AbbVie Deutschland GmbH & Co KG, Ludwigshafen, Germany.
(6)Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacometrics, AbbVie Inc, North Chicago, IL, 
USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2021 Mar;20(3):162-163. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00035-1.
    Nat Med. 2021 Aug;27(8):1341-1342. doi: 10.1038/s41591-021-01465-9.
    Lancet Neurol. 2021 Oct;20(10):786-787. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00283-0.
    Lancet Neurol. 2021 Oct;20(10):787-788. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00284-2.

BACKGROUND: Progressive supranuclear palsy is a neurodegenerative disorder 
associated with tau protein aggregation. Tilavonemab (ABBV-8E12) is a monoclonal 
antibody that binds to the N-terminus of human tau. We assessed the safety and 
efficacy of tilavonemab for the treatment of progressive supranuclear palsy.
METHODS: We did a phase 2, multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, 
double-blind study at 66 hospitals and clinics in Australia, Canada, France, 
Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain, and the USA. Participants (aged ≥40 years) 
diagnosed with possible or probable progressive supranuclear palsy who were 
symptomatic for less than 5 years, had a reliable study partner, and were able 
to walk five steps with minimal assistance, were randomly assigned (1:1:1) by 
interactive response technology to tilavonemab 2000 mg, tilavonemab 4000 mg, or 
matching placebo administered intravenously on days 1, 15, and 29, then every 28 
days through to the end of the 52-week treatment period. Randomisation was done 
by the randomisation specialist of the study sponsor, who did not otherwise 
participate in the study. The sponsor, investigators, and participants were 
unaware of treatment allocations. The primary endpoint was the change from 
baseline to week 52 in the Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Rating Scale (PSPRS) 
total score in the intention-to-treat population. Adverse events were monitored 
in participants who received at least one dose of study drug. Prespecified 
interim futility criteria were based on a model-based effect size of 0 or lower 
when 60 participants had completed the 52-week treatment period and 0·12 or 
lower when 120 participants had completed the 52-week treatment period. This 
study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02985879.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 12, 2016, and Dec 31, 2018, 466 participants were 
screened, 378 were randomised. The study was terminated on July 3, 2019, after 
prespecified futility criteria were met at the second interim analysis. A total 
of 377 participants received at least one dose of study drug and were included 
in the efficacy and safety analyses (2000 mg, n=126; 4000 mg, n=125; placebo, 
n=126). Least squares mean change from baseline to week 52 in PSPRS was similar 
in all groups (between-group difference vs placebo: 2000 mg, 0·0 [95% CI -2·6 to 
2·6], effect size 0·000, p>0·99; 4000 mg, 1·0 [-1·6 to 3·6], -0·105, p=0·46). 
Most participants reported at least one adverse event (2000 mg, 111 [88%]; 4000 
mg, 111 [89%]; placebo, 108 [86%]). Fall was the most common adverse event (2000 
mg, 42 [33%]; 4000 mg, 54 [43%]; placebo, 49 [39%]). Proportions of patients 
with serious adverse events were similar among groups (2000 mg, 29 [23%]; 4000 
mg, 34 [27%]; placebo, 33 [26%]). Fall was the most common treatment-emergent 
serious adverse event (2000 mg, five [4%]; 4000 mg, six [5%]; placebo, six 
[5%]). 26 deaths occurred during the study (2000 mg, nine [7%]; 4000 mg, nine 
[7%]; placebo, eight [6%]) but none was drug related.
INTERPRETATION: A similar safety profile was seen in all treatment groups. No 
beneficial treatment effects were recorded. Although this study did not provide 
evidence of efficacy in progressive supranuclear palsy, the findings provide 
potentially useful information for future investigations of passive immunisation 
using tau antibodies for progressive supranuclear palsy.
FUNDING: AbbVie Inc.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(20)30489-0
PMID: 33609476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]