---
reference_id: "PMID:40293509"
title: The Cardiovascular Manifestations and Management Recommendations for Ogden Syndrome.
authors:
- Makwana R
- Patel R
- "O'Neill R"
- Marchi E
- Lyon GJ
journal: Pediatr Cardiol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1007/s00246-025-03877-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electrocardiography
- Adolescent
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, diagnosis, complications"
- Echocardiography
- N-Terminal Acetyltransferase A/genetics
- N-Terminal Acetyltransferase E/genetics
- Phenotype
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Cardiovascular Manifestations and Management Recommendations for Ogden Syndrome.
**Authors:** Makwana R, Patel R, O'Neill R, Marchi E, Lyon GJ
**Journal:** Pediatr Cardiol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00246-025-03877-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00246-025-03877-7)

## Content

1. Pediatr Cardiol. 2026 Mar;47(3):1044-1055. doi: 10.1007/s00246-025-03877-7.
Epub  2025 Apr 28.

The Cardiovascular Manifestations and Management Recommendations for Ogden 
Syndrome.

Makwana R(#)(1), Patel R(#)(1), O'Neill R(1), Marchi E(1), Lyon GJ(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY, USA. gholsonjlyon@gmail.com.
(3)George A. Jervis Clinic, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY, USA. gholsonjlyon@gmail.com.
(4)Biology PhD Program, The Graduate Center, The City University of New York, 
New York, NY, USA. gholsonjlyon@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    medRxiv. 2025 Feb 13:2025.02.11.25321331. doi: 10.1101/2025.02.11.25321331.

The NatA complex is composed of the NAA10, NAA15, and HYPK sub-units. It is 
primarily responsible for N-terminal acetylation, a critical post-translational 
modification in eukaryotes. Pathogenic variants within NAA10 cause Ogden 
Syndrome (OS), which is characterized by varying degrees of intellectual 
disability, hypotonia, developmental delay, and cardiac abnormalities. Although 
the cardiac manifestations of the disease have been described extensively in 
case reports, there has not been a study focusing on the cardiac manifestations 
and their recommended clinical cardiac management. In this study, we describe 
the cardiac manifestations of OS in a cohort of 85 probands. We found increased 
incidence of structural and electrophysiologic abnormalities, with particularly 
high prevalence of QT interval prolongation. Sub-analysis showed that male 
probands and those with variants within the NAA15-binding domain had more severe 
phenotypes than females or those with variants outside of the NAA15-binding 
domain. Our results suggest that an OS diagnosis should be accompanied by full 
cardiac workup with emphasis on echocardiogram for structural defects and 
EKG/Holter monitoring for electrophysiologic abnormalities. Additionally, we 
strongly recommend that the use of QT-prolonging drugs be followed up with 
routine electrophysiological monitoring or consultation with a pediatric 
cardiologist. We hope this study guides clinicians and caregivers treating 
patients with OS and moves the field toward a standardized diagnostic workup for 
patients with this condition.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00246-025-03877-7
PMCID: PMC12901112
PMID: 40293509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of Interest: The authors 
declare no competing interests.