---
reference_id: "PMID:39519401"
title: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Involved in the Pathophysiology of Retinal Vascular Disease-Interplay Between Inflammation and Oxidative Stress.
authors:
- Srejovic JV
- Muric MD
- Jakovljevic VL
- Srejovic IM
- Sreckovic SB
- Petrovic NT
- Todorovic DZ
- Bolevich SB
- Sarenac Vulovic TS
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms252111850
keywords:
- Humans
- Oxidative Stress
- "Inflammation/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Signal Transduction
- "Retinal Diseases/metabolism, pathology, etiology"
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Involved in the Pathophysiology of Retinal Vascular Disease-Interplay Between Inflammation and Oxidative Stress.
**Authors:** Srejovic JV, Muric MD, Jakovljevic VL, Srejovic IM, Sreckovic SB, Petrovic NT, Todorovic DZ, Bolevich SB, Sarenac Vulovic TS
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms252111850](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms252111850)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Nov 4;25(21):11850. doi: 10.3390/ijms252111850.

Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Involved in the Pathophysiology of Retinal 
Vascular Disease-Interplay Between Inflammation and Oxidative Stress.

Srejovic JV(1)(2), Muric MD(3), Jakovljevic VL(3)(4)(5), Srejovic IM(3)(4)(6), 
Sreckovic SB(1)(2), Petrovic NT(1)(2), Todorovic DZ(1)(2), Bolevich SB(5), 
Sarenac Vulovic TS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University Clinical Center "Kragujevac", 34000 Kragujevac, Serbia.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of 
Kragujevac, 34000 Kragujevac, Serbia.
(3)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of 
Kragujevac, 34000 Kragujevac, Serbia.
(4)Center of Excellence for the Study of Redox Balance in Cardiovascular and 
Metabolic Disorders, University of Kragujevac, 34000 Kragujevac, Serbia.
(5)Department of Human Pathology, First Moscow State Medical University I.M. 
Sechenov, Moscow 119435, Russia.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, First Moscow State Medical University I.M. 
Sechenov, Moscow 119435, Russia.

Retinal vascular diseases encompass several retinal disorders, including 
diabetic retinopathy, retinopathy of prematurity, age-related macular 
degeneration, and retinal vascular occlusion; these disorders are classified as 
similar groups of disorders due to impaired retinal vascularization. The aim of 
this review is to address the main signaling pathways involved in the 
pathogenesis of retinal vascular diseases and to identify crucial molecules and 
the importance of their interactions. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
is recognized as a crucial and central molecule in abnormal neovascularization 
and a key phenomenon in retinal vascular occlusion; thus, anti-VEGF therapy is 
now the most successful form of treatment for these disorders. Interaction 
between angiopoietin 2 and the Tie2 receptor results in aberrant Tie2 signaling, 
resulting in loss of pericytes, neovascularization, and inflammation. Notch 
signaling and hypoxia-inducible factors in ischemic conditions induce 
pathological neovascularization and disruption of the blood-retina barrier. An 
increase in the pro-inflammatory cytokines-TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6-and activation 
of microglia create a persistent inflammatory milieu that promotes breakage of 
the blood-retinal barrier and neovascularization. Toll-like receptor signaling 
and nuclear factor-kappa B are important factors in the dysregulation of the 
immune response in retinal vascular diseases. Increased production of reactive 
oxygen species and oxidative damage follow inflammation and together create a 
vicious cycle because each factor amplifies the other. Understanding the complex 
interplay among various signaling pathways, signaling cascades, and molecules 
enables the development of new and more successful therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252111850
PMCID: PMC11546760
PMID: 39519401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.