---
reference_id: "PMID:15350172"
title: Transcatheter closure of atrial septal defects.
authors:
- Gupta A
- Kapoor G
- Dalvi B
journal: Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1586/14779072.2.5.713
keywords:
- Balloon Occlusion/instrumentation
- Cardiac Catheterization/methods
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/therapy"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcatheter closure of atrial septal defects.
**Authors:** Gupta A, Kapoor G, Dalvi B
**Journal:** Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1586/14779072.2.5.713](https://doi.org/10.1586/14779072.2.5.713)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2004 Sep;2(5):713-9. doi:
10.1586/14779072.2.5.713.

Transcatheter closure of atrial septal defects.

Gupta A(1), Kapoor G, Dalvi B.

Author information:
(1)KEM Hospital, 48/49 Hatkesh Society, Road number 7, Juhu Scheme, Mumbai400 
049, India. doctoranuja@yahoo.com

Transcatheter closure of atrial septal defects has evolved significantly over 
the last 20 years. Transcatheter closure has replaced surgical closure for the 
treatment of most secundum atrial septal defectsat the current time. A major 
reason for this is the lower morbidity of transcatheter closure procedures. 
Several closure devices have come into clinical use. The Amplatzer septal 
occluder (AGA Medical Co.) currently has the largest reported experience and 
subsequently the best-established safety and efficacy features. Clinically 
challenging situations, such as larger atrial septal defects, atrial septal 
defects with deficient rims and multiple atrial septal defects, are increasingly 
being addressed using the transcatheter approach, with improved results. The 
incidence of most complications has significantly reduced over time, and serious 
side effects are relatively uncommon. In this review, the literature is 
summarized regarding the current role of transcatheter closure, the evolution of 
the different available devices for clinical use and the complications that 
occur with their use. A comparison is also made with surgical closure 
techniques.

DOI: 10.1586/14779072.2.5.713
PMID: 15350172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]