---
reference_id: "PMID:33483996"
title: De-coding genetic risk variants in type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Shapiro MR
- Thirawatananond P
- Peters L
- Sharp RC
- Ogundare S
- Posgai AL
- Perry DJ
- Brusko TM
journal: Immunol Cell Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/imcb.12438
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De-coding genetic risk variants in type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Shapiro MR, Thirawatananond P, Peters L, Sharp RC, Ogundare S, Posgai AL, Perry DJ, Brusko TM
**Journal:** Immunol Cell Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imcb.12438](https://doi.org/10.1111/imcb.12438)

## Content

1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2021 May;99(5):496-508. doi: 10.1111/imcb.12438. Epub 2021 
Feb 24.

De-coding genetic risk variants in type 1 diabetes.

Shapiro MR(1), Thirawatananond P(1), Peters L(1), Sharp RC(1), Ogundare S(1), 
Posgai AL(1), Perry DJ(1), Brusko TM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, College of 
Medicine, Diabetes Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32610, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Diabetes Institute, University 
of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32610, USA.

The conceptual basis for a genetic predisposition underlying the risk for 
developing type 1 diabetes (T1D) predates modern human molecular genetics. Over 
half of the genetic risk has been attributed to the human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) class II gene region and to the insulin (INS) gene locus - both thought to 
confer direction of autoreactivity and tissue specificity. Notwithstanding, 
questions still remain regarding the functional contributions of a vast array of 
minor polygenic risk variants scattered throughout the genome that likely 
influence disease heterogeneity and clinical outcomes. Herein, we summarize the 
available literature related to the T1D-associated coding variants defined at 
the time of this review, for the genes PTPN22, IFIH1, SH2B3, CD226, TYK2, FUT2, 
SIRPG, CTLA4, CTSH and UBASH3A. Data from genotype-selected human cohorts are 
summarized, and studies from the non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse are presented to 
describe the functional impact of these variants in relation to innate and 
adaptive immunity as well as to β-cell fragility, with expression profiles in 
tissues and peripheral blood highlighted. The contribution of each variant to 
progression through T1D staging, including environmental interactions, are 
discussed with consideration of how their respective protein products may serve 
as attractive targets for precision medicine-based therapeutics to prevent or 
suspend the development of T1D.

© 2021 Australian and New Zealand Society for Immunology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/imcb.12438
PMCID: PMC8119379
PMID: 33483996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare that no 
relevant conflicts of interest exist.