---
reference_id: "PMID:37752221"
title: "Glutamatergic basis of antipsychotic response in first-episode psychosis: a dual voxel study of the anterior cingulate cortex."
authors:
- Fan L
- Liang L
- Wang Y
- Ma X
- Yuan L
- Ouyang L
- He Y
- Li Z
- Li C
- Chen X
- Palaniyappan L
journal: Neuropsychopharmacology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41386-023-01741-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glutamatergic basis of antipsychotic response in first-episode psychosis: a dual voxel study of the anterior cingulate cortex.
**Authors:** Fan L, Liang L, Wang Y, Ma X, Yuan L, Ouyang L, He Y, Li Z, Li C, Chen X, Palaniyappan L
**Journal:** Neuropsychopharmacology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41386-023-01741-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386-023-01741-x)

## Content

1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2024 Apr;49(5):845-853. doi: 
10.1038/s41386-023-01741-x. Epub 2023 Sep 26.

Glutamatergic basis of antipsychotic response in first-episode psychosis: a dual 
voxel study of the anterior cingulate cortex.

Fan L(1)(2), Liang L(3), Wang Y(1), Ma X(1), Yuan L(1), Ouyang L(1), He Y(1), Li 
Z(1), Li C(4), Chen X(5), Palaniyappan L(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Clinical Research Center for Mental 
Disorders, and National Center for Mental Disorders, The Second Xiangya Hospital 
of Central South University, Changsha, China.
(2)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Department of Psychiatry, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Robarts Research Institute, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Radiology, Hunan Children's Hospital, Changsha, China.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, National Clinical Research Center for Mental 
Disorders, and National Center for Mental Disorders, The Second Xiangya Hospital 
of Central South University, Changsha, China. Chenxiaogang@csu.edu.cn.
(6)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Department of Psychiatry, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC, Canada. lena.palaniyappan@mcgill.ca.
(7)Robarts Research Institute, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Western University, London, ON, Canada. lena.palaniyappan@mcgill.ca.

A subgroup of patients with schizophrenia is believed to have aberrant excess of 
glutamate in the frontal cortex; this subgroup is thought to show poor response 
to first-line antipsychotic treatments that focus on dopamine blockade. If we 
can identify this subgroup early in the course of illness, we can reduce the 
repeated use of first-line antipsychotics and potentially stratify first-episode 
patients to intervene early with second-line treatments such as clozapine. The 
use of proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS) to measure glutamate and 
Glx (glutamate plus glutamine) may provide a means for such a stratification. We 
must first establish if there is robust evidence linking elevations in anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC) glutamate metabolites to poor response, and determine if 
the use of antipsychotics worsens the glutamatergic excess in eventual 
nonresponders. In this study, we estimated glutamate levels at baseline in 42 
drug-naive patients with schizophrenia. We then treated them all with 
risperidone at a standard dose range of 2-6 mg/day and followed them up for 3 
months to categorize their response status. We expected to see baseline 
"hyperglutamatergia" in nonresponders, and expected this to worsen over time at 
the follow-up. In line with our predictions, nonresponders had higher glutamate 
than responders, but patients as a group did not differ in glutamate and Glx 
from the healthy control (HC) group before treatment-onset (F1,79 = 3.20, 
p = 0.046, partial η2 = 0.075). Glutamatergic metabolites did not change 
significantly over time in both nonresponders and responders over the 3 months 
of antipsychotic exposure (F1,31 = 1.26, p = 0.270, partial η2 = 0.039). We 
conclude that the use of antipsychotics without prior knowledge of later 
response delays symptom relief in a subgroup of first-episode patients, but does 
not worsen the glutamatergic excess seen at the baseline. Given the current 
practice of nonstratified use of antipsychotics, longer-time follow-up MRS 
studies are required to see if improvement in symptoms accompanies a dynamic 
shift in glutamate profile.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41386-023-01741-x
PMCID: PMC10948866
PMID: 37752221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LP reports personal fees for serving as chief 
editor from the Canadian Medical Association Journals, speaker/consultant fee 
from Janssen Canada and Otsuka Canada, SPMM Course Limited, UK, Canadian 
Psychiatric Association; book royalties from Oxford University Press; 
investigator-initiated educational grants from Janssen Canada, Sunovion and 
Otsuka Canada outside the submitted work. All the other authors have nothing to 
disclose.