---
reference_id: "PMID:11483392"
title: "Lafora's disease: towards a clinical, pathologic, and molecular synthesis."
authors:
- Minassian BA
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s0887-8994(00)00276-9
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- "Brain/enzymology, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Electroencephalography
- Glucans/metabolism
- Humans
- "Lafora Disease/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Models, Neurological"
- Mutation
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive/diagnosis"
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lafora's disease: towards a clinical, pathologic, and molecular synthesis.
**Authors:** Minassian BA
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0887-8994(00)00276-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0887-8994(00)00276-9)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2001 Jul;25(1):21-9. doi: 10.1016/s0887-8994(00)00276-9.

Lafora's disease: towards a clinical, pathologic, and molecular synthesis.

Minassian BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for Sick
Children and The University of Toronto, M5G 1X8, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Lafora's disease is one of five inherited progressive myoclonus epilepsy
syndromes. It is an autosomal-recessive disorder with onset in late childhood or
adolescence. Characteristic seizures include myoclonic and occipital lobe
seizures with visual hallucinations, scotomata, and photoconvulsions. The course
of the disease consists of worsening seizures and an inexorable decline in
mental and other neurologic functions that result in dementia and death within
10 years of onset. Pathology reveals pathognomonic polyglucosan inclusions that
are not seen in any other progressive myoclonus epilepsy. Lafora's disease is
one of several neurologic conditions associated with brain polyglucosan bodies.
Why Lafora's polyglucosan bodies alone are associated with epilepsy is unknown
and is discussed in this article. Up to 80% of patients with Lafora's disease
have mutations in the EPM2A gene. Although common mutations are rare, simple
genetic tests to identify most mutations have been established. At least one
other still-unknown gene causes Lafora's disease. The EPM2A gene codes for the
protein laforin, which localizes at the plasma membrane and the rough
endoplasmic reticulum and functions as a dual-specificity phosphatase. Work
toward establishing the connection between laforin and Lafora's disease
polyglucosans is underway, as are attempts to replace it into the central
nervous system of patients with Lafora's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0887-8994(00)00276-9
PMID: 11483392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
