---
reference_id: "PMID:18854860"
title: Xq28 duplication presenting with intestinal and bladder dysfunction and a distinctive facial appearance.
authors:
- Clayton-Smith J
- Walters S
- Hobson E
- Burkitt-Wright E
- Smith R
- Toutain A
- Amiel J
- Lyonnet S
- Mansour S
- Fitzpatrick D
- Ciccone R
- Ricca I
- Zuffardi O
- Donnai D
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.192
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- Facies
- Gene Duplication
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/pathology"
- Humans
- "Intestinal Pseudo-Obstruction/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics
- "Urinary Bladder Diseases/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Xq28 duplication presenting with intestinal and bladder dysfunction and a distinctive facial appearance.
**Authors:** Clayton-Smith J, Walters S, Hobson E, Burkitt-Wright E, Smith R, Toutain A, Amiel J, Lyonnet S, Mansour S, Fitzpatrick D, Ciccone R, Ricca I, Zuffardi O, Donnai D
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2008.192](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2008.192)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;17(4):434-43. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.192. Epub 2008 
Oct 15.

Xq28 duplication presenting with intestinal and bladder dysfunction and a 
distinctive facial appearance.

Clayton-Smith J(1), Walters S, Hobson E, Burkitt-Wright E, Smith R, Toutain A, 
Amiel J, Lyonnet S, Mansour S, Fitzpatrick D, Ciccone R, Ricca I, Zuffardi O, 
Donnai D.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Research Group and Regional Genetics Service, St Mary's 
Hospital, Manchester, UK. Jill.Clayton-Smith@cmmc.nhs.uk

Xq28 duplications encompassing MECP2 have been described in male patients with a 
severe neurodevelopmental disorder associated with hypotonia and spasticity, 
severe learning disability and recurrent pneumonia. We identified an Xq28 
duplication in three families where several male patients had presented with 
intestinal pseudo-obstruction or bladder distension. The affected boys had 
similar dysmorphic facial appearances. Subsequently, we ascertained seven 
further families where the proband presented with similar features. We 
demonstrated duplications of the Xq28 region in five of these additional 
families. In addition to MECP2, these duplications encompassed several other 
genes already known to be associated with diseases including SLC6A8, L1CAM and 
Filamin A (FLNA). The two remaining families were shown to have intragenic 
duplications of FLNA only. We discuss which elements of the Xq28 duplication 
phenotype may be associated with the various genes in the duplication. We 
propose that duplication of FLNA may contribute to the bowel and bladder 
phenotype seen in these seven families.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.192
PMCID: PMC2986219
PMID: 18854860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]