---
reference_id: "PMID:38402623"
title: SEPN1-related myopathy depends on the oxidoreductase ERO1A and is druggable with the chemical chaperone TUDCA.
authors:
- Germani S
- Van Ho AT
- Cherubini A
- Varone E
- Chernorudskiy A
- Renna GM
- Fumagalli S
- Gobbi M
- Lucchetti J
- Bolis M
- Guarrera L
- Craparotta I
- Rastelli G
- Piccoli G
- de Napoli C
- Nogara L
- Poggio E
- Brini M
- Cattaneo A
- Bachi A
- Simmen T
- Calì T
- Quijano-Roy S
- Boncompagni S
- Blaauw B
- Ferreiro A
- Zito E
journal: Cell Rep Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101439
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- Muscle Proteins
- "Muscular Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Taurochenodeoxycholic Acid/pharmacology
- Oxidoreductases
- "Mice, Knockout"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SEPN1-related myopathy depends on the oxidoreductase ERO1A and is druggable with the chemical chaperone TUDCA.
**Authors:** Germani S, Van Ho AT, Cherubini A, Varone E, Chernorudskiy A, Renna GM, Fumagalli S, Gobbi M, Lucchetti J, Bolis M, Guarrera L, Craparotta I, Rastelli G, Piccoli G, de Napoli C, Nogara L, Poggio E, Brini M, Cattaneo A, Bachi A, Simmen T, Calì T, Quijano-Roy S, Boncompagni S, Blaauw B, Ferreiro A, Zito E
**Journal:** Cell Rep Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101439](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101439)

## Content

1. Cell Rep Med. 2024 Mar 19;5(3):101439. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101439. Epub 
2024 Feb 22.

SEPN1-related myopathy depends on the oxidoreductase ERO1A and is druggable with 
the chemical chaperone TUDCA.

Germani S(1), Van Ho AT(2), Cherubini A(3), Varone E(3), Chernorudskiy A(3), 
Renna GM(3), Fumagalli S(3), Gobbi M(3), Lucchetti J(3), Bolis M(4), Guarrera 
L(3), Craparotta I(3), Rastelli G(5), Piccoli G(6), de Napoli C(6), Nogara L(7), 
Poggio E(8), Brini M(9), Cattaneo A(10), Bachi A(11), Simmen T(12), Calì T(13), 
Quijano-Roy S(14), Boncompagni S(5), Blaauw B(15), Ferreiro A(16), Zito E(17).

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Milan, Italy; 
Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, Siena, 
Italy.
(2)Basic and Translational Myology Laboratory, Université Paris, BFA, UMR 8251, 
CNRS, 75013 Paris, France.
(3)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(4)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Milan, Italy; 
Bioinformatics Core Unit, Institute of Oncology Research (IOR), 6500 Bellinzona, 
Switzerland.
(5)CAST, Center for Advanced Studies and Technology & DNICS, Department of 
Neuroscience, Imaging and Clinical Sciences, University G. D'Annunzio of 
Chieti-Pescara, 66100 Chieti, Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(7)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy; 
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(8)Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(9)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy; 
Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy; Study Center for 
Neurodegeneration (CESNE), University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(10)Cogentech SRL Benefit Corporation, 20139 Milan, Italy.
(11)IFOM-ETS AIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, Milan, Italy.
(12)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(13)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy; Study 
Center for Neurodegeneration (CESNE), University of Padova, Padova, Italy; 
Padova Neuroscience Center, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(14)APHP-Université Paris-Saclay, Reference Center for Neuromuscular Disorders 
Nord-Est-Ile de France, FILNEMUS, ERN-Euro-NMD, Creteil, France; Pediatric 
Neurology and ICU Department, DMU Santé Enfant Adolescent (SEA), Raymond 
Poincaré University Hospital, Garches, France.
(15)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy; 
Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine, Padova, Italy. Electronic address: 
bert.blaauw@unipd.it.
(16)Basic and Translational Myology Laboratory, Université Paris, BFA, UMR 8251, 
CNRS, 75013 Paris, France; APHP, Reference Center for Neuromuscular Disorders 
Nord-Est-Ile de France, Neuromyology Department, Groupe Hospitalier 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. Electronic address: ana.b.ferreiro@gmail.com.
(17)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Milan, Italy; 
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Urbino Carlo Bo, Urbino, 
Italy. Electronic address: ester.zito@marionegri.it.

Selenoprotein N (SEPN1) is a protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) whose 
inherited defects originate SEPN1-related myopathy (SEPN1-RM). Here, we identify 
an interaction between SEPN1 and the ER-stress-induced oxidoreductase ERO1A. 
SEPN1 and ERO1A, both enriched in mitochondria-associated membranes (MAMs), are 
involved in the redox regulation of proteins. ERO1A depletion in SEPN1 knockout 
cells restores ER redox, re-equilibrates short-range MAMs, and rescues 
mitochondrial bioenergetics. ERO1A knockout in a mouse background of SEPN1 loss 
blunts ER stress and improves multiple MAM functions, including Ca2+ levels and 
bioenergetics, thus reversing diaphragmatic weakness. The treatment of SEPN1 
knockout mice with the ER stress inhibitor tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) 
mirrors the results of ERO1A loss. Importantly, muscle biopsies from patients 
with SEPN1-RM exhibit ERO1A overexpression, and TUDCA-treated SEPN1-RM 
patient-derived primary myoblasts show improvement in bioenergetics. These 
findings point to ERO1A as a biomarker and a viable target for intervention and 
to TUDCA as a pharmacological treatment for SEPN1-RM.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101439
PMCID: PMC10982971
PMID: 38402623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.