---
reference_id: "PMID:32476157"
title: "Diastology: 2020-A practical guide."
authors:
- Nagueh SF
journal: Echocardiography
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/echo.14742
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diastology: 2020-A practical guide.
**Authors:** Nagueh SF
**Journal:** Echocardiography (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/echo.14742](https://doi.org/10.1111/echo.14742)

## Content

1. Echocardiography. 2020 Nov;37(11):1919-1925. doi: 10.1111/echo.14742. Epub
2020  Jun 1.

Diastology: 2020-A practical guide.

Nagueh SF(1).

Author information:
(1)Methodist DeBakey Heart and Vascular Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Left ventricular (LV) diastolic function can be most conveniently assessed by 
echocardiography which provides reliable assessments of LV structure and 
function. Most patients with structural heart disease have variable degrees of 
myocardial dysfunction. LV structural changes as pathologic hypertrophy and 
systolic functional abnormalities as depressed LV long-axis systolic function 
are associated with diastolic dysfunction. The recognition of structural 
abnormalities and abnormal LV long-axis function as indices of diastolic 
dysfunction is an important difference between 2016 and 2009 guidelines. In 
addition, there are other Doppler findings indicative of diastolic dysfunction 
and abnormally elevated LV filling pressures. In the absence of clinical, 2D 
echocardiographic, and specific Doppler indices of diastolic dysfunction, mitral 
annulus early diastolic velocity (e'), left atrium (LA) maximum volume index, 
peak velocity of tricuspid regurgitation jet by continuous-wave Doppler, and 
ratio of mitral inflow early diastolic velocity to e' velocity can be used to 
draw inferences about LV diastolic function. In the presence of diastolic 
dysfunction, mean LA pressure and grade of diastolic dysfunction should be 
determined. When LA pressure at rest is normal, it is reasonable to proceed to 
diastolic stress testing in an attempt to identify patients with dyspnea due to 
heart failure. There are specific algorithms recommended in patients with atrial 
fibrillation, moderate or severe mitral annular calcification, and noncardiac 
pulmonary hypertension.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/echo.14742
PMID: 32476157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]