---
reference_id: "PMID:37189937"
title: "Additional Anomalies in Children with Gastroschisis and Omphalocele: A Retrospective Cohort Study."
authors:
- Pijpers AGH
- de Beaufort CMC
- Maat SC
- Broers CJM
- Straver B
- van Heurn E
- Gorter RR
- Derikx JPM
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/children10040688
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Additional Anomalies in Children with Gastroschisis and Omphalocele: A Retrospective Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Pijpers AGH, de Beaufort CMC, Maat SC, Broers CJM, Straver B, van Heurn E, Gorter RR, Derikx JPM
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children10040688](https://doi.org/10.3390/children10040688)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2023 Apr 5;10(4):688. doi: 10.3390/children10040688.

Additional Anomalies in Children with Gastroschisis and Omphalocele: A 
Retrospective Cohort Study.

Pijpers AGH(1)(2)(3), de Beaufort CMC(1)(2)(3), Maat SC(1)(2)(3), Broers CJM(4), 
Straver B(5), van Heurn E(1)(2)(3), Gorter RR(1)(2)(3), Derikx JPM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Emma Children's Hospital Amsterdam UMC, 
Location University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam Gastroenterology and Metabolism Research Institute, 1105 AZ 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Amsterdam Reproduction and Development Research Institute, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital Amsterdam UMC, Location 
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Emma Children's Hospital Amsterdam UMC, 
Location University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Congenital abdominal wall defects might be associated with other 
anomalies, such as atresia in gastroschisis and cardiac anomalies in omphalocele 
patients. However, in the current literature, an overview of these additional 
anomalies and potential patient-specific risk factors is missing. Therefore, we 
aimed to assess the prevalence of associated anomalies and their 
patient-specific risk factors in patients with gastroschisis and omphalocele.
METHODS: A mono-center retrospective cohort study between 1997 and 2023 was 
performed. Outcomes were the presence of any additional anomalies. Risk factors 
were analyzed via logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: In total, 122 patients were included, of whom 82 (67.2%) had 
gastroschisis, and 40 (32.8%) had omphalocele. Additional anomalies were 
identified in 26 gastroschisis patients (31.7%) and in 27 omphalocele patients 
(67.5%). In patients with gastroschisis, intestinal anomalies were most 
identified (n = 13, 15.9%), whereas, in patients with omphalocele, cardiac 
anomalies were most identified (n = 15, 37.5%). Logistic regression showed that 
cardiac anomalies were associated with complex gastroschisis (OR: 8.5; CI-95%: 
1.4-49.5).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with gastroschisis and omphalocele, intestinal and 
cardiac anomalies were most identified, respectively. Cardiac anomalies were 
found to be a risk factor for patients with complex gastroschisis. Therefore, 
regardless of the type of gastroschisis and/or omphalocele, postnatal cardiac 
screening remains important.

DOI: 10.3390/children10040688
PMCID: PMC10137210
PMID: 37189937

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.