---
reference_id: "PMID:31874716"
title: Ebola virus disease in children in Conakry and Coyah Ebola treatment centers and risk factors associated with death.
authors:
- Sow MS
- Sow DC
- Diallo ML
- Kassé D
- Sylla K
- Camara A
- Djiro SD
- Diallo MOS
- Bah EI
- Bah I
- Diallo MP
journal: Med Mal Infect
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2019.12.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus disease in children in Conakry and Coyah Ebola treatment centers and risk factors associated with death.
**Authors:** Sow MS, Sow DC, Diallo ML, Kassé D, Sylla K, Camara A, Djiro SD, Diallo MOS, Bah EI, Bah I, Diallo MP
**Journal:** Med Mal Infect (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medmal.2019.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medmal.2019.12.001)

## Content

1. Med Mal Infect. 2020 Oct;50(7):562-566. doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2019.12.001.
Epub  2019 Dec 23.

Ebola virus disease in children in Conakry and Coyah Ebola treatment centers and 
risk factors associated with death.

Sow MS(1), Sow DC(2), Diallo ML(3), Kassé D(3), Sylla K(2), Camara A(4), Djiro 
SD(5), Diallo MOS(2), Bah EI(2), Bah I(2), Diallo MP(3).

Author information:
(1)Service des maladies infectieuses et tropicales de l'hôpital National de 
Donka. Electronic address: smsaliou@gmail.com.
(2)Service des maladies infectieuses et tropicales de l'hôpital National de 
Donka.
(3)Service de pédiatrie de l'hôpital National de Donka.
(4)Chaire de santé publique.
(5)Registre des cancers de Guinée, Guinea.

OBJECTIVE: To study Ebola virus disease (EVD) in children aged 15 years and 
below, and to identify risk factors associated with death.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Retrospective, multicenter, descriptive, and analytical 
study of files of children aged 15 years and below in Ebola treatment centers 
(ETC) of Donka from March 2014 to May 2015. We included all files of children 
aged 15 years and below hospitalized for EVD in the two ETCs.
RESULTS: A total of 739 patients hospitalized in both ETCs, 146 children aged 15 
years and below (20%) were registered during the study period. The mean age of 
children was 6.73±4.26 years. Most children were aged above five years (65.8%) 
and the mean time to consultation was 4.34±3.21 days. The main clinical signs 
were asthenia (78.8%), fever (75.3%), anorexia (53.4%), headache (45.9%), 
vomiting (41.8%), abdominal pain (29.5%), and diarrhea (28.8%). The case 
fatality was 48%, including 54.3% in Coyah and 45% in Conakry. Older age 
(aOR=0.83, 95% CI [0.76-0.95]), fever (aOR=3.28, 95% CI [1.22-8.87]), diarrhea 
(aOR=2.98, 95% CI [1.19-4.48]), and hemorrhage (aOR=3.13, 95% CI [1.00-10.38]) 
were independently associated with death due to EVD.
CONCLUSION: EVD remains serious especially in children, with high case fatality. 
Risk factors independently associated with death were young age, diarrhea, 
hemorrhage, and fever. Particular attention to these risk factors and 
vaccination will contribute to improving the prognosis of EVD in children.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medmal.2019.12.001
PMID: 31874716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]