---
reference_id: "PMID:39651973"
title: "12. Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care: Standards of Care in Diabetes-2025."
authors:
- American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
journal: Diabetes Care
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2337/dc25-S012
keywords:
- Humans
- "Diabetic Retinopathy/therapy, diagnosis"
- Standard of Care
- Diabetic Neuropathies/therapy
- Diabetic Foot/therapy
- Diabetes Mellitus/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 12. Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care: Standards of Care in Diabetes-2025.
**Authors:** American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
**Journal:** Diabetes Care (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2337/dc25-S012](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S012)

## Content

1. Diabetes Care. 2025 Jan 1;48(1 Suppl 1):S252-S265. doi: 10.2337/dc25-S012.

12. Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care: Standards of Care in Diabetes-2025.

American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee.

Collaborators: ElSayed NA, McCoy RG, Aleppo G, Balapattabi K, Beverly EA, Briggs 
Early K, Bruemmer D, Callaghan BC, Echouffo-Tcheugui JB, Ekhlaspour L, Frykberg 
RG, Garg R, Garg SJ, Giurini JM, Khunti K, Lal R, Lingvay I, Matfin G, Pandya N, 
Pekas EJ, Pilla SJ, Polsky S, Segal AR, Seley JJ, Stanton RC, Bannuru RR.

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) "Standards of Care in Diabetes" includes 
the ADA's current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide 
the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and 
tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice 
Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating 
the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed 
description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the 
evidence-grading system for ADA's clinical practice recommendations and a full 
list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction 
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are 
invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

© 2024 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/dc25-S012
PMCID: PMC11635040
PMID: 39651973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]