---
reference_id: "PMID:11862410"
title: "Analysis of genetic regulation of chicken spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis, an animal model of human Hashimoto's thyroiditis."
authors:
- Vasícek D
- Vasícková K
- Kaiser P
- Drozenová R
- Cítek J
- Hala K
journal: Immunogenetics
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1007/s00251-001-0388-6
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Northern"
- Chickens
- "Crosses, Genetic"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Male
- "Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Species Specificity
- Thyroglobulin/genetics
- Thyroid Gland/pathology
- "Thyroiditis, Autoimmune/genetics, immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of genetic regulation of chicken spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis, an animal model of human Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
**Authors:** Vasícek D, Vasícková K, Kaiser P, Drozenová R, Cítek J, Hala K
**Journal:** Immunogenetics (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00251-001-0388-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00251-001-0388-6)

## Content

1. Immunogenetics. 2001 Dec;53(9):776-85. doi: 10.1007/s00251-001-0388-6. Epub
2001  Nov 29.

Analysis of genetic regulation of chicken spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis, an 
animal model of human Hashimoto's thyroiditis.

Vasícek D(1), Vasícková K, Kaiser P, Drozenová R, Cítek J, Hala K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathophysiology, University of Innsbruck, Austria.

We analyzed the genetic regulation of spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis (SAT) 
by means of crosses between Obese strain (OS) chickens with the disease, and 
healthy inbred chicken of line CB. Mononuclear cell infiltration of the thyroid 
was used as a criterion for the disease. We confirmed the existence of one 
recessive gene, regulating the susceptibility of the thyroid gland to autoimmune 
attack. From the frequency of progeny with the thyroid infiltration in backcross 
and F2 generations, we presume the existence of one or two additional dominant 
genes coding for abnormal reactivity of the immune system. The total number of 
genes regulating SAT is therefore a maximum of three. We attempted to identify 
disease-specific transcripts responsible for the initiation of the disease using 
suppression subtractive hybridization of RNA prepared from OS and CB thyroid 
lobes, obtained from 3-day-old chicks. From forward and reverse subtractions, we 
recovered a fragment mixture in the range of 300 bp to 1.5 kb. In total, 768 
clones were screened and 9 were sequenced. Four of them represent unknown 
sequences. Two, specific for OS thyroid, correspond to envelope genes of avian 
endogenous viruses (ev)-1, -3 and -6. The expressed product of an env gene could 
be iodinated in the thyroid gland and become involved in thyroglobulin 
metabolism. This may be another possible mechanism driving SAT, as iodine 
modulates SAT in the chicken. Further experiments will be required to prove this 
hypothesis. Two thyroid-specific clones had significant alignment to human 
thyroglobulin, and one clone to human coatomer protein. We analyzed, by RFLP and 
RNA dot blots, cosegregation between clones for the env gene of endogenous 
viruses as the most promising candidate for involvement in driving SAT; we did 
not find differences at the DNA and RNA levels. We can possibly therefore rule 
out a simple involvement of env genes with the initiation of disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-001-0388-6
PMID: 11862410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]