---
reference_id: "PMID:8623687"
title: Outpatient management of tuberculosis.
authors:
- McColloster P
- Neff NE
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outpatient management of tuberculosis.
**Authors:** McColloster P, Neff NE
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (1996)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 1996 Apr;53(5):1579-94.

Outpatient management of tuberculosis.

McColloster P(1), Neff NE.

Author information:
(1)Baylor University College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Am Fam Physician. 1996 Apr;53(5):1511-2.

All patients with a positive reaction to the tuberculin skin test should be 
evaluated for weight loss, night sweats, fever, chronic cough and other signs of 
active tuberculosis. Chest radiographs should also be obtained in these 
patients. All converters receiving isoniazid should be examined monthly for 
signs of hepatitis and neurotoxicity. Liver function tests should be obtained at 
initiation of isoniazid therapy and again during the first two to four months in 
patients age 35 or older or with a history of alcoholism, liver disease or 
intravenous drug use. All cases of active tuberculosis should be reported to the 
local public health department. Most patients with active tuberculosis should 
receive isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide daily for two weeks, 
followed by directly observed administration twice weekly for six additional 
weeks. If sputum cultures show no resistance after two months of therapy, 
pyrazinamide and ethambutol may be discontinued, with isoniazid and rifampin 
taken for an additional 16 weeks. Patients with human immunodeficiency virus 
infection or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome should receive the initial 
treatment for at least nine to 12 months, and isoniazid and rifampin for at 
least six months after culture conversion has occurred.

PMID: 8623687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]