---
reference_id: "PMID:35638029"
title: "Demographic, clinical, and radiological characteristics of cleidocranial dysplasia: A systematic review of cases reported in south America."
authors:
- Cano-Pérez E
- Gómez-Alegría C
- Herrera FP
- Gómez-Camargo D
- Malambo-García D
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103611
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Demographic, clinical, and radiological characteristics of cleidocranial dysplasia: A systematic review of cases reported in south America.
**Authors:** Cano-Pérez E, Gómez-Alegría C, Herrera FP, Gómez-Camargo D, Malambo-García D
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103611](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103611)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2022 Apr 10;77:103611. doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103611. 
eCollection 2022 May.

Demographic, clinical, and radiological characteristics of cleidocranial 
dysplasia: A systematic review of cases reported in south America.

Cano-Pérez E(1), Gómez-Alegría C(2), Herrera FP(3), Gómez-Camargo D(1)(4), 
Malambo-García D(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Grupo de Investigación UNIMOL, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de 
Cartagena, Cartagena de Indias, Colombia.
(2)Grupo de Investigación UNIMOL, Departamento de Farmacia, Facultad de 
Ciencias, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá, Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Grupo de Investigación en Atención Primaria en Salud/Telesalud, Facultad de 
Medicina, Universidad de Cartagena, Cartagena, Colombia.
(4)Doctorado en Medicina Tropical, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de 
Cartagena, Cartagena de Indias, Colombia.

INTRODUCTION: Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is a rare disease characterized by 
craniofacial, skeletal, and oral anomalies. The disease prevalence is estimated 
to be 1 per million inhabitants; thus, only a few studies have described large 
cohorts of CCD patients. This study reviewed the clinical-radiological and 
demographic characteristics of patients with CCD in South America.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review of all cases of CCD reported in South 
America following the PRISMA guidelines. Demographic information (sex, age at 
diagnosis, origin, reason for consultation, and family history) was also 
recorded. CCD signs were divided into "craniofacial" and "skeletal" categories.
RESULTS: A total of 72 cases were included. We found that oral anomalies were 
the most common reason for consultation leading to a diagnosis in patients, with 
a median age at diagnosis of 14 years. Fifty percent of the patients were women. 
Open fontanels or cranial sutures, the presence of at least one of the typical 
CCD facies (frontal bossing, brachycephaly, hypertelorism, or depression of the 
nasal bridge), and supernumerary teeth were reported in 92%, 85%, and 88% of 
cases, respectively. Clavicular dysplasia was present in 98.6% of cases, and 
other skeletal abnormalities such as scoliosis, pubic symphysis diastasis, and 
flat feet were found; short stature was present in 71% of cases, and one case 
presented cognitive deficits.
CONCLUSION: Although the phenotypic spectrum of CCD is variable, clavicular 
dysplasia, open fontanels or cranial sutures, dental anomalies, and at least one 
of the typical CCD facies are present in at least 80% of cases.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103611
PMCID: PMC9142397
PMID: 35638029

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.