---
reference_id: "PMID:39146015"
title: Modulation of NOX2 causes obesity-mediated atrial fibrillation.
authors:
- Sridhar A
- DeSantiago J
- Chen H
- Pavel MA
- Ly O
- Owais A
- Barney M
- Jousma J
- Nukala SB
- Abdelhady K
- Massad M
- Rizkallah LE
- Ong SG
- Rehman J
- Darbar D
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI175447
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modulation of NOX2 causes obesity-mediated atrial fibrillation.
**Authors:** Sridhar A, DeSantiago J, Chen H, Pavel MA, Ly O, Owais A, Barney M, Jousma J, Nukala SB, Abdelhady K, Massad M, Rizkallah LE, Ong SG, Rehman J, Darbar D
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI175447](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI175447)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 Aug 15;134(18):e175447. doi: 10.1172/JCI175447.

Modulation of NOX2 causes obesity-mediated atrial fibrillation.

Sridhar A(1)(2), DeSantiago J(1), Chen H(1), Pavel MA(1), Ly O(1), Owais A(1), 
Barney M(1), Jousma J(2), Nukala SB(2), Abdelhady K(3), Massad M(3), Rizkallah 
LE(3), Ong SG(1)(2), Rehman J(1)(4), Darbar D(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology.
(2)Department of Pharmacology.
(3)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, and.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Jesse Brown Veterans Administration, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.

Obesity is linked to an increased risk of atrial fibrillation (AF) via increased 
oxidative stress. While NADPH oxidase 2 (NOX2), a major source of oxidative 
stress and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the heart, predisposes to AF, the 
underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we studied NOX2-mediated ROS 
production in obesity-mediated AF using Nox2-knockout mice and mature human 
induced pluripotent stem cell-derived atrial cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-aCMs). 
Diet-induced obesity (DIO) mice and hiPSC-aCMs treated with palmitic acid (PA) 
were infused with a NOX blocker (apocynin) and a NOX2-specific inhibitor, 
respectively. We showed that NOX2 inhibition normalized atrial action potential 
duration and abrogated obesity-mediated ion channel remodeling with reduced AF 
burden. Unbiased transcriptomics analysis revealed that NOX2 mediates atrial 
remodeling in obesity-mediated AF in DIO mice, PA-treated hiPSC-aCMs, and human 
atrial tissue from obese individuals by upregulation of paired-like homeodomain 
transcription factor 2 (PITX2). Furthermore, hiPSC-aCMs treated with hydrogen 
peroxide, a NOX2 surrogate, displayed increased PITX2 expression, establishing a 
mechanistic link between increased NOX2-mediated ROS production and modulation 
of PITX2. Our findings offer insights into possible mechanisms through which 
obesity triggers AF and support NOX2 inhibition as a potential novel 
prophylactic or adjunctive therapy for patients with obesity-mediated AF.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI175447
PMCID: PMC11405042
PMID: 39146015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.