---
reference_id: "PMID:17611006"
title: "G6PD deficiency: the genotype-phenotype association."
authors:
- Mason PJ
- Bautista JM
- Gilsanz F
journal: Blood Rev
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2007.05.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# G6PD deficiency: the genotype-phenotype association.
**Authors:** Mason PJ, Bautista JM, Gilsanz F
**Journal:** Blood Rev (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.blre.2007.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.blre.2007.05.002)

## Content

1. Blood Rev. 2007 Sep;21(5):267-83. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2007.05.002. Epub 2007
Jul  3.

G6PD deficiency: the genotype-phenotype association.

Mason PJ(1), Bautista JM, Gilsanz F.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington 
University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8125, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA. Pmason@im.wustl.edu

Erratum in
    Blood Rev. 2010 Jan;24(1):49.

Deficiency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase is a very common X-linked 
genetic disorder though most deficient people are asymptomatic. A number of 
different G6PD variants have reached polymorphic frequencies in different parts 
of the world due to the relative protection they confer against malaria 
infection. People, usually males, with deficient alleles are susceptible to 
neonatal jaundice, and acute hemolytic anemia, usually during infection, after 
treatment with certain drugs or after eating fava beans. Very rarely de novo 
mutations can arise causing the more severe condition of chronic nonspherocytic 
hemolytic anemia. Altogether 160 different mutations have been described. The 
majority of mutations cause red cell enzyme deficiency by decreasing enzyme 
stability. The polymorphic mutations affect amino acid residues throughout the 
enzyme and decrease the stability of the enzyme in the red cell, possibly by 
disturbing protein folding. The severe mutations mostly affect residues at the 
dimer interface or those that interact with a structural NADP molecule that 
stabilizes the enzyme.

DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2007.05.002
PMID: 17611006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]