---
reference_id: "PMID:20547706"
title: "In search of a new therapeutic target for the treatment of genetically triggered thoracic aortic aneurysms and cardiovascular conditions: insights from human and animal lathyrism."
authors:
- Sherif HM
journal: Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1510/icvts.2010.239681
keywords:
- Amine Oxidase (Copper-Containing)/metabolism
- Animals
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Thoracic/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Lathyrism/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Marfan Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In search of a new therapeutic target for the treatment of genetically triggered thoracic aortic aneurysms and cardiovascular conditions: insights from human and animal lathyrism.
**Authors:** Sherif HM
**Journal:** Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1510/icvts.2010.239681](https://doi.org/10.1510/icvts.2010.239681)

## Content

1. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2010 Sep;11(3):271-6. doi: 
10.1510/icvts.2010.239681. Epub 2010 Jun 14.

In search of a new therapeutic target for the treatment of genetically triggered 
thoracic aortic aneurysms and cardiovascular conditions: insights from human and 
animal lathyrism.

Sherif HM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Christiana Hospital, Christiana Care Health 
System, 4755 Ogletown-Stanton Road, Suite 1E50, Newark, DE 19718, USA. 
hsherif@christianacare.org

Lathyrism, or the effect of certain plants on connective tissue disruption, 
particularly involving the vascular and skeletal systems, especially aortic 
dissection/rupture, has been well documented in animals. Its impact on the 
pathogenesis of connective tissue diseases in humans is still unclear. An 
extensive review of the scientific literature from the 1800s until the present 
time was performed to examine the common pathways between animal and human 
lathyrism and genetically triggered thoracic aortic aneurysms and cardiovascular 
conditions in humans, with special focus on the identification of potential 
therapeutic targets. Search areas covered the following subjects: 
lathyrism/spontaneous aortic dissection/rupture in animals; 
beta-aminopropionitrile, semicarbazide and their effects; collagen and elastin 
synthesis and cross-linking; genetic and molecular biology characteristics of 
the genetically triggered thoracic aortic conditions. Search results demonstrate 
Marfan syndrome as a model for the genetically triggered thoracic aortic 
aneurysms, has been linked to mutations of the fibrillin-1 gene, via 
transforming growth factor beta-1. Several other conditions do not share this 
mutation. Inhibition of semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase [vascular adhesion 
protein-1 (VAP-1)] in animals has been shown to result in aortic dilatation due 
to disruption of elastin cross-linking. Significantly low activity of this 
enzyme was identified in annulo-aortic ectasia; a condition similar to Marfan 
syndrome. In conclusion, the precise molecular and genetic pathways responsible 
for the clinical findings in Marfan syndrome and related conditions remain 
unclear. Observational and experimental findings relating to the vascular and 
systemic effects of molecular pathways implicated in the phenomenon of animal 
and human lathyrism suggest that VAP-1 seems to be involved in the molecular and 
developmental pathways of the genetically triggered thoracic aortic diseases and 
thus could be a potential therapeutic target for these conditions.

DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2010.239681
PMID: 20547706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]