---
reference_id: "PMID:19878548"
title: The exstrophy-epispadias complex.
authors:
- Ebert AK
- Reutter H
- Ludwig M
- Rösch WH
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-23
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/pathology"
- "Bladder Exstrophy/embryology, genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Cloaca/abnormalities
- Counseling
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Epispadias/embryology, genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Osteotomy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The exstrophy-epispadias complex.
**Authors:** Ebert AK, Reutter H, Ludwig M, Rösch WH
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-4-23](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-4-23)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Oct 30;4:23. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-23.

The exstrophy-epispadias complex.

Ebert AK(1), Reutter H, Ludwig M, Rösch WH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Urology, University Medical Center Regensburg, 
Germany. anne-karoline.ebert@barmherzige-regensburg.de

Exstrophy-epispadias complex (EEC) represents a spectrum of genitourinary 
malformations ranging in severity from epispadias (E) to classical bladder 
exstrophy (CEB) and exstrophy of the cloaca (EC). Depending on severity, EEC may 
involve the urinary system, musculoskeletal system, pelvis, pelvic floor, 
abdominal wall, genitalia, and sometimes the spine and anus. Prevalence at birth 
for the whole spectrum is reported at 1/10,000, ranging from 1/30,000 for CEB to 
1/200,000 for EC, with an overall greater proportion of affected males. EEC is 
characterized by a visible defect of the lower abdominal wall, either with an 
evaginated bladder plate (CEB), or with an open urethral plate in males or a 
cleft in females (E). In CE, two exstrophied hemibladders, as well as 
omphalocele, an imperforate anus and spinal defects, can be seen after birth. 
EEC results from mechanical disruption or enlargement of the cloacal membrane; 
the timing of the rupture determines the severity of the malformation. The 
underlying cause remains unknown: both genetic and environmental factors are 
likely to play a role in the etiology of EEC. Diagnosis at birth is made on the 
basis of the clinical presentation but EEC may be detected prenatally by 
ultrasound from repeated non-visualization of a normally filled fetal bladder. 
Counseling should be provided to parents but, due to a favorable outcome, 
termination of the pregnancy is no longer recommended. Management is primarily 
surgical, with the main aims of obtaining secure abdominal wall closure, 
achieving urinary continence with preservation of renal function, and, finally, 
adequate cosmetic and functional genital reconstruction. Several methods for 
bladder reconstruction with creation of an outlet resistance during the newborn 
period are favored worldwide. Removal of the bladder template with complete 
urinary diversion to a rectal reservoir can be an alternative. After 
reconstructive surgery of the bladder, continence rates of about 80% are 
expected during childhood. Additional surgery might be needed to optimize 
bladder storage and emptying function. In cases of final reconstruction failure, 
urinary diversion should be undertaken. In puberty, genital and reproductive 
function are important issues. Psychosocial and psychosexual outcome depend on 
long-term multidisciplinary care to facilitate an adequate quality of life.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-23
PMCID: PMC2777855
PMID: 19878548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]