---
reference_id: "PMID:30704406"
title: "Recognition of aerosol transmission of infectious agents: a commentary."
authors:
- Tellier R
- Li Y
- Cowling BJ
- Tang JW
journal: BMC Infect Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12879-019-3707-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recognition of aerosol transmission of infectious agents: a commentary.
**Authors:** Tellier R, Li Y, Cowling BJ, Tang JW
**Journal:** BMC Infect Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12879-019-3707-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-019-3707-y)

## Content

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2019 Jan 31;19(1):101. doi: 10.1186/s12879-019-3707-y.

Recognition of aerosol transmission of infectious agents: a commentary.

Tellier R(1), Li Y(2), Cowling BJ(3), Tang JW(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong 
Kong, Special Administrative Region of China.
(3)WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control, 
School of Public Health, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, 
Special Administrative Region of China.
(4)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, UK. julian.tang@uhl-tr.nhs.uk.
(5)Clinical Microbiology, University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Level 5 
Sandringham Building, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Infirmary Square, Leicester, 
LE1 5WW, UK. julian.tang@uhl-tr.nhs.uk.

Although short-range large-droplet transmission is possible for most respiratory 
infectious agents, deciding on whether the same agent is also airborne has a 
potentially huge impact on the types (and costs) of infection control 
interventions that are required.The concept and definition of aerosols is also 
discussed, as is the concept of large droplet transmission, and airborne 
transmission which is meant by most authors to be synonymous with aerosol 
transmission, although some use the term to mean either large droplet or aerosol 
transmission.However, these terms are often used confusingly when discussing 
specific infection control interventions for individual pathogens that are 
accepted to be mostly transmitted by the airborne (aerosol) route (e.g. 
tuberculosis, measles and chickenpox). It is therefore important to clarify such 
terminology, where a particular intervention, like the type of personal 
protective equipment (PPE) to be used, is deemed adequate to intervene for this 
potential mode of transmission, i.e. at an N95 rather than surgical mask level 
requirement.With this in mind, this review considers the commonly used term of 
'aerosol transmission' in the context of some infectious agents that are 
well-recognized to be transmissible via the airborne route. It also discusses 
other agents, like influenza virus, where the potential for airborne 
transmission is much more dependent on various host, viral and environmental 
factors, and where its potential for aerosol transmission may be underestimated.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-019-3707-y
PMCID: PMC6357359
PMID: 30704406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
required. No individual patient information is included. Only previously 
published papers are discussed. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: None of the authors have any competing interests to 
declare. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.