---
reference_id: "PMID:36738840"
title: A human liver organoid screening platform for DILI risk prediction.
authors:
- Zhang CJ
- Meyer SR
- "O'Meara MJ"
- Huang S
- Capeling MM
- Ferrer-Torres D
- Childs CJ
- Spence JR
- Fontana RJ
- Sexton JZ
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.01.019
keywords:
- Humans
- Liver/metabolism
- Hepatocytes/metabolism
- "Chemical and Drug Induced Liver Injury/etiology, metabolism"
- Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions
- Organoids
- Albumins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A human liver organoid screening platform for DILI risk prediction.
**Authors:** Zhang CJ, Meyer SR, O'Meara MJ, Huang S, Capeling MM, Ferrer-Torres D, Childs CJ, Spence JR, Fontana RJ, Sexton JZ
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2023.01.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2023.01.019)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2023 May;78(5):998-1006. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.01.019. Epub 2023
 Feb 3.

A human liver organoid screening platform for DILI risk prediction.

Zhang CJ(1), Meyer SR(1), O'Meara MJ(2), Huang S(3), Capeling MM(3), 
Ferrer-Torres D(3), Childs CJ(4), Spence JR(5), Fontana RJ(3), Sexton JZ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(2)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Michigan 
Medicine at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(4)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Michigan 
Medicine at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA; Department of 
Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, 
USA.
(6)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, 
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Michigan Medicine at the University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA; U-M Center for Drug Repurposing, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. Electronic address: 
jzsexton@med.umich.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Drug-induced liver injury (DILI), both intrinsic and 
idiosyncratic, causes frequent morbidity, mortality, clinical trial failures and 
post-approval withdrawal. This suggests an unmet need for improved in vitro 
models for DILI risk prediction that can account for diverse host genetics and 
other clinical factors. In this study, we evaluated the utility of human liver 
organoids (HLOs) for high-throughput DILI risk prediction and in an 
organ-on-chip system.
METHODS: HLOs were derived from three separate iPSC lines and benchmarked on two 
platforms for their ability to model in vitro liver function and identify 
hepatotoxic compounds using biochemical assays for albumin, ALT, AST, 
microscopy-based morphological profiling, and single-cell transcriptomics: i) 
HLOs dispersed in 384-well-formatted plates and exposed to a library of 
compounds; ii) HLOs adapted to a liver-on-chip system.
RESULTS: Dispersed HLOs derived from the three iPSC lines had similar DILI 
predictive capacity as intact HLOs in a high-throughput screening format, 
allowing for measurable IC50 values of compound cytotoxicity. Distinct 
morphological differences were observed in cells treated with drugs exerting 
differing mechanisms of toxicity. On-chip HLOs significantly increased albumin 
production, CYP450 expression, and ALT/AST release when treated with known 
hepatoxic drugs compared to dispersed HLOs and primary human hepatocytes. 
On-chip HLOs were able to predict the synergistic hepatotoxicity of 
tenofovir-inarigivir and displayed steatosis and mitochondrial perturbation, via 
phenotypic and transcriptomic analysis, on exposure to fialuridine and 
acetaminophen, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The high-throughput and liver-on-chip systems exhibit enhanced 
in vivo-like functions and demonstrate the potential utility of these platforms 
for DILI risk assessment. Tenofovir-inarigivr-associated hepatotoxicity was 
observed and correlates with the clinical manifestation of DILI observed in 
patients.
IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: Idiosyncratic (spontaneous, patient-specific) 
drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is difficult to study due to the lack of liver 
models that function as human liver tissue and are adaptable for large-scale 
drug screening. Human liver organoids grown from patient stem cells respond to 
known DILI-causing drugs in both a high-throughput and on a physiological "chip" 
culture system. These platforms show promise for researchers in their use as 
predictive models for novel drugs before entering clinical trials and as a 
potential in vitro diagnostic tool. Our findings support further development of 
patient-derived liver organoid lines and their use in the context of DILI 
research.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.01.019
PMCID: PMC11268729
PMID: 36738840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: RJF has research support 
from Gilead and Abbvie. Other authors have no conflicts.