---
reference_id: "PMID:18504386"
title: "A case of thanatophoric dysplasia: the early prenatal 2D and 3D sonographic findings and molecular confirmation of diagnosis."
authors:
- Wong HS
- Kidd A
- Zuccollo J
- Tuohy J
- Strand L
- Tait J
- Pringle KC
journal: Fetal Diagn Ther
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1159/000132411
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional"
- Mutation
- Pregnancy
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of thanatophoric dysplasia: the early prenatal 2D and 3D sonographic findings and molecular confirmation of diagnosis.
**Authors:** Wong HS, Kidd A, Zuccollo J, Tuohy J, Strand L, Tait J, Pringle KC
**Journal:** Fetal Diagn Ther (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000132411](https://doi.org/10.1159/000132411)

## Content

1. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2008;24(1):71-3. doi: 10.1159/000132411. Epub 2008 May 27.

A case of thanatophoric dysplasia: the early prenatal 2D and 3D sonographic 
findings and molecular confirmation of diagnosis.

Wong HS(1), Kidd A, Zuccollo J, Tuohy J, Strand L, Tait J, Pringle KC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Wellington School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, University of Otago, Wellington, New Zealand. 
hongsoo.wong@otago.ac.nz

OBJECTIVE: To present the early 2D and 3D ultrasound findings and the molecular 
confirmation in a case of thanatophoric dysplasia.
METHODS: On ultrasound examination, there was frontal bossing, increased nuchal 
translucency and short limbs at 12 weeks' gestation and a small thorax and short 
and bowed long bones on 3D at 16 weeks. Amniocentesis and DNA analysis confirmed 
the mutation of FGFR3 gene indicating thanatophoric dysplasia.
RESULTS: After medical termination of pregnancy, the postmortem X-ray and 
pathology examination findings were consistent with the diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: 3D anatomy scan and molecular confirmation may be helpful in early 
diagnosis and genetic counseling of thanatophoric dysplasia.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000132411
PMID: 18504386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]