---
reference_id: "PMID:10973257"
title: Autosomal recessive lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia is associated with human RELN mutations.
authors:
- Hong SE
- Shugart YY
- Huang DT
- Shahwan SA
- Grant PE
- Hourihane JO
- Martin ND
- Walsh CA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/79246
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Brain Stem/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules, Neuronal/blood, genetics, metabolism"
- "Cerebellum/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities, pathology"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7"
- "DNA, Complementary/metabolism"
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/blood, genetics, metabolism"
- Family Health
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Genetic Linkage
- "Hippocampus/abnormalities, pathology"
- Humans
- Lod Score
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mice
- Microsatellite Repeats
- "Models, Genetic"
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- RNA Splicing
- Reelin Protein
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Serine Endopeptidases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal recessive lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia is associated with human RELN mutations.
**Authors:** Hong SE, Shugart YY, Huang DT, Shahwan SA, Grant PE, Hourihane JO, Martin ND, Walsh CA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/79246](https://doi.org/10.1038/79246)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Sep;26(1):93-6. doi: 10.1038/79246.

Autosomal recessive lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia is associated with 
human RELN mutations.

Hong SE(1), Shugart YY, Huang DT, Shahwan SA, Grant PE, Hourihane JO, Martin ND, 
Walsh CA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 2001 Feb;27(2):225.

Normal development of the cerebral cortex requires long-range migration of 
cortical neurons from proliferative regions deep in the brain. Lissencephaly 
("smooth brain," from "lissos," meaning smooth, and "encephalos," meaning brain) 
is a severe developmental disorder in which neuronal migration is impaired, 
leading to a thickened cerebral cortex whose normally folded contour is 
simplified and smooth. Two identified lissencephaly genes do not account for all 
known cases, and additional lissencephaly syndromes have been described. An 
autosomal recessive form of lissencephaly (LCH) associated with severe 
abnormalities of the cerebellum, hippocampus and brainstem maps to chromosome 
7q22, and is associated with two independent mutations in the human gene 
encoding reelin (RELN). The mutations disrupt splicing of RELN cDNA, resulting 
in low or undetectable amounts of reelin protein. LCH parallels the reeler mouse 
mutant (Reln(rl)), in which Reln mutations cause cerebellar hypoplasia, abnormal 
cerebral cortical neuronal migration and abnormal axonal connectivity. RELN 
encodes a large (388 kD) secreted protein that acts on migrating cortical 
neurons by binding to the very low density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), the 
apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2; refs 9-11 ), alpha3beta1 integrin and 
protocadherins. Although reelin was previously thought to function exclusively 
in brain, some humans with RELN mutations show abnormal neuromuscular 
connectivity and congenital lymphoedema, suggesting previously unsuspected 
functions for reelin in and outside of the brain.

DOI: 10.1038/79246
PMID: 10973257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]