---
reference_id: "PMID:37928748"
title: "Globoid Cell Leukodystrophy (Krabbe Disease): An Update."
authors:
- Maghazachi AA
journal: Immunotargets Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2147/ITT.S424622
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Globoid Cell Leukodystrophy (Krabbe Disease): An Update.
**Authors:** Maghazachi AA
**Journal:** Immunotargets Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2147/ITT.S424622](https://doi.org/10.2147/ITT.S424622)

## Content

1. Immunotargets Ther. 2023 Oct 31;12:105-111. doi: 10.2147/ITT.S424622. 
eCollection 2023.

Globoid Cell Leukodystrophy (Krabbe Disease): An Update.

Maghazachi AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Department, ImmnoProfiling and Boosting, Oslo, Norway.

Globoid cell leukodystrophy or Krabbe is a disease that affects children as well 
as adults who have mutations in the gene encoding the enzyme 
galactosylceramidase/galctocerebrosidase (GALC), resulting in the deposition of 
the toxic lipid D-galactosyl-beta1-1' sphingosine (GalSph or psychosine). 
Several therapeutic modalities were used to treat patients with Krabbe disease, 
including hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, enzyme replacement therapy, 
autophagy activators, intravenous immunoglobulin, and inhibitors of the 
Pyroptosis process, among many other approaches. In this article, I will briefly 
discuss the disease in both human and animal model, describe recent clinical 
observations as well as methods utilizing genetic analysis for diagnosis, and 
finally review recent advances in treating this rare and devastating disease.

© 2023 Maghazachi.

DOI: 10.2147/ITT.S424622
PMCID: PMC10625317
PMID: 37928748

Conflict of interest statement: The author reports no conflicts of interest in 
this work.