---
reference_id: "PMID:38674442"
title: "Spectrum of ERCC6-Related Cockayne Syndrome (Type B): From Mild to Severe Forms."
authors:
- Sartorelli J
- Travaglini L
- Macchiaiolo M
- Garone G
- Gonfiantini MV
- Vecchio D
- Sinibaldi L
- Frascarelli F
- Ceccatelli V
- Petrillo S
- Piemonte F
- Piccolo G
- Novelli A
- Longo D
- Pro S
- "D'Amico A"
- Bertini ES
- Nicita F
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15040508
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cockayne Syndrome/genetics, pathology, diagnosis"
- Poly-ADP-Ribose Binding Proteins/genetics
- DNA Repair Enzymes/genetics
- Female
- Male
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Retrospective Studies
- Adult
- Infant
- Genetic Association Studies
- Young Adult
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spectrum of ERCC6-Related Cockayne Syndrome (Type B): From Mild to Severe Forms.
**Authors:** Sartorelli J, Travaglini L, Macchiaiolo M, Garone G, Gonfiantini MV, Vecchio D, Sinibaldi L, Frascarelli F, Ceccatelli V, Petrillo S, Piemonte F, Piccolo G, Novelli A, Longo D, Pro S, D'Amico A, Bertini ES, Nicita F
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15040508](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15040508)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Apr 18;15(4):508. doi: 10.3390/genes15040508.

Spectrum of ERCC6-Related Cockayne Syndrome (Type B): From Mild to Severe Forms.

Sartorelli J(1), Travaglini L(2), Macchiaiolo M(3), Garone G(4)(5), Gonfiantini 
MV(3), Vecchio D(3), Sinibaldi L(3), Frascarelli F(6), Ceccatelli V(6), Petrillo 
S(1), Piemonte F(1), Piccolo G(2), Novelli A(2), Longo D(7), Pro S(8), D'Amico 
A(1), Bertini ES(1), Nicita F(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disease, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, P.zza Sant'Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, 
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, P.zza Sant'Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Rare Diseases and Medical Genetics Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
IRCCS, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(4)Neurology, Epilepsy and Movement Disorder Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, P.zza Sant'Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Mental Health and Sensory Organs, Faculty of 
Medicine and Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(6)Rehabilitation Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, P.zza 
Sant'Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(7)Neuroradiology Unit, Imaging Department, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
P.zza Sant'Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(8)Developmental Neurology Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, P.zza 
Sant'Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy.

(1) Background: Cockayne syndrome (CS) is an ultra-rare multisystem disorder, 
classically subdivided into three forms and characterized by a clinical spectrum 
without a clear genotype-phenotype correlation for both the two causative genes 
ERCC6 (CS type B) and ERCC8 (CS type A). We assessed this, presenting a series 
of patients with genetically confirmed CSB. (2) Materials and Methods: We 
retrospectively collected demographic, clinical, genetic, neuroimaging, and 
serum neurofilament light-chain (sNFL) data about CSB patients; diagnostic and 
severity scores were also determined. (3) Results: Data of eight ERCC6/CSB 
patients are presented. Four patients had CS I, three patients CS II, and one 
patient CS III. Various degrees of ataxia and spasticity were cardinal 
neurologic features, with variably combined systemic characteristics. Mean age 
at diagnosis was lower in the type II form, in which classic CS signs were more 
evident. Interestingly, sNFL determination appeared to reflect clinical 
classification. Two novel premature stop codon and one novel missense variants 
were identified. All CS I subjects harbored the p.Arg735Ter variant; the milder 
CS III subject carried the p.Leu764Ser missense change. (4) Conclusion: Our work 
confirms clinical variability also in the ERCC6/CSB type, where manifestations 
may range from severe involvement with prenatal or neonatal onset to normal 
psychomotor development followed by progressive ataxia. We propose, for the 
first time in CS, sNFL as a useful peripheral biomarker, with increased levels 
compared to currently available reference values and with the potential ability 
to reflect disease severity.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15040508
PMCID: PMC11050085
PMID: 38674442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.