---
reference_id: "PMID:37341643"
title: "Neuropsychiatric lupus in late- and early-onset systemic lupus erythematosus patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Pamuk ON
- Raza AA
- Hasni S
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kead297
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychiatric lupus in late- and early-onset systemic lupus erythematosus patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Pamuk ON, Raza AA, Hasni S
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kead297](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kead297)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2024 Jan 4;63(1):8-15. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/kead297.

Neuropsychiatric lupus in late- and early-onset systemic lupus erythematosus 
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Pamuk ON(1)(2), Raza AA(3), Hasni S(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University Hospitals/Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Rheumatology Fellowship and Training Branch, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine, Dothan, AL, USA.
(4)Lupus Clinical Trials Unit, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Late-onset SLE is usually milder and associated with lower frequency 
of LN and neuropsychiatric manifestations. The diagnosis of NPSLE is especially 
challenging in older patients because of increased incidence of neurological 
comorbidities. We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate 
the differences in NPSLE manifestations in early-onset (<50-year-old) vs 
late-onset (≥50-year-old) SLE patients.
METHODS: A literature search was performed using the PubMed, Web of Science and 
Cochrane Library databases. Studies available in English (1959-2022) including a 
late-onset SLE comparison group and evaluating the frequency of NPSLE were 
eligible. A forest plot was used to compare odds ratios (95% CI) of incidence 
and manifestations of NPSLE by age groups. Study heterogeneity was assessed 
using I2 statistics.
RESULTS: A total of 44 studies, including 17 865 early-onset and 2970 late-onset 
SLE patients, fulfilled our eligibility criteria. CNS involvement was reported 
in 3326 patients. Cumulative NPSLE frequency was higher in the early-onset group 
than in the late-onset group (OR: 1.41, 95% CI: 1.24, 1.59, P < 0.0001). In 
early-onset SLE patients, seizures (OR: 1.68, 95% CI: 1.27, 2.22) and psychosis 
(OR: 1.72, 95% CI: 1.23, 2.41) were more common than in late-onset SLE patients 
(P values, 0.0003 and 0.0014, respectively). Peripheral neuropathy was more 
commonly reported in the late-onset SLE group than in the early-onset SLE group 
(OR: 0.64, 95% CI: 0.47, 0.86, P = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: Our meta-analysis revealed that the frequencies of overall NPSLE, 
seizures, and psychosis were less common in late-onset SLE patients than in 
early-onset SLE patients. In contrast, peripheral neuropathy was more common in 
the late-onset SLE group.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kead297
PMCID: PMC10765162
PMID: 37341643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]