---
reference_id: "PMID:10726057"
title: "Molecular virology of hepatitis C virus: an update with respect to potential antiviral targets."
authors:
- Blight KJ
- Kolykhalov AA
- Reed KE
- Agapov EV
- Rice CM
journal: Antivir Ther
year: '1998'
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Cysteine Endopeptidases/metabolism
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- "DNA, Viral/genetics"
- "Genes, Regulator"
- "Genome, Viral"
- "Hepacivirus/classification, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Liver/virology
- Pan troglodytes
- Protein Biosynthesis/drug effects
- Protein Sorting Signals/pharmacology
- Transfection
- Vero Cells
- "Viral Nonstructural Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Viral Structural Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Virus Replication/drug effects
- Serine Endopeptidases
- Nucleoside-Triphosphatase
- DEAD-box RNA Helicases
- Viral Proteases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular virology of hepatitis C virus: an update with respect to potential antiviral targets.
**Authors:** Blight KJ, Kolykhalov AA, Reed KE, Agapov EV, Rice CM
**Journal:** Antivir Ther (1998)

## Content

1. Antivir Ther. 1998;3(Suppl 3):71-81.

Molecular virology of hepatitis C virus: an update with respect to potential
antiviral targets.

Blight KJ(1), Kolykhalov AA, Reed KE, Agapov EV, Rice CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV), a positive-strand enveloped RNA virus, is a major cause
of chronic liver disease worldwide. Cis-acting RNA elements and virus-encoded
polypeptides required for HCV replication represent attractive targets for the
development of antiviral therapies. Internal ribosome entry site-directed
translation of HCV genome RNA produces a long polyprotein which is co- and
post-translationally processed to yield at least 10 viral proteins. A host
signal peptidase is responsible for maturation of the structural proteins
located in the N-terminal one-third of the polyprotein. Thus far, four enzymatic
activities encoded by the non-structural (NS) proteins have been reported. The
NS2-3 region encodes an autoproteinase responsible for cleavage at the 2/3 site.
The N-terminal one-third of NS3 functions as the catalytic subunit of a serine
proteinase which cleaves at the 3/4A, 4A/4B, 4B/5A and 5A/5B sites, and NS4A is
an essential cofactor for some of these cleavages. NS3 also encodes an
RNA-stimulated NTPase/RNA helicase at its C terminus, and NS5B has been shown to
possess an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity. To date, no functions have
been reported for NS4B or NS5A in RNA replication, however, NS5A has been
implicated in modulating the sensitivity of HCV to interferon. Sequence and
structural conservation within the 3' terminal 98 bases of genomic RNA suggest a
functional importance in the virus life-cycle and hence another target for
antiviral intervention. Recently, HCV infection was shown to be initiated in
chimpanzees following intrahepatic inoculation of RNA transcribed from cloned
HCV cDNA. The ability to generate large quantities of infectious HCV RNA may
facilitate the development of reliable cell culture replication systems useful
for the evaluation of antiviral drugs.

PMID: 10726057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
