---
reference_id: "PMID:32763681"
title: Use of thermal treatment with CaCl(2) and CaO to remove (137)Cs in the soil collected from the area near the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant.
authors:
- Jiao F
- Kinoshita N
- Kawaguchi M
- Asada M
- Honda M
- Sueki K
- Koido K
- Ninomiya Y
journal: J Hazard Mater
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123364
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of thermal treatment with CaCl(2) and CaO to remove (137)Cs in the soil collected from the area near the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant.
**Authors:** Jiao F, Kinoshita N, Kawaguchi M, Asada M, Honda M, Sueki K, Koido K, Ninomiya Y
**Journal:** J Hazard Mater (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123364](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123364)

## Content

1. J Hazard Mater. 2021 Jan 5;401:123364. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123364.
Epub  2020 Jul 3.

Use of thermal treatment with CaCl(2) and CaO to remove (137)Cs in the soil 
collected from the area near the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant.

Jiao F(1), Kinoshita N(2), Kawaguchi M(2), Asada M(2), Honda M(3), Sueki K(4), 
Koido K(5), Ninomiya Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Chubu University, 1200 Matsumoto-Cho, 
Kasugai, Aichi, 487-8501, Japan; School of Chemical Engineering, Anhui 
University of Science and Technology, No.168 Taifeng Road, Huainan, Anhui, 
232001, PR China. Electronic address: fcjiao@aust.edu.cn.
(2)Institute of Technology, Shimizu Corporation, 3-4-17 Etchujima Koto-ku, 
Tokyo, 135-8530, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Pure and Applied Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 
Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8577, Japan.
(4)Faculty of Pure and Applied Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8577, Japan.
(5)Faculty of Symbiotic Systems Science, Fukushima University, 1 Kanayagawa, 
Fukushima, Fukushima, 960-1296, Japan.
(6)Department of Applied Chemistry, Chubu University, 1200 Matsumoto-Cho, 
Kasugai, Aichi, 487-8501, Japan. Electronic address: ninomiya@isc.chubu.ac.jp.

A massive amount of soils and inflammable materials of plants etc. contaminated 
by radiocesium are generated from decontamination work in the Fukushima Daiichi 
Nuclear Power Plant (FDNPP) accident affected area. In present study, the 
removal experiments of 137Cs in a soil collected from the FDNPP accident 
affected area were carried out in a lab-scale electrical heating horizontal 
furnace through thermal treatment with CaCl2 addition over a temperature of 900 
- 1300 °C. The results indicated that the average radioactive concentration of 
137Cs in the soil was 52.8 Bq/g. The removal ratio of 137Cs in the soil treated 
at 1300 °C was 96.3 % when 20 % CaCl2 was added. The addition of CaCl2 and CaO 
mixture exhibited a synergistic effect on the removal of 137Cs, relative to the 
addition of CaCl2 alone. Accordingly, the addition of CaCl2 or its mixture with 
CaO during thermal treatment is suggested to remove 137Cs in the soil collected 
from the FDNPP accident affected area. Additionally, segregation of the soil 
sample to fine and coarse fraction and then treated individually are also 
recommended.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123364
PMID: 32763681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]