---
reference_id: "PMID:37582367"
title: Single-cell census of human tooth development enables generation of human enamel.
authors:
- Alghadeer A
- Hanson-Drury S
- Patni AP
- Ehnes DD
- Zhao YT
- Li Z
- Phal A
- Vincent T
- Lim YC
- "O'Day D"
- Spurrell CH
- Gogate AA
- Zhang H
- Devi A
- Wang Y
- Starita L
- Doherty D
- Glass IA
- Shendure J
- Freedman BS
- Baker D
- Regier MC
- Mathieu J
- Ruohola-Baker H
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2023.07.013
keywords:
- Humans
- Ameloblasts/metabolism
- Amelogenesis/genetics
- Dental Enamel
- Odontogenesis
- Tooth
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell census of human tooth development enables generation of human enamel.
**Authors:** Alghadeer A, Hanson-Drury S, Patni AP, Ehnes DD, Zhao YT, Li Z, Phal A, Vincent T, Lim YC, O'Day D, Spurrell CH, Gogate AA, Zhang H, Devi A, Wang Y, Starita L, Doherty D, Glass IA, Shendure J, Freedman BS, Baker D, Regier MC, Mathieu J, Ruohola-Baker H
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2023.07.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2023.07.013)

## Content

1. Dev Cell. 2023 Oct 23;58(20):2163-2180.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2023.07.013. 
Epub 2023 Aug 14.

Single-cell census of human tooth development enables generation of human 
enamel.

Alghadeer A(1), Hanson-Drury S(2), Patni AP(3), Ehnes DD(4), Zhao YT(2), Li 
Z(4), Phal A(5), Vincent T(6), Lim YC(4), O'Day D(7), Spurrell CH(8), Gogate 
AA(9), Zhang H(10), Devi A(11), Wang Y(12), Starita L(13), Doherty D(14), Glass 
IA(14), Shendure J(15), Freedman BS(16), Baker D(17), Regier MC(18), Mathieu 
J(19), Ruohola-Baker H(20).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Dental Sciences, Imam Abdulrahman bin Faisal 
University, College of Dentistry, Dammam 31441, Saudi Arabia; Department of Oral 
Health Sciences University of Washington, School of Dentistry, Seattle, WA 
98109, USA; Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative 
Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)Department of Oral Health Sciences University of Washington, School of 
Dentistry, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Institute for Stem Cell 
and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, 
WA 98109, USA.
(3)Department of Oral Health Sciences University of Washington, School of 
Dentistry, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Institute for Stem Cell 
and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, 
WA 98109, USA; Cancer Biology and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, Department of 
Genetic Engineering, School of Bioengineering, College of Engineering and 
Technology, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai 603203, India.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department 
of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(6)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of Bioengineering, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Brotman Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(8)Brotman Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(9)Brotman Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(10)Department of Restorative Dentistry, University of Washington, School of 
Dentistry, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(11)Cancer Biology and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, Department of Genetic 
Engineering, School of Bioengineering, College of Engineering and Technology, 
SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai 603203, India.
(12)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Paul G. Allen School of Computer 
Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(13)Brotman Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(14)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Center for Integrative Brain Research, 
Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(15)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Brotman Baty Institute for Precision 
Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Department of Genome Sciences, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(16)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of Bioengineering, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Division of Nephrology, 
Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle WA 
98109.
(17)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Brotman 
Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Department of 
Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Institute for 
Protein Design, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(18)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(19)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of Comparative Medicine, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(20)Department of Biomedical Dental Sciences, Imam Abdulrahman bin Faisal 
University, College of Dentistry, Dammam 31441, Saudi Arabia; Department of Oral 
Health Sciences University of Washington, School of Dentistry, Seattle, WA 
98109, USA; Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative 
Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; 
Brotman Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. 
Electronic address: hannele@uw.edu.

Tooth enamel secreted by ameloblasts (AMs) is the hardest material in the human 
body, acting as a shield to protect the teeth. However, the enamel is gradually 
damaged or partially lost in over 90% of adults and cannot be regenerated due to 
a lack of ameloblasts in erupted teeth. Here, we use single-cell combinatorial 
indexing RNA sequencing (sci-RNA-seq) to establish a spatiotemporal single-cell 
census for the developing human tooth and identify regulatory mechanisms 
controlling the differentiation process of human ameloblasts. We identify key 
signaling pathways involved between the support cells and ameloblasts during 
fetal development and recapitulate those findings in human ameloblast in vitro 
differentiation from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). We furthermore 
develop a disease model of amelogenesis imperfecta in a three-dimensional (3D) 
organoid system and show AM maturation to mineralized structure in vivo. These 
studies pave the way for future regenerative dentistry.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2023.07.013
PMCID: PMC10629594
PMID: 37582367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests A.A., S.H.-D., Y.T.Z., 
D.D.E., Y.W., A.P.P., H.Z., J.M., D.B., and H.R.-B. are co-inventors on a patent 
application entitled “Human IPSC Derived Ameloblasts and Uses Thereof” 
(PCT/US2022/053517 filed 12/20/2022 and published 7/6/2023).