---
reference_id: "PMID:28826422"
title: "A systematic review of varicella seroprevalence in European countries before universal childhood immunization: deriving incidence from seroprevalence data."
authors:
- Bollaerts K
- Riera-Montes M
- Heininger U
- Hens N
- Souverain A
- Verstraeten T
- Hartwig S
journal: Epidemiol Infect
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1017/S0950268817001546
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review of varicella seroprevalence in European countries before universal childhood immunization: deriving incidence from seroprevalence data.
**Authors:** Bollaerts K, Riera-Montes M, Heininger U, Hens N, Souverain A, Verstraeten T, Hartwig S
**Journal:** Epidemiol Infect (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0950268817001546](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268817001546)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Infect. 2017 Oct;145(13):2666-2677. doi: 10.1017/S0950268817001546. 
Epub 2017 Aug 22.

A systematic review of varicella seroprevalence in European countries before 
universal childhood immunization: deriving incidence from seroprevalence data.

Bollaerts K(1), Riera-Montes M(1), Heininger U(2), Hens N(3), Souverain A(4), 
Verstraeten T(1), Hartwig S(5).

Author information:
(1)P95 Pharmacovigilance and Epidemiology Services,Koning Leopold III Laan 
1,Leuven 3001,Belgium.
(2)Division of Paediatric Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology,University of 
Basel Children's Hospital,Basel CH-4056,Switzerland.
(3)Interuniversity Institute for Biostatistics and statistical Bioinformatics, 
Hasselt University,Diepenbeek,Belgium.
(4)Aixial,4 rue Danjou, Boulogne-Billancourt 92513,France.
(5)Sanofi Pasteur MSD,162 avenue Jean Jaurès, Lyon 69007,France.

Surveillance systems for varicella in Europe are highly heterogeneous or 
completely absent. We estimated the varicella incidence based on seroprevalence 
data, as these data are largely available and not biased by under-reporting or 
underascertainment. We conducted a systematic literature search for varicella 
serological data in Europe prior to introduction of universal varicella 
immunization. Age-specific serological data were pooled by country and 
serological profiles estimated using the catalytic model with piecewise constant 
force of infection. From the estimated profiles, we derived the annual incidence 
of varicella infection (/100·000) for six age groups (<5, 5-9, 10-14, 15-19, 
20-39 and 40-65 years). In total, 43 studies from 16 countries were identified. 
By the age of 15 years, over 90% of the population has been infected by 
varicella in all countries except for Greece (86·6%) and Italy (85·3%). 
Substantial variability across countries exists in the age-specific annual 
incidence of varicella primary infection among the <5 years old (from 7052 to 16 
122 per 100 000) and 5-9 years old (from 3292 to 11 798 per 100 000). The 
apparent validity and robustness of our estimates highlight the importance of 
serological data for the characterization of varicella epidemiology, even in the 
absence of sampling or assay standardization.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268817001546
PMCID: PMC5647669
PMID: 28826422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KB, MR-M and TV received consulting fees from 
SPMSD for this work. SH was a SPMSD employee at the time of the conduct of the 
work; AS was mandated by SPMSD. No honoraria were paid to UH and NH for this 
work. UH and NH have no conflicts to declare.