---
reference_id: "PMID:23818648"
title: Coronary microvascular dysfunction is an early feature of cardiac involvement in patients with Anderson-Fabry disease.
authors:
- Tomberli B
- Cecchi F
- Sciagrà R
- Berti V
- Lisi F
- Torricelli F
- Morrone A
- Castelli G
- Yacoub MH
- Olivotto I
journal: Eur J Heart Fail
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hft104
keywords:
- Adult
- Analysis of Variance
- Coronary Circulation
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Echocardiography/methods
- Fabry Disease/complications
- Female
- "Heart Ventricles/pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology"
- Italy
- Male
- Microvessels/physiopathology
- Middle Aged
- Positron-Emission Tomography/methods
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coronary microvascular dysfunction is an early feature of cardiac involvement in patients with Anderson-Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Tomberli B, Cecchi F, Sciagrà R, Berti V, Lisi F, Torricelli F, Morrone A, Castelli G, Yacoub MH, Olivotto I
**Journal:** Eur J Heart Fail (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurjhf/hft104](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurjhf/hft104)

## Content

1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2013 Dec;15(12):1363-73. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hft104. Epub
2013  Jun 30.

Coronary microvascular dysfunction is an early feature of cardiac involvement in
patients with Anderson-Fabry disease.

Tomberli B(1), Cecchi F, Sciagrà R, Berti V, Lisi F, Torricelli F, Morrone A,
Castelli G, Yacoub MH, Olivotto I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Florence,
Italy.

AIMS: Male patients with Anderson-Fabry disease (AFD) often exhibit cardiac
involvement, characterized by LV hypertrophy (LVH), associated with severe
coronary microvascular dysfunction (CMD). Whether CMD is present in patients
without LVH, particularly when female, remains unresolved. The aim of the study
was to investigate the presence of CMD by positron emission tomography (PET) in
AFD patients of both genders, with and without evidence of LVH.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We assessed myocardial blood flow following dipyridamole
infusion (Dip-MBF) with 13N-labelled ammonia by PET in 30 AFD patients (age 51 ±
13 years; 18 females) and in 24 healthy controls. LVH was defined as
echocardiographic maximal LV wall thickness ≥13 mm. LVH was present in 67% of
patients (n = 20; 10 males and 10 females). Dip-MBF was reduced in all patients
compared with controls (1.8 ± 0.5 and 3.2 ± 0.5 mL/min/g, respectively, P <
0.001). For both genders, flow impairment was most severe in patients with LVH
(1.4 ± 0.5 mL/min/g in males and 1.9 ± 0.5 mL/min/g in females), but was also
evident in those without LVH (1.8 ± 0.3 mL/min/g in males and 2.1 ± 0.4 mL/min/g
in females; overall P = 0.064 vs. patients with LVH). Analysis of variance
(ANOVA) for the 17 LV segments showed marked regional heterogeneity of MBF in
AFD (F = 4.46, P < 0.01), with prevalent hypoperfusion of the apical region.
Conversely, controls showed homogeneous LV perfusion (F = 1.25, P = 0.23).
CONCLUSIONS: Coronary microvascular function is markedly impaired in AFD
patients irrespective of LVH and gender. CMD may represent the only sign of
cardiac involvement in AFD patients, with potentially important implications for
clinical management.

DOI: 10.1093/eurjhf/hft104
PMID: 23818648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
