---
reference_id: "PMID:32265161"
title: "The aspartate aminotransferase/platelet count ratio index as a marker of dengue virus infection: Course of illness."
authors:
- Ahmed AE
- Dahman B
- Altamimi A
- McClish DK
- Al-Jahdali H
journal: J Infect Public Health
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jiph.2020.03.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The aspartate aminotransferase/platelet count ratio index as a marker of dengue virus infection: Course of illness.
**Authors:** Ahmed AE, Dahman B, Altamimi A, McClish DK, Al-Jahdali H
**Journal:** J Infect Public Health (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jiph.2020.03.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2020.03.009)

## Content

1. J Infect Public Health. 2020 Jul;13(7):980-984. doi:
10.1016/j.jiph.2020.03.009.  Epub 2020 Apr 4.

The aspartate aminotransferase/platelet count ratio index as a marker of dengue 
virus infection: Course of illness.

Ahmed AE(1), Dahman B(2), Altamimi A(3), McClish DK(4), Al-Jahdali H(5).

Author information:
(1)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, F. Edward Hébert School 
of Medicine, Department of Preventive Medicine & Biostatistics, Bethesda, MD, 
USA; Henry M Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, 
Bethesda, MD, USA; King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, King 
Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Ministry of the National Guard - 
Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: 
anwar.ahmed.ctr@usuhs.edu.
(2)Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA. Electronic address: 
bassam.dahman@vcuhealth.org.
(3)Tropical Diseases Center, National Health Laboratory, Saudi Center for 
Disease Prevention and Control (Saudi CDC), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic 
address: asmaa.altamimi88@gmail.com.
(4)Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA. Electronic address: 
donna.mcclish@vcuhealth.org.
(5)King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, King Abdullah 
International Medical Research Center, Ministry of the National Guard - Health 
Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: jahdalih@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The usefulness of laboratory tests in the decision-making process 
with regard to early identification of dengue virus infection has not been 
widely reported, particularly the aspartate aminotransferase (AST)/platelet 
count ratio index during a patient's days of illness. The aim of this study was 
to examine the pattern of the ratio index over the course of illness and 
identify whether it is a marker of dengue virus infection in dengue patients, as 
well as to assess the role of other laboratory tests.
METHODS: A chart review of 205 dengue patients was analyzed using available 
records of 845 laboratory results within different time intervals or exam dates 
during the course of illness. We used repeated measures mixed binary logistic 
regression analyses to model the dengue virus infection, defined as giving at 
least one positive antibody test (yes/no).
RESULTS: The high risk of dengue virus infection in dengue patients was found in 
the male gender (adjusted OR=4.316, 95% CI: 1.285-14.498, P=0.018), in patients 
with a high AST/platelet count ratio index (adjusted OR=1.438, 95% CI: 
1.057-1.957, P=0.021), in patients with a low MCV level (adjusted OR=0.815, 95% 
CI: 0.679-0.978, P=0.028), and in patients with a low ALT level (adjusted 
OR=0.996, 95% CI: 0.993-0.999, P=0.010).
CONCLUSION: Laboratory markers, in particular the AST/platelet count ratio 
index, can be useful for clinicians to strengthen the decision-making process in 
primary care settings. Furthermore, our model revealed that low MCV and low ALT 
are predictors of the dengue virus infection, while being a male increases the 
risk of dengue virus infection. More studies are needed to evaluate the impact 
of the AST/platelet count ratio index on the severity of dengue fever infection 
during the onset of symptoms and course of treatment.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2020.03.009
PMID: 32265161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]