---
reference_id: "PMID:26545718"
title: "How Important is Vertical Transmission of Dengue Viruses by Mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae)?"
authors:
- Grunnill M
- Boots M
journal: J Med Entomol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/jme/tjv168
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How Important is Vertical Transmission of Dengue Viruses by Mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae)?
**Authors:** Grunnill M, Boots M
**Journal:** J Med Entomol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jme/tjv168](https://doi.org/10.1093/jme/tjv168)

## Content

1. J Med Entomol. 2016 Jan;53(1):1-19. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjv168. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

How Important is Vertical Transmission of Dengue Viruses by Mosquitoes (Diptera: 
Culicidae)?

Grunnill M(1), Boots M(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ecology and Conservation Biosciences, College of Life and 
Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, Treliever Road, 
Penryn, Cornwall TR10 9FE, United Kingdom (mdg206@exeter.ac.uk), 
mg206@exeter.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California, United States of America (mboots@berkeley.edu).

Vertical transmission of dengue viruses by mosquitoes was discovered at the end 
of the late 1970s and has been suggested to be a means by which these viruses 
persist. However, it is unclear how widespread it is in nature, and its 
importance in the epidemiology of this disease is still debated. Here, we review 
the literature on vertical transmission and discuss its role in dengue's 
epidemiology and control. We conclude that given the number of studies that 
failed to find evidence of vertical transmission, as well as mathematical models 
and its mechanistic basis, it is unlikely that vertical transmission is 
important for the epidemiological persistence of dengue viruses. A combination 
of asymptomatic infection in humans and movement of people are likely to be more 
important determinants of dengue's persistence. We argue, however, that there 
may be some need for further research into the prevalence of dengue viruses in 
desiccated, as well as diapausing, eggs and the role of horizontal transmission 
through larval cannibalism.

© Crown copyright 2015.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjv168
PMID: 26545718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]