---
reference_id: "PMID:39919878"
title: "Intermittent Fasting: Implications for Obesity-Related Colorectal Tumorigenesis."
authors:
- Peñalver Bernabé B
- Oliveira ML
- Wolf PG
- McLeod A
- Gabel K
- Cares K
- Robinson N
- DiPiazza B
- Varady K
- Tussing-Humphreys L
journal: Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ecl.2024.10.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intermittent Fasting: Implications for Obesity-Related Colorectal Tumorigenesis.
**Authors:** Peñalver Bernabé B, Oliveira ML, Wolf PG, McLeod A, Gabel K, Cares K, Robinson N, DiPiazza B, Varady K, Tussing-Humphreys L
**Journal:** Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ecl.2024.10.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecl.2024.10.007)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2025 Mar;54(1):61-83. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecl.2024.10.007.

Intermittent Fasting: Implications for Obesity-Related Colorectal Tumorigenesis.

Peñalver Bernabé B(1), Oliveira ML(2), Wolf PG(3), McLeod A(2), Gabel K(4), 
Cares K(5), Robinson N(6), DiPiazza B(5), Varady K(5), Tussing-Humphreys L(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Illinois Chicago, 851 
South Morgan Street, Chicago, IL, USA; Center for Bioinformatics and 
Quantitative Biology, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Kinesiology and Nutrition, University of Illinois Chicago, 1919 
West Taylor Street, Chicago, IL, USA; University of Illinois Cancer Center, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Nutrition Science, Purdue University, 700 Mitch Daniels 
Boulevard, West Lafayette, IN, USA; Purdue Institute for Cancer Research, West 
Lafayette, IN, USA.
(4)Department of Kinesiology and Nutrition, University of Illinois Chicago, 1919 
West Taylor Street, Chicago, IL, USA; Department of Nutrition Science, Purdue 
University, 700 Mitch Daniels Boulevard, West Lafayette, IN, USA.
(5)Department of Kinesiology and Nutrition, University of Illinois Chicago, 1919 
West Taylor Street, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)College of Nursing, University of Illinois Chicago, 845 South Damen Avenue, 
MC 802, Chicago, IL, USA.
(7)Department of Kinesiology and Nutrition, University of Illinois Chicago, 1919 
West Taylor Street, Chicago, IL, USA; University of Illinois Cancer Center, 
Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic address: tussing@uic.edu.

Obesity is associated with metabolic and immune perturbations (ie, insulin 
resistance, increased inflammation, and oxidative stress), circadian rhythm 
dysregulation, and gut microbial changes that can promote colorectal 
tumorigenesis. Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most incident cancer in the 
United States. This narrative review examines the effects of intermittend 
fasting on factors influencing colon tumorigenesis, such as body weight, 
metabolic and immune markers, circadian rythm, and the gut microbiota in humans. 
Findings suggest that intermittent fasting regimens can lead to weight loss and 
shifts in metabolic markers, which could be preventive for CRC but effects on 
the gut microbiota composition and functions still remains elusive.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecl.2024.10.007
PMCID: PMC12240480
PMID: 39919878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]