---
reference_id: "PMID:36508511"
title: SOST-Related Sclerosing Bone Dysplasias.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Appelman-Dijkstra N
- Van Lierop A
- Papapoulos S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SOST-Related Sclerosing Bone Dysplasias.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Appelman-Dijkstra N, Van Lierop A, Papapoulos S

## Content

1. SOST-Related Sclerosing Bone Dysplasias.

Appelman-Dijkstra N(1), Van Lierop A(1)(2), Papapoulos S(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2002 Jun 4 [updated 2024 Aug 1].

Author information:
(1)Leiden Center for Bone Quality, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
Netherlands
(2)Flevoziekenhuis, Almere, Netherlands

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SOST-related sclerosing bone dysplasias include
SOST-related sclerosteosis and SOST-related endosteal hyperostosis, van Buchem
type (van Buchem disease), both disorders of progressive bone overgrowth due to
increased bone formation. The major clinical features of SOST-related
sclerosteosis are progressive skeletal overgrowth, most pronounced in the skull
and mandible, and variable syndactyly, usually of the second (index) and third
(middle) fingers. Affected individuals appear normal at birth except for
syndactyly. Facial distortion due to frontal bossing and mandibular overgrowth
is seen in nearly all individuals and becomes apparent in early childhood with
progression into adulthood. Hyperostosis of the skull results in narrowing of
the foramina, causing entrapment of the seventh cranial nerve (leading to facial
palsy) with other, less common nerve entrapment syndromes including visual loss
(2nd cranial nerve), neuralgia or anosmia (5th cranial nerve), and sensorineural
hearing loss (8th cranial nerve). In SOST-related sclerosteosis, hyperostosis of
the calvarium reduces intracranial volume, increasing the risk for potentially
lethal elevation of intracranial pressure. Survival of individuals with
SOST-related sclerosteosis into old age is unusual but not unprecedented. The
manifestations of van Buchem disease are generally milder than SOST-related
sclerosteosis. Stature is typically normal, cranial nerve entrapment of the
seventh and eighth cranial nerves are common, and increased intracranial
pressure is rare, seen only in severely affected individuals. Individuals with
van Buchem disease do not have syndactyly or other digit deformities. Life span
appears not to be altered.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a SOST-related sclerosing bone dysplasia is
established in a proband with typical clinical and radiographic findings and
biallelic pathogenic variants in SOST (in individuals with SOST-related
sclerosteosis) or a biallelic 52-kb deletion downstream of SOST (in individuals
with van Buchem disease) identified on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Hearing aids with middle ear surgery or
cochlear implant depending on the nature of the hearing loss; surgical
decompression as needed for entrapped facial nerves; surgical reduction of
mandibular overgrowth; orbital decompression for proptosis; treatment of dental
manifestations per orthodontist and/or craniofacial team; craniectomy and
ventriculoperitoneal drain for increased intracranial pressure; surgical
correction of syndactyly. Surveillance: Intermittent assessment of bone mineral
density and biochemical markers of bone turnover until age 18 years and then
every five years in adulthood; annual audiologic assessment in childhood and as
needed in adults; examination for evidence of cranial nerve entrapment and
increased intracranial pressure every six months until age 18 years and then
annually in adulthood; annual ophthalmology examination to assess for proptosis,
intraocular pressure, and evaluation of the optic nerve papilla; annual dental
and orthodontic evaluation to assess for tooth malalignment and malocclusion
until age 18 years; routine dental screening in adults. Agents to avoid: Agents
known to suppress bone resorption (e.g., bisphosphonates, denosumab, selective
estrogen receptor modulators) and agents known to stimulate bone formation
(e.g., teriparatide, abaloparatide, romozosumab).
GENETIC COUNSELING: SOST-related sclerosing bone dysplasias are inherited in an
autosomal recessive manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a
pathogenic variant associated with a SOST-related sclerosing bone dysplasia,
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being
affected, a 50% chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting
neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Once the pathogenic variants
associated with a SOST-related sclerosing bone dysplasia have been identified in
an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk family members and
prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 36508511
