---
reference_id: "PMID:19451025"
title: Early clinical and biological features of severe clinical manifestations of dengue in Vietnamese adults.
authors:
- Binh PT
- Matheus S
- Huong VT
- Deparis X
- Marechal V
journal: J Clin Virol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2009.04.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early clinical and biological features of severe clinical manifestations of dengue in Vietnamese adults.
**Authors:** Binh PT, Matheus S, Huong VT, Deparis X, Marechal V
**Journal:** J Clin Virol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcv.2009.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2009.04.004)

## Content

1. J Clin Virol. 2009 Aug;45(4):276-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2009.04.004. Epub 2009
 May 17.

Early clinical and biological features of severe clinical manifestations of 
dengue in Vietnamese adults.

Binh PT(1), Matheus S, Huong VT, Deparis X, Marechal V.

Author information:
(1)Infectious Disease Department, People's Hospital 115 of Ho Chi Minh City, 
Viet Nam. ifmtbinh@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Dengue is a major public health problem in both children and adults 
in Vietnam, but dengue severity in adults has been poorly investigated.
OBJECTIVES: To describe severe manifestations of dengue in Vietnamese adults and 
to identify early indicators of these manifestations.
STUDY DESIGN: A prospective longitudinal study was carried out from July to 
October, 2007, in People's Hospital 115, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
RESULTS: One hundred ninety-five clinically suspected dengue patients were 
enrolled. 151 of these were laboratory-confirmed using serum samples on day 3 
after onset of fever for RT-PCR and/or virus isolation. Dengue was associated 
with plasma leakage in 51 patients (33.8%), gallbladder thickening in 30 
patients (20%), spontaneous bleeding in 127 patients (84.1%), and internal 
bleeding in 37 patients (24.5%). Several early indicators were associated with 
severe manifestations of dengue. Frequent vomiting (> or =3 times a day), marked 
lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated liver enzymes on day 3 after onset 
of fever were significantly associated with plasma leakage and gallbladder 
thickening. Increased alanine aminotransferase level in plasma on day 3 was 
significantly associated with internal bleeding. Gallbladder thickening and 
internal bleeding were more common with specific serotypes.
CONCLUSION: Several severe manifestations of dengue were observed in Vietnamese 
adults. These manifestations were associated with early clinical and biological 
indicators. This information may be useful for clinicians to better monitor 
adult dengue patients, particularly in tropical areas where health resources may 
be limited.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2009.04.004
PMID: 19451025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]