---
reference_id: "PMID:38771880"
title: Cryo-EM structures elucidate the multiligand receptor nature of megalin.
authors:
- Goto S
- Tsutsumi A
- Lee Y
- Hosojima M
- Kabasawa H
- Komochi K
- Nagatoishi S
- Takemoto K
- Tsumoto K
- Nishizawa T
- Kikkawa M
- Saito A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2318859121
keywords:
- "Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-2/metabolism, genetics"
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- Animals
- Humans
- Rats
- Ligands
- Endocytosis
- "Agenesis of Corpus Callosum/metabolism, genetics"
- "Renal Tubular Transport, Inborn Errors"
- Myopia
- "Hernias, Diaphragmatic, Congenital"
- Proteinuria
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cryo-EM structures elucidate the multiligand receptor nature of megalin.
**Authors:** Goto S, Tsutsumi A, Lee Y, Hosojima M, Kabasawa H, Komochi K, Nagatoishi S, Takemoto K, Tsumoto K, Nishizawa T, Kikkawa M, Saito A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2318859121](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2318859121)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2024 May 28;121(22):e2318859121. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2318859121. Epub 2024 May 21.

Cryo-EM structures elucidate the multiligand receptor nature of megalin.

Goto S(#)(1), Tsutsumi A(#)(2), Lee Y(3), Hosojima M(4), Kabasawa H(4), Komochi 
K(4), Nagatoishi S(5), Takemoto K(1), Tsumoto K(6), Nishizawa T(3), Kikkawa 
M(2), Saito A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Medicine, Kidney Research Center, Niigata 
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata City 
951-8510, Japan.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(3)Department of the Biological Membrane Dynamics, Graduate School of Medical 
Life Science, Yokohama City University, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Nutrition Science, Kidney Research Center, Niigata 
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata City 
951-8510, Japan.
(5)Medical Device Development and Regulation Research Center, School of 
Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan.
(6)Department of Bioengineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 113-8656, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Megalin (low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 2) is a giant 
glycoprotein of about 600 kDa, mediating the endocytosis of more than 60 
ligands, including those of proteins, peptides, and drug compounds [S. Goto, M. 
Hosojima, H. Kabasawa, A. Saito, Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 157, 106393 
(2023)]. It is expressed predominantly in renal proximal tubule epithelial 
cells, as well as in the brain, lungs, eyes, inner ear, thyroid gland, and 
placenta. Megalin is also known to mediate the endocytosis of toxic compounds, 
particularly those that cause renal and hearing disorders [Y. Hori et al., J. 
Am. Soc. Nephrol. 28, 1783-1791 (2017)]. Genetic megalin deficiency causes 
Donnai-Barrow syndrome/facio-oculo-acoustico-renal syndrome in humans. However, 
it is not known how megalin interacts with such a wide variety of ligands and 
plays pathological roles in various organs. In this study, we elucidated the 
dimeric architecture of megalin, purified from rat kidneys, using cryoelectron 
microscopy. The maps revealed the densities of endogenous ligands bound to 
various regions throughout the dimer, elucidating the multiligand receptor 
nature of megalin. We also determined the structure of megalin in complex with 
receptor-associated protein, a molecular chaperone for megalin. The results will 
facilitate further studies on the pathophysiology of megalin-dependent 
multiligand endocytic pathways in multiple organs and will also be useful for 
the development of megalin-targeted drugs for renal and hearing disorders, 
Alzheimer's disease [B. V. Zlokovic et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93, 
4229-4234 (1996)], and other illnesses.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2318859121
PMCID: PMC11145282
PMID: 38771880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:A.S. received 
research grants from Denka Co., Ltd.