---
reference_id: "PMID:39209868"
title: Spaceflight alters host-gut microbiota interactions.
authors:
- Gonzalez E
- Lee MD
- Tierney BT
- Lipieta N
- Flores P
- Mishra M
- Beckett L
- Finkelstein A
- Mo A
- Walton P
- Karouia F
- Barker R
- Jansen RJ
- Green SJ
- Weging S
- Kelliher J
- Singh NK
- Bezdan D
- Galazska J
- Brereton NJB
journal: NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41522-024-00545-1
keywords:
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Animals
- Space Flight
- Mice
- "Bacteria/classification, genetics"
- Liver/microbiology
- Host Microbial Interactions
- Metagenomics/methods
- Colon/microbiology
- Bile Acids and Salts/metabolism
- Energy Metabolism
- Male
- Humans
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spaceflight alters host-gut microbiota interactions.
**Authors:** Gonzalez E, Lee MD, Tierney BT, Lipieta N, Flores P, Mishra M, Beckett L, Finkelstein A, Mo A, Walton P, Karouia F, Barker R, Jansen RJ, Green SJ, Weging S, Kelliher J, Singh NK, Bezdan D, Galazska J, Brereton NJB
**Journal:** NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41522-024-00545-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41522-024-00545-1)

## Content

1. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes. 2024 Aug 29;10(1):71. doi:
10.1038/s41522-024-00545-1.

Spaceflight alters host-gut microbiota interactions.

Gonzalez E(1)(2), Lee MD(3)(4), Tierney BT(5)(6), Lipieta N(7), Flores P(8), 
Mishra M(9), Beckett L(10), Finkelstein A(11), Mo A(11), Walton P(11), Karouia 
F(3)(4)(12), Barker R(4)(13)(14), Jansen RJ(15)(16), Green SJ(17), Weging S(18), 
Kelliher J(19), Singh NK(20), Bezdan D(14)(21)(22), Galazska J(23), Brereton 
NJB(24).

Author information:
(1)Microbiome Unit, Canadian Centre for Computational Genomics, Department of 
Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.
(2)Centre for Microbiome Research, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.
(3)Exobiology Branch, NASA Ames Research Centre, Moffett Field, CA, USA.
(4)Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
(8)BioServe Space Technologies, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, 
USA.
(9)Grossman School of Medicine, New York University, New York, USA.
(10)University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK.
(11)NASA GeneLab for High Schools (GL4HS) program, NASA Ames Research Centre, 
Moffett Field, CA, USA.
(12)Centre for Space Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(13)Yuri GmbH, Wiesentalstr. 40, 88074, Meckenbeuren, Germany.
(14)University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(15)Department of Public Health, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND, USA.
(16)Genomics, Phenomics, and Bioinformatics Program, North Dakota State 
University, Fargo, ND, USA.
(17)Genomics and Microbiome Core Facility, Rush University Medical Centre, 
1653 W. Congress Parkway, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA.
(18)Institute of Computer Science, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, 
Halle, Germany.
(19)Bioscience Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA.
(20)Department of Industrial Relations, Division of Occupational Safety and 
Health, Oakland, USA.
(21)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(22)NGS Competence Centre Tübingen (NCCT), University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(23)Space Biosciences Research Branch, NASA Ames Research Centre, Moffett Field, 
CA, USA.
(24)School of Biology and Environmental Science, University College Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland. nicholas.brereton@ucd.ie.

The ISS rodent habitat has provided crucial insights into the impact of 
spaceflight on mammals, inducing symptoms characteristic of liver disease, 
insulin resistance, osteopenia, and myopathy. Although these physiological 
responses can involve the microbiome on Earth, host-microbiota interactions 
during spaceflight are still being elucidated. We explore murine gut microbiota 
and host gene expression in the colon and liver after 29 and 56 days of 
spaceflight using multiomics. Metagenomics revealed significant changes in 44 
microbiome species, including relative reductions in bile acid and butyrate 
metabolising bacteria like Extibacter muris and Dysosmobacter welbionis. 
Functional prediction indicate over-representation of fatty acid and bile acid 
metabolism, extracellular matrix interactions, and antibiotic resistance genes. 
Host gene expression described corresponding changes to bile acid and energy 
metabolism, and immune suppression. These changes imply that interactions at the 
host-gut microbiome interface contribute to spaceflight pathology and that these 
interactions might critically influence human health and long-duration 
spaceflight feasibility.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41522-024-00545-1
PMCID: PMC11362537
PMID: 39209868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.