---
reference_id: "PMID:15146051"
title: Prenatal glucocorticoid exposure alters hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function and blood pressure in mature male guinea pigs.
authors:
- Banjanin S
- Kapoor A
- Matthews SG
journal: J Physiol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2004.063669
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal glucocorticoid exposure alters hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function and blood pressure in mature male guinea pigs.
**Authors:** Banjanin S, Kapoor A, Matthews SG
**Journal:** J Physiol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1113/jphysiol.2004.063669](https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2004.063669)

## Content

1. J Physiol. 2004 Jul 1;558(Pt 1):305-18. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2004.063669.
Epub  2004 May 14.

Prenatal glucocorticoid exposure alters hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function 
and blood pressure in mature male guinea pigs.

Banjanin S(1), Kapoor A, Matthews SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Medical 
Sciences Building, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A8, Canada.

Pregnant guinea pigs were treated with dexamethasone (1 mg kg(-1)) or vehicle on 
days 40-41, 50-51 and 60-61 of gestation, after which animals delivered 
normally. Adult male offspring were catheterized at 145 days of age and 
subjected to tests of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis function in 
basal and activated states. Animals exposed to dexamethasone in utero (mat-dex) 
exhibited increased hippocampus-to-brain weight ratio, increased adrenal-to-body 
weight ratio and increased mean arterial pressure. There were no effects on 
gestation length, birth weight and postnatal growth. There were no overall 
differences in diurnal plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and cortisol 
profiles, though there were subtle differences during the subjective afternoon 
between control and mat-dex offspring. A significant decrease in initial ACTH 
suppression was observed following dexamethasone injection in mat-dex offspring 
compared to control offspring. Molecular analysis revealed significantly 
increased MR mRNA expression in the limbic system and particularly in the 
dentate gyrus in mat-dex offspring. In the anterior pituitary, both 
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) mRNA levels were 
significantly elevated in mat-dex offspring. In conclusion, (1) repeated 
prenatal treatment with synthetic glucocorticoid (sGC) permanently programmes 
organ growth, blood pressure and HPA regulation in mature male offspring and 
these changes involve modification of corticosteroid receptor expression in the 
brain and pituitary; (2) the effects of prenatal sGC exposure on HPA function 
appear to change as a function of age, indicating the importance of 
investigating HPA and cardiovascular outcome at multiple time points throughout 
life.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2004.063669
PMCID: PMC1664909
PMID: 15146051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]