---
reference_id: "PMID:20301475"
title: "Leber Congenital Amaurosis – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Weleber RG
- Francis PJ
- Trzupek KM
- Beattie C
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leber Congenital Amaurosis – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Weleber RG, Francis PJ, Trzupek KM, Beattie C

## Content

1. Leber Congenital Amaurosis – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.

Weleber RG(1), Francis PJ(2), Trzupek KM(3), Beattie C(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2004 Jul 7 [updated 2013 May 2].

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmic Genetics Clinic, Casey Eye Institute of Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, Oregon
(2)Pacific Ophthalmology Consulting, LLC, Portland, Oregon
(3)Hear See Hope Foundation, Seattle, Washington

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE. SEE LEBER CONGENITAL
AMAUROSIS / EARLY-ONSET SEVERE RETINAL DYSTROPHY OVERVIEW.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), a severe dystrophy
of the retina, typically becomes evident in the first year of life. Visual
function is usually poor and often accompanied by nystagmus, sluggish or
near-absent pupillary responses, photophobia, high hyperopia, and keratoconus.
Visual acuity is rarely better than 20/400. A characteristic finding is
Franceschetti's oculo-digital sign, comprising eye poking, pressing, and
rubbing. The appearance of the fundus is extremely variable. While the retina
may initially appear normal, a pigmentary retinopathy reminiscent of retinitis
pigmentosa is frequently observed later in childhood. The electroretinogram
(ERG) is characteristically "nondetectable" or severely subnormal.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of LCA is established by clinical findings.
Pathogenic variants in 17 genes are known to cause LCA: GUCY2D (locus name:
LCA1), RPE65 (LCA2), SPATA7 (LCA3), AIPL1 (LCA4), LCA5 (LCA5), RPGRIP1 (LCA6),
CRX (LCA7), CRB1 (LCA8), NMNAT1 (LCA9), CEP290 (LCA10), IMPDH1 (LCA11), RD3
(LCA12), RDH12 (LCA13), LRAT (LCA14), TULP1 (LCA15), KCNJ13 (LCA16), and IQCB1.
Together, pathogenic variants in these genes are estimated to account for more
than half of all LCA diagnoses. At least one other disease locus for LCA has
been reported, but the gene is not known.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is supportive. Children and
their parents should be referred to programs for the visually impaired child
within their state or locality. Affected individuals benefit from correction of
refractive error, use of low-vision aids when possible, and optimal access to
educational and work-related opportunities. Prevention of secondary
complications: When possible children should be discouraged from repeatedly
poking and pressing on their eyes. Surveillance: Periodic ophthalmic evaluation
for assessment of vision, trials of correction for refractive error, and, in
those with residual vision, assessment of the presence of amblyopia, glaucoma,
or cataract.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Most often LCA is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. At conception, each sib of an individual with recessively inherited LCA
has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic
carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing
for at-risk family members is possible if the pathogenic variants in the family
are known. Prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk is possible
through laboratories offering either testing for the gene of interest or custom
testing. Rarely, LCA is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner as a result of
a pathogenic variant in CRX; the possibility of autosomal dominant inheritance
resulting from a de novo CRX pathogenic variant should be considered in
individuals with LCA and no family history of the disease.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301475
