---
reference_id: "PMID:36251691"
title: An assessment of remotely sensed environmental variables on Dengue epidemiology in Central India.
authors:
- Sarma DK
- Kumar M
- Balabaskaran Nina P
- Balasubramani K
- Pramanik M
- Kutum R
- Shubham S
- Das D
- Kumawat M
- Verma V
- Dhurve J
- George SL
- Balasundreshwaran A
- Prakash A
- Tiwari RR
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0010859
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An assessment of remotely sensed environmental variables on Dengue epidemiology in Central India.
**Authors:** Sarma DK, Kumar M, Balabaskaran Nina P, Balasubramani K, Pramanik M, Kutum R, Shubham S, Das D, Kumawat M, Verma V, Dhurve J, George SL, Balasundreshwaran A, Prakash A, Tiwari RR
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0010859](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0010859)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2022 Oct 17;16(10):e0010859. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0010859. eCollection 2022 Oct.

An assessment of remotely sensed environmental variables on Dengue epidemiology 
in Central India.

Sarma DK(1), Kumar M(1), Balabaskaran Nina P(2)(3), Balasubramani K(4), Pramanik 
M(5), Kutum R(6)(7), Shubham S(1), Das D(1), Kumawat M(1), Verma V(8), Dhurve 
J(1), George SL(4), Balasundreshwaran A(4), Prakash A(1), Tiwari RR(1).

Author information:
(1)ICMR- National Institute for Research in Environmental Health, Bhopal Bypass 
Road, Bhouri, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Central University of Tamil 
Nadu, Thiruvarur, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Department of Public Health and Community Medicine, Central University of 
Kerala, Kasaragod, Kerala, India.
(4)Department of Geography, School of Earth Sciences, Central University of 
Tamil Nadu, Thiruvarur, Tamil Nadu, India.
(5)Urban Innovation and Sustainability Program, Department of Development and 
Sustainability, Asian Institute of Technology, Klong Luang, Pathumthani, 
Thailand.
(6)Department of Computer Science, Ashoka University, Sonipat, Haryana, India.
(7)Trivedi School of Biosciences, Ashoka University.
(8)Stem Cell Research Centre, Department of Hematology, Sanjay Gandhi 
Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

In recent decades, dengue has been expanding rapidly in the tropical cities. 
Even though environmental factors and landscape features profoundly impact 
dengue vector abundance and disease epidemiology, significant gaps exist in 
understanding the role of local environmental heterogeneity on dengue 
epidemiology in India. In this study, we assessed the role of remotely sensed 
climatic factors (rainfall, temperature and humidity) and landscape variables 
(land use pattern, vegetation and built up density) on dengue incidence 
(2012-2019) in Bhopal city, Central India. Dengue hotspots in the city were 
assessed through geographical information system based spatial statistics. 
Dengue incidence increased from 0.59 cases in 2012 to 9.11 cases in 2019 per 
10,000 inhabitants, and wards located in Southern Bhopal were found to be dengue 
hotspots. Distributed lag non-linear model combined with quasi Poisson 
regression was used to assess the exposure-response association, relative risk 
(RR), and delayed effects of environmental factors on dengue incidence. The 
analysis revealed a non-linear relationship between meteorological variables and 
dengue cases. The model shows that the risk of dengue cases increases with 
increasing mean temperature, rainfall and absolute humidity. The highest RR of 
dengue cases (~2.0) was observed for absolute humidity ≥60 g/m3 with a 5-15 week 
lag. Rapid urbanization assessed by an increase in the built-up area (a 9.1% 
increase in 2020 compared to 2014) could also be a key factor driving dengue 
incidence in Bhopal city. The study sheds important insight into the synergistic 
effects of both the landscape and climatic factors on the transmission dynamics 
of dengue. Furthermore, the study provides key baseline information on the 
climatic variables that can be used in the micro-level dengue prediction models 
in Bhopal and other cities with similar climatic conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0010859
PMCID: PMC9612820
PMID: 36251691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.