---
reference_id: "PMID:30871704"
title: "Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome: JACC Focus Seminar."
authors:
- Bryarly M
- Phillips LT
- Fu Q
- Vernino S
- Levine BD
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.11.059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome: JACC Focus Seminar.
**Authors:** Bryarly M, Phillips LT, Fu Q, Vernino S, Levine BD
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2018.11.059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2018.11.059)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019 Mar 19;73(10):1207-1228. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2018.11.059.

Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome: JACC Focus Seminar.

Bryarly M(1), Phillips LT(1), Fu Q(2), Vernino S(1), Levine BD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
(2)Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, Texas Health Presbyterian 
Hospital, Dallas, Texas; Division of Cardiology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
(3)Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, Texas Health Presbyterian 
Hospital, Dallas, Texas; Division of Cardiology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. Electronic address: 
BenjaminLevine@TexasHealth.org.

Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), the most common form of 
orthostatic intolerance in young people, affects approximately 500,000 people in 
the United States alone, typically young women at the peak of their education 
and the beginning of their working lives. This is a heterogeneous disorder, the 
pathophysiology and mechanisms of which are not well understood. There are 
multiple contributing factors and numerous potential mimics. This review details 
the most current views on the potential causes, comorbid conditions, proposed 
subtypes, differential diagnoses, evaluations, and treatment of POTS from 
cardiological and neurological perspectives.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.11.059
PMID: 30871704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]