---
reference_id: "PMID:21303834"
title: "Task Force on Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome (APS) and Non-criteria APS Manifestations (II): thrombocytopenia and skin manifestations."
authors:
- Cervera R
- Tektonidou MG
- Espinosa G
- Cabral AR
- González EB
- Erkan D
- Vadya S
- Adrogué HE
- Solomon M
- Zandman-Goddard G
- Shoenfeld Y
journal: Lupus
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1177/0961203310395052
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Task Force on Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome (APS) and Non-criteria APS Manifestations (II): thrombocytopenia and skin manifestations.
**Authors:** Cervera R, Tektonidou MG, Espinosa G, Cabral AR, González EB, Erkan D, Vadya S, Adrogué HE, Solomon M, Zandman-Goddard G, Shoenfeld Y
**Journal:** Lupus (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0961203310395052](https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203310395052)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2011 Feb;20(2):174-81. doi: 10.1177/0961203310395052.

Task Force on Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome (APS) and Non-criteria APS 
Manifestations (II): thrombocytopenia and skin manifestations.

Cervera R(1), Tektonidou MG, Espinosa G, Cabral AR, González EB, Erkan D, Vadya 
S, Adrogué HE, Solomon M, Zandman-Goddard G, Shoenfeld Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Autoimmune Diseases, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain. rcervera@clinic.ub.es

The objectives of the 'Task Force on Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome 
(APS) and Non-criteria APS Manifestations' were to assess the clinical utility 
of the international consensus statement on classification criteria and 
treatment guidelines for the catastrophic APS, to identify and grade the studies 
that analyze the relationship between the antiphospholipid antibodies and the 
non-criteria APS manifestations, and to present the current evidence regarding 
the accuracy of these non-criteria APS manifestations for the detection of 
patients with APS. This article summarizes the studies analyzed on 
thrombocytopenia and skin manifestations, and presents the recommendations 
elaborated by the Task Force after this analysis.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203310395052
PMID: 21303834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]