---
reference_id: "PMID:7630403"
title: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome caused by mutations in the transcriptional co-activator CBP.
authors:
- Petrij F
- Giles RH
- Dauwerse HG
- Saris JJ
- Hennekam RC
- Masuno M
- Tommerup N
- van Ommen GJ
- Goodman RH
- Peters DJ
journal: Nature
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1038/376348a0
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- CREB-Binding Protein
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- Chromosome Walking
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16"
- Cosmids
- DNA
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome/genetics
- Sequence Deletion
- Trans-Activators
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome caused by mutations in the transcriptional co-activator CBP.
**Authors:** Petrij F, Giles RH, Dauwerse HG, Saris JJ, Hennekam RC, Masuno M, Tommerup N, van Ommen GJ, Goodman RH, Peters DJ
**Journal:** Nature (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/376348a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/376348a0)

## Content

1. Nature. 1995 Jul 27;376(6538):348-51. doi: 10.1038/376348a0.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome caused by mutations in the transcriptional 
co-activator CBP.

Petrij F(1), Giles RH, Dauwerse HG, Saris JJ, Hennekam RC, Masuno M, Tommerup N, 
van Ommen GJ, Goodman RH, Peters DJ, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University, Sylvius Laboratories, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nature. 1995 Jul 27;376(6538):292-3. doi: 10.1038/376292a0.

The Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a well-defined syndrome with facial 
abnormalities, broad thumbs, broad big toes and mental retardation as the main 
clinical features. Many patients with RTS have been shown to have breakpoints 
in, and microdeletions of, chromosome 16p13.3 (refs 4-8). Here we report that 
all these breakpoints are restricted to a region that contains the gene for the 
human CREB binding protein (CBP), a nuclear protein participating as a 
co-activator in cyclic-AMP-regulated gene expression. We show that RTS results 
not only from gross chromosomal rearrangements of chromosome 16p, but also from 
point mutations in the CBP gene itself. Because the patients are heterozygous 
for the mutations, we propose that the loss of one functional copy of the CBP 
gene underlies the developmental abnormalities in RTS and possibly the 
propensity for malignancy.

DOI: 10.1038/376348a0
PMID: 7630403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]