---
reference_id: "PMID:27980006"
title: "Differentiation of Diabetes by Pathophysiology, Natural History, and Prognosis."
authors:
- Skyler JS
- Bakris GL
- Bonifacio E
- Darsow T
- Eckel RH
- Groop L
- Groop PH
- Handelsman Y
- Insel RA
- Mathieu C
- McElvaine AT
- Palmer JP
- Pugliese A
- Schatz DA
- Sosenko JM
- Wilding JP
- Ratner RE
journal: Diabetes
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2337/db16-0806
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differentiation of Diabetes by Pathophysiology, Natural History, and Prognosis.
**Authors:** Skyler JS, Bakris GL, Bonifacio E, Darsow T, Eckel RH, Groop L, Groop PH, Handelsman Y, Insel RA, Mathieu C, McElvaine AT, Palmer JP, Pugliese A, Schatz DA, Sosenko JM, Wilding JP, Ratner RE
**Journal:** Diabetes (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2337/db16-0806](https://doi.org/10.2337/db16-0806)

## Content

1. Diabetes. 2017 Feb;66(2):241-255. doi: 10.2337/db16-0806. Epub 2016 Dec 15.

Differentiation of Diabetes by Pathophysiology, Natural History, and Prognosis.

Skyler JS(1), Bakris GL(2), Bonifacio E(3), Darsow T(4), Eckel RH(5), Groop 
L(6), Groop PH(7)(8)(9), Handelsman Y(10), Insel RA(11), Mathieu C(12), 
McElvaine AT(13), Palmer JP(14), Pugliese A(1), Schatz DA(15), Sosenko JM(16), 
Wilding JP(17), Ratner RE(4).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Research Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL.
(2)The University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL.
(3)Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(4)American Diabetes Association, Arlington, VA.
(5)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO.
(6)Lund University, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(7)Abdominal Center Nephrology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(9)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(10)Metabolic Institute of America, Tarzana, CA.
(11)JDRF, New York, NY.
(12)Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(13)American Diabetes Association, Arlington, VA amcelvaine@diabetes.org.
(14)University of Washington and VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA.
(15)University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL.
(16)University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL.
(17)University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, U.K.

The American Diabetes Association, JDRF, the European Association for the Study 
of Diabetes, and the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists convened 
a research symposium, "The Differentiation of Diabetes by Pathophysiology, 
Natural History and Prognosis" on 10-12 October 2015. International experts in 
genetics, immunology, metabolism, endocrinology, and systems biology discussed 
genetic and environmental determinants of type 1 and type 2 diabetes risk and 
progression, as well as complications. The participants debated how to determine 
appropriate therapeutic approaches based on disease pathophysiology and stage 
and defined remaining research gaps hindering a personalized medical approach 
for diabetes to drive the field to address these gaps. The authors recommend a 
structure for data stratification to define the phenotypes and genotypes of 
subtypes of diabetes that will facilitate individualized treatment.

© 2017 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/db16-0806
PMCID: PMC5384660
PMID: 27980006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]