---
reference_id: "PMID:27019229"
title: TGFβ and BMP Dependent Cell Fate Changes Due to Loss of Filamin B Produces Disc Degeneration and Progressive Vertebral Fusions.
authors:
- Zieba J
- Forlenza KN
- Khatra JS
- Sarukhanov A
- Duran I
- Rigueur D
- Lyons KM
- Cohn DH
- Merrill AE
- Krakow D
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005936
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- "Actin Cytoskeleton/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Connective Tissue Growth Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Filamins/genetics
- "Growth Plate/growth & development, pathology"
- Humans
- "Intervertebral Disc Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- "Lumbar Vertebrae/abnormalities, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Musculoskeletal Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Scoliosis/congenital, genetics, pathology"
- Signal Transduction
- "Smad Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Spine/growth & development, pathology"
- "Synostosis/genetics, pathology"
- "Thoracic Vertebrae/abnormalities, pathology"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TGFβ and BMP Dependent Cell Fate Changes Due to Loss of Filamin B Produces Disc Degeneration and Progressive Vertebral Fusions.
**Authors:** Zieba J, Forlenza KN, Khatra JS, Sarukhanov A, Duran I, Rigueur D, Lyons KM, Cohn DH, Merrill AE, Krakow D
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1005936](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1005936)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2016 Mar 28;12(3):e1005936. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005936.
eCollection 2016 Mar.

TGFβ and BMP Dependent Cell Fate Changes Due to Loss of Filamin B Produces Disc
Degeneration and Progressive Vertebral Fusions.

Zieba J(1)(2), Forlenza KN(2), Khatra JS(2), Sarukhanov A(2), Duran I(2),
Rigueur D(3), Lyons KM(2)(3), Cohn DH(2)(3), Merrill AE(4)(5), Krakow
D(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at the
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States
of America.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at the
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States
of America.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(4)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine at
the University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America.

Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis (SCT) is an autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by progressive vertebral fusions and caused by loss of function
mutations in Filamin B (FLNB). FLNB acts as a signaling scaffold by linking the
actin cytoskleteon to signal transduction systems, yet the disease mechanisms
for SCT remain unclear. Employing a Flnb knockout mouse, we found morphologic
and molecular evidence that the intervertebral discs (IVDs) of Flnb-/-mice
undergo rapid and progressive degeneration during postnatal development as a
result of abnormal cell fate changes in the IVD, particularly the annulus
fibrosus (AF). In Flnb-/-mice, the AF cells lose their typical fibroblast-like
characteristics and acquire the molecular and phenotypic signature of
hypertrophic chondrocytes. This change is characterized by hallmarks of
endochondral-like ossification including alterations in collagen matrix,
expression of Collagen X, increased apoptosis, and inappropriate ossification of
the disc tissue. We show that conversion of the AF cells into chondrocytes is
coincident with upregulated TGFβ signaling via Smad2/3 and BMP induced p38
signaling as well as sustained activation of canonical and noncanonical target
genes p21 and Ctgf. These findings indicate that FLNB is involved in attenuation
of TGFβ/BMP signaling and influences AF cell fate. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that the IVD disruptions in Flnb-/-mice resemble aging degenerative discs and
reveal new insights into the molecular causes of vertebral fusions and disc
degeneration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005936
PMCID: PMC4809497
PMID: 27019229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
