---
reference_id: "PMID:23861731"
title: "A liver-specific defect of Acyl-CoA degradation produces hyperammonemia, hypoglycemia and a distinct hepatic Acyl-CoA pattern."
authors:
- Gauthier N
- Wu JW
- Wang SP
- Allard P
- Mamer OA
- Sweetman L
- Moser AB
- Kratz L
- Alvarez F
- Robitaille Y
- Lépine F
- Mitchell GA
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060581
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A liver-specific defect of Acyl-CoA degradation produces hyperammonemia, hypoglycemia and a distinct hepatic Acyl-CoA pattern.
**Authors:** Gauthier N, Wu JW, Wang SP, Allard P, Mamer OA, Sweetman L, Moser AB, Kratz L, Alvarez F, Robitaille Y, Lépine F, Mitchell GA
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0060581](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0060581)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 5;8(7):e60581. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060581. Print
2013.

A liver-specific defect of Acyl-CoA degradation produces hyperammonemia, 
hypoglycemia and a distinct hepatic Acyl-CoA pattern.

Gauthier N(1), Wu JW, Wang SP, Allard P, Mamer OA, Sweetman L, Moser AB, Kratz 
L, Alvarez F, Robitaille Y, Lépine F, Mitchell GA.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche and Département de Pédiatrie, CHU Sainte-Justine, 
Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Most conditions detected by expanded newborn screening result from deficiency of 
one of the enzymes that degrade acyl-coenzyme A (CoA) esters in mitochondria. 
The role of acyl-CoAs in the pathophysiology of these disorders is poorly 
understood, in part because CoA esters are intracellular and samples are not 
generally available from human patients. We created a mouse model of one such 
condition, deficiency of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase (HL), in liver 
(HLLKO mice). HL catalyses a reaction of ketone body synthesis and of leucine 
degradation. Chronic HL deficiency and acute crises each produced distinct 
abnormal liver acyl-CoA patterns, which would not be predictable from levels of 
urine organic acids and plasma acylcarnitines. In HLLKO hepatocytes, ketogenesis 
was undetectable. Carboxylation of [2-(14)C] pyruvate diminished following 
incubation of HLLKO hepatocytes with the leucine metabolite 2-ketoisocaproate 
(KIC). HLLKO mice also had suppression of the normal hyperglycemic response to a 
systemic pyruvate load, a measure of gluconeogenesis. Hyperammonemia and 
hypoglycemia, cardinal features of many inborn errors of acyl-CoA metabolism, 
occurred spontaneously in some HLLKO mice and were inducible by administering 
KIC. KIC loading also increased levels of several leucine-related acyl-CoAs and 
reduced acetyl-CoA levels. Ultrastructurally, hepatocyte mitochondria of 
KIC-treated HLLKO mice show marked swelling. KIC-induced hyperammonemia improved 
following administration of carglumate (N-carbamyl-L-glutamic acid), which 
substitutes for the product of an acetyl-CoA-dependent reaction essential for 
urea cycle function, demonstrating an acyl-CoA-related mechanism for this 
complication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060581
PMCID: PMC3702508
PMID: 23861731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.