---
reference_id: "PMID:36896471"
title: COL1A1 and COL1A2 variants in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome phenotypes and COL1-related overlap disorder.
authors:
- Venable E
- Knight DRT
- Thoreson EK
- Baudhuin LM
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.32038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COL1A1 and COL1A2 variants in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome phenotypes and COL1-related overlap disorder.
**Authors:** Venable E, Knight DRT, Thoreson EK, Baudhuin LM
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.32038](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.32038)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2023 Jun;193(2):147-159. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.32038. Epub 2023 Mar 9.

COL1A1 and COL1A2 variants in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome phenotypes and COL1-related 
overlap disorder.

Venable E(1), Knight DRT(2), Thoreson EK(1), Baudhuin LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of General Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, 
USA.

Pathogenic variants in COL1A1 and COL1A2 are involved in osteogenesis imperfecta 
(OI) and, rarely, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) subtypes and OI-EDS overlap 
syndromes (OIEDS1 and OIEDS2, respectively). Here we describe a cohort of 34 
individuals with likely pathogenic and pathogenic variants in COL1A1 and COL1A2, 
15 of whom have potential OIEDS1 (n = 5) or OIEDS2 (n = 10). A predominant OI 
phenotype and COL1A1 frameshift variants are present in 4/5 cases with potential 
OIEDS1. On the other hand, 9/10 potential OIEDS2 cases have a predominant EDS 
phenotype, including four with an initial diagnosis of hypermobile EDS (hEDS). 
An additional case with a predominant EDS phenotype had a COL1A1 
arginine-to-cysteine variant that was originally misclassified as a variant of 
uncertain significance despite this type of variant being associated with 
classical EDS with vascular fragility. Vascular/arterial fragility was observed 
in 4/15 individuals (including one individual with an original diagnosis of 
hEDS), which underscores the unique clinical surveillance and management needs 
in these patients. In comparison to previously described OIEDS1/2, we observed 
differentiating features that should be considered to refine currently proposed 
criteria for genetic testing in OIEDS, which will be beneficial for diagnosis 
and management. Additionally, these results highlight the importance of 
gene-specific knowledge for informed variant classification and point to a 
potential genetic resolution (COL1A2) for some cases of clinically diagnosed 
hEDS.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.32038
PMID: 36896471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]