---
reference_id: "PMID:23471748"
title: "Genetic modifiers of cancer risk in Lynch syndrome: a review."
authors:
- Talseth-Palmer BA
- Wijnen JT
- Grice DM
- Scott RJ
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s10689-013-9614-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic modifiers of cancer risk in Lynch syndrome: a review.
**Authors:** Talseth-Palmer BA, Wijnen JT, Grice DM, Scott RJ
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10689-013-9614-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10689-013-9614-2)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2013 Jun;12(2):207-16. doi: 10.1007/s10689-013-9614-2.

Genetic modifiers of cancer risk in Lynch syndrome: a review.

Talseth-Palmer BA(1), Wijnen JT, Grice DM, Scott RJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, University of Newcastle, 
Newcastle, Australia.

The report by Aldred Scott Warthin in 1913 of a cancer family history and 
expanded on by Henry T. Lynch demonstrated one of the most enduring traits 
observed in patients with Lynch syndrome. The recognition of a variety of 
malignancies occurring at differing ages within a single family suggested the 
role of genetic variance on disease expression in an autosomal dominantly 
inherited genetic condition. With the identification of the genetic basis of 
Lynch syndrome and the subsequent collection of families and their medical 
records it has become possible to identify subtle genetic effects that influence 
the age at which disease onset occurs in this cancer predisposition. Knowledge 
about genetic modifiers influencing disease expression has the potential to be 
used to personalise prophylactic screening measures to maximise the benefits for 
family members and their carers.

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-013-9614-2
PMCID: PMC3717148
PMID: 23471748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]