---
reference_id: PMID:16444517
title: Recoverin as a cancer-retina antigen.
authors:
- Bazhin AV
- Schadendorf D
- Philippov PP
- Eichmüller SB
journal: Cancer Immunol Immunother
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/s00262-006-0132-z
keywords:
- Autoantibodies
- G-Protein-Coupled Receptor Kinase 1/metabolism
- Humans
- "Neoplasms/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- Paraneoplastic Syndromes/pathology
- Recoverin
- "Retina/cytology, physiology"
- "Retinal Degeneration/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recoverin as a cancer-retina antigen.
**Authors:** Bazhin AV, Schadendorf D, Philippov PP, Eichmüller SB
**Journal:** Cancer Immunol Immunother (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00262-006-0132-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00262-006-0132-z)

## Content

1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2007 Jan;56(1):110-6. doi:
10.1007/s00262-006-0132-z.

Recoverin as a cancer-retina antigen.

Bazhin AV(1), Schadendorf D, Philippov PP, Eichmüller SB.

Author information:
(1)Skin Cancer Unit (D070), German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 
280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

In photoreceptor cells the Ca(2+) -binding protein recoverin controls 
phosphorylation of the visual receptor rhodopsin by inhibiting rhodopsin kinase 
(GRK-1). It can also serve as a paraneoplastic antigen in the development of 
retinal degeneration in some patients with cancer. The aberrant expression of 
recoverin in cancer cells and the presence of autoantibodies against recoverin 
are essential for the occurrence of cancer-associated retinopathy, which finally 
results in the apoptosis of photoreceptor cells. Noteworthy in cancer patients, 
the aberrant recoverin expression and the appearance of autoantibodies against 
recoverin are more frequent than paraneoplastic syndromes. We suggest the term 
"cancer-retina antigens" for this kind of proteins like recoverin that are 
solely expressed in retina and tumor tissues and evoke antibodies and/or T cells 
in patients with cancer. The rare development of a paraneoplastic syndrome is 
possibly caused by this immune response and probably depends on further events 
allowing to overcome the blood-retina barrier and the immune privileged status 
of the retina. It is still unknown whether aberrantly expressed recoverin could 
have a specific function in cancer cells, though it is suggested that it can be 
functionally associated with G-protein-coupled receptor kinases. This paper 
reviews the present knowledge on paraneoplastic syndromes associated with the 
aberrant expression of recoverin. A possible application of recoverin as a 
potential target for immunotherapy of cancer is discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-006-0132-z
PMCID: PMC11030721
PMID: 16444517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]