---
reference_id: "PMID:33776625"
title: "Expanding the Phenotype of TUBB2A-Related Tubulinopathy: Three Cases of a Novel, Heterozygous TUBB2A Pathogenic Variant p.Gly98Arg."
authors:
- Schmidt L
- Wain KE
- Hajek C
- Estrada-Veras JI
- Guillen Sacoto MJ
- Wentzensen IM
- Malhotra A
- Clause A
- Perry D
- Moreno-De-Luca A
- Bell M
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000512160
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the Phenotype of TUBB2A-Related Tubulinopathy: Three Cases of a Novel, Heterozygous TUBB2A Pathogenic Variant p.Gly98Arg.
**Authors:** Schmidt L, Wain KE, Hajek C, Estrada-Veras JI, Guillen Sacoto MJ, Wentzensen IM, Malhotra A, Clause A, Perry D, Moreno-De-Luca A, Bell M
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000512160](https://doi.org/10.1159/000512160)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2021 Mar;12(1):33-40. doi: 10.1159/000512160. Epub 2020 Dec 9.

Expanding the Phenotype of TUBB2A-Related Tubulinopathy: Three Cases of a Novel,
Heterozygous TUBB2A Pathogenic Variant p.Gly98Arg.

Schmidt L(1), Wain KE(2), Hajek C(3), Estrada-Veras JI(4), Guillen Sacoto MJ(5),
Wentzensen IM(5), Malhotra A(6), Clause A(6), Perry D(6), Moreno-De-Luca A(7),
Bell M(3).

Author information:
(1)Sanford Health, Augustana-Sanford Genetic Counseling Program, Sioux Falls,
South Dakota, USA.
(2)Geisinger Autism & Developmental Medicine Institute, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania,
USA.
(3)Sanford Health, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, USA.
(4)Henry M Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine and
Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
(6)Illumina Clinical Services Laboratory, San Diego, California, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, Geisinger Autism & Developmental Medicine Institute,
Genomic Medicine Institute, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania, USA.

Tubulinopathies are a group of conditions caused by variants in 6 tubulin genes
that present with a spectrum of brain malformations. One of these conditions is
TUBB2A-related tubulinopathy. Currently, there are 9 reported individuals with
pathogenic variants within the TUBB2A gene, with common manifestations
including, but not limited to, global developmental delay, seizures, cortical
dysplasia, and dysmorphic corpus callosum. We report 3 patients identified by
exome and genome sequencing to have a novel, pathogenic, missense variant in
TUBB2A (p.Gly98Arg). They presented similarly with intellectual disability,
hypotonia, and global developmental delay and varied with respect to the type of
cortical brain malformation, seizure history, diagnosis of autism spectrum
disorder, and other features. This case series expands the natural history of
TUBB2A-related tubulinopathy while describing the presentation of a novel,
pathogenic, missense variant in 3 patients.

Copyright © 2020 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000512160
PMCID: PMC7983673
PMID: 33776625

Conflict of interest statement: I.W.M. and M.J.G.S. are employees of GeneDx,
Inc. A.M., D.P., and A.C. are employees of Illumina, Inc. Other authors have no
conflicts of interest to declare.
