---
reference_id: "PMID:17907046"
title: Positive blood cultures and diagnosis of bacterial meningitis in cases with negative culture of cerebrospinal fluid.
authors:
- Fuglsang-Damgaard D
- Pedersen G
- Schønheyder HC
journal: Scand J Infect Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1080/00365540701642161
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Positive blood cultures and diagnosis of bacterial meningitis in cases with negative culture of cerebrospinal fluid.
**Authors:** Fuglsang-Damgaard D, Pedersen G, Schønheyder HC
**Journal:** Scand J Infect Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00365540701642161](https://doi.org/10.1080/00365540701642161)

## Content

1. Scand J Infect Dis. 2008;40(3):229-33. doi: 10.1080/00365540701642161. Epub
2007  Sep 28.

Positive blood cultures and diagnosis of bacterial meningitis in cases with 
negative culture of cerebrospinal fluid.

Fuglsang-Damgaard D(1), Pedersen G, Schønheyder HC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Aalborg Hospital, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. dfd@rn.dk

The diagnosis of bacterial meningitis may be established through positive blood 
cultures in cases with negative culture of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). However, 
information is sparse regarding how often the aetiological diagnosis is 
determined by blood culture alone. Therefore, we undertook a retrospective study 
of patients with meningitis and a blood culture-based bacterial diagnosis in 
North Jutland County, Denmark in 1997-2005. Patients were included if they had 
1) a microscopy- and culture-negative CSF specimen with a leukocyte count > or 
=100x10(6)/l and an erythrocyte count < or =10,000x10(6)/l and 2) a positive 
blood culture within an interval of 3 d. A total of 20 patients fulfilled these 
criteria: 7 with Streptococcus pneumoniae, 4 with Neisseria meningitidis, 4 with 
Staphylococcus aureus, and 5 with miscellaneous bacteria. Suitable antibiotic 
therapy was delayed up to 48 h after lumbar puncture, and in-hospital mortality 
was 25%. A discharge diagnosis of bacterial meningitis was missing in 6/20 
cases, and 12/20 cases had not been reported to Danish health authorities. Thus, 
patients with CSF-culture negative bacterial meningitis are at risk of delayed 
therapy, a poor outcome, and incomplete notification to health authorities.

DOI: 10.1080/00365540701642161
PMID: 17907046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]