---
reference_id: "PMID:21839423"
title: Mutations in IL36RN/IL1F5 are associated with the severe episodic inflammatory skin disease known as generalized pustular psoriasis.
authors:
- Onoufriadis A
- Simpson MA
- Pink AE
- Di Meglio P
- Smith CH
- Pullabhatla V
- Knight J
- Spain SL
- Nestle FO
- Burden AD
- Capon F
- Trembath RC
- Barker JN
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.022
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/genetics, immunology"
- "Interleukins/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Psoriasis/genetics, immunology"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in IL36RN/IL1F5 are associated with the severe episodic inflammatory skin disease known as generalized pustular psoriasis.
**Authors:** Onoufriadis A, Simpson MA, Pink AE, Di Meglio P, Smith CH, Pullabhatla V, Knight J, Spain SL, Nestle FO, Burden AD, Capon F, Trembath RC, Barker JN
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.022)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Sep 9;89(3):432-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.022. Epub 
2011 Aug 11.

Mutations in IL36RN/IL1F5 are associated with the severe episodic inflammatory 
skin disease known as generalized pustular psoriasis.

Onoufriadis A(1), Simpson MA, Pink AE, Di Meglio P, Smith CH, Pullabhatla V, 
Knight J, Spain SL, Nestle FO, Burden AD, Capon F, Trembath RC, Barker JN.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, King's College London School of 
Medicine, Guy's Hospital, UK.

Generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) is a rare and yet potentially lethal 
clinical variant of psoriasis, characterized by the formation of sterile 
cutaneous pustules, neutrophilia, fever and features of systemic inflammation. 
We sequenced the exomes of five unrelated individuals diagnosed with GPP. 
Nonsynonymous, splice-site, insertion, and deletion variants with an estimated 
population frequency of <0.01 were considered as candidate pathogenic mutations. 
A homozygous c.338C>T (p.Ser113Leu) missense substitution of IL36RN was 
identified in two individuals, with a third subject found to be a compound 
heterozygote for c.338C>T (p.Ser113Leu) and a c.142C>T (p.Arg48Trp) missense 
substitution. IL36RN (previously known as IL1F5) encodes an IL-1 family receptor 
antagonist, which opposes the activity of the IL-36A and IL-36G innate 
cytokines. Homology searches revealed that GPP mutations alter evolutionarily 
conserved residues. Homozygosity for the c.338C>T (p.Ser113Leu) variant is 
associated with an elevated proinflammatory response following ex vivo 
stimulation with IL36A. These findings suggest loss of function of IL36RN as the 
genetic basis of GPP and implicate innate immune dysregulation in this severe 
episodic inflammatory disease, thereby highlighting IL-1 signaling as a 
potential target for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.022
PMCID: PMC3169817
PMID: 21839423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]