---
reference_id: "PMID:12672860"
title: "Memantine in moderate-to-severe Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Reisberg B
- Doody R
- Stöffler A
- Schmitt F
- Ferris S
- Möbius HJ
- Memantine Study Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa013128
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Aged
- "Alzheimer Disease/classification, drug therapy, psychology"
- Behavior
- Cognition
- Disease Progression
- "Excitatory Amino Acid Antagonists/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Memantine/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Middle Aged
- "N-Methylaspartate/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Memantine in moderate-to-severe Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Reisberg B, Doody R, Stöffler A, Schmitt F, Ferris S, Möbius HJ, Memantine Study Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa013128](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa013128)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2003 Apr 3;348(14):1333-41. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa013128.

Memantine in moderate-to-severe Alzheimer's disease.

Reisberg B(1), Doody R, Stöffler A, Schmitt F, Ferris S, Möbius HJ; Memantine 
Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, New York University School of Medicine, New York 
10016, USA. barry.reisberg@med.nyu.edu

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2003 Aug 7;349(6):609-10; author reply 609-10. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200308073490616.
    Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2003 Nov;3(6):485-6. doi: 
10.1007/s11910-003-0051-8.
    Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2004 Jan-Mar;18(1):47-8; author reply 48. doi: 
10.1097/00002093-200401000-00010.

BACKGROUND: Overstimulation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor by 
glutamate is implicated in neurodegenerative disorders. Accordingly, we 
investigated memantine, an NMDA antagonist, for the treatment of Alzheimer's 
disease.
METHODS: Patients with moderate-to-severe Alzheimer's disease were randomly 
assigned to receive placebo or 20 mg of memantine daily for 28 weeks. The 
primary efficacy variables were the Clinician's Interview-Based Impression of 
Change Plus Caregiver Input (CIBIC-Plus) and the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative 
Study Activities of Daily Living Inventory modified for severe dementia 
(ADCS-ADLsev). The secondary efficacy end points included the Severe Impairment 
Battery and other measures of cognition, function, and behavior. Treatment 
differences between base line and the end point were assessed. Missing 
observations were imputed by using the most recent previous observation (the 
last observation carried forward). The results were also analyzed with only the 
observed values included, without replacing the missing values (observed-cases 
analysis).
RESULTS: Two hundred fifty-two patients (67 percent women; mean age, 76 years) 
from 32 U.S. centers were enrolled. Of these, 181 (72 percent) completed the 
study and were evaluated at week 28. Seventy-one patients discontinued treatment 
prematurely (42 taking placebo and 29 taking memantine). Patients receiving 
memantine had a better outcome than those receiving placebo, according to the 
results of the CIBIC-Plus (P=0.06 with the last observation carried forward, 
P=0.03 for observed cases), the ADCS-ADLsev (P=0.02 with the last observation 
carried forward, P=0.003 for observed cases), and the Severe Impairment Battery 
(P<0.001 with the last observation carried forward, P=0.002 for observed cases). 
Memantine was not associated with a significant frequency of adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: Antiglutamatergic treatment reduced clinical deterioration in 
moderate-to-severe Alzheimer's disease, a phase associated with distress for 
patients and burden on caregivers, for which other treatments are not available.

Copyright 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa013128
PMID: 12672860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]