---
reference_id: "PMID:32197277"
title: Inclisiran for the Treatment of Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia.
authors:
- Raal FJ
- Kallend D
- Ray KK
- Turner T
- Koenig W
- Wright RS
- Wijngaard PLJ
- Curcio D
- Jaros MJ
- Leiter LA
- Kastelein JJP
- ORION-9 Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1913805
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anticholesteremic Agents/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Cholesterol, LDL/blood"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- "Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II/blood, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Injections, Subcutaneous"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "PCSK9 Inhibitors/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Proprotein Convertase 9
- "RNA, Small Interfering/therapeutic use"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inclisiran for the Treatment of Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia.
**Authors:** Raal FJ, Kallend D, Ray KK, Turner T, Koenig W, Wright RS, Wijngaard PLJ, Curcio D, Jaros MJ, Leiter LA, Kastelein JJP, ORION-9 Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1913805](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1913805)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2020 Apr 16;382(16):1520-1530. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1913805. Epub 
2020 Mar 18.

Inclisiran for the Treatment of Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia.

Raal FJ(1), Kallend D(1), Ray KK(1), Turner T(1), Koenig W(1), Wright RS(1), 
Wijngaard PLJ(1), Curcio D(1), Jaros MJ(1), Leiter LA(1), Kastelein JJP(1); 
ORION-9 Investigators.

Collaborators: Raal FJ, Ray KK, Koenig W, Leiter LA, Kastelein JJP, Wright S, 
Wijngaard PLJ, Kallend DG, Waters D, Pedersen T, Lonn E, Ford I, Homan J, Turner 
T, Hemphill L, Wadell C, Pullman J, Fishberg R, Knowles J, Baum S, Forgosh L, 
Captain A, Adams A, Baass A, Dufour R, Bergeron J, Gaudet D, Burgess L, Fourie 
N, Coetzer S, Abelson M, Van Nieuwenhuizen E, Ebrahim I, Pretorius M, Jansen van 
Rensburg D, Raal F, Mol G, Stroes E, Hovingh G, Visseren F, van Kesteren H, 
Bergen PV, Masana L, Civeira Murillo F, Diaz Diaz JL, Fuentes Jimenez F, Zambon 
Rados D, Pinto Sala X, Schmidt E, Andersen LJ, Corell P, Bottcher M, Thomsen KK, 
Klausen IC, Hove JD, Olsson Å, Romeo S, Eriksson M, Adamkova V, Solcova L, Zeman 
J.

Author information:
(1)From the Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa (F.J.R.); the Medicines Company, Zurich, Switzerland 
(D.K.); the Imperial Centre for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention, Department of 
Primary Care and Public Health, Imperial College, London (K.K.R.); Medpace 
Reference Laboratories, Cincinnati (T.T.); Deutsches Herzzentrum München, 
Technische Universität München, and German Center for Cardiovascular Research, 
Munich Heart Alliance, Munich (W.K.), and the Institute of Epidemiology and 
Medical Biometry, University of Ulm, Ulm (W.K.) - all in Germany; the Division 
of Preventive Cardiology and the Department of Cardiology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN (R.S.W.); the Medicines Company, Parsippany, NJ (P.L.J.W., D.C.); 
Summit Analytical, Denver (M.J.J.); Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. 
Michael's Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto (L.A.L.); and the Department 
of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam (J.J.P.K.).

BACKGROUND: Familial hypercholesterolemia is characterized by an elevated level 
of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and an increased risk of premature 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Monoclonal antibodies directed against 
proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 (PCSK9) have been shown to reduce 
LDL cholesterol levels by more than 50% but require administration every 2 to 4 
weeks. In a phase 2 trial, a twice-yearly injection of inclisiran, a small 
interfering RNA, was shown to inhibit hepatic synthesis of PCSK9 in adults with 
heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia.
METHODS: In this phase 3, double-blind trial, we randomly assigned, in a 1:1 
ratio, 482 adults who had heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia to receive 
subcutaneous injections of inclisiran sodium (at a dose of 300 mg) or matching 
placebo on days 1, 90, 270, and 450. The two primary end points were the percent 
change from baseline in the LDL cholesterol level on day 510 and the 
time-adjusted percent change from baseline in the LDL cholesterol level between 
day 90 and day 540.
RESULTS: The median age of the patients was 56 years, and 47% were men; the mean 
baseline level of LDL cholesterol was 153 mg per deciliter. At day 510, the 
percent change in the LDL cholesterol level was a reduction of 39.7% (95% 
confidence interval [CI], -43.7 to -35.7) in the inclisiran group and an 
increase of 8.2% (95% CI, 4.3 to 12.2) in the placebo group, for a between-group 
difference of -47.9 percentage points (95% CI, -53.5 to -42.3; P<0.001). The 
time-averaged percent change in the LDL cholesterol level between day 90 and day 
540 was a reduction of 38.1% (95% CI, -41.1 to -35.1) in the inclisiran group 
and an increase of 6.2% (95% CI, 3.3 to 9.2) in the placebo group, for a 
between-group difference of -44.3 percentage points (95% CI, -48.5 to -40.1; 
P<0.001). There were robust reductions in LDL cholesterol levels in all 
genotypes of familial hypercholesterolemia. Adverse events and serious adverse 
events were similar in the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Among adults with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, those 
who received inclisiran had significantly lower levels of LDL cholesterol than 
those who received placebo, with an infrequent dosing regimen and an acceptable 
safety profile. (Funded by the Medicines Company; ORION-9 ClinicalTrials.gov 
number, NCT03397121.).

Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1913805
PMID: 32197277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]