---
reference_id: "PMID:38619599"
title: "Familial syndromes associated with testicular and paratesticular neoplasms: a comprehensive review."
authors:
- Strakova-Peterikova A
- Slisarenko M
- Skopal J
- Pivovarcikova K
- Pitra T
- Farcas M
- Michal M
- Michal M
- Michalova K
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-024-03803-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Testicular Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary/pathology, genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Genital Neoplasms, Male/pathology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial syndromes associated with testicular and paratesticular neoplasms: a comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Strakova-Peterikova A, Slisarenko M, Skopal J, Pivovarcikova K, Pitra T, Farcas M, Michal M, Michal M, Michalova K
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-024-03803-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-024-03803-x)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2024 May;484(5):723-731. doi: 10.1007/s00428-024-03803-x. Epub 
2024 Apr 15.

Familial syndromes associated with testicular and paratesticular neoplasms: a 
comprehensive review.

Strakova-Peterikova A(1), Slisarenko M(1)(2), Skopal J(1), Pivovarcikova K(1), 
Pitra T(3), Farcas M(1)(4), Michal M(1), Michal M(1), Michalova K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine in Plzeň, Charles University, 
Czech Republic, Bioptical Laboratory, Ltd, Plzeň, Czech Republic.
(2)Medical Laboratory CSD, Ltd, Kiev, Ukraine.
(3)Department of Urology, Faculty of Medicine in Plzeň, Charles University, 
Plzeň, Czech Republic.
(4)Onco Team Diagnostic, Bucharest, Romania.
(5)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine in Plzeň, Charles University, 
Czech Republic, Bioptical Laboratory, Ltd, Plzeň, Czech Republic. 
kveta.michalova@biopticka.cz.

A syndromic association between a subset of testicular/paratesticular neoplasms 
is well established. Such examples include Carney complex and large cell 
calcifying Sertoli cell tumor, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and intratubular large 
cell hyalinizing Sertoli cell neoplasia, and VHL syndrome and clear cell 
papillary cystadenoma of the epididymis.However, recent studies proposed 
potential novel links between some testicular and paratesticular neoplasms with 
certain tumor syndromes. While more studies are still needed to solidify these 
associations, recent research suggests that a subset of Leydig cell tumors may 
arise in patients with hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma 
syndrome or that some seminomas may occur in Lynch syndrome patients. 
Additionally, an association between testicular sex cord stromal tumors and 
paratesticular sarcomas with Familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome and DICER1 
syndrome, respectively, has been proposed as well. This review provides a 
comprehensive overview of the intricate relationship between familial syndromes 
and associated testicular and paratesticular tumors, shedding light on their 
clinicopathological and molecular characteristics.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-024-03803-x
PMID: 38619599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]