---
reference_id: "PMID:24492020"
title: "Transmission of Dientamoeba fragilis: pinworm or cysts?"
authors:
- Clark CG
- Röser D
- Stensvold CR
journal: Trends Parasitol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2014.01.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transmission of Dientamoeba fragilis: pinworm or cysts?
**Authors:** Clark CG, Röser D, Stensvold CR
**Journal:** Trends Parasitol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pt.2014.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2014.01.005)

## Content

1. Trends Parasitol. 2014 Mar;30(3):136-40. doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2014.01.005. Epub 
2014 Jan 31.

Transmission of Dientamoeba fragilis: pinworm or cysts?

Clark CG(1), Röser D(2), Stensvold CR(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London WC1E 7HT, UK.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Statens Serum Institut, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Statens Serum Institut, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: run@ssi.dk.

Recently, conflicting evidence has been published on the mode of transmission of 
the trichomonad Dientamoeba fragilis. Detection of D. fragilis DNA inside 
Enterobius vermicularis eggs agrees with the prediction of Dobell in 1940 that 
the eggs of a nematode act as a vector for transmission. However, the 
identification of a cyst stage of D. fragilis in the stool of rodents infected 
with a human isolate has also been reported, and this implies a life cycle 
similar to those of most other intestinal protistan parasites. Herein we discuss 
the recent data, identify gaps in the experimental evidence, and propose a 
method for determining which view of the life cycle of this organism is correct.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pt.2014.01.005
PMID: 24492020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]