---
reference_id: "PMID:17508531"
title: Pleurisy.
authors:
- Kass SM
- Williams PM
- Reamy BV
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2007'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pleurisy.
**Authors:** Kass SM, Williams PM, Reamy BV
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2007)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2007 May 1;75(9):1357-64.

Pleurisy.

Kass SM(1), Williams PM, Reamy BV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA. smkass@us.med.navy.mil

Pleuritic chest pain is a common presenting symptom and has many causes, which 
range from life-threatening to benign, self-limited conditions. Pulmonary 
embolism is the most common potentially life-threatening cause, found in 5 to 20 
percent of patients who present to the emergency department with pleuritic pain. 
Other clinically significant conditions that may cause pleuritic pain include 
pericarditis, pneumonia, myocardial infarction, and pneumothorax. Patients 
should be evaluated appropriately for these conditions before an alternative 
diagnosis is made. History, physical examination, and chest radiography are 
recommended for all patients with pleuritic chest pain. Electrocardiography is 
helpful, especially if there is clinical suspicion of myocardial infarction, 
pulmonary embolism, or pericarditis. When these other significant causes of 
pleuritic pain have been excluded, the diagnosis of pleurisy can be made. There 
are numerous causes of pleurisy, with viral pleurisy among the most common. 
Other etiologies may be evaluated through additional diagnostic testing in 
selected patients. Treatment of pleurisy typically consists of pain management 
with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, as well as specific treatments 
targeted at the underlying cause.

PMID: 17508531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]