---
reference_id: "PMID:39099980"
title: "Hydatid Cyst or Echinococcosis: A Comprehensive Review of Transmission, Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Multidisciplinary Treatment."
authors:
- Badwaik N
- Gharde P
- Shinde RK
- Tayade H
- Navandhar PS
- Patil M
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.63713
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hydatid Cyst or Echinococcosis: A Comprehensive Review of Transmission, Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Multidisciplinary Treatment.
**Authors:** Badwaik N, Gharde P, Shinde RK, Tayade H, Navandhar PS, Patil M
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.63713](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.63713)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jul 2;16(7):e63713. doi: 10.7759/cureus.63713. eCollection 2024 
Jul.

Hydatid Cyst or Echinococcosis: A Comprehensive Review of Transmission, Clinical 
Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Multidisciplinary Treatment.

Badwaik N(1), Gharde P(1), Shinde RK(1), Tayade H(1), Navandhar PS(1), Patil 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)General Surgery, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of 
Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

Echinococcosis, a parasitic infection caused by Echinococcus tapeworms, can 
cause various symptoms depending on the location and size of the cysts. This 
article explores the complexities of echinococcosis, including its transmission 
cycle, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and treatment approaches. The review 
highlights the challenges associated with diagnosing the different 
echinococcosis types, including cystic echinococcosis, alveolar echinococcosis, 
and polycystic echinococcosis. Each form of the disease necessitates a unique 
diagnostic approach that often combines serological tests, imaging techniques, 
and histological analysis. The article explores treatment options for each type 
of echinococcosis, including surgical resection, medication, and minimally 
invasive procedures such as puncture-aspiration-injection-reaspiration (PAIR). 
The article acknowledges current treatment methods' limitations and emphasises 
the need for further research into improved diagnostics, drug targets, and 
preventative measures. This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of 
echinococcosis, encompassing its transmission, clinical presentation, diagnosis, 
and treatment modalities. By outlining the complexities of the disease and 
highlighting areas for future research, the article hopes to contribute to 
improved disease management and control. Key findings of the review include the 
identification of significant diagnostic challenges in differentiating between 
cystic, alveolar, and polycystic echinococcosis, the varying efficacy of 
treatment modalities such as surgical resection and PAIR, and the urgent need 
for further research into enhanced diagnostic methods, novel drug targets, and 
effective preventative strategies.

Copyright © 2024, Badwaik et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.63713
PMCID: PMC11294710
PMID: 39099980

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.