---
reference_id: "PMID:34389165"
title: "Palliative gastrectomy for metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma: A national population-based cohort study."
authors:
- Kamarajah SK
- Markar SR
- Phillips AW
- Salti GI
- Dahdaleh F
- Griffiths EA
journal: Surgery
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2021.07.016
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/diagnosis, mortality, secondary, therapy"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- "Gastrectomy/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Palliative Care/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- Prognosis
- Proportional Hazards Models
- "Risk Assessment/statistics & numerical data"
- "Stomach Neoplasms/diagnosis, mortality, pathology, therapy"
- United States/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Palliative gastrectomy for metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma: A national population-based cohort study.
**Authors:** Kamarajah SK, Markar SR, Phillips AW, Salti GI, Dahdaleh F, Griffiths EA
**Journal:** Surgery (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.surg.2021.07.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surg.2021.07.016)

## Content

1. Surgery. 2021 Dec;170(6):1702-1710. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2021.07.016. Epub 2021
 Aug 11.

Palliative gastrectomy for metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma: A national 
population-based cohort study.

Kamarajah SK(1), Markar SR(2), Phillips AW(3), Salti GI(4), Dahdaleh F(5), 
Griffiths EA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Upper Gastrointestinal Surgery, University Hospitals Birmingham 
NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK; Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, 
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK. Electronic 
address: https://twitter.com/Sivesh93.
(2)Department of Surgery & Cancer, Imperial College London, London United 
Kingdom; Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. Electronic address: https://twitter.com/MarkarSheraz.
(3)Northern Oesophagogastric Unit, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle 
University Trust Hospitals, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne, UK; School of Medical 
Education, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, Tyne and Wear, UK. 
Electronic address: https://twitter.com/AlexWPhillips7.
(4)Department of General Surgery, University of Illinois Hospital and Health 
Sciences System, Chicago, IL; Edward-Elmhurst Health, Department of Surgical 
Oncology, Naperville, IL. Electronic address: https://twitter.com/DrGeorgeSalti.
(5)Edward-Elmhurst Health, Department of Surgical Oncology, Naperville, IL. 
Electronic address: https://twitter.com/fdahdaleh.
(6)Department of Upper Gastrointestinal Surgery, University Hospitals Birmingham 
NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK; Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, 
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK. Electronic 
address: ewen.griffiths@uhb.nhs.uk.

BACKGROUND: The impact of palliative gastrectomy for metastatic gastric 
adenocarcinoma, especially by site of metastasis remains unclear.
METHODS: The National Cancer Database, 2010-2015, was used to identify patients 
with clinical metastatic (cM1) gastric adenocarcinoma (n = 19,411) at diagnosis. 
The main variable was index management for cM1 gastric adenocarcinoma (ie, no 
treatment, palliative chemotherapy, or palliative gastrectomy). Cox 
multivariable analyses were used to account for treatment selection bias and 
reported as hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval.
RESULTS: Of 19,411 patients, 10,893 (56%) received palliative chemotherapy, and 
only 1,101 (6%) received palliative gastrectomy only. The median survival was 
6.1 months, and 5-year survival was 4% in the entire cohort. Patients receiving 
palliative gastrectomy had a significantly longer survival than patients without 
any treatment or palliative chemotherapy (median: 12.8 vs 1.8 vs 9.5 months, P < 
.001), which remained after multivariable adjustment (HR: 0.76, 95% confidence 
interval: 0.71-0.81, P < .001) compared with palliative chemotherapy. Stratified 
analyses by clinical nodal stage (cN) demonstrated survival benefit with 
palliative gastrectomy: cN0 (HR: 0.71, 95% confidence interval: 0.62-0.82), cN1 
(HR: 0.68, 95% confidence interval: 0.59-0.79), cN2 (HR: 0.86, 95% confidence 
interval: 0.70-0.94), and cN3 (HR: 0.82, 95% confidence interval: 0.70-0.92) 
over palliative chemotherapy. Stratified analyses by metastasis site 
demonstrated that palliative gastrectomy remained superior compared with 
palliative chemotherapy for metastatic disease limited to liver, bone, and 
peritoneum, but equivalent to lung metastasis and inferior to brain metastasis.
CONCLUSION: Palliative gastrectomy appears to have a modest survival benefit 
over palliative chemotherapy alone. Differences in outcomes by site of 
metastasis warrant further research to understand tumor biology and identify 
specific subgroups which may benefit from palliative gastrectomy.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.surg.2021.07.016
PMID: 34389165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]