---
reference_id: "PMID:21152085"
title: "Which neurodevelopmental disorders get researched and why?"
authors:
- Bishop DV
journal: PLoS One
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015112
keywords:
- Animals
- "Biomedical Research/economics, statistics & numerical data"
- Child
- "Developmental Disabilities/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- "Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Publications/statistics & numerical data"
- "Research Support as Topic/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Which neurodevelopmental disorders get researched and why?
**Authors:** Bishop DV
**Journal:** PLoS One (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0015112](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0015112)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 30;5(11):e15112. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015112.

Which neurodevelopmental disorders get researched and why?

Bishop DV(1).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Neuropsychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
dorothy.bishop@psy.ox.ac.uk

AIM: There are substantial differences in the amount of research concerned with 
different disorders. This paper considers why.
METHODS: Bibliographic searches were conducted to identify publications 
(1985-2009) concerned with 35 neurodevelopmental disorders: Developmental 
dyslexia, Developmental dyscalculia, Developmental coordination disorder, Speech 
sound disorder, Specific language impairment, Attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder, Autistic spectrum disorder, Tourette syndrome, Intellectual 
disability, Angelman syndrome, Cerebral palsy, Cornelia de Lange syndrome, Cri 
du chat syndrome, Down syndrome, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Fetal alcohol 
syndrome, Fragile X syndrome, Galactosaemia, Klinefelter syndrome, Lesch-Nyhan 
syndrome, Lowe syndrome, Marfan syndrome, Neurofibromatosis type 1, Noonan 
syndrome, Phenylketonuria, Prader-Willi syndrome, Rett syndrome, 
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, Trisomy 18, Tuberous sclerosis, Turner syndrome, 
Velocardiofacial syndrome, Williams syndrome, XXX and XYY. A publication index 
reflecting N publications relative to prevalence was derived.
RESULTS: The publication index was higher for rare than common conditions. 
However, this was partly explained by the tendency for rare disorders to be more 
severe.
INTERPRETATION: Although research activity is predictable from severity and 
prevalence, there are exceptions. Low rates of research, and relatively low 
levels of NIH funding, characterise conditions that are the domain of a single 
discipline with limited research resources. Growth in research is not explained 
by severity, and was exceptionally steep for autism and ADHD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015112
PMCID: PMC2994844
PMID: 21152085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The author has declared 
that no competing interests exist.