---
reference_id: "PMID:28617055"
title: New treatment strategies for ulcerative colitis.
authors:
- Panés J
- Alfaro I
journal: Expert Rev Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/1744666X.2017.1343668
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New treatment strategies for ulcerative colitis.
**Authors:** Panés J, Alfaro I
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1744666X.2017.1343668](https://doi.org/10.1080/1744666X.2017.1343668)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2017 Oct;13(10):963-973. doi: 
10.1080/1744666X.2017.1343668. Epub 2017 Jun 21.

New treatment strategies for ulcerative colitis.

Panés J(1), Alfaro I(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Gastroenterology , Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, 
CIBERehd , Barcelona , Spain.

Therapeutic strategies in ulcerative colitis are evolving. A personalized and 
optimal use of available drugs and the integration of new drug classes are the 
cornerstones underpinning the new treatment paradigms. Areas covered: A 
structured literature search in Medline and PubMed, Cochrane meta-analyses, and 
abstracts of international congresses has been performed to review therapeutic 
approaches to ulcerative colitis. The primary therapeutic objective of therapy 
is to achieve clinical remission since persistence of active disease, even if 
mild, leads to a significant reduction in quality of life. Current treatment 
paradigms of ulcerative colitis are based on the use of 5-aminosalycilates, 
corticosteroids, thiopurines, TNF-α inhibitors and α4ß7 integrin blockers. The 
main determinants for drug class selection are disease extension, disease 
severity, and previous drug history. New drug classes that will likely become 
available in the foreseeable future include inhibitors of Janus kinases, 
modulators of sphingosine-1-phosphate receptors, SMAD-7 antisense 
oligonucleotides, interleukin-12/23 blockers, and fecal microbiota 
transplantation. Expert commentary: Increasing therapeutic options for 
ulcerative colitis make predictors of response highly relevant. While these are 
not available, judicious use of therapies, avoidance of underdosing, or 
persistent therapy when criteria for drug failure are met are essential.

DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2017.1343668
PMID: 28617055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]