---
reference_id: "PMID:16818462"
title: Raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate signals heart failure in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Maradit-Kremers H
- Nicola PJ
- Crowson CS
- Ballman KV
- Jacobsen SJ
- Roger VL
- Gabriel SE
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/ard.2006.053710
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate signals heart failure in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Maradit-Kremers H, Nicola PJ, Crowson CS, Ballman KV, Jacobsen SJ, Roger VL, Gabriel SE
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard.2006.053710](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard.2006.053710)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Jan;66(1):76-80. doi: 10.1136/ard.2006.053710. Epub 2006
Jul  3.

Raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate signals heart failure in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis.

Maradit-Kremers H(1), Nicola PJ, Crowson CS, Ballman KV, Jacobsen SJ, Roger VL, 
Gabriel SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, 200 1st St SW, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory markers are associated with heart failure. Patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis have twice the risk of heart failure compared with 
people without rheumatoid arthritis.
OBJECTIVE: To assess whether heart failure in patients with rheumatoid arthritis 
is preceded by an inflammatory activation as shown by erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR), a systemic marker of inflammation.
METHODS: A population-based inception cohort of 575 patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis, free of heart failure at their rheumatoid arthritis incidence date, 
was followed up longitudinally until death or 2001. During 15 years of 
follow-up, they had a median of 15 ESR tests, and 172 patients had new-onset 
heart failure (Framingham Heart Study criteria). The follow-up period, beginning 
with the rheumatoid arthritis incidence date and ending with date of the last 
follow-up, was divided into 6-month intervals. The proportions of patients with 
at least one ESR value >/=40 mm/h and with anaemia (haemoglobin <11 g/dl) within 
each 6-month interval were plotted against time from fulfilment of heart failure 
criteria. A binomial test was used to compare proportions.
RESULTS: In patients with rheumatoid arthritis who developed heart failure, the 
proportion with ESR >/=40 mm/h was highest (23%) during the 6-month period 
immediately preceding the new-onset heart failure, as compared with the average 
ESR during the entire remaining follow-up period, both before and after heart 
failure (10.6%; p<0.01). The proportion of patients with anaemia peaked (54%) 
during the 6-month period after heart failure.
CONCLUSIONS: Inflammatory stimuli may be involved in the initiation of heart 
failure among patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

DOI: 10.1136/ard.2006.053710
PMCID: PMC1798392
PMID: 16818462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.