---
reference_id: "PMID:41073373"
title: "SETBP1 variants outside the degron disrupt DNA-binding, transcription and neuronal differentiation capacity to cause a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder."
authors:
- Wong MMK
- Kampen RA
- Braden RO
- Alagöz G
- Hildebrand MS
- Dingemans AJM
- Corbally J
- den Hoed J
- Mendoza E
- Claassen WJJ
- Barnett C
- Barnett M
- Brusco A
- Carli D
- de Vries BBA
- Elmslie F
- Ferrero GB
- Jansen NA
- van de Laar IMBH
- Moroni A
- Mowat D
- Murray L
- Novara F
- Peron A
- Scheffer IE
- Sirchia F
- Turner SJ
- Vignoli A
- Vino A
- Weber S
- Chung WK
- Gerard M
- López-González V
- Palmer E
- Morgan AT
- van Bon BW
- Fisher SE
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-64074-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Male
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Child
- Haploinsufficiency
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Degrons
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SETBP1 variants outside the degron disrupt DNA-binding, transcription and neuronal differentiation capacity to cause a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder.
**Authors:** Wong MMK, Kampen RA, Braden RO, Alagöz G, Hildebrand MS, Dingemans AJM, Corbally J, den Hoed J, Mendoza E, Claassen WJJ, Barnett C, Barnett M, Brusco A, Carli D, de Vries BBA, Elmslie F, Ferrero GB, Jansen NA, van de Laar IMBH, Moroni A, Mowat D, Murray L, Novara F, Peron A, Scheffer IE, Sirchia F, Turner SJ, Vignoli A, Vino A, Weber S, Chung WK, Gerard M, López-González V, Palmer E, Morgan AT, van Bon BW, Fisher SE
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-64074-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64074-x)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 Oct 10;16(1):9021. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-64074-x.

SETBP1 variants outside the degron disrupt DNA-binding, transcription and 
neuronal differentiation capacity to cause a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental 
disorder.

Wong MMK(1), Kampen RA(2), Braden RO(3)(4), Alagöz G(2), Hildebrand MS(3)(5), 
Dingemans AJM(6), Corbally J(2), den Hoed J(2), Mendoza E(7), Claassen WJJ(2), 
Barnett C(8), Barnett M(8), Brusco A(9)(10), Carli D(11)(12), de Vries BBA(6), 
Elmslie F(13), Ferrero GB(14), Jansen NA(6), van de Laar IMBH(15), Moroni A(9), 
Mowat D(16)(17), Murray L(18), Novara F(19), Peron A(20)(21)(22), Scheffer 
IE(3), Sirchia F(23), Turner SJ(3)(4), Vignoli A(24), Vino A(2), Weber S(25), 
Chung WK(26)(27), Gerard M(25), López-González V(28), Palmer E(17)(18), Morgan 
AT(4)(29), van Bon BW(6), Fisher SE(30)(31).

Author information:
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. maggie.wong@mpi.nl.
(2)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine and Paediatrics, University 
of Melbourne Austin Health Victoria, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(4)Speech and Language, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(5)Neuroscience Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's 
Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(7)Institut für Verhaltensbiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(8)SA Clinical Genetics Service, Women's and Children's Hospital, North 
Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(9)Department of Neurosciences Rita Levi-Montalcini, University of Torino, 
Torino, Italy.
(10)Medical Genetics Unit, Città della Salute e della Scienza, University 
Hospital, Turin, Italy.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(12)Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Stem Cell Transplantation and Cell Therapy 
Division, Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, Città della Salute e della 
Scienza di Torino, Torino, Italy.
(13)South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George's, University of 
London, London, UK.
(14)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Torino, 
Orbassano (Torino), Italy.
(15)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(16)Centre for Clinical Genetics, Sydney Children's Hospitals Network Randwick, 
Randwick, NSW, Australia.
(17)Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, Faculty of Clinical Medicine, 
UNSW, Randwick, NSW, Australia.
(18)Genetics of Learning Disability Service, Royal North Shore Hospital, St 
Leonards, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(19)Microgenomics srl, Pavia, Italy.
(20)Human Pathology, ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, San Paolo Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(21)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit-Epilepsy Center, ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, San 
Paolo Hospital, Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, 
Milan, Italy.
(22)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(23)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(24)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, ASST Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, 
Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(25)Department of Genetics, Reference center for Rare Diseases and Developmental 
Anomalies, Caen, France.
(26)Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(27)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(28)Sección de Genética Médica, Servicio de Pediatria, Hospital Clinico 
Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, IMIB-Arrixaca, CIBERER-ISCIII, Murcia, 
Spain.
(29)Department of Audiology and Speech Pathology, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(30)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for 
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. simon.fisher@mpi.nl.
(31)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. simon.fisher@mpi.nl.

Different types of germline de novo SETBP1 variants cause clinically distinct 
and heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorders: Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (SGS, 
via missense variants at a critical degron region) and SETBP1-haploinsufficiency 
disorder. However, due to the lack of systematic investigation of 
genotype-phenotype associations of different types of SETBP1 variants, and 
limited understanding of its roles in neurodevelopment, the extent of clinical 
heterogeneity and how this relates to underlying pathophysiological mechanisms 
remains elusive. This imposes challenges for diagnosis. Here, we present a 
comprehensive investigation of the largest cohort to date of individuals 
carrying SETBP1 missense variants outside the degron region (n = 18). We 
performed thorough clinical and speech phenotyping with functional follow-up 
using cellular assays and transcriptomics. Our findings suggest that such 
variants cause a clinically and functionally variable developmental syndrome, 
showing only partial overlaps with classical SGS and SETBP1-haploinsufficiency 
disorder. We provide evidence of loss-of-function pathophysiological mechanisms 
impairing ubiquitination, DNA-binding, transcription, and neuronal 
differentiation capacity and morphologies. In contrast to SGS and SETBP1 
haploinsufficiency, these effects are independent of protein abundance. Overall, 
our study provides important novel insights into diagnosis, patient care, and 
aetiology of SETBP1-related disorders.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-64074-x
PMCID: PMC12514306
PMID: 41073373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.