---
reference_id: "PMID:29659837"
title: Noonan syndrome-causing SHP2 mutants impair ERK-dependent chondrocyte differentiation during endochondral bone growth.
authors:
- Tajan M
- Pernin-Grandjean J
- Beton N
- Gennero I
- Capilla F
- Neel BG
- Araki T
- Valet P
- Tauber M
- Salles JP
- Yart A
- Edouard T
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy133
keywords:
- Animals
- "Butadienes/administration & dosage"
- Cell Differentiation/drug effects
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Chondrocytes/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Growth Plate/abnormalities, drug effects"
- Humans
- "Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/administration & dosage, genetics"
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- "Nitriles/administration & dosage"
- "Noonan Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noonan syndrome-causing SHP2 mutants impair ERK-dependent chondrocyte differentiation during endochondral bone growth.
**Authors:** Tajan M, Pernin-Grandjean J, Beton N, Gennero I, Capilla F, Neel BG, Araki T, Valet P, Tauber M, Salles JP, Yart A, Edouard T
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy133](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy133)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Jul 1;27(13):2276-2289. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy133.

Noonan syndrome-causing SHP2 mutants impair ERK-dependent chondrocyte
differentiation during endochondral bone growth.

Tajan M(1), Pernin-Grandjean J(2), Beton N(2), Gennero I(2), Capilla F(3), Neel
BG(4), Araki T(4), Valet P(1), Tauber M(2)(5), Salles JP(2)(5), Yart A(1),
Edouard T(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR 1048, Institute of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases (I2MC).
(2)INSERM UMR 1043, Centre of Pathophysiology of Toulouse Purpan (CPTP),
University of Toulouse Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.
(3)INSERM, US006, ANEXPLO/CREFRE, Histopathology Unit, Purpan Hospital,
Toulouse, France.
(4)Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU-Langone Medical Center, NY
10016, USA.
(5)Pediatric Department, Endocrine, Bone Diseases, and Genetics Unit, Children's
Hospital, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, France.

Growth retardation is a constant feature of Noonan syndrome (NS) but its
physiopathology remains poorly understood. We previously reported that
hyperactive NS-causing SHP2 mutants impair the systemic production of
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) through hyperactivation of the
RAS/extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) signalling pathway. Besides
endocrine defects, a direct effect of these mutants on growth plate has not been
explored, although recent studies have revealed an important physiological role
for SHP2 in endochondral bone growth. We demonstrated that growth plate length
was reduced in NS mice, mostly due to a shortening of the hypertrophic zone and
to a lesser extent of the proliferating zone. These histological features were
correlated with decreased expression of early chondrocyte differentiation
markers, and with reduced alkaline phosphatase staining and activity, in NS
murine primary chondrocytes. Although IGF1 treatment improved growth of NS mice,
it did not fully reverse growth plate abnormalities, notably the decreased
hypertrophic zone. In contrast, we documented a role of RAS/ERK hyperactivation
at the growth plate level since 1) NS-causing SHP2 mutants enhance RAS/ERK
activation in chondrocytes in vivo (NS mice) and in vitro (ATDC5 cells) and 2)
inhibition of RAS/ERK hyperactivation by U0126 treatment alleviated growth plate
abnormalities and enhanced chondrocyte differentiation. Similar effects were
obtained by chronic treatment of NS mice with statins. In conclusion, we
demonstrated that hyperactive NS-causing SHP2 mutants impair chondrocyte
differentiation during endochondral bone growth through a local hyperactivation
of the RAS/ERK signalling pathway, and that statin treatment may be a possible
therapeutic approach in NS.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy133
PMCID: PMC6005060
PMID: 29659837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
