---
reference_id: "PMID:41636194"
title: "Novel FUCA1 variants in two families, including the first report of a contiguous gene deletion syndrome involving FUCA1 and HMGCL."
authors:
- Kılıç M
- Yıldız H
- Dinçsoy Bir F
journal: Turk J Pediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.24953/turkjpediatr.2025.6009
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- alpha-L-Fucosidase/genetics
- "Fucosidosis/genetics, diagnosis"
- Gene Deletion
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Pedigree
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel FUCA1 variants in two families, including the first report of a contiguous gene deletion syndrome involving FUCA1 and HMGCL.
**Authors:** Kılıç M, Yıldız H, Dinçsoy Bir F
**Journal:** Turk J Pediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.24953/turkjpediatr.2025.6009](https://doi.org/10.24953/turkjpediatr.2025.6009)

## Content

1. Turk J Pediatr. 2025 Oct 19;67(6):896-903. doi:
10.24953/turkjpediatr.2025.6009.

Novel FUCA1 variants in two families, including the first report of a contiguous
gene deletion syndrome involving FUCA1 and HMGCL.

Kılıç M(1), Yıldız H(1), Dinçsoy Bir F(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara Etlik City Hospital,
University of Health Sciences, Ankara, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara Etlik City Hospital, Ankara, Türkiye.

BACKGROUND: Fucosidosis is a rare, autosomal recessive lysosomal storage
disorder caused by deficiency of an alpha-L-fucosidase due to pathogenic
variants in the FUCA1 gene, leading to the accumulation of fucoglyco-conjugates
in the lysosomes of the liver, brain, skin and other organs. Its main clinical
features include progressive neurological deterioration, seizures, coarse
facies, visceromegaly, angiokeratoma, growth retardation, recurrent
sinopulmonary infections and dysostosis multiplex.
CASE PRESENTATION: Three patients with fucosidosis from two unrelated families
with severe developmental delay, hearing loss, coarse facies but no
hepatosplenomegaly and angiokeratoma are presented. A homozygous, novel nonsense
mutation c.236G>A (p.Trp79*) in exon 1 of the FUCA1 gene was identified in one
family, and a homozygous novel 64.5 kb deletion, including HMGCL (exons 1-6),
FUCA1, and CNR2 (exon 2) genes in the other.
CONCLUSIONS: Fucosidosis should be considered in patients with delayed motor and
cognitive development followed by progressive neurological deterioration, even
in the absence of common features such as organomegaly and angiokeratoma. The
pathogenic variants identified in both families were novel and consistent with
fucosidosis type 1. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of
fucosidosis accompanied by 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) lyase
deficiency resulting from a contiguous gene deletion involving the HMGCL gene at
the 1p36.11 locus.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjpediatr.2025.6009
PMID: 41636194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interest.
