---
reference_id: "PMID:33350917"
title: Delineating and Analyzing Locality-Level Determinants of Cholera, Haiti.
authors:
- Griffiths K
- Moise K
- Piarroux M
- Gaudart J
- Beaulieu S
- Bulit G
- Marseille JP
- Jasmin PM
- Namphy PC
- Henrys JH
- Piarroux R
- Rebaudet S
journal: Emerg Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3201/eid2701.191787
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delineating and Analyzing Locality-Level Determinants of Cholera, Haiti.
**Authors:** Griffiths K, Moise K, Piarroux M, Gaudart J, Beaulieu S, Bulit G, Marseille JP, Jasmin PM, Namphy PC, Henrys JH, Piarroux R, Rebaudet S
**Journal:** Emerg Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3201/eid2701.191787](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2701.191787)

## Content

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2021 Jan;27(1):170-181. doi: 10.3201/eid2701.191787.

Delineating and Analyzing Locality-Level Determinants of Cholera, Haiti.

Griffiths K, Moise K, Piarroux M, Gaudart J, Beaulieu S, Bulit G, Marseille JP, 
Jasmin PM, Namphy PC, Henrys JH, Piarroux R, Rebaudet S.

Centre Department, Haiti, was the origin of a major cholera epidemic during 
2010-2019. Although no fine-scale spatial delineation is officially available, 
we aimed to analyze determinants of cholera at the local level and identify 
priority localities in need of interventions. After estimating the likely 
boundaries of 1,730 localities by using Voronoi polygons, we mapped 5,322 
suspected cholera cases reported during January 2015-September 2016 by locality 
alongside environmental and socioeconomic variables. A hierarchical clustering 
on principal components highlighted 2 classes with high cholera risk: localities 
close to rivers and unimproved water sources (standardized incidence ratio 1.71, 
95% CI 1.02-2.87; p = 0.04) and urban localities with markets (standardized 
incidence ratio 1.69, 95% CI 1.25-2.29; p = 0.0006). Our analyses helped 
identify and characterize areas where efforts should be focused to reduce 
vulnerability to cholera and other waterborne diseases; these methods could be 
used in other contexts.

DOI: 10.3201/eid2701.191787
PMCID: PMC7774537
PMID: 33350917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]