---
reference_id: "PMID:24461539"
title: Diagnosis and classification of the antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Gómez-Puerta JA
- Cervera R
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.006
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Antiphospholipid/adverse effects, blood"
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/classification, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Catastrophic Illness/classification, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Lupus Coagulation Inhibitor/adverse effects, blood"
- Prevalence
- Registries
- "Thrombosis/classification, diagnosis, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and classification of the antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Gómez-Puerta JA, Cervera R
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.006)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2014 Feb-Mar;48-49:20-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.006. Epub
2014  Jan 24.

Diagnosis and classification of the antiphospholipid syndrome.

Gómez-Puerta JA(1), Cervera R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Autoimmune Diseases, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain; Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Section of Clinical 
Sciences, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Autoimmune Diseases, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain. Electronic address: rcervera@clinic.cat.

The antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is defined by the occurrence of venous and 
arterial thromboses, often multiple, and recurrent fetal losses, frequently 
accompanied by a moderate thrombocytopenia, in the presence of antiphospholipid 
antibodies (aPL). Some estimates indicate that the incidence of the APS is 
around 5 new cases per 100,000 persons per year and the prevalence around 40-50 
cases per 100,000 persons. The aPL are positive in approximately 13% of patients 
with stroke, 11% with myocardial infarction, 9.5% of patients with deep vein 
thrombosis and 6% of patients with pregnancy morbidity. The original 
classification criteria for the APS were formulated at a workshop in Sapporo, 
Japan, in 1998, during the 8th International Congress on aPL. The Sapporo 
criteria, as they are often called, were revised at another workshop in Sydney, 
Australia, in 2004, during the 11th International Congress on aPL. At least one 
clinical (vascular thrombosis or pregnancy morbidity) and one laboratory 
(anticardiolipin antibodies, lupus anticoagulant or anti-β2-glycoprotein I 
antibodies) criterion had to be met for the classification of APS.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.006
PMID: 24461539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]