---
reference_id: "PMID:24275069"
title: "Arsenite binding-induced zinc loss from PARP-1 is equivalent to zinc deficiency in reducing PARP-1 activity, leading to inhibition of DNA repair."
authors:
- Sun X
- Zhou X
- Du L
- Liu W
- Liu Y
- Hudson LG
- Liu KJ
journal: Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2013.11.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenite binding-induced zinc loss from PARP-1 is equivalent to zinc deficiency in reducing PARP-1 activity, leading to inhibition of DNA repair.
**Authors:** Sun X, Zhou X, Du L, Liu W, Liu Y, Hudson LG, Liu KJ
**Journal:** Toxicol Appl Pharmacol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.taap.2013.11.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2013.11.010)

## Content

1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Jan 15;274(2):313-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.taap.2013.11.010. Epub 2013 Nov 22.

Arsenite binding-induced zinc loss from PARP-1 is equivalent to zinc deficiency 
in reducing PARP-1 activity, leading to inhibition of DNA repair.

Sun X(1), Zhou X(1), Du L(2), Liu W(1), Liu Y(2), Hudson LG(1), Liu KJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of New 
Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
(2)Center for Molecular Science, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of New 
Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. Electronic address: 
kliu@salud.unm.edu.

Inhibition of DNA repair is a recognized mechanism for arsenic enhancement of 
ultraviolet radiation-induced DNA damage and carcinogenesis. Poly(ADP-ribose) 
polymerase-1 (PARP-1), a zinc finger DNA repair protein, has been identified as 
a sensitive molecular target for arsenic. The zinc finger domains of PARP-1 
protein function as a critical structure in DNA recognition and binding. Since 
cellular poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity has been positively correlated with 
zinc status in cells, we hypothesize that arsenite binding-induced zinc loss 
from PARP-1 is equivalent to zinc deficiency in reducing PARP-1 activity, 
leading to inhibition of DNA repair. To test this hypothesis, we compared the 
effects of arsenite exposure with zinc deficiency, created by using the 
membrane-permeable zinc chelator TPEN, on 8-OHdG formation, PARP-1 activity and 
zinc binding to PARP-1 in HaCat cells. Our results show that arsenite exposure 
and zinc deficiency had similar effects on PARP-1 protein, whereas supplemental 
zinc reversed these effects. To investigate the molecular mechanism of zinc loss 
induced by arsenite, ICP-AES, near UV spectroscopy, fluorescence, and circular 
dichroism spectroscopy were utilized to examine arsenite binding and occupation 
of a peptide representing the first zinc finger of PARP-1. We found that 
arsenite binding as well as zinc loss altered the conformation of zinc finger 
structure which functionally leads to PARP-1 inhibition. These findings suggest 
that arsenite binding to PARP-1 protein created similar adverse biological 
effects as zinc deficiency, which establishes the molecular mechanism for zinc 
supplementation as a potentially effective treatment to reverse the detrimental 
outcomes of arsenic exposure.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2013.11.010
PMCID: PMC3891920
PMID: 24275069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]