---
reference_id: "PMID:23894016"
title: Recognition of face and non-face stimuli in autistic spectrum disorder.
authors:
- Arkush L
- Smith-Collins AP
- Fiorentini C
- Skuse DH
journal: Autism Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/aur.1318
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recognition of face and non-face stimuli in autistic spectrum disorder.
**Authors:** Arkush L, Smith-Collins AP, Fiorentini C, Skuse DH
**Journal:** Autism Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/aur.1318](https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.1318)

## Content

1. Autism Res. 2013 Dec;6(6):550-60. doi: 10.1002/aur.1318. Epub 2013 Jul 25.

Recognition of face and non-face stimuli in autistic spectrum disorder.

Arkush L(1), Smith-Collins AP, Fiorentini C, Skuse DH.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK.

The ability to remember faces is critical for the development of social 
competence. From childhood to adulthood, we acquire a high level of expertise in 
the recognition of facial images, and neural processes become dedicated to 
sustaining competence. Many people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have poor 
face recognition memory; changes in hairstyle or other non-facial features in an 
otherwise familiar person affect their recollection skills. The observation 
implies that they may not use the configuration of the inner face to achieve 
memory competence, but bolster performance in other ways. We aimed to test this 
hypothesis by comparing the performance of a group of high-functioning 
unmedicated adolescents with ASD and a matched control group on a "surprise" 
face recognition memory task. We compared their memory for unfamiliar faces with 
their memory for images of houses. To evaluate the role that is played by 
peripheral cues in assisting recognition memory, we cropped both sets of 
pictures, retaining only the most salient central features. ASD adolescents had 
poorer recognition memory for faces than typical controls, but their recognition 
memory for houses was unimpaired. Cropping images of faces did not 
disproportionately influence their recall accuracy, relative to controls. House 
recognition skills (cropped and uncropped) were similar in both groups. In the 
ASD group only, performance on both sets of task was closely correlated, 
implying that memory for faces and other complex pictorial stimuli is achieved 
by domain-general (non-dedicated) cognitive mechanisms. Adolescents with ASD 
apparently do not use domain-specialized processing of inner facial cues to 
support face recognition memory.

© 2013 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/aur.1318
PMID: 23894016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]