---
reference_id: "PMID:23559409"
title: "Identification of 99 novel mutations in a worldwide cohort of 1,056 patients with a nephronophthisis-related ciliopathy."
authors:
- Halbritter J
- Porath JD
- Diaz KA
- Braun DA
- Kohl S
- Chaki M
- Allen SJ
- Soliman NA
- Hildebrandt F
- Otto EA
- GPN Study Group
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1297-0
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- "Caroli Disease/genetics, pathology"
- "Cilia/genetics, pathology"
- Cohort Studies
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Global Health
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Kidney Diseases, Cystic/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Pilot Projects
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Identification of 99 novel mutations in a worldwide cohort of 1,056 patients with a nephronophthisis-related ciliopathy.
**Authors:** Halbritter J, Porath JD, Diaz KA, Braun DA, Kohl S, Chaki M, Allen SJ, Soliman NA, Hildebrandt F, Otto EA, GPN Study Group
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-013-1297-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-013-1297-0)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2013 Aug;132(8):865-84. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1297-0. Epub 2013
Apr  5.

Identification of 99 novel mutations in a worldwide cohort of 1,056 patients
with a nephronophthisis-related ciliopathy.

Halbritter J(1), Porath JD, Diaz KA, Braun DA, Kohl S, Chaki M, Allen SJ,
Soliman NA, Hildebrandt F, Otto EA; GPN Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan Health System, 8220A MSRB
III, 1150 West Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5646, USA.

Nephronophthisis-related ciliopathies (NPHP-RC) are autosomal-recessive cystic
kidney diseases. More than 13 genes are implicated in its pathogenesis to date,
accounting for only 40 % of all cases. High-throughput mutation screenings of
large patient cohorts represent a powerful tool for diagnostics and
identification of novel NPHP genes. We here performed a new high-throughput
mutation analysis method to study 13 established NPHP genes (NPHP1-NPHP13) in a
worldwide cohort of 1,056 patients diagnosed with NPHP-RC. We first applied
multiplexed PCR-based amplification using Fluidigm Access-Array™ technology
followed by barcoding and next-generation resequencing on an Illumina platform.
As a result, we established the molecular diagnosis in 127/1,056 independent
individuals (12.0 %) and identified a single heterozygous truncating mutation in
an additional 31 individuals (2.9 %). Altogether, we detected 159 different
mutations in 11 out of 13 different NPHP genes, 99 of which were novel.
Phenotypically most remarkable were two patients with truncating mutations in
INVS/NPHP2 who did not present as infants and did not exhibit extrarenal
manifestations. In addition, we present the first case of Caroli disease due to
mutations in WDR19/NPHP13 and the second case ever with a recessive mutation in
GLIS2/NPHP7. This study represents the most comprehensive mutation analysis in
NPHP-RC patients, identifying the largest number of novel mutations in a single
study worldwide.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-013-1297-0
PMCID: PMC4643834
PMID: 23559409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

The term nephronophthisis-related ciliopathies (NPHP-RC) describes a group of rare autosomal-recessive cystic kidney diseases, characterized by a broad genetic and clinical heterogeneity and accounting for the majority of genetic causes of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) during childhood (Hildebrandt et al. 2009; Hildebrandt and Otto 2005; Wolf and Hildebrandt 2011). NPHP-RC includes isolated nephronophthisis (NPHP), Senior-Loken syndrome (SLS), Joubert syndrome (JBTS), and Meckel Gruber syndrome (MKS). In renal histology, the most prominent features of NPHP are tubular atrophy, basement membrane disintegration, interstitial fibrosis, and cyst formation. The most common extrarenal manifestation observed in NPHP is progressive retinal dystrophy defined as SLS. The hallmark of JBTS is mid-hindbrain malformation and cerebellar vermis hypoplasia or aplasia, descriptively designated as “molar tooth sign” on a cranial MRI. This results in various neurological features including developmental delay, intellectual disability, muscle hypotonia, ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, nystagmus, and respiratory distress (Parisi 2009). MKS, a perinatally lethal ciliopathy, represents the most severe manifestation of the NPHP-RC clinical spectrum. It is characterized by central nervous system malformations, bilateral postaxial hexadactyly, hepatobiliary ductal plate malformation, and multicystic dysplastic kidneys (Johnson et al. 2003). As the phenotype of NPHP-RC shows a vast and partially overlapping spectrum, the genotype is also broadly heterogeneous, with more than 13 NPHP genes implicated to date (Table 1), accounting for only about 40 % of all cases: NPHP1, INVS/NPHP2, NPHP3, NPHP4, IQCB1/NPHP5, CEP290/NPHP6, GLIS2/NPHP7, RPGRIP1L/NPHP8, NEK8/NPHP9, SDCCAG8/NPHP10, TMEM67/NPHP11, TTC21B/NPHP12 and WDR19/NPHP13 (Hildebrandt et al. 1997; Olbrich et al. 2003; Otto et al. 2002, 2003, 2005, 2008b, 2009b, 2010; Mollet et al. 2002; Sayer et al. 2006; Attanasio et al. 2007; Delous et al. 2007; Davis et al. 2011; Bredrup et al. 2011). In addition, JBTS or MKS results from mutations in a subset of these genes or from any of at least 20 additional disease genes (MKS1, B9D1, B9D2, AHI1, INPP5E, ARL13B, TMEM216, CC2D2A, KIF7, TCTN1, TCTN2, TCTN3, ATXN10, CEP41, OFD1, TMEM138, C5ORF42, ZNF423, TMEM231 and TMEM237), most of which have been identified only recently (Kyttälä et al. 2006; Hopp et al. 2011; Dowdle et al. 2011; Ferland et al. 2004; Bielas et al. 2009; Cantagrel et al. 2008; Valente et al. 2010; Gorden et al. 2008; Dafinger et al. 2011; Garcia-Gonzalo et al. 2011; Sang et al. 2011; Huang et al. 2011; Lee et al. 2012a, b; Coene et al. 2009; Srour et al. 2012a, b; Chaki et al. 2012; Thomas et al. 2012).

The common feature of proteins encoded by genes mutated in NPHP-RC is their localization to primary cilia, basal body or centrosomes, which results in defects of the respective cell organelle. The discovery of the crucial role of primary cilia led to the general term “ciliopathy” (Hildebrandt et al. 2011).

Since 60 % of NPHP-RC cases harbor mutations in genes that are yet to be identified, the detection of novel, disease causing NPHP genes remains a major challenge. In order to address this issue, mutation analysis of established genes is a necessity in way of a priori exclusion. Due to an increasing number of NPHP genes, comprehensive mutation analysis by Sanger sequencing becomes more tedious and costly. However, technical advances in next-generation resequencing (NGS) and development of commercially available high-throughput polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based resequencing platforms facilitate and accelerate mutation analysis. One of those platforms is the 48.48 Access Array™ microfluidic system from Fluidigm (South San Francisco, CA), which enables amplification of 48 DNA samples in combination with each of 48 target-specific primer pairs, resulting in 2,304 individual PCRs in parallel. Applying a tenfold primer pooling strategy, we recently were able to successfully scale up the Fluidigm/NGS approach to about 23,000 parallel PCRs (Halbritter et al. 2012). This pilot project was conducted in 192 patients and showed high efficiency at a low cost with a sensitivity of 90 % and specificity of 87 %. In the present study, we describe a streamlined screening approach using the Fluidigm platform to amplify all coding exons of 13 known NPHP genes by multiplexed-PCR and barcoded consecutive NGS in a comprehensive cohort of 1,056 individuals with NPHP-RC. The most frequent mutation in patients with NPHP-RC, a homozygous NPHP1 deletion, has been excluded in all affected individuals prior to inclusion in the present study.

We obtained blood samples, pedigrees, and clinical information after receiving informed consent (http://www.renalgenes.org). Approval for experiments on humans was obtained from the University of Michigan Institutional Review Board. The diagnosis of NPHP-RC was based on published clinical criteria (Chaki et al. 2011). The total cohort of 1,056 patients with NPHP-RC included 447 patients with isolated NPHP versus 609 patients with additional extrarenal manifestations mainly in patients with Joubert syndrome (109), Senior-Loken syndrome (103), Meckel–Gruber syndrome (9), and Jeune syndrome (5). Frequent extrarenal manifestations seen in our cohort were retinal dystrophy (157), cerebellar vermis hypoplasia (109), liver fibrosis/hepatomegaly (94), early blindness/Leber congenital amaurosis (49), heart anomalies (30), oculomotor apraxia (30), deafness (18), polydactyly (17), microcephaly (15), situs inversus (14), facial dysmorphic features (11), retina coloboma (10), cone-shaped epiphysis (9), hydrocephalus (6), pancreatic cysts (6), and microophthalmia (2). Our total cohort consisted of 159 families with multiple affected cases vs. 897 single affected cases. Consanguinity was known to be present in 190 (18 %) families. As a first diagnostic step, homozygous deletions of NPHP1 were excluded in all patients by applying a multiplex PCR-based deletion analysis described elsewhere (Otto et al. 2008a).

We designed 345 target-specific primer pairs to cover all 316 coding exons and intron/exon boundaries of the genes NPHP1–NPHP13 (Suppl. Table 1). The maximum amplicon size was chosen as 300 bp, anticipating subsequent NGS bidirectional sequence reads of 150 bases from each side. Universal primer sequences 5′-ACACTGACGACA TGGTTCTACA-[target-specific forward]-3′ and 5′-TAC GGTAGCAGAGACTTGGTCT-[target-specific reverse]-3′ were added at the 5′ end to all target-specific forward and reverse primers, respectively.

Primers were pooled to generate 7-plex NPHP primer pools per PCR with a final concentration of 1 μM per primer. Every sample master mix solution contained 50 ng genomic DNA, 1× FastStart High Fidelity Reaction Buffer with MgCl2, 5 % DMSO, dNTP (200 μM each), 1× Access Array™ loading reagent, and FastStart High Fidelity Enzyme Blend (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA). In one microfluidic 48.48 Access Array™, 48 different DNA samples and 48 different primer pools were applied. Subsequently, thermal cycling on a Fluidigm FC1 Cycler was performed. PCR products were then harvested as 48 separate amplicon pools using the IFC controller AX and transferred to a 96-well plate. In a separate PCR on a standard thermocycler, Illumina sequence-specific adaptors and sample barcodes were attached. Altogether, we processed 22 different Fluidigm 48.48-Access Arrays™ and divided all of the 1,056 patient-derived amplicon pools into batches of 144 unique barcodes/indices. The primer sequences required for bidirectional amplicon tagging (requiring 2 separate PCRs) compatible with Illumina NGS were as follows: PE1-CS1, 5′-AATGATACGGCGACCA CCGAGATCTACACTGACGACATGGTTCTACA-3′ and PE2-BC-CS2, 5′-CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGA T-[BARCODE]-TACGGTAGCAGAGACTTGGTCT-3′ as well as PE1-CS2, 5′AATGATACGGCGACCACCGA GATCTTACGGTAGCAGAGACTTGGTCT-3′, and PE2-BC-CS1, 5′-CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGAT-[BARCODE]-ACACTGACGACATGGTTCTACA-3′. Subsequently, 7 × 144 indexed samples and 1 × 48 indexed samples were pooled in order to allocate all 1,056 samples to 8 lanes of an Illumina next-generation sequencing instrument.

Pooled and indexed PCR products were sequenced on 8 lanes of an Illumina GAIIx instrument as one 150 base run (v2.5 reagents) following standard Illumina protocols with the following modifications. In order to sequence the Fluidigm specific barcodes, we substituted the Illumina-specific index sequencing primer with a mixture of two custom Fluidigm-specific index primers (CS1rc, 5′-T+GT+AG+AACCATGTCGTCAGTGT-3′ and CS2rc, 5′-A+GAC+CA+AGTCTCTGCTACCGTA-3′). Modified oligos were ordered from Exiqon company (http://www.exiqon.com, Vedbaek, Denmark) with nucleotides preceded by a “+” representing LNA® nucleotides. To decipher the full Fluidigm barcodes, we extended the index read length to 10 cycles. Finally, for a single 150 base Illumina sequence run, we equally mixed and applied Fluidigm custom primer CS1 (5′-A+CA+CTG+ACGACATGGTTCTACA-3′) and CS2 (5′-T+AC+GGT+AGCAGAGACTTGGTCT-3′).

Sequence reads were separated according to their barcodes using the CASAVA v1.7 demultiplex.dp script (Illumina) resulting in 30–40 million bases per barcode. Sequence reads were aligned for each barcode (patient) using CLC Genomics Workbench™ software (CLC-bio, Aarhus, Denmark) to a single reference sequence containing the concatenated genomic sequences of all 13 NPHP target genes (NPHP1–NPHP13). We annotated all donor and acceptor splice sites of all exons within that reference sequence. Variant calls were obtained using the following filter parameters: minimum central base quality = 20, minimum average quality = 15, variant frequency ≥ 20 %. A minimum variant count of 2 was applied for potential truncating mutations (nonsense, frameshift, and obligatory splice-site mutations). More stringent parameters were applied to non-synonymous missense variants with a minimum count of 10 and a PolyPhen2 score above 0.9. The rationale for choosing the variant frequency and count parameters has been previously described in detail (Halbritter et al. 2012). Synonymous variants and common dbSNP (v135) with a population allele frequency above 1 % were excluded. Variants were ranked by the criteria of whether mutations were likely to truncate the conceptual reading frame (nonsense, frameshift, and obligatory splice mutations). Missense variants were ranked by evolutionary conservation and using web-based programs (PolyPhen2, Mutation Taster, SIFT), predicting the impact on the encoded protein.

Variants/mutations detected by NGS and predicted to be detrimental were subsequently confirmed by Sanger sequencing using original DNA samples from the respective patients as PCR template. Whenever parental DNA was available, we performed segregation analysis. Polymerase chain reaction was performed using a touchdown protocol described previously (Otto et al. 2011). Sequencing was performed using BigDye® Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit on an ABI 3730 XL sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Sequence traces were analyzed using Sequencher (version 4.8) software (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI, USA).

In patients with only a single confirmed heterozygous truncating or obligatory splice-site mutation, a standard PCR-amplification of all coding exons of the respective gene was performed. After barcoding the various patient-derived PCR-products, all samples were pooled and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq Personal Sequencer instrument in one 2 × 151 bases paired-end run following the standard Illumina protocol with the following modifications. In order to sequence the Fluidigm-specific barcodes, we used the chemically modified CS1rc oligo (5′-T+GT+AG+AACCATGTCGTCAGTGT-3′). To sequence the forward and reverse paired-end reads, we used custom oligo CS1 (A+CA+CTG+ACGACATGGTTCTACA) and CS2 (T+AC+GGT+AGCAGAGACTTGGTCT), respectively. These oligos contain Locked Nucleic Acid® (LNA®) oligonucleotides, indicated with a plus sign in front of the modified base, and provide superior hybridization characteristics and enhanced biostability compared to conventional oligos. The LNA® oligos were purchased from Exiqon (Vedbaek, Denmark).

We performed sequencing on 8 lanes of a GAIIx instrument after targeted amplification of 316 coding exons (345 amplicons) in 1,056 different indexed patients using the Fluidigm platform. The total output (8 lanes) was 204 million reads of 150 bases (25.5 million reads per lane) yielding an average of 193,000 reads per DNA sample. Using CLC Genomics Workbench™ software, we mapped an average of 177,000 (92 %) reads per patient to a human reference. Alignment resulted in mean exon coverage of 185×, with 70 % of the targeted coding regions covered at least fivefold and 66 % being covered tenfold. Insufficient coverage was found in 20 % of targeted exons randomly distributed across all genes investigated (Suppl. Table 1).

Variant calling resulted in altogether 52,063 single nucleotide variant calls and 7,181 indels. We found a total of 26,534 known dbSNP135 (exonic and intronic) variants across the dataset derived from all 1,056 patients analyzed. As in our pilot project, we set a threshold of 20 % minimal allele frequency as a filter parameter and considered variants below this threshold as most likely “false positives” (Halbritter et al. 2012). Due to the low coverage, compared to our pilot project, we evaluated all truncating and obligatory splice-site variants with a count of at least 2. In contrast, missense variants were evaluated applying a cutoff parameter of ≥10 counts. Only missense variants with PolyPhen2 scores above 0.9 were further analyzed. In summary, filtering and ranking led to the selection of 315 potentially truncating mutations (including nonsense, frameshift, and obligatory splice-site mutations) and 80 missense variants/mutations for validation by standard Sanger sequencing. We were able to confirm 194 of the truncating mutations and 20 of the selected missense variants. In total, 214 out of 395 variants (specificity: 54 %) have been confirmed by Sanger sequencing.

In order to calculate the sensitivity, we included 27 DNA samples with 44 known mutations as positive controls. Overall, only 27 out of these 44 mutations have been re-detected in the present study (“mutation” sensitivity 61 %). The low total coverage resulted in the detection of only one heterozygous mutation in some of these patients who knowingly carried a compound heterozygous mutation. When taking these patients into account, we were able to identify 20 out of 27 patients (“patient” sensitivity 74 %). Identified control samples are indicated as underlined in Table 2.

Combination of high-throughput multiplex-PCR and bar-coded subsequent NGS in a worldwide cohort of 1,056 independent patients revealed the molecular diagnosis in 90 patients. Furthermore, one single heterozygous truncating mutation was found in 68 additional patients. In order to screen for a potential second mutated allele, standard amplification of all coding exons of the respective gene and barcoded consecutive NGS on an Illumina MiSeq Personal Sequencer System was conducted. Using this approach, a second mutated allele could be identified in 36 of those 68 patients. Due to low DNA quality, sequencing on the MiSeq failed for seven samples. However, after Sanger sequencing, one additional patient with a second heterozygous mutation was detected.

In summary, high-throughput mutation analysis led to the molecular diagnosis in 127 (90 + 36 + 1) out of 1,056 (12.0 %) independent NPHP-RC patients. Segregation analysis in multiplex families resulted in the identification of causative mutations in an additional 15 affected siblings. A molecular genetic diagnosis has been obtained in 142 patients derived from 127 families who carried mutations on both alleles. Recessive mutations have been identified in the following genes: NPHP1 (26 patients/23 families), INVS/NPHP2 (2 patients/2 families), NPHP3 (20 patients/17 families), NPHP4 (24 patients/22 families), IQCB1/NPHP5 (18 patients/16 families), CEP290/NPHP6 (22 patients/20 families), GLIS2/NPHP7 (1 patient/1 family), SDCCAG8/NPHP10 (3 patients/3 families), TMEM67/NPHP11 (15 patients/14 families), TTC21B/NPHP12 (6 patients/5 families), and WDR19/NPHP13 (5 patients/4 families) (Table 2). No causative mutation was identified in the gene NEK8/NPHP9 for which only four mutations have been reported to date (Otto et al. 2008b; Frank et al. 2013). Overall, we identified 51 independent individuals with homozygous mutations, 4 individuals with hemizygous mutations (all in NPHP1), and 72 individuals with compound heterozygous mutations. In 93 patients, truncating mutations (nonsense, frameshift or obligatory splice-site mutations) were found on both alleles, whereas 18 patients carried one truncating mutation in combination with a non-synonymous missense mutation. The remaining 16 patients exhibited missense mutations only.

After evaluation of all coding regions and intron/exon boundaries in the respective genes, 31 patients remained with only one heterozygous truncating mutation (Table 3).

In total, we discovered 99 novel pathogenic mutations in the genes NPHP1 (14), INVS/NPHP2 (6), NPHP3 (16), NPHP4 (26), IQCB1/NPHP5 (2), CEP290/NPHP6 (12), GLIS2/NPHP7 (1), RPGRIP1L/NPHP8 (1), SDCCAG8/NPHP10 (1), TMEM67/NPHP11 (6), TTC21B/NPHP12 (6), and WDR19/NPHP13 (8). These mutations add an additional 20 % to the previously reported 492 mutations in the genes NPHP1–NPHP13, according to the HGMD®-Professional mutation database “Biobase” (September 28th 2012 release) (Table 4).

High-throughput mutation analysis of 13 NPHP genes in a large worldwide cohort of 1,056 patients using the Fluidigm/NGS system led to the identification of the causative mutations in 127 different families with 142 affected individuals with NPHP-RC. In addition, we detected single heterozygous truncating mutations, which do not fully explain the phenotype in a recessive disease in 31 patients. Individuals with mutations in NPHP1 (23), NPHP4 (22), CEP290/NPHP6 (20), NPHP3 (17) and IQCB1/NPHP5 (16) were the most frequent findings. Combined with previous studies and the results of the homozygous NPHP1 deletion analysis, which has been applied to every affected individual in our cohort of 1,540 families, we hereby obtain a representative frequency distribution of genes implicated in NPHP-RC with 63.8 % of cases remaining still unsolved (Fig. 1). By identifying 99 novel mutations, our study generated the largest number of previously unreported mutations in patients with a NPHP-RC phenotype, adding an additional 20 % to publicly available databases.

In contrast to previously reported phenotypical findings, it is noteworthy that two patients with truncating mutations in INVS/NPHP2 did not present as infants and did not exhibit extrarenal manifestations. Another striking observation is that NPHP3 represents the most common gene implicated in infantile NPHP in this study. Remarkably, two patients with homozygous WDR19 mutations additionally displayed Caroli disease, a rare inherited disorder characterized by dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts.

In GLIS2/NPHP7, only one homozygous splice-site mutation (c.755+1G>T) has been published to date (Attanasio et al. 2007). We hereby report the second mutation, an evolutionary highly conserved (Drosophila melanogaster) homozygous missense mutation, located at the first nucleotide of exon 4, potentially affecting the splicing of the respective exon (c.523T>C, p.C175R). Similarly, in WDR19/NPHP13 we added an additional eight mutations to the five currently known (Table 4). Interestingly, in this project we have not found any indication for the presence of oligogenicity in NPHP unlike described earlier (Hoefele et al. 2007). Except for one (F1369, Table 3), none of the patients showed truncating mutations in more than one NPHP gene. Still, we cannot exclude oligogenicity for those patients with only one truncating mutation detected. To address the oligogenicity hypothesis, one might have to analyze even more genes in parallel, take missense alleles into account, and compare with the results derived from an ethnically matched cohort of healthy individuals.

Regarding the 31 patients with only one heterozygous truncating mutation, one has to consider the possibility that some of these truncating mutations, although rare, might have been found by chance in concordance with the frequency seen in the general population. Using the data derived from about 6,500 individuals deposited in the Exome Variant Server database (EVS, http://evs.gs. washington.edu/EVS/), we previously calculated that 10 heterozygous deleterious truncating mutations within an NPHP gene is expected to be present by chance in a cohort of 1,000 individuals (Halbritter et al. 2012). Interestingly, four out of the above mentioned 31 patients indeed do carry rare truncating variants listed in the EVS server.

There are multiple reasons why we did not detect mutations in about 900 patients. First, in comparison with our pilot project, the mutation detection sensitivity was substantially lower (Halbritter et al. 2012). In the current study, NGS was performed on a GAIIx instead of a HiSeq2000, resulting in fewer reads per lane, significantly lower mean exon-coverage, and thus lower sensitivity. We estimate that we therefore might have overlooked about 10 % of patients with exonic mutations. Second, many disease causing mutations are not exonic and therefore not detectable with our exon-resequencing method. Third, some patients in our cohort might have been misdiagnosed with NPHP but suffer from other cystic kidney diseases like autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). Fourth, some of the cases might be explained by disease causing mutations implicated in JBTS or MKS that were not part of the present study such as AHI1, ARL13B, CC2D2A, INPP5E, TCTN1-3, MKS1. Nevertheless, the high number of still “unsolved” cases indicates that additional extensive heterogeneity in NPHP-RC is likely.

To improve the method, in subsequent projects we have begun testing bidirectional sequencing of 150 bp reads on a HiSeq2000. As a consequence, we are able to increase the sequence output from 25.5 million reads up to 200–300 million reads per lane.

Identification of the remaining unknown genes in genetically heterogeneous diseases like nephronophthisis and other ciliopathies still represents a major challenge. Discovery of these genes can be achieved by applying high-throughput methods like whole exome/genome sequencing (WES/WGS). The Fluidigm/NGS approach is an affordable method to screen large cohorts for a predefined set of genes and should be considered before applying WES/WGS.

In summary, we successfully introduced the use of a high-throughput mutation analysis in a large NPHP-RC cohort and were able to detect the largest number of novel mutations in a single experiment. Further method optimizations will lead to a higher sensitivity and specificity and will enable rapid screening of large cohorts in an efficient and streamlined way.
