---
reference_id: "PMID:35140116"
title: A Neutralizing IL-11 Antibody Improves Renal Function and Increases Lifespan in a Mouse Model of Alport Syndrome.
authors:
- Widjaja AA
- Shekeran SG
- Adami E
- Ting JGW
- Tan J
- Viswanathan S
- Lim SY
- Tan PH
- Hübner N
- Coffman T
- Cook SA
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2021040577
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Interleukin-11/therapeutic use
- Kidney/pathology
- Longevity
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Neutralizing IL-11 Antibody Improves Renal Function and Increases Lifespan in a Mouse Model of Alport Syndrome.
**Authors:** Widjaja AA, Shekeran SG, Adami E, Ting JGW, Tan J, Viswanathan S, Lim SY, Tan PH, Hübner N, Coffman T, Cook SA
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2021040577](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2021040577)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2022 Apr;33(4):718-730. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2021040577. Epub
2022  Feb 9.

A Neutralizing IL-11 Antibody Improves Renal Function and Increases Lifespan in
a Mouse Model of Alport Syndrome.

Widjaja AA(1), Shekeran SG(1), Adami E(1)(2), Ting JGW(1), Tan J(3), Viswanathan
S(1), Lim SY(1), Tan PH(1)(4)(5), Hübner N(2)(6)(7), Coffman T(1), Cook
SA(1)(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disorders Program, Duke-National University of
Singapore Medical School, Singapore.
(2)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular
Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany.
(3)National Heart Research Institute Singapore, National Heart Centre Singapore,
Singapore.
(4)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore.
(5)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(6)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.
(7)Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
(8)MRC-London Institute of Medical Sciences, Hammersmith Hospital Campus,
London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Alport syndrome is a genetic disorder characterized by a defective
glomerular basement membrane, tubulointerstitial fibrosis, inflammation, and
progressive renal failure. IL-11 was recently implicated in fibrotic kidney
disease, but its role in Alport syndrome is unknown.
METHODS: We determined IL-11 expression by molecular analyses and in an Alport
syndrome mouse model. We assessed the effects of a neutralizing IL-11 antibody
(×203) versus an IgG control in Col4a3-/- mice (lacking the gene encoding a type
IV collagen component) on renal tubule damage, function, fibrosis, and
inflammation. Effects of ×203, the IgG control, an angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitor (ramipril), or ramipril+X203 on lifespan were also studied.
RESULTS: In Col4a3-/- mice, as kidney failure advanced, renal IL-11 levels
increased, and IL-11 expression localized to tubular epithelial cells. The IL-11
receptor (IL-11RA1) is expressed in tubular epithelial cells and podocytes and
is upregulated in tubular epithelial cells of Col4a3-/- mice. Administration of
×203 reduced albuminuria, improved renal function, and preserved podocyte
numbers and levels of key podocyte proteins that are reduced in Col4a3-/- mice;
these effects were accompanied by reduced fibrosis and inflammation, attenuation
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and increased expression of
regenerative markers. X203 attenuated pathogenic ERK and STAT3 pathways, which
were activated in Col4a3-/- mice. The median lifespan of Col4a3-/- mice was
prolonged 22% by ramipril, 44% with ×203, and 99% with ramipril+X203.
CONCLUSIONS: In an Alport syndrome mouse model, renal IL-11 is upregulated, and
neutralization of IL-11 reduces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, fibrosis,
and inflammation while improving renal function. Anti-IL-11 combined with ACE
inhibition synergistically extends lifespan. This suggests that a therapeutic
approach targeting IL-11 holds promise for progressive kidney disease in Alport
syndrome.

Copyright © 2022 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2021040577
PMCID: PMC8970448
PMID: 35140116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
