---
reference_id: "PMID:37243436"
title: Arginase deficiency-An unheralded cause of developmental epileptic encephalopathy.
authors:
- Pavuluri H
- Jose M
- Fasaludeen A
- Sundaram S
- Radhakrishnan A
- Banerjee M
- Menon RN
journal: Epileptic Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/epd2.20081
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Hyperargininemia/complications, diagnosis"
- Hyperammonemia
- Valproic Acid/therapeutic use
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Epilepsy, Generalized"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arginase deficiency-An unheralded cause of developmental epileptic encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Pavuluri H, Jose M, Fasaludeen A, Sundaram S, Radhakrishnan A, Banerjee M, Menon RN
**Journal:** Epileptic Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/epd2.20081](https://doi.org/10.1002/epd2.20081)

## Content

1. Epileptic Disord. 2023 Aug;25(4):556-561. doi: 10.1002/epd2.20081. Epub 2023
May  31.

Arginase deficiency-An unheralded cause of developmental epileptic
encephalopathy.

Pavuluri H(1), Jose M(1), Fasaludeen A(1), Sundaram S(1), Radhakrishnan A(1),
Banerjee M(2), Menon RN(1).

Author information:
(1)R Madhavan Nayar Centre for Comprehensive Epilepsy Care, Sree Chitra Tirunal
Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, India.
(2)Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thiruvananthapuram, India.

Arginase deficiency, which leads to hyperargininaemia is a rare urea cycle
disorder caused by a mutation in the ARG1 gene. It is an under-recognized cause
of pediatric developmental epileptic encephalopathy, with the key coexistent
clinical features being developmental delay or regression and spasticity.
Detection of ARG1 gene mutation on genetic testing is the confirmatory
diagnostic test. However, elevated levels of plasma arginine and low plasma
arginase level can be considered as biochemical markers for diagnosis. We
present two cases of arginase deficiency with genetically confirmed ARG1
mutation in one and biochemical confirmation in both. As the spectrum of
epilepsy in arginase deficiency has been less explored, we attempted to
elucidate the novel electroclinical features and syndromic presentations in
these patients. Informed consent was obtained from families of patients.
Electroclinical diagnosis was consistent with Lennox Gastaut syndrome (LGS) in
the first patient while the second patient had refractory atonic seizures with
electrophysiological features consistent with developmental and epileptic
encephalopathy. Though primary hyperammonaemia is not a consistent feature,
secondary hyperammonaemia in the setting of infectious triggers and drugs like
valproate (valproate sensitivity) has been well described as also observed in
our patient. In the absence of an overt antecedent in a child with spasticity
and seizure disorder, with a progressive course consistent with a developmental
epileptic encephalopathy, arginase deficiency merits consideration. Diagnosis
often has important therapeutic implications with respect to dietary management
and choice of the appropriate antiseizure medications.

© 2023 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1002/epd2.20081
PMID: 37243436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
