---
reference_id: "PMID:37674925"
title: Epidemiology and risk factors for ovarian cancer.
authors:
- Ali AT
- Al-Ani O
- Al-Ani F
journal: Prz Menopauzalny
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5114/pm.2023.128661
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and risk factors for ovarian cancer.
**Authors:** Ali AT, Al-Ani O, Al-Ani F
**Journal:** Prz Menopauzalny (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5114/pm.2023.128661](https://doi.org/10.5114/pm.2023.128661)

## Content

1. Prz Menopauzalny. 2023 Jun;22(2):93-104. doi: 10.5114/pm.2023.128661. Epub
2023  Jun 14.

Epidemiology and risk factors for ovarian cancer.

Ali AT(1), Al-Ani O(2), Al-Ani F(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Parktown, 
Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Odessa National Medical University, Odessa, Ukraine.

Ovarian cancer is a complex disease, mostly observed in postmenopausal women, 
and is associated with poor survival rates. It is the sixth most common cancer 
and the fifth most common cause of death due to cancer among women in developed 
countries. Thus, despite representing less than one third of all gynaecologic 
cancers, deaths due to ovarian cancer account for more than two thirds of deaths 
due to gynaecologic cancers. Its prevalence is higher in Western Europe and 
Northern America than Asia and Africa. In sub-Saharan Africa, there is a 
considerably lower prevalence of ovarian cancer than other parts of Africa. 
Ovarian cancer is multifaceted, involving many factors, complex biological 
processes and unpredictable consequences. Unlike other female cancers that have 
early warning symptoms, ovarian cancer's symptoms are non-specific. As a result, 
ovarian cancers are normally undetected until advanced stages (III or IV). The 
major risk factors for ovarian cancer include older age, genetics, family 
history, hormone replacement therapy, nulliparity, and dietary fat. 
Controversial factors include obesity, infertility, talc powder, radiation 
exposure, fertility medications and in vitro fertilization. The current review 
discusses the aetiology, epidemiology and risk factors for ovarian cancer. 
Nevertheless, identification of the main risk factors for ovarian cancer may 
increase the awareness among women of the general population. This should help 
to decrease the incidence rate of ovarian cancer and increase the five-year 
survival rate.

Copyright © 2023 Termedia.

DOI: 10.5114/pm.2023.128661
PMCID: PMC10477765
PMID: 37674925