---
reference_id: "PMID:29628378"
title: "Pegvaliase for the treatment of phenylketonuria: A pivotal, double-blind randomized discontinuation Phase 3 clinical trial."
authors:
- Harding CO
- Amato RS
- Stuy M
- Longo N
- Burton BK
- Posner J
- Weng HH
- Merilainen M
- Gu Z
- Jiang J
- Vockley J
- PRISM-2 Investigators
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.03.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pegvaliase for the treatment of phenylketonuria: A pivotal, double-blind randomized discontinuation Phase 3 clinical trial.
**Authors:** Harding CO, Amato RS, Stuy M, Longo N, Burton BK, Posner J, Weng HH, Merilainen M, Gu Z, Jiang J, Vockley J, PRISM-2 Investigators
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.03.003)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2018 May;124(1):20-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.03.003. Epub
 2018 Mar 18.

Pegvaliase for the treatment of phenylketonuria: A pivotal, double-blind 
randomized discontinuation Phase 3 clinical trial.

Harding CO(1), Amato RS(2), Stuy M(3), Longo N(4), Burton BK(5), Posner J(6), 
Weng HH(7), Merilainen M(8), Gu Z(9), Jiang J(10), Vockley J(11); PRISM-2 
Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW 
Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA. Electronic address: 
hardingc@ohsu.edu.
(2)Medical Genetics and Metabolism, University of Kentucky, 138 Leader Avenue, 
#119-130, Lexington, KY 40506, USA. Electronic address: stephen.amato@uky.edu.
(3)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University, 975 W 
Walnut St, Research and Library Building IB 130, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. 
Electronic address: mstuy@iu.edu.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of Utah, 
295 Chipeta Way, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA. Electronic address: 
Nicola.Longo@hsc.utah.edu.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics, Birth Defects & Metabolism, 
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, 225 E Chicago Ave, 
Chicago, IL 60601, USA. Electronic address: bburton@luriechildrens.org.
(6)Department of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College London Strand, 
Franklin Wilkins Building, Stamford Street, London, UK. Electronic address: 
john.posner@talk21.com.
(7)BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., 105 Digital Drive, Novato, CA 94949, USA. 
Electronic address: holly.weng@bmrn.com.
(8)BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., 105 Digital Drive, Novato, CA 94949, USA. 
Electronic address: mmerilainen@bmrn.com.
(9)BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., 105 Digital Drive, Novato, CA 94949, USA. 
Electronic address: kgu@bmrn.com.
(10)BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., 105 Digital Drive, Novato, CA 94949, USA. 
Electronic address: joy.jiang@bmrn.com.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
Pittsburgh and Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 4401 Penn Avenue, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15224, USA. Electronic address: vockleyg@upmc.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Pegvaliase is a recombinant Anabaena variabilis phenylalanine 
ammonia lyase (PAL) enzyme under investigation for treatment of adult 
phenylketonuria (PKU). This manuscript describes results of a randomized 
discontinuation trial (RDT) designed to evaluate the effects of pegvaliase 
treatment on blood phenylalanine (Phe) and neuropsychiatric outcomes in adults 
with PKU.
METHODS: PRISM-2 is a 4-part, Phase 3 study that enrolled adults with PKU 
receiving pegvaliase treatment (initiated in a prior Phase 2 or Phase 3 study). 
The RDT, Part 2 of PRISM-2, was an 8-week trial that evaluated change in blood 
Phe concentrations, neuropsychiatric and neurocognitive measures, and safety 
outcomes in PRISM-2 participants who had achieved at least a 20% blood Phe 
reduction from pre-treatment baseline with pegvaliase treatment. Participants 
were randomized 2:1 to either continue pegvaliase (20 mg/day or 40 mg/day) or 
switch to matching placebo.
RESULTS: The pooled pegvaliase group enrolled 66 participants and each placebo 
group enrolled 14 participants. The primary endpoint of change in blood Phe 
concentration from RDT entry to RDT Week 8 was met with clinically meaningful 
and statistically significant differences between the pegvaliase and placebo 
groups. Mean (SD) blood Phe at the beginning of the RDT when all participants 
were receiving pegvaliase was 563.9 μM (504.6) in the group assigned to the 
20 mg/day placebo group (n = 14), 508.2 μM (363.7) in those assigned to the 
40 mg/day placebo group (n = 14), and 503.9 μM (520.3) in those assigned to 
continue pegvaliase treatment (n = 58). At Week 8 of the RDT, the least squares 
mean change (95% confidence interval) in blood Phe was 949.8 μM (760.4 to 
1139.1) for the 20 mg/day placebo group and 664.8 μM (465.5 to 864.1) for the 
40 mg/day placebo group in comparison to 26.5 μM (-68.3 to 121.3) for the pooled 
(20 mg/day and 40 mg/day) pegvaliase group (P < 0.0001 for pooled pegvaliase 
group vs each placebo group). Adverse events (AEs) were usually lower in the 
pooled placebo group when compared to the pooled pegvaliase group. The most 
common AEs for the pooled pegvaliase and pooled placebo groups were arthralgia 
(13.6% and 10.3%, respectively), headache (12.1% and 24.1%), anxiety (10.6% and 
6.9%), fatigue (10.6% and 10.3%), and upper respiratory tract infection (1.5% 
and 17.2%).
CONCLUSION: Mean blood Phe reduction was sustained in the pegvaliase group, 
while placebo groups had mean blood Phe concentration increase toward 
pre-treatment baseline levels. Results from this study confirmed the efficacy of 
pegvaliase in maintaining reduced blood Phe concentrations with a manageable 
safety profile for most participants.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.03.003
PMID: 29628378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]