---
reference_id: "PMID:32098179"
title: "Estimating the Threshold Effects of Climate on Dengue: A Case Study of Taiwan."
authors:
- Tran BL
- Tseng WC
- Chen CC
- Liao SY
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph17041392
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimating the Threshold Effects of Climate on Dengue: A Case Study of Taiwan.
**Authors:** Tran BL, Tseng WC, Chen CC, Liao SY
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph17041392](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17041392)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Feb 21;17(4):1392. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph17041392.

Estimating the Threshold Effects of Climate on Dengue: A Case Study of Taiwan.

Tran BL(1), Tseng WC(1), Chen CC(1), Liao SY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Economics, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 
402, Taiwan.

Climate change is regarded as one of the major factors enhancing the 
transmission intensity of dengue fever. In this study, we estimated the 
threshold effects of temperature on Aedes mosquito larval index as an early 
warning tool for dengue prevention. We also investigated the relationship 
between dengue vector index and dengue epidemics in Taiwan using weekly panel 
data for 17 counties from January 2012 to May 2019. To achieve our goals, we 
first applied the panel threshold regression technique to test for threshold 
effects and determine critical temperature values. Data were then further 
decomposed into different sets corresponding to different temperature regimes. 
Finally, negative binomial regression models were applied to assess the 
non-linear relationship between meteorological factors and Breteau index (BI). 
At the national level, we found that a 1°C temperature increase caused the 
expected value of BI to increase by 0.09 units when the temperature is less than 
27.21 °C, and by 0.26 units when the temperature is greater than 27.21 °C. At 
the regional level, the dengue vector index was more sensitive to temperature 
changes because double threshold effects were found in the southern Taiwan 
model. For southern Taiwan, as the temperature increased by 1°C, the expected 
value of BI increased by 0.29, 0.63, and 1.49 units when the average temperature 
was less than 27.27 °C, between 27.27 and 30.17 °C, and higher than 30.17 °C, 
respectively. In addition, the effects of precipitation and relative humidity on 
BI became stronger when the average temperature exceeded the thresholds. 
Regarding the impacts of climate change on BI, our results showed that the 
potential effects on BI range from 3.5 to 54.42% under alternative temperature 
scenarios. By combining threshold regression techniques with count data 
regression models, this study provides evidence of threshold effects between 
climate factors and the dengue vector index. The proposed threshold of 
temperature could be incorporated into the implementation of public health 
measures and risk prediction to prevent and control dengue fever in the future.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17041392
PMCID: PMC7068348
PMID: 32098179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.