---
reference_id: "PMID:38469086"
title: "Long term follow-up in GAMT deficiency - Correlation of therapy regimen, biochemical and in vivo brain proton MR spectroscopy data."
authors:
- Marten LM
- Krätzner R
- Salomons GS
- Fernandez Ojeda M
- Dechent P
- Gärtner J
- Huppke P
- Dreha-Kulaczewski S
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long term follow-up in GAMT deficiency - Correlation of therapy regimen, biochemical and in vivo brain proton MR spectroscopy data.
**Authors:** Marten LM, Krätzner R, Salomons GS, Fernandez Ojeda M, Dechent P, Gärtner J, Huppke P, Dreha-Kulaczewski S
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101053)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2024 Jan 18;38:101053. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101053. 
eCollection 2024 Mar.

Long term follow-up in GAMT deficiency - Correlation of therapy regimen, 
biochemical and in vivo brain proton MR spectroscopy data.

Marten LM(1), Krätzner R(1), Salomons GS(2)(3), Fernandez Ojeda M(2)(3), Dechent 
P(4), Gärtner J(1), Huppke P(5), Dreha-Kulaczewski S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center 
Goettingen, Germany.
(2)Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Dept of Laboratory Medicine, 
Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases and Dept of Pediatrics Emma Children's 
Hospital, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Amsterdam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(4)MR-Research in Neurosciences, Department of Cognitive Neurology, University 
Medical Center Goettingen, Germany.
(5)Department of Neuropediatrics, Jena University Hospital, Germany.

GAMT deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disease within the group of 
cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes. Cerebral creatine depletion and 
accumulation of guanidinoacetate (GAA) lead to clinical presentation with 
intellectual disability, seizures, speech disturbances and movement disorders. 
Treatment consists of daily creatine supplementation to increase cerebral 
creatine, reduction of arginine intake and supplementation of ornithine for 
reduction of toxic GAA levels. This study represents the first long-term 
follow-up over a period of 14 years, with detailed clinical data, biochemical 
and multimodal neuroimaging findings. Developmental milestones, brain MRI, 
quantitative single voxel 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) and 
biochemical analyses were assessed. The results reveal insights into the dose 
dependent effects of creatine/ornithine supplementation and expand the 
phenotypic spectrum of GAMT deficiency. Of note, the creatine concentrations, 
which were regularly monitored over a long follow-up period, increased 
significantly over time, but did not reach age matched control ranges. Our 
patient is the second reported to show normal neurocognitive outcome after an 
initial delay, stressing the importance of early diagnosis and treatment 
initiation.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101053
PMCID: PMC10926185
PMID: 38469086

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest for any of the 
authors.