---
reference_id: "PMID:29187394"
title: "Carrion's Disease: the Sound of Silence."
authors:
- Gomes C
- Ruiz J
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00056-17
keywords:
- Animal Distribution
- Animals
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Bartonella/drug effects, physiology"
- "Bartonella Infections/drug therapy, epidemiology, microbiology, transmission"
- "Drug Resistance, Microbial"
- "Insect Vectors/microbiology, physiology"
- "Psychodidae/microbiology, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carrion's Disease: the Sound of Silence.
**Authors:** Gomes C, Ruiz J
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00056-17](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00056-17)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2017 Nov 29;31(1):e00056-17. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00056-17.
Print 2018 Jan.

Carrion's Disease: the Sound of Silence.

Gomes C(1), Ruiz J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Global Health, Barcelona Centre for International Health
Research, Hospital Clínic, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
claudiasofiapgomes@gmail.com joruiz.trabajo@gmail.com.

Carrion's disease (CD) is a neglected biphasic vector-borne illness related to
Bartonella bacilliformis. It is found in the Andean valleys and is transmitted
mainly by members of the Lutzomyia genus but also by blood transfusions and from
mother to child. The acute phase, Oroya fever, presents severe anemia and fever.
The lethality is high in the absence of adequate treatment, despite the organism
being susceptible to most antibiotics. Partial immunity is developed after
infection by B. bacilliformis, resulting in high numbers of asymptomatic
carriers. Following infection there is the chronic phase, Peruvian warts,
involving abnormal proliferation of the endothelial cells. Despite potentially
being eradicable, CD has been expanded due to human migration and geographical
expansion of the vector. Moreover, in vitro studies have demonstrated the risk
of the development of antimicrobial resistance. These findings, together with
the description of new Bartonella species producing CD-like infections, the
presence of undescribed potential vectors in new areas, the lack of adequate
diagnostic tools and knowledge of the immunology and bacterial pathogenesis of
CD, and poor international visibility, have led to the risk of increasing the
potential expansion of resistant strains which will challenge current treatment
schemes as well as the possible appearance of CD in areas where it is not
endemic.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00056-17
PMCID: PMC5740975
PMID: 29187394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
