---
reference_id: "PMID:39657203"
title: "Pediatric Patients With Acute Flaccid Myelitis: Long-term Respiratory and Neurologic Outcomes."
authors:
- Patel D
- Kragel EA
- Liu SD
- Sonne C
- Zhu S
- Malhotra A
- Van Haren KP
- Ritterman Weintraub M
- Kane M
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000004673
keywords:
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Myelitis/complications, epidemiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Child
- Female
- Male
- Adolescent
- Infant
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/epidemiology, complications"
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/epidemiology, complications"
- "Respiratory Insufficiency/epidemiology, etiology"
- Incidence
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Patients With Acute Flaccid Myelitis: Long-term Respiratory and Neurologic Outcomes.
**Authors:** Patel D, Kragel EA, Liu SD, Sonne C, Zhu S, Malhotra A, Van Haren KP, Ritterman Weintraub M, Kane M
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/INF.0000000000004673](https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0000000000004673)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2025 May 1;44(5):411-415. doi:
10.1097/INF.0000000000004673. Epub 2024 Dec 10.

Pediatric Patients With Acute Flaccid Myelitis: Long-term Respiratory and
Neurologic Outcomes.

Patel D(1)(2)(3), Kragel EA(4), Liu SD(4), Sonne C(5), Zhu S(6), Malhotra A(7),
Van Haren KP(8)(9), Ritterman Weintraub M(10), Kane M(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)From the Pediatric Hospital Medicine Fellowship, Kaiser Permanente Oakland
Medical Center, Oakland, CA.
(2)University of California Berkeley, School of Public Health, Berkeley, CA.
(3)Department of Pediatric Hospital Medicine, Kaiser Permanente San Francisco
Medical Center, San Francisco, CA.
(4)Pediatric Residency, Kaiser Permanente Oakland Medical Center, Oakland, CA.
(5)Department of Radiology, Kaiser Permanente Oakland Medical Center, Oakland,
CA.
(6)Division of Research, Research Analytics Programming Team, Kaiser Permanente,
Pleasanton, CA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatric Specialty, Kaiser
Permanente Oakland Medical Center, Oakland, CA.
(8)Department of Neurology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA.
(10)Graduate Medical Education, Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, CA.
(11)Department of Pediatric Hospital Medicine, Kaiser Permanente Oakland Medical
Center, Oakland, CA.

BACKGROUND: Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM), an infection-mediated neurologic
condition, may be accompanied by respiratory failure and subsequent variable
recovery. This study assessed and provided prescriptive data on long-term
respiratory and neurologic outcomes according to respiratory status at the time
of presentation.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study using a large, single-payer
healthcare database to identify children 1-18 years old, diagnosed with AFM
between January 1, 2011 and December 31, 2019. Descriptive statistics described
the overall cohort and the cohort by respiratory failure status. Bivariate
analyses evaluated incidence rate ratios of outcome data, comparing those with
respiratory failure to those without.
RESULTS: A total of 37 patients met the study criteria for AFM; 28 were from a
previously established cohort. Median follow-up time was 4.7 years
[interquartile range (IQR): 2.39-6.06]. Overall incidence rate of AFM over the
study period was 0.6 per 100,000 person-years. Eight patients (21.6%) had
respiratory failure during the index hospitalization. Among children with
respiratory failure, 6 patients (75%) required follow-up respiratory support.
Those with respiratory failure had higher Modified Rankin Scores [mean
difference 1.29, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.34-2.23] and a higher rate of
respiratory-related emergency and in-hospital visits (incidence rate ratios
1.94; 95% CI: 1.27-2.96) compared to those without respiratory failure.
CONCLUSIONS: Having respiratory failure at presentation was observed to have
worse outcomes, including the need for long-term respiratory support, higher
healthcare utilization, and prolonged neurologic deficits. This study
contributes to the scant literature on pediatric patients with AFM.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000004673
PMID: 39657203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding or conflicts of
interest to disclose.
