---
reference_id: "PMID:24945598"
title: "Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy: a classification based on multimodal imaging."
authors:
- Mrejen S
- Khan S
- Gallego-Pinazo R
- Jampol LM
- Yannuzzi LA
journal: JAMA Ophthalmol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.1683
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Coloring Agents
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Indocyanine Green
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multimodal Imaging/classification
- Photography
- Retrospective Studies
- "Scotoma/classification, diagnosis"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- White Dot Syndromes
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy: a classification based on multimodal imaging.
**Authors:** Mrejen S, Khan S, Gallego-Pinazo R, Jampol LM, Yannuzzi LA
**Journal:** JAMA Ophthalmol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.1683](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.1683)

## Content

1. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2014 Sep;132(9):1089-98. doi:
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.1683.

Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy: a classification based on multimodal
imaging.

Mrejen S(1), Khan S(2), Gallego-Pinazo R(3), Jampol LM(2), Yannuzzi LA(1).

Author information:
(1)LuEsther T. Mertz Retinal Research Center, New York, New York2Vitreous Retina
Macula Consultants of New York, New York, New York3Department of Ophthalmology,
New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)LuEsther T. Mertz Retinal Research Center, New York, New York2Vitreous Retina
Macula Consultants of New York, New York, New York5Department of Ophthalmology,
University and Polytechnic Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

Comment in
    JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015 May;133(5):618-9. doi:
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.5655.

IMPORTANCE: We describe the multimodal imaging in a group of patients showing a
distinct clinical entity that best represents acute zonal occult outer
retinopathy (AZOOR).
OBJECTIVE: To propose a classification of AZOOR based on clinical fundus and
multimodal imaging.
DESIGN, SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: A retrospective review of patients diagnosed
as having AZOOR at 2 centers. After reviewing more than 400 cases diagnosed or
referred to us as AZOOR or AZOOR complex, we assembled 30 cases that fit our
current definition; (48 eyes) with a median age at diagnosis of 47 years (age
range, 17-86 years) and a mean follow-up period of 39 months. Twenty patients
were female. Eighteen patients had initially been seen with bilateral lesions,
mostly asymmetric (4 cases were symmetric). Most patients had no remarkable
medical or ocular history. The median visual acuity at the time of presentation
was 20/25 (range, 20/20 to 20/400).
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Multimodal imaging, including fundus photography,
fluorescein and indocyanine green angiography, fundus autofluorescence imaging,
and corresponding eye-tracked spectral-domain coherence tomography imaging.
RESULTS: Each patient was initially seen with visual symptoms of photopsia and
scotoma, and most had a detectable lesion in the fundus evident clinically or
detected on multimodal imaging. The clinical appearance of the AZOOR lesions
varied depending on their duration and location, but some features were
characteristic, including a demarcating line of the progression at the level of
the outer retina and a trizonal pattern of sequential involvement of the outer
retina, retinal pigment epithelium, and choroid, as well as frequent zonal
progression. Advanced cases of AZOOR demonstrated disruption of the inner and
outer retina and severe damage or loss of the retinal pigment epithelium and the
choroid.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: A specific definition of AZOOR based on multimodal
imaging is proposed to help physicians distinguish it from other diseases of the
posterior fundus, including white spot syndromes and autoimmune, hereditary,
paraneoplastic, toxic, and other inflammatory retinopathies.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.1683
PMID: 24945598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
