---
reference_id: "PMID:20301348"
title: Autosomal Dominant Sleep-Related Hypermotor (Hyperkinetic) Epilepsy.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Kurahashi H
- Hirose S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Dominant Sleep-Related Hypermotor (Hyperkinetic) Epilepsy.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Kurahashi H, Hirose S

## Content

1. Autosomal Dominant Sleep-Related Hypermotor (Hyperkinetic) Epilepsy.

Kurahashi H(1), Hirose S(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2002 May 16 [updated 2023 Mar 23].

Author information:
(1)Aichi Medical University, Nagakute, Japan
(2)Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Autosomal dominant sleep-related hypermotor
(hyperkinetic) epilepsy (ADSHE) is a seizure disorder characterized by clusters
of nocturnal motor seizures that are often stereotyped and brief (<2 minutes).
They vary from simple arousals from sleep to dramatic, often hyperkinetic events
with tonic or dystonic features. Affected individuals may experience an aura.
Retained awareness during seizures is common. A minority of individuals
experience daytime seizures. Age of onset ranges from infancy to adulthood.
About 80% of individuals develop ADSHE in the first two decades of life; mean
age of onset is ten years. Clinical neurologic examination is normal and
intellect is usually preserved, but reduced intellect, psychiatric
comorbidities, or cognitive deficits may occur. Within a family, the
manifestations of the disorder may vary considerably. ADSHE is lifelong but not
progressive. As an individual reaches middle age, seizures may become milder and
less frequent.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ADSHE is established in a proband who has
suggestive clinical findings and a family history consistent with autosomal
dominant inheritance and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in CABP4, CHRNA4,
CHRNA2, CHRNB2, CRH, DEPDC5, KCNT1, NPRL2, NPRL3, or STX1B identified by
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Many anti-seizure medications (ASM) may
be effective. Carbamazepine is associated with remission in about 70% of
individuals, often in relatively low doses. Individuals with ADSHE associated
with the CHRNA4 pathogenic variant p.Ser284Leu are more responsive to zonisamide
than carbamazepine. KCNT1-related ADSHE is difficult to treat but may be
treatable using quinidine based on limited data. Resistance to ASM is present in
about 30% of affected individuals and typically requires a trial of all
appropriate ASM. Adjunctive fenofibrate therapy or vagal nerve stimulation may
be considered in individuals resistant to standard ASM. Surveillance:
Reevaluation of EEGs at regular intervals to monitor disease progression, as
well as assessment for changes in seizure semiology, changes in tone, and
movement disorders; monitoring of developmental progress and educational needs.
Evaluation of relatives at risk: A medical history from relatives at risk can
identify those with ADSHE so that treatment can be initiated promptly. Pregnancy
management: Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given ASM during
pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to a
lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ADSHE, by definition, is inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner. Most individuals diagnosed with ADSHE have an affected parent. Each
child of an individual with ADSHE has a 50% chance of inheriting the
ADSHE-related pathogenic variant; the chance that the offspring will manifest
ADSHE is (50% x 70% =) 35%, assuming penetrance of 70%. If the ADSHE-related
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal
testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation genetic testing
are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301348
