---
reference_id: "PMID:23714113"
title: Inherent properties of adenylosuccinate lyase could explain S-Ado/SAICAr ratio due to homozygous R426H and R303C mutations.
authors:
- Ray SP
- Duval N
- Wilkinson TG 2nd
- Shaheen SE
- Ghosh K
- Patterson D
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.05.013
keywords:
- "Adenosine/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Aminoimidazole Carboxamide/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- Autistic Disorder
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- Electrochemistry
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Kinetics
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics"
- Ribonucleotides/metabolism
- Substrate Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherent properties of adenylosuccinate lyase could explain S-Ado/SAICAr ratio due to homozygous R426H and R303C mutations.
**Authors:** Ray SP, Duval N, Wilkinson TG 2nd, Shaheen SE, Ghosh K, Patterson D
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.05.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.05.013)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1834(8):1545-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.05.013. Epub 2013 May 25.

Inherent properties of adenylosuccinate lyase could explain S-Ado/SAICAr ratio
due to homozygous R426H and R303C mutations.

Ray SP(1), Duval N, Wilkinson TG 2nd, Shaheen SE, Ghosh K, Patterson D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Denver, Denver, CO, USA.
Stephen.Ray@du.edu

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) is a homotetrameric enzyme involved in the de novo
purine biosynthesis pathway and purine nucleotide cycle. Missense mutations in
the protein lead to ADSL deficiency, an inborn error of purine metabolism
characterized by neurological and physiological symptoms. ADSL deficiency is
biochemically diagnosed by elevated levels of succinylaminoimidazolecarboxamide
riboside (SAICAr) and succinyladenosine (S-Ado), the dephosphorylated
derivatives of the substrates. S-Ado/SAICAr ratios have been associated with
three phenotypic groups. Different hypotheses to explain these ratios have been
proposed. Recent studies have focused on measuring activity on the substrates
independently. However, it is important to examine mixtures of the substrates to
determine if mutations affect enzyme activity on both substrates similarly in
these conditions. The two substrates may experience an indirect communication
due to being acted upon by the same enzyme, altering their activities from the
non-competitive case. In this study, we investigate this hidden coupling between
the two substrates. We chose two mutations that represent extremes of the
phenotype, R426H and R303C. We describe a novel electrochemical-detection method
of measuring the kinetic activity of ADSL in solution with its two substrates at
varying concentration ratios. Furthermore, we develop an enzyme kinetic model to
predict substrate activity from a given ratio of substrate concentrations. Our
findings indicate a non-linear dependence of the activities on the substrate
ratios due to competitive binding, distinct differences in the behaviors of the
different mutations, and S-Ado/SAICAr ratios in patients could be explained by
inherent properties of the mutant enzyme.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.05.013
PMID: 23714113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
