---
reference_id: "PMID:38762468"
title: Longitudinal changes in serum immunoglobulin G testing in patients with fibrotic avian hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
authors:
- Okuda R
- Takemura T
- Misumi T
- Sekine A
- Hagiwara E
- Ogura T
journal: BMC Pulm Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12890-024-03063-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinal changes in serum immunoglobulin G testing in patients with fibrotic avian hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Okuda R, Takemura T, Misumi T, Sekine A, Hagiwara E, Ogura T
**Journal:** BMC Pulm Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12890-024-03063-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12890-024-03063-0)

## Content

1. BMC Pulm Med. 2024 May 18;24(1):245. doi: 10.1186/s12890-024-03063-0.

Longitudinal changes in serum immunoglobulin G testing in patients with fibrotic 
avian hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Okuda R(1), Takemura T(2), Misumi T(3), Sekine A(4), Hagiwara E(4), Ogura T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory 
Center, 6-16-1 Tomioka-Higashi, Kanazawa-Ku, Yokohama, Japan. 
b980013@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Pathology, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center, 
Yokohama, Japan.
(3)Department of Data Science, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Chiba, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory 
Center, 6-16-1 Tomioka-Higashi, Kanazawa-Ku, Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Evaluation of the antigen responsible for fibrotic hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis (HP) is challenging. Serum immunoglobulin (Ig) G testing against 
HP-associated antigens is performed. Although single-serum IgG testing has been 
investigated, multiple-serum IgG testing has not yet been studied.
METHODS: This study included patients who underwent histopathological 
examination and positive inhalation challenge test as well as those with 
moderate or high HP guideline confidence level. Serum IgG testing against pigeon 
serum was conducted twice using two methods: enzyme linked-immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) and ImmunoCAP. The association between changes in serum IgG antibody 
titers and changes in forced vital capacity (FVC) and other parameters was 
investigated.
RESULTS: In this study, 28 patients (mean age, 64.5 years; mean FVC, 85.3%) with 
fibrotic avian HP were selected, of whom 20 and 8 underwent surgical lung biopsy 
and transbronchial lung cryobiopsy, respectively. Of the 28 patients, 19 had 
been keeping birds for more than 6 months. A correlation was observed between 
the annual changes in serum IgG antibody titers by ELISA and changes in relative 
FVC (r =  - 0.6221, p < 0.001). Furthermore, there was a correlation between the 
annual changes in serum IgG antibody titers by ImmunoCAP and changes in relative 
FVC (r =  - 0.4302, p = 0.022). Multiple regression analysis revealed that the 
change in serum IgG antibody titers by both ELISA and ImmunoCAP also influenced 
the relative FVC change (p = 0.012 and p = 0.015, respectively). Moreover, 13 
patients were given additional treatments between the first and second blood 
test; however, the additional treatment group was not significantly different in 
relative FVC change compared to the group with no additional treatment 
(p = 0.982).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with fibrotic avian HP, the annual changes in serum IgG 
testing were correlated with FVC changes, highlighting the importance of serum 
IgG testing over time.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-024-03063-0
PMCID: PMC11102294
PMID: 38762468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.