---
reference_id: "PMID:8218125"
title: "[Pathomorpholigical findings in ketothiolase deficiency]."
authors:
- Jänisch W
- Hesse V
- Fiedler B
- Förster H
- Böhles H
journal: Zentralbl Pathol
year: '1993'
keywords:
- Acetyl-CoA C-Acyltransferase/deficiency
- Adolescent
- Autopsy
- Brain/pathology
- Cardiomegaly/pathology
- Child
- Humans
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/pathology"
- Male
- Myocardium/pathology
- Neurons/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Pathomorpholigical findings in ketothiolase deficiency].
**Authors:** Jänisch W, Hesse V, Fiedler B, Förster H, Böhles H
**Journal:** Zentralbl Pathol (1993)

## Content

1. Zentralbl Pathol. 1993 Aug;139(3):245-53.

[Pathomorpholigical findings in ketothiolase deficiency].

[Article in German]

Jänisch W(1), Hesse V, Fiedler B, Förster H, Böhles H.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pathologie der Humboldt-Universität, Berlin, Deutschland.

The post-mortem findings in two brothers who had suffered from clinically and
biochemically confirmed ketothiolase deficiency are reported. They had died as a
consequence of metabolic-acidotic crisis at the age of 6 years and 9 months and
4 years and 1 month, respectively. Autopsy revealed cardiac hypertrophy and
brain pathology in both children. The latter consisted of loss of neurons,
spongiosis and slight reactive astrocytosis affecting parasagittal areas of the
parietal and occipital cortex, visual cortex, putamen, caput nuclei caudati and
claustrum. Furthermore demyelination of the visual pathways, including chiasma
opticum, was seen. Changes in both hemispheres were almost symmetric. In the
younger child, changes were less severe than in the older one in whom the course
of the disease had been longer. To the best of our knowledge this is the first
report of autopsy findings in siblings with ketothiolase deficiency.

PMID: 8218125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
