---
reference_id: "PMID:23226436"
title: The incubation periods of Dengue viruses.
authors:
- Chan M
- Johansson MA
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050972
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The incubation periods of Dengue viruses.
**Authors:** Chan M, Johansson MA
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0050972](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0050972)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50972. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050972. Epub 2012 Nov 
30.

The incubation periods of Dengue viruses.

Chan M(1), Johansson MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Dengue viruses are major contributors to illness and death globally. Here we 
analyze the extrinsic and intrinsic incubation periods (EIP and IIP), in the 
mosquito and human, respectively. We identified 146 EIP observations from 8 
studies and 204 IIP observations from 35 studies. These data were fitted with 
censored Bayesian time-to-event models. The best-fitting temperature-dependent 
EIP model estimated that 95% of EIPs are between 5 and 33 days at 25°C, and 2 
and 15 days at 30°C, with means of 15 and 6.5 days, respectively. The mean IIP 
estimate was 5.9 days, with 95% expected between days 3 and 10. Differences 
between serotypes were not identified for either incubation period. These 
incubation period models should be useful in clinical diagnosis, outbreak 
investigation, prevention and control efforts, and mathematical modeling of 
dengue virus transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050972
PMCID: PMC3511440
PMID: 23226436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.