---
reference_id: "PMID:38344522"
title: Isovaleric Acidemia in Jordan.
authors:
- Megdadi N
- Alakil M
- Ghanmiyin L
- Maaita O
- Abulannaz A
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.52039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isovaleric Acidemia in Jordan.
**Authors:** Megdadi N, Alakil M, Ghanmiyin L, Maaita O, Abulannaz A
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.52039](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.52039)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jan 10;16(1):e52039. doi: 10.7759/cureus.52039. eCollection 2024 
Jan.

Isovaleric Acidemia in Jordan.

Megdadi N(1), Alakil M(1), Ghanmiyin L(1), Maaita O(1), Abulannaz A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Royal Medical Services, Amman, JOR.

BACKGROUND: Isovaleric acidemia (IVA) was the first condition to be recognized 
as an organic acid disorder. It is marked by metabolic ketoacidosis with an 
unexplained anion gap. This study examines IVA in Jordan, laying the groundwork 
for future studies. Furthermore, it seeks to enhance the understanding of 
clinical characteristics and outcomes in affected individuals.
METHOD: This case series study includes all isovaleric acidemia diagnoses at the 
metabolic unit of the Queen Rania Al Abdullah Hospital for Children (QRHC) in 
Amman, Jordan, from 2010 to 2023. The study encompassed sociodemographic 
features, clinical and laboratory results, familial history, and parental 
consanguinity.
RESULTS: Our cohort was composed of 21 individuals (10 males and 11 females), 
who presented IVA at an average age of 3.1 years. Positive family history and 
parental consanguinity were observed in 23.8% and 75% of the cases, 
respectively. Vomiting was the most prevalent symptom (57.1%), and 
encephalopathy occurred in 33.3%. Laboratory results showed acidosis (81%), 
hyperammonemia (71.4%), and hypoglycemia (14.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: The early initiation of treatment for organic acid disorders 
carries a more favorable prognosis. Therefore, we strongly recommend for 
implementing newborn screening to overcome diagnostic challenges and delays. For 
effective intervention, healthcare professionals should have a comprehensive 
understanding of the clinical manifestations of IVA and be proficient in 
interpreting biochemical test results.

Copyright © 2024, Megdadi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.52039
PMCID: PMC10857476
PMID: 38344522

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.