---
reference_id: "PMID:31093868"
title: "Autoimmune autonomic neuropathies and ganglionopathies: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and therapeutic advances."
authors:
- Golden EP
- Vernino S
journal: Clin Auton Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s10286-019-00611-1
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Ganglia, Autonomic/physiopathology"
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Immunotherapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune autonomic neuropathies and ganglionopathies: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and therapeutic advances.
**Authors:** Golden EP, Vernino S
**Journal:** Clin Auton Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10286-019-00611-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10286-019-00611-1)

## Content

1. Clin Auton Res. 2019 Jun;29(3):277-288. doi: 10.1007/s10286-019-00611-1. Epub 
2019 May 15.

Autoimmune autonomic neuropathies and ganglionopathies: epidemiology, 
pathophysiology, and therapeutic advances.

Golden EP(1), Vernino S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd. MC 9368, Dallas, TX, 75390, 
USA. Elisabeth.golden@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd. MC 9368, Dallas, TX, 75390, 
USA.

Autonomic disorders can be the result of autoimmunity. The classic, 
well-characterized example is autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG), in 
which antibodies against the ganglionic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor impair 
autonomic transmission, causing autonomic failure, which responds to 
immunotherapy. However, a number of other autoimmune disorders cause autonomic 
failure through a variety of mechanisms. In this article, we review autoimmune 
disorders causing impairment of the peripheral autonomic nervous system (ganglia 
and nerves), including AAG, other autoimmune autonomic neuropathies, 
paraneoplastic autonomic neuropathies, and neuromuscular and rheumatologic 
diseases with autonomic symptomatology. Awareness of primary autoimmune 
autonomic disorders and the autonomic manifestations of other autoimmune 
diseases promotes timely diagnosis and appropriate management, including 
supportive care for unpleasant or dangerous autonomic dysfunction, a search for 
underlying malignancy when indicated, and the use of immunotherapy when 
appropriate. A better understanding of the underlying pathophysiology aids in 
the judicious use and selection of immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10286-019-00611-1
PMID: 31093868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]