---
reference_id: "PMID:36928301"
title: Boosting peripheral BDNF rescues impaired in vivo axonal transport in CMT2D mice.
authors:
- Sleigh JN
- Villarroel-Campos D
- Surana S
- Wickenden T
- Tong Y
- Simkin RL
- Vargas JNS
- Rhymes ER
- Tosolini AP
- West SJ
- Zhang Q
- Yang XL
- Schiavo G
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.157191
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Axonal Transport/genetics
- Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor/genetics
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Boosting peripheral BDNF rescues impaired in vivo axonal transport in CMT2D mice.
**Authors:** Sleigh JN, Villarroel-Campos D, Surana S, Wickenden T, Tong Y, Simkin RL, Vargas JNS, Rhymes ER, Tosolini AP, West SJ, Zhang Q, Yang XL, Schiavo G
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.157191](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.157191)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2023 May 8;8(9):e157191. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.157191.

Boosting peripheral BDNF rescues impaired in vivo axonal transport in CMT2D
mice.

Sleigh JN(1)(2), Villarroel-Campos D(1), Surana S(1)(2), Wickenden T(1), Tong
Y(3), Simkin RL(1), Vargas JNS(1), Rhymes ER(1), Tosolini AP(1), West SJ(4),
Zhang Q(3), Yang XL(3), Schiavo G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases and UCL Queen Square Motor Neuron
Disease Centre, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, and.
(2)UK Dementia Research Institute, University College London (UCL), London,
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California, USA.
(4)Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, UCL, London, United Kingdom.

Gain-of-function mutations in the housekeeping gene GARS1, which lead to the
expression of toxic versions of glycyl-tRNA synthetase (GlyRS), cause the
selective motor and sensory pathology characterizing Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
(CMT). Aberrant interactions between GlyRS mutants and different proteins,
including neurotrophin receptor tropomyosin receptor kinase receptor B (TrkB),
underlie CMT type 2D (CMT2D); however, our pathomechanistic understanding of
this untreatable peripheral neuropathy remains incomplete. Through intravital
imaging of the sciatic nerve, we show that CMT2D mice displayed early and
persistent disturbances in axonal transport of neurotrophin-containing signaling
endosomes in vivo. We discovered that brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF)/TrkB impairments correlated with transport disruption and overall CMT2D
neuropathology and that inhibition of this pathway at the nerve-muscle interface
perturbed endosome transport in wild-type axons. Accordingly, supplementation of
muscles with BDNF, but not other neurotrophins, completely restored
physiological axonal transport in neuropathic mice. Together, these findings
suggest that selectively targeting muscles with BDNF-boosting therapies could
represent a viable therapeutic strategy for CMT2D.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.157191
PMCID: PMC10243821
PMID: 36928301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The technology described
in this work has been protected in the patent GB2303495.2 (patent applicant, UCL
Business Ltd., status pending), on which JNS and GS are named as inventors.
