---
reference_id: "PMID:18489744"
title: McCune-Albright syndrome.
authors:
- Dumitrescu CE
- Collins MT
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-12
content_type: abstract_only
---

# McCune-Albright syndrome.
**Authors:** Dumitrescu CE, Collins MT
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-3-12](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-3-12)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2008 May 19;3:12. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-12.

McCune-Albright syndrome.

Dumitrescu CE(1), Collins MT.

Author information:
(1)Skeletal Clinical Studies Unit, Craniofacial and Skeletal Diseases Branch, 
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of 
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. 
mosteanuc@nidcr.nih.gov

McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS) is classically defined by the clinical triad of 
fibrous dysplasia of bone (FD), café-au-lait skin spots, and precocious puberty 
(PP). It is a rare disease with estimated prevalence between 1/100,000 and 
1/1,000,000. FD can involve a single or multiple skeletal sites and presents 
with a limp and/or pain, and, occasionally, a pathologic fracture. Scoliosis is 
common and may be progressive. In addition to PP (vaginal bleeding or spotting 
and development of breast tissue in girls, testicular and penile enlargement and 
precocious sexual behavior in boys), other hyperfunctioning endocrinopathies may 
be involved including hyperthyroidism, growth hormone excess, Cushing syndrome, 
and renal phosphate wasting. Café-au-lait spots usually appear in the neonatal 
period, but it is most often PP or FD that brings the child to medical 
attention. Renal involvement is seen in approximately 50% of the patients with 
MAS. The disease results from somatic mutations of the GNAS gene, specifically 
mutations in the cAMP regulating protein, Gs alpha. The extent of the disease is 
determined by the proliferation, migration and survival of the cell in which the 
mutation spontaneously occurs during embryonic development. Diagnosis of MAS is 
usually established on clinical grounds. Plain radiographs are often sufficient 
to make the diagnosis of FD and biopsy of FD lesions can confirm the diagnosis. 
The evaluation of patients with MAS should be guided by knowledge of the 
spectrum of tissues that may be involved, with specific testing for each. 
Genetic testing is possible, but is not routinely available. Genetic counseling, 
however, should be offered. Differential diagnoses include neurofibromatosis, 
osteofibrous dysplasia, non-ossifying fibromas, idiopathic central precocious 
puberty, and ovarian neoplasm. Treatment is dictated by the tissues affected, 
and the extent to which they are affected. Generally, some form of surgical 
intervention is recommended. Bisphosphonates are frequently used in the 
treatment of FD. Strengthening exercises are recommended to help maintaining the 
musculature around the FD bone and minimize the risk for fracture. Treatment of 
all endocrinopathies is required. Malignancies associated with MAS are 
distinctly rare occurrences. Malignant transformation of FD lesions occurs in 
probably less than 1% of the cases of MAS.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-12
PMCID: PMC2459161
PMID: 18489744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]