---
reference_id: "PMID:26804733"
title: How Does Streptococcus pneumoniae Invade the Brain?
authors:
- Iovino F
- Seinen J
- Henriques-Normark B
- van Dijl JM
journal: Trends Microbiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2015.12.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How Does Streptococcus pneumoniae Invade the Brain?
**Authors:** Iovino F, Seinen J, Henriques-Normark B, van Dijl JM
**Journal:** Trends Microbiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tim.2015.12.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2015.12.012)

## Content

1. Trends Microbiol. 2016 Apr;24(4):307-315. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2015.12.012. Epub
 2016 Jan 21.

How Does Streptococcus pneumoniae Invade the Brain?

Iovino F(1), Seinen J(2), Henriques-Normark B(3), van Dijl JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE 
171 77, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska 
University Hospital, SE 171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: 
federico.iovino@ki.se.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Groningen, University 
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE 
171 77, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska 
University Hospital, SE 171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.

Streptococcus pneumoniae (the pneumococcus) is the major cause of bacterial 
meningitis. The mechanisms by which pneumococci from the bloodstream penetrate 
the blood-brain barrier to reach the brain are not fully understood. 
Receptor-mediated adhesion of the bacteria to the brain endothelium is 
considered a key event leading to meningitis development. The aim of this review 
is to discuss recent advances and perspectives related to the interactions of S. 
pneumoniae with the blood-brain barrier during the events leading to meningitis. 
Altogether, the available data suggest that, by precisely defining the pathways 
and ligands by which S. pneumoniae adheres to specific receptors, it may be 
possible to interfere with the respective mechanisms and develop strategies to 
prevent or even cure pneumococcal meningitis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2015.12.012
PMID: 26804733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]