---
reference_id: "PMID:37487740"
title: Meningeal P2X7 Signaling Mediates Migraine-Related Intracranial Mechanical Hypersensitivity.
authors:
- Zhao J
- Harrison S
- Levy D
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0368-23.2023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meningeal P2X7 Signaling Mediates Migraine-Related Intracranial Mechanical Hypersensitivity.
**Authors:** Zhao J, Harrison S, Levy D
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0368-23.2023](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0368-23.2023)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2023 Aug 16;43(33):5975-5985. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0368-23.2023.
 Epub 2023 Jul 24.

Meningeal P2X7 Signaling Mediates Migraine-Related Intracranial Mechanical 
Hypersensitivity.

Zhao J(1), Harrison S(2), Levy D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115.
(2)Center for Anesthesia Research Excellence, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.
(3)Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 
dlevy1@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Cortical spreading depolarization (CSD) is a key pathophysiological event that 
underlies visual and sensory auras in migraine. CSD is also thought to drive the 
headache phase in migraine by promoting the activation and mechanical 
sensitization of trigeminal primary afferent nociceptive neurons that innervate 
the cranial meninges. The factors underlying meningeal nociception in the wake 
of CSD remain poorly understood but potentially involve the parenchymal release 
of algesic mediators and damage-associated molecular patterns, particularly ATP. 
Here, we explored the role of ATP-P2X purinergic receptor signaling in mediating 
CSD-evoked meningeal afferent activation and mechanical sensitization. Male rats 
were subjected to a single CSD episode. In vivo, extracellular single-unit 
recording was used to measure meningeal afferent ongoing activity changes. 
Quantitative mechanical stimuli using a servomotor force-controlled stimulator 
assessed changes in the afferent's mechanosensitivity. Manipulation of meningeal 
P2X receptors was achieved via local administration of pharmacological agents. 
Broad-spectrum P2X receptor inhibition, selective blockade of the P2X7 receptor, 
and its related Pannexin 1 channel suppressed CSD-evoked afferent mechanical 
sensitization but did not affect the accompanying afferent activation response. 
Surprisingly, inhibition of the pronociceptive P2X2/3 receptor did not affect 
the activation or sensitization of meningeal afferents post-CSD. P2X7 signaling 
underlying afferent mechanosensitization was localized to the meninges and did 
not affect CSD susceptibility. We propose that meningeal P2X7 and Pannexin 1 
signaling, potentially in meningeal macrophages or neutrophils, mediates the 
mechanical sensitization of meningeal afferents, which contributes to migraine 
pain by exacerbating the headache during normally innocuous physical 
activities.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Activation and sensitization of meningeal 
afferents play a key role in migraine headache, but the underlying mechanisms 
remain unclear. Here, using a rat model of migraine with aura involving cortical 
spreading depolarization (CSD), we demonstrate that meningeal purinergic P2X7 
signaling and its related Pannexin 1 pore, but not nociceptive P2X2/3 receptors, 
mediate prolonged meningeal afferent sensitization. Additionally, we show that 
meningeal P2X signaling does not contribute to the increased afferent ongoing 
activity in the wake of CSD. Our finding points to meningeal P2X7 signaling as a 
critical mechanism underlying meningeal nociception in migraine, the presence of 
distinct mechanisms underlying the activation and sensitization of meningeal 
afferents in migraine, and highlight the need to target both processes for 
effective migraine therapy.

Copyright © 2023 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0368-23.2023
PMCID: PMC10436684
PMID: 37487740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]