---
reference_id: "PMID:270889"
title: "Natural history of acute hepatitis B in previously healthy patients: A prospective study."
authors:
- Niermeijer P
- Gips CH
journal: Acta Hepatogastroenterol (Stuttg)
year: '1977'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of acute hepatitis B in previously healthy patients: A prospective study.
**Authors:** Niermeijer P, Gips CH
**Journal:** Acta Hepatogastroenterol (Stuttg) (1977)

## Content

1. Acta Hepatogastroenterol (Stuttg). 1977 Oct;24(5):317-25.

Natural history of acute hepatitis B in previously healthy patients: A 
prospective study.

Niermeijer P, Gips CH.

A prospective study of the natural history of acute hepatitis B was performed in 
38 patients. Fatigue started median 4 weeks, abdominal symptoms median 3 weeks 
and signs of cholestasis median 2.5 weeks before peak SGPT values were reached. 
Extrahepatic manifestations occurred throughout the prodromal stage, the 
presence of arthropathy, urticaria or skin rashes was not related to the 
biochemical severity of liver disease. The higher the the maximal values of 
serum bilirubin and/or the older the patient, the longer the period of bilirubin 
elevation; a maximal bilirubin elevation less than 20 X the upper limit of 
normal was associated with normalisation of serum bilirubin within 6 weeks. No 
such correlations were found between the height of serum glutamic pyruvic 
transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, thymol turbidity and cholesterol levels and 
the subsequent duration of their abnormality. The elevation of alkaline 
phosphatase as well as the abdominal complaints might partly be caused by 
gastro-intestinal involvement. Immobilisation before peak SGPT was attained was 
associated with normalisation of serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase levels 
within 8 weeks after peak levels. 37 patients recovered completely. In one 
HBs-antigenemia and slight SGPT elevation persisted. Long term follow up was 
possible in 33 patients for 4 to 7 years, median 5 years.

PMID: 270889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]