---
reference_id: "PMID:41560462"
title: "Neuropathic Pain and Enlarged Nerves in Adult Noonan Syndrome and Noonan Syndrome With Multiple Lentigines: Health-Related Quality of Life and Neurologic Symptoms."
authors:
- Draaisma JMT
- Reintjes W
- Leenders E
- Draaisma F
- Burgers M
- Kleimeier L
- Tartaglia M
- Klaassens M
- Becks R
- Renes S
- Wingbermühle E
- Voermans NC
- van Alfen N
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1002/ajmga.70060
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathic Pain and Enlarged Nerves in Adult Noonan Syndrome and Noonan Syndrome With Multiple Lentigines: Health-Related Quality of Life and Neurologic Symptoms.
**Authors:** Draaisma JMT, Reintjes W, Leenders E, Draaisma F, Burgers M, Kleimeier L, Tartaglia M, Klaassens M, Becks R, Renes S, Wingbermühle E, Voermans NC, van Alfen N
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmga.70060](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmga.70060)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2026 Jan 20. doi: 10.1002/ajmga.70060. Online ahead of
print.

Neuropathic Pain and Enlarged Nerves in Adult Noonan Syndrome and Noonan 
Syndrome With Multiple Lentigines: Health-Related Quality of Life and Neurologic 
Symptoms.

Draaisma JMT(1), Reintjes W(2), Leenders E(3), Draaisma F(1), Burgers M(1), 
Kleimeier L(1), Tartaglia M(4), Klaassens M(5), Becks R(6), Renes S(7), 
Wingbermühle E(3)(8), Voermans NC(2), van Alfen N(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud 
University Medical Center Amalia Children's Hospital, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behavior, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Molecular Genetics and Functional Genomics, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, 
IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Maastricht University Medical Center (MUMC+), 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medical Imaging, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology, University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(8)Center of Excellence for Neuropsychiatry, Vincent Van Gogh Institute for 
Psychiatry, Venray, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Neurology, Clinical Neuromuscular Imaging Group, Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Noonan syndrome (NS) and the clinically related Noonan syndrome with multiple 
lentigines (NSML) belong to the group of RASopathies. Although pain is not 
mentioned as a characteristic feature, it has recently been reported as a 
clinically significant problem. This pain is likely multifactorial in origin, 
with a significant contribution from neuropathic mechanisms. Patients with NS 
also have a high chance of having multifocally enlarged nerves, and sometimes 
show clinical features of neuropathy. The relationship between these nerve 
findings, pain, health-related quality of life and neurological symptoms remains 
unclear. This case series aims to provide more insight into the perceived 
health-related quality of life and neurological symptoms in nine adults with NS 
or NSML who reported neuropathic pain and had enlarged nerves. Features of some 
of these patients were already reported in an earlier article. The perceived 
health-related quality of life was markedly below average. All patients reported 
somatosensory symptoms consistent with peripheral neuropathy. Six of nine 
patients reported muscle weakness. Sensory testing was abnormal in five 
patients, but muscle strength was normal in all patients. Electrodiagnostic 
testing was consistent with peroneal neuropathy in one patient, muscle and nerve 
ultrasound imaging confirmed neuromuscular involvement in five of the six 
patients who reported muscle weakness. No muscle ultrasound imaging was 
performed in the sixth patient. This study thus shows that adults with NS and 
NSML with neuropathic pain and enlarged nerves have a significantly impaired 
perceived health-related quality of life with a variable clinical neurologic 
phenotype.

© 2026 The Author(s). American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmga.70060
PMID: 41560462