---
reference_id: "PMID:38637895"
title: The efficacy of Carbamylglutamate impacts the nutritional management of patients with N-Acetylglutamate synthase deficiency.
authors:
- Singh RH
- Bourdages MH
- Kurtz A
- MacLoed E
- Norman C
- Ratko S
- van Calcar SC
- Kenneson A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03167-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The efficacy of Carbamylglutamate impacts the nutritional management of patients with N-Acetylglutamate synthase deficiency.
**Authors:** Singh RH, Bourdages MH, Kurtz A, MacLoed E, Norman C, Ratko S, van Calcar SC, Kenneson A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03167-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03167-0)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Apr 18;19(1):168. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03167-0.

The efficacy of Carbamylglutamate impacts the nutritional management of patients 
with N-Acetylglutamate synthase deficiency.

Singh RH(1), Bourdages MH(2), Kurtz A(3), MacLoed E(4), Norman C(5), Ratko S(6), 
van Calcar SC(7), Kenneson A(8).

Author information:
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, 101 Woodruff Circle, 7th Floor Suite 
7130, 30322, Atlanta, GA, USA. rsingh@emory.edu.
(2)Children's University Hospital of Quebec, Quebec, QC, Canada.
(3)Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.
(5)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(6)London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada.
(7)Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(8)Emory University School of Medicine, 101 Woodruff Circle, 7th Floor Suite 
7130, 30322, Atlanta, GA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The autosomal recessive disorder N-acetylglutamate synthase (NAGS) 
deficiency is the rarest defect of the urea cycle, with an incidence of less 
than one in 2,000,000 live births. Hyperammonemic crises can be avoided in 
individuals with NAGS deficiency by the administration of carbamylglutamate 
(also known as carglumic acid), which activates carbamoyl phosphatase synthetase 
1 (CPS1). The aim of this case series was to introduce additional cases of NAGS 
deficiency to the literature as well as to assess the role of nutrition 
management in conjunction with carbamylglutamate therapy across new and existing 
cases.
METHODS: We conducted retrospective chart reviews of seven cases of NAGS 
deficiency in the US and Canada, focusing on presentation, diagnosis, medication 
management, nutrition management, and outcomes.
RESULTS: Five new and two previously published cases were included. Presenting 
symptoms were consistent with previous reports. Diagnostic confirmation via 
molecular testing varied in protocol across cases, with consecutive single gene 
tests leading to long delays in diagnosis in some cases. All patients responded 
well to carbamylglutamate therapy, as indicated by normalization of plasma 
ammonia and citrulline, as well as urine orotic acid in patients with abnormal 
levels at baseline. Although protein restriction was not prescribed in any cases 
after carbamylglutamate initiation, two patients continued to self-restrict 
protein intake. One patient experienced two episodes of hyperammonemia that 
resulted in poor long-term outcomes. Both episodes occurred after a disruption 
in access to carbamylglutamate, once due to insurance prior authorization 
requirements and language barriers and once due to seizure activity limiting the 
family's ability to administer carbamylglutamate.
CONCLUSIONS: Follow-up of patients with NAGS deficiency should include plans for 
illness and for disruption of carbamylglutamate access, including nutrition 
management strategies such as protein restriction. Carbamylglutamate can help 
patients with NAGS deficiency to liberalize their diets, but the maximum safe 
level of protein intake to prevent hyperammonemia is not yet known. Patients 
using this medication should still monitor their diet closely and be prepared 
for any disruptions in medication access, which might require immediate dietary 
adjustments or medical intervention to prevent hyperammonemia.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03167-0
PMCID: PMC11027358
PMID: 38637895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.