---
reference_id: "PMID:38711130"
title: "Novel SETBP1 D874V adjacent to the degron causes canonical schinzel-giedion syndrome: a case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Zheng J
- Gu M
- Xiao S
- Li C
- Mi H
- Xu X
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-024-04779-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics, complications"
- Clubfoot/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics, complications"
- Degrons
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital"
- "Nails, Malformed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel SETBP1 D874V adjacent to the degron causes canonical schinzel-giedion syndrome: a case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Zheng J, Gu M, Xiao S, Li C, Mi H, Xu X
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-024-04779-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-024-04779-y)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2024 May 6;24(1):309. doi: 10.1186/s12887-024-04779-y.

Novel SETBP1 D874V adjacent to the degron causes canonical schinzel-giedion 
syndrome: a case report and review of the literature.

Zheng J(1)(2), Gu M(1)(2), Xiao S(1)(2), Li C(1)(2), Mi H(1)(2), Xu X(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, 157 
Jinbi Road, Xishan District, Kunming, 650032, Yunnan Province, China.
(2)The Affiliated Hospital of Kunming University of Science and Technology, 
Kunming, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, 157 
Jinbi Road, Xishan District, Kunming, 650032, Yunnan Province, China. 
laoshu_008@163.com.
(4)The Affiliated Hospital of Kunming University of Science and Technology, 
Kunming, China. laoshu_008@163.com.

Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (SGS) is a severe multisystem disorder characterized 
by distinctive facial features, profound intellectual disability, refractory 
epilepsy, cortical visual impairment, hearing loss, and various congenital 
anomalies. SGS is attributed to gain-of-function (GoF) variants in the SETBP1 
gene, with reported variants causing canonical SGS located within a 12 bp 
hotspot region encoding SETBP1 residues aa868-871 (degron). Here, we describe a 
case of typical SGS caused by a novel heterozygous missense variant, D874V, 
adjacent to the degron. The female patient was diagnosed in the neonatal period 
and presented with characteristic facial phenotype (midface retraction, 
prominent forehead, and low-set ears), bilateral symmetrical talipes 
equinovarus, overlapping toes, and severe bilateral hydronephrosis accompanied 
by congenital heart disease, consistent with canonical SGS. This is the first 
report of a typical SGS caused by a, SETBP1 non-degron missense variant. This 
case expands the genetic spectrum of SGS and provides new insights into 
genotype-phenotype correlations.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-024-04779-y
PMCID: PMC11071329
PMID: 38711130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.