---
reference_id: "PMID:19769422"
title: "Perioperative management of the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficient patient: a review of literature."
authors:
- Elyassi AR
- Rowshan HH
journal: Anesth Prog
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2344/0003-3006-56.3.86
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perioperative management of the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficient patient: a review of literature.
**Authors:** Elyassi AR, Rowshan HH
**Journal:** Anesth Prog (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2344/0003-3006-56.3.86](https://doi.org/10.2344/0003-3006-56.3.86)

## Content

1. Anesth Prog. 2009 Autumn;56(3):86-91. doi: 10.2344/0003-3006-56.3.86.

Perioperative management of the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficient 
patient: a review of literature.

Elyassi AR(1), Rowshan HH.

Author information:
(1)Tripler Army Medical Center, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. Ali.Elyassi@US.Army.Mil

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most common enzymatic 
disorder of red blood cells in humans. It is estimated that about 400 million 
people are affected by this deficiency. The G6PD enzyme catalyzes the first step 
in the pentose phosphate pathway, leading to antioxidants that protect cells 
against oxidative damage. A G6PD-deficient patient, therefore, lacks the ability 
to protect red blood cells against oxidative stresses from certain drugs, 
metabolic conditions, infections, and ingestion of fava beans. The following is 
a literature review, including disease background, pathophysiology, and clinical 
implications, to help guide the clinician in management of the G6PD-deficient 
patient. A literature search was conducted in the following databases: PubMed, 
The Cochrane Library, Web of Science, OMIM, and Google; this was supplemented by 
a search for selected authors. Keywords used were glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, anesthesia, analgesia, anxiolysis, management, 
favism, hemolytic anemia, benzodiazepines, codeine, codeine derivatives, 
ketamine, barbiturates, propofol, opioids, fentanyl, and inhalation anesthetics. 
Based on titles and abstracts, 23 papers and 1 website were identified. The 
highest prevalence of G6PD is reported in Africa, southern Europe, the Middle 
East, Southeast Asia, and the central and southern Pacific islands; however, 
G6PD deficiency has now migrated to become a worldwide disease. Numerous drugs, 
infections, and metabolic conditions have been shown to cause acute hemolysis of 
red blood cells in the G6PD-deficient patient, with the rare need for blood 
transfusion. Benzodiazepines, codeine/codeine derivatives, propofol, fentanyl, 
and ketamine were not found to cause hemolytic crises in the G6PD-deficient 
patient. The most effective management strategy is to prevent hemolysis by 
avoiding oxidative stressors. Thus, management for pain and anxiety should 
include medications that are safe and have not been shown to cause hemolytic 
crises, such as benzodiazepines, codeine/codeine derviatives, propofol, 
fentanyl, and ketamine. The authors of this article make 5 particular 
recommendations: (1) Anyone suspected of G6PD deficiency should be screened; (2) 
exposure to oxidative stressors in these individuals should be avoided; (3) 
these patients should be informed of risks along with signs and symptoms of an 
acute hemolytic crisis; (4) the clinician should be able to identify both 
laboratory and clinical signs of hemolysis; and finally, (5) if an acute 
hemolytic crisis is identified, the patient should be admitted for close 
observation and care.

DOI: 10.2344/0003-3006-56.3.86
PMCID: PMC2749581
PMID: 19769422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]