---
reference_id: PMID:35104837
title: Altered TMPRSS2 usage by SARS-CoV-2 Omicron impacts infectivity and fusogenicity.
authors:
- Meng B
- Abdullahi A
- Ferreira IATM
- Goonawardane N
- Saito A
- Kimura I
- Yamasoba D
- Gerber PP
- Fatihi S
- Rathore S
- Zepeda SK
- Papa G
- Kemp SA
- Ikeda T
- Toyoda M
- Tan TS
- Kuramochi J
- Mitsunaga S
- Ueno T
- Shirakawa K
- Takaori-Kondo A
- Brevini T
- Mallery DL
- Charles OJ
- CITIID-NIHR BioResource COVID-19 Collaboration
- Genotype to Phenotype Japan (G2P-Japan) Consortium
- Ecuador-COVID19 Consortium
- Bowen JE
- Joshi A
- Walls AC
- Jackson L
- Martin D
- Smith KGC
- Bradley J
- Briggs JAG
- Choi J
- Madissoon E
- Meyer KB
- Mlcochova P
- Ceron-Gutierrez L
- Doffinger R
- Teichmann SA
- Fisher AJ
- Pizzuto MS
- de Marco A
- Corti D
- Hosmillo M
- Lee JH
- James LC
- Thukral L
- Veesler D
- Sigal A
- Sampaziotis F
- Goodfellow IG
- Matheson NJ
- Sato K
- Gupta RK
journal: Nature
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04474-x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2/metabolism
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing/immunology"
- "Antibodies, Viral/immunology"
- "COVID-19/immunology, pathology, virology"
- COVID-19 Vaccines/immunology
- Cell Line
- "Cell Membrane/metabolism, virology"
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Convalescence
- Female
- Humans
- Immune Sera/immunology
- "Intestines/pathology, virology"
- "Lung/pathology, virology"
- Male
- Membrane Fusion
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Nasal Mucosa/pathology, virology"
- "SARS-CoV-2/drug effects, immunology, metabolism, pathogenicity"
- Serine Endopeptidases/metabolism
- "Spike Glycoprotein, Coronavirus/genetics, metabolism"
- Tissue Culture Techniques
- Virulence
- Virus Internalization
- Virus Replication
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered TMPRSS2 usage by SARS-CoV-2 Omicron impacts infectivity and fusogenicity.
**Authors:** Meng B, Abdullahi A, Ferreira IATM, Goonawardane N, Saito A, Kimura I, Yamasoba D, Gerber PP, Fatihi S, Rathore S, Zepeda SK, Papa G, Kemp SA, Ikeda T, Toyoda M, Tan TS, Kuramochi J, Mitsunaga S, Ueno T, Shirakawa K, Takaori-Kondo A, Brevini T, Mallery DL, Charles OJ, CITIID-NIHR BioResource COVID-19 Collaboration, Genotype to Phenotype Japan (G2P-Japan) Consortium, Ecuador-COVID19 Consortium, Bowen JE, Joshi A, Walls AC, Jackson L, Martin D, Smith KGC, Bradley J, Briggs JAG, Choi J, Madissoon E, Meyer KB, Mlcochova P, Ceron-Gutierrez L, Doffinger R, Teichmann SA, Fisher AJ, Pizzuto MS, de Marco A, Corti D, Hosmillo M, Lee JH, James LC, Thukral L, Veesler D, Sigal A, Sampaziotis F, Goodfellow IG, Matheson NJ, Sato K, Gupta RK
**Journal:** Nature (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-022-04474-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04474-x)

## Content

1. Nature. 2022 Mar;603(7902):706-714. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04474-x. Epub 2022
 Feb 1.

Altered TMPRSS2 usage by SARS-CoV-2 Omicron impacts infectivity and 
fusogenicity.

Meng B(#)(1)(2), Abdullahi A(#)(1)(2), Ferreira IATM(#)(1)(2), Goonawardane 
N(#)(1)(2), Saito A(#)(3), Kimura I(#)(4), Yamasoba D(#)(4), Gerber PP(1)(2), 
Fatihi S(5), Rathore S(5), Zepeda SK(6), Papa G(7), Kemp SA(1)(2), Ikeda T(8), 
Toyoda M(9), Tan TS(9), Kuramochi J(10), Mitsunaga S(11), Ueno T(9), Shirakawa 
K(12), Takaori-Kondo A(12), Brevini T(2), Mallery DL(7), Charles OJ(13); 
CITIID-NIHR BioResource COVID-19 Collaboration; Genotype to Phenotype Japan 
(G2P-Japan) Consortium; Ecuador-COVID19 Consortium; Bowen JE(6), Joshi A(6), 
Walls AC(6)(14), Jackson L(15), Martin D(16), Smith KGC(1)(2), Bradley J(2), 
Briggs JAG(17), Choi J(18), Madissoon E(19)(20), Meyer KB(19), Mlcochova 
P(1)(2), Ceron-Gutierrez L(21), Doffinger R(21), Teichmann SA(19)(22), Fisher 
AJ(23), Pizzuto MS(24), de Marco A(24), Corti D(24), Hosmillo M(14), Lee 
JH(18)(25), James LC(7), Thukral L(5), Veesler D(6)(26), Sigal A(15)(27)(28), 
Sampaziotis F(1)(2)(18)(21), Goodfellow IG(14), Matheson NJ(1)(2)(21)(29), Sato 
K(30)(31), Gupta RK(32)(33)(34).

Collaborators: Baker S, Dougan G, Hess C, Kingston N, Lehner PJ, Lyons PA, 
Matheson NJ, Ouwehand WH, Saunders C, Summers C, Thaventhiran JED, Toshner M, 
Weekes MP, Maxwell P, Shaw A, Bucke A, Calder J, Canna L, Domingo J, Elmer A, 
Fuller S, Harris J, Hewitt S, Kennet J, Jose S, Kourampa J, Meadows A, O'Brien 
C, Price J, Publico C, Rastall R, Ribeiro C, Rowlands J, Ruffolo V, Tordesillas 
H, Bullman B, Dunmore BJ, Gräf S, Hodgson J, Huang C, Hunter K, Jones E, 
Legchenko E, Matara C, Martin J, Mescia F, O'Donnell C, Pointon L, Shih J, 
Sutcliffe R, Tilly T, Treacy C, Tong Z, Wood J, Wylot M, Betancourt A, Bower G, 
Cossetti C, De Sa A, Epping M, Fawke S, Gleadall N, Grenfell R, Hinch A, Jackson 
S, Jarvis I, Krishna B, Nice F, Omarjee O, Perera M, Potts M, Richoz N, 
Romashova V, Stefanucci L, Strezlecki M, Turner L, De Bie EMDD, Bunclark K, 
Josipovic M, Mackay M, Butcher H, Caputo D, Chandler M, Chinnery P, 
Clapham-Riley D, Dewhurst E, Fernandez C, Furlong A, Graves B, Gray J, Hein S, 
Ivers T, Le Gresley E, Linger R, Kasanicki M, King R, Kingston N, Meloy S, 
Moulton A, Muldoon F, Ovington N, Papadia S, Penkett CJ, Phelan I, Ranganath V, 
Paraschiv R, Sage A, Sambrook J, Scholtes I, Schon K, Stark H, Stirrups KE, 
Townsend P, Walker N, Webster J, Butlertanaka EP, Tanaka YL, Ito J, Uriu K, 
Kosugi Y, Suganami M, Oide A, Yokoyama M, Chiba M, Motozono C, Nasser H, Shimizu 
R, Kitazato K, Hasebe H, Irie T, Nakagawa S, Wu J, Takahashi M, Fukuhara T, 
Shimizu K, Tsushima K, Kubo H, Kazuma Y, Nomura R, Horisawa Y, Nagata K, Kawai 
Y, Yanagida Y, Tashiro Y, Tokunaga K, Ozono S, Kawabata R, Morizako N, Sadamasu 
K, Asakura H, Nagashima M, Yoshimura K, Cárdenas P, Muñoz E, Barragan V, Márquez 
S, Prado-Vivar B, Becerra-Wong M, Caravajal M, Trueba G, Rojas-Silva P, Grunauer 
M, Gutierrez B, Guadalupe JJ, Fernández-Cadena JC, Andrade-Molina D, Baldeon M, 
Pinos A.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology & Infectious Disease (CITIID), 
Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Veterinary Science, Faculty of Agriculture, University of 
Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.
(4)Division of Systems Virology, Department of Infectious Disease Control, 
International Research Center for Infectious Diseases, The Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)CSIR Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Delhi, India.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)MRC-Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.
(8)Division of Molecular Virology and Genetics, Joint Research Center for Human 
Retrovirus Infection, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(9)Division of Infection and Immunity, Joint Research Center for Human 
Retrovirus Infection, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(10)Kuramochi Clinic Interpark, Utsunomiya, Japan.
(11)Human Genetics Laboratory, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan.
(12)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(13)Division of Infection and Immunity, UCL, London, UK.
(14)Department of Virology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(15)Africa Health Research Institute, Durban, South Africa.
(16)University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(17)Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.
(18)Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, UK.
(19)Welcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK.
(20)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
EMBL-EBI, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK.
(21)Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.
(22)Cavendish Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK.
(23)Transplant and Regenerative Medicine Laboratory, Translational and Clinical 
Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle 
Upon Tyne, UK.
(24)Humabs Biomed SA, a subsidiary of Vir Biotechnology, Bellinzona, 
Switzerland.
(25)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(26)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(27)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany.
(28)School of Laboratory Medicine and Medical Sciences, University of 
KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.
(29)NHS Blood and Transplant, Cambridge, UK.
(30)Division of Systems Virology, Department of Infectious Disease Control, 
International Research Center for Infectious Diseases, The Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. keisato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
(31)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan. 
keisato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
(32)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology & Infectious Disease (CITIID), 
Cambridge, UK. rkg20@cam.ac.uk.
(33)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
rkg20@cam.ac.uk.
(34)Africa Health Research Institute, Durban, South Africa. rkg20@cam.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2022 May 7;7(1):151. doi: 
10.1038/s41392-022-01009-8.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2022 Jan 17:rs.3.rs-1191837. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-1191837/v1.

The SARS-CoV-2 Omicron BA.1 variant emerged in 20211 and has multiple mutations 
in its spike protein2. Here we show that the spike protein of Omicron has a 
higher affinity for ACE2 compared with Delta, and a marked change in its 
antigenicity increases Omicron's evasion of therapeutic monoclonal and 
vaccine-elicited polyclonal neutralizing antibodies after two doses. mRNA 
vaccination as a third vaccine dose rescues and broadens neutralization. 
Importantly, the antiviral drugs remdesivir and molnupiravir retain efficacy 
against Omicron BA.1. Replication was similar for Omicron and Delta virus 
isolates in human nasal epithelial cultures. However, in lung cells and gut 
cells, Omicron demonstrated lower replication. Omicron spike protein was less 
efficiently cleaved compared with Delta. The differences in replication were 
mapped to the entry efficiency of the virus on the basis of 
spike-pseudotyped virus assays. The defect in entry of Omicron pseudotyped virus 
to specific cell types effectively correlated with higher cellular RNA 
expression of TMPRSS2, and deletion of TMPRSS2 affected Delta entry to a greater 
extent than Omicron. Furthermore, drug inhibitors targeting specific entry 
pathways3 demonstrated that the Omicron spike inefficiently uses the cellular 
protease TMPRSS2, which promotes cell entry through plasma membrane fusion, with 
greater dependency on cell entry through the endocytic pathway. Consistent with 
suboptimal S1/S2 cleavage and inability to use TMPRSS2, syncytium formation by 
the Omicron spike was substantially impaired compared with the Delta spike. The 
less efficient spike cleavage of Omicron at S1/S2 is associated with a shift in 
cellular tropism away from TMPRSS2-expressing cells, with implications for 
altered pathogenesis.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-04474-x
PMCID: PMC8942856
PMID: 35104837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.S.P., D.C. and A.d.M. are employees of Vir 
Biotechnology and may hold shares in Vir Biotechnology. R.K.G. has received 
honoraria for educational activities from Johnson & Johnson, ViiV and GSK. F.S. 
is shareholder in Bilitech. The Veesler laboratory has received an unrelated 
research sponsored agreement from Vir Biotechnology. KGCS is a member of the GSK 
Immunology Scientific Advisory Board, is a founder, Chief Medical Officer, and a 
non-executive director of PredictImmune, and is a co-founder of Rheos Medicines. 
The other authors declare no competing interests.