---
reference_id: "PMID:19020892"
title: Major histopathological patterns of lung cancer related to arsenic exposure in German uranium miners.
authors:
- Taeger D
- Johnen G
- Wiethege T
- Tapio S
- Möhner M
- Wesch H
- Tannapfel A
- Müller KM
- Brüning T
- Pesch B
journal: Int Arch Occup Environ Health
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s00420-008-0386-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Major histopathological patterns of lung cancer related to arsenic exposure in German uranium miners.
**Authors:** Taeger D, Johnen G, Wiethege T, Tapio S, Möhner M, Wesch H, Tannapfel A, Müller KM, Brüning T, Pesch B
**Journal:** Int Arch Occup Environ Health (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00420-008-0386-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00420-008-0386-1)

## Content

1. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 2009 Jul;82(7):867-75. doi: 
10.1007/s00420-008-0386-1. Epub 2008 Nov 20.

Major histopathological patterns of lung cancer related to arsenic exposure in 
German uranium miners.

Taeger D(1), Johnen G, Wiethege T, Tapio S, Möhner M, Wesch H, Tannapfel A, 
Müller KM, Brüning T, Pesch B.

Author information:
(1)BGFA-Research Institute of Occupational Medicine, German Social Accident 
Insurance, Ruhr University, Bochum, Germany. taeger@bgfa.de

OBJECTIVE: The mechanisms of action of arsenic in the development of lung cancer 
are still not yet elucidated. Considering the relationship between arsenic and 
squamous cell carcinomas of the skin, we hypothesized that arsenic exposure may 
be more closely associated with squamous cell carcinoma of the lung.
METHODS: A comprehensive histopathological database and a detailed job-exposure 
matrix developed for former German uranium miners with exposure to arsenic, 
radon, and quartz were analyzed to quantitatively assess the effect of arsenic 
regarding cell type of lung cancer. The distributions of major lung cancer cell 
types in 1,786 German uranium miners were associated with levels of arsenic 
exposure under control for the other lung carcinogens. To evaluate the arsenic 
effects in association with a frequent occupational lung disease in miners 
stratification by silicosis was performed.
RESULTS: There was an arsenic-related increase of the proportion of squamous 
cell carcinoma of the lung but restricted to miners without silicosis. The 
increase was found at all levels of co-exposure to radon and quartz dust. In 
miners with silicosis, the proportion of adenocarcinoma increased with rising 
arsenic exposure. Arsenic exposure was associated with non-small cell lung 
cancer. Silicosis turned out as major determinant of the cell type related with 
arsenic.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate a cell type characteristic effect of arsenic 
in the development of lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s00420-008-0386-1
PMID: 19020892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]