---
reference_id: "PMID:39112824"
title: Highlights of Gene and Cell Therapy for Epidermolysis Bullosa and Ichthyosis.
authors:
- Koutsoukos SA
- Bilousova G
journal: Dermatol Ther (Heidelb)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s13555-024-01239-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Highlights of Gene and Cell Therapy for Epidermolysis Bullosa and Ichthyosis.
**Authors:** Koutsoukos SA, Bilousova G
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (Heidelb) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13555-024-01239-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13555-024-01239-4)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2024 Sep;14(9):2379-2392. doi: 
10.1007/s13555-024-01239-4. Epub 2024 Aug 7.

Highlights of Gene and Cell Therapy for Epidermolysis Bullosa and Ichthyosis.

Koutsoukos SA(1)(2), Bilousova G(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.
(2)Gates Institute, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, 
80045, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, 80045, USA. ganna.bilousova@cuanschutz.edu.
(4)Gates Institute, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, 
80045, USA. ganna.bilousova@cuanschutz.edu.

Advancements in the molecular genetics of epidermolysis bullosa (EB) and 
ichthyosis, two rare inherited skin conditions, have enabled the identification 
of genetic variants that cause these diseases. Alongside technological 
advancements in genetic medicine, the identification of variants causal of these 
rare skin conditions has led to preclinical research and the clinical 
development of various in vivo and ex vivo gene and cell therapies for their 
treatment. Gene and cell therapies are considered to be the most advanced forms 
of personalized medicine, demonstrating safety and efficacy in numerous rare 
diseases. Although the orphan drug development boom has resulted in regulatory 
approval of multiple gene and cell therapies for various rare conditions, the 
application of these modalities to rare inherited skin conditions remains 
limited. Nonetheless, there are successful examples of both in vivo gene 
therapy- and ex vivo cell therapy-based approaches developed to treat EB and 
ichthyosis. This review highlights preclinical research and the clinical 
development of gene and cell therapies for multiple subtypes of these two 
devastating congenital skin conditions, including a gene therapy recently 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of recessive 
dystrophic EB.

Plain Language Summary: Advances in genetics research for skin diseases such as 
epidermolysis bullosa and ichthyosis have led to the discovery of many new 
subtypes of these severe skin conditions. Identifying new subtypes has in turn 
led to new treatments for these conditions, including gene and cell therapies. 
Gene and cell therapies aim to address the underlying genetic causes of disease 
and have already shown success in the clinic. While the development of such 
treatments for rare skin diseases has been limited, there are notable examples 
of gene and cell therapies developed for epidermolysis bullosa and ichthyosis. 
This review highlights recent developments in gene and cell therapy for 
epidermolysis bullosa and ichthyosis, including a newly approved gene therapy 
for recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13555-024-01239-4
PMCID: PMC11393223
PMID: 39112824

Conflict of interest statement: Stefanos A. Koutsoukos and Ganna Bilousova 
declare that they have no competing interest.