---
reference_id: "PMID:30033747"
title: "Patient Indications for Mohs Micrographic Surgery: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Murray C
- Sivajohanathan D
- Hanna TP
- Bradshaw S
- Solish N
- Moran B
- Hekkenberg R
- Wei AC
- Petrella T
journal: J Cutan Med Surg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/1203475418786208
keywords:
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Humans
- Mohs Surgery
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, surgery"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient Indications for Mohs Micrographic Surgery: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Murray C, Sivajohanathan D, Hanna TP, Bradshaw S, Solish N, Moran B, Hekkenberg R, Wei AC, Petrella T
**Journal:** J Cutan Med Surg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1203475418786208](https://doi.org/10.1177/1203475418786208)

## Content

1. J Cutan Med Surg. 2019 Jan/Feb;23(1):75-90. doi: 10.1177/1203475418786208.
Epub  2018 Jul 22.

Patient Indications for Mohs Micrographic Surgery: A Systematic Review.

Murray C(1), Sivajohanathan D(2), Hanna TP(3), Bradshaw S(4), Solish N(1), Moran
B(5), Hekkenberg R(6), Wei AC(7), Petrella T(8).

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Dermatology, Women's College Hospital & University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)2 Department of Oncology, McMaster University & Program in Evidence-Based
Care, Cancer Care Ontario, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(3)3 Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Centre of Southeastern Ontario,
Kingston, ON, Canada.
(4)4 Dynacare Labs, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(5)5 Division of Dermatology, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(6)6 Department of Surgery, Royal Victoria Regional Health Centre & Surgical
Oncology Program, Cancer Care Ontario, Barrie, ON, Canada.
(7)7 Quality and Knowledge Transfer, Surgical Oncology Program, Cancer Care
Ontario, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)8 Department of Medical Oncology, Odette Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada.

The purpose of the present review was to describe evidence-based indications for
Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS) in patients with a diagnosis of skin cancer.
Relevant studies were identified from a systematic MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews search of studies published from 1970 to 2017.
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs), prospective and retrospective comparative
studies with greater than 30 patients, and single-arm retrospective studies with
multivariate analyses were included. A total of 2 RCTs, 3 prospective studies,
and 16 retrospective studies (14 comparative and 2 single-arm) were included.
Data on recurrence rate, cure rate, complications, cosmesis, and quality of life
were extracted. Surgery (with postoperative or intraoperative marginal
assessment) or radiation for those who are ineligible for surgery should remain
the standard of care for patients with skin cancer given the lack of
high-quality, comparative evidence. MMS is recommended for those with
histologically confirmed recurrent basal cell carcinoma (BCC) of the face and is
appropriate for primary BCCs of the face that are >1 cm, have aggressive
histology, or are located on the H zone of the face. The available evidence is
difficult to generalize to all patients with skin cancer because the evidence
did not adequately cover non-BCC skin cancers; however, those skin cancers can
be considered on a case-by-case basis for MMS. MMS should be performed by
physicians who have completed a degree in medicine or equivalent, including a
Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada Specialist Certificate or
equivalent, and have received advanced training in MMS.

DOI: 10.1177/1203475418786208
PMID: 30033747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
