---
reference_id: "PMID:25201797"
title: Anti-CD20 treatment of giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
authors:
- Paganelli M
- Patey N
- Bass LM
- Alvarez F
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2014-0032
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/complications, drug therapy, immunology"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Antigens, CD20/immunology"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Child
- "Giant Cells/immunology, pathology"
- "Hepatitis/complications, drug therapy, immunology"
- Humans
- Rituximab
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-CD20 treatment of giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
**Authors:** Paganelli M, Patey N, Bass LM, Alvarez F
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2014-0032](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2014-0032)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2014 Oct;134(4):e1206-10. doi: 10.1542/peds.2014-0032. Epub 2014
Sep  8.

Anti-CD20 treatment of giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia.

Paganelli M(1), Patey N(2), Bass LM(3), Alvarez F(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, and 
m.paganelli@umontreal.ca.
(2)Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine, Université de 
Montréal, Montreal (QC), Canada;
(3)Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; 
and Department of Pediatrics, Feinberg Medical School of Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Departments of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, and.

Giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia (GCH-AHA) is a rare 
autoimmune disease of infancy characterized by severe liver disease associated 
with Coombs-positive hemolytic anemia. We recently showed that GCH-AHA is 
probably caused by a humoral immune mechanism. Such data support the use of 
rituximab, an anti-CD-20 monoclonal antibody specifically targeting B 
lymphocytes, as a treatment for GCH-AHA. We describe here the detailed clinical 
evolution of 4 children with GCH-AHA who showed a complete response to 
rituximab. All patients shared a severe course of the disease with poor control 
on standard and aggressive immunosuppression. Rituximab was well tolerated, and 
no side effects or infections were registered. Several doses were needed to 
induce remission, and 5 to 11 additional maintenance injections were necessary 
in the 2 more severe cases. Weaning from corticosteroids was achieved in all 
subjects. A steroid-sparing effect was noted in the 3 children who started 
rituximab early in the course of the disease. Overall, we show here that there 
is a strong rationale for treating GCH-AHA with rituximab. Early treatment could 
reduce the use of corticosteroids. Nevertheless, short-term steroids should be 
initially associated with rituximab to account for autoantibodies' half-life. 
Repeated injections are needed to treat and prevent relapses, but the best 
frequency and duration of treatment remain to be defined.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2014-0032
PMID: 25201797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]