---
reference_id: "PMID:26862926"
title: Zika Virus Associated with Microcephaly.
authors:
- Mlakar J
- Korva M
- Tul N
- Popović M
- Poljšak-Prijatelj M
- Mraz J
- Kolenc M
- Resman Rus K
- Vesnaver Vipotnik T
- Fabjan Vodušek V
- Vizjak A
- Pižem J
- Petrovec M
- Avšič Županc T
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1600651
keywords:
- "Abortion, Therapeutic"
- Adult
- "Brain/embryology, pathology, virology"
- Female
- "Fetal Diseases/diagnostic imaging, pathology, virology"
- "Genome, Viral"
- Humans
- "Infectious Disease Transmission, Vertical"
- "Microcephaly/diagnostic imaging, pathology, virology"
- Phylogeny
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Trimester, Third"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
- "Zika Virus/genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Zika Virus Infection/complications, pathology, transmission"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zika Virus Associated with Microcephaly.
**Authors:** Mlakar J, Korva M, Tul N, Popović M, Poljšak-Prijatelj M, Mraz J, Kolenc M, Resman Rus K, Vesnaver Vipotnik T, Fabjan Vodušek V, Vizjak A, Pižem J, Petrovec M, Avšič Županc T
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1600651](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1600651)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2016 Mar 10;374(10):951-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1600651. Epub 2016
 Feb 10.

Zika Virus Associated with Microcephaly.

Mlakar J(1), Korva M(1), Tul N(1), Popović M(1), Poljšak-Prijatelj M(1), Mraz 
J(1), Kolenc M(1), Resman Rus K(1), Vesnaver Vipotnik T(1), Fabjan Vodušek V(1), 
Vizjak A(1), Pižem J(1), Petrovec M(1), Avšič Županc T(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine (J. Mlakar, M. Popović, 
J. Mraz, A.V., J.P.), and the Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty 
of Medicine (M. Korva, M.P.-P., M. Kolenc, K.R.R., M. Petrovec, T.A.Z.), 
University of Ljubljana, and the Department of Perinatology, Division of 
Gynecology and Obstetrics (N.T., V.F.V.), and the Institute of Radiology 
(T.V.V.), University Medical Center Ljubljana - all in Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Mar 10;374(10):984-5. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1601862.

A widespread epidemic of Zika virus (ZIKV) infection was reported in 2015 in 
South and Central America and the Caribbean. A major concern associated with 
this infection is the apparent increased incidence of microcephaly in fetuses 
born to mothers infected with ZIKV. In this report, we describe the case of an 
expectant mother who had a febrile illness with rash at the end of the first 
trimester of pregnancy while she was living in Brazil. Ultrasonography performed 
at 29 weeks of gestation revealed microcephaly with calcifications in the fetal 
brain and placenta. After the mother requested termination of the pregnancy, a 
fetal autopsy was performed. Micrencephaly (an abnormally small brain) was 
observed, with almost complete agyria, hydrocephalus, and multifocal dystrophic 
calcifications in the cortex and subcortical white matter, with associated 
cortical displacement and mild focal inflammation. ZIKV was found in the fetal 
brain tissue on reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-PCR) assay, 
with consistent findings on electron microscopy. The complete genome of ZIKV was 
recovered from the fetal brain.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1600651
PMID: 26862926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]