---
reference_id: "PMID:38388416"
title: "Simulating impaired left ventricular-arterial coupling in aging and disease: a systematic review."
authors:
- Ding CCA
- Dokos S
- Bakir AA
- Zamberi NJ
- Liew YM
- Chan BT
- Md Sari NA
- Avolio A
- Lim E
journal: Biomed Eng Online
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12938-024-01206-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Simulating impaired left ventricular-arterial coupling in aging and disease: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Ding CCA, Dokos S, Bakir AA, Zamberi NJ, Liew YM, Chan BT, Md Sari NA, Avolio A, Lim E
**Journal:** Biomed Eng Online (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12938-024-01206-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12938-024-01206-2)

## Content

1. Biomed Eng Online. 2024 Feb 22;23(1):24. doi: 10.1186/s12938-024-01206-2.

Simulating impaired left ventricular-arterial coupling in aging and disease: a 
systematic review.

Ding CCA(1)(2), Dokos S(2), Bakir AA(3), Zamberi NJ(1)(2), Liew YM(1), Chan 
BT(4), Md Sari NA(5), Avolio A(6), Lim E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of 
Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Graduate School of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University 
of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia.
(3)University of Southampton Malaysia Campus, 79200, Iskandar Puteri, Johor, 
Malaysia.
(4)Department of Mechanical, Materials and Manufacturing Engineering, Faculty of 
Science and Engineering, University of Nottingham Malaysia, 43500, Selangor, 
Malaysia.
(5)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(6)Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, 
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 2109, Australia.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of 
Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. einly_lim@um.edu.my.

Aortic stenosis, hypertension, and left ventricular hypertrophy often coexist in 
the elderly, causing a detrimental mismatch in coupling between the heart and 
vasculature known as ventricular-vascular (VA) coupling. Impaired left VA 
coupling, a critical aspect of cardiovascular dysfunction in aging and disease, 
poses significant challenges for optimal cardiovascular performance. This 
systematic review aims to assess the impact of simulating and studying this 
coupling through computational models. By conducting a comprehensive analysis of 
34 relevant articles obtained from esteemed databases such as Web of Science, 
Scopus, and PubMed until July 14, 2022, we explore various modeling techniques 
and simulation approaches employed to unravel the complex mechanisms underlying 
this impairment. Our review highlights the essential role of computational 
models in providing detailed insights beyond clinical observations, enabling a 
deeper understanding of the cardiovascular system. By elucidating the existing 
models of the heart (3D, 2D, and 0D), cardiac valves, and blood vessels (3D, 1D, 
and 0D), as well as discussing mechanical boundary conditions, model 
parameterization and validation, coupling approaches, computer resources and 
diverse applications, we establish a comprehensive overview of the field. The 
descriptions as well as the pros and cons on the choices of different 
dimensionality in heart, valve, and circulation are provided. Crucially, we 
emphasize the significance of evaluating heart-vessel interaction in 
pathological conditions and propose future research directions, such as the 
development of fully coupled personalized multidimensional models, integration 
of deep learning techniques, and comprehensive assessment of confounding effects 
on biomarkers.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12938-024-01206-2
PMCID: PMC10885508
PMID: 38388416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.