---
reference_id: "PMID:15660652"
title: "Monkeypox virus: histologic, immunohistochemical and electron-microscopic findings."
authors:
- Bayer-Garner IB
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1111/j.0303-6987.2005.00254.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox virus: histologic, immunohistochemical and electron-microscopic findings.
**Authors:** Bayer-Garner IB
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.0303-6987.2005.00254.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0303-6987.2005.00254.x)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2005 Jan;32(1):28-34. doi: 10.1111/j.0303-6987.2005.00254.x.

Monkeypox virus: histologic, immunohistochemical and electron-microscopic 
findings.

Bayer-Garner IB(1).

Author information:
(1)Marshfield Clinic, Marshfield, WI 54449, USA. 
bayer-garner.ilene@marshfieldclinic.org

BACKGROUND: Human monkeypox, an emerging viral zoonosis first recognized in 
Africa, has recently emerged in the mid-western US. Initially, it presents with 
skin eruptions and fevers with diaphoresis and rigors. Clinically, the skin 
lesions progress from papules to vesiculopustules to resolving eschars.
METHODS: Three cutaneous biopsy specimens from two patients with polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR)-proven monkeypox were available for review. The histologic, 
immunohistochemical and electron-microscopic features were identified.
RESULTS: The clinical progression of lesions is mirrored histologically with 
ballooning degeneration of basal keratinocytes and spongiosis of a mildly 
acanthotic epidermis progressing to full thickness necrosis of a markedly 
acanthotic epidermis containing few viable keratinocytes. A lichenoid-mixed 
inflammatory cell infiltrate is present, which exhibits progressive exocytosis 
with the keratinocyte necrosis. Inflammation of the superficial and deep 
vascular plexes, eccrine units and follicles is also present. Viral cytopathic 
effect is manifest by multinucleated syncytial keratinocytes. 
Immunohistochemically, viral antigen is detected within keratinocytes of the 
lesional epidermis, follicular and eccrine epithelium and few dermal mononuclear 
cells. Electron microscopy reveals virions at various stages of assembly within 
the keratinocyte cytoplasm.
CONCLUSIONS: The histologic differential diagnosis includes herpes simplex 
virus, varicella and other pox viruses, such as smallpox. The first one may be 
differentiated histologically, immunohistochemically and electron 
microscopically. The last two may be differentiated using PCR assay for the 
monkeypox extracellular-envelope virus protein gene.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0303-6987.2005.00254.x
PMID: 15660652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]