---
reference_id: "PMID:20799475"
title: Treatment with a combination of anti-IgE and specific immunotherapy for allergic rhinitis and asthma.
authors:
- Hamelmann E
- Rolinck-Werninghaus C
- Wahn U
- Kopp MV
journal: Arb Paul Ehrlich Inst Bundesinstitut Impfstoffe Biomed Arzneim Langen Hess
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment with a combination of anti-IgE and specific immunotherapy for allergic rhinitis and asthma.
**Authors:** Hamelmann E, Rolinck-Werninghaus C, Wahn U, Kopp MV
**Journal:** Arb Paul Ehrlich Inst Bundesinstitut Impfstoffe Biomed Arzneim Langen Hess (2009)

## Content

1. Arb Paul Ehrlich Inst Bundesinstitut Impfstoffe Biomed Arzneim Langen Hess. 
2009;96:303-13; discussion 313-5.

Treatment with a combination of anti-IgE and specific immunotherapy for allergic 
rhinitis and asthma.

Hamelmann E(1), Rolinck-Werninghaus C, Wahn U, Kopp MV.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Ruhr Universität Bochum.

Novel therapies that interfere specifically with immunological mechanisms 
underlying allergen-induced pathology are currently in clinical evaluation. 
Among these is anti-IgE, which directly targets IgE serum antibodies, thus 
inhibiting the central mechanism of immediate type hypersensitivity reactions. 
Application of anti-IgE antibodies effectively reduces IgE serum levels 
regardless of allergen specificity. It has been successfully tested in patients 
with allergic rhinitis, asthma and food allergy, showing significant efficacy in 
reducing symptom scores and use of rescue medications. Anti-IgE therapy is 
limited by high costs and the requirements for permanent or every-season 
treatment. The advantage of specific immune therapy (SIT) is the potential to 
alter the course of the disease, which has been demonstrated in patients with 
allergic rhinitis, insect venom allergy and, to a lesser degree, with asthma. 
The broader application of SIT is restricted by sometimes life-threatening 
side-effects. Here, we summarize the results of clinical trials investigating 
the effects of combination therapy with anti-IgE and SIT in patients with 
rhinitis and asthma. These studies show that combination of anti-IgE plus SIT 
may be beneficial for the treatment of allergic diseases by improving efficacy 
and limiting side effects.

PMID: 20799475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]