---
reference_id: "PMID:18313022"
title: "Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy type 5 is a fully penetrant, lethal arrhythmic disorder caused by a missense mutation in the TMEM43 gene."
authors:
- Merner ND
- Hodgkinson KA
- Haywood AF
- Connors S
- French VM
- Drenckhahn JD
- Kupprion C
- Ramadanova K
- Thierfelder L
- McKenna W
- Gallagher B
- Morris-Larkin L
- Bassett AS
- Parfrey PS
- Young TL
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.01.010
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Testing
- "Heart Failure/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Life Expectancy
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Myocardium/pathology
- Pedigree
- Penetrance
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
- Protein Conformation
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy type 5 is a fully penetrant, lethal arrhythmic disorder caused by a missense mutation in the TMEM43 gene.
**Authors:** Merner ND, Hodgkinson KA, Haywood AF, Connors S, French VM, Drenckhahn JD, Kupprion C, Ramadanova K, Thierfelder L, McKenna W, Gallagher B, Morris-Larkin L, Bassett AS, Parfrey PS, Young TL
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.01.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.01.010)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Apr;82(4):809-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.01.010. Epub
2008 Feb 28.

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy type 5 is a fully penetrant,
lethal arrhythmic disorder caused by a missense mutation in the TMEM43 gene.

Merner ND(1), Hodgkinson KA, Haywood AF, Connors S, French VM, Drenckhahn JD,
Kupprion C, Ramadanova K, Thierfelder L, McKenna W, Gallagher B, Morris-Larkin
L, Bassett AS, Parfrey PS, Young TL.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland and
Labrador A1B 3V6, Canada.

Autosomal-dominant arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia
(ARVC/D) causes sudden cardiac death and is characterized by clinical and
genetic heterogeneity. Fifteen unrelated ARVC families with a disease-associated
haplotype on chromosome 3p (ARVD5) were ascertained from a genetically isolated
population. Identification of key recombination events reduced the disease
region to a 2.36 Mb interval containing 20 annotated genes. Bidirectional
resequencing showed one rare variant in transmembrane protein 43 (TMEM43
1073C-->T, S358L), was carried on all recombinant ARVD5 ancestral haplotypes
from affected subjects and not found in population controls. The mutation occurs
in a highly conserved transmembrane domain of TMEM43 and is predicted to be
deleterious. Clinical outcomes in 257 affected and 151 unaffected subjects were
compared, and penetrance was determined. We concluded that ARVC at locus ARVD5
is a lethal, fully penetrant, sex-influenced morbid disorder. Median life
expectancy was 41 years in affected males compared to 71 years in affected
females (relative risk 6.8, 95% CI 1.3-10.9). Heart failure was a late
manifestation in survivors. Although little is known about the function of the
TMEM43 gene, it contains a response element for PPAR gamma (an adipogenic
transcription factor), which may explain the fibrofatty replacement of the
myocardium, a characteristic pathological finding in ARVC.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.01.010
PMCID: PMC2427209
PMID: 18313022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
