---
reference_id: "PMID:37797581"
title: An inhibitory circuit-based enhancer of DYRK1A function reverses Dyrk1a-associated impairment in social recognition.
authors:
- Shih YT
- Alipio JB
- Sahay A
journal: Neuron
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.09.009
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Autism Spectrum Disorder
- Brain
- "Mossy Fibers, Hippocampal/physiology"
- Parvalbumins
- "Recognition, Psychology"
- Synapses/physiology
- Dyrk Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An inhibitory circuit-based enhancer of DYRK1A function reverses Dyrk1a-associated impairment in social recognition.
**Authors:** Shih YT, Alipio JB, Sahay A
**Journal:** Neuron (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2023.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2023.09.009)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2023 Oct 4;111(19):3084-3101.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.09.009.

An inhibitory circuit-based enhancer of DYRK1A function reverses 
Dyrk1a-associated impairment in social recognition.

Shih YT(1), Alipio JB(1), Sahay A(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; BROAD 
Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; BROAD 
Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
asahay@mgh.harvard.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Feb 03:2023.02.03.526955. doi: 10.1101/2023.02.03.526955.

Heterozygous mutations in the dual-specificity tyrosine 
phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1a (Dyrk1a) gene define a syndromic form of 
autism spectrum disorder. The synaptic and circuit mechanisms mediating DYRK1A 
functions in social cognition are unclear. Here, we identify a social 
experience-sensitive mechanism in hippocampal mossy fiber-parvalbumin 
interneuron (PV IN) synapses by which DYRK1A recruits feedforward inhibition of 
CA3 and CA2 to promote social recognition. We employ genetic epistasis logic to 
identify a cytoskeletal protein, ABLIM3, as a synaptic substrate of DYRK1A. We 
demonstrate that Ablim3 downregulation in dentate granule cells of adult 
heterozygous Dyrk1a mice is sufficient to restore PV IN-mediated inhibition of 
CA3 and CA2 and social recognition. Acute chemogenetic activation of PV INs in 
CA3/CA2 of adult heterozygous Dyrk1a mice also rescued social recognition. 
Together, these findings illustrate how targeting DYRK1A synaptic and circuit 
substrates as "enhancers of DYRK1A function" harbors the potential to reverse 
Dyrk1a haploinsufficiency-associated circuit and cognition impairments.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.09.009
PMCID: PMC10575685
PMID: 37797581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests A.S. is a named 
inventor on US Patent 10,287,580 (Methods for inhibition of Ablim3 to improve 
memory in aging, Alzheimer’s disease and PTSD).