---
reference_id: "PMID:20685671"
title: The GST domain of GDAP1 is a frequent target of mutations in the dominant form of axonal Charcot Marie Tooth type 2K.
authors:
- Crimella C
- Tonelli A
- Airoldi G
- Baschirotto C
- "D'Angelo MG"
- Bonato S
- Losito L
- Trabacca A
- Bresolin N
- Bassi MT
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.077909
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Axons/metabolism
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electrophysiology
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Glutathione Transferase/genetics
- Humans
- Italy
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The GST domain of GDAP1 is a frequent target of mutations in the dominant form of axonal Charcot Marie Tooth type 2K.
**Authors:** Crimella C, Tonelli A, Airoldi G, Baschirotto C, D'Angelo MG, Bonato S, Losito L, Trabacca A, Bresolin N, Bassi MT
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2010.077909](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2010.077909)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2010 Oct;47(10):712-6. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.077909. Epub 2010
Aug  3.

The GST domain of GDAP1 is a frequent target of mutations in the dominant form 
of axonal Charcot Marie Tooth type 2K.

Crimella C(1), Tonelli A, Airoldi G, Baschirotto C, D'Angelo MG, Bonato S, 
Losito L, Trabacca A, Bresolin N, Bassi MT.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, E. Medea Scientific Institute, Via D. L. 
Monza 20, 23842 Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in GDAP1 associate with demyelinating (CMT4A) and axonal 
(CMT2K) forms of CMT. While CMT4A shows recessive inheritance, CMT2K can present 
with either recessive (AR-CMT2K) or dominant segregation pattern (AD-CMT2K), the 
latter being characterised by milder phenotypes and later onset. The majority of 
the GDAP1 mutations are associated with CMT4A and AR-CMT2K, with only four 
heterozygous mutations identified in AD-CMT2K.
METHODS: We screened GDAP1 gene in a series of 43 index patients, 39 with CMT2 
and 4 with intermediate CMT, with sporadic and familial occurrence of the 
disease.
RESULTS: Three novel mutations were identified in three families with dominant 
segregation of the disease: two missense changes, p.Arg226Ser and p.Ser34Cys, 
affecting the GST domain of the GDAP1 protein and a novel deletion (c.23delAG) 
leading to early truncation of the protein upstream the GST domain. Wide 
variability in clinical presentation is shared by all three families mostly in 
terms of age at onset and disease severity. A rare variant p.Gly269Arg, located 
within the GST domain, apparently acts as phenotype modulator in the family 
carrying the deletion.
CONCLUSION: The results obtained reveal a GDAP1 mutation frequency of 27% in the 
dominant families analysed, a figure still unreported for this gene, thus 
suggesting that GDAP1 involvement in dominant CMT2 might be higher than 
expected.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2010.077909
PMID: 20685671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]