---
reference_id: PMID:27127101
title: Pigment epithelium-derived factor restoration increases bone mass and improves bone plasticity in a model of osteogenesis imperfecta type VI via Wnt3a blockade.
authors:
- Belinsky GS
- Sreekumar B
- Andrejecsk JW
- Saltzman WM
- Gong J
- Herzog RI
- Lin S
- Horsley V
- Carpenter TO
- Chung C
journal: FASEB J
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1096/fj.201500027R
keywords:
- Animals
- Biomechanical Phenomena
- "Bone Density/genetics, physiology"
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation/physiology
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nerve Growth Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Serpins/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "Wnt3A Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- beta Catenin/metabolism
- Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pigment epithelium-derived factor restoration increases bone mass and improves bone plasticity in a model of osteogenesis imperfecta type VI via Wnt3a blockade.
**Authors:** Belinsky GS, Sreekumar B, Andrejecsk JW, Saltzman WM, Gong J, Herzog RI, Lin S, Horsley V, Carpenter TO, Chung C
**Journal:** FASEB J (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.201500027R](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.201500027R)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2016 Aug;30(8):2837-48. doi: 10.1096/fj.201500027R. Epub 2016 Apr 28.

Pigment epithelium-derived factor restoration increases bone mass and improves 
bone plasticity in a model of osteogenesis imperfecta type VI via Wnt3a 
blockade.

Belinsky GS(1), Sreekumar B(1), Andrejecsk JW(2), Saltzman WM(2), Gong J(1), 
Herzog RI(1), Lin S(3), Horsley V(3), Carpenter TO(4), Chung C(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA;
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA;
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, Connecticut, USA;
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA;
(5)Department of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA; Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, 
Connecticut, USA chuhan.chung@yale.edu.

Null mutations in for pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), the protein 
product of the SERPINF1 gene, are the cause of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type 
VI. The PEDF-knockout (KO) mouse captures crucial elements of the human disease, 
including diminished bone mineralization and propensity to fracture. Our group 
and others have demonstrated that PEDF directs human mesenchymal stem cell 
(hMSC) commitment to the osteoblast lineage and modulates Wnt/β-catenin 
signaling, a major regulator of bone development; however, the ability of PEDF 
to restore bone mass in a mouse model of OI type VI has not been determined. In 
this study, PEDF delivery increased trabecular bone volume/total volume by 52% 
in 6-mo-old PEDF-KO mice but not in wild-type mice. In young (19-d-old) PEDF-KO 
mice, PEDF restoration increased bone volume fraction by 35% and enhanced 
biomechanical parameters of bone plasticity. A Wnt-green fluorescent protein 
reporter demonstrated dynamic changes in Wnt/β-catenin signaling characterized 
by early activation and marked suppression during terminal differentiation of 
hMSCs. Continuous Wnt3a exposure impeded mineralization of hMSCs, whereas the 
combination of Wnt3a and PEDF potentiated mineralization. Interrogation of the 
PEDF sequence identified a conserved motif found in other Wnt modulators, such 
as the dickkopf proteins. Mutation of a single amino acid on a 34-mer PEDF 
peptide increased mineralization of hMSC cultures compared with the native 
peptide sequence. These results indicate that PEDF counters Wnt signaling to 
allow for osteoblast differentiation and provides a mechanistic insight into how 
the PEDF null state results in OI type VI.-Belinsky, G. S., Sreekumar, B., 
Andrejecsk, J. W., Saltzman, W. M., Gong, J., Herzog, R. I., Lin, S., Horsley, 
V., Carpenter, T. O., Chung, C. Pigment epithelium-derived factor restoration 
increases bone mass and improves bone plasticity in a model of osteogenesis 
imperfecta type VI via Wnt3a blockade.

© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201500027R
PMCID: PMC4970601
PMID: 27127101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]