---
reference_id: "PMID:11967537"
title: AGPAT2 is mutated in congenital generalized lipodystrophy linked to chromosome 9q34.
authors:
- Agarwal AK
- Arioglu E
- De Almeida S
- Akkoc N
- Taylor SI
- Bowcock AM
- Barnes RI
- Garg A
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/ng880
keywords:
- 1-Acylglycerol-3-Phosphate O-Acyltransferase
- Acyltransferases/genetics
- Adipose Tissue/enzymology
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9/genetics"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- "Lipodystrophy/congenital, enzymology, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Triglycerides/biosynthesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AGPAT2 is mutated in congenital generalized lipodystrophy linked to chromosome 9q34.
**Authors:** Agarwal AK, Arioglu E, De Almeida S, Akkoc N, Taylor SI, Bowcock AM, Barnes RI, Garg A
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng880](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng880)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2002 May;31(1):21-3. doi: 10.1038/ng880. Epub 2002 Apr 22.

AGPAT2 is mutated in congenital generalized lipodystrophy linked to chromosome 
9q34.

Agarwal AK(1), Arioglu E, De Almeida S, Akkoc N, Taylor SI, Bowcock AM, Barnes 
RI, Garg A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Congenital generalized lipodystrophy is an autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by marked paucity of adipose tissue, extreme insulin resistance, 
hypertriglyceridemia, hepatic steatosis and early onset of diabetes. We report 
several different mutations of the gene (AGPAT2) encoding 
1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate O-acyltransferase 2 in 20 affected individuals from 
11 pedigrees of diverse ethnicities showing linkage to chromosome 9q34. The 
AGPAT2 enzyme catalyzes the acylation of lysophosphatidic acid to form 
phosphatidic acid, a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of triacylglycerol and 
glycerophospholipids. AGPAT2 mRNA is highly expressed in adipose tissue. We 
conclude that mutations in AGPAT2 may cause congenital generalized lipodystrophy 
by inhibiting triacylglycerol synthesis and storage in adipocytes.

DOI: 10.1038/ng880
PMID: 11967537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]