---
reference_id: "PMID:34120901"
title: "Time to Diagnosis in Young Onset Alzheimer's Disease: A Population-Based Study from Central Norway."
authors:
- Kvello-Alme M
- Bråthen G
- White LR
- Sando SB
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-210090
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Time to Diagnosis in Young Onset Alzheimer's Disease: A Population-Based Study from Central Norway.
**Authors:** Kvello-Alme M, Bråthen G, White LR, Sando SB
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-210090](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-210090)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;82(3):965-974. doi: 10.3233/JAD-210090.

Time to Diagnosis in Young Onset Alzheimer's Disease: A Population-Based Study 
from Central Norway.

Kvello-Alme M(1)(2), Bråthen G(1)(3), White LR(1), Sando SB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromedicine and Movement Science (INB), Faculty of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Nord-Trøndelag Hospital Trust, Levanger Hospital, 
Levanger, Norway.
(3)Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, University Hospital of 
Trondheim, Trondheim, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Young onset dementia is associated with a longer time to diagnosis 
compared to late onset dementia. Earlier publications have indicated that 
atypical presentation is a key contributing factor to the diagnostic delay. Our 
hypothesis was that even the most common presentation of Alzheimer's disease is 
associated with a substantial diagnostic delay in patients < 65 years.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the time to diagnosis, and time lags in the diagnostic 
pathway in typical young onset Alzheimer's disease in central Norway.
METHODS: The main sources of patients were the databases at the Department of 
Neurology, University Hospital of Trondheim (St. Olav's Hospital), and 
Department of Psychiatry, Levanger Hospital. Other sources included key persons 
in the communities, collaborating hospital departments examining patients with 
suspected cognitive impairment, and review of hospital records of all three 
hospitals in the area. Information on the time lags, and the clinical 
assessment, including the use of biomarkers, was collected from hospital notes. 
Caregivers were interviewed by telephone.
RESULTS: Time from first symptom to diagnosis in typical young onset Alzheimer's 
disease was 5.5 years (n = 223, SD 2.8). Time from onset to contact with 
healthcare services (usually a general practitioner) was 3.4 years (SD 2.3). 
Time from contact with healthcare services to the first visit at a hospital was 
10.3 months (SD 15.5). Time from first visit at a hospital to diagnosis was 14.8 
months (SD 22.6). The analysis of cerebrospinal fluid core biomarkers was 
performed after 8.3 months (SD 20.9).
CONCLUSION: Typical Alzheimer's disease is associated with a substantial 
diagnostic delay in younger patients. Raising public awareness, and education of 
healthcare professionals on the aspects of young onset Alzheimer's disease is 
warranted. CSF core biomarkers should be performed earlier in the hospital 
evaluation process.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-210090
PMCID: PMC8461696
PMID: 34120901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors’ disclosures available online 
(https://www.j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/21-0090r1).