---
reference_id: "PMID:39004795"
title: "PD-L1 Expression and Its Modulating Factors in Anaplastic Thyroid Carcinoma: A Multi-institutional Study."
authors:
- Agarwal S
- Jung CK
- Gaddam P
- Hirokawa M
- Higashiyama T
- Hang JF
- Lai WA
- Keelawat S
- Liu Z
- Na HY
- Park SY
- Fukuoka J
- Satoh S
- Mussazhanova Z
- Nakashima M
- Kakudo K
- Bychkov A
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000002284
keywords:
- Humans
- "B7-H1 Antigen/analysis, metabolism"
- "Thyroid Carcinoma, Anaplastic/pathology, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/pathology, genetics, therapy"
- Male
- Female
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics, analysis"
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Mutation
- Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Telomerase/genetics
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Asia
- Immunohistochemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PD-L1 Expression and Its Modulating Factors in Anaplastic Thyroid Carcinoma: A Multi-institutional Study.
**Authors:** Agarwal S, Jung CK, Gaddam P, Hirokawa M, Higashiyama T, Hang JF, Lai WA, Keelawat S, Liu Z, Na HY, Park SY, Fukuoka J, Satoh S, Mussazhanova Z, Nakashima M, Kakudo K, Bychkov A
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0000000000002284](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0000000000002284)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2024 Oct 1;48(10):1233-1244. doi: 
10.1097/PAS.0000000000002284. Epub 2024 Jul 15.

PD-L1 Expression and Its Modulating Factors in Anaplastic Thyroid Carcinoma: A 
Multi-institutional Study.

Agarwal S(1), Jung CK(2), Gaddam P(1), Hirokawa M(3), Higashiyama T(4), Hang 
JF(5), Lai WA(6), Keelawat S(7)(8), Liu Z(9), Na HY(10)(11), Park SY(10)(11), 
Fukuoka J(12), Satoh S(13), Mussazhanova Z(14), Nakashima M(14), Kakudo K(15), 
Bychkov A(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.
(2)Department of Hospital Pathology, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Pathology and Cytology, Kuma Hospital, Kobe, Japan.
(4)Department of Surgery, Kuma Hospital, Kobe, Japan.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(8)Precision Pathology of Neoplasia Research Group, Department of Pathology, 
Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(9)Department of Pathology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth 
People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.
(10)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, South Korea.
(11)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(12)Department of Pathology Informatics, Nagasaki University Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.
(13)Department of Endocrine Surgery, Yamashita Thyroid and Parathyroid Clinic, 
Fukuoka, Japan.
(14)Department of Tumor and Diagnostic Pathology, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, 
Japan.
(15)Department of Pathology, Izumi City General Hospital, Izumi, Japan.
(16)Department of Pathology, Kameda Medical Center, Kamogawa, Chiba, Japan.

Anti-PD immunotherapy is currently under investigation in anaplastic thyroid 
carcinoma (ATC). Tumor cell surface PD-L1 expression is considered predictive of 
therapeutic response. Although papillary thyroid carcinoma has been widely 
studied for PD-L1 expression, there are limited data on ATC. In this 
retrospective multi-institutional study involving 9 centers across Asia, 179 
ATCs were assessed for PD-L1 expression using the SP263 (Ventana) clone. A tumor 
proportion score (TPS) ≥1% was required to consider a case PD-L1-positive. PD-L1 
expression was compared with the histological patterns, the type of specimen 
(small or large), tumor molecular profile ( BRAF V600E and TERT promoter 
mutation status), and patient outcome. PD-L1 expression in any co-existent 
differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC) was evaluated separately and compared 
with ATC. Most ATCs (73.2%) were PD-L1-positive. The median TPS among positive 
cases was 36% (IQR 11% to 75%; range 1% to 99%). A high expression (TPS ≥ 50%) 
was noted in 30.7%. PD-L1-negative cases were more likely to be small specimens 
( P =0.01). A negative result on small samples, hence, may not preclude 
expression elsewhere. ATCs having epithelioid and pleomorphic histological 
patterns were more likely to be PD-L1-positive with higher TPS than sarcomatoid 
( P <0.01). DTCs were more frequently negative and had lower TPS than ATC ( P 
<0.01). Such PD-L1 conversion from DTC-negative to ATC-positive was documented 
in 71% of cases with co-existent DTC. BRAF V600E, but not TERT promoter 
mutations, correlated significantly with PD-L1-positivity rate ( P =0.039), 
reinforcing the potential of combining anti-PD and anti-BRAF V600E drugs. PD-L1 
expression, however, did not impact the patient outcome.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000002284
PMID: 39004795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest and Source of Funding: The 
authors have disclosed that they have no significant relationships with, or 
financial interest in, any commercial companies pertaining to this article. This 
research was supported by the following grants/funds/programs: grant (HI21C0940) 
from the Korean Health Technology R&D Project funded by the Ministry of Health 
and Welfare, Republic of Korea to C.K.J.; funding received from the Indian 
Council of Medical Research, New Delhi, India (Order No. 52/29/2020-Bio/BMS) to 
S.A.; the Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki University; and the Program of 
the Network-Type Joint Usage/Research Center for Radiation Disaster Medical 
Science to M.N.