---
reference_id: "PMID:11889373"
title: Risk factors and demographics in patients with spasmodic dysphonia.
authors:
- Schweinfurth JM
- Billante M
- Courey MS
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1097/00005537-200202000-00004
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Botulinum Toxins/administration & dosage"
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Probability
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sex Distribution
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- United States/epidemiology
- "Voice Disorders/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk factors and demographics in patients with spasmodic dysphonia.
**Authors:** Schweinfurth JM, Billante M, Courey MS
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00005537-200202000-00004](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005537-200202000-00004)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2002 Feb;112(2):220-3. doi: 10.1097/00005537-200202000-00004.

Risk factors and demographics in patients with spasmodic dysphonia.

Schweinfurth JM(1), Billante M, Courey MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, 
USA.

OBJECTIVES: Spasmodic dysphonia has been characterized as a functional, 
psychogenic, or movement disorder with no known etiology or cure. In the present 
study, risk factors associated with other movement disorders were evaluated in 
patients with spasmodic dysphonia.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective patient survey of 168 patients with a known 
diagnosis of spasmodic dysphonia who completed questionnaires at the time of 
interval botulinum toxin injection.
METHODS: Patients completed questionnaires on demographics, education level, 
work history, significant life events, medical, social, and family history. The 
results were compared with those of first-degree relatives as a control group 
with similar demographics. Data were analyzed using percentages calculated on 
the total number of responses and distribution of frequency of each. Statistical 
significance was estimated on t tests of chi2 values.
RESULTS: In the series of 168 patients, there was a female predominance of 79%. 
Age range at onset was 13 to 71 years with an average of age of 45 years. 
Sixty-five percent of patients had previously had the measles or mumps compared 
with the national average of 15% in a similar age group (P =.0001). Thirty 
percent of patients directly associated onset of spasmodic dysphonia symptoms to 
an upper respiratory tract infection, and 21% to a major life stress. There was 
no significant incidence of any other medical or neurological condition or 
symptomatology. There was no family history of spasmodic dysphonia. Twenty-six 
percent of patients had an essential tremor compared with 4% of first-degree 
relatives (P =.0001), and 11% had associated writer's cramp compared with 2% of 
relatives (P =.02). Less than 1% of patients described a history of toxic 
exposure or electrical injury.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of patients with spasmodic dysphonia are girls and 
women. A significantly higher incidence of childhood viral illness was found in 
the patients with spasmodic dysphonia. Patients with spasmodic dysphonia had a 
significant incidence of both essential tremor and writer's cramp but no history 
of major illness or other neurological disorder. There appear to be no 
significant environmental or hereditary patterns in the etiology of spasmodic 
dysphonia. Stress or viral infection may induce the onset of symptoms of 
spasmodic dysphonia. Many features of the disorder are common to other movement 
disorders, and this knowledge may direct future research efforts.

DOI: 10.1097/00005537-200202000-00004
PMID: 11889373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]