---
reference_id: "PMID:27564400"
title: Bacterial biofilm in chronic lesions of hidradenitis suppurativa.
authors:
- Ring HC
- Bay L
- Nilsson M
- Kallenbach K
- Miller IM
- Saunte DM
- Bjarnsholt T
- Tolker-Nielsen T
- Jemec GB
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.15007
keywords:
- Adult
- Biofilms
- Chronic Disease
- Female
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/diagnostic imaging, microbiology"
- Humans
- Male
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- Prospective Studies
- "Staphylococcal Skin Infections/diagnostic imaging, microbiology"
- "Staphylococcus aureus/isolation & purification"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial biofilm in chronic lesions of hidradenitis suppurativa.
**Authors:** Ring HC, Bay L, Nilsson M, Kallenbach K, Miller IM, Saunte DM, Bjarnsholt T, Tolker-Nielsen T, Jemec GB
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.15007](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.15007)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2017 Apr;176(4):993-1000. doi: 10.1111/bjd.15007. Epub 2017 Feb
 19.

Bacterial biofilm in chronic lesions of hidradenitis suppurativa.

Ring HC(1), Bay L(2), Nilsson M(2), Kallenbach K(3), Miller IM(1), Saunte DM(1),
Bjarnsholt T(2)(4), Tolker-Nielsen T(2), Jemec GB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Zealand University Hospital, Health Sciences
Faculty, University of Copenhagen, Roskilde, Denmark.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Costerton Biofilm Centre,
University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Pathology, Zealand University Hospital, Health Sciences
Faculty, University of Copenhagen, Roskilde, Denmark.
(4)Department for Clinical Microbiology, Section 9301, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Denmark.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2017 Apr;176(4):855-856. doi: 10.1111/bjd.15256.

BACKGROUND: Chronic nonhealing or recurrent inflammatory lesions, reminiscent of
infection but recalcitrant to antibiotic therapy, generally characterize
biofilm-driven diseases. Chronic lesions of hidradenitis suppurativa (HS)
exhibit several characteristics, which are compatible with well-known biofilm
infections.
OBJECTIVES: To determine and quantify the potential presence of bacterial
aggregates in chronic HS lesions.
METHODS: In 42 consecutive patients with HS suffering from chronic lesions,
biopsies were obtained from lesional as well as from perilesional skin. Samples
were investigated using peptide nucleic acid-fluorescence in situ hybridization
in combination with confocal laser scanning microscopy. In addition,
corresponding histopathological analysis on haematoxylin and eosin slides was
performed.
RESULTS: Biofilms were seen in 67% of the samples of chronic lesions and in 75%
of the perilesional samples. The mean diameter of aggregates in lesional skin
was significantly greater than in perilesional skin (P = 0·01). Large biofilms
(aggregates > 50 μm in diameter) were found in 42% of lesional samples and in
only 5% of the perilesional samples (P = 0·009). The majority of the large
biofilms were situated in sinus tracts (63%) or in the infundibulum (37%). The
majority of the sinus tract samples (73%) contained active bacterial cells,
which were associated with inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that biofilm formation is associated with
inflammation of chronic HS lesions. The aggregates most likely occur as a
secondary event, possibly due to predisposing local anatomical changes such as
sinus tracts (tunnels), keratinous detritus and dilated hair follicles.

© 2016 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.15007
PMID: 27564400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
