---
reference_id: "PMID:23894498"
title: Ocular-motor profile and effects of memantine in a familial form of adult cerebellar ataxia with slow saccades and square wave saccadic intrusions.
authors:
- Rosini F
- Federighi P
- Pretegiani E
- Piu P
- Leigh RJ
- Serra A
- Federico A
- Rufa A
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069522
keywords:
- Adult
- "Axons/drug effects, pathology"
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/drug therapy, pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Memantine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Middle Aged
- "Motor Activity/drug effects, physiology"
- Saccades/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular-motor profile and effects of memantine in a familial form of adult cerebellar ataxia with slow saccades and square wave saccadic intrusions.
**Authors:** Rosini F, Federighi P, Pretegiani E, Piu P, Leigh RJ, Serra A, Federico A, Rufa A
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0069522](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0069522)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 22;8(7):e69522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069522. Print 
2013.

Ocular-motor profile and effects of memantine in a familial form of adult 
cerebellar ataxia with slow saccades and square wave saccadic intrusions.

Rosini F(1), Federighi P, Pretegiani E, Piu P, Leigh RJ, Serra A, Federico A, 
Rufa A.

Author information:
(1)Eye tracking and Visual Application Lab (EVA Lab), Medical, Surgical and 
Neurological Sciences, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

Fixation instability due to saccadic intrusions is a feature of autosomal 
recessive spinocerebellar ataxias, and includes square wave intrusions (SWI) and 
macrosaccadic oscillations (MSO). A recent report suggested that the 
non-competitive antagonist of NMDA receptors, memantine, could decrease MSO and 
improve fixation in patients with spinocerebellar ataxia with saccadic 
intrusions (SCASI). We similarly tested two sisters, respectively of 58 and 60 
years, with an unrecognized form of recessive, adult-onset cerebellar ataxia, 
peripheral neuropathy and slow saccades, who showed prominent SWI and also 
complained with difficulty in reading. We tested horizontal visually guided 
saccades (10°-18°) and three minutes of steady fixation in each patient and in 
thirty healthy controls. Both patients showed a significant reduction of peak 
and mean velocity compared with control subjects. Large SWI interrupting steady 
fixation were prominent during steady fixation and especially following visually 
guided saccades. Eye movements were recorded before and during the treatment 
with memantine, 20 mg/daily for 6 months. The treatment with memantine reduced 
both the magnitude and frequency of SWI (the former significantly), but did not 
modified neurological conditions or saccade parameters. Thus, our report 
suggests that memantine may have some general suppressive effect on saccadic 
intrusions, including both SWI and MSO, thereby restoring the capacity of 
reading and visual attention in these and in other recessive forms of ataxia, 
including Friedreich's, in which saccadic intrusions are prominent.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069522
PMCID: PMC3718679
PMID: 23894498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.