---
reference_id: "PMID:19631028"
title: Thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroid hormones, and bone loss.
authors:
- Zaidi M
- Davies TF
- Zallone A
- Blair HC
- Iqbal J
- Moonga SS
- Mechanick J
- Sun L
journal: Curr Osteoporos Rep
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s11914-009-0009-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroid hormones, and bone loss.
**Authors:** Zaidi M, Davies TF, Zallone A, Blair HC, Iqbal J, Moonga SS, Mechanick J, Sun L
**Journal:** Curr Osteoporos Rep (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11914-009-0009-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11914-009-0009-0)

## Content

1. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2009 Jul;7(2):47-52. doi: 10.1007/s11914-009-0009-0.

Thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroid hormones, and bone loss.

Zaidi M(1), Davies TF, Zallone A, Blair HC, Iqbal J, Moonga SS, Mechanick J, Sun 
L.

Author information:
(1)Mount Sinai Bone Program, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, 
USA. mone.zaidi@mssm.edu

It has become accepted by virtue of rich anecdotal experience and clinical 
research that thyrotoxicosis is associated with high-turnover osteoporosis. The 
bone loss, primarily due to accelerated resorption that is not compensated by a 
coupled increase in bone formation, has been attributed solely to elevated 
thyroid hormone levels. Evidence using mice lacking the thyroid hormone 
receptors alpha and beta establishes a role for thyroid hormones in regulating 
bone remodeling but does not exclude an independent action of 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), levels of which are low in hyperthyroid 
states, even when thyroid hormones are normal, as after thyroxine 
supplementation and in subclinical hyperthyroidism. We show that TSH directly 
suppresses bone remodeling and that TSH receptor null mice have profound bone 
loss, suggesting that reduced TSH signaling contributes to hyperthyroid 
osteoporosis. TSH and its receptor could become valuable drug targets in 
treating bone loss.

DOI: 10.1007/s11914-009-0009-0
PMID: 19631028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]