---
reference_id: "PMID:39273325"
title: "Cognitive Effects of Simulated Galactic Cosmic Radiation Are Mediated by ApoE Status, Sex, and Environment in APP Knock-In Mice."
authors:
- Wieg L
- Ciola JC
- Wasén CC
- Gaba F
- Colletti BR
- Schroeder MK
- Hinshaw RG
- Ekwudo MN
- Holtzman DM
- Saito T
- Sasaguri H
- Saido TC
- Cox LM
- Lemere CA
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25179379
keywords:
- Animals
- Female
- Male
- Cosmic Radiation/adverse effects
- Mice
- Cognition/radiation effects
- "Amyloid beta-Protein Precursor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Alzheimer Disease/genetics, etiology, metabolism"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Apolipoproteins E/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Sex Factors
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/etiology, metabolism"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive Effects of Simulated Galactic Cosmic Radiation Are Mediated by ApoE Status, Sex, and Environment in APP Knock-In Mice.
**Authors:** Wieg L, Ciola JC, Wasén CC, Gaba F, Colletti BR, Schroeder MK, Hinshaw RG, Ekwudo MN, Holtzman DM, Saito T, Sasaguri H, Saido TC, Cox LM, Lemere CA
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25179379](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25179379)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Aug 29;25(17):9379. doi: 10.3390/ijms25179379.

Cognitive Effects of Simulated Galactic Cosmic Radiation Are Mediated by ApoE 
Status, Sex, and Environment in APP Knock-In Mice.

Wieg L(1), Ciola JC(1), Wasén CC(1), Gaba F(1), Colletti BR(1), Schroeder MK(1), 
Hinshaw RG(1)(2), Ekwudo MN(1), Holtzman DM(3), Saito T(4), Sasaguri H(5), Saido 
TC(5), Cox LM(1)(6), Lemere CA(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Knight 
Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(4)Department of Neurocognitive Science, Institute of Brain Science, Nagoya City 
University Graduate School of Medical Science, Nagoya 467-8601, Aichi, Japan.
(5)Laboratory for Proteolytic Neuroscience, RIKEN Center for Brain Science, Wako 
City 351-0198, Saitama, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cosmic radiation experienced during space travel may increase the risk of 
cognitive impairment. While simulated galactic cosmic radiation (GCRsim) has led 
to memory deficits in wildtype (WT) mice, it has not been investigated whether 
GCRsim in combination with genetic risk factors for Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
worsens memory further in aging mice. Here, we investigated the central nervous 
system (CNS) effects of 0 Gy (sham) or 0.75 Gy five-ion GCRsim or 2 Gy gamma 
radiation (IRR) in 14-month-old female and male APPNL-F/NL-F knock-in (KI) mice 
bearing humanized ApoE3 or ApoE4 (APP;E3F and APP;E4F). As travel to a 
specialized facility was required for irradiation, both traveled sham-irradiated 
C57BL/6J WT and KI mice and non-traveled (NT) KI mice acted as controls for 
potential effects of travel. Mice underwent four behavioral tests at 20 months 
of age and were euthanized for pathological and biochemical analyses 1 month 
later. Fecal samples were collected pre- and post-irradiation at four different 
time points. GCRsim seemed to impair memory in male APP;E3F mice compared to 
their sham counterparts. Travel tended to improve cognition in male APP;E3F mice 
and lowered total Aβ in female and male APP;E3F mice compared to their 
non-traveled counterparts. Sham-irradiated male APP;E4F mice accumulated more 
fibrillar amyloid than their APP;E3F counterparts. Radiation exposure had only 
modest effects on behavior and brain changes, but travel-, sex-, and 
genotype-specific effects were seen. Irradiated mice had immediate and long-term 
differences in their gut bacterial composition that correlated to Alzheimer's 
disease phenotypes.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25179379
PMCID: PMC11394682
PMID: 39273325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.M.H. is a co-founder with equity of C2N 
Diagnostics and is on the scientific advisory board of Genentech, C2N 
Diagnostics, Denali, Cajal Neurosciences, and Asteroid. C.A.L. serves as a paid 
scientific advisor for Acumen Pharmaceuticals, ADvantage Therapeutics, Alnylam 
Pharmaceuticals, Apellis Pharmaceuticals, Cyclo Therapeutics, Merck, Novo 
Nordisk, and Sanofi-Genzyme and receives research funding from the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), NASA, and the Cure Alzheimer’s Fund. All the other 
authors declare no conflicts of interest.