---
reference_id: "PMID:40021042"
title: A single-cell map of patients with non-small cell lung cancer harboring rare-driver mutations after anti-PD-1 treatment.
authors:
- Fu R
- Zhang C
- Song MM
- Gao X
- Li F
- Cai M
- Jiang BY
- Yang XN
- Wu YL
- Zhong WZ
journal: Cancer Lett
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2025.217595
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Tumor Microenvironment/immunology, drug effects"
- Single-Cell Analysis/methods
- "Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A single-cell map of patients with non-small cell lung cancer harboring rare-driver mutations after anti-PD-1 treatment.
**Authors:** Fu R, Zhang C, Song MM, Gao X, Li F, Cai M, Jiang BY, Yang XN, Wu YL, Zhong WZ
**Journal:** Cancer Lett (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canlet.2025.217595](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2025.217595)

## Content

1. Cancer Lett. 2025 Apr 28;616:217595. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2025.217595. Epub
2025 Feb 26.

A single-cell map of patients with non-small cell lung cancer harboring
rare-driver mutations after anti-PD-1 treatment.

Fu R(1), Zhang C(1), Song MM(2), Gao X(2), Li F(2), Cai M(2), Jiang BY(1), Yang
XN(1), Wu YL(1), Zhong WZ(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Translational Medicine in Lung Cancer, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital
(Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
China.
(2)Geneplus-Beijing Institute, Beijing, China.
(3)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Translational Medicine in Lung Cancer, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital
(Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
China. Electronic address: 13609777314@163.com.

The effects of the tumor microenvironment the therapeutic efficacy of combining
chemotherapy with checkpoint inhibitors in patients with lung cancer harboring
rare -driver mutations remain unclear. We utilized single-cell RNA- and T-cell
receptor (TCR) -sequencing to explore the immune and stromal cell profiles of 12
tumors and five tumor-adjacent tissues in seven patients with non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLCs) with rare -driver mutations treated with anti-PD-1 agents
combined with chemotherapy. A class of highly expanded T -cells, known as
GZMK + CD8+ effector memory T cells (GZMK + CD8+Tem), was enriched in both
responsive tumors with and without rare driver mutations, suggesting similar
anti-tumor immune mechanisms in both cohorts and that high levels of
GZMK + CD8+Tem might be associated with effective responses to combination
therapy. Non-responsive tumors exhibited a highly immunosuppressive M2-phenotype
with enriched macrophages and monocytes. In non-major pathological response
tumors, tumor cells interacted with alveolar and M0 macrophages via
LAMC2-(ITGA6+ITGB1), possibly leading to M2 polarization. OAS1 was specifically
expressed in CHIT1+ and FABP4+ macrophages and promoted macrophage polarization.
These findings suggest that combination therapy reprogramed alveolar and M0-like
macrophages to a pro-tumor phenotype, creating an immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment that resisted anti-PD1 therapy. In conclusion, GZMK + CD8+Tem
is crucial for effective responses, whereas myeloid cells contribute to the
immunosuppressive effects in anti-PD-1 therapies for NSCLCs with rare-driver
mutations.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2025.217595
PMID: 40021042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Wen-Zhao Zhong
declares speaker fees from AstraZeneca, BeiGene, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Hengrui, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Pfizer, Roche,
Sanofi outside the submitted work. Yi-Long Wu declares advisory services for
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and Takeda; speaker fees from
AstraZeneca, BeiGene, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly,
Hengrui, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi; and grants from
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Pfizer and Roche outside the submitted
work. Meng-Meng Song, Xuan Gao, Miao Cai, and Fang Li are current employees of
Geneplus-Beijing Ltd. All financial interests are unrelated to this study. Rui
Fu, Chao Zhang, Ben-Yuan Jiang, and Xue-Ning Yang declares that he has no
conflict of interest.
