---
reference_id: "PMID:22038276"
title: Incidence and clinical features of hyperimmunoglobulinemia D and periodic fever syndrome (HIDS) and spectrum of mevalonate kinase (MVK) mutations in German children.
authors:
- Lainka E
- Neudorf U
- Lohse P
- Timmann C
- Bielak M
- Stojanov S
- Huss K
- von Kries R
- Niehues T
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-011-2180-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age of Onset
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Germany/epidemiology
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- Male
- "Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency/diagnosis, enzymology, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/genetics
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and clinical features of hyperimmunoglobulinemia D and periodic fever syndrome (HIDS) and spectrum of mevalonate kinase (MVK) mutations in German children.
**Authors:** Lainka E, Neudorf U, Lohse P, Timmann C, Bielak M, Stojanov S, Huss K, von Kries R, Niehues T
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-011-2180-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-011-2180-8)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2012 Oct;32(10):3253-60. doi: 10.1007/s00296-011-2180-8. Epub 
2011 Oct 30.

Incidence and clinical features of hyperimmunoglobulinemia D and periodic fever 
syndrome (HIDS) and spectrum of mevalonate kinase (MVK) mutations in German 
children.

Lainka E(1), Neudorf U, Lohse P, Timmann C, Bielak M, Stojanov S, Huss K, von 
Kries R, Niehues T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Children's Hospital, University 
Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45147 Essen, Germany. elke.lainka@uni-due.de

Autoinflammatory diseases (AIDs) are characterized by recurrent, self-limiting 
systemic inflammation. Disorders include hereditary recurrent fever (HRF) 
syndromes such as hyperimmunoglobulinemia D and periodic fever syndrome (HIDS). 
To determine the incidence of HIDS and report clinical and genetic 
characteristics together with the underlying MVK genotypes in German children, a 
prospective active surveillance was conducted in Germany during a period of 3 
years. Monthly inquiries were sent to 370 children's hospitals by the German 
Paediatric Surveillance Unit (Clinic-ESPED, n1) and to two laboratories 
(Laboratory-ESPED, n2) performing genetic analyses. Inclusion criteria were a 
MVK mutation-positive patient ≤16 years of age with more than three 
self-limiting episodes of fever >38.5°C associated with increased inflammation 
markers. Clinical, epidemiological, and genetic data were assessed via 
questionnaires. Eight out of 16 patients were identified in Clinic-ESPED (n1) 
and 15 of 16 in Laboratory-ESPED (n2). Clinical and laboratory surveys 
overlapped in 7 of 16 cases. Incidence of HIDS was estimated to be 0.39 (95% CI: 
0.22, 0.64) per 10(6) person-years. HIDS symptoms generally started in infancy 
with recurrent fever episodes lasting 3-12 (median, 4.5) days and recurring 
every 1-12 weeks. Fever was accompanied by abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, 
cervical lymphadenopathy, and sometimes by headache, skin and joint symptoms. 
The patients carried 11 different MVK mutations mostly in compound 
heterozygosity (75%, 12 out of 16). The most frequent mutation was p.Val377Ile 
(81%, 13 out of 16). In Germany, the incidence of HIDS is very low with 0.39 per 
10(6) person-years.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-011-2180-8
PMID: 22038276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]