---
reference_id: "PMID:10404810"
title: "The development of Graves' disease and the CTLA-4 gene on chromosome 2q33."
authors:
- Heward JM
- Allahabadia A
- Armitage M
- Hattersley A
- Dodson PM
- Macleod K
- Carr-Smith J
- Daykin J
- Daly A
- Sheppard MC
- Holder RL
- Barnett AH
- Franklyn JA
- Gough SC
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1210/jcem.84.7.5820
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The development of Graves' disease and the CTLA-4 gene on chromosome 2q33.
**Authors:** Heward JM, Allahabadia A, Armitage M, Hattersley A, Dodson PM, Macleod K, Carr-Smith J, Daykin J, Daly A, Sheppard MC, Holder RL, Barnett AH, Franklyn JA, Gough SC
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.84.7.5820](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.84.7.5820)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Jul;84(7):2398-401. doi: 10.1210/jcem.84.7.5820.

The development of Graves' disease and the CTLA-4 gene on chromosome 2q33.

Heward JM(1), Allahabadia A, Armitage M, Hattersley A, Dodson PM, Macleod K, 
Carr-Smith J, Daykin J, Daly A, Sheppard MC, Holder RL, Barnett AH, Franklyn JA, 
Gough SC.

Author information:
(1)Queen Elizabeth Hospitals, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Case-control studies suggest that the CTLA-4 gene may be a susceptibility locus 
for Graves' disease. The previously reported A/G polymorphism at position 49 in 
exon 1 of the CTLA-4 gene was, therefore, investigated in a case-control (n = 
743) and family-based (n = 179) dataset of white Caucasian subjects with Graves' 
disease. The relationship between CTLA-4 genotype and severity of thyroid 
dysfunction at diagnosis was also investigated. An increase in frequency of the 
G (alanine) allele was seen in Graves' patients compared with control subjects 
(42% vs. 31.5%, respectively; corrected P<0.0002; odds ratio = 1.58), and a 
significant difference in the distribution of GG, GA, and AA genotypes was 
observed between the groups (chi2 = 21.7; corrected P<0.00003). Increased 
transmission of the G allele was seen from heterozygous parents to affected 
offspring compared to unaffected offspring (chi2 = 5.7; P = 0.025). Circulating 
free T4 concentrations at diagnosis were significantly associated with CTLA-4 
genotype (F = 3.26; P = 0.04). These results support the hypothesis that CTLA-4 
may play a role in regulating self-tolerance by the immune system and in the 
pathogenesis of autoimmune disorders such as Graves' disease.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.84.7.5820
PMID: 10404810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]