---
reference_id: "PMID:20301360"
title: Citrin Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Song YZ
- Oishi K
- Saheki T
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Citrin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Song YZ, Oishi K, Saheki T

## Content

1. Citrin Deficiency.

Song YZ(1), Oishi K(2), Saheki T(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Sep 16 [updated 2025 Mar 20].

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou, China
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
(3)Department of Hygiene and Health Promotion Medicine, Kagoshima University 
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Citrin deficiency can manifest in newborns or infants 
as neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency (NICCD), in 
older children as failure to thrive and dyslipidemia caused by citrin deficiency 
(FTTDCD), and in adults as recurrent hyperammonemia with neuropsychiatric 
symptoms in citrullinemia type II (CTLN2). Often citrin deficiency is 
characterized by strong preference for protein-rich and/or lipid-rich foods and 
aversion to carbohydrate-rich foods. NICCD: Children younger than age one year 
have a history of low birth weight with growth restriction and transient 
intrahepatic cholestasis, hepatomegaly, diffuse fatty liver, and parenchymal 
cellular infiltration associated with hepatic fibrosis, variable liver 
dysfunction, hypoproteinemia, decreased coagulation factors, anemia, and/or 
hypoglycemia. NICCD is generally not severe, and clinical manifestations are 
often resolved by age one year with appropriate treatment, although liver 
failure may still occur; liver transplantation has been required in rare 
instances. FTTDCD: Beyond age one year, many children with citrin deficiency 
develop a protein-rich and/or lipid-rich food preference and aversion to 
carbohydrate-rich foods. Clinical abnormalities may include poor weight gain, 
growth deficiency, severe fatigue, anorexia, and impaired quality of life. 
Laboratory changes are dyslipidemia, recurrent hypoglycemia, increased 
lactate-to-pyruvate ratio, higher levels of urinary oxidative stress markers, 
and considerable deviation in tricarboxylic acid cycle metabolites. One or more 
decades later, some adults with NICCD or FTTDCD may progress and develop 
features of CTLN2. CTLN2: Presentation is sudden and usually between ages 20 and 
50 years. Clinical manifestations include recurrent hyperammonemia with 
neuropsychiatric (aggression, irritability, restlessness, hyperactivity, 
delusions, nocturnal delirium) and neurologic manifestations (flapping tremors, 
memory loss, disorientation, drowsiness, convulsive seizures, coma). Clinical 
manifestations are often caused by alcohol and sugar intake, medication, and/or 
surgery. Complications include severe liver steatosis and pancreatitis. Affected 
individuals may or may not have a prior history of NICCD or FTTDCD.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of citrin deficiency is established in an 
individual with characteristic biochemical analytes (increased blood or plasma 
concentration of ammonia, plasma or serum concentration of citrulline and 
arginine, plasma or serum threonine-to-serine ratio) and biallelic pathogenic 
variants in SLC25A13 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: NICCD: lactose-free and medium-chain 
triglyceride (MCT)-enriched formula supplemented with fat-soluble vitamins. 
FTTDCD: protein- and lipid-rich, low-carbohydrate diet; in addition to dietary 
treatment, administration of sodium pyruvate and MCT oil may improve growth. 
CTLN2: reduced calorie/carbohydrate intake and increased protein intake lessens 
hypertriglyceridemia. Sodium pyruvate can increase weight and decrease frequency 
of hyperammonemia; arginine administration decreases blood ammonia 
concentration; MCT oil can decrease frequency of hyperammonemia; use of 
arginine, sodium pyruvate, and MCT oil may delay the need for liver 
transplantation; liver transplantation prevents hyperammonemic crises, corrects 
metabolic disturbances, and eliminates preferences for protein-rich foods. 
Surveillance: Periodic measurement of plasma concentration of ammonia and 
citrulline for all phenotypes associated with citrin deficiency. Assess growth 
and development throughout childhood; assessment of liver and pancreatic 
function as clinically indicated; neuropsychologic testing and quality of life 
assessment as clinically indicated; complete blood count and ferritin as 
clinically indicated. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Low-protein and 
high-carbohydrate diets; glycerol, fructose, and glucose infusions due to risk 
of brain edema; alcohol. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to 
identify affected sibs of a proband so that appropriate dietary management can 
be instituted before symptoms occur.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Citrin deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an SLC25A13 pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
inheriting biallelic pathogenic variants, a 50% chance of inheriting one 
pathogenic variant and being a carrier, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither 
of the familial SLC25A13 pathogenic variants. If one parent is known to be 
heterozygous for an SLC25A13 pathogenic variant and the other parent is known to 
have biallelic SLC25A13 pathogenic variants, each sib of an affected individual 
has at conception a 50% chance of inheriting biallelic SLC25A13 pathogenic 
variants and a 50% chance of inheriting one SLC25A13 pathogenic variant. In 
general, sibs who inherit biallelic SLC25A13 pathogenic variants will be 
affected and have clinical manifestations of citrin deficiency similar to those 
of the proband in the family. Once the SLC25A13 pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301360