---
reference_id: "PMID:11953398"
title: "Rickettsia-macrophage interactions: host cell responses to Rickettsia akari and Rickettsia typhi."
authors:
- Radulovic S
- Price PW
- Beier MS
- Gaywee J
- Macaluso JA
- Azad A
journal: Infect Immun
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1128/IAI.70.5.2576-2582.2002
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Cell Line
- Cytokines/biosynthesis
- Female
- Interleukin-1/biosynthesis
- Interleukin-6/biosynthesis
- L-Lactate Dehydrogenase/metabolism
- "Macrophages/immunology, microbiology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C3H"
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Rickettsia/physiology
- Rickettsia typhi/physiology
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/biosynthesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rickettsia-macrophage interactions: host cell responses to Rickettsia akari and Rickettsia typhi.
**Authors:** Radulovic S, Price PW, Beier MS, Gaywee J, Macaluso JA, Azad A
**Journal:** Infect Immun (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/IAI.70.5.2576-2582.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.70.5.2576-2582.2002)

## Content

1. Infect Immun. 2002 May;70(5):2576-82. doi: 10.1128/IAI.70.5.2576-2582.2002.

Rickettsia-macrophage interactions: host cell responses to Rickettsia akari and
Rickettsia typhi.

Radulovic S(1), Price PW, Beier MS, Gaywee J, Macaluso JA, Azad A.

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland, School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA. sradu001@umaryland.edu

The existence of intracellular rickettsiae requires entry, survival, and
replication in the eukaryotic host cells and exit to initiate new infection.
While endothelial cells are the preferred target cells for most pathogenic
rickettsiae, infection of monocytes/macrophages may also contribute to the
establishment of rickettsial infection and resulting pathogenesis. We initiated
studies to characterize macrophage-Rickettsia akari and -Rickettsia typhi
interactions and to determine how rickettsiae survive within phagocytic cells.
Flow cytometry, microscopic analysis, and LDH release demonstrated that R. akari
and R. typhi caused negligible cytotoxicity in mouse peritoneal macrophages as
well as in macrophage-like cell line, P388D1. Host cells responded to
rickettsial infection with increased secretion of proinflammatory cytokines such
as interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and IL-6. Furthermore, macrophage infection with
R. akari and R. typhi resulted in differential synthesis and expression of
IL-beta and IL-6, which may correlate with the existence of biological
differences among these two closely related bacteria. In contrast, levels of
gamma interferon (IFN-gamma), IL-10, and IL-12 in supernatants of infected
P388D1 cells and mouse peritoneal macrophages did not change significantly
during the course of infection and remained below the enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay cytokine detection limits. In addition, differential
expression of cytokines was observed between R. akari- and R. typhi-infected
macrophages, which may correlate with the biological differences among these
closely related bacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.70.5.2576-2582.2002
PMCID: PMC127898
PMID: 11953398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
