---
reference_id: "PMID:11471169"
title: "Corpus callosum agenesis, multiple cysts, skin defects, and subtle ocular abnormalities with a de novo mutation [45,XX,der(5), t(5;;14) (pter;q11.2)]."
authors:
- Zannolli R
- Mostardini R
- Pucci L
- Sorrentino L
- Biagioli M
- Perotti R
- Guarna M
- Hadjistilianou T
- Zerega G
- Pierluigi M
- Franco B
- "D'Ambrosio A"
- Morgese G
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2001'
doi: "10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<29::aid-ajmg1367>3.0.co;2-8"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Corpus callosum agenesis, multiple cysts, skin defects, and subtle ocular abnormalities with a de novo mutation [45,XX,der(5), t(5;;14) (pter;q11.2)].
**Authors:** Zannolli R, Mostardini R, Pucci L, Sorrentino L, Biagioli M, Perotti R, Guarna M, Hadjistilianou T, Zerega G, Pierluigi M, Franco B, D'Ambrosio A, Morgese G
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<29::aid-ajmg1367>3.0.co;2-8](https://doi.org/10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<29::aid-ajmg1367>3.0.co;2-8)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Jul 22;102(1):29-35. doi: 
10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<29::aid-ajmg1367>3.0.co;2-8.

Corpus callosum agenesis, multiple cysts, skin defects, and subtle ocular 
abnormalities with a de novo mutation [45,XX,der(5), t(5;;14) (pter;q11.2)].

Zannolli R(1), Mostardini R, Pucci L, Sorrentino L, Biagioli M, Perotti R, 
Guarna M, Hadjistilianou T, Zerega G, Pierluigi M, Franco B, D'Ambrosio A, 
Morgese G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Siena, Italy. zannolli@unisi.it

We report on a 2-year-old girl with a de novo mutation [45,XX,der(5),t(5;14) 
(pter;q11.2)] with corpus callosum agenesis, multiple cysts (cerebral and 
cardiac), subtle eye abnormalities, and at least two different skin defects, 
strongly indicating neuroectodermal involvement, as a neuromuscular choristoma 
(hamartoma) and an eccrine hamartoma. Fluorescent in situ hybridization with 
different single-locus probes showed that chromosome 5 has a very small 
deletion, confined to a region composed of repetitive sequences. By contrast, 
the long (q) arm of chromosome 14 seems to be much more involved in the 
rearrangement, with partial monosomy spanning from the centromere to the D14S72 
and D14S261 loci. The extent of the deleted region of chromosome 14 is 
approximately 16 cM. To our knowledge, this is the smallest reported deletion 
involving the chromosome 14q11.2 region to be associated with a developmental 
disorder resulting in variable eye, skin, and brain anomalies. We suggest that a 
new syndrome, mimicking in some ways the MLS phenotype, is caused by a deletion 
in the chromosome 14q11.2 region.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<29::aid-ajmg1367>3.0.co;2-8
PMID: 11471169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]