---
reference_id: "PMID:11385236"
title: Syndactyly/brachyphalangy and nail dysplasias as marker lesions for sclerosteosis.
authors:
- Itin PH
- Keserü B
- Hauser V
journal: Dermatology
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1159/000051649
keywords:
- Adult
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Fingers/abnormalities
- Humans
- "Nails, Malformed"
- "Osteosclerosis/complications, pathology"
- "Syndactyly/etiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Syndactyly/brachyphalangy and nail dysplasias as marker lesions for sclerosteosis.
**Authors:** Itin PH, Keserü B, Hauser V
**Journal:** Dermatology (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000051649](https://doi.org/10.1159/000051649)

## Content

1. Dermatology. 2001;202(3):259-60. doi: 10.1159/000051649.

Syndactyly/brachyphalangy and nail dysplasias as marker lesions for
sclerosteosis.

Itin PH(1), Keserü B, Hauser V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kantonsspital Aarau, Department of Dermatology,
University Hospital Basel, Switzerland.

Sclerosteosis describes an autosomal recessive form of hyperostosis corticalis
generalisata (MIM 239100). Sclerosteosis is primarily a disorder of osteoblast
hyperactivity and metabolic abnormalities are not present. Besides generalized
bone changes the presence of asymmetric cutaneous syndactyly of the index and
middle fingers is characteristic. In many cases this syndactyly is associated
with nail dysplasia and therefore dermatologists should recognize this clinical
finding as a possible marker of this entity. We report on a 36-year-old female
of Greek origin who had had finger and nail dysplasias and facial asymmetry
since birth. The patient was hospitalized on the Neurology ward because of
increasing spastic and ataxic gait disturbances. Physical examination revealed
numerous neurological problems resulting from bony compression of nerves.
Furthermore the patient had remarkably deformed fingers with hypoplasia of the
second finger on both sides. The nails were dysplastic, especially on both index
fingers. All laboratory results concerning metabolic diseases were normal. It
has been shown that sclerosteosis is clinically and radiographically very
similar to van Buchem disease. Through a genome-wide search with a highly
polymorphic microsatellite the gene responsible for van Buchem disease has been
mapped to 17q12-q21, and Balemans et al. (1999) assigned the locus for
sclerosteosis to the same region providing genetic support for the hypothesis of
allelism. Dermatologists should be able to interpret such syndactyly associated
with nail deformities as a possible hint for the diagnosis of sclerosteosis in
patients with hyperostotic features.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000051649
PMID: 11385236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
