---
reference_id: "PMID:19646678"
title: Spinal muscular atrophy with pontocerebellar hypoplasia is caused by a mutation in the VRK1 gene.
authors:
- Renbaum P
- Kellerman E
- Jaron R
- Geiger D
- Segel R
- Lee M
- King MC
- Levy-Lahad E
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.006
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Brain Diseases/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Consanguinity
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Genetic Markers
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Israel
- Jews
- Lod Score
- Male
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/genetics"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Penetrance
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal muscular atrophy with pontocerebellar hypoplasia is caused by a mutation in the VRK1 gene.
**Authors:** Renbaum P, Kellerman E, Jaron R, Geiger D, Segel R, Lee M, King MC, Levy-Lahad E
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.006)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Aug;85(2):281-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.006. Epub
2009  Jul 30.

Spinal muscular atrophy with pontocerebellar hypoplasia is caused by a mutation 
in the VRK1 gene.

Renbaum P(1), Kellerman E, Jaron R, Geiger D, Segel R, Lee M, King MC, 
Levy-Lahad E.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

The spinal muscular atrophies (SMAs) are a genetically and clinically 
heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by degeneration and loss of 
anterior horn cells in the spinal cord, leading to muscle weakness and atrophy. 
Spinal muscular atrophy with pontocerebellar hypoplasia (SMA-PCH, also known as 
pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1 [PCH1]) is one of the rare infantile SMA 
variants that include additional clinical manifestations, and its genetic basis 
is unknown. We used a homozygosity mapping and positional cloning approach in a 
consanguineous family of Ashkenazi Jewish origin and identified a nonsense 
mutation in the vaccinia-related kinase 1 gene (VRK1) as a cause of SMA-PCH. 
VRK1, one of three members of the mammalian VRK family, is a serine/threonine 
kinase that phosphorylates p53 and CREB and is essential for nuclear envelope 
formation. Its identification as a gene involved in SMA-PCH implies new roles 
for the VRK proteins in neuronal development and maintenance and suggests the 
VRK genes as candidates for related phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.006
PMCID: PMC2725266
PMID: 19646678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]