---
reference_id: "PMID:25299040"
title: Barth Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Ferreira C
- Pierre G
- Thompson R
- Vernon H
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Barth Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Ferreira C, Pierre G, Thompson R, Vernon H

## Content

1. Barth Syndrome.

Ferreira C(1), Pierre G(2), Thompson R(3), Vernon H(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2014 Oct 9 [updated 2026 Jan 8].

Author information:
(1)Unit on Skeletal Genomics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Pediatric Metabolic Consultant, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol,
United Kingdom
(3)Associate Professor, Pediatric Cardiology, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland
(4)Professor, Departments of Genetic Medicine and Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Barth syndrome is a multisystem disorder characterized
in affected males by cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, skeletal myopathy, and
prepubertal growth delay; however, not all features may be present in an
affected male. Cardiomyopathy, which is almost always present before age five
years, is typically dilated cardiomyopathy with or without endocardial
fibroelastosis or left ventricular noncompaction; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
can also occur. Heart failure is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality;
risk of arrhythmia and sudden death is increased. Neutropenia is most often
associated with bacterial infections and aphthous ulcers, pneumonia, and sepsis.
Skeletal myopathy predominantly affects the proximal muscles, and results in
delays in development of early motor skills. Prepubertal growth delay is
followed by a postpubertal growth spurt with remarkable "catch-up" growth.
Heterozygous females who have a normal karyotype are asymptomatic and have
normal biochemical studies.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Barth syndrome is established in a male
proband with suggestive findings and either an increased
monolysocardiolipin-to-cardiolipin ratio (if available) or a hemizygous
pathogenic variant in TAFAZZIN (formerly TAZ) identified by molecular genetic
testing. The diagnosis of Barth syndrome is usually established in a female
proband with suggestive clinical findings and a heterozygous TAFAZZIN pathogenic
variant identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Elamipretide is indicated for the improvement of
muscle strength in individuals with Barth syndrome. Treatment of manifestations:
Standard treatment of cardiac issues include: (1) for cardiac arrhythmia,
consideration of antiarrhythmic medications or implantable cardiac defibrillator
(ICD); (2) for heart failure, careful fluid and volume management and avoidance
of overdiuresis and dehydration, standard heart failure medications, and cardiac
transplantation when heart failure is severe and intractable. Interventions for
other findings include granulocyte colony-stimulating factor for neutropenia;
physical therapy for skeletal muscle weakness; standard treatment for talipes
equinovarus and/or scoliosis; feeding therapy and consideration of gastrostomy
tube placement for persistent feeding issues; uncooked cornstarch prior to
bedtime for hypoglycemia; standard management of developmental delay /
intellectual disability. Prevention of secondary complications: Aspirin therapy
to prevent clot formation in those with severe cardiac dysfunction and/or marked
left ventricular noncompaction; antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent recurrent
infections; limit fasting or provide intravenous glucose infusion prior to
planned medical procedures; regularly monitor blood potassium concentrations
during administration of IV fluids that contain potassium and during episodes of
diarrhea; consult with nutritionist and/or gastroenterologist to determine
optimal caloric delivery. Surveillance: Monitoring existing manifestations, the
individual's response to supportive care, and the emergence of new
manifestations requires at least annual electrocardiography with Holter monitor
and echocardiography; as-needed electrophysiologic studies to assess for
potentially serious cardiac arrhythmia; at least semiannual complete blood count
with differential as well as with all febrile episodes; at each visit,
measurement of height and weight, clinical assessment of strength, and clinical
assessment for scoliosis; every three to five years during childhood, formal
assessments of developmental progress and educational needs.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Prolonged fasting, use of rectal thermometers in
those with neutropenia, and use of succinylcholine. Although growth hormone is
typically not indicated as most affected males will attain normal stature by
adulthood, recommendations about use of human growth hormone may vary based on
endocrinology testing and recommendations. The muscular involvement in Barth
syndrome may increase the risk for malignant hyperthermia compared to the
general population. Evaluations of relatives at risk: Molecular genetic testing
(if the TAFAZZIN pathogenic variant in the family is known) or
monolysocardiolipin-to-cardiolipin ratio testing (if the TAFAZZIN pathogenic
variant in the family is not known) of male sibs of a proband and male relatives
in the maternal lineage is appropriate to identify as early as possible those
who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Barth syndrome is inherited in an X-linked manner. If the
mother of the proband has a TAFAZZIN pathogenic variant, the chance of
transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the pathogenic
variant will be affected. Females who inherit the pathogenic variant will be
heterozygotes. Heterozygous females typically do not manifest the disease.
Affected males transmit the TAFAZZIN pathogenic variant to all of their
daughters and none of their sons. If the TAFAZZIN pathogenic variant has been
identified in an affected family member, identification of female heterozygotes
and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing for Barth syndrome are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 25299040
