---
reference_id: "PMID:3054550"
title: Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. Diagnosis by stable-isotope dilution measurement of urinary n-hexanoylglycine and 3-phenylpropionylglycine.
authors:
- Rinaldo P
- "O'Shea JJ"
- Coates PM
- Hale DE
- Stanley CA
- Tanaka K
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1056/NEJM198811173192003
keywords:
- Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase
- Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenases/deficiency
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Dicarboxylic Acids/urine
- "Glycine/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Methods
- Radioisotope Dilution Technique
- Retrospective Studies
- Reye Syndrome/diagnosis
- Sudden Infant Death
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. Diagnosis by stable-isotope dilution measurement of urinary n-hexanoylglycine and 3-phenylpropionylglycine.
**Authors:** Rinaldo P, O'Shea JJ, Coates PM, Hale DE, Stanley CA, Tanaka K
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJM198811173192003](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM198811173192003)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 1988 Nov 17;319(20):1308-13. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198811173192003.

Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. Diagnosis by stable-isotope
dilution measurement of urinary n-hexanoylglycine and 3-phenylpropionylglycine.

Rinaldo P(1), O'Shea JJ, Coates PM, Hale DE, Stanley CA, Tanaka K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Conn. 06510.

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med 1989 May 4;320(18):1227.

Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency, one of the most common
inherited metabolic disorders, is often mistaken for the sudden infant death
syndrome or Reye's syndrome. Diagnosing it has been difficult because of a lack
of fast and reliable diagnostic methods. We developed a stable-isotope dilution
method to measure urinary n-hexanoylglycine, 3-phenylpropionylglycine, and
suberylglycine, and we retrospectively tested its accuracy in diagnosing MCAD
deficiency. We measured the concentrations of these three acylglycines in 54
urine samples from 21 patients with confirmed MCAD deficiency during the acute
and asymptomatic phases of the illness and compared the results with the
concentrations in 98 samples from healthy controls and patient controls with
various diseases. The levels of urinary hexanoylglycine and
phenylpropionylglycine were significantly increased in all samples from the
patients with MCAD deficiency, clearly distinguishing them from both groups of
controls. Although urinary suberylglycine was increased in the patients, the
range of values in the normal controls who were receiving formula containing
medium-chain triglycerides was very wide, overlapping somewhat with the values
in the patients with asymptomatic MCAD deficiency. These results indicate that
the measurement of urinary hexanoylglycine and phenylpropionylglycine by our
method is highly specific for the diagnosis of MCAD deficiency. The method is
fast and can be applied to random urine specimens, without any pretreatment of
patients.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM198811173192003
PMID: 3054550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
