---
reference_id: "PMID:22974167"
title: "Early identification of autism in fragile X syndrome: a review."
authors:
- McCary LM
- Roberts JE
journal: J Intellect Disabil Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2788.2012.01609.x
keywords:
- "Autistic Disorder/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Comorbidity
- Early Diagnosis
- Fragile X Syndrome/epidemiology
- Humans
- Infant
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early identification of autism in fragile X syndrome: a review.
**Authors:** McCary LM, Roberts JE
**Journal:** J Intellect Disabil Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2788.2012.01609.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2788.2012.01609.x)

## Content

1. J Intellect Disabil Res. 2013 Sep;57(9):803-14. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2788.2012.01609.x. Epub 2012 Sep 14.

Early identification of autism in fragile X syndrome: a review.

McCary LM(1), Roberts JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA.
lmmcdona@gmail.com

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the leading genetic cause of autism, accounting for
approximately 5% of autism cases with as many as 50% of individuals with FXS
meeting DSM-IV-TR criteria for autistic disorder. Both FXS and idiopathic autism
(IA) are attributed to genetic causes; however, FXS is an identified single gene
disorder whereas autism is a complex disorder with multiple potential causes,
some of which have been identified. Studies in IA have focused on the
prospective longitudinal examination of infant siblings of children with autism
as a target group due to their high risk of developing the disorder. We propose
that this same model be applied to the study of infants with FXS. There is a
lack of research focusing on the early development of autism within FXS and
debate in the literature regarding how to best conceptualise this co-morbidity
or whether it should be considered a co-morbid condition at all. Studying the
emergence and stability of autism in infants with FXS has multiple benefits such
as clarifying the underlying mechanisms of the development of autism in FXS and
solidifying similarities and differences between co-morbid FXS with autism and
IA. Infant research in both IA and FXS are discussed as well as conclusions and
implications for practice and future research.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research © 2012 John
Wiley & Sons Ltd, MENCAP & IASSID.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2788.2012.01609.x
PMCID: PMC4023162
PMID: 22974167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
