---
reference_id: "PMID:12193940"
title: Nutrient intake and congenital heart defects in maternal phenylketonuria.
authors:
- Michals-Matalon K
- Platt LD
- Acosta P P
- Azen C
- Walla CA
journal: Am J Obstet Gynecol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1067/mob.2002.124276
keywords:
- Dietary Proteins/metabolism
- Female
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/etiology, prevention & control"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Phenylketonuria, Maternal/blood, diet therapy"
- "Phenylketonurias/blood, diet therapy"
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nutrient intake and congenital heart defects in maternal phenylketonuria.
**Authors:** Michals-Matalon K, Platt LD, Acosta P P, Azen C, Walla CA
**Journal:** Am J Obstet Gynecol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1067/mob.2002.124276](https://doi.org/10.1067/mob.2002.124276)

## Content

1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2002 Aug;187(2):441-4. doi: 10.1067/mob.2002.124276.

Nutrient intake and congenital heart defects in maternal phenylketonuria.

Michals-Matalon K(1), Platt LD, Acosta P P, Azen C, Walla CA.

Author information:
(1)University of Houston, Texas, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether nutritional
components other than high maternal blood phenylalanine levels (> or = 10 mg/dL)
are associated with congenital heart defects in the offspring of women with
hyperphenylalaninemia.
STUDY DESIGN: Of the 414 subjects who had live births, 249 women (60.1%) started
diet treatment before 8 weeks of gestation and had nutritional assessments and
infant outcome data. Maternal phenylalanine levels, protein intake, and the
incidence of congenital heart defects were determined. Simple contingency table
analysis was done by chi(2) and Fisher exact test.
RESULTS: A significantly increased incidence of congenital heart defects was
observed in offspring of mothers with hyperphenylalaninemia who had an elevated
blood phenylalanine level >10 mg/dL at 0 to 8 weeks of gestation and a protein
intake of < or = 50% of the recommended dietary allowance (P <.0013).
CONCLUSION: An inadequate intake of protein during pregnancy in conjunction with
elevated blood phenylalanine levels appear to have an additive effect in the
incidence of congenital heart defects in the offspring of women with
hyperphenylalaninemia.

DOI: 10.1067/mob.2002.124276
PMID: 12193940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
