---
reference_id: "PMID:34510165"
title: Vitamin D status and its associations with clinical and laboratory parameters in patients with Addison's disease.
authors:
- Zawadzka K
- Matwiej K
- Sokołowski G
- Trofimiuk-Müldner M
- Skalniak A
- Hubalewska-Dydejczyk A
journal: Folia Med Cracov
year: '2021'
doi: 10.24425/fmc.2021.137224
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitamin D status and its associations with clinical and laboratory parameters in patients with Addison's disease.
**Authors:** Zawadzka K, Matwiej K, Sokołowski G, Trofimiuk-Müldner M, Skalniak A, Hubalewska-Dydejczyk A
**Journal:** Folia Med Cracov (2021)
**DOI:** [10.24425/fmc.2021.137224](https://doi.org/10.24425/fmc.2021.137224)

## Content

1. Folia Med Cracov. 2021;61(2):65-78. doi: 10.24425/fmc.2021.137224.

Vitamin D status and its associations with clinical and laboratory parameters in 
patients with Addison's disease.

Zawadzka K(1), Matwiej K(1), Sokołowski G(2), Trofimiuk-Müldner M(3), Skalniak 
A(2), Hubalewska-Dydejczyk A(2).

Author information:
(1)Students' Scientific Group of Endocrinology at the Department of 
Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Kraków, Poland.
(2)Chair and Department of Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University Medical 
College, Kraków, Poland.
(3)Chair and Department of Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University Medical 
College, Kraków, Poland. malgorzata.trofimiuk@uj.edu.pl.

INTRODUCTION: There is increasing evidence that several autoimmune diseases, as 
well as their activity, are associated with vitamin D (VD) deficiency. Our study 
aimed to evaluate the prevalence of VD insufficiency in patients with Addison's 
disease (AD), as well as to evaluate associations between VD concentrations and 
various clinical and laboratory parameters of the disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed medical records of 31 adult 
patients diagnosed with autoimmune Addison's disease, in whom serum VD was 
measured. We assessed correlations between serum VD and various clinical and 
laboratory parameters. R e s u l t s: 90.3% of AD patients had inadequate VD 
concentrations (<30 ng/mL), and 19.3% of them were found to be severely VD 
deficient (<10 ng/mL). Among assessed laboratory variables, only serum calcium 
concentrations significantly correlated with VD status (r = 0.53, p = 0.006). 
The mean serum VD concentration was significantly lower in patients with severe 
fatigue (15.17 ± 8.41 vs 26.83 ± 12.29 ng/mL, p = 0.011) and limited exercise 
capacity (12.38 ± 6.9 vs 21.63 ± 10.87 ng/mL, p = 0.016). C o n c l u s i o n s: 
This study demonstrates a high prevalence of VD deficiency in AD patients, as 
well as the association between low VD concentrations with symptoms such as 
severe fatigue or limited exercise capacity. Further studies are needed to 
clarify if impaired VD status is a risk factor in the pathogenesis of AD and to 
assess if VD supplementation improves the quality of life of AD patients.

DOI: 10.24425/fmc.2021.137224
PMID: 34510165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]