---
reference_id: "PMID:36756177"
title: "Extracutaneous features and complications of the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes: A systematic review."
authors:
- Doolan BJ
- Lavallee ME
- Hausser I
- Schubart JR
- Michael Pope F
- Seneviratne SL
- Winship IM
- Burrows NP
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1053466
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extracutaneous features and complications of the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Doolan BJ, Lavallee ME, Hausser I, Schubart JR, Michael Pope F, Seneviratne SL, Winship IM, Burrows NP
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1053466](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1053466)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Jan 23;10:1053466. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1053466. 
eCollection 2023.

Extracutaneous features and complications of the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes: A 
systematic review.

Doolan BJ(1), Lavallee ME(2), Hausser I(3), Schubart JR(4), Michael Pope F(5), 
Seneviratne SL(6)(7), Winship IM(8)(9), Burrows NP(10).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic and Medical Biosciences, St. John's Institute of Dermatology, 
King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center of Central 
PA, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(3)Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Surgery, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, United 
States.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust (West Middlesex University Hospital), London, United Kingdom.
(6)Institute of Immunity and Transplantation, Royal Free Hospital and University 
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Nawaloka Hospital Research and Education Foundation, Nawaloka Hospitals, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(8)Department of Genetic Medicine, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(9)Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) comprise a group of inherited 
connective tissue disorders presenting with variable fragility to skin, soft 
tissue, and certain internal organs, which can cause significant complications, 
particularly arterial rupture, bowel perforation and joint difficulties. 
Currently, there are 14 proposed subtypes of EDS, with all except one subtype 
(hypermobile EDS) having an identified genetic etiology. An understanding of the 
extracutaneous features and complications within each subtype is key to 
maximizing clinical care and reducing the risk of further complications.
METHODS: A systematic review of EDS-related extracutaneous features and 
complications was undertaken.
RESULTS: We identified 839 EDS cases that met the inclusion criteria. We noted a 
high prevalence of joint hypermobility amongst kyphoscoliotic (39/39, 100%), 
spondylodysplastic (24/25, 96.0%), and hypermobile (153/160, 95.6%) EDS 
subtypes. The most common musculoskeletal complications were decreased bone 
density (39/43, 90.7%), joint pain (217/270, 80.4%), and hypotonia/weakness 
(79/140, 56.4%). Vascular EDS presented with cerebrovascular events (25/153, 
16.3%), aneurysm (77/245, 31.4%), arterial dissection/rupture (89/250, 35.5%), 
and pneumothorax/hemothorax. Chronic pain was the most common miscellaneous 
complication, disproportionately affecting hypermobile EDS patients (139/157, 
88.5%). Hypermobile EDS cases also presented with chronic fatigue (61/63, 96.8%) 
and gastrointestinal complications (57/63, 90.5%). Neuropsychiatric 
complications were noted in almost all subtypes.
DISCUSSION: Understanding the extracutaneous features and complications of each 
EDS subtype may help diagnose and treat EDS prior to the development of 
substantial comorbidities and/or additional complications.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: 
https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?ID=CRD42022308151, 
identifier CRD42022308151.

Copyright © 2023 Doolan, Lavallee, Hausser, Schubart, Michael Pope, Seneviratne, 
Winship and Burrows.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1053466
PMCID: PMC9899794
PMID: 36756177

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.