---
reference_id: "PMID:31058012"
title: Acute Dysphagia Caused by Sarcomatoid Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Esophagus.
authors:
- Phelps BJ
- Tiley YM
- Skrove JL
- Berry AC
- Mohan K
journal: Cureus
year: '2019'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.4129
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Dysphagia Caused by Sarcomatoid Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Esophagus.
**Authors:** Phelps BJ, Tiley YM, Skrove JL, Berry AC, Mohan K
**Journal:** Cureus (2019)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.4129](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.4129)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2019 Feb 25;11(2):e4129. doi: 10.7759/cureus.4129.

Acute Dysphagia Caused by Sarcomatoid Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Esophagus.

Phelps BJ(1), Tiley YM(1), Skrove JL(2), Berry AC(3), Mohan K(4).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Palmetto General Hospital, Hialeah, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Larkin Community Hospital, South Miami, USA.
(3)Gastroenterology, Larkin Community Hospital, South Miami, USA.
(4)Gastroenterology, Palmetto General Hospital, Hialeah, USA.

Sarcomatoid squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus is a rare etiology of
esophageal cancer. Due to its large polypoid character, patients suffering from
this disease typically present with progressive dysphagia, weight loss,
odynophagia, or chest pain. Risk factors for esophageal cancer include smoking,
alcohol use, and chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease. We present a case of
an elderly female who presented to our hospital with a one-week history of
progressive dysphagia secondary to a large esophageal sarcomatoid squamous cell
carcinoma.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.4129
PMCID: PMC6485518
PMID: 31058012

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
