---
reference_id: "PMID:28448514"
title: A new GTF2I-BRAF fusion mediating MAPK pathway activation in pilocytic astrocytoma.
authors:
- Tomić TT
- Olausson J
- Wilzén A
- Sabel M
- Truvé K
- Sjögren H
- Dósa S
- Tisell M
- Lannering B
- Enlund F
- Martinsson T
- Åman P
- Abel F
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175638
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Astrocytoma/genetics, pathology"
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Copy Number Variations/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Infant
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/genetics
- Male
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism
- Oncogene Fusion
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Transcription Factors, TFII/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new GTF2I-BRAF fusion mediating MAPK pathway activation in pilocytic astrocytoma.
**Authors:** Tomić TT, Olausson J, Wilzén A, Sabel M, Truvé K, Sjögren H, Dósa S, Tisell M, Lannering B, Enlund F, Martinsson T, Åman P, Abel F
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0175638](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0175638)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 27;12(4):e0175638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175638.
eCollection 2017.

A new GTF2I-BRAF fusion mediating MAPK pathway activation in pilocytic
astrocytoma.

Tomić TT(1), Olausson J(1), Wilzén A(1), Sabel M(2), Truvé K(3), Sjögren H(4),
Dósa S(5), Tisell M(6), Lannering B(3), Enlund F(4), Martinsson T(1), Åman P(7),
Abel F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska
Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Children´s Cancer Centre, The Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, Gothenburg,
Sweden.
(3)Bioinformatics core facility, Sahlgrenska academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical chemistry, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Department of Pathology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Sahlgrenska University hospital, Gothenburg,
Sweden.
(7)Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at
the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2017 Sep 7;12(9):e0184715. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184715.

Pilocytic astrocytoma (PA) is the most common pediatric brain tumor. A recurrent
feature of PA is deregulation of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway most often through KIAA1549-BRAF fusion, but also by other BRAF- or
RAF1-gene fusions and point mutations (e.g. BRAFV600E). These features may serve
as diagnostic and prognostic markers, and also facilitate development of
targeted therapy. The aims of this study were to characterize the genetic
alterations underlying the development of PA in six tumor cases, and evaluate
methods for fusion oncogene detection. Using a combined analysis of RNA
sequencing and copy number variation data we identified a new BRAF fusion
involving the 5' gene fusion partner GTF2I (7q11.23), not previously described
in PA. The new GTF2I-BRAF 19-10 fusion was found in one case, while the other
five cases harbored the frequent KIAA1549-BRAF 16-9 fusion gene. Similar to
other BRAF fusions, the GTF2I-BRAF fusion retains an intact BRAF kinase domain
while the inhibitory N-terminal domain is lost. Functional studies on GTF2I-BRAF
showed elevated MAPK pathway activation compared to BRAFWT. Comparing fusion
detection methods, we found Fluorescence in situ hybridization with BRAF break
apart probe as the most sensitive method for detection of different BRAF
rearrangements (GTF2I-BRAF and KIAA1549-BRAF). Our finding of a new BRAF fusion
in PA further emphasis the important role of B-Raf in tumorigenesis of these
tumor types. Moreover, the consistency and growing list of BRAF/RAF gene fusions
suggests these rearrangements to be informative tumor markers in molecular
diagnostics, which could guide future treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175638
PMCID: PMC5407815
PMID: 28448514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
