---
reference_id: "PMID:20074235"
title: "The Epilepsy Genetic Association Database (epiGAD): analysis of 165 genetic association studies, 1996-2008."
authors:
- Tan NC
- Berkovic SF
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02423.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Epilepsy Genetic Association Database (epiGAD): analysis of 165 genetic association studies, 1996-2008.
**Authors:** Tan NC, Berkovic SF
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02423.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02423.x)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2010 Apr;51(4):686-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02423.x. Epub 
2010 Jan 13.

The Epilepsy Genetic Association Database (epiGAD): analysis of 165 genetic 
association studies, 1996-2008.

Tan NC(1), Berkovic SF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore city, 
Singapore. nigel.tan@alumni.nus.edu.sg

We have created the Epilepsy Genetic Association Database (epiGAD, 
http://www.epigad.org, an online database of epilepsy genetic association 
studies. A systematic search using several search engines identified 165 
studies. Herein we analyze the types of studies available, the sample sizes 
used, and the strength of the findings. Common questions examined were 
susceptibility to idiopathic generalized epilepsy, focal epilepsy, or febrile 
seizures, and pharmacogenomic approaches to drug-resistant epilepsy. Sample 
sizes were generally small; 80% of studies had 200 or fewer cases, although more 
recent studies published from 2005-2008 incorporated slightly larger sample 
sizes. No association was judged as "strong" using current criteria for 
assessing genetic associations--this is probably due to inadequate sample sizes. 
Sample sizes need to increase, either by research collaboration or via 
systematic reviews and meta-analyses. We believe epiGAD will facilitate future 
meta-analyses.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02423.x
PMID: 20074235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]