---
reference_id: "PMID:29331873"
title: "Epilepsy and ovarian failure: Two cases of adolescent-onset ovarioleukodystrophy."
authors:
- Herrera-García JD
- Guillen-Martínez V
- Creus-Fernández C
- Mínguez-Castellanos A
- Carnero Pardo C
journal: Clin Neurol Neurosurg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2017.12.027
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Cognition Disorders/etiology
- "Epilepsy/etiology, genetics"
- Eukaryotic Initiation Factor-2B
- Female
- Humans
- "Leukoencephalopathies/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mental Disorders/etiology
- Mutation/genetics
- "Ovarian Diseases/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Paraparesis, Spastic/etiology"
- White Matter/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epilepsy and ovarian failure: Two cases of adolescent-onset ovarioleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Herrera-García JD, Guillen-Martínez V, Creus-Fernández C, Mínguez-Castellanos A, Carnero Pardo C
**Journal:** Clin Neurol Neurosurg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clineuro.2017.12.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2017.12.027)

## Content

1. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2018 Feb;165:94-95. doi:
10.1016/j.clineuro.2017.12.027.  Epub 2018 Jan 5.

Epilepsy and ovarian failure: Two cases of adolescent-onset 
ovarioleukodystrophy.

Herrera-García JD(1), Guillen-Martínez V(2), Creus-Fernández C(2), 
Mínguez-Castellanos A(2), Carnero Pardo C(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain. 
Electronic address: jdavid.herrera.sppa@juntadeandalucia.es.
(2)Neurology Unit, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain.

Vanishing white matter disease (VWM) was described by Van der Knaap in 1996. 
This association with premature ovarian failure is known as 
ovarioleukodystrophy. This is a rare entity caused by a mutation in one of the 
subunits of eukaryotic initiation factor 2B (EIF2B). The onset in adulthood or 
late in adolescence is very infrequent. A 41-years-old woman and her 
37-years-old sister developed epilepsy in association with premature ovarian 
failure at the age of 13 and 18 respectively. The oldest-one started 17 years 
later progressive subcortical cognitive decline with predominant behavioural 
disorders and a progressive spastic paraparesis in association with symmetric 
cystic changes in the with matter of both hemispheres. In both patients we found 
the c.1117C>T (p.Arg373Cys) mutation in homozygosis in the EIF2B4 gen.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2017.12.027
PMID: 29331873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]