---
reference_id: "PMID:36980088"
title: PEX6 Mutation in a Child with Infantile Refsum Disease-A Case Report and Literature Review.
authors:
- Slanina AM
- Coman AE
- Anton-Păduraru DT
- Popa E
- Barbacariu CL
- Novac O
- Petroaie AD
- Bacușcă AI
- Manole M
- Cosmescu A
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/children10030530
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PEX6 Mutation in a Child with Infantile Refsum Disease-A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Slanina AM, Coman AE, Anton-Păduraru DT, Popa E, Barbacariu CL, Novac O, Petroaie AD, Bacușcă AI, Manole M, Cosmescu A
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children10030530](https://doi.org/10.3390/children10030530)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2023 Mar 9;10(3):530. doi: 10.3390/children10030530.

PEX6 Mutation in a Child with Infantile Refsum Disease-A Case Report and 
Literature Review.

Slanina AM(1), Coman AE(1), Anton-Păduraru DT(2), Popa E(1), Barbacariu CL(1), 
Novac O(1), Petroaie AD(1), Bacușcă AI(1), Manole M(1), Cosmescu A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa" University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Iași 700115, Romania.
(2)Department of Mother and Child Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa" University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Iași 700115, Romania.

The aim of this paper is to describe the temporal progression and clinical 
picture of a 2-year-old child with infantile Refsum disease, as well as the 
diagnostic procedures performed; this case presented multiple hematologic, 
metabolic, and developmental complications and progressive disabilities. Genetic 
testing revealed a mutation of the PEX6 (Peroxisomal Biogenesis Factor 6) gene, 
and the metabolic profile was consistent with the diagnosis. Particularly, the 
child also presented altered coagulation factors and developed a spontaneous 
brain hemorrhage. The clinical picture includes several neurological, 
ophthalmological, digestive, cutaneous, and endocrine disorders as a result of 
the very long chain fatty acid accumulation as well as secondary oxidative 
anomalies. The study of metabolic disorders occurring because of genetic 
mutations is a subject of core importance in the pathology of children today. 
The PEX mutations, difficult to identify antepartum, are linked to an array of 
cell anomalies with severe consequences on the patient's status, afflicting 
multiple organs and systems. This is the reason for which our case history may 
be relevant, including a vast number of symptoms, as well as modified biological 
parameters.

DOI: 10.3390/children10030530
PMCID: PMC10047879
PMID: 36980088

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.