---
reference_id: PMID:31729369
title: Genetic variants of calcium and vitamin D metabolism in kidney stone disease.
authors:
- Howles SA
- Wiberg A
- Goldsworthy M
- Bayliss AL
- Gluck AK
- Ng M
- Grout E
- Tanikawa C
- Kamatani Y
- Terao C
- Takahashi A
- Kubo M
- Matsuda K
- Thakker RV
- Turney BW
- Furniss D
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13145-x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Asian People/genetics
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Diacylglycerol Kinase/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Genetic Variation
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genotype
- Humans
- Japan
- "Kidney Calculi/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Prospective Studies
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Calcium-Sensing/genetics, metabolism"
- United Kingdom
- Vitamin D/metabolism
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic variants of calcium and vitamin D metabolism in kidney stone disease.
**Authors:** Howles SA, Wiberg A, Goldsworthy M, Bayliss AL, Gluck AK, Ng M, Grout E, Tanikawa C, Kamatani Y, Terao C, Takahashi A, Kubo M, Matsuda K, Thakker RV, Turney BW, Furniss D
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-019-13145-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13145-x)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2019 Nov 15;10(1):5175. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13145-x.

Genetic variants of calcium and vitamin D metabolism in kidney stone disease.

Howles SA(#)(1)(2), Wiberg A(#)(3), Goldsworthy M(4)(5), Bayliss AL(5), Gluck 
AK(5), Ng M(3), Grout E(4), Tanikawa C(6), Kamatani Y(7), Terao C(7), Takahashi 
A(7), Kubo M(7), Matsuda K(8), Thakker RV(5), Turney BW(4), Furniss D(3).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
sarah.howles@nds.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Academic Endocrine Unit, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK. sarah.howles@nds.ox.ac.uk.
(3)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal 
Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(5)Academic Endocrine Unit, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(6)Laboratory of Genome Technology, Human Genome Centre, University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(7)RIKEN Centre for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(8)Laboratory of Clinical Genome Sequencing, Department of Computational Biology 
and Medical Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2022 May 30;13(1):3115. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30920-5.

Kidney stone disease (nephrolithiasis) is a major clinical and economic health 
burden with a heritability of ~45-60%. We present genome-wide association 
studies in British and Japanese populations and a trans-ethnic meta-analysis 
that include 12,123 cases and 417,378 controls, and identify 20 
nephrolithiasis-associated loci, seven of which are previously unreported. A 
CYP24A1 locus is predicted to affect vitamin D metabolism and five loci, DGKD, 
DGKH, WDR72, GPIC1, and BCR, are predicted to influence calcium-sensing receptor 
(CaSR) signaling. In a validation cohort of only nephrolithiasis patients, the 
CYP24A1-associated locus correlates with serum calcium concentration and a 
number of nephrolithiasis episodes while the DGKD-associated locus correlates 
with urinary calcium excretion. In vitro, DGKD knockdown impairs CaSR-signal 
transduction, an effect rectified with the calcimimetic cinacalcet. Our findings 
indicate that studies of genotype-guided precision-medicine approaches, 
including withholding vitamin D supplementation and targeting vitamin D 
activation or CaSR-signaling pathways in patients with recurrent kidney stones, 
are warranted.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-13145-x
PMCID: PMC6858460
PMID: 31729369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.