---
reference_id: "PMID:38791450"
title: "Multiple Sclerosis: From the Application of Oligoclonal Bands to Novel Potential Biomarkers."
authors:
- Maglio G
- D'Agostino M
- Caronte FP
- Pezone L
- Casamassimi A
- Rienzo M
- Di Zazzo E
- Nappo C
- Medici N
- Molinari AM
- Abbondanza C
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25105412
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Sclerosis: From the Application of Oligoclonal Bands to Novel Potential Biomarkers.
**Authors:** Maglio G, D'Agostino M, Caronte FP, Pezone L, Casamassimi A, Rienzo M, Di Zazzo E, Nappo C, Medici N, Molinari AM, Abbondanza C
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25105412](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25105412)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 15;25(10):5412. doi: 10.3390/ijms25105412.

Multiple Sclerosis: From the Application of Oligoclonal Bands to Novel Potential 
Biomarkers.

Maglio G(1), D'Agostino M(1), Caronte FP(1), Pezone L(1), Casamassimi A(2), 
Rienzo M(3), Di Zazzo E(4), Nappo C(1), Medici N(1)(2), Molinari AM(1)(2), 
Abbondanza C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Clinical and Molecular Pathology, A.O.U. University of Campania 
"Luigi Vanvitelli", 80138 Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 
80138 Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and 
Technologies, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 81100 Caserta, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine and Health Sciences "V. Tiberio", University of 
Molise, 86100 Campobasso, Italy.

Multiple sclerosis is a chronic immune-mediated disorder of the central nervous 
system with a high heterogeneity among patients. In the clinical setting, one of 
the main challenges is a proper and early diagnosis for the prediction of 
disease activity. Current diagnosis is based on the integration of clinical, 
imaging, and laboratory results, with the latter based on the presence of 
intrathecal IgG oligoclonal bands in the cerebrospinal fluid whose detection via 
isoelectric focusing followed by immunoblotting represents the gold standard. 
Intrathecal synthesis can also be evidenced by the measurement of kappa free 
light chains in the cerebrospinal fluid, which has reached similar diagnostic 
accuracy compared to that of oligoclonal bands in the identification of patients 
with multiple sclerosis; moreover, recent studies have also highlighted its 
value for early disease activity prediction. This strategy has significant 
advantages as compared to using oligoclonal band detection, even though some 
issues remain open. Here, we discuss the current methods applied for 
cerebrospinal fluid analysis to achieve the most accurate diagnosis and for 
follow-up and prognosis evaluation. In addition, we describe new promising 
biomarkers, currently under investigation, that could contribute both to a 
better diagnosis of multiple sclerosis and to its monitoring of the therapeutic 
treatment response.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25105412
PMCID: PMC11121866
PMID: 38791450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.