---
reference_id: "PMID:31899521"
title: Secular changes in the progression of clinical markers and patient-reported outcomes in early rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Carpenter L
- Nikiphorou E
- Kiely PDW
- Walsh DA
- Young A
- Norton S
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kez635
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secular changes in the progression of clinical markers and patient-reported outcomes in early rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Carpenter L, Nikiphorou E, Kiely PDW, Walsh DA, Young A, Norton S
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kez635](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kez635)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2020 Sep 1;59(9):2381-2391. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kez635.

Secular changes in the progression of clinical markers and patient-reported 
outcomes in early rheumatoid arthritis.

Carpenter L(1), Nikiphorou E(2), Kiely PDW(3)(4), Walsh DA(5), Young A(6), 
Norton S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Health Psychology Section, King's College LondonUK.
(2)Centre for Rheumatic Diseases, King's College LondonUK.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, St George's University Hospital NHS Foundation 
TrustLondon, UK.
(4)Institute of Medical and Biomedical Education, St George's University of 
London, LondonUK.
(5)Arthritis UK Pain Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(6)Postgraduate Medicine, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To examine secular trends in the progression of clinical and 
patient-reported outcomes in early RA.
METHODS: A total of 2701 patients recruited to the Early Rheumatoid Arthritis 
Study or Early Rheumatoid Arthritis Network with year of diagnosis from 1986 to 
2011. The 5-year progression rates for patients diagnosed at different points in 
time were modelled using mixed-effects regression; 1990, 2002 and 2010, were 
compared. Clinical markers of disease included the 28-joint count DAS and the 
ESR. Patient-reported markers included the HAQ, visual analogue scale of pain 
and global health, and the Short-Form 36.
RESULTS: Statistically significant improvements in both 28-joint count DAS and 
ESR were seen over the 5 years in patients diagnosed with RA compared with those 
diagnosed earlier. By 5 years, 59% of patients with diagnosis in 2010 were 
estimated to reach low disease activity compared with 48% with diagnosis in 2002 
and 32% with diagnosis in 1990. Whilst HAQ demonstrated statistically 
significant improvements, these improvements were small, with similar 
proportions of patients achieving HAQ scores of ≤1.0 by 5 years with a diagnosis 
in 1990 compared with 2010. Levels of the visual analogue scale and the Mental 
Component Scores of the Short-Form 36 indicated similar, statistically 
non-significant levels over the 5 years, irrespective of year diagnosed.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates improvements in inflammatory markers over 
time in early RA, in line with improved treatment strategies. These have not 
translated into similar improvements in patient-reported outcomes relating to 
either physical or mental health.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kez635
PMCID: PMC7449804
PMID: 31899521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]