---
reference_id: "PMID:33506206"
title: "Outcome and molecular analysis of young children with choroid plexus carcinoma treated with non-myeloablative therapy: results from the SJYC07 trial."
authors:
- Liu APY
- Wu G
- Orr BA
- Lin T
- Ashford JM
- Bass JK
- Bowers DC
- Hassall T
- Fisher PG
- Indelicato DJ
- Klimo P Jr
- Boop F
- Conklin H
- Onar-Thomas A
- Merchant TE
- Ellison DW
- Gajjar A
- Robinson GW
journal: Neurooncol Adv
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdaa168
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcome and molecular analysis of young children with choroid plexus carcinoma treated with non-myeloablative therapy: results from the SJYC07 trial.
**Authors:** Liu APY, Wu G, Orr BA, Lin T, Ashford JM, Bass JK, Bowers DC, Hassall T, Fisher PG, Indelicato DJ, Klimo P Jr, Boop F, Conklin H, Onar-Thomas A, Merchant TE, Ellison DW, Gajjar A, Robinson GW
**Journal:** Neurooncol Adv (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/noajnl/vdaa168](https://doi.org/10.1093/noajnl/vdaa168)

## Content

1. Neurooncol Adv. 2020 Dec 15;3(1):vdaa168. doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdaa168.
eCollection 2021 Jan-Dec.

Outcome and molecular analysis of young children with choroid plexus carcinoma
treated with non-myeloablative therapy: results from the SJYC07 trial.

Liu APY(1), Wu G(2), Orr BA(2), Lin T(3), Ashford JM(4), Bass JK(5), Bowers
DC(6), Hassall T(7), Fisher PG(8), Indelicato DJ(9), Klimo P Jr(10)(11)(12)(13),
Boop F(10)(11)(12)(13), Conklin H(4), Onar-Thomas A(3), Merchant TE(14), Ellison
DW(2), Gajjar A(1), Robinson GW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.
(5)Department of Rehabilitation Services, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(6)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(7)Queensland Children's Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(8)Department of Neurology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, USA.
(9)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Florida College of
Medicine-Jacksonville, Semmes Murphey Clinic, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(10)Department of Surgery, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Semmes Murphey
Clinic, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(11)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Semmes Murphey Clinic, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(12)Le Bonheur Neuroscience Institute, Le Bonheur Children's Hospital, Semmes
Murphey Clinic, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(13)Semmes Murphey Clinic, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(14)Department of Radiation Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

BACKGROUND: Choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) is a rare and aggressive tumor of
infancy without a clear treatment strategy. This study describes the outcomes of
children with CPC treated on the multi-institutional phase 2 SJYC07 trial and
reports on the significance of clinical and molecular characteristics.
METHODS: Eligible children <3 years-old with CPC were postoperatively stratified
to intermediate-risk (IR) stratum if disease was localized or high-risk (HR)
stratum, if metastatic. All received high-dose methotrexate-containing induction
chemotherapy. IR-stratum patients received focal irradiation as consolidation
whereas HR-stratum patients received additional chemotherapy. Consolidation was
followed by oral antiangiogenic maintenance regimen. Survival rates and
potential prognostic factors were analyzed.
RESULTS: Thirteen patients (median age: 1.41 years, range: 0.21-2.93) were
enrolled; 5 IR, 8 HR. Gross-total resection or near-total resection was achieved
in ten patients and subtotal resection in 3. Seven patients had TP53-mutant
tumors, including 4 who were germline carriers. Five patients experienced
progression and died of disease; 8 (including 5 HR) are alive without
progression. The 5-year progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival
rates were 61.5 ± 13.5% and 68.4 ± 13.1%. Patients with TP53-wild-type tumors
had a 5-year PFS of 100% as compared to 28.6 ± 17.1% for TP53-mutant tumors (P =
.012). Extent of resection, metastatic status, and use of radiation therapy were
not significantly associated with survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Non-myeloablative high-dose methotrexate-containing therapy with
maximal surgical resection resulted in long-term PFS in more than half of
patients with CPC. TP53-mutational status was the only significant prognostic
variable and should form the basis of risk-stratification in future trials.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press, the Society for
Neuro-Oncology and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/noajnl/vdaa168
PMCID: PMC7813199
PMID: 33506206
