---
reference_id: "PMID:39011315"
title: "Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome in a Patient With Multilevel Cervical Disc Disease: A Case Report."
authors:
- Althobaiti F
- Maghrabi R
- Alharbi N
- Alwadai M
- Almatrafi MK
- Bajammal S
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.64577
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome in a Patient With Multilevel Cervical Disc Disease: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Althobaiti F, Maghrabi R, Alharbi N, Alwadai M, Almatrafi MK, Bajammal S
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.64577](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.64577)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jul 15;16(7):e64577. doi: 10.7759/cureus.64577. eCollection 2024 
Jul.

Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome in a Patient With Multilevel Cervical Disc 
Disease: A Case Report.

Althobaiti F(1), Maghrabi R(1), Alharbi N(1), Alwadai M(1), Almatrafi MK(2), 
Bajammal S(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurology, King Fahad General Hospital, Jeddah, SAU.
(2)Medicine and Surgery, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, SAU.

Anterior spinal artery syndrome (ASAS) is a rare form of spinal cord infarction, 
making its incidence and prevalence difficult to determine. We present the case 
of a 60-year-old woman with multiple vascular risk factors who experienced a 
sudden onset of severe lower limb weakness, raising immediate concerns about 
spinal cord ischemia. Diagnostic evaluations confirmed ASAS, although the exact 
cause and mechanism of her spinal cord infarction remained undetermined. The 
potential presence of significant cervical disc disease suggests 
fibrocartilaginous embolism (FCE) as a possible underlying mechanism, despite 
the lack of direct evidence. This case underscores the importance of clinical 
awareness and timely intervention in patients with similar symptoms and vascular 
risk factors. Early recognition, cause identification, and appropriate 
management are crucial for improving outcomes in spinal cord ischemia, guiding 
specific treatment strategies, and potentially preventing recurrence.

Copyright © 2024, Althobaiti et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.64577
PMCID: PMC11249051
PMID: 39011315

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.