---
reference_id: "PMID:29681101"
title: "A patient with peripheral demyelinating neuropathy, central dysmyelinating leukodystrophy, Waardenburg syndrome, and severe hypoganglionosis associated with a novel SOX10 mutation."
authors:
- Akutsu Y
- Shirai K
- Takei A
- Goto Y
- Aoyama T
- Watanabe A
- Imamura M
- Enokizono T
- Ohto T
- Hori T
- Suzuki K
- Hayashi M
- Masumoto K
- Inoue K
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38657
keywords:
- Biopsy
- "Brain/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Demyelinating Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Exons
- Facies
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Hirschsprung Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Infant
- Intestines/pathology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- SOXE Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Skull/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A patient with peripheral demyelinating neuropathy, central dysmyelinating leukodystrophy, Waardenburg syndrome, and severe hypoganglionosis associated with a novel SOX10 mutation.
**Authors:** Akutsu Y, Shirai K, Takei A, Goto Y, Aoyama T, Watanabe A, Imamura M, Enokizono T, Ohto T, Hori T, Suzuki K, Hayashi M, Masumoto K, Inoue K
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38657](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38657)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 May;176(5):1195-1199. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38657.

A patient with peripheral demyelinating neuropathy, central dysmyelinating 
leukodystrophy, Waardenburg syndrome, and severe hypoganglionosis associated 
with a novel SOX10 mutation.

Akutsu Y(1), Shirai K(1), Takei A(1)(2), Goto Y(3)(4), Aoyama T(3)(4), Watanabe 
A(1), Imamura M(2), Enokizono T(5), Ohto T(5), Hori T(3), Suzuki K(6), Hayashi 
M(7), Masumoto K(4), Inoue K(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tsuchiura Kyodo Hospital, Tsuchiura, Ibaraki, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Neonatology, Tsuchiura Kyodo Hospital, Tsuchiura, Ibaraki, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Tsuchiura Kyodo Hospital, Tsuchiura, 
Ibaraki, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(6)Department of Pathology, Tsuchiura Kyodo Hospital, Tsuchiura, Ibaraki, Japan.
(7)College of Nursing and Nutrition, University of Shukutoku, Chiba, Chiba, 
Japan.
(8)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National 
Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, 
Tokyo, Japan.

In this report, we present the case of a female infant with peripheral 
demyelinating neuropathy, central dysmyelinating leukodystrophy, Waardenburg 
syndrome, and Hirschsprung disease (PCWH) associated with a novel frameshift 
mutation (c.842dupT) in exon 5, the last exon of SOX10. She had severe 
hypoganglionosis in the small intestine and entire colon, and suffered from 
frequent enterocolitis. The persistence of ganglion cells made both the 
diagnosis and treatment difficult in the neonatal period. She also showed 
hypopigmentation of the irises, hair and skin, bilateral sensorineural deafness 
with hypoplastic inner year, severe demyelinating neuropathy with hypotonia, and 
diffuse brain hypomyelination. The p.Ser282GlnfsTer12 mutation presumably 
escapes from nonsense-mediated decay and may generate a dominant-negative 
effect. We suggest that hypoganglionosis can be a variant intestinal 
manifestation associated with PCWH and that hypoganglionosis and aganglionosis 
may share the same pathoetiological mechanism mediated by SOX10 mutations.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38657
PMID: 29681101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]