---
reference_id: "PMID:23239211"
title: Amyloid neuropathies.
authors:
- Shin SC
- Robinson-Papp J
journal: Mt Sinai J Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/msj.21352
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyloid neuropathies.
**Authors:** Shin SC, Robinson-Papp J
**Journal:** Mt Sinai J Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/msj.21352](https://doi.org/10.1002/msj.21352)

## Content

1. Mt Sinai J Med. 2012 Nov-Dec;79(6):733-48. doi: 10.1002/msj.21352.

Amyloid neuropathies.

Shin SC(1), Robinson-Papp J.

Author information:
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Peripheral neuropathy is a common complication of many of the systemic 
amyloidoses. Although the cause of neuropathy is not entirely clear, it is 
likely related to amyloid deposition within the nerve. This may lead to focal, 
multifocal, or diffuse neuropathies involving sensory, motor and/or autonomic 
fibers. The presenting symptoms depend on the distribution of nerves affected. 
One of the most common phenotypes is sensorimotor polyneuropathy, which is 
characterized by symptoms of neuropathic pain, numbness, and in advanced cases 
weakness. Symptoms begin in the feet and ultimately progress to the proximal 
legs and hands. The most common focal neuropathy is a median neuropathy at the 
wrist, clinically known as carpal tunnel syndrome. Carpal tunnel symptoms may 
include pain and sensory disturbances in the lateral palm and fingers; hand 
weakness may ensue if the focal neuropathy is severe. Autonomic neuropathy may 
affect a variety of organ systems such as the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, 
and genitourinary systems. Symptoms may be non-specific making the diagnosis of 
autonomic neuropathy more difficult to identify. However, it is important to 
recognize and distinguish autonomic neuropathy from diseases of the end-organs 
themselves. This article reviews the inherited and acquired amyloidoses that 
affect the peripheral nervous system including familial amyloid polyneuropathy, 
and primary, secondary and senile amyloidosis. We emphasize the clinical 
presentation of the neurologic aspects of these diseases, physical examination 
findings, appropriate diagnostic evaluation, treatment and prognosis.

© 2012 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/msj.21352
PMCID: PMC3531896
PMID: 23239211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]