---
reference_id: "PMID:38339031"
title: "From Acute to Chronic: Unraveling the Pathophysiological Mechanisms of the Progression from Acute Kidney Injury to Acute Kidney Disease to Chronic Kidney Disease."
authors:
- Yeh TH
- Tu KC
- Wang HY
- Chen JY
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25031755
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From Acute to Chronic: Unraveling the Pathophysiological Mechanisms of the Progression from Acute Kidney Injury to Acute Kidney Disease to Chronic Kidney Disease.
**Authors:** Yeh TH, Tu KC, Wang HY, Chen JY
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25031755](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25031755)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Feb 1;25(3):1755. doi: 10.3390/ijms25031755.

From Acute to Chronic: Unraveling the Pathophysiological Mechanisms of the 
Progression from Acute Kidney Injury to Acute Kidney Disease to Chronic Kidney 
Disease.

Yeh TH(1), Tu KC(2), Wang HY(1)(3), Chen JY(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chi Mei Medical 
Center, Tainan 71004, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chi Mei Medical 
Center, Tainan 71004, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Sport Management, College of Leisure and Recreation Management, 
Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan 71710, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Health and Nutrition, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and 
Science, Tainan 71710, Taiwan.

This article provides a thorough overview of the biomarkers, pathophysiology, 
and molecular pathways involved in the transition from acute kidney injury (AKI) 
and acute kidney disease (AKD) to chronic kidney disease (CKD). It categorizes 
the biomarkers of AKI into stress, damage, and functional markers, highlighting 
their importance in early detection, prognosis, and clinical applications. This 
review also highlights the links between renal injury and the pathophysiological 
mechanisms underlying AKI and AKD, including renal hypoperfusion, sepsis, 
nephrotoxicity, and immune responses. In addition, various molecules play 
pivotal roles in inflammation and hypoxia, triggering maladaptive repair, 
mitochondrial dysfunction, immune system reactions, and the cellular senescence 
of renal cells. Key signaling pathways, such as Wnt/β-catenin, TGF-β/SMAD, and 
Hippo/YAP/TAZ, promote fibrosis and impact renal function. The 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) triggers a cascade leading to renal 
fibrosis, with aldosterone exacerbating the oxidative stress and cellular 
changes that promote fibrosis. The clinical evidence suggests that RAS 
inhibitors may protect against CKD progression, especially post-AKI, though more 
extensive trials are needed to confirm their full impact.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25031755
PMCID: PMC10855633
PMID: 38339031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.