---
reference_id: "PMID:25954027"
title: RAN translation at CGG repeats induces ubiquitin proteasome system impairment in models of fragile X-associated tremor ataxia syndrome.
authors:
- Oh SY
- He F
- Krans A
- Frazer M
- Taylor JP
- Paulson HL
- Todd PK
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv165
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
- "Ataxia/genetics, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Drosophila Proteins/genetics
- Drosophila melanogaster
- Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1/genetics
- "Fragile X Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mice
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
- "Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tremor/genetics, pathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
- "Ubiquitin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RAN translation at CGG repeats induces ubiquitin proteasome system impairment in models of fragile X-associated tremor ataxia syndrome.
**Authors:** Oh SY, He F, Krans A, Frazer M, Taylor JP, Paulson HL, Todd PK
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv165](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv165)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Aug 1;24(15):4317-26. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv165. Epub 2015
May  7.

RAN translation at CGG repeats induces ubiquitin proteasome system impairment in 
models of fragile X-associated tremor ataxia syndrome.

Oh SY(1), He F(1), Krans A(1), Frazer M(1), Taylor JP(2), Paulson HL(1), Todd 
PK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA and.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 
Neurology, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA petertod@umich.edu.

Fragile X-associated tremor ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a neurodegenerative 
disorder caused by a CGG trinucleotide repeat expansion in the 5' UTR of the 
Fragile X gene, FMR1. FXTAS is thought to arise primarily from an RNA 
gain-of-function toxicity mechanism. However, recent studies demonstrate that 
the repeat also elicits production of a toxic polyglycine protein, FMRpolyG, via 
repeat-associated non-AUG (RAN)-initiated translation. Pathologically, FXTAS is 
characterized by ubiquitin-positive intranuclear neuronal inclusions, raising 
the possibility that failure of protein quality control pathways could 
contribute to disease pathogenesis. To test this hypothesis, we used Drosophila- 
and cell-based models of CGG-repeat-associated toxicity. In Drosophila, 
ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) impairment led to enhancement of 
CGG-repeat-induced degeneration, whereas overexpression of the chaperone protein 
HSP70 suppressed this toxicity. In transfected mammalian cells, CGG repeat 
expression triggered accumulation of a UPS reporter in a length-dependent 
fashion. To delineate the contributions from CGG repeats as RNA from RAN 
translation-associated toxicity, we enhanced or impaired the production of 
FMRpolyG in these models. Driving expression of FMRpolyG enhanced induction of 
UPS impairment in cell models, while prevention of RAN translation attenuated 
UPS impairment in cells and suppressed the genetic interaction with UPS 
manipulation in Drosophila. Taken together, these findings suggest that CGG 
repeats induce UPS impairment at least in part through activation of RAN 
translation.

Published by Oxford University Press 2015. This work is written by (a) US 
Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv165
PMCID: PMC4492395
PMID: 25954027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]