---
reference_id: "PMID:33666111"
title: "Histologic features of hair follicle neoplasms and cysts in dogs and cats: a diagnostic guide."
authors:
- Wiener DJ
journal: J Vet Diagn Invest
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/1040638721993565
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cat Diseases/diagnosis, pathology"
- Cats
- "Cysts/diagnosis, pathology, veterinary"
- "Dog Diseases/diagnosis, pathology"
- Dogs
- "Hair Diseases/diagnosis, pathology, veterinary"
- Hair Follicle/pathology
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology, veterinary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histologic features of hair follicle neoplasms and cysts in dogs and cats: a diagnostic guide.
**Authors:** Wiener DJ
**Journal:** J Vet Diagn Invest (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1040638721993565](https://doi.org/10.1177/1040638721993565)

## Content

1. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2021 May;33(3):479-497. doi: 10.1177/1040638721993565.
Epub  2021 Mar 5.

Histologic features of hair follicle neoplasms and cysts in dogs and cats: a 
diagnostic guide.

Wiener DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Texas A&M College of Veterinary 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, College Station, TX.

Hair follicle neoplasms occur in many different species, including humans. In 
domestic animals, they are most common in dogs. Most hair follicle tumors are 
benign, but malignant neoplasms can also occur. To diagnose hair follicle 
neoplasms, a thorough knowledge of follicular anatomy is important, given that 
follicular tumors are classified according to the differentiation pattern seen 
in the corresponding part of the normal hair follicle. This review focuses on 
the key diagnostic features of hair follicle tumors and follicular cysts in dogs 
and cats.

DOI: 10.1177/1040638721993565
PMCID: PMC8120078
PMID: 33666111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The author 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.