---
reference_id: "PMID:16382340"
title: Wilson disease.
authors:
- Kitzberger R
- Madl C
- Ferenci P
journal: Metab Brain Dis
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s11011-005-7910-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilson disease.
**Authors:** Kitzberger R, Madl C, Ferenci P
**Journal:** Metab Brain Dis (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11011-005-7910-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-005-7910-8)

## Content

1. Metab Brain Dis. 2005 Dec;20(4):295-302. doi: 10.1007/s11011-005-7910-8.

Wilson disease.

Kitzberger R(1), Madl C, Ferenci P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine IV, Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical 
University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, A 1090, Vienna, Austria.

Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder of copper 
metabolism, resulting in pathological accumulation of copper in many organs and 
tissues. The hallmarks of the disease are the presence of liver disease, 
neurologic symptoms, and Kayser-Fleischer corneal rings. The leading neurologic 
symptoms in WD are dysathria, dyspraxia, ataxia, and Parkinsonian-like 
extrapyramidal signs. Changes in the basal ganglia in brain magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) are characteristic features of the disease. In presence of liver 
cirrhosis, some features may resemble hepatic encephalopathy. Symptoms and MRI 
abnormalities may be fully reversible on treatment with zinc or copper 
chelators. Improvement can be monitored by serial recording of brain-stem-evoked 
responses. The basic defect is an impaired trafficking of copper in hepatocytes. 
ATP7B is the gene product of the WD gene located on chromosome 13 and resides in 
hepatocytes in the trans-Golgi network, transporting copper into the secretory 
pathway for incorporation into apoceruloplasmin and excretion into the bile. 
While about 40% of patients preset with neurologic symptoms, little is known 
about the role of copper and ATP7B in the central nervous system. In some brain 
areas, like in the pineal gland, ATP7B is expressed and functionally active. 
Increasing evidence supports an important role for metals in neurobiology. Two 
proteins related to neurodegeneration are copper-binding proteins (1) the 
amyloid precursor protein (APP), a protein related to Alzheimer's disease, and 
(2) the Prion protein, related to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. A major source of 
free-radical production in the brain derives from copper. To prevent 
metal-mediated oxidative stress, cells have evolved complex metal transport 
systems. APP is a major regulator of neuronal copper homeostasis and has a 
copper-binding domain (CuBD). The surface location of this site, structural 
homology of CuBD to copper chaperones, and the role of APP in neuronal copper 
homeostasis are consistent with the CuBD acting as a neuronal 
metallotransporter. There are several copper-containing enzymes in the brain, 
like dopamine beta hydroxylase or Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1). Their 
function may be altered because of copper overload. WD appears to be associated 
with a dopaminergic deficit. Mutations in the SOD1gene cause familial 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Survival of transgenic mice with a mutant SOD1 
which fails to incorporate Cu((2+)) in its active site was improved by copper 
depletion. Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder in 
which copper pathologically accumulates primarily within the liver and 
subsequently in the neurologic system and many other organs and tissues. 
Presence of liver disease, neurologic symptoms, and Kayser-Fleischer corneal 
rings are the hallmarks of the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-005-7910-8
PMID: 16382340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]