---
reference_id: "PMID:27190888"
title: Ainhum - A Rare Case Report.
authors:
- Prabhu R
- Kannan NS
- Vinoth S
- Praveen CB
journal: J Clin Diagn Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2016/17556.7648
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ainhum - A Rare Case Report.
**Authors:** Prabhu R, Kannan NS, Vinoth S, Praveen CB
**Journal:** J Clin Diagn Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.7860/JCDR/2016/17556.7648](https://doi.org/10.7860/JCDR/2016/17556.7648)

## Content

1. J Clin Diagn Res. 2016 Apr;10(4):PD17-8. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2016/17556.7648.
Epub  2016 Apr 1.

Ainhum - A Rare Case Report.

Prabhu R(1), Kannan NS(2), Vinoth S(3), Praveen CB(3).

Author information:
(1)Senior Resident, Department of General Surgery, Mahatma Gandhi Medical 
College & Research Institute, Sri Balaji Vidyapeeth , Pondicherry, India .
(2)Associate Professor, Department of General Surgery, Mahatma Gandhi Medical 
College & Research Institute, Sri Balaji Vidyapeeth , Pondicherry, India .
(3)Assistant Professor, Department of General Surgery, Mahatma Gandhi Medical 
College & Research Institute, Sri Balaji Vidyapeeth , Pondicherry, India .

The term 'AINHUM' is derived from the African word meaning 'to saw or cut'. True 
ainhum otherwise called dactylolysis spontanea is a condition involving soft 
tissue or digits with constricting rings commonly presenting in fifth toes, 
usually bilateral. It is to be differentiated from Pseudo-ainhum that occurs 
secondary to some hereditary and nonhereditary diseases that lead to annular 
constriction of digits. We report a rare case of true ainhum involving the left 
fourth toe only. It is a very rare case and a very few were reported worldwide. 
The highest incidence of ainhum has been reported in South Africa and South 
America. It is rarely reported in India. Ainhum when diagnosed and treated in 
early stages can be prevented from progressing to mutilating deformities.

DOI: 10.7860/JCDR/2016/17556.7648
PMCID: PMC4866186
PMID: 27190888