---
reference_id: "PMID:35298329"
title: "Artificial tanning devices (Sunbeds): where do we stand?"
authors:
- Morais P
journal: Cutan Ocul Toxicol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/15569527.2022.2050748
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Artificial tanning devices (Sunbeds): where do we stand?
**Authors:** Morais P
**Journal:** Cutan Ocul Toxicol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15569527.2022.2050748](https://doi.org/10.1080/15569527.2022.2050748)

## Content

1. Cutan Ocul Toxicol. 2022 Jun;41(2):123-128. doi:
10.1080/15569527.2022.2050748.  Epub 2022 Mar 17.

Artificial tanning devices (Sunbeds): where do we stand?

Morais P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Unit, Hospital da Luz Clínica de Amarante, Amarante, Portugal.
(2)Dermatology Unit, Trofa Saúde Hospital de Alfena, Valongo, Portugal.

Exposure to ultraviolet radiation emitted by indoor tanning devices (sunbeds) 
has well-documented negative effects on human health, but no clear benefit 
beyond cosmetic outcomes. Sunbed use is responsible for a significant proportion 
of both melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancers, especially in patients exposed 
to this practice in early life, premature skin ageing, immunosuppression, skin 
burns, and eye damage. Artificial tanning is now seen as a public health issue. 
In this review we discuss the potential additive effect of indoor tanning, 
misleading facts regarding sunbed benefit, safety concerns and negative effects 
on human health, indoor tanning legislation and current position of several 
international organisations, and the impact of some policies adopted in order to 
mitigate the effects of this dangerous practice.

DOI: 10.1080/15569527.2022.2050748
PMID: 35298329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]