---
reference_id: PMID:24395055
title: "Celiac disease: a review."
authors:
- Guandalini S
- Assiri A
journal: JAMA Pediatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.3858
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Celiac Disease/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Child
- "Food Hypersensitivity/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Glutens/adverse effects
- Humans
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Celiac disease: a review.
**Authors:** Guandalini S, Assiri A
**Journal:** JAMA Pediatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.3858](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.3858)

## Content

1. JAMA Pediatr. 2014 Mar;168(3):272-8. doi: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.3858.

Celiac disease: a review.

Guandalini S(1), Assiri A(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois2Section of Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, and Prince Abdullah Bin Khalid 
Celiac Disease Center, King Saud Uni.
(2)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, and Prince 
Abdullah Bin Khalid Celiac Disease Center, King Saud University Faculty of 
Medicine, and King Khalid University Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Triggered by the ingestion of gluten in genetically predisposed individuals, 
celiac disease is the most common genetically based food intolerance in the 
world, with a prevalence among approximately 1% of the general population. This 
enteropathy may appear at any age and is characterized by a wide variety of 
clinical signs and symptoms that go well beyond the gastrointestinal tract. In 
young children, gastrointestinal presentations are common and include chronic 
diarrhea, failure to thrive, and abdominal distention; however, extraintestinal 
manifestations are becoming increasingly more common. They include numerous 
conditions such as dermatitis herpetiformis, anemia, dental enamel hypoplasia, 
recurrent oral aphthae, short stature, osteoporosis, arthritis, neurologic 
problems, unexplained elevation of transaminase levels, and female infertility. 
Therefore, diagnosing celiac disease requires a high degree of suspicion, 
followed by correct screening and a confirmatory test with an intestinal biopsy. 
After diagnosis, a strict gluten-free diet must be followed, which in most cases 
will bring a marked improvement of symptoms. However, there are important 
compliance and quality-of-life problems, especially in adolescents.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.3858
PMID: 24395055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]