---
reference_id: "PMID:34569297"
title: Using platelet-rich fibrin scaffolds with diced cartilage graft in the treatment of empty nose syndrome.
authors:
- Chang CF
journal: Ear Nose Throat J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/01455613211045567
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Using platelet-rich fibrin scaffolds with diced cartilage graft in the treatment of empty nose syndrome.
**Authors:** Chang CF
**Journal:** Ear Nose Throat J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/01455613211045567](https://doi.org/10.1177/01455613211045567)

## Content

1. Ear Nose Throat J. 2024 Mar;103(3):NP168-NP172. doi:
10.1177/01455613211045567.  Epub 2021 Sep 25.

Using platelet-rich fibrin scaffolds with diced cartilage graft in the treatment 
of empty nose syndrome.

Chang CF(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Jen-Ai Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Rong Hsing Research Center For Translational Medicine, National Chung Hsing 
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Basic Medical Education Center, Central Taiwan University of Science and 
Technology, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Education and Research, Jen-Ai Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan.

Empty nose syndrome (ENS) is a rare entity in patients who undergo sinonasal 
surgery due to over-resection of the turbinate. This syndrome leads to 
debilitating symptoms that include dry nose, painful nasal breathing, 
paradoxical nasal obstruction, crusting, and sleep disorder. The goal of 
surgical treatment is to reestablish the volume of the turbinates to 
rehabilitate the nasal resistance. Endonasal microplasty with cartilage implants 
on the lateral wall of the nasal cavity is useful for creating the neoturbinate. 
Here, we present 2 cases that describe the management of empty nose syndrome by 
endonasal microplasty using platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) scaffolds embedded with a 
diced cartilage graft. The integration of the PRF scaffolds with diced cartilage 
efficiently facilitated the reestablishment of the neoturbinate. This autologous 
biomaterial is suitable for the treatment of ENS.

DOI: 10.1177/01455613211045567
PMID: 34569297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.