---
reference_id: "PMID:37508575"
title: Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSCs) in Ovarian Cancer-Looking Back and Forward.
authors:
- Okła K
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12141912
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells/pathology
- Ovarian Neoplasms/pathology
- Myeloid Cells
- Immunosuppression Therapy
- Immune Tolerance
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSCs) in Ovarian Cancer-Looking Back and Forward.
**Authors:** Okła K
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12141912](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12141912)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Jul 22;12(14):1912. doi: 10.3390/cells12141912.

Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSCs) in Ovarian Cancer-Looking Back and 
Forward.

Okła K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The First Department of Oncologic Gynecology and Gynecology, Medical 
University of Lublin, 20-081 Lublin, Poland.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) play a significant role in the immune 
system and have been extensively studied in cancer. MDSCs are a heterogeneous 
population of myeloid cells that accumulate in the tumor microenvironment. 
Consequently, the high abundance of these cells often leads to 
immunosuppression, tumor growth, treatment failure, and poor prognosis. Ovarian 
cancer ranks fifth in cancer deaths among women, accounting for more deaths than 
any other cancer of the female genital tract. Currently, there is a lack of 
effective clinical strategies for the treatment of ovarian cancer. Although 
several studies underline the negative role of human MDSCs in ovarian cancer, 
this topic is still understudied. The works on MDSCs are summarized here, along 
with an explanation of why focusing on these cells would be a promising approach 
for treating ovarian cancer patients.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12141912
PMCID: PMC10377883
PMID: 37508575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.