---
reference_id: "PMID:37689673"
title: Prevalence of propionic acidemia in China.
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Peng C
- Wang L
- Chen S
- Wang J
- Tian Z
- Wang C
- Chen X
- Zhu S
- Zhang GF
- Wang Y
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02898-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of propionic acidemia in China.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Peng C, Wang L, Chen S, Wang J, Tian Z, Wang C, Chen X, Zhu S, Zhang GF, Wang Y
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02898-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02898-w)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Sep 9;18(1):281. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02898-w.

Prevalence of propionic acidemia in China.

Zhang Y(1), Peng C(1), Wang L(1), Chen S(1), Wang J(1), Tian Z(1), Wang C(2)(3), 
Chen X(4)(5)(6)(7), Zhu S(8)(9), Zhang GF(10)(11), Wang Y(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)School of Clinical Medicine, Jining Medical University, Shandong, 272067, 
China.
(2)School of Basic Medicine, Jining Medical University, 133 Hehua Road, 
Shandong, 272067, China.
(3)Jining Key Laboratory of Pharmacology, Jining Medical University, Shandong, 
272067, China.
(4)Surgical Research Lab, Department of Surgery, Cooper University Hospital, 
Camden, NJ, 08103, USA.
(5)Coriell Institute for Medical Research, Camden, NJ, 08103, USA.
(6)MD Anderson Cancer Center at Cooper, Camden, NJ, 08103, USA.
(7)Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, Camden, NJ, 08103, USA.
(8)School of Basic Medicine, Jining Medical University, 133 Hehua Road, 
Shandong, 272067, China. zhusuhong99@126.com.
(9)Jining Key Laboratory of Pharmacology, Jining Medical University, Shandong, 
272067, China. zhusuhong99@126.com.
(10)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute and Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and 
Metabolism Center, Duke University Medical Center, Carmichael Building 48-203, 
300 North Duke Street, Durham, NC, 27701, USA. Guofang.zhang@duke.edu.
(11)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism Nutrition, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27701, USA. Guofang.zhang@duke.edu.
(12)School of Basic Medicine, Jining Medical University, 133 Hehua Road, 
Shandong, 272067, China. wangyou0537@163.com.
(13)Jining Key Laboratory of Pharmacology, Jining Medical University, Shandong, 
272067, China. wangyou0537@163.com.

Propionic acidemia (PA) is a rare autosomal recessive congenital disease caused 
by mutations in the PCCA or PCCB genes. Elevated propionylcarnitine, 
2-methylcitric acid (2MCA), propionylglycine, glycine and 3-hydroxypropionate 
can be used to diagnose PA. Early-onset PA can lead to acute deterioration, 
metabolic acidosis, and hyperammonemia shortly after birth, which can result in 
high mortality and disability. Late-onset cases of PA have a more heterogeneous 
clinical spectra, including growth retardation, intellectual disability, 
seizures, basal ganglia lesions, pancreatitis, cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, 
adaptive immune defects, rhabdomyolysis, optic atrophy, hearing loss, premature 
ovarian failure, and chronic kidney disease. Timely and accurate diagnosis and 
appropriate treatment are crucial to saving patients' lives and improving their 
prognosis. Recently, the number of reported PA cases in China has increased due 
to advanced diagnostic techniques and increased research attention. However, an 
overview of PA prevalence in China is lacking. Therefore, this review provides 
an overview of recent advances in the pathogenesis, diagnostic strategies, and 
treatment of PA, including epidemiological data on PA in China. The most 
frequent variants among Chinese PA patients are c.2002G > A in PCCA and 
c.1301C > T in PCCB, which are often associated with severe clinical symptoms. 
At present, liver transplantation from a living (heterozygous parental) donor is 
a better option for treating PA in China, especially for those exhibiting a 
severe metabolic phenotype and/or end-organ dysfunction. However, a 
comprehensive risk-benefit analysis should be conducted as an integral part of 
the decision-making process. This review will provide valuable information for 
the medical care of Chinese patients with PA.

© 2023. Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02898-w
PMCID: PMC10493020
PMID: 37689673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.