---
reference_id: "PMID:22612755"
title: "Management of spasticity in progressive multiple sclerosis: efficacy of repeated intrathecal triamcinolone acetonide administration."
authors:
- Abu-Mugheisib M
- Benecke R
- Zettl UK
journal: Curr Pharm Des
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2174/138161212802502251
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of spasticity in progressive multiple sclerosis: efficacy of repeated intrathecal triamcinolone acetonide administration.
**Authors:** Abu-Mugheisib M, Benecke R, Zettl UK
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Des (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2174/138161212802502251](https://doi.org/10.2174/138161212802502251)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18(29):4564-9. doi: 10.2174/138161212802502251.

Management of spasticity in progressive multiple sclerosis: efficacy of repeated 
intrathecal triamcinolone acetonide administration.

Abu-Mugheisib M(1), Benecke R, Zettl UK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rostock, Gehlsheimer Str. 20, D - 
18147 Rostock, Germany. mazen.abu-mugheisib@med.uni-rostock.de

Multiple sclerosis (MS) as a chronic disease presents a vast variability of 
neurological symptoms. Spasticity is one of the most common symptoms. The 
principle indication to treat spasticity is disability or handicap of 
capabilities. All pharmacological methods are attributed to a basic physical 
management. Different effective treatment schemes have been established. 
Nevertheless the value of intrathecal triamcinolone acetonid (TCA) in MS is 
still a controversial issue. Bearing in mind that only limited data are 
available and due to its invasive application form repeated TCA administration 
can be recommended as one therapy option in MS with a progressive clinical 
course and predominantly spinal symptoms.

DOI: 10.2174/138161212802502251
PMID: 22612755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]