---
reference_id: "PMID:29198720"
title: Mutations in TUBB4B Cause a Distinctive Sensorineural Disease.
authors:
- Luscan R
- Mechaussier S
- Paul A
- Tian G
- Gérard X
- Defoort-Dellhemmes S
- Loundon N
- Audo I
- Bonnin S
- LeGargasson JF
- Dumont J
- Goudin N
- Garfa-Traoré M
- Bras M
- Pouliet A
- Bessières B
- Boddaert N
- Sahel JA
- Lyonnet S
- Kaplan J
- Cowan NJ
- Rozet JM
- Marlin S
- Perrault I
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.10.010
keywords:
- Adult
- Binding Sites/genetics
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Leber Congenital Amaurosis/genetics
- Male
- "Microtubules/genetics, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism
- "Tubulin/genetics, metabolism"
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in TUBB4B Cause a Distinctive Sensorineural Disease.
**Authors:** Luscan R, Mechaussier S, Paul A, Tian G, Gérard X, Defoort-Dellhemmes S, Loundon N, Audo I, Bonnin S, LeGargasson JF, Dumont J, Goudin N, Garfa-Traoré M, Bras M, Pouliet A, Bessières B, Boddaert N, Sahel JA, Lyonnet S, Kaplan J, Cowan NJ, Rozet JM, Marlin S, Perrault I
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.10.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.10.010)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Dec 7;101(6):1006-1012. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.10.010. 
Epub 2017 Nov 30.

Mutations in TUBB4B Cause a Distinctive Sensorineural Disease.

Luscan R(1), Mechaussier S(2), Paul A(1), Tian G(3), Gérard X(2), 
Defoort-Dellhemmes S(4), Loundon N(5), Audo I(6), Bonnin S(7), LeGargasson 
JF(8), Dumont J(9), Goudin N(10), Garfa-Traoré M(10), Bras M(11), Pouliet A(12), 
Bessières B(13), Boddaert N(14), Sahel JA(6), Lyonnet S(1), Kaplan J(2), Cowan 
NJ(3), Rozet JM(15), Marlin S(16), Perrault I(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Embryology and Genetics of Human Malformation, INSERM UMR1163, 
Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris Descartes University, 75015 
Paris, France.
(2)Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), INSERM UMR1163, Institute of 
Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris Descartes University, 75015 Paris, France.
(3)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Langone Medical 
Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(4)Service d'Exploration de la Vision et Neuro-ophtalmologie, Pôle d'Imagerie et 
Explorations Fonctionnelles, CHRU de Lille, Hôpital Roger Salengro, 59000 Lille, 
France.
(5)Pediatric ENT Department, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP and Paris 
Descartes University, 75015 Paris, France.
(6)Centre Hospitalier National d'Ophtalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, 75012 Paris, 
France.
(7)Ophthalmology Department, Hôpital Lariboisière, APHP and Paris Diderot 
University, 75010 Paris, France.
(8)Visual Exploration Department, Hôpital Lariboisière, APHP, Paris, Diderot 
University, 75010 Paris, France.
(9)Cell Division and Reproduction, Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS, University 
Paris Diderot, 75013 Paris, France.
(10)Cell Imaging Core Facility of the Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker 
INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633 Imagine and Paris Descartes University, 75015 Paris, 
France.
(11)Bioinformatics Platform, Imagine and Paris Descartes University, 75015 
Paris, France.
(12)Genomics Platform, Imagine and Paris Descartes University, 75015 Paris, 
France.
(13)Unité d'Embryo-foetopathologie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP and 
Paris Descartes University, 75015 Paris, France.
(14)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, 
Paris, Descartes University, 75015 Paris, France.
(15)Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), INSERM UMR1163, Institute of 
Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris Descartes University, 75015 Paris, France. 
Electronic address: jean-michel.rozet@inserm.fr.
(16)Laboratory of Embryology and Genetics of Human Malformation, INSERM UMR1163, 
Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris Descartes University, 75015 
Paris, France; Centre de Référence des Surdités Génétiques, Genetic Department, 
Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP and Paris Descartes University, 75015 
Paris, France. Electronic address: sandrine.marlin@aphp.fr.

Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is a neurodegenerative disease of photoreceptor 
cells that causes blindness within the first year of life. It occasionally 
occurs in syndromic metabolic diseases and plurisystemic ciliopathies. Using 
exome sequencing in a multiplex family and three simplex case subjects with an 
atypical association of LCA with early-onset hearing loss, we identified two 
heterozygous mutations affecting Arg391 in β-tubulin 4B isotype-encoding 
(TUBB4B). Inspection of the atomic structure of the microtubule (MT) 
protofilament reveals that the β-tubulin Arg391 residue contributes to a binding 
pocket that interacts with α-tubulin contained in the longitudinally adjacent 
αβ-heterodimer, consistent with a role in maintaining MT stability. Functional 
analysis in cultured cells overexpressing FLAG-tagged wild-type or mutant TUBB4B 
as well as in primary skin-derived fibroblasts showed that the mutant TUBB4B is 
able to fold, form αβ-heterodimers, and co-assemble into the endogenous MT 
lattice. However, the dynamics of growing MTs were consistently altered, showing 
that the mutations have a significant dampening impact on normal MT growth. Our 
findings provide a link between sensorineural disease and anomalies in MT 
behavior and describe a syndromic LCA unrelated to ciliary dysfunction.

Copyright © 2017 American Society of Human Genetics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.10.010
PMCID: PMC5812887
PMID: 29198720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]