---
reference_id: "PMID:31897866"
title: Spaceflight-Induced Bone Tissue Changes that Affect Bone Quality and Increase Fracture Risk.
authors:
- Coulombe JC
- Senwar B
- Ferguson VL
journal: Curr Osteoporos Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s11914-019-00540-y
keywords:
- Aerospace Medicine
- Animals
- Bone Density
- Bone Remodeling
- Bone and Bones
- "Calcification, Physiologic"
- Cancellous Bone
- Collagen
- Cortical Bone
- Fracture Healing
- "Fractures, Bone"
- Humans
- Mice
- Osteoblasts
- Osteoclasts
- Osteocytes
- Osteoporosis
- Porosity
- Rats
- Space Flight
- United States
- United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration
- Weightlessness
- Weightlessness Simulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spaceflight-Induced Bone Tissue Changes that Affect Bone Quality and Increase Fracture Risk.
**Authors:** Coulombe JC, Senwar B, Ferguson VL
**Journal:** Curr Osteoporos Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11914-019-00540-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11914-019-00540-y)

## Content

1. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2020 Feb;18(1):1-12. doi: 10.1007/s11914-019-00540-y.

Spaceflight-Induced Bone Tissue Changes that Affect Bone Quality and Increase 
Fracture Risk.

Coulombe JC(1)(2)(3), Senwar B(1)(2)(3), Ferguson VL(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Colorado, UCB 427, 
Boulder, CO, 80309, USA.
(2)BioFrontiers Institute, University of Colorado, UCB 596, Boulder, CO, 80309, 
USA.
(3)BioServe Space Technologies, University of Colorado, UCB 429, Boulder, CO, 
80309, USA.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Colorado, UCB 427, 
Boulder, CO, 80309, USA. Virginia.Ferguson@colorado.edu.
(5)BioFrontiers Institute, University of Colorado, UCB 596, Boulder, CO, 80309, 
USA. Virginia.Ferguson@colorado.edu.
(6)BioServe Space Technologies, University of Colorado, UCB 429, Boulder, CO, 
80309, USA. Virginia.Ferguson@colorado.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Bone mineral density and systemic factors are used to assess 
skeletal health in astronauts. Yet, even in a general population, these measures 
fail to accurately predict when any individual will fracture. This review 
considers how long-duration human spaceflight requires evaluation of additional 
bone structural and material quality measures that contribute to 
microgravity-induced skeletal fragility.
RECENT FINDINGS: In both humans and small animal models following spaceflight, 
bone mass is compromised via reduced bone formation and elevated resorption 
levels. Concurrently, bone structural quality (e.g., trabecular 
microarchitecture) is diminished and the quality of bone material is reduced via 
impaired tissue mineralization, maturation, and maintenance (e.g., mediated by 
osteocytes). Bone structural and material quality are both affected by 
microgravity and may, together, jeopardize astronaut operational readiness and 
lead to increased fracture risk upon return to gravitational loading. Future 
studies need to directly evaluate how bone quality combines with diminished bone 
mass to influence bone strength and toughness (e.g., resistance to fracture). 
Bone quality assessment promises to identify novel biomarkers and therapeutic 
targets.

DOI: 10.1007/s11914-019-00540-y
PMID: 31897866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]