---
reference_id: "PMID:39696474"
title: "Efficacy and safety of azathioprine in patients with Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: a case series from Peking Union Medical College Hospital."
authors:
- Xu Q
- Jin L
- Ou C
- Xu T
- Yang Z
- Zhang R
- Liu S
- Yan X
- Ruan G
- Li J
- Li J
journal: BMC Pharmacol Toxicol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40360-024-00825-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of azathioprine in patients with Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: a case series from Peking Union Medical College Hospital.
**Authors:** Xu Q, Jin L, Ou C, Xu T, Yang Z, Zhang R, Liu S, Yan X, Ruan G, Li J, Li J
**Journal:** BMC Pharmacol Toxicol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40360-024-00825-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40360-024-00825-8)

## Content

1. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2024 Dec 18;25(1):96. doi: 10.1186/s40360-024-00825-8.

Efficacy and safety of azathioprine in patients with Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: 
a case series from Peking Union Medical College Hospital.

Xu Q(1), Jin L(2), Ou C(1), Xu T(1), Yang Z(3), Zhang R(4), Liu S(5), Yan X(1), 
Ruan G(1), Li J(6), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, No.1 Shuaifuyuan Wangfujing Dongcheng District, 
Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, People's Hospital of Rizhao, Rizhao, 276800, 
China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, 100730, China.
(4)Department of Hematology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital, Beijing, 100730, China.
(5)Department of Allergy, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital, Beijing, 100730, China.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, No.1 Shuaifuyuan Wangfujing Dongcheng District, 
Beijing, 100730, China. liji0235@pumch.cn.

BACKGROUND: Cronkhite-Canada syndrome (CCS) is a rare non-hereditary chronic 
inflammatory disease characteristic of gastrointestinal polyps and ectodermal 
abnormalities. Corticosteroid therapy is the mainstay medication for CCS. Few 
studies indicated immunosuppressants might be the choices for patients with 
steroid refractory, steroid dependent or intolerant.
AIM: To examine the efficacy and safety of azathioprine (AZA) in CCS patients.
METHOD: We retrospectively reviewed the records of 12 CCS patients treated with 
azathioprine between July 2014 and October 2023 and the clinical data including 
demographic characteristics, treatment regimen and adverse events were 
subsequently collected and analyzed. The genetic variants of TPMT and NUDT15 
genes were also retrospectively assessed using sanger sequencing in 11 patients.
OUTCOME: All patients were in active stage at baseline and 9 patients (75%) were 
in combination with corticosteroid. On account of the indication, 6 patients 
were steroid dependent or intolerant and another 6 patients needed augmentation 
therapy. The target dose of AZA was 1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg per day. Ten (83.3%) 
patients achieved clinical response, of whom 3 cases had endoscopic remission 
and 5 cases had endoscopic improvement respectively. Three (25%) patients 
suffered from pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, liver dysfunction and leukopenia, 
respectively, resulting in cessation of AZA in the initial 3 months. Four 
heterozygous missense variants of TPMT and NUDT15 were identified in four 
patients. One patient who had TPMT*6 and took AZA with the dose of 2.04 mg/kg 
per day suffered from severe leukopenia.
CONCLUSION: Azathioprine might be a good alternative medication in CCS patients 
who are steroid dependent or intolerant, or need augmentation therapy. The 
adverse events should be closely monitored especially myelosuppression and the 
tests of TPMT and NUDT15 genotypes before therapy may be helpful for medication 
guidance.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40360-024-00825-8
PMCID: PMC11656886
PMID: 39696474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Written informed consent was obtained from each patient, and this 
study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital (I-22PJ1077). Consent for publication: All individuals provided 
consent for publication as part of the informed consent process. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests.