---
reference_id: "PMID:39072425"
title: The first report of leukocytoclastic vasculitis induced by once-weekly subcutaneous semaglutide.
authors:
- Pinheiro MM
- de Souza LG
- Nunes GP
- Martin IF
- de Oliveira YU
- Pinheiro FMM
- Costa LN
- Caprio M
- Della-Morte D
- Infante M
journal: Curr Med Res Opin
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/03007995.2024.2386047
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Glucagon-Like Peptides/adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Aged
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/drug therapy, complications"
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/chemically induced, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Injections, Subcutaneous"
- "Hypoglycemic Agents/adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Semaglutide
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The first report of leukocytoclastic vasculitis induced by once-weekly subcutaneous semaglutide.
**Authors:** Pinheiro MM, de Souza LG, Nunes GP, Martin IF, de Oliveira YU, Pinheiro FMM, Costa LN, Caprio M, Della-Morte D, Infante M
**Journal:** Curr Med Res Opin (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03007995.2024.2386047](https://doi.org/10.1080/03007995.2024.2386047)

## Content

1. Curr Med Res Opin. 2024 Sep;40(9):1525-1531. doi:
10.1080/03007995.2024.2386047.  Epub 2024 Aug 2.

The first report of leukocytoclastic vasculitis induced by once-weekly
subcutaneous semaglutide.

Pinheiro MM(1), de Souza LG(2), Nunes GP(1), Martin IF(1), de Oliveira YU(1),
Pinheiro FMM(3), Costa LN(4), Caprio M(5), Della-Morte D(6), Infante M(7).

Author information:
(1)UNIVAG, Centro Universitário de Várzea Grande, Várzea Grande, MT, Brazil.
(2)UFMT, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, MT, Brazil.
(3)Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina de São Paulo, Universidade de
São Paulo-USP, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)LAPAT Anatomia Patológica e Citopatologia, Cuiabá, MT, Brazil.
(5)Department of Human Sciences and Promotion of the Quality of Life &
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Endocrinology, San Raffaele Open University & San
Raffaele Research Institute-IRCCS San Raffaele, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Section of Clinical Nutrition and
Nutrigenomics, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(7)Section of Diabetes & Metabolic Disorders, UniCamillus, Saint Camillus
International University of Health Sciences, Rome, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Leukocytoclastic vasculitis (LCV) is a small vessel vasculitis
involving arterioles, capillaries and postcapillary venules. LCV is generally
confined to the skin, with extracutaneous manifestations occurring less
frequently. LCV has multiple potential etiologies. Indeed, histological LCV can
be found in anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis,
immune complex vasculitis, vasculitis associated with systemic diseases (i.e.
sarcoidosis, Sjögren's syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupus
erythematosus), or in vasculitis associated with cancer, infections, sepsis and
use of certain medications. LCV can also be idiopathic in up to 50% of cases.
CASE REPORT: Semaglutide is a glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist
used for management of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), obesity and overweight
associated with one or more weight-related comorbidities. A case of drug-induced
LCV has already been described with the use of once-daily oral semaglutide.
Herein, we describe the first case of skin-limited LCV induced by once-weekly
subcutaneous semaglutide in a 73-year-old man with T2DM, who experienced the
complete resolution of the skin lesions shortly after the discontinuation of
semaglutide therapy.
CONCLUSION: Future prospective studies, adverse event reporting and
post-marketing surveillance will certainly contribute to establishing if LCV
represents a less rare than expected side effect of both oral and subcutaneous
semaglutide formulations.

DOI: 10.1080/03007995.2024.2386047
PMID: 39072425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
