---
reference_id: "PMID:39381137"
title: NLRP3 inflammasome activation and pyroptosis are dispensable for tau pathology.
authors:
- Paesmans I
- Van Kolen K
- Vandermeeren M
- Shih PY
- Wuyts D
- Boone F
- Garcia Sanchez S
- Grauwen K
- Van Hauwermeiren F
- Van Opdenbosch N
- Lamkanfi M
- van Loo G
- Bottelbergs A
journal: Front Aging Neurosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1459134
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NLRP3 inflammasome activation and pyroptosis are dispensable for tau pathology.
**Authors:** Paesmans I, Van Kolen K, Vandermeeren M, Shih PY, Wuyts D, Boone F, Garcia Sanchez S, Grauwen K, Van Hauwermeiren F, Van Opdenbosch N, Lamkanfi M, van Loo G, Bottelbergs A
**Journal:** Front Aging Neurosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnagi.2024.1459134](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2024.1459134)

## Content

1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2024 Sep 24;16:1459134. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1459134.
 eCollection 2024.

NLRP3 inflammasome activation and pyroptosis are dispensable for tau pathology.

Paesmans I(1), Van Kolen K(2), Vandermeeren M(2), Shih PY(2), Wuyts D(2), Boone
F(3)(4), Garcia Sanchez S(3)(4), Grauwen K(1), Van Hauwermeiren F(1), Van
Opdenbosch N(1), Lamkanfi M(5), van Loo G(3)(4), Bottelbergs A(1).

Author information:
(1)Janssen Research and Development, Janssen Pharmaceutica NV, Johnson & Johnson
Company, Beerse, Belgium.
(2)Neuroscience Therapeutic Area, Janssen Research and Development, Beerse,
Belgium.
(3)VIB Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Neuroinflammation is widely recognized as a key factor in the
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), alongside ß-amyloid deposition and the
formation of neurofibrillary tangles. The NLR family pyrin domain containing 3
(NLRP3) inflammasome, part of the innate immune system, has been implicated in
the neuropathology of both preclinical amyloid and tau transgenic models.
Activation of the NLRP3 pathway involves an initial priming step, which
increases the expression of Nlrp3 and interleukin (IL)-1β, followed by the
assembly of the NLRP3 inflammasome complex, comprising NLRP3, ASC, and
caspase-1. This assembly leads to the proteolytic maturation of the
pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18. Additionally, the NLRP3 inflammasome
induces Gasdermin D (GSDMD) cleavage, forming membrane pores through which IL-1β
and IL-18 are secreted. Inhibition of NLRP3 has been shown to enhance plaque
clearance by modulating microglial activation. Furthermore, blocking NLRP3 in
tau transgenic mice has been found to reduce tau phosphorylation by affecting
the activity of certain tau kinases and phosphatases.
METHODS: In this study, organotypic brain slice cultures from P301S transgenic
mice were treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) plus nigericin as a positive
control or exposed to tau seeds (K18) to evaluate NLRP3 inflammasome activation.
The effect of tau seeding on NLRP3 activity was further examined using Meso
Scale Discovery (MSD) assays to measure IL1β secretion levels in the presence
and absence of NLRP3 inhibitors. The role of NLRP3 activity was investigated in
full-body Nlrp3 knockout mice crossbred with the tau transgenic P301S model.
Additionally, full-body and microglia-selective Gsdmd knockout mice were
crossbred with P301S mice, and tau pathology and neurodegeneration were
evaluated at early and late stages of the disease using immunohistochemistry and
biochemical assays.
RESULTS: Activation of the NLRP3 pathway was observed in the mouse organotypic
slice culture (OSC) model following stimulation with LPS and nigericin or
exposure to tau seeds. However, Nlrp3 deficiency did not mitigate tauopathy or
neurodegeneration in P301S mice in vivo, showing only a minor effect on plasma
neurofilament (NF-L) levels. Consistently, Gsdmd deficiency did not alter tau
pathology in P301S mice. Furthermore, neither full-body nor microglia-selective
Gsdmd deletion had an impact on neuronal pathology or the release of
pro-inflammatory cytokines.
CONCLUSION: The absence of key components of the NLRP3 inflammasome pathway did
not yield a beneficial effect on tau pathology or neurodegeneration in the
preclinical Tau-P301S mouse model of AD. Nonetheless, organotypic slice cultures
could serve as a valuable ex vivo mechanistic model for evaluating NLRP3 pathway
activation and pharmacological inhibitors.

Copyright © 2024 Paesmans, Van Kolen, Vandermeeren, Shih, Wuyts, Boone, Garcia
Sanchez, Grauwen, Van Hauwermeiren, Van Opdenbosch, Lamkanfi, van Loo and
Bottelbergs.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1459134
PMCID: PMC11458539
PMID: 39381137

Conflict of interest statement: AB, DW, IP, KG, KV, and NO are employees of
Jansssssen Pharmaceutica. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
