---
reference_id: "PMID:27411431"
title: Genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes in childhood - estimation of HLA class II associated disease risk and class II effect in various phases of islet autoimmunity.
authors:
- Ilonen J
- Kiviniemi M
- Lempainen J
- Simell O
- Toppari J
- Veijola R
- Knip M
- Finnish Pediatric Diabetes Register
journal: Pediatr Diabetes
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/pedi.12327
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes in childhood - estimation of HLA class II associated disease risk and class II effect in various phases of islet autoimmunity.
**Authors:** Ilonen J, Kiviniemi M, Lempainen J, Simell O, Toppari J, Veijola R, Knip M, Finnish Pediatric Diabetes Register
**Journal:** Pediatr Diabetes (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pedi.12327](https://doi.org/10.1111/pedi.12327)

## Content

1. Pediatr Diabetes. 2016 Jul;17 Suppl 22:8-16. doi: 10.1111/pedi.12327.

Genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes in childhood - estimation of HLA class 
II associated disease risk and class II effect in various phases of islet 
autoimmunity.

Ilonen J(1), Kiviniemi M(1), Lempainen J(1), Simell O(2)(3), Toppari J(2)(3)(4), 
Veijola R(5)(6), Knip M(7)(8)(9); Finnish Pediatric Diabetes Register.

Author information:
(1)Immunogenetics Laboratory, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(4)Department of Physiology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oulu, PEDEGO Research Unit, MRC Oulu, 
Oulu, Finland.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(7)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, 
Helsinki, Finland, Research Programs Unit, Diabetes and Obesity, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: The HLA-DR/DQ region remains the major determinant of susceptibility 
to type 1 diabetes (T1D) despite the more than 50 risk affecting loci outside 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region that have been identified. We aimed at 
developing a simple risk estimation based on HLA class II genotyping, which was 
also tested by analyzing HLA class II effect on the autoantibody seroconversion 
and further progression to diabetes.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: A total of 2991 trio families with a diabetic child from 
the Finnish Pediatric Diabetes Register were genotyped and the risk contributed 
by each DR-DQ haplotype calculated through transmission analysis. The genotype 
risk was estimated based on the summary effect of haplotypes. Genotype grouping 
was further tested in a subcohort of the Finnish Type 1 Diabetes Prediction and 
Prevention (DIPP) Study
RESULTS: The summary effect of haplotypes was generally seen in genotypes, while 
the expected synergistic effect of DR3-DQ2 and DR4-DQ8 (DRB1*04:03 excluded) 
combination was also clear in the T1D risk association analysis. This highest 
risk DR/DQ genotype was found in 21.6% of patients and 2.0% of controls, odds 
ratio (OR) = 13.2 (10.1-17.2), whereas the lowest risk genotype contained only 
0.8% of patients and 28.0% of controls, OR = 0.02 (0.01-0.03). In the subcohort 
from the DIPP study the risk grades correlated clearly with seroconversion for 
islet autoantibodies and T1D development. In contrast, DR/DQ risk groups did not 
associate with the progression rate from advanced autoimmunity to clinical 
diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: Class II HLA genotype groups improve the estimation of T1D risk. 
Class II effect is limited to the early phase of the disease process 
characterized by seroconversion for islet autoantibodies.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pedi.12327
PMID: 27411431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]