---
reference_id: "PMID:38189150"
title: "A Genomic Link From Heart Failure to Atrial Fibrillation Risk: FOG2 Modulates a TBX5/GATA4-Dependent Atrial Gene Regulatory Network."
authors:
- Broman MT
- Nadadur RD
- Perez-Cervantes C
- Burnicka-Turek O
- Lazarevic S
- Gams A
- Laforest B
- Steimle JD
- Iddir S
- Wang Z
- Smith L
- Mazurek SR
- Olivey HE
- Zhou P
- Gadek M
- Shen KM
- Khan Z
- Theisen JWM
- Yang XH
- Ikegami K
- Efimov IR
- Pu WT
- Weber CR
- McNally EM
- Svensson EC
- Moskowitz IP
journal: Circulation
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.066804
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Genomic Link From Heart Failure to Atrial Fibrillation Risk: FOG2 Modulates a TBX5/GATA4-Dependent Atrial Gene Regulatory Network.
**Authors:** Broman MT, Nadadur RD, Perez-Cervantes C, Burnicka-Turek O, Lazarevic S, Gams A, Laforest B, Steimle JD, Iddir S, Wang Z, Smith L, Mazurek SR, Olivey HE, Zhou P, Gadek M, Shen KM, Khan Z, Theisen JWM, Yang XH, Ikegami K, Efimov IR, Pu WT, Weber CR, McNally EM, Svensson EC, Moskowitz IP
**Journal:** Circulation (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.066804](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.066804)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2024 Apr 9;149(15):1205-1230. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.066804. Epub 2024 Jan 8.

A Genomic Link From Heart Failure to Atrial Fibrillation Risk: FOG2 Modulates a 
TBX5/GATA4-Dependent Atrial Gene Regulatory Network.

Broman MT(#)(1), Nadadur RD(#)(2)(3)(4), Perez-Cervantes C(#)(2)(3)(4), 
Burnicka-Turek O(2)(3)(4), Lazarevic S(2)(3)(4), Gams A(5), Laforest B(1), 
Steimle JD(3)(4), Iddir S(3)(4), Wang Z(2)(3)(4), Smith L(2)(3)(4), Mazurek 
SR(1), Olivey HE(6), Zhou P(7), Gadek M(2)(3)(4), Shen KM(2)(3)(4), Khan 
Z(2)(3)(4), Theisen JWM(2)(3)(4), Yang XH(2)(3)(4), Ikegami K(8), Efimov IR(5), 
Pu WT(9)(10), Weber CR(3), McNally EM(11), Svensson EC(12), Moskowitz 
IP(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Cardiology (M.T.B., B.L., S.R.M.), 
University of Chicago, IL.
(2)Departments of Pediatrics (R.D.N., C.P.-C., O.B.-T., S.L., J.D.S., S.I., 
Z.W., L.S., M.G., K.M.S., Z.K., J.W.M.T., X.H.Y., I.P.M.), University of 
Chicago, IL.
(3)Pathology (R.D.N., C.P.-C., O.B.-T., S.L., J.D.S., S.I., Z.W., L.S., M.G., 
K.M.S., Z.K., J.W.M.T., X.H.Y., C.R.W., I.P.M.), University of Chicago, IL.
(4)Human Genetics (R.D.N., C.P.-C., O.B.-T., S.L., J.D.S., S.I., Z.W., L.S., 
M.G., K.M.S., Z.K., J.W.M.T., X.H.Y., I.P.M.), University of Chicago, IL.
(5)Department of Biomedical Engineering, George Washington University (A.G., 
I.R.E.), Washington, DC.
(6)Department of Biology, Indiana University Northwest, Gary (H.E.O.).
(7)School of Medicine, Shanghai University, China (P.Z.).
(8)Division of Molecular and Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, OH (K.I.).
(9)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA (W.T.P.).
(10)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, MA (W.T.P.).
(11)Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL (E.M.M.).
(12)Boston Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA (E.C.S.).
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nat Cardiovasc Res. 2024 Feb;3(2):97. doi: 10.1038/s44161-024-00437-9.

BACKGROUND: The relationship between heart failure (HF) and atrial fibrillation 
(AF) is clear, with up to half of patients with HF progressing to AF. The 
pathophysiological basis of AF in the context of HF is presumed to result from 
atrial remodeling. Upregulation of the transcription factor FOG2 (friend of 
GATA2; encoded by ZFPM2) is observed in human ventricles during HF and causes HF 
in mice.
METHODS: FOG2 expression was assessed in human atria. The effect of 
adult-specific FOG2 overexpression in the mouse heart was evaluated by whole 
animal electrophysiology, in vivo organ electrophysiology, cellular 
electrophysiology, calcium flux, mouse genetic interactions, gene expression, 
and genomic function, including a novel approach for defining functional 
transcription factor interactions based on overlapping effects on enhancer 
noncoding transcription.
RESULTS: FOG2 is significantly upregulated in the human atria during HF. Adult 
cardiomyocyte-specific FOG2 overexpression in mice caused primary spontaneous AF 
before the development of HF or atrial remodeling. FOG2 overexpression generated 
arrhythmia substrate and trigger in cardiomyocytes, including calcium cycling 
defects. We found that FOG2 repressed atrial gene expression promoted by TBX5. 
FOG2 bound a subset of GATA4 and TBX5 co-bound genomic locations, defining a 
shared atrial gene regulatory network. FOG2 repressed TBX5-dependent 
transcription from a subset of co-bound enhancers, including a conserved 
enhancer at the Atp2a2 locus. Atrial rhythm abnormalities in mice caused by Tbx5 
haploinsufficiency were rescued by Zfpm2 haploinsufficiency.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcriptional changes in the atria observed in human HF directly 
antagonize the atrial rhythm gene regulatory network, providing a genomic link 
between HF and AF risk independent of atrial remodeling.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.066804
PMCID: PMC11152454
PMID: 38189150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures None.