---
reference_id: "PMID:26639367"
title: "Properties of Apolar Solutes in Alkyl Imidazolium-Based Ionic Liquids: The Importance of Local Interactions."
authors:
- Lesch V
- Heuer A
- Holm C
- Smiatek J
journal: Chemphyschem
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/cphc.201501021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Properties of Apolar Solutes in Alkyl Imidazolium-Based Ionic Liquids: The Importance of Local Interactions.
**Authors:** Lesch V, Heuer A, Holm C, Smiatek J
**Journal:** Chemphyschem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cphc.201501021](https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.201501021)

## Content

1. Chemphyschem. 2016 Feb 3;17(3):387-94. doi: 10.1002/cphc.201501021. Epub 2015 
Dec 23.

Properties of Apolar Solutes in Alkyl Imidazolium-Based Ionic Liquids: The 
Importance of Local Interactions.

Lesch V(1)(2), Heuer A(2), Holm C(3), Smiatek J(3).

Author information:
(1)Helmholtz-Institut Münster: Ionics in Energy Storage (IEK-12), 
Forschungszentrum Jülich, Münster (Germany).
(2)Institute of Physical Chemistry, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Institute for Computational Physics, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, 
Germany.

The solvation and the dynamic properties of apolar model solutes in alkyl 
imidazolium-based ionic liquids (IL) are studied by using all-atom molecular 
dynamics simulations. In regards to specific IL effects, we focused on the often 
used 1-ethyl-3-methyl imidazolium cation in combination with the anions 
tetrafluoroborate, acetate, and bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide. Our findings 
reveal that the size of the anion crucially influences the accumulation behavior 
of the cations, which results in modified IL solvation properties. Deviations 
between the different alkyl imidazolium-based IL combinations can be also 
observed with regard to the results for the radial distribution functions, the 
number of surrounding molecules, and the molecular orientation. The analysis of 
the van Hove function further shows pronounced differences in the dynamic 
behavior of the solutes. The simulations verify that the solute mobilities are 
mainly influenced by the composition of the local solvent shell and the 
properties of the underlying Lennard-Jones interactions. Additional simulations 
with regard to modified short-range dispersion energies for alkyl 
imidazolium-based ILs validate our conclusions.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cphc.201501021
PMID: 26639367