---
reference_id: "PMID:30868735"
title: "CHRNG-related nonlethal multiple pterygium syndrome: Muscle imaging pattern and clinical, histopathological, and molecular genetic findings."
authors:
- Carrera-García L
- Natera-de Benito D
- Dieterich K
- de la Banda MGG
- Felter A
- Inarejos E
- Codina A
- Jou C
- Roldan M
- Palau F
- Hoenicka J
- Pijuan J
- Ortez C
- Expósito-Escudero J
- Durand C
- Nugues F
- Jimenez-Mallebrera C
- Colomer J
- Carlier RY
- Lochmüller H
- Quijano-Roy S
- Nascimento A
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61122
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Adolescent
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Biopsy
- "Child, Preschool"
- Echocardiography
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Malignant Hyperthermia/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Protein Conformation
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/chemistry, genetics"
- "Skin Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Whole Body Imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHRNG-related nonlethal multiple pterygium syndrome: Muscle imaging pattern and clinical, histopathological, and molecular genetic findings.
**Authors:** Carrera-García L, Natera-de Benito D, Dieterich K, de la Banda MGG, Felter A, Inarejos E, Codina A, Jou C, Roldan M, Palau F, Hoenicka J, Pijuan J, Ortez C, Expósito-Escudero J, Durand C, Nugues F, Jimenez-Mallebrera C, Colomer J, Carlier RY, Lochmüller H, Quijano-Roy S, Nascimento A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61122](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61122)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Jun;179(6):915-926. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61122. Epub
2019  Mar 14.

CHRNG-related nonlethal multiple pterygium syndrome: Muscle imaging pattern and 
clinical, histopathological, and molecular genetic findings.

Carrera-García L(1)(2), Natera-de Benito D(1)(2), Dieterich K(3), de la Banda 
MGG(4), Felter A(5), Inarejos E(6), Codina A(1)(2), Jou C(1)(2)(7), Roldan M(8), 
Palau F(9)(10)(11)(12), Hoenicka J(10)(13), Pijuan J(10), Ortez C(1)(2), 
Expósito-Escudero J(1)(2), Durand C(14), Nugues F(14), Jimenez-Mallebrera 
C(1)(2), Colomer J(1)(2), Carlier RY(5), Lochmüller H(15)(16)(17), Quijano-Roy 
S(4), Nascimento A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Unit, Neuropaediatrics Department, Institut de Recerca Hospital 
Universitari Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Département de Génétique et Procréation, CHU de Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble 
Cedex 9, France.
(4)Neuromuscular Unit, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Intensive Care and 
Rehabilitation, Raymond Poincaré University Hospital (AP-HP; UVSQ Paris Saclay), 
Garches, France.
(5)Department of Medical Radiology, Raymond Poincaré University Hospital (AP-HP; 
UVSQ Paris Saclay), Garches, France.
(6)Department of Radiology, Hospital Universitari Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(7)Department of Pathology, Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Confocal Microscopy Unit, Department of Pathology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Department of Genetic and Molecular Medicine, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Molecular Medicine, Institut de Recerca Sant 
Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Division of Pediatrics, University of Barcelona School of Medicine, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(14)Department of Radiology, CHU de Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.
(15)Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Medical Center - 
University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(16)Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG-CRG), Center for Genomic 
Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(17)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada and Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, The 
Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Mutations in the CHRNG gene cause autosomal recessive multiple pterygium 
syndrome (MPS). Herein we present a long-term follow-up of seven patients with 
CHRNG-related nonlethal MPS and we compare them with the 57 previously published 
patients. The objective is defining not only the clinical, histopathological, 
and molecular genetic characteristics, but also the type and degree of muscle 
involvement on whole-body magnetic resonance imaging (WBMRI). CHRNG mutations 
lead to a distinctive phenotype characterized by multiple congenital 
contractures, pterygium, and facial dysmorphism, with a stable clinical course 
over the years. Postnatal abnormalities at the neuromuscular junction were 
observed in the muscle biopsy of these patients. WBMRI showed distinctive 
features different from other arthrogryposis multiple congenita. A marked muscle 
bulk reduction is the predominant finding, mostly affecting the spinal erector 
muscles and gluteus maximus. Fatty infiltration was only observed in deep 
paravertebral muscles and distal lower limbs. Mutations in CHRNG are mainly 
located at the extracellular domain of the protein. Our study contributes to 
further define the phenotypic spectrum of CHRNG-related nonlethal MPS, including 
muscle imaging features, which may be useful in distinguishing it from other 
diffuse arthrogryposis entities.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61122
PMID: 30868735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]