---
reference_id: "PMID:30700593"
title: "TDP43 pathology in the brain, spinal cord, and dorsal root ganglia of a patient with FOSMN."
authors:
- Rossor AM
- Jaunmuktane Z
- Rossor MN
- Hoti G
- Reilly MM
journal: Neurology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007008
keywords:
- Autopsy
- Brain/pathology
- "Bulbar Palsy, Progressive/pathology"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Facial Paralysis/pathology
- "Ganglia, Spinal/pathology"
- Humans
- Inclusion Bodies/pathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Oligodendroglia/pathology
- Paresthesia
- Personality
- Spinal Cord/pathology
- Syndrome
- "TDP-43 Proteinopathies/pathology, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TDP43 pathology in the brain, spinal cord, and dorsal root ganglia of a patient with FOSMN.
**Authors:** Rossor AM, Jaunmuktane Z, Rossor MN, Hoti G, Reilly MM
**Journal:** Neurology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000007008](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000007008)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2019 Feb 26;92(9):e951-e956. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007008.
Epub  2019 Jan 30.

TDP43 pathology in the brain, spinal cord, and dorsal root ganglia of a patient 
with FOSMN.

Rossor AM(1), Jaunmuktane Z(1), Rossor MN(1), Hoti G(1), Reilly MM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases (A.M.R., M.M.R.), Department 
of Neurodegenerative Disease (Z.J.), Queen Square Brain Bank (Z.J., G.H.), and 
Dementia Research Centre (M.N.R.), UCL Institute of Neurology; National Hospital 
for Neurology and Neurosurgery (A.M.R., M.M.R., M.N.R.); and Division of 
Neuropathology (Z.J.), National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Queen Square, UK.
(2)From the MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases (A.M.R., M.M.R.), Department 
of Neurodegenerative Disease (Z.J.), Queen Square Brain Bank (Z.J., G.H.), and 
Dementia Research Centre (M.N.R.), UCL Institute of Neurology; National Hospital 
for Neurology and Neurosurgery (A.M.R., M.M.R., M.N.R.); and Division of 
Neuropathology (Z.J.), National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Queen Square, UK. 
m.reilly@ucl.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Neurology. 2019 Jul 9;93(2):e88. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007291.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the histopathologic features of a case of facial-onset 
sensory and motor neuronopathy (FOSMN).
METHODS: We describe a postmortem examination performed on a 54-year-old man 
with FOSMN associated with personality change.
RESULTS: Postmortem examination revealed TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP) 43 
proteinopathy with widespread distribution. TDP43 pathology was seen in the 
neurons and glial cells and was most pronounced in the subthalamic nucleus 
followed by the spinal cord, including dorsal root ganglia, brainstem, and other 
deep cerebral nuclei. In the medial temporal lobe, neocortex and subcortical 
hemispheric white matter TDP43 pathologic inclusions were very rare. In contrast 
to TDP43 pathologies associated with typical amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
or frontotemporal dementia (FTD)-TDP, in this case, there were more frequent 
TDP43-positive oligodendroglial, coiled body-like cytoplasmic inclusions than 
neuronal inclusions. Neuronal cytoplasmic TDP43 inclusions with globular and 
skein-like morphology were seen in both anterior horn cells and dorsal root 
ganglia. No β-amyloid, α-synuclein, or significant hyperphosphorylated tau 
pathology was seen.
CONCLUSION: This case provides further evidence that FOSMN is a 
neurodegenerative disease characterized by TDP43 pathology. Despite minimal 
cortical TDP43 pathology, the clinical features of the behavioral variant of FTD 
in this patient suggest that FOSMN may fall within or overlap with the FTD-ALS 
spectrum.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007008
PMCID: PMC6404468
PMID: 30700593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]