---
reference_id: "PMID:37762322"
title: "Pathway from Acute Kidney Injury to Chronic Kidney Disease: Molecules Involved in Renal Fibrosis."
authors:
- Niculae A
- Gherghina ME
- Peride I
- Tiglis M
- Nechita AM
- Checherita IA
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241814019
keywords:
- Humans
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/etiology"
- Kidney
- Acute Kidney Injury/etiology
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic"
- Fibrosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathway from Acute Kidney Injury to Chronic Kidney Disease: Molecules Involved in Renal Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Niculae A, Gherghina ME, Peride I, Tiglis M, Nechita AM, Checherita IA
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241814019](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241814019)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 13;24(18):14019. doi: 10.3390/ijms241814019.

Pathway from Acute Kidney Injury to Chronic Kidney Disease: Molecules Involved 
in Renal Fibrosis.

Niculae A(1), Gherghina ME(2), Peride I(1), Tiglis M(3), Nechita AM(4), 
Checherita IA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Clinical Department No. 3, "Carol Davila" 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Ilfov County Emergency Clinical Hospital, 022104 
Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Emergency Clinical Hospital of 
Bucharest, 014461 Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Department of Nephrology, "St. John" Emergency Clinical Hospital, 042122 
Bucharest, Romania.
(5)Research Department, Emergency Clinical Hospital of Bucharest, 014461 
Bucharest, Romania.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is one of the main conditions responsible for chronic 
kidney disease (CKD), including end-stage renal disease (ESRD) as a long-term 
complication. Besides short-term complications, such as electrolyte and 
acid-base disorders, fluid overload, bleeding complications or immune 
dysfunctions, AKI can develop chronic injuries and subsequent CKD through renal 
fibrosis pathways. Kidney fibrosis is a pathological process defined by 
excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, evidenced in chronic kidney 
injuries with maladaptive architecture restoration. So far, cited maladaptive 
kidney processes responsible for AKI to CKD transition were epithelial, 
endothelial, pericyte, macrophage and fibroblast transition to myofibroblasts. 
These are responsible for smooth muscle actin (SMA) synthesis and abnormal renal 
architecture. Recently, AKI progress to CKD or ESRD gained a lot of interest, 
with impressive progression in discovering the mechanisms involved in renal 
fibrosis, including cellular and molecular pathways. Risk factors mentioned in 
AKI progression to CKD are frequency and severity of kidney injury, chronic 
diseases such as uncontrolled hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obesity and 
unmodifiable risk factors (i.e., genetics, older age or gender). To provide a 
better understanding of AKI transition to CKD, we have selected relevant and 
updated information regarding the risk factors responsible for AKIs unfavorable 
long-term evolution and mechanisms incriminated in the progression to a chronic 
state, along with possible therapeutic approaches in preventing or delaying CKD 
from AKI.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241814019
PMCID: PMC10531003
PMID: 37762322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.