---
reference_id: "PMID:26667418"
title: The first NINDS/NIBIB consensus meeting to define neuropathological criteria for the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy.
authors:
- McKee AC
- Cairns NJ
- Dickson DW
- Folkerth RD
- Keene CD
- Litvan I
- Perl DP
- Stein TD
- Vonsattel JP
- Stewart W
- Tripodis Y
- Crary JF
- Bieniek KF
- "Dams-O'Connor K"
- Alvarez VE
- Gordon WA
- TBI/CTE group
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-015-1515-z
keywords:
- Alzheimer Disease/pathology
- Autopsy
- "Brain Injury, Chronic/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Humans
- National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (U.S.)
- National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (U.S.)
- Neurofibrillary Tangles/pathology
- Neurons/pathology
- Tauopathies/pathology
- United States
- tau Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The first NINDS/NIBIB consensus meeting to define neuropathological criteria for the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy.
**Authors:** McKee AC, Cairns NJ, Dickson DW, Folkerth RD, Keene CD, Litvan I, Perl DP, Stein TD, Vonsattel JP, Stewart W, Tripodis Y, Crary JF, Bieniek KF, Dams-O'Connor K, Alvarez VE, Gordon WA, TBI/CTE group
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-015-1515-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-015-1515-z)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2016 Jan;131(1):75-86. doi: 10.1007/s00401-015-1515-z. Epub 
2015 Dec 14.

The first NINDS/NIBIB consensus meeting to define neuropathological criteria for 
the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy.

McKee AC(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Cairns NJ(6), Dickson DW(7), Folkerth RD(8), Keene 
CD(9), Litvan I(10), Perl DP(11), Stein TD(12)(13)(14)(15), Vonsattel JP(16), 
Stewart W(17), Tripodis Y(13)(18), Crary JF(19), Bieniek KF(7), Dams-O'Connor 
K(20), Alvarez VE(21)(12)(13)(14), Gordon WA(20); TBI/CTE group.

Collaborators: Flannery E, Daneshvar DH, Kiernan PT, Mez J, Murphy L, Solomon 
TM, Babcock D, Bellgowan PS, Koroshetz WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 East 
Concord Street, Boston, MA, 02118, USA. amckee@bu.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 East 
Concord Street, Boston, MA, 02118, USA. amckee@bu.edu.
(3)Alzheimer's Disease Center, CTE Program, Boston University School of 
Medicine, 72 East Concord Street, Boston, MA, 02118, USA. amckee@bu.edu.
(4)VA Boston Healthcare System, 150 South Huntington Avenue, Boston, 02130, MA, 
USA. amckee@bu.edu.
(5)Department of Veteran Affairs Medical Center, 200 Springs Road, Bedford, MA, 
01730, USA. amckee@bu.edu.
(6)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South 
Euclid Avenue, Saint Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, 
FL, 32224, USA.
(8)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 325 
Ninth Avenue, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA.
(10)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego School of 
Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, Center for Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, 
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, 
Bethesda, MD, 20814, USA.
(12)Department of Pathology, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 East 
Concord Street, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(13)Alzheimer's Disease Center, CTE Program, Boston University School of 
Medicine, 72 East Concord Street, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(14)VA Boston Healthcare System, 150 South Huntington Avenue, Boston, 02130, MA, 
USA.
(15)Department of Veteran Affairs Medical Center, 200 Springs Road, Bedford, MA, 
01730, USA.
(16)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's disease and the Aging Brain, 
Columbia University Medical Center, 710 West 168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, 
USA.
(17)Department of Neuropathology, University of Glasgow Institute of 
Neuroscience and Psychology and Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, 1345 Govan 
Road, Glasgow, G51 4TF, UK.
(18)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, 801 
Massachusetts Avenue, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(19)Department of Pathology, Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain 
Institute, Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai School, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, 
USA.
(20)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, 3 East 101st Street, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(21)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 East 
Concord Street, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is a neurodegeneration characterized by 
the abnormal accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau protein within the brain. 
Like many other neurodegenerative conditions, at present, CTE can only be 
definitively diagnosed by post-mortem examination of brain tissue. As the first 
part of a series of consensus panels funded by the NINDS/NIBIB to define the 
neuropathological criteria for CTE, preliminary neuropathological criteria were 
used by 7 neuropathologists to blindly evaluate 25 cases of various tauopathies, 
including CTE, Alzheimer's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, argyrophilic 
grain disease, corticobasal degeneration, primary age-related tauopathy, and 
parkinsonism dementia complex of Guam. The results demonstrated that there was 
good agreement among the neuropathologists who reviewed the cases (Cohen's 
kappa, 0.67) and even better agreement between reviewers and the diagnosis of 
CTE (Cohen's kappa, 0.78). Based on these results, the panel defined the 
pathognomonic lesion of CTE as an accumulation of abnormal hyperphosphorylated 
tau (p-tau) in neurons and astroglia distributed around small blood vessels at 
the depths of cortical sulci and in an irregular pattern. The group also defined 
supportive but non-specific p-tau-immunoreactive features of CTE as: pretangles 
and NFTs affecting superficial layers (layers II-III) of cerebral cortex; 
pretangles, NFTs or extracellular tangles in CA2 and pretangles and proximal 
dendritic swellings in CA4 of the hippocampus; neuronal and astrocytic 
aggregates in subcortical nuclei; thorn-shaped astrocytes at the glial limitans 
of the subpial and periventricular regions; and large grain-like and dot-like 
structures. Supportive non-p-tau pathologies include TDP-43 immunoreactive 
neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions and dot-like structures in the hippocampus, 
anteromedial temporal cortex and amygdala. The panel also recommended a minimum 
blocking and staining scheme for pathological evaluation and made 
recommendations for future study. This study provides the first step towards the 
development of validated neuropathological criteria for CTE and will pave the 
way towards future clinical and mechanistic studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-015-1515-z
PMCID: PMC4698281
PMID: 26667418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]