---
reference_id: "PMID:38677871"
title: Primary Amenorrhea and Premature Ovarian Insufficiency.
authors:
- Yatsenko SA
- Witchel SF
- Gordon CM
journal: Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ecl.2024.01.009
keywords:
- Humans
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/therapy, etiology"
- Female
- "Amenorrhea/etiology, therapy"
- "Hypogonadism/therapy, diagnosis, etiology"
- Estrogen Replacement Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Amenorrhea and Premature Ovarian Insufficiency.
**Authors:** Yatsenko SA, Witchel SF, Gordon CM
**Journal:** Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ecl.2024.01.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecl.2024.01.009)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2024 Jun;53(2):293-305. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecl.2024.01.009. Epub 2024 Feb 19.

Primary Amenorrhea and Premature Ovarian Insufficiency.

Yatsenko SA(1), Witchel SF(2), Gordon CM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Magee-Womens Research 
Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and 
Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Magee-Womens Research 
Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, UPMC 
Children's Hospital, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Electronic 
address: witchelsf@upmc.edu.
(3)USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research Center, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.

This review focuses on primary amenorrhea and primary/premature ovarian 
insufficiency due to hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Following a thoughtful, 
thorough evaluation, a diagnosis can usually be discerned. Pubertal induction 
and ongoing estrogen replacement therapy are often necessary. Shared 
decision-making involving the patient, family, and health-care team can empower 
the young person and family to successfully thrive with these chronic 
conditions.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecl.2024.01.009
PMCID: PMC11110077
PMID: 38677871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to report.