---
reference_id: "PMID:24746312"
title: Erythema nodosum - a review of an uncommon panniculitis.
authors:
- Blake T
- Manahan M
- Rodins K
journal: Dermatol Online J
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythema nodosum - a review of an uncommon panniculitis.
**Authors:** Blake T, Manahan M, Rodins K
**Journal:** Dermatol Online J (2014)

## Content

1. Dermatol Online J. 2014 Apr 16;20(4):22376.

Erythema nodosum - a review of an uncommon panniculitis.

Blake T(1), Manahan M, Rodins K.

Author information:
(1)The University of Queensland, School of Medicine.

Panniculitis, inflammation of the subcutaneous fat, is a relatively uncommon 
condition that usually presents with inflammatory nodules or plaques. Erythema 
nodosum (EN) is clinically the most frequent form of panniculitis and is 
considered a reactive process that may be triggered by a wide variety of 
stimuli. Whilst up to 55% of EN is considered idiopathic, the most common causes 
include infections, drugs, systemic illnesses such as sarcoidosis and 
inflammatory bowel disease, pregnancy, and malignancy. EN typically presents in 
the teens and 20s, and is seen more commonly in females. It is often preceded by 
a non-specific prodrome of one to three weeks, which may include fever, malaise, 
and symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection. Cutaneous lesions then 
follow, typically localized on the extensor aspect of the limbs. The lesions are 
painful rounded or oval, slightly raised, non-ulcerative red nodules. The exact 
pathogenesis of EN is not understood, although is thought to result from 
deposition of immune complexes in the venules of the septae in subcutaneous fat, 
causing a neutrophilic panniculitis. The classical histopathological picture is 
of a septal panniculitis without vasculitis. However, the pathological features 
vary with the chronology of the lesions. Even without specific therapy for a 
causative condition, EN typically resolves without treatment. Therefore, 
symptomatic support is adequate for the majority of patients.

PMID: 24746312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]