---
reference_id: "PMID:33965003"
title: "The COVID-19 puzzle: deciphering pathophysiology and phenotypes of a new disease entity."
authors:
- Osuchowski MF
- Winkler MS
- Skirecki T
- Cajander S
- Shankar-Hari M
- Lachmann G
- Monneret G
- Venet F
- Bauer M
- Brunkhorst FM
- Weis S
- Garcia-Salido A
- Kox M
- Cavaillon JM
- Uhle F
- Weigand MA
- Flohé SB
- Wiersinga WJ
- Almansa R
- de la Fuente A
- Martin-Loeches I
- Meisel C
- Spinetti T
- Schefold JC
- Cilloniz C
- Torres A
- Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ
- Ferrer R
- Girardis M
- Cossarizza A
- Netea MG
- van der Poll T
- Bermejo-Martín JF
- Rubio I
journal: Lancet Respir Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00218-6
keywords:
- "COVID-19/immunology, physiopathology"
- Endothelium/physiopathology
- Humans
- Immunity
- "Multiple Organ Failure/etiology, physiopathology"
- Patient Acuity
- SARS-CoV-2/pathogenicity
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The COVID-19 puzzle: deciphering pathophysiology and phenotypes of a new disease entity.
**Authors:** Osuchowski MF, Winkler MS, Skirecki T, Cajander S, Shankar-Hari M, Lachmann G, Monneret G, Venet F, Bauer M, Brunkhorst FM, Weis S, Garcia-Salido A, Kox M, Cavaillon JM, Uhle F, Weigand MA, Flohé SB, Wiersinga WJ, Almansa R, de la Fuente A, Martin-Loeches I, Meisel C, Spinetti T, Schefold JC, Cilloniz C, Torres A, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Ferrer R, Girardis M, Cossarizza A, Netea MG, van der Poll T, Bermejo-Martín JF, Rubio I
**Journal:** Lancet Respir Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00218-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00218-6)

## Content

1. Lancet Respir Med. 2021 Jun;9(6):622-642. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00218-6.
Epub 2021 May 6.

The COVID-19 puzzle: deciphering pathophysiology and phenotypes of a new disease
entity.

Osuchowski MF(1), Winkler MS(2), Skirecki T(3), Cajander S(4), Shankar-Hari
M(5), Lachmann G(6), Monneret G(7), Venet F(7), Bauer M(8), Brunkhorst FM(9),
Weis S(10), Garcia-Salido A(11), Kox M(12), Cavaillon JM(13), Uhle F(14),
Weigand MA(14), Flohé SB(15), Wiersinga WJ(16), Almansa R(17), de la Fuente
A(18), Martin-Loeches I(19), Meisel C(20), Spinetti T(21), Schefold JC(21),
Cilloniz C(22), Torres A(23), Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ(24), Ferrer R(25),
Girardis M(26), Cossarizza A(27), Netea MG(28), van der Poll T(16),
Bermejo-Martín JF(17), Rubio I(29).

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Experimental and Clinical Traumatology in the
AUVA Research Center, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Anaesthesiology, University of Göttingen Medical Center,
Göttingen, Georg-August University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Flow Cytometry, Centre of Postgraduate Medical Education,
Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro
University, Örebro, Sweden.
(5)Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, ICU support offices, St Thomas'
Hospital, London, UK; School of Immunology & Microbial Sciences, Kings College
London, London, UK.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology and Operative Intensive Care Medicine (CCM/CVK),
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Berlin Institute of Health,
Berlin, Germany.
(7)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Immunology Laboratory, Edouard Herriot Hospital,
Lyon, France; Pathophysiology of Injury-Induced Immunosuppression, Equipe
d'Accueil 7426, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 - bioMérieux - Hospices Civils
de Lyon, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France.
(8)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine and Center for
Sepsis Control and Care, Jena University Hospital-Friedrich Schiller University,
Jena, Germany.
(9)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine and Center for
Sepsis Control and Care, Jena University Hospital-Friedrich Schiller University,
Jena, Germany; Center for Clinical Studies, Jena University Hospital-Friedrich
Schiller University, Jena, Germany.
(10)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine and Center for
Sepsis Control and Care, Jena University Hospital-Friedrich Schiller University,
Jena, Germany; Institute for Infectious Disease and Infection Control, Jena
University Hospital-Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany.
(11)Pediatric Critical Care Unit, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús,
Madrid, Spain.
(12)Department of Intensive Care Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious
Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(13)Agence Nationale de la Recherche, Paris, France.
(14)Department of Anesthesiology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(15)Department of Trauma, Hand, and Reconstructive Surgery, University Hospital
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(16)Division of Infectious Diseases and Center of Experimental and Molecular
Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Location Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(17)Group for Biomedical Research in Sepsis, Hospital Universitario Río Hortega
de Valladolid, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca, Salamanca,
Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomedica En Red-Enfermedades Respiratorias,
Instituto de salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(18)Group for Biomedical Research in Sepsis, Hospital Universitario Río Hortega
de Valladolid, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca, Salamanca,
Spain.
(19)Multidisciplinary Intensive Care Research Organization, St James's Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland.
(20)Institute for Medical Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany; Department of Immunology, Labor Berlin-Charité Vivantes,
Berlin, Germany.
(21)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Inselspital, Bern University
Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(22)Pneumology Department, Respiratory Institute, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, University of
Barcelona, ICREA, CIBERESUCICOVID, Spain.
(23)Division of Infectious Diseases and Center of Experimental and Molecular
Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Location Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Pneumology Department,
Respiratory Institute, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, University of Barcelona, ICREA, CIBERESUCICOVID,
Spain; SGR 911-ICREA Academia, Barcelona, Spain.
(24)4th Department of Internal Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Medical School, Athens, Greece.
(25)Centro de Investigación Biomedica En Red-Enfermedades Respiratorias,
Instituto de salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; Intensive Care Department and
Shock, Organ Dysfunction and Resuscitation Research Group, Vall d'Hebron
University Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(26)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, University Hospital of Modena,
Modena, Italy.
(27)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences for Children and Adults,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(28)Department of Intensive Care Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious
Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands; Human
Genomics Laboratory, Craiova University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Craiova,
Romania; Department for Immunology and Metabolism, Life and Medical Sciences
Institute, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(29)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine and Center for
Sepsis Control and Care, Jena University Hospital-Friedrich Schiller University,
Jena, Germany. Electronic address: ignacio.rubio@med.uni-jena.de.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2021 Jun;9(6):545. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00242-3.

The zoonotic SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19 continues to spread
worldwide, with devastating consequences. While the medical community has gained
insight into the epidemiology of COVID-19, important questions remain about the
clinical complexities and underlying mechanisms of disease phenotypes. Severe
COVID-19 most commonly involves respiratory manifestations, although other
systems are also affected, and acute disease is often followed by protracted
complications. Such complex manifestations suggest that SARS-CoV-2 dysregulates
the host response, triggering wide-ranging immuno-inflammatory, thrombotic, and
parenchymal derangements. We review the intricacies of COVID-19 pathophysiology,
its various phenotypes, and the anti-SARS-CoV-2 host response at the humoral and
cellular levels. Some similarities exist between COVID-19 and respiratory
failure of other origins, but evidence for many distinctive mechanistic features
indicates that COVID-19 constitutes a new disease entity, with emerging data
suggesting involvement of an endotheliopathy-centred pathophysiology. Further
research, combining basic and clinical studies, is needed to advance
understanding of pathophysiological mechanisms and to characterise
immuno-inflammatory derangements across the range of phenotypes to enable
optimum care for patients with COVID-19.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00218-6
PMCID: PMC8102044
PMID: 33965003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests MSW has received
unrestricted funding from Sartorius. GL reports personal fees from Swedish
Orphan Biovitrum. TSp and JCS disclose institutional funding (received by the
University of Bern) from Orion Pharma, Abbott Nutrition International, B Braun
Medical, CSEM, Edwards Lifesciences, Kenta Biotech, Maquet Critical Care,
Omnicare Clinical Research, Nestlé, Pierre Fabre Pharma, Pfizer, Bard Medica,
Abbott, Anandic Medical Systems, PanGas Healthcare, Bracco, Hamilton Medical,
Fresenius Kabi, Getinge Group Maquet, Dräger, Teleflex Medical, GlaxoSmithKline,
Merck Sharp and Dohme, Eli Lilly, Baxter, Astellas, AstraZeneca, CSL Behring,
Novartis, Covidien, Nycomed, Phagenesis, and Hemotune. MGN reports grants from
GlaxoSmithKline and ViiV Healthcare, and was a scientific founder of TTxD. All
other authors declare no competing interests.
