---
reference_id: "PMID:31217029"
title: "Treatment of Satoyoshi syndrome: a systematic review."
authors:
- Solís-García Del Pozo J
- de Cabo C
- Solera J
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1120-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Satoyoshi syndrome: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Solís-García Del Pozo J, de Cabo C, Solera J
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1120-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1120-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Jun 19;14(1):146. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1120-7.

Treatment of Satoyoshi syndrome: a systematic review.

Solís-García Del Pozo J(1), de Cabo C(2)(3), Solera J(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital General de Villarrobledo, 
Villarrobledo, Spain.
(2)Research Department, Neuropsychopharmacology Unit, Complejo Hospitalario 
Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain. carlosd@sescam.jccm.es.
(3)Hospital General Universitario de Albacete, Unidad de Neuropsicofarmacología, 
Edificio de Investigación, 3ª planta, c/ Hermanos Falcó, 37, E-02008, Albacete, 
Spain. carlosd@sescam.jccm.es.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de 
Albacete, Albacete, Spain.
(5)Department of Medical Sciences, Falculty of Medicine, Universidad de Castilla 
- La Mancha, Albacete, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Satoyoshi syndrome is a multisystemic rare disease of unknown 
etiology, although an autoimmune basis is presumed. Its main symptoms are: 
painful muscle spasms, diarrhea, alopecia and skeletal abnormalities. Clinical 
course without treatment may result in serious disability or death. A review of 
treatment and its response is still pending.
RESULTS: Sixty-four cases of Satoyoshi syndrome were published between 1967 and 
2018. 47 cases described the treatment administered. Drugs used can be divided 
into two main groups of treatment: muscle relaxants/anticonvulsants, and 
corticosteroids/immunosuppressants. Dantrolene improved muscle symptoms in 13 
out of 15 cases, but not any other symptoms of the disease. Other muscle 
relaxants or anticonvulsant drugs showed little or no effect. 28 out of 30 cases 
responded to a regimen that included costicosteroids. Other immunosuppressive 
drugs including cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine, methotrexate, 
tacrolimus and cyclophosphamide were used to decrease corticosteroid dose or 
improve efficacy. Immunoglobulin therapy was used in nine patients and four of 
them obtained a favorable response.
CONCLUSION: Corticosteroids was the most widely treatment employed with the best 
results in Satoyoshi syndrome. Further studies are needed to determine optimal 
dose and duration of corticosteroids as well as the role of other 
immunosuppressants and immunoglobulin therapy. Genetic or autoimmune markers 
will be useful to guide future therapies.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1120-7
PMCID: PMC6585110
PMID: 31217029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant affiliations or 
financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest 
in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the 
manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership 
or options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or 
royalties.