---
reference_id: "PMID:29287859"
title: Hearing loss in children with primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- Kreicher KL
- Schopper HK
- Naik AN
- Hatch JL
- Meyer TA
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2017.11.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hearing loss in children with primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Kreicher KL, Schopper HK, Naik AN, Hatch JL, Meyer TA
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2017.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2017.11.005)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2018 Jan;104:161-165. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2017.11.005. Epub 2017 Nov 11.

Hearing loss in children with primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Kreicher KL(1), Schopper HK(2), Naik AN(1), Hatch JL(1), Meyer TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Medical University of South 
Carolina, 135 Rutledge Ave, MSC 550, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Medical University of South 
Carolina, 135 Rutledge Ave, MSC 550, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. Electronic 
address: schopper@musc.edu.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the type and severity of hearing impairment in pediatric 
patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) and relate these measures to 
patient demographics, treatment options, and other otologic factors.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of children with a diagnosis of PCD, 
Kartagener's syndrome, or situs inversus in the AudGen Database was conducted. 
Audiograms were analyzed for type of hearing loss (HL), severity, laterality, 
and progression. Medical charts were reviewed to identify factors that influence 
severity and progression of hearing loss.
RESULTS: 56 patients met inclusion criteria and 42 patients had HL. 66.6% had 
bilateral and 33.3% had unilateral loss (70 total ears with HL). Conductive 
hearing loss (CHL) was the most common type of HL, though 30% of children had 
some sensorineural component to their hearing loss. 92.9% of children with HL 
received at least one diagnosis of otitis media, but HL did not improve in the 
majority (77.8%) of ears in our study regardless of ear tube placement.
CONCLUSIONS: Slight to mild CHL and all types of otitis media are prevalent 
among patients with PCD, and some of these children have sensorineural hearing 
loss (SNHL). All patients diagnosed with situs inversus at birth should be 
evaluated by an otolaryngologist.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2017.11.005
PMID: 29287859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]