---
reference_id: "PMID:17925299"
title: "Feasibility study of single agent Cisplatin and concurrent radiotherapy in Japanese patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: preliminary results."
authors:
- Zenda S
- Onozawa Y
- Tahara M
- Kawashima M
- Shikama N
- Sasaki S
- Boku N
journal: Jpn J Clin Oncol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/jjco/hym106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Feasibility study of single agent Cisplatin and concurrent radiotherapy in Japanese patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: preliminary results.
**Authors:** Zenda S, Onozawa Y, Tahara M, Kawashima M, Shikama N, Sasaki S, Boku N
**Journal:** Jpn J Clin Oncol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jjco/hym106](https://doi.org/10.1093/jjco/hym106)

## Content

1. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2007 Oct;37(10):725-9. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hym106. Epub 2007
Oct  8.

Feasibility study of single agent Cisplatin and concurrent radiotherapy in 
Japanese patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: preliminary 
results.

Zenda S(1), Onozawa Y, Tahara M, Kawashima M, Shikama N, Sasaki S, Boku N.

Author information:
(1)Division of Radiation Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 6-5-1 
Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. szenda@east.ncc.go.jp

BACKGROUND: Concurrent chemoradiotherapy with the single agent cisplatin (CDDP + 
RT) has been recognized worldwide as the standard treatment for unresectable 
locally advanced SCCHN. The objective of this study was to clarify the 
feasibility of CDDP + RT in Japanese patients. Patients and methods Patients 
with unresectable squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck were given single 
daily fractionated radiation (70 Gy at 2 Gy/day) and chemotherapy consisting of 
a 2 h infusion of CDDP 100 mg/m(2) on days 1, 22 and 43. The primary endpoint 
was the rate of completion of CDDP + RT.
RESULTS: Between November 2005 and January 2007, 20 patients were enrolled, 19 
males and one female with a median age of 61.5 years (range 50-74). One patient 
had recurrent unresectable disease after surgery and the remaining 19 had stage 
IV disease. No grade 4 hematologic toxicities were observed. The incidence of 
grade 3 mucositis was 55% and no treatment-related death occurred. Full-dose 
irradiation was performed in all patients, with a median duration of 
radiotherapy of 50 days (range 48-54). Although all patients received the first 
two administrations of CDDP, the third dose was administed in 17 patients (85%). 
The rate of completion of CDDP + RT was 85% and the dose intensity of CDDP was 
28.9 mg/m(2)/week (relative dose intensity 89%). Overall complete response rate 
was 50% and the rate of primary complete response was 90%.
CONCLUSION: Concurrent chemoradiation therapy with the standard dose of CDDP is 
feasible in Japanese patients. Treatment modification based on racial 
differences is not necessary.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hym106
PMID: 17925299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]