---
reference_id: "PMID:34389161"
title: "Treatment strategies for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: past and future perspectives."
authors:
- Garcia AA
- Koperniku A
- Ferreira JCB
- Mochly-Rosen D
journal: Trends Pharmacol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2021.07.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment strategies for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: past and future perspectives.
**Authors:** Garcia AA, Koperniku A, Ferreira JCB, Mochly-Rosen D
**Journal:** Trends Pharmacol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tips.2021.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2021.07.002)

## Content

1. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2021 Oct;42(10):829-844. doi:
10.1016/j.tips.2021.07.002.  Epub 2021 Aug 10.

Treatment strategies for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: past and 
future perspectives.

Garcia AA(1), Koperniku A(1), Ferreira JCB(2), Mochly-Rosen D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, School of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, School of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA; Department of Anatomy, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, School of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA. Electronic address: mochly@stanford.edu.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) maintains redox balance in a variety of 
cell types and is essential for erythrocyte resistance to oxidative stress. G6PD 
deficiency, caused by mutations in the G6PD gene, is present in ~400 million 
people worldwide, and can cause acute hemolytic anemia. Currently, there are no 
therapeutics for G6PD deficiency. We discuss the role of G6PD in hemolytic and 
nonhemolytic disorders, treatment strategies attempted over the years, and 
potential reasons for their failure. We also discuss potential pharmacological 
pathways, including glutathione (GSH) metabolism, compensatory NADPH production 
routes, transcriptional upregulation of the G6PD gene, highlighting potential 
drug targets. The needs and opportunities described here may motivate the 
development of a therapeutic for hematological and other chronic diseases 
associated with G6PD deficiency.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2021.07.002
PMCID: PMC8448981
PMID: 34389161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests None are declared.