---
reference_id: "PMID:39980751"
title: "Recent advances in systemic therapy for advanced biliary tract cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis using reconstructed RCT survival data."
authors:
- Li Z
- Aliseda D
- Jones O
- Rajendran L
- Magyar C
- Grant R
- "O'Kane GM"
- Saborowski A
- Sapisochin G
- Vogel A
journal: JHEP Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101290
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in systemic therapy for advanced biliary tract cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis using reconstructed RCT survival data.
**Authors:** Li Z, Aliseda D, Jones O, Rajendran L, Magyar C, Grant R, O'Kane GM, Saborowski A, Sapisochin G, Vogel A
**Journal:** JHEP Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101290](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101290)

## Content

1. JHEP Rep. 2024 Nov 30;7(3):101290. doi: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101290.
eCollection  2025 Mar.

Recent advances in systemic therapy for advanced biliary tract cancer: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis using reconstructed RCT survival data.

Li Z(1), Aliseda D(2), Jones O(1), Rajendran L(1), Magyar C(1), Grant R(3), 
O'Kane GM(4)(5), Saborowski A(6), Sapisochin G(1), Vogel A(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)HBP & Multi-Organ Transplant Program, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(2)HBP and Liver Transplant Unit, Clinica Universidad de Navarra, University of 
Navarra, Pamplona-Madrid, Spain.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, 
University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Wallace McCain Centre for Pancreatic Cancer, Princess Margaret Hospital, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, St Vincent's University Hospital and 
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Infectious Diseases and 
Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Health Network, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Gemcitabine/cisplatin (GemCis) was the long-standing 
first-line treatment for advanced biliary tract cancers (BTCs). Following 
positive results from the TOPAZ-01 and KEYNOTE-966 trials, immune checkpoint 
inhibitors (ICIs) combined with chemotherapy are now the standard of care. We 
aim to compare the efficacy of first-line therapies for advanced BTCs.
METHODS: Our systematic review included studies from five databases focusing on 
English-language articles published between January 2010 and June 2024. We 
included randomized clinical trials (RCTs) that featured GemCis in a treatment 
arm for treatment-naive adults with advanced BTCs. The primary endpoints were 
overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival. We conducted a one-stage 
meta-analysis using reconstructed survival data, Cox-based models, and 
restricted mean survival time (RMST).
RESULTS: After screening 8,797 studies, 17 RCTs were selected, involving a total 
of 4,584 patients. Of these, 2,140 (46.7%) received GemCis. The majority (68.9%) 
were diagnosed with intrahepatic or extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, and 80% had 
metastatic disease at the time of treatment. The pooled median OS in the GemCis 
group was 11.6 months (95% CI 11.3-12.2 months). GemCis plus pembrolizumab 
(hazard ratio [HR] 0.99, 95% CI 0.98-0.99; p <0.001), GemCis plus durvalumab (HR 
0.98, 95% CI 0.97-0.99; p = 0.015), GemCis plus S-1 (HR 0.97 95% CI 0.95-0.99; p 
<0.001), and GemCis plus nab-paclitaxel (HR 0.98, 95% CI 0.98-0.99; p <0.001) 
demonstrated superior OS compared with GemCis alone. These combinations also 
showed increases in RMST by +1.1, +2.5, +2.8, and +2.1 months, respectively. In 
terms of progression-free survival, GemCis with ICIs (HR 0.91, 95% CI 0.78-0.94; 
p <0.001), GemCis plus S-1 (HR 0.98, 95% CI 0.96-0.99; p = 0.003), and GemCis 
plus nab-paclitaxel (HR 0.98, 95% CI 0.97-0.99; p <0.001) also demonstrated 
superiority, with corresponding RMST increases of +0.7, +1.9, and +2.5 months, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite incremental advancements, a breakthrough in advanced BTC 
treatment remains elusive. Further improvements in treatment efficacy may 
require biomarker identification to optimize combinational therapies for better 
patient selection.
IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: This study analyzed recent RCTs, including KEYNOTE-966, 
TOPAZ-1, NIFE, and SWOG 1815, involving 4,584 patients with advanced biliary 
tract cancer. A meta-analysis of 17 treatment arms, using reconstructed survival 
data, confirmed the modest survival benefit of GemCis plus ICIs, supporting its 
guideline adoption. The findings, however, highlight the need for biomarker 
identification and better patient selection.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101290
PMCID: PMC11840543
PMID: 39980751

Conflict of interest statement: AV had been directly paid honoraria and has been 
paid consulting or advisory roles for AstraZeneca, BeiGene, Boehringer Mannheim, 
BMS, BTG, EISAI, GSK, Incyte, Ipsen, MSD, Hoffmann-La Roche, Servier, Sirtex, 
and Taiho. GS discloses consultancy for AstraZeneca, Roche, Evidera, Novartis, 
HepaRegenix, and Integra; has received financial compensation for talks for 
Roche, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, and Integra; has received grants from Roche and 
AstraZeneca. GO has received grants from Roche and AstraZeneca; consulting fees 
from AstraZeneca, Servier, and Incyte; payment for lectures from Roche; and 
support for attending meetings from MSD and Roche. None of the other authors 
have any conflicts of interest to declare. Please refer to the accompanying 
ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.