---
reference_id: "PMID:24333619"
title: Somatic mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 are a frequent cause of mismatch-repair deficiency in Lynch syndrome-like tumors.
authors:
- Mensenkamp AR
- Vogelaar IP
- van Zelst-Stams WA
- Goossens M
- Ouchene H
- Hendriks-Cornelissen SJ
- Kwint MP
- Hoogerbrugge N
- Nagtegaal ID
- Ligtenberg MJ
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.12.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Somatic mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 are a frequent cause of mismatch-repair deficiency in Lynch syndrome-like tumors.
**Authors:** Mensenkamp AR, Vogelaar IP, van Zelst-Stams WA, Goossens M, Ouchene H, Hendriks-Cornelissen SJ, Kwint MP, Hoogerbrugge N, Nagtegaal ID, Ligtenberg MJ
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2013.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2013.12.002)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2014 Mar;146(3):643-646.e8. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2013.12.002.  Epub 2013 Dec 10.

Somatic mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 are a frequent cause of mismatch-repair 
deficiency in Lynch syndrome-like tumors.

Mensenkamp AR(1), Vogelaar IP(2), van Zelst-Stams WA(2), Goossens M(3), Ouchene 
H(2), Hendriks-Cornelissen SJ(3), Kwint MP(3), Hoogerbrugge N(2), Nagtegaal 
ID(3), Ligtenberg MJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands. Electronic address: arjen.mensenkamp@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands; Department of Pathology, Radboud university medical center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2014 Mar;146(3):602-4. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.01.041.

Lynch syndrome is caused by germline mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) 
genes. Tumors are characterized by microsatellite instability (MSI). However, a 
considerable number of MSI-positive tumors have no known molecular mechanism of 
development. By using Sanger and ion semiconductor sequencing, 25 MSI-positive 
tumors were screened for somatic mutations and loss of heterozygosity in mutL 
homolog 1 (MLH1) and mutS homolog 2 (MSH2). In 13 of 25 tumors (8 MLH1-deficient 
and 5 MSH2-deficient tumors), we identified 2 somatic mutations in these genes. 
We conclude that 2 acquired events explain the MMR-deficiency in more than 50% 
of the MMR-deficient tumors without causal germline mutations or promoter 
methylation.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.12.002
PMID: 24333619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]