---
reference_id: "PMID:35328014"
title: "Aspirin Colorectal Cancer Prevention in Lynch Syndrome: Recommendations in the Era of Precision Medicine."
authors:
- Serrano D
- Patrignani P
- Stigliano V
- Turchetti D
- Sciallero S
- Roviello F
- D'Arpino A
- Grattagliano I
- Testa S
- Oliani C
- Bertario L
- Bonanni B
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13030460
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspirin Colorectal Cancer Prevention in Lynch Syndrome: Recommendations in the Era of Precision Medicine.
**Authors:** Serrano D, Patrignani P, Stigliano V, Turchetti D, Sciallero S, Roviello F, D'Arpino A, Grattagliano I, Testa S, Oliani C, Bertario L, Bonanni B
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13030460](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13030460)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Mar 3;13(3):460. doi: 10.3390/genes13030460.

Aspirin Colorectal Cancer Prevention in Lynch Syndrome: Recommendations in the 
Era of Precision Medicine.

Serrano D(1), Patrignani P(2), Stigliano V(3), Turchetti D(4), Sciallero S(5), 
Roviello F(6), D'Arpino A(7), Grattagliano I(8), Testa S(9), Oliani C(10), 
Bertario L(1), Bonanni B(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Prevention and Genetics, European Institute of Oncology 
IRCCS, 20141 Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Imaging and Clinical Sciences, and CAST, "G. 
d'Annunzio" University, 66100 Chieti, Italy.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Digestive Endoscopy, IRCCS, Regina Elena 
National Cancer Institute, 00144 Rome, Italy.
(4)Center for Hereditary Cancer, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, 
University of Bologna, 40100 Bologna, Italy.
(5)IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, 16100 Genoa, Italy.
(6)Unit of General Surgery and Surgical Oncology, Department of Medicine, 
Surgery and Neurosciences, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(7)Hospital Pharmacy Unit, Santa Maria della Misericordia Hospital, Azienda 
Ospedaliera di Perugia, 06100 Perugia, Italy.
(8)Italian College of General Practitioners and Primary Care, 70100 Bari, Italy.
(9)Mutagens Foundation, 20100 Milano, Italy.
(10)Ambulatorio Familiarita' Neoplastica UOC Oncologia Medica ULSS5 Polesana, 
45100 Rovigo, Italy.

Cancer prevention in the era of precision medicine has to consider integrated 
therapeutic approaches. Therapeutic cancer prevention should be offered to 
selected cohorts with increased cancer risk. Undoubtedly, carriers of hereditary 
cancer syndromes have a well-defined high cancer risk. Lynch Syndrome is one of 
the most frequent hereditary syndromes; it is mainly associated with colorectal 
cancer (CRC). Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and, in particular, aspirin 
use, has been associated with reduced CRC risk in several studies, initially 
with contradictory results; however, longer follow-up confirmed a reduced CRC 
incidence and mortality. The CAPP2 study recruited 861 Lynch syndrome 
participants randomly assigned to 600 mg of aspirin versus placebo. Like 
sporadic CRCs, a significant CRC risk reduction was seen after an extended 
follow-up, with a median treatment time that was relatively short (2 years). The 
ongoing CAPP3 will address whether lower doses are equally effective. Based on 
pharmacology and clinical data on sporadic CRCs, the preventive effect should 
also be obtained with low-dose aspirin. The leading international guidelines 
suggest discussing with Lynch syndrome carriers the possibility of using 
low-dose aspirin for CRC prevention. We aim systematically promote this 
intervention with all Lynch syndrome carriers.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13030460
PMCID: PMC8952565
PMID: 35328014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.