---
reference_id: "PMID:24847004"
title: Mitochondrial NADP(H) deficiency due to a mutation in NADK2 causes dienoyl-CoA reductase deficiency with hyperlysinemia.
authors:
- Houten SM
- Denis S
- Te Brinke H
- Jongejan A
- van Kampen AH
- Bradley EJ
- Baas F
- Hennekam RC
- Millington DS
- Young SP
- Frazier DM
- Gucsavas-Calikoglu M
- Wanders RJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu218
keywords:
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- "Hyperlysinemias/genetics, physiopathology"
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- NADP/deficiency
- Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors/deficiency
- Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Stress, Physiological"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial NADP(H) deficiency due to a mutation in NADK2 causes dienoyl-CoA reductase deficiency with hyperlysinemia.
**Authors:** Houten SM, Denis S, Te Brinke H, Jongejan A, van Kampen AH, Bradley EJ, Baas F, Hennekam RC, Millington DS, Young SP, Frazier DM, Gucsavas-Calikoglu M, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu218](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu218)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Sep 15;23(18):5009-16. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu218. Epub 2014 
May 8.

Mitochondrial NADP(H) deficiency due to a mutation in NADK2 causes dienoyl-CoA 
reductase deficiency with hyperlysinemia.

Houten SM(1), Denis S(2), Te Brinke H(2), Jongejan A(3), van Kampen AH(4), 
Bradley EJ(5), Baas F(5), Hennekam RC(6), Millington DS(7), Young SP(7), Frazier 
DM(8), Gucsavas-Calikoglu M(8), Wanders RJ(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, 
Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Department of Genetics and 
Genomic Sciences and Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1425 Madison Avenue, Box 1498, New York, NY 
10029, USA sander.houten@mssm.edu.
(2)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases.
(3)Bioinformatics Laboratory, Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and 
Bioinformatics and.
(4)Bioinformatics Laboratory, Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and 
Bioinformatics and Biosystems Data Analysis Group, University of Amsterdam, 
Science Park 904, 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Genome Analysis, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital.
(7)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(8)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(9)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, 
Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital.

Dienoyl-CoA reductase (DECR) deficiency with hyperlysinemia is a rare disorder 
affecting the metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids and lysine. The 
molecular basis of this condition is currently unknown. We describe a new case 
with failure to thrive, developmental delay, lactic acidosis and severe 
encephalopathy suggestive of a mitochondrial disorder. Exome sequencing revealed 
a causal mutation in NADK2. NADK2 encodes the mitochondrial NAD kinase, which is 
crucial for NADP biosynthesis evidenced by decreased mitochondrial NADP(H) 
levels in patient fibroblasts. DECR and also the first step in lysine 
degradation are performed by NADP-dependent oxidoreductases explaining their in 
vivo deficiency. DECR activity was also deficient in lysates of patient 
fibroblasts and could only be rescued by transfecting patient cells with 
functional NADK2. Thus NADPH is not only crucial as a cosubstrate, but can also 
act as a molecular chaperone that activates and stabilizes enzymes. In addition 
to polyunsaturated fatty acid oxidation and lysine degradation, NADPH also plays 
a role in various other mitochondrial processes. We found decreased oxygen 
consumption and increased extracellular acidification in patient fibroblasts, 
which may explain why the disease course is consistent with clinical criteria 
for a mitochondrial disorder. We conclude that DECR deficiency with 
hyperlysinemia is caused by mitochondrial NADP(H) deficiency due to a mutation 
in NADK2.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu218
PMID: 24847004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]