---
reference_id: "PMID:29915965"
title: Clinical Relevance of Joint Hypermobility and Its Impact on Musculoskeletal Pain and Bone Mass.
authors:
- Guarnieri V
- Castori M
journal: Curr Osteoporos Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s11914-018-0460-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Relevance of Joint Hypermobility and Its Impact on Musculoskeletal Pain and Bone Mass.
**Authors:** Guarnieri V, Castori M
**Journal:** Curr Osteoporos Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11914-018-0460-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11914-018-0460-x)

## Content

1. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2018 Aug;16(4):333-343. doi: 10.1007/s11914-018-0460-x.

Clinical Relevance of Joint Hypermobility and Its Impact on Musculoskeletal Pain 
and Bone Mass.

Guarnieri V(1), Castori M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, 
Poliambulatorio "Papa Giovanni Paolo II", 2nd Floor, Viale Padre Pio 7, 71013, 
San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, 
Poliambulatorio "Papa Giovanni Paolo II", 2nd Floor, Viale Padre Pio 7, 71013, 
San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy. m.castori@operapadrepio.it.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize current evidence on the links between joint 
hypermobility (JH) and Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS), with pain and reduced bone 
mass; to illustrate an updated approach to JH and EDS.
RECENT FINDINGS: In 2017, a novel classification for EDS and JH has been 
published. Increasing data demonstrate that pain is a major disability 
determinator in JH and EDS. Recent findings confirm a complex pathogenesis for 
pain in JH and EDS and suggest a potential role for joint instability, central 
sensitization and small fiber neuropathy. Some papers present bone mass 
reduction as an associated feature of JH and EDS. The association is preliminary 
and reflects heterogeneous mechanisms. Assessment of patients with JH/EDS is now 
well-structured and based on an integrated approach of clinical evaluations and 
molecular testing. Pain and reduced bone mass are possibly common satellite 
manifestations of JH/EDS and need expert consult for appropriate interpretation 
and management.

DOI: 10.1007/s11914-018-0460-x
PMID: 29915965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]