---
reference_id: "PMID:3977716"
title: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita. Light and electron microscopic studies of the eye.
authors:
- Murray TG
- Green WR
- Maumenee IH
- Kopits SE
journal: Arch Ophthalmol
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1001/archopht.1985.01050030103032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita. Light and electron microscopic studies of the eye.
**Authors:** Murray TG, Green WR, Maumenee IH, Kopits SE
**Journal:** Arch Ophthalmol (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archopht.1985.01050030103032](https://doi.org/10.1001/archopht.1985.01050030103032)

## Content

1. Arch Ophthalmol. 1985 Mar;103(3):407-11. doi: 
10.1001/archopht.1985.01050030103032.

Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita. Light and electron microscopic studies 
of the eye.

Murray TG, Green WR, Maumenee IH, Kopits SE.

A 5-month-old infant with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC) died 
after an anoxic episode. Ophthalmologic examination one month before death 
revealed marked myopia and a normal ophthalmoscopic examination, without 
evidence of retinal detachment, lattice degeneration, or vitreoretinal changes. 
On postmortem histopathologic and electron microscopic examination of the eyes, 
we found the vitreous to have central liquefaction, to be detached in multifocal 
areas, and exerting traction on the retina. The internal limiting membrane of 
the retina was thin throughout and displayed many areas of discontinuity. There 
were multiple areas of preretinal cellular proliferation and a few small areas 
of retinoschisis. Our observation of extensive vitreoretinal degeneration with 
traction of the retina indicates that eyes of patients with SEDC are at an 
increased risk for the development of retinal detachment.

DOI: 10.1001/archopht.1985.01050030103032
PMID: 3977716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]