---
reference_id: "PMID:38196773"
title: "Glycogen storage disease type III: a mixed-methods study to assess the burden of disease."
authors:
- Evins A
- Mayhew J
- Cimms T
- Whyte J
- Vong K
- Hribal E
- Evans CJ
- Grimm A
journal: Ther Adv Endocrinol Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/20420188231224233
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycogen storage disease type III: a mixed-methods study to assess the burden of disease.
**Authors:** Evins A, Mayhew J, Cimms T, Whyte J, Vong K, Hribal E, Evans CJ, Grimm A
**Journal:** Ther Adv Endocrinol Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/20420188231224233](https://doi.org/10.1177/20420188231224233)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Endocrinol Metab. 2024 Jan 8;15:20420188231224233. doi:
10.1177/20420188231224233. eCollection 2024.

Glycogen storage disease type III: a mixed-methods study to assess the burden of
disease.

Evins A(1), Mayhew J(2), Cimms T(2), Whyte J(3), Vong K(3), Hribal E(3), Evans
CJ(3), Grimm A(2).

Author information:
(1)Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc., 60 Leveroni Court, Novato, CA, 94949 USA.
(2)Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA, USA.
(3)Endpoint Outcomes, A Lumanity Company, Boston, MA and Long Beach, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glycogen storage disease type III (GSD III) is a rare inherited
disorder that results from a glycogen debranching enzyme deficiency.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this research was to collect data on the signs,
symptoms, and impacts of GSD III from the perspective of adult patients and
caregivers of individuals with GSD III.
DESIGN: Online survey and qualitative interviews.
METHODS: Following institutional review board approval, adult patients and
caregivers of children with GSD III were recruited through advocacy networks and
clinical sites. If eligible, participants were consented, screened, and sent a
survey and/or participated in a 60-min interview. The survey and interview
included questions about family history, diagnosis, signs and symptoms, impacts,
and management of GSD III. Conceptual models were developed following the
analysis of results.
RESULTS: In all, 29 adults and 46 caregivers completed the online survey and/or
the interviews with 73 survey and 19 interview respondents. Adults and
caregivers reported digestive, musculoskeletal, growth and physical appearance,
and cardiac signs and symptoms. Liver conditions were reported by most
respondents (83%). Adults and caregivers frequently reported impacts such as
difficulty keeping up with peers (77%) and difficulty exercising/difficulty with
physical activity (53%). Hypoglycemia was frequently reported in both adults and
children, with more than half reporting hospitalizations due to hypoglycemia.
Caregivers focused on hypoglycemia when reporting signs/symptoms that most
interfere with their child's life and prevention of hypoglycemia as a desired
outcome for an effective therapy. Adults most often reported muscle weakness as
a top interfering symptom and the most important goal of a potential therapy.
Impacts were also reported in activities of daily living, cognitive, emotional,
work/school, and sleep domains.
CONCLUSION: Individuals with GSD III experience a broad spectrum of symptoms and
disease impacts. There is an unmet need for therapies that improve metabolic
control, reduce the burden of dietary management, reduce fatigue and liver
problems, and improve muscle strength and function.

© The Author(s), 2024.

DOI: 10.1177/20420188231224233
PMCID: PMC10775738
PMID: 38196773
