---
reference_id: "PMID:22541879"
title: Massive human ingestion of orpiment (arsenic trisulfide).
authors:
- Buchanan JA
- Eberhardt A
- Tebb ZD
- Heard K
- Wendlandt RF
- Kosnett MJ
journal: J Emerg Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2012.02.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Massive human ingestion of orpiment (arsenic trisulfide).
**Authors:** Buchanan JA, Eberhardt A, Tebb ZD, Heard K, Wendlandt RF, Kosnett MJ
**Journal:** J Emerg Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jemermed.2012.02.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jemermed.2012.02.019)

## Content

1. J Emerg Med. 2013 Feb;44(2):367-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2012.02.019. Epub 
2012 Apr 26.

Massive human ingestion of orpiment (arsenic trisulfide).

Buchanan JA(1), Eberhardt A, Tebb ZD, Heard K, Wendlandt RF, Kosnett MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Denver Health and Hospital Authority, 
University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, Denver & Aurora, Colorado, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Because the toxicity of arsenic is well known, arsenic-containing 
compounds have frequently been ingested for suicidal purposes. We report a case 
of attempted suicide by massive ingestion of arsenic trisulfide, an arsenic 
mineral of low solubility, which resulted in minimal symptoms.
CASE REPORT: An asymptomatic 57-year-old man presented to an Emergency 
Department 13h after his reported ingestion of approximately 84g of arsenic 
contained in a mineral specimen of orpiment (arsenic trisulfide) that had been 
crushed and mixed with an alcoholic beverage and food. His only symptom before 
presentation was nausea. Physical examination was unremarkable, and diagnostic 
tests included a normal electrolyte panel, a normal serum lactate, and a normal 
electrocardiogram. An abdominal radiograph revealed hyper-dense material 
scattered throughout the large intestine. As per the recommendations of the 
regional poison center, the patient was managed with whole bowel irrigation with 
a polyethylene glycol solution, maintenance intravenous hydration, and 
observation on a telemetry unit. Chelation was not performed. A spot urine 
specimen collected 12h after admission contained 1490μg of total arsenic per 
liter (background range<50μg per liter). The patient remained asymptomatic 
throughout his hospital course. Follow-up studies revealed a diminution in both 
intra-abdominal radiopacities and urine arsenic concentration. X-ray diffraction 
analysis of the specimen confirmed its identity as arsenic trisulfide.
CONCLUSIONS: Our experience demonstrates that massive ingestion of a poorly 
soluble inorganic arsenic compound can be successfully managed with 
gastrointestinal decontamination alone without chelation, provided that the 
patient remains asymptomatic during close clinical monitoring.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2012.02.019
PMID: 22541879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]