---
reference_id: "PMID:33741809"
title: Recent advances in the treatment of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders.
authors:
- Romeo AR
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000791
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in the treatment of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders.
**Authors:** Romeo AR
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000791](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000791)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2021 May 1;33(3):233-239. doi: 
10.1097/BOR.0000000000000791.

Recent advances in the treatment of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders.

Romeo AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review examines recently published randomized 
placebo-controlled trials for the treatment of neuromyelitis optica spectrum 
disorders (NMOSD).
RECENT FINDINGS: Until recently, treatments for NMOSD were used-off label and 
had not been subjected to randomized placebo-controlled trials. Increased 
understanding of the pathophysiology of NMOSD, particularly aquaporin-4-IgG 
seropositive NMOSD, lead to the investigation of eculizumab, inebilizumab, and 
satralizumab for maintenance therapy. Eculizumab inhibits the cleavage of the 
terminal complement protein C5, inebilizumab depletes immune cells of 
B-lymphocyte lineage, and satralizumab inhibits interleukin-6 receptors. 
International, phase 3, randomized, placebo-controlled trials have demonstrated 
that each of these therapies reduces the risk of NMOSD relapse. In some cases, 
the studied therapies were administered in conjunction with other 
immunosuppressants. Each therapy has important safety considerations, notably 
risk of meningococcal infection with eculizumab and risks of infection and 
hypogammaglobulinemia with inebilizumab. Reviewing trial design highlights 
future areas of inquiry for the treatment of NMOSD.
SUMMARY: Eculizumab, inebilizumab, and satralizumab are effective maintenance 
therapies approved for the treatment of AQP-4 seropositive NMOSD.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000791
PMID: 33741809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]