---
reference_id: "PMID:24027799"
title: Cranioectodermal Dysplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Tan W
- Lin A
- Keppler-Noreuil K
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cranioectodermal Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Tan W, Lin A, Keppler-Noreuil K

## Content

1. Cranioectodermal Dysplasia.

Tan W(1), Lin A(2), Keppler-Noreuil K(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2013 Sep 12 [updated 2022 Dec 15].

Author information:
(1)Clinical Instructor, Harvard Medical School, Division of Pediatric 
Nephrology, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Professor of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Medical Genetics, 
MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Boston, Massachusetts
(3)Professor of Pediatrics, Division Chief of Genetics & Metabolism, University 
of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED) is a ciliopathy with 
skeletal involvement (narrow thorax, shortened proximal limbs, syndactyly, 
polydactyly, brachydactyly), ectodermal features (widely spaced hypoplastic 
teeth, hypodontia, sparse hair, skin laxity, abnormal nails), joint laxity, 
growth deficiency, and characteristic facial features (frontal bossing, low-set 
simple ears, high forehead, telecanthus, epicanthal folds, full cheeks, everted 
lower lip). Most affected children develop nephronophthisis that often leads to 
end-stage kidney disease in infancy or childhood, a major cause of morbidity and 
mortality. Hepatic fibrosis and retinal dystrophy are also observed. 
Dolichocephaly, often secondary to sagittal craniosynostosis, is a primary 
manifestation that distinguishes CED from most other ciliopathies. Brain 
malformations and developmental delay may also occur.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CED is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical and radiographic features (including two frequent 
features and two other abnormalities, with at least one ectodermal defect – 
i.e., involvement of the teeth, hair, or nails) and/or by identification of 
biallelic pathogenic variants in one of the six genes currently known to be 
associated with CED: IFT43, IFT52, IFT122, IFT140, WDR19, or WDR35.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: As needed, surgery to correct sagittal 
craniosynostosis usually before age one year. Surgical correction may be needed 
for polydactyly of the hands and feet. Orthopedic care for hip dysplasia. Human 
growth hormone therapy could be considered in those who meet standard treatment 
criteria. Standard treatment for dental anomalies, nephronophthisis, liver 
disease, cardiac anomalies, and/or inguinal and umbilical hernias. For those 
with progressive visual impairment: low-vision aids and appropriate educational 
programs. Mechanical ventilation may be required in newborns with pulmonary 
hypoplasia. For those with developmental delay, speech and physical therapy and 
appropriate educational programs. Surveillance: In infancy and childhood: 
monitor tooth development; morning urine osmolarity testing, urine collection 
assay for polyuria, blood pressure, serum creatinine and blood urea assessment, 
and renal ultrasound as recommended by nephrologist; hepatic transaminases and 
measurement of synthetic liver function as recommended by hepatologist. Annual 
ophthalmologic examinations starting at age four years to detect early signs of 
retinal degeneration. Cardiac examinations, EKG, and echocardiography per 
cardiologist. Review of developmental progress at each primary care visit, and 
formal evaluation with neuropsychological testing if delays noted.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CED is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for a CED-causing pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, 
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives, prenatal 
testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing 
are possible once the CED-causing pathogenic variants have been identified in an 
affected family member. Second-trimester ultrasound examination may detect renal 
cysts, shortening of the limbs, and/or polydactyly.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 24027799