---
reference_id: "PMID:23699518"
title: A novel transgenic rat model for spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 recapitulates neuropathological changes and supplies in vivo imaging biomarkers.
authors:
- Kelp A
- Koeppen AH
- Petrasch-Parwez E
- Calaminus C
- Bauer C
- Portal E
- Yu-Taeger L
- Pichler B
- Bauer P
- Riess O
- Nguyen HP
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5622-12.2013
keywords:
- Animals
- "Anxiety/etiology, genetics"
- Body Weight/genetics
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- Diffusion Tensor Imaging
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electronic Data Processing
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Maze Learning
- Motor Activity
- Neurologic Examination
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- Psychomotor Performance/physiology
- Raclopride/pharmacokinetics
- Rats
- "Rats, Transgenic"
- Rotarod Performance Test
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
- Tubulin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel transgenic rat model for spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 recapitulates neuropathological changes and supplies in vivo imaging biomarkers.
**Authors:** Kelp A, Koeppen AH, Petrasch-Parwez E, Calaminus C, Bauer C, Portal E, Yu-Taeger L, Pichler B, Bauer P, Riess O, Nguyen HP
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5622-12.2013](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5622-12.2013)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2013 May 22;33(21):9068-81. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5622-12.2013.

A novel transgenic rat model for spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 recapitulates
neuropathological changes and supplies in vivo imaging biomarkers.

Kelp A(1), Koeppen AH, Petrasch-Parwez E, Calaminus C, Bauer C, Portal E,
Yu-Taeger L, Pichler B, Bauer P, Riess O, Nguyen HP.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen,
72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Spinocerebellar ataxia 17 (SCA17) is an autosomal-dominant, late-onset
neurodegenerative disorder caused by an expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) repeat in
the TATA-box-binding protein (TBP). To further investigate this devastating
disease, we sought to create a first transgenic rat model for SCA17 that carries
a full human cDNA fragment of the TBP gene with 64 CAA/CAG repeats (TBPQ64). In
line with previous observations in mouse models for SCA17, TBPQ64 rats show a
severe neurological phenotype including ataxia, impairment of postural reflexes,
and hyperactivity in early stages followed by reduced activity, loss of body
weight, and early death. Neuropathologically, the severe phenotype of SCA17 rats
was associated with neuronal loss, particularly in the cerebellum. Degeneration
of Purkinje, basket, and stellate cells, changes in the morphology of the
dendrites, nuclear TBP-positive immunoreactivity, and axonal torpedos were
readily found by light and electron microscopy. While some of these changes are
well recapitulated in existing mouse models for SCA17, we provide evidence that
some crucial characteristics of SCA17 are better mirrored in TBPQ64 rats. Thus,
this SCA17 model represents a valuable tool to pursue experimentation and
therapeutic approaches that may be difficult or impossible to perform with SCA17
transgenic mice. We show for the first time positron emission tomography (PET)
and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data of a SCA animal model that replicate
recent PET studies in human SCA17 patients. Our results also confirm that DTI
are potentially useful correlates of neuropathological changes in TBPQ64 rats
and raise hope that DTI imaging could provide a biomarker for SCA17 patients.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5622-12.2013
PMCID: PMC6705027
PMID: 23699518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
