---
reference_id: "PMID:37925436"
title: Systemic and intrinsic functions of ATRX in glial cell fate and CNS myelination in male mice.
authors:
- Rowland ME
- Jiang Y
- Shafiq S
- Ghahramani A
- Pena-Ortiz MA
- Dumeaux V
- Bérubé NG
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-42752-y
keywords:
- Male
- Thyroxine/metabolism
- X-Linked Intellectual Disability
- Neurogenesis
- Oligodendroglia/metabolism
- Neuroglia
- alpha-Thalassemia
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- "X-linked Nuclear Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
- Mice
- Animals
- Humans
- Chromatin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic and intrinsic functions of ATRX in glial cell fate and CNS myelination in male mice.
**Authors:** Rowland ME, Jiang Y, Shafiq S, Ghahramani A, Pena-Ortiz MA, Dumeaux V, Bérubé NG
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-42752-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42752-y)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Nov 4;14(1):7090. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-42752-y.

Systemic and intrinsic functions of ATRX in glial cell fate and CNS myelination 
in male mice.

Rowland ME(1)(2), Jiang Y(2)(3), Shafiq S(2)(4), Ghahramani A(2)(4), Pena-Ortiz 
MA(2)(5), Dumeaux V(4)(6), Bérubé NG(7)(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(2)Children's Health Research Institute, Division of Genetics & Development, 
London, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western 
University, London, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(5)Graduate Program in Neuroscience, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(6)Department of Oncology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western 
University, London, ON, Canada.
(7)Children's Health Research Institute, Division of Genetics & Development, 
London, ON, Canada. nberube@uwo.ca.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western 
University, London, ON, Canada. nberube@uwo.ca.
(9)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada. nberube@uwo.ca.
(10)Graduate Program in Neuroscience, Western University, London, ON, Canada. 
nberube@uwo.ca.
(11)Department of Oncology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western 
University, London, ON, Canada. nberube@uwo.ca.

Myelin, an extension of the oligodendrocyte plasma membrane, wraps around axons 
to facilitate nerve conduction. Myelination is compromised in ATR-X intellectual 
disability syndrome patients, but the causes are unknown. We show that loss of 
ATRX leads to myelination deficits in male mice that are partially rectified 
upon systemic thyroxine administration. Targeted ATRX inactivation in either 
neurons or oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) reveals OPC-intrinsic effects 
on myelination. OPCs lacking ATRX fail to differentiate along the 
oligodendrocyte lineage and acquire a more plastic state that favors astrocytic 
differentiation in vitro and in vivo. ATRX chromatin occupancy in OPCs greatly 
overlaps with that of the chromatin remodelers CHD7 and CHD8 as well as H3K27Ac, 
a mark of active enhancers. Overall, our data indicate that ATRX regulates the 
onset of myelination systemically via thyroxine, and by promoting OPC 
differentiation and suppressing astrogliogenesis. These functions of ATRX 
identified in mice could explain white matter pathogenesis observed in ATR-X 
syndrome patients.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-42752-y
PMCID: PMC10625541
PMID: 37925436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.