---
reference_id: "PMID:10074888"
title: "Reference values of urinary excretion of cystine and dibasic aminoacids: classification of patients with cystinuria in the Valencian Community, Spain."
authors:
- Guillén M
- Corella D
- Cabello ML
- García AM
- Hernández-Yago J
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0009-9120(98)00087-3
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Amino Acids, Diamino/urine"
- Arginine/urine
- "Chemistry, Clinical/methods"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- "Cystinuria/classification, metabolism"
- Female
- Haplotypes
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Lysine/urine
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Ornithine/urine
- Reference Values
- Sex Factors
- Spain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reference values of urinary excretion of cystine and dibasic aminoacids: classification of patients with cystinuria in the Valencian Community, Spain.
**Authors:** Guillén M, Corella D, Cabello ML, García AM, Hernández-Yago J
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0009-9120(98)00087-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0009-9120(98)00087-3)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 1999 Feb;32(1):25-30. doi: 10.1016/s0009-9120(98)00087-3.

Reference values of urinary excretion of cystine and dibasic aminoacids: 
classification of patients with cystinuria in the Valencian Community, Spain.

Guillén M(1), Corella D, Cabello ML, García AM, Hernández-Yago J.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Citológicas. Fundación Valenciana de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Cystinuria is an autosomal-recessive disorder of the kidneys and 
small intestine affecting a luminal transport mechanism shared by cystine, 
ornithine, arginine, and lysine. Three different types of cystinuria can be 
distinguished according to the excretion of these amino acids in urine samples. 
We propose cutoff values from our population as references and we present a 
classification of cystinuric patients using quantitative amino acid 
chromatography in first morning urine samples.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A random sample of forty healthy subjects belonging to 
general population of the Valencian Community were selected as control subjects. 
Cystine, lysine, arginine, and ornithine were quantified by reverse-phase HPLC. 
Seventy-two subjects, diagnosed previously as cystinuric by the 
cyanide-nitroprusside test were classified. Probands excreting more than 113.12 
micromol cystine per mmol of creatinine (i.e., 1,000 micromol cystine per gram 
of creatinine) were classified as homozygotes. Parents of homozygotes in whom 
excretion of amino acids were normal were classified as heterozygotes type I. 
Those probands showing the excretion of at least one amino acid and the sum of 
urinary cystine plus the basic amino acids higher than the corresponding 
references ranges in our population were classified as heterozygotes type II or 
type III (heterozygotes non-type 1).
RESULTS: We identified 24 homozygotes, 39 non-type I heterozygotes and 3 type I 
heterozygotes. The remaining 6 probands could not be classified. Means for 
cystine, lysine, arginine ornithine and their sum in homozygotes and 
heterozygotes non-type I were significantly (p < 0.001) in excess of the 
respective reference ranges. Moreover, means values in homozygotes were 
statistically different (p < 0.001) from heterozygotes non-type I.
CONCLUSION: Urinary excretion of cystine per mmol creatinine allow us to 
distinguish heterozygotes from homozygotes. However, the best discriminator to 
distinguish non-type I heterozygotes from normal population might be the 
excretion of lysine per mmol creatinine. Additional studies including 
characterization of appropriate haplotypes should be carried out for a more 
precise identification of types of cystinuria.

DOI: 10.1016/s0009-9120(98)00087-3
PMID: 10074888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]