---
reference_id: "PMID:38199397"
title: "The prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder: Systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Reilly TJ
- Patel S
- Unachukwu IC
- Knox CL
- Wilson CA
- Craig MC
- Schmalenberger KM
- Eisenlohr-Moul TA
- Cullen AE
journal: J Affect Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.01.066
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder/epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Prevalence
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Reilly TJ, Patel S, Unachukwu IC, Knox CL, Wilson CA, Craig MC, Schmalenberger KM, Eisenlohr-Moul TA, Cullen AE
**Journal:** J Affect Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jad.2024.01.066](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2024.01.066)

## Content

1. J Affect Disord. 2024 Mar 15;349:534-540. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.01.066. Epub
 2024 Jan 8.

The prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder: Systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Reilly TJ(1), Patel S(2), Unachukwu IC(3), Knox CL(4), Wilson CA(5), Craig 
MC(6), Schmalenberger KM(7), Eisenlohr-Moul TA(8), Cullen AE(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; Department of 
Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's 
College London, London, UK; South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK. Electronic address: thomas.reilly@psych.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(3)Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, NJ, USA; Department of 
Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, USA.
(4)Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK; Section of Women's Mental 
Health, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College 
London, London, UK.
(5)South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; Section of 
Women's Mental Health, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, 
King's College London, London, UK.
(6)South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; Department of 
Forensic & Neurodevelopmental Sciences, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, USA; 
Institute of Medical Psychology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Ruprecht-Karls 
University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, USA.
(9)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK; Division of Insurance Medicine, 
Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Premenstrual dysphoric disorder is characterised by symptoms 
confined to the premenstrual phase of the menstrual cycle. Confirmed diagnosis 
requires prospective monitoring of symptoms over two cycles, otherwise the 
diagnosis is provisional. We aimed to measure the point prevalence of 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
METHODS: We searched for studies of prevalence using MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO 
and PubMed. For each study, the total sample size and number of cases were 
extracted. The prevalence across studies was calculated using random effects 
meta-analysis with a generalised linear mixed model. Potential sources of 
heterogeneity were explored by meta-regression and subgroup analyses. 
Pre-registration was with PROSPERO (CRD42021249249).
RESULTS: 44 studies with 48 independent samples met inclusion criteria, 
consisting of 50,659 participants. The pooled prevalence was 3.2 % (95 % 
confidence intervals: 1.7 %-5.9 %) for confirmed and 7.7 % (95 % confidence 
intervals: 5.3 %-11.0 %) for provisional diagnosis. There was high heterogeneity 
across all studies (I2 = 99 %). Sources of heterogeneity identified by 
meta-regression were continent of sample (p < 0.0001), type of sample 
(community-based, university, high school) (p = 0.007), risk of bias 
(p = 0.009), and method of diagnosis (p = 0.017). Restricting the analysis to 
community-based samples using confirmed diagnosis resulted in a prevalence of 
1.6 % (95 % confidence intervals: 1.0 %-2.5 %), with low heterogeneity 
(I2 = 26 %).
LIMITATIONS: A small number of included studies used full DSM criteria in 
community settings.
CONCLUSIONS: The point prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder using 
confirmed diagnosis is lower compared with provisional diagnosis. Studies 
relying on provisional diagnosis are likely to produce artificially high 
prevalence rates.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.01.066
PMID: 38199397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We declare no 
competing interests.