---
reference_id: "PMID:27527829"
title: Friesian horses as a possible model for human acquired aortopulmonary fistulation.
authors:
- Saey V
- Vandecasteele T
- van Loon G
- Cornillie P
- Ploeg M
- Delesalle C
- Gröne A
- Gielen I
- Ducatelle R
- Chiers K
journal: BMC Res Notes
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13104-016-2201-5
keywords:
- Animals
- "Aortic Rupture/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Arterio-Arterial Fistula/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- Coronary Circulation
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Horses
- Humans
- Male
- "Pulmonary Artery/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- Ultrasonics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Friesian horses as a possible model for human acquired aortopulmonary fistulation.
**Authors:** Saey V, Vandecasteele T, van Loon G, Cornillie P, Ploeg M, Delesalle C, Gröne A, Gielen I, Ducatelle R, Chiers K
**Journal:** BMC Res Notes (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13104-016-2201-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13104-016-2201-5)

## Content

1. BMC Res Notes. 2016 Aug 15;9(1):405. doi: 10.1186/s13104-016-2201-5.

Friesian horses as a possible model for human acquired aortopulmonary
fistulation.

Saey V(1), Vandecasteele T(2), van Loon G(3), Cornillie P(2), Ploeg M(4),
Delesalle C(5), Gröne A(4), Gielen I(6), Ducatelle R(7), Chiers K(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Bacteriology and Poultry Diseases, Ghent University,
Merelbeke, Belgium. Veronique.saey@ugent.be.
(2)Department of Morphology, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.
(3)Department of Large Animal Internal Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke,
Belgium.
(4)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Comparative Physiology and Biometrics, Ghent University,
Merelbeke, Belgium.
(6)Department of Veterinary Medical Imaging and Small Animal Orthopaedics,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.
(7)Department of Pathology, Bacteriology and Poultry Diseases, Ghent University,
Merelbeke, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Acquired aortopulmonary fistulation is a rare condition in humans.
It usually results as a late complication of a true or pseudoaneurysm of the
thoracic aorta. It is most commonly associated with trauma or surgery, less
commonly with atherosclerosis, inflammation, hypertension or Marfan's syndrome.
Aortopulmonary fistulation is also seen as a rare complication of acute aortic
dissection. On rare occasions, acquired aortopulmonary fistulation is reported
in aged patients without any of the above mentioned triggering factors. Thus,
these cases should be considered as idiopathic aortopulmonary fistulation.
Clearly, the pathogenesis of this condition is not yet completely understood.
Friesian horses are highly inbred and are affected by several genetic
conditions. Rupture of the thoracic aorta has a relatively high prevalence in
Friesian horses and is often characterized by the formation of a pseudoaneurysm
with subsequent fistulation into the pulmonary artery. Affected animals may
survive for several weeks to months.
FINDINGS: Here we performed vascular casting in three affected Friesian horses.
In all three cases, an aortic rupture at the caudoventral side of the aorta was
connected with a rupture of the main pulmonary artery just proximal to its
bifurcation.
CONCLUSIONS: Affected Friesians show a consistent location and configuration of
the aortic rupture site, very similar to the human condition and therefore could
act as a spontaneous model to study this disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s13104-016-2201-5
PMCID: PMC4986238
PMID: 27527829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
