---
reference_id: "PMID:40789982"
title: Aflatoxin B1 Promotes M2-like Macrophage Polarization via IL-6 Expression in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.
authors:
- Niu J
- Wu W
- Zhang H
- Li Z
- Meng X
- Xu B
journal: Dig Dis Sci
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1007/s10620-025-09230-5
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/metabolism, chemically induced, pathology, genetics, drug therapy, immunology"
- "Liver Neoplasms/metabolism, chemically induced, pathology, genetics, immunology, drug therapy"
- Animals
- "Interleukin-6/metabolism, genetics"
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- Humans
- Mice
- "Macrophages/drug effects, metabolism, immunology"
- Tumor Microenvironment/drug effects
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Male
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aflatoxin B1 Promotes M2-like Macrophage Polarization via IL-6 Expression in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Niu J, Wu W, Zhang H, Li Z, Meng X, Xu B
**Journal:** Dig Dis Sci (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10620-025-09230-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620-025-09230-5)

## Content

1. Dig Dis Sci. 2026 Jan;71(1):179-192. doi: 10.1007/s10620-025-09230-5. Epub
2025  Aug 11.

Aflatoxin B1 Promotes M2-like Macrophage Polarization via IL-6 Expression in
Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Niu J(1)(2), Wu W(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2), Li Z(1)(2), Meng X(1)(2), Xu B(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Food and Biological Engineering, Hefei University of Technology,
Hefei, 230601, China.
(2)Engineering Research Center of Bio-Process, Ministry of Education, Hefei
University of Technology, Hefei, 230601, China.
(3)School of Food and Biological Engineering, Hefei University of Technology,
Hefei, 230601, China. baocaixu@163.com.
(4)Engineering Research Center of Bio-Process, Ministry of Education, Hefei
University of Technology, Hefei, 230601, China. baocaixu@163.com.

Erratum in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2026 Feb;71(2):745-746. doi: 10.1007/s10620-025-09376-2.

BACKGROUND: The development of liver cancer in China is mainly caused by HBV,
HCV infection, and exposure to aflatoxin. Especially in warm and humid southern
regions, aflatoxin pollution poses a threat to health, emphasizing the urgency
of research on related liver cancer.
METHODS: Firstly, through in vivo experiments, the important role of AFB1 in
mediating changes in the immune microenvironment of liver cancer has been
preliminarily validated. In addition, statistical and mIHC analysis were
conducted on clinical specimens collected from patients exposed and non-exposed
to aflatoxin. Transcriptome sequencing technology enabled us to further explore
the specific molecular mechanisms underlying the occurrence of HCC caused by
AFB1 exposure. Finally, the synergistic effect of targeting IL-6 on PD1 therapy
was validated through an in vivo animal tumor model.
RESULTS: We found that AFB1 indirectly influences M2-like macrophage
polarization by upregulating IL-6 expression in tumor cells through the NF-κB
signaling pathway. To address this challenge, we evaluated the efficacy of
targeting IL-6 in combination with PD1 antibody therapy in a subcutaneous tumor
model. Our results demonstrate that the combination treatment significantly
reduces tumor growth, decreases the number of M2-like macrophages, and enhances
CD8 + T cell infiltration compared to monotherapy with PD1 antibody alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our study highlights the potential of targeting IL-6 as a
therapeutic strategy and suggests avenues for further research and clinical
studies to validate and translate these findings into clinical applications,
ultimately leading to improved outcomes for patients with AFB1-associated
hepatocellular carcinoma.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-025-09230-5
PMID: 40789982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interests: The authors
declare no competing interests. Ethical approval: This study has been approved
by the Academic Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, and
all informed patient consent was obtained. All animal experiments were approved
by the Medical Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of USTC.
Informed consent: Not applicable.
