---
reference_id: "PMID:35964930"
title: Phenotype of COL3A1/COL5A2 deletion patients.
authors:
- Kempers MJ
- Wessels M
- Van Berendoncks A
- van de Laar IM
- de Leeuw N
- Loeys B
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104593
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype of COL3A1/COL5A2 deletion patients.
**Authors:** Kempers MJ, Wessels M, Van Berendoncks A, van de Laar IM, de Leeuw N, Loeys B
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104593](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104593)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2022 Oct;65(10):104593. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104593. Epub
 2022 Aug 11.

Phenotype of COL3A1/COL5A2 deletion patients.

Kempers MJ(1), Wessels M(2), Van Berendoncks A(3), van de Laar IM(2), de Leeuw 
N(4), Loeys B(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands. Electronic address: marlies.kempers@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Antwerp University Hospital/University of Antwerp, 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands; Center for Medical Genetics, Antwerp University 
Hospital/University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: The diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is usually based on 
well-defined diagnostic criteria and the result of DNA investigation. Classical 
(cEDS) and vascular type (vEDS) are the most prevalent subtypes and are caused 
by heterozygous pathogenic variants in COL5A1, COL5A2, COL1A1 or, respectively, 
in COL3A1. We describe 3 cases with contiguous deletions resulting in 
haploinsufficiency of both genes with relative mild features of connective 
tissue disease.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Information on medical history, physical information, 
genetic results (CNV-analysis) and imaging were obtained from the medical file.
RESULTS: The first patient was a 31 yr old female, diagnosed during pregnancy 
after the NIPT result showed an interstitial deletion of 2.3 Mb on chromosome 
2q32.2, confirmed by XON array. She had normal aortic diameters. She had no 
signs of cEDS or vEDS except for a relatively thin skin with increased 
visibility of the veins. Her father died suddenly of a type A/B dissection at 
the age of 62 years. The second patient was diagnosed at the age of 10 years 
after she was referred because of her intellectual disability, autism and 
constipation. She was known with a thin and vulnerable skin and had a bleeding 
after tooth extraction. Array showed a 14,5 Mb deletion of 2q31.3q32.3 (de 
novo). Imaging (latest age 17 years) did not show any abnormalities. The third 
patient, aged 28 years, was diagnosed during pregnancy with an interstitial 
deletion of circa 6 Mb on chromosome 2q31.1q32.2 3, previously shown in the 
fetus with bilateral club feet and hydronephrosis. She had no vEDS facial 
features and the skin was relatively thin. She has thoracolumbar scoliosis and 
dural ectasia. Imaging did not reveal any vascular abnormalities. Her son, born 
at 37 weeks 3 days. had club feet but not other clinical signs suggestive of 
classical or vascular EDS.
DISCUSSION: Three patients are described with a contiguous deletion of varying 
size encompassing the COL3A1 and COL5A2 gene. Due to the mild phenotype a 
diagnosis of EDS was not suspected and was found coincidental. Since two of the 
patients were pregnant without major complications these patients may require a 
less defensive, approach to pregnancy/delivery.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104593
PMID: 35964930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]