---
reference_id: PMID:21616434
title: Toll-like receptors and their crosstalk with other innate receptors in infection and immunity.
authors:
- Kawai T
- Akira S
journal: Immunity
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.05.006
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate"
- "Infections/immunology, metabolism"
- Protein Transport
- "Receptors, Immunologic/immunology"
- Signal Transduction
- "Toll-Like Receptors/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toll-like receptors and their crosstalk with other innate receptors in infection and immunity.
**Authors:** Kawai T, Akira S
**Journal:** Immunity (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.immuni.2011.05.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2011.05.006)

## Content

1. Immunity. 2011 May 27;34(5):637-50. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.05.006.

Toll-like receptors and their crosstalk with other innate receptors in infection 
and immunity.

Kawai T(1), Akira S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka 
University, Osaka, Japan.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are germline-encoded pattern recognition receptors 
(PRRs) that play a central role in host cell recognition and responses to 
microbial pathogens. TLR-mediated recognition of components derived from a wide 
range of pathogens and their role in the subsequent initiation of innate immune 
responses is widely accepted; however, the recent discovery of non-TLR PRRs, 
such as C-type lectin receptors, NOD-like receptors, and RIG-I-like receptors, 
suggests that many aspects of innate immunity are more sophisticated and 
complex. In this review, we will focus on the role played by TLRs in mounting 
protective immune responses against infection and their crosstalk with other 
PRRs with respect to pathogen recognition.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.05.006
PMID: 21616434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]