---
reference_id: "PMID:34911717"
title: "Colorectal cancer in adolescents and young adults with Lynch syndrome: a Danish register-based study."
authors:
- Durhuus JA
- Therkildsen C
- Kallemose T
- Nilbert M
journal: BMJ Open
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053538
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Colorectal cancer in adolescents and young adults with Lynch syndrome: a Danish register-based study.
**Authors:** Durhuus JA, Therkildsen C, Kallemose T, Nilbert M
**Journal:** BMJ Open (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053538](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053538)

## Content

1. BMJ Open. 2021 Dec 15;11(12):e053538. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053538.

Colorectal cancer in adolescents and young adults with Lynch syndrome: a Danish 
register-based study.

Durhuus JA(1), Therkildsen C(2)(3), Kallemose T(2), Nilbert M(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Research, Copenhagen University Hospital - Amager and 
Hvidovre, Copenhagen, Denmark jon.durhuus@regionh.dk.
(2)Department of Clinical Research, Copenhagen University Hospital - Amager and 
Hvidovre, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)The Danish HNPCC Register, Gastro Unit, Copenhagen University Hospital - 
Amager and Hvidovre, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: To assess clinicopathological predictors and prognosis in early-onset 
colorectal cancer (CRC) in Lynch syndrome with comparison to patients diagnosed 
from age 40 and up.
DESIGN: National, retrospective register-based case-control study.
SETTING: Danish national hereditary CRC register.
PARTICIPANTS: Individuals with Lynch syndrome diagnosed with CRC from January 
1950 to June 2020. The analysis was based on 215 early-onset CRCs diagnosed 
between 15 and 39 years of age and 574 CRCs diagnosed at age 40-88 years.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical and histopathological characteristics and 
survival. Confounding variables were analysed by Cox analysis.
RESULTS: 27.2% of the tumours in the Danish Lynch syndrome cohort were diagnosed 
under age 40. Disease-predisposing alterations in MLH1 and MSH2 were 
overrepresented in the age 15-39 cohort compared with patients diagnosed over 
age 40. CRCs diagnosed under age 40 showed an adverse stage distribution with 
36.2% stage III-IV tumours compared with 25.8% in the over age 40 group. 
However, young patients diagnosed with early-stage tumours did have a 
significantly better prognosis compared with early-stage tumours in the older 
age group.
CONCLUSIONS: Early-onset CRC in Lynch syndrome is primarily linked to 
alterations in MLH1 and MSH2 and displays an adverse stage distribution. These 
observations serve as a reminder of surveillance, symptom awareness and rapid 
diagnostic handling of CRC in young adults with Lynch syndrome.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053538
PMCID: PMC8679060
PMID: 34911717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.