---
reference_id: "PMID:38180040"
title: "Pancreas agenesis and fetal growth: a semi-quantitative analysis."
authors:
- van Poppel MNM
- Nolan CJ
- Desoye G
journal: Endocr Connect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1530/EC-23-0500
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pancreas agenesis and fetal growth: a semi-quantitative analysis.
**Authors:** van Poppel MNM, Nolan CJ, Desoye G
**Journal:** Endocr Connect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EC-23-0500](https://doi.org/10.1530/EC-23-0500)

## Content

1. Endocr Connect. 2024 Mar 1;13(3):e230500. doi: 10.1530/EC-23-0500. Epub 2023
Jan  29.

Pancreas agenesis and fetal growth: a semi-quantitative analysis.

van Poppel MNM(1), Nolan CJ(2), Desoye G(3).

Author information:
(1)M van Poppel, Institute of Human Movement Science, Sport and Health, 
University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(2)C Nolan, Department of Endocrinology at The Canberra Hospital, Australian 
National University, Canberra, Australia.
(3)G Desoye, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, 
Austria.

Pancreas agenesis is a rare condition underlying a variant of permanent neonatal 
diabetes mellitus. Neonates with this condition are born small for gestational 
age, but less is known about which components of growth are impacted, the timing 
of the growth restriction and potential sex differences. Our objective was to 
assess in which periods in gestation complete pancreas agenesis restricts fetal 
growth and possible sex differences in susceptibility. Published cases (n=49) 
with pancreas agenesis providing relevant data (gestational age, fetal sex, 
birth weight, birth length, head circumference, placental weight) were 
identified by MEDLINE and secondary literature search covering the years 
1950-January 2023. Semi-quantitative analysis of these case reports used 
centiles based on Intergrowth-21 reference charts. Neonates with pancreas 
agenesis were severely growth restricted, however, median centiles for birth 
weight, length and head circumference of those born before week 36 were 
significantly higher compared to those born from 36 weeks. Similar results were 
found when data were separated by before and from 38 weeks. Head circumference 
was less affected than birth weight or length. No sex differences were found. In 
conclusion, pancreas agenesis severely restricts fetal length and head 
circumference in addition to weight growth, with stronger effects evident from 
36 weeks of gestation. In addition to the well-known effects of insulin on 
growth of fetal fat mass, the pronounced effect on birth length and head 
circumference indicates effects of insulin on fetal lean body growth as well. 
Lack of power may account for failure to find sex differences.

DOI: 10.1530/EC-23-0500
PMCID: PMC10895321
PMID: 38180040

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest related 
to this work.