---
reference_id: "PMID:23852276"
title: "Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy: update on clinical features, phenotypes and treatment options."
authors:
- Eftimov F
- van Schaik I
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e328363bfa4
keywords:
- Humans
- Immunoglobulins/therapeutic use
- Neurologic Examination/methods
- Phenotype
- "Polyradiculoneuropathy, Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating/diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Time
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy: update on clinical features, phenotypes and treatment options.
**Authors:** Eftimov F, van Schaik I
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WCO.0b013e328363bfa4](https://doi.org/10.1097/WCO.0b013e328363bfa4)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2013 Oct;26(5):496-502. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e328363bfa4.

Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy: update on clinical
features, phenotypes and treatment options.

Eftimov F(1), van Schaik I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: In this review, we focus on less recognised signs and
symptoms in typical chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy
(CIDP) and on the clinical presentation, course of disease and response to
treatment of the atypical CIDP phenotypes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Frequently occurring and often disabling symptoms in CIDP such
as fatigue, pain and tremor have recently been emphasised, whereas autonomic
dysfunction, if present, is usually mild. Sensory CIDP is probably the most
frequent atypical CIDP phenotype and diagnosis can be difficult in the absence
of clear demyelinating features on nerve conduction studies. The most important
study comparing intravenous immunoglobulin treatment with intravenous
methylprednisolone showed a lower rate of discontinuation due to inefficacy,
adverse events or intolerance with intravenous immunoglobulin treatment.
However, improvement after corticosteroids seems to be more long-lasting than
after intravenous immunoglobulin suggesting superior long-term immunosuppressive
and immunomodulating effect of corticosteroids in CIDP.
SUMMARY: Symptoms other than the classical motor and sensory symptoms can lead
to significant disability in CIDP patients. Based on limited evidence from
largely small retrospective case series, we conclude that atypical CIDP
phenotypes often have a different course of disease and sometimes response to
treatment when compared with typical CIDP. Prospective multicentre cohort
studies using standardised clinical description, electrophysiological parameters
and outcome measures are needed to study the natural disease course of these
phenotypes including response to different treatments.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e328363bfa4
PMID: 23852276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
