---
reference_id: "PMID:7304569"
title: "Pontiac fever: isolation of the etiologic agent (Legionella pneumophilia) and demonstration of its mode of transmission."
authors:
- Kaufmann AF
- McDade JE
- Patton CM
- Bennett JV
- Skaliy P
- Feeley JC
- Anderson DC
- Potter ME
- Newhouse VF
- Gregg MB
- Brachman PS
journal: Am J Epidemiol
year: '1981'
doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a113200
keywords:
- Air Conditioning
- Air Microbiology
- Animals
- Disease Outbreaks
- Epidemiologic Methods
- Guinea Pigs
- Humans
- "Legionella/isolation & purification"
- "Legionnaires' Disease/transmission"
- Michigan
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pontiac fever: isolation of the etiologic agent (Legionella pneumophilia) and demonstration of its mode of transmission.
**Authors:** Kaufmann AF, McDade JE, Patton CM, Bennett JV, Skaliy P, Feeley JC, Anderson DC, Potter ME, Newhouse VF, Gregg MB, Brachman PS
**Journal:** Am J Epidemiol (1981)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a113200](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a113200)

## Content

1. Am J Epidemiol. 1981 Sep;114(3):337-47. doi:
10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a113200.

Pontiac fever: isolation of the etiologic agent (Legionella pneumophilia) and 
demonstration of its mode of transmission.

Kaufmann AF, McDade JE, Patton CM, Bennett JV, Skaliy P, Feeley JC, Anderson DC, 
Potter ME, Newhouse VF, Gregg MB, Brachman PS.

Pontiac fever, a unique epidemiologic form of legionellosis, is characterized by 
a short (one- to two-day) incubation period and a self-limited grippe-like 
illness without pneumonia. In 1968, the first documented outbreak of this 
syndrome affected persons who had entered a health department building in 
Pontiac, Michigan. Epidemiologic analyses clearly implicated as airborne agent 
and suggested that evaporative condenser water aerosols being disseminated by a 
defective air conditioning system played a key role in the outbreak. Guinea pigs 
that were exposed in the building and to laboratory aerosols of evaporative 
condenser water developed bronchopneumonia. Legionella pneumophilia (serogroup 
1) was isolated from the exposed guinea pigs' lungs. Paired acute and 
convalescent serum specimens from 37 patients were tested by the indirect 
fluorescent antibody technique using L. pneumophila serogroup 1 antigen, and 31 
(84%) had rises in titer from less than 32 to greater than or equal to 64.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a113200
PMID: 7304569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]