---
reference_id: "PMID:35657325"
title: Natural history of Sudan ebolavirus infection in rhesus and cynomolgus macaques.
authors:
- Woolsey C
- Fears AC
- Borisevich V
- Agans KN
- Dobias NS
- Prasad AN
- Deer DJ
- Geisbert JB
- Fenton KA
- Geisbert TW
- Cross RW
journal: Emerg Microbes Infect
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/22221751.2022.2086072
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of Sudan ebolavirus infection in rhesus and cynomolgus macaques.
**Authors:** Woolsey C, Fears AC, Borisevich V, Agans KN, Dobias NS, Prasad AN, Deer DJ, Geisbert JB, Fenton KA, Geisbert TW, Cross RW
**Journal:** Emerg Microbes Infect (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/22221751.2022.2086072](https://doi.org/10.1080/22221751.2022.2086072)

## Content

1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2022 Dec;11(1):1635-1646. doi: 
10.1080/22221751.2022.2086072.

Natural history of Sudan ebolavirus infection in rhesus and cynomolgus macaques.

Woolsey C(1)(2), Fears AC(1)(2), Borisevich V(1)(2), Agans KN(1)(2), Dobias 
NS(1)(2), Prasad AN(1)(2), Deer DJ(1)(2), Geisbert JB(1)(2), Fenton KA(1)(2), 
Geisbert TW(1)(2), Cross RW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(2)Galveston National Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
TX, USA.

Due to its high mortality rate and continued re-emergence, Ebolavirus disease 
(EVD) continues to pose a serious threat to global health. A group of viruses 
within the genus Ebolavirus causes this severe hemorrhagic disease in humans: 
Ebola virus (EBOV; species Zaire ebolavirus), Sudan virus (SUDV; species Sudan 
ebolavirus), Bundibugyo virus, and Taï Forest virus. EBOV and SUDV are 
associated with the highest case fatality rates. While the host response to EBOV 
has been comprehensively examined, limited data exists for SUDV infection. For 
medical countermeasure testing, well-characterized SUDV nonhuman primate (NHP) 
models are thus needed. Here, we describe a natural history study in which 
rhesus (N = 11) and cynomolgus macaques (N = 14) were intramuscularly exposed to 
a 1000 plaque-forming unit dose of SUDV (Gulu variant). Time-course analyses of 
various hematological, pathological, serological, coagulation, and 
transcriptomic findings are reported. SUDV infection was uniformly lethal in 
cynomolgus macaques (100% mortality), whereas a single rhesus macaque subject 
(91% mortality) survived to the study endpoint (median time-to-death of ∼8.0 and 
∼8.5 days in cynomolgus and rhesus macaques, respectively). Infected macaques 
exhibited hallmark features of human EVD. The early stage was typified by 
viremia, granulocytosis, lymphopenia, albuminemia, thrombocytopenia, and 
decreased expression of HLA-class transcripts. At mid-to-late disease, animals 
developed fever and petechial rashes, and expressed high levels of 
pro-inflammatory mediators, pro-thrombotic factors, and markers indicative of 
liver and kidney injury. End-stage disease was characterized by shock and 
multi-organ failure. In summary, macaques recapitulate human SUDV disease, 
supporting these models for use in the development of vaccines and therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2022.2086072
PMCID: PMC9225728
PMID: 35657325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).