---
reference_id: "PMID:28968718"
title: Evaluating Treatment Efficacy in a Mouse Model of Enterovirus D68-Associated Paralytic Myelitis.
authors:
- Hixon AM
- Clarke P
- Tyler KL
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix468
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing/blood, immunology"
- "Antibodies, Viral/blood, immunology"
- "Dexamethasone/administration & dosage"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Enterovirus D, Human/immunology"
- "Fluoxetine/administration & dosage"
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/administration & dosage"
- Mice
- "Myelitis/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy, virology"
- Neutralization Tests
- "Paralysis/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy, virology"
- "Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/administration & dosage"
- Treatment Outcome
- Viral Load
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating Treatment Efficacy in a Mouse Model of Enterovirus D68-Associated Paralytic Myelitis.
**Authors:** Hixon AM, Clarke P, Tyler KL
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jix468](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jix468)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2017 Dec 5;216(10):1245-1253. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix468.

Evaluating Treatment Efficacy in a Mouse Model of Enterovirus D68-Associated
Paralytic Myelitis.

Hixon AM(1)(2), Clarke P(3), Tyler KL(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program.
(2)Neuroscience Program.
(3)Department of Neurology.
(4)Department of Medicine.
(5)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine Aurora.

BACKGROUND: Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68)-associated acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is
a devastating neurological disease for which there are no treatments of proven
efficacy. The unpredictable temporal and geographic distribution of cases and
the rarity of the disease make it unlikely that data from randomized controlled
trials will be available to guide therapeutic decisions. We evaluated the
following 3 widely used empirical therapies for the ability to reduce the
severity of paralysis in a mouse model of EV-D68 infection: (1) human
intravenous immunoglobulin (hIVIG), (2) fluoxetine, and (3) dexamethasone.
METHODS: Neonatal mice were injected intramuscularly with a human 2014 EV-D68
isolate that reliably induces paralysis in mice due to infection and loss of
spinal cord motor neurons. Mice receiving treatments were evaluated for motor
impairment, mortality, and spinal cord viral load.
RESULTS: hIVIG, which contained neutralizing antibodies to EV-D68, reduced
paralysis in infected mice and decreased spinal cord viral loads. Fluoxetine had
no effect on motor impairment or viral loads. Dexamethasone treatment worsened
motor impairment, increased mortality, and increased viral loads.
CONCLUSION: Results in this model of EV-D68-associated AFM provide a rational
basis for selecting empirical therapy in humans and establish this model as a
useful system for evaluating other potential therapies.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix468
PMCID: PMC5853295
PMID: 28968718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
