---
reference_id: "PMID:29959858"
title: "Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3: lessons from disease pathogenesis and clues into therapy."
authors:
- Matos CA
- de Almeida LP
- Nóbrega C
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/jnc.14541
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Machado-Joseph Disease/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3: lessons from disease pathogenesis and clues into therapy.
**Authors:** Matos CA, de Almeida LP, Nóbrega C
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jnc.14541](https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.14541)

## Content

1. J Neurochem. 2019 Jan;148(1):8-28. doi: 10.1111/jnc.14541. Epub 2018 Oct 5.

Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3: lessons from disease 
pathogenesis and clues into therapy.

Matos CA(1)(2), de Almeida LP(1)(3), Nóbrega C(1)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology (CNC), University of Coimbra, 
Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)Institute for Interdisciplinary Research, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 
Portugal.
(3)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve, 
Coimbra, Portugal.
(5)Centre for Biomedical Research (CBMR), University of Algarve, Coimbra, 
Portugal.
(6)Algarve Biomedical Center (ABC), University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal.

Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), also known as spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 
(SCA3), is an incurable disorder, widely regarded as the most common form of 
spinocerebellar ataxia in the world. MJD/SCA3 arises from mutation of the ATXN3 
gene, but this simple monogenic cause contrasts with the complexity of the 
pathogenic mechanisms that are currently admitted to underlie neuronal 
dysfunction and death. The aberrantly expanded protein product - ataxin-3 - is 
known to aggregate and generate toxic species that disrupt several cell systems, 
including autophagy, proteostasis, transcription, mitochondrial function and 
signalling. Over the years, research into putative therapeutic approaches has 
often been devoted to the development of strategies that counteract disease at 
different stages of cellular pathogenesis. Silencing the pathogenic protein, 
blocking aggregation, inhibiting toxic proteolytic processing and counteracting 
dysfunctions of the cellular systems affected have yielded promising 
ameliorating results in studies with cellular and animal models. The current 
review analyses the available studies dedicated to the investigation of MJD/SCA3 
pathogenesis and the exploration of possible therapeutic strategies, focusing 
primarily on gene therapy and pharmacological approaches rooted on the molecular 
and cellular mechanisms of disease.

© 2018 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.14541
PMID: 29959858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]