---
reference_id: "PMID:33901207"
title: Blood-brain barrier breakdown in non-enhancing multiple sclerosis lesions detected by 7-Tesla MP2RAGE ΔT1 mapping.
authors:
- Choi S
- Spini M
- Hua J
- Harrison DM
journal: PLoS One
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0249973
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blood-brain barrier breakdown in non-enhancing multiple sclerosis lesions detected by 7-Tesla MP2RAGE ΔT1 mapping.
**Authors:** Choi S, Spini M, Hua J, Harrison DM
**Journal:** PLoS One (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0249973](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0249973)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2021 Apr 26;16(4):e0249973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0249973. 
eCollection 2021.

Blood-brain barrier breakdown in non-enhancing multiple sclerosis lesions 
detected by 7-Tesla MP2RAGE ΔT1 mapping.

Choi S(1), Spini M(2), Hua J(3)(4), Harrison DM(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States 
of America.
(3)Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United Stated of America.
(4)F.M. Kirby Research Center for Functional Brain Imaging, Kennedy Krieger 
Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(5)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2022 Feb 22;17(2):e0264452. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0264452.

Although the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is altered in most multiple sclerosis 
(MS) lesions, gadolinium enhancement is seen only in acute lesions. In this 
study, we aimed to investigate gadolinium-induced changes in T1 relaxation time 
in MS lesions on 7-tesla (7T) MRI as a means to quantify BBB breakdown in 
non-enhancing MS lesions. Forty-seven participants with MS underwent 7T MRI of 
the brain with a magnitude-prepared rapid acquisition of 2 gradient echoes 
(MP2RAGE) sequence before and after contrast. Subtraction of pre- and 
post-contrast T1 maps was used to measure T1 relaxation time change (ΔT1) from 
gadolinium. ΔT1 values were interrogated in enhancing white matter lesions 
(ELs), non-enhancing white matter lesions (NELs), and normal appearing white 
matter (NAWM) and metrics were compared to clinical data. ΔT1 was measurable in 
NELs (median: -0.139 (-0.304, 0.174) seconds; p < 0.001) and was negligible in 
NAWM (median: -0.001 (-0.036, 0.155) seconds; p = 0.516). Median ΔT1 in NELs 
correlated with disability as measured by Expanded Disability Status Scale 
(EDSS) (rho = -0.331, p = 0.026). Multiple measures of NEL ΔT1 variability also 
correlated with EDSS. NEL ΔT1 values were greater and more variable in patients 
with progressive forms of MS and greater in those not on MS treatment. 
Measurement of the changes in T1 relaxation time caused by contrast on 7T 
MP2RAGE reveals clinically relevant evidence of BBB breakdown in NELs in MS. 
This data suggests that NEL ΔT1 should be evaluated further as a potential 
biomarker of persistently disrupted BBB in MS. Although the blood-brain barrier 
(BBB) is altered in most multiple sclerosis (MS) lesions, gadolinium enhancement 
is seen only in acute lesions. In this study, we aimed to investigate 
gadolinium-induced changes in T1 relaxation time in MS lesions on 7-tesla (7T) 
MRI as a means to quantify BBB breakdown in non-enhancing MS lesions. 
Forty-seven participants with MS underwent 7T MRI of the brain with a 
magnitude-prepared rapid acquisition of 2 gradient echoes (MP2RAGE) sequence 
before and after contrast. Subtraction of pre- and post-contrast T1 maps was 
used to measure T1 relaxation time change (ΔT1) from gadolinium. ΔT1 values were 
interrogated in enhancing white matter lesions (ELs), non-enhancing white matter 
lesions (NELs), and normal appearing white matter (NAWM) and metrics were 
compared to clinical data. ΔT1 was measurable in NELs (median: -0.139 (-0.304, 
0.174) seconds; p < 0.001) and was negligible in NAWM (median: -0.001 (-0.036, 
0.155) seconds; p = 0.516). Median ΔT1 in NELs correlated with disability as 
measured by Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) (rho = -0.331, p = 0.026). 
Multiple measures of NEL ΔT1 variability also correlated with EDSS. NEL ΔT1 
values were greater and more variable in patients with progressive forms of MS 
and greater in those not on MS treatment. Measurement of the changes in T1 
relaxation time caused by contrast on 7T MP2RAGE reveals clinically relevant 
evidence of BBB breakdown in NELs in MS. This data suggests that NEL ΔT1 should 
be evaluated further as a potential biomarker of persistently disrupted BBB in 
MS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0249973
PMCID: PMC8075220
PMID: 33901207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: DMH has received 
consulting fees from EMD Serono, Inc., Genentech, Sanofi-Genzyme, and Biogen.