---
reference_id: "PMID:29970458"
title: A System-wide Approach to Monitor Responses to Synergistic BRAF and EGFR Inhibition in Colorectal Cancer Cells.
authors:
- Ressa A
- Bosdriesz E
- de Ligt J
- Mainardi S
- Maddalo G
- Prahallad A
- Jager M
- de la Fonteijne L
- Fitzpatrick M
- Groten S
- Altelaar AFM
- Bernards R
- Cuppen E
- Wessels L
- Heck AJR
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1074/mcp.RA117.000486
keywords:
- Cell Cycle/drug effects
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Down-Regulation/drug effects
- Drug Synergism
- "ErbB Receptors/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Feedback, Physiological"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/drug effects
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation/genetics
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/metabolism
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11/metabolism"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism
- Systems Biology/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A System-wide Approach to Monitor Responses to Synergistic BRAF and EGFR Inhibition in Colorectal Cancer Cells.
**Authors:** Ressa A, Bosdriesz E, de Ligt J, Mainardi S, Maddalo G, Prahallad A, Jager M, de la Fonteijne L, Fitzpatrick M, Groten S, Altelaar AFM, Bernards R, Cuppen E, Wessels L, Heck AJR
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.RA117.000486](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.RA117.000486)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2018 Oct;17(10):1892-1908. doi: 10.1074/mcp.RA117.000486.
 Epub 2018 Jul 3.

A System-wide Approach to Monitor Responses to Synergistic BRAF and EGFR
Inhibition in Colorectal Cancer Cells.

Ressa A(1), Bosdriesz E(2), de Ligt J(3), Mainardi S(2), Maddalo G(1), Prahallad
A(2), Jager M(3), de la Fonteijne L(3), Fitzpatrick M(1), Groten S(1), Altelaar
AFM(1), Bernards R(2), Cuppen E(3), Wessels L(4)(5), Heck AJR(6).

Author information:
(1)From the ‡Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht
Institute for Pharmaceutical Science, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)§Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Cancer Genomics Centre Netherlands,
Oncode Institute, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)¶Center for Molecular Medicine and Cancer Genomics Netherlands, Division
Biomedical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University,
Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)§Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Cancer Genomics Centre Netherlands,
Oncode Institute, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; l.wessels@nki.nl.
(5)‖Department of EEMCS, Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 4, 2628 CD
Delft, The Netherlands.
(6)From the ‡Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht
Institute for Pharmaceutical Science, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH
Utrecht, The Netherlands; a.j.r.heck@uu.nl.

Intrinsic and/or acquired resistance represents one of the great challenges in
targeted cancer therapy. A deeper understanding of the molecular biology of
cancer has resulted in more efficient strategies, where one or multiple drugs
are adopted in novel therapies to tackle resistance. This beneficial effect of
using combination treatments has also been observed in colorectal cancer
patients harboring the BRAF(V600E) mutation, whereby dual inhibition of
BRAF(V600E) and EGFR increases antitumor activity. Notwithstanding this success,
it is not clear whether this combination treatment is the only or most effective
treatment to block intrinsic resistance to BRAF inhibitors. Here, we investigate
molecular responses upon single and multi-target treatments, over time, using
BRAF(V600E) mutant colorectal cancer cells as a model system. Through
integration of transcriptomic, proteomic and phosphoproteomics data we obtain a
comprehensive overview, revealing both known and novel responses. We primarily
observe widespread up-regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases and metabolic
pathways upon BRAF inhibition. These findings point to mechanisms by which the
drug-treated cells switch energy sources and enter a quiescent-like state as a
defensive response, while additionally compensating for the MAPK pathway
inhibition.

© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.RA117.000486
PMCID: PMC6166676
PMID: 29970458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest
