---
reference_id: "PMID:34833494"
title: "Acute Zonal Occult Outer Retinopathy in a Patient Suffering from Epilepsy: Five-Year Follow-Up."
authors:
- Karska-Basta I
- Romanowska-Dixon B
- Pojda-Wilczek D
- Bakunowicz-Łazarczyk A
- Kubicka-Trząska A
- Gerba-Górecka K
journal: Medicina (Kaunas)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/medicina57111276
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Epilepsy/complications, drug therapy"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- "Scotoma/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- White Dot Syndromes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Zonal Occult Outer Retinopathy in a Patient Suffering from Epilepsy: Five-Year Follow-Up.
**Authors:** Karska-Basta I, Romanowska-Dixon B, Pojda-Wilczek D, Bakunowicz-Łazarczyk A, Kubicka-Trząska A, Gerba-Górecka K
**Journal:** Medicina (Kaunas) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medicina57111276](https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina57111276)

## Content

1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Nov 20;57(11):1276. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111276.

Acute Zonal Occult Outer Retinopathy in a Patient Suffering from Epilepsy:
Five-Year Follow-Up.

Karska-Basta I(1)(2), Romanowska-Dixon B(1)(2), Pojda-Wilczek D(3),
Bakunowicz-Łazarczyk A(4), Kubicka-Trząska A(1)(2), Gerba-Górecka K(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Ophthalmology and Ocular Oncology, Department of Ophthalmology,
Faculty of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 31-501 Kraków,
Poland.
(2)Department of Opthalmology and Ocular Oncology, University Hospital, 31-501
Kraków, Poland.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medical Sciences in Katowice, Medical
University of Silesia in Katowice, 40-752 Katowice, Poland.
(4)Department of Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus, Medical University of
Białystok, Białystok University Children's Hospital, 15-274 Białystok, Poland.

We report an unprecedented case of a young patient with epilepsy coexisting with
acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR), a rare white dot syndrome of
unknown etiology, associated with damage to the large zones of the outer retina.
Recently, it has been established that epileptic episodes contribute to an
inflammatory response both in the brain and the retina. A 13-year-old male
patient with epilepsy was referred by a neurologist for an ophthalmologic
consultation due to a sudden deterioration of visual acuity in the left eye. The
examination, with a key role of multimodal imaging including color fundus
photography, fluorescein angiography, indocyanine green angiography (ICGA),
fundus autofluorescence (FAF), swept-source optical coherence tomography
(SS-OCT) with visual field assessment, and electroretinography indicated AZOOR
as the underlying entity. Findings at the first admission included enlargement
of the blind spot in visual field examination along a typical trizonal pattern,
which was revealed by FAF, ICGA, and SS-OCT in the left eye. The right eye
exhibited no abnormalities. Seminal follow-up revealed no changes in best
corrected visual acuity, and multimodal imaging findings remain unaltered. Thus,
no medical intervention is required. Our case and recent laboratory findings
suggest a causative link between epilepsy and retinal disorders, although this
issue requires further research.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111276
PMCID: PMC8624097
PMID: 34833494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
