---
reference_id: "PMID:39041895"
title: Cellular turnover and degradation of the most common missense cystathionine beta-synthase variants causing homocystinuria.
authors:
- Mijatovic E
- Ascenção K
- Szabo C
- Majtan T
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/pro.5123
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular turnover and degradation of the most common missense cystathionine beta-synthase variants causing homocystinuria.
**Authors:** Mijatovic E, Ascenção K, Szabo C, Majtan T
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pro.5123](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.5123)

## Content

1. Protein Sci. 2024 Aug;33(8):e5123. doi: 10.1002/pro.5123.

Cellular turnover and degradation of the most common missense cystathionine 
beta-synthase variants causing homocystinuria.

Mijatovic E(1), Ascenção K(1), Szabo C(1), Majtan T(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pharmacology, Faculty of Science and Medicine, University of 
Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.

Homocystinuria (HCU) due to cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) deficiency is the 
most common inborn error of sulfur amino acid metabolism. Recent work suggests 
that missense pathogenic mutations-regardless of their topology-cause 
instability of the C-terminal regulatory domain, which likely translates into 
CBS misfolding, impaired assembly, and loss of function. However, it is unknown 
how instability of the regulatory domain translates into cellular CBS turnover 
and which degradation pathways are involved in CBS proteostasis. Here, we 
developed a human HEK293-based cellular model lacking intrinsic CBS and stably 
overexpressing wild-type (WT) CBS or its 10 most common missense HCU mutants. We 
found that HCU mutants, except the I278T variant, expressed similarly or better 
than CBS WT, with some of them showing impaired oligomerization, activity and 
response to allosteric activator S-adenosylmethionine. Cellular stability of all 
HCU mutants, except P49L and A114V, was significantly lower than the stability 
of CBS WT, suggesting their increased degradation. Ubiquitination analysis of 
CBS WT and two representative CBS mutants (T191M and I278T) showed that 
proteasomal degradation is the major pathway for CBS disposal, with a minor 
involvement of lysosomal-autophagic and endoplasmic reticulum-associated 
degradation (ERAD) pathways for HCU mutants. Proteasomal inhibition 
significantly increased the half-life and activity of T191M and I278T CBS 
mutants. Lysosomal and ERAD inhibition had only a minor impact on CBS turnover, 
but ERAD inhibition rescued the activity of T191M and I278T CBS mutants 
similarly as proteasomal inhibition. In conclusion, the present study provides 
new insights into proteostasis of CBS in HCU.

© 2024 The Author(s). Protein Science published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.5123
PMCID: PMC11264351
PMID: 39041895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.