---
reference_id: "PMID:10907591"
title: Consequences of long-term inflammation. The natural history of asthma.
authors:
- Sears MR
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0272-5231(05)70269-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consequences of long-term inflammation. The natural history of asthma.
**Authors:** Sears MR
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0272-5231(05)70269-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0272-5231(05)70269-0)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2000 Jun;21(2):315-29. doi: 10.1016/s0272-5231(05)70269-0.

Consequences of long-term inflammation. The natural history of asthma.

Sears MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. 
Searsm@fhs.csu.McMaster.ca

Although asthma is classically defined as reversible airflow obstruction, and 
often remits in younger subjects with milder disease, the natural history of 
asthma is that various degrees of airflow obstruction may persist and, in the 
long-term, asthma may become moderately to fully irreversible. Severe, 
irreversible airflow obstruction may develop despite apparently appropriate 
therapy and in the absence of other risk factors, such as smoking and 
environmental insults. All studies of subjects with persisting asthma show 
increased decline in lung function compared with normal subjects. Persistent 
abnormal physiology is reflected both in reduced airflow rates and in increased 
airway responsiveness. The cellular and molecular mechanisms of airway 
remodeling are described elsewhere in this issue. Questions not yet clearly 
answered are the reasons for these persistent abnormalities in some asthmatics, 
and which subjects are most at risk. Factors that adversely impact the outcome 
as adults identified relatively consistently among many longitudinal studies of 
the natural history of asthma include: Female gender. Environmental tobacco 
smoke exposure in childhood. Personal tobacco smoking in adolescence and 
adulthood. Age of onset of symptoms. Severity of childhood asthma. Duration of 
asthma. Severity of lung function abnormality in childhood. Bronchodilator 
reversibility. Degree of airway hyperresponsiveness. Delay in initiating 
anti-inflammatory therapy. Remission among adult asthmatics is uncommon, but is 
associated with better initial lung function, young age, male gender, and lesser 
degrees of airway responsiveness. The role of atopy remains controversial. 
Conversely, risk factors for death from asthma include older age, smoking, 
atopy, impaired lung function, and moderate to high reversibility. Treatment can 
improve lung function, reduce airway responsiveness, and improve quality of 
life. The overall effect of treatment on the natural history of the disease is 
not yet clear, despite significant short-term improvements from effective 
anti-inflammatory therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/s0272-5231(05)70269-0
PMID: 10907591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]