---
reference_id: "PMID:23814040"
title: Altered 2-thiouridylation impairs mitochondrial translation in reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency.
authors:
- Boczonadi V
- Smith PM
- Pyle A
- Gomez-Duran A
- Schara U
- Tulinius M
- Chinnery PF
- Horvath R
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt309
keywords:
- Cell Line
- Cysteine/metabolism
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Mitochondria/genetics
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- Mutation
- Myoblasts/metabolism
- Oxidative Phosphorylation
- "Protein Biosynthesis/genetics, physiology"
- "RNA, Transfer/genetics, metabolism"
- "Thiouridine/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- "tRNA Methyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered 2-thiouridylation impairs mitochondrial translation in reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency.
**Authors:** Boczonadi V, Smith PM, Pyle A, Gomez-Duran A, Schara U, Tulinius M, Chinnery PF, Horvath R
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt309](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt309)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Nov 15;22(22):4602-15. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt309. Epub 2013 
Jun 28.

Altered 2-thiouridylation impairs mitochondrial translation in reversible 
infantile respiratory chain deficiency.

Boczonadi V(1), Smith PM, Pyle A, Gomez-Duran A, Schara U, Tulinius M, Chinnery 
PF, Horvath R.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Central Parkway, 
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2013 Aug;9(8):417. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2013.138.

Childhood-onset mitochondrial encephalomyopathies are severe, relentlessly 
progressive conditions. However, reversible infantile respiratory chain 
deficiency (RIRCD), due to a homoplasmic mt-tRNA(Glu) mutation, and reversible 
infantile hepatopathy, due to tRNA 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridylate 
methyltransferase (TRMU) deficiency, stand out by showing spontaneous recovery, 
and provide the key to treatments of potential broader relevance. Modification 
of mt-tRNA(Glu) is a possible functional link between these two conditions, 
since TRMU is responsible for 2-thiouridylation of mt-tRNA(Glu), mt-tRNA(Lys) 
and mt-tRNA(Gln). Here we show that down-regulation of TRMU in RIRCD impairs 
2-thiouridylation and exacerbates the effect of the mt-tRNA(Glu) mutation by 
triggering a mitochondrial translation defect in vitro. Skeletal muscle of RIRCD 
patients in the symptomatic phase showed significantly reduced 
2-thiouridylation. Supplementation with l-cysteine, which is required for 
optimal TRMU function, rescued respiratory chain enzyme activities in human cell 
lines of patients with RIRCD as well as deficient TRMU. Our results show that 
l-cysteine supplementation is a potential treatment for RIRCD and for TRMU 
deficiency, and is likely to have broader application for the growing group of 
intra-mitochondrial translation disorders.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt309
PMCID: PMC3889809
PMID: 23814040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]