---
reference_id: "PMID:37706198"
title: A systematic review of targeted therapy for vestibular schwannoma in patients with NF2-related schwannomatosis.
authors:
- Chiranth S
- Langer SW
- Poulsen HS
- Urup T
journal: Neurooncol Adv
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdad099
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review of targeted therapy for vestibular schwannoma in patients with NF2-related schwannomatosis.
**Authors:** Chiranth S, Langer SW, Poulsen HS, Urup T
**Journal:** Neurooncol Adv (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/noajnl/vdad099](https://doi.org/10.1093/noajnl/vdad099)

## Content

1. Neurooncol Adv. 2023 Aug 16;5(1):vdad099. doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdad099. 
eCollection 2023 Jan-Dec.

A systematic review of targeted therapy for vestibular schwannoma in patients 
with NF2-related schwannomatosis.

Chiranth S(1)(2), Langer SW(2)(3), Poulsen HS(1), Urup T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)The DCCC Brain Tumor Center , Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Oncology, Copenhagen University Hospital - Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: One of the hallmarks of NF2-related Schwannomatosis (NF2-related 
SWN) is bilateral vestibular schwannomas (VS) that can cause progressive hearing 
impairment in patients. This systematic review was performed to investigate the 
efficacy and toxicity of tested targeted agents.
METHODS: The systematic search was conducted on PubMed and EMBASE Ovid databases 
from inception to October 2022, according to the Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. The incidence of 
outcomes in studies involving bevacizumab and other targeted therapies was 
extracted. The bevacizumab results were pooled, and 95% confidence intervals 
(95% CI) were calculated.
RESULTS: Sixteen studies (8 prospective and 8 retrospective) testing 6 drugs 
were selected out of 721 search results. There were 10 studies concerning 
bevacizumab, with a total of 200 patients. The pooled radiographic response rate 
(RR) was 38% (95% CI: 31 - 45%) and the pooled hearing response rate (HR) was 
45% (95% CI: 36 - 54%). The most frequent bevacizumab-related toxicities were 
hypertension and menorrhagia. Of other targeted therapies showing activity, 
lapatinib had a RR of 6% and a HR of 31%. A VEGFR vaccine showed RR in 29% and 
HR in 40% of patients. Both agents had a manageable safety profile.
CONCLUSIONS: Bevacizumab, in comparison to other targeted agents, showed the 
highest efficacy. Lower dosage of bevacizumab shows comparable efficacy and may 
reduce toxicity. Other targeted agents, administered alone or as combination 
therapy, have the potential to improve outcomes for VS in patients with 
NF2-related SWN, but future clinical studies are needed.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press, the Society for 
Neuro-Oncology and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/noajnl/vdad099
PMCID: PMC10496940
PMID: 37706198

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.