---
reference_id: "PMID:39076647"
title: "The Challenges of Diagnosis and Treatment of Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy: Are We there yet?"
authors:
- Spadotto A
- Morabito D
- Carecci A
- Massaro G
- Statuto G
- Angeletti A
- Graziosi M
- Biagini E
- Martignani C
- Ziacchi M
- Diemberger I
- Biffi M
journal: Rev Cardiovasc Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.31083/j.rcm2308283
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Challenges of Diagnosis and Treatment of Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy: Are We there yet?
**Authors:** Spadotto A, Morabito D, Carecci A, Massaro G, Statuto G, Angeletti A, Graziosi M, Biagini E, Martignani C, Ziacchi M, Diemberger I, Biffi M
**Journal:** Rev Cardiovasc Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.31083/j.rcm2308283](https://doi.org/10.31083/j.rcm2308283)

## Content

1. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Aug 15;23(8):283. doi: 10.31083/j.rcm2308283.
eCollection 2022 Aug.

The Challenges of Diagnosis and Treatment of Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy: Are
We there yet?

Spadotto A(1)(2), Morabito D(1)(2), Carecci A(1)(2), Massaro G(1)(2), Statuto
G(1)(2), Angeletti A(1), Graziosi M(1), Biagini E(1), Martignani C(1), Ziacchi
M(1), Diemberger I(1)(2), Biffi M(1).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, 40138 Bologna,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: we sought to review the evolution in the diagnosis and treatment of
Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy (ACM), a clinically multifaceted entity beyond the
observation of ventricular arrhythmias, and the outcome of therapies aiming at
sudden death prevention in a single center experience.
METHODS: retrospective analysis of the data of consecutive patients with an
implanted cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) and a confirmed diagnosis of ACM
according to the proposed Padua Criteria, who were referred to our center from
January 1992 to October 2021.
RESULTS: we enrolled 72 patients (66% males, mean age at implant 46 ± 16 years),
63.9% implanted for primary prevention. At the time of ICD implant, 29 (40.3%)
patients had a right ventricular involvement, 24 (33.3%) had a dominant LV
involvement and 19 (26.4%) had a biventricular involvement. After a median
follow-up of 6,1 years [IQR: 2.5-9.9], 34 patients (47.2%) had 919 sustained
episodes of ventricular arrhythmias (VA). 27 patients (37.5%) had 314 episodes
of life-threatening arrhythmias (LT-VA), defined as sustained ventricular
tachycardia  ≥  200 beats/min. Considering only the patients with an ICD capable
of delivering ATP, 80.4% of VA and 65% of LT-VA were successfully terminated
with ATP. 16 (22.2%) patients had an inappropriate ICD activation, mostly caused
by atrial fibrillation, while in 9 patients (12.5%) there was a complication
needing reintervention (in 3 cases there was a loss of ventricular sensing
dictating lead revision). During the follow-up 11 (15.3%) patients died, most of
them due to heart failure, and 8 (11.1%) underwent heart transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: ACM is increasingly diagnosed owing to heightened suspicion at ECG
examination and to improved imaging technology and availability, though the
diagnostic workflow is particularly challenging in the earliest disease stages.
ICD therapy is the cornerstone of sudden death prevention, albeit its efficacy
is not based on controlled studies, and VT ablation/medical therapy are
complementary to this strategy. The high burden of ATP-terminated VA makes
shock-only devices debatable. The progressive nature of ACM leads to severe
biventricular enlargement and refractory heart failure, which pose significant
treatment issues when a predominant RV dysfunction occurs owing to the reduced
possibility for mechanical circulatory assistance.

Copyright: © 2022 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/j.rcm2308283
PMCID: PMC11266951
PMID: 39076647

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
