---
reference_id: "PMID:27491075"
title: A mouse model for fucosidosis recapitulates storage pathology and neurological features of the milder form of the human disease.
authors:
- Wolf H
- Damme M
- Stroobants S
- "D'Hooge R"
- Beck HC
- Hermans-Borgmeyer I
- Lüllmann-Rauch R
- Dierks T
- Lübke T
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.025122
keywords:
- Animals
- "Behavior, Animal"
- "Brain/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Enzyme Activation
- Fucose/metabolism
- "Fucosidosis/metabolism, pathology, urine"
- G(M2) Ganglioside/metabolism
- Glycoconjugates/urine
- Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Humans
- Inflammation/pathology
- "Lysosomes/enzymology, ultrastructure"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Organ Specificity
- Proteolysis
- "Purkinje Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Viscera/metabolism, pathology"
- "alpha-L-Fucosidase/deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model for fucosidosis recapitulates storage pathology and neurological features of the milder form of the human disease.
**Authors:** Wolf H, Damme M, Stroobants S, D'Hooge R, Beck HC, Hermans-Borgmeyer I, Lüllmann-Rauch R, Dierks T, Lübke T
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.025122](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.025122)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2016 Sep 1;9(9):1015-28. doi: 10.1242/dmm.025122. Epub 2016
Aug  4.

A mouse model for fucosidosis recapitulates storage pathology and neurological
features of the milder form of the human disease.

Wolf H(1), Damme M(2), Stroobants S(3), D'Hooge R(3), Beck HC(4),
Hermans-Borgmeyer I(5), Lüllmann-Rauch R(6), Dierks T(1), Lübke T(7).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry I, Department of Chemistry, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld
D-33615, Germany.
(2)Biochemical Institute, University of Kiel, Kiel D-24098, Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Biological Psychology, University of Leuven, Leuven B-3000,
Belgium.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Centre for Clinical Proteomics,
Odense University Hospital, Odense DK-5000, Denmark.
(5)ZMNH, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg D-20246, Germany.
(6)Department of Anatomy, University of Kiel, Kiel D-24098, Germany.
(7)Biochemistry I, Department of Chemistry, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld
D-33615, Germany torben.luebke@uni-bielefeld.de.

Fucosidosis is a rare lysosomal storage disorder caused by the inherited
deficiency of the lysosomal hydrolase α-L-fucosidase, which leads to an impaired
degradation of fucosylated glycoconjugates. Here, we report the generation of a
fucosidosis mouse model, in which the gene for lysosomal α-L-fucosidase (Fuca1)
was disrupted by gene targeting. Homozygous knockout mice completely lack
α-L-fucosidase activity in all tested organs leading to highly elevated amounts
of the core-fucosylated glycoasparagine Fuc(α1,6)-GlcNAc(β1-N)-Asn and, to a
lesser extent, other fucosylated glycoasparagines, which all were also partially
excreted in urine. Lysosomal storage pathology was observed in many visceral
organs, such as in the liver, kidney, spleen and bladder, as well as in the
central nervous system (CNS). On the cellular level, storage was characterized
by membrane-limited cytoplasmic vacuoles primarily containing water-soluble
storage material. In the CNS, cellular alterations included enlargement of the
lysosomal compartment in various cell types, accumulation of secondary storage
material and neuroinflammation, as well as a progressive loss of Purkinje cells
combined with astrogliosis leading to psychomotor and memory deficits. Our
results demonstrate that this new fucosidosis mouse model resembles the human
disease and thus will help to unravel underlying pathological processes.
Moreover, this model could be utilized to establish diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies for fucosidosis.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.025122
PMCID: PMC5047687
PMID: 27491075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing or financial
interests.
