---
reference_id: "PMID:31495881"
title: "Choice of endpoint in kidney outcome trials: considerations from the EMPA-REG OUTCOME® trial."
authors:
- Perkovic V
- Koitka-Weber A
- Cooper ME
- Schernthaner G
- Pfarr E
- Woerle HJ
- von Eynatten M
- Wanner C
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfz179
keywords:
- Benzhydryl Compounds/therapeutic use
- Creatinine/blood
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Glucosides/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/drug therapy, epidemiology, mortality, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2 Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Choice of endpoint in kidney outcome trials: considerations from the EMPA-REG OUTCOME® trial.
**Authors:** Perkovic V, Koitka-Weber A, Cooper ME, Schernthaner G, Pfarr E, Woerle HJ, von Eynatten M, Wanner C
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfz179](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfz179)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2020 Dec 4;35(12):2103-2111. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfz179.

Choice of endpoint in kidney outcome trials: considerations from the EMPA-REG 
OUTCOME® trial.

Perkovic V(1), Koitka-Weber A(2)(3)(4), Cooper ME(3), Schernthaner G(5), Pfarr 
E(2), Woerle HJ(2), von Eynatten M(2), Wanner C(4).

Author information:
(1)The George Institute for Global Health, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, Australia.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany.
(3)Department of Diabetes, Central Clinical School, Monash University, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Department of Medicine, Würzburg University Clinic, Würzburg, Germany.
(5)Rudolfstiftung Hospital Vienna, Department of Medicine, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Doubling of serum creatinine [equivalent to 57% reduction in 
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)] is an established surrogate for 
end-stage kidney disease (ESKD); however, this endpoint necessitates lengthy 
follow-up and large sample sizes in clinical trials. We explored whether 
alternative eGFR decline thresholds provide more feasible surrogate kidney 
endpoints.
METHODS: The study involved post hoc analysis of the EMPA-REG OUTCOME® trial. 
Adults with type 2 diabetes, high cardiovascular risk and eGFR ≥30 mL/min/1.73 
m2 were assigned empagliflozin 10 mg or 25 mg (n = 4687) or placebo (n = 2333), 
on top of standard of care. We assessed composite endpoints incorporating 
different eGFR decline thresholds (≥30, ≥40, ≥50 or ≥57%) combined with 
initiation of renal replacement therapy (RRT) or renal death. This trial is 
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01131676).
RESULTS: Empagliflozin versus placebo significantly lowered the risk of decline 
in eGFR for each threshold listed above, combined with initiation of RRT or 
renal death, ranging from a hazard ratio (HR) of 0.81 [95% confidence interval 
(CI) 0.72-0.91] for endpoints based on 30% eGFR decline to an HR of 0.37 
(0.23-0.61) for endpoints based on 57% eGFR decline. Lower thresholds (e.g. 30%) 
were associated with higher event rates but weaker treatment effects. The time 
to the 95% CI of the HR falling to <1.0 decreased with increasing eGFR 
threshold.
CONCLUSIONS: The composite of 40% decline in eGFR, ESKD or renal death appears 
to provide reliable results similar to the traditional 57% decline in eGFR.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
ERA-EDTA. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfz179
PMID: 31495881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]