---
reference_id: "PMID:30359775"
title: Novel variants in natriuretic peptide receptor 2 in unrelated patients with acromesomelic dysplasia type Maroteaux.
authors:
- Ain NU
- Iqbal M
- Valta H
- Emerling CA
- Ahmed S
- Makitie O
- Naz S
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.10.006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Receptors, Atrial Natriuretic Factor/genetics"
- Atrial Natriuretic Factor Receptor B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel variants in natriuretic peptide receptor 2 in unrelated patients with acromesomelic dysplasia type Maroteaux.
**Authors:** Ain NU, Iqbal M, Valta H, Emerling CA, Ahmed S, Makitie O, Naz S
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.10.006)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2019 Sep;62(9):103554. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.10.006. Epub 
2018 Oct 22.

Novel variants in natriuretic peptide receptor 2 in unrelated patients with 
acromesomelic dysplasia type Maroteaux.

Ain NU(1), Iqbal M(2), Valta H(3), Emerling CA(4), Ahmed S(2), Makitie O(5), Naz 
S(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan; 
Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery and Center for Molecular Medicine, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Center, University of Helsinki and 
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier, Université de 
Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, EPHE, Montpellier, France.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery and Center for Molecular 
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Children's Hospital, 
Pediatric Research Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Department of Clinical Genetics, HUSLAB, Helsinki 
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; Department of Clinical Genetics, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: 
outi.makitie@helsinki.fi.
(6)School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan. 
Electronic address: naz.sbs@pu.edu.pk.

Acromesomelic dysplasia are a heterogeneous group of disorders with variable 
spectrum and severity of skeletal anomalies in the affected individuals. 
Acromesomelic dysplasia type Maroteaux (AMDM) is characterized by extreme 
shortening of the forelimbs and disproportionate short stature. Several 
homozygous inactivating mutations in NPR2 have been identified in different AMDM 
patients. We report five novel variants in affected individuals in four 
different families. These include two nonsense and three missense variants. This 
study broadens the genotypic spectrum of NPR2 mutations in individuals with AMDM 
and also describes the intra- and inter-familial phenotypic variability due to 
NPR2 variants.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.10.006
PMID: 30359775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]