---
reference_id: PMID:36090971
title: Activation mechanisms of monocytes/macrophages in adult-onset Still disease.
authors:
- Tsuboi H
- Segawa S
- Yagishita M
- Toko H
- Honda F
- Kitada A
- Miki H
- Ohyama A
- Hagiwara S
- Kondo Y
- Matsumoto I
- Sumida T
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.953730
keywords:
- Humans
- Interleukin-18/metabolism
- "Macrophage Activation Syndrome/etiology, metabolism"
- Macrophages
- Monocytes/metabolism
- Proteins/metabolism
- "Still's Disease, Adult-Onset"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation mechanisms of monocytes/macrophages in adult-onset Still disease.
**Authors:** Tsuboi H, Segawa S, Yagishita M, Toko H, Honda F, Kitada A, Miki H, Ohyama A, Hagiwara S, Kondo Y, Matsumoto I, Sumida T
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.953730](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.953730)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Aug 26;13:953730. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.953730. 
eCollection 2022.

Activation mechanisms of monocytes/macrophages in adult-onset Still disease.

Tsuboi H(1), Segawa S(1), Yagishita M(1), Toko H(1), Honda F(1), Kitada A(1), 
Miki H(1), Ohyama A(1), Hagiwara S(1), Kondo Y(1), Matsumoto I(1), Sumida T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.

Adult onset Still disease (AOSD) is a systemic inflammatory disorder 
characterized by skin rash, spiking fever, arthritis, sore throat, 
lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly. Although the etiology of this disease 
has not been fully clarified, both innate and acquired immune responses could 
contribute to its pathogenesis. Hyperactivation of macrophages and neutrophils 
along with low activation of natural killer (NK) cells in innate immunity, as 
well as hyperactivation of Th1 and Th17 cells, whereas low activation of 
regulatory T cells (Tregs) in acquired immunity are involved in the pathogenic 
process of AOSD. In innate immunity, activation of monocytes/macrophages might 
play central roles in the development of AOSD and macrophage activation syndrome 
(MAS), a severe life-threating complication of AOSD. Regarding the activation 
mechanisms of monocytes/macrophages in AOSD, in addition to type II interferon 
(IFN) stimulation, several pathways have recently been identified, such as the 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular 
patterns (DAMPs)-pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) axis, and neutrophil 
extracellular traps (NETs)-DNA. These stimulations on monocytes/macrophages 
cause activation of the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain, leucine-rich 
repeat, and pyrin domain (NLRP) 3 inflammasomes, which trigger capase-1 
activation, resulting in conversion of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 into mature 
forms. Thereafter, IL-1β and IL-18 produced by activated monocytes/macrophages 
contribute to various clinical features in AOSD. We identified placenta-specific 
8 (PLAC8) as a specifically increased molecule in monocytes of active AOSD, 
which correlated with serum levels of CRP, ferritin, IL-1β, and IL-18. 
Interestingly, PLAC8 could suppress the synthesis of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 via 
enhanced autophagy; thus, PLAC8 seems to be a regulatory molecule in AOSD. These 
findings for the activation mechanisms of monocytes/macrophages could shed light 
on the pathogenesis and development of a novel therapeutic strategy for AOSD.

Copyright © 2022 Tsuboi, Segawa, Yagishita, Toko, Honda, Kitada, Miki, Ohyama, 
Hagiwara, Kondo, Matsumoto and Sumida.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.953730
PMCID: PMC9461677
PMID: 36090971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.