---
reference_id: "PMID:21913264"
title: "Urinary protein profiling by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry: ADAM28 is overexpressed in bladder transitional cell carcinoma."
authors:
- Tyan YC
- Yang MH
- Chen SC
- Jong SB
- Chen WC
- Yang YH
- Chung TW
- Liao PC
journal: Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/rcm.5169
keywords:
- "ADAM Proteins/biosynthesis, urine"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Arsenic/urine
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/biosynthesis, urine"
- "Carcinoma, Transitional Cell/metabolism, urine"
- Case-Control Studies
- "Chromatography, Liquid/methods"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Peptide Fragments/analysis, urine"
- Peripheral Vascular Diseases
- "Proteinase Inhibitory Proteins, Secretory/urine"
- "Proteins/analysis, classification"
- Proteinuria/urine
- Proteome/analysis
- Proteomics/methods
- Reproducibility of Results
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Serine Peptidase Inhibitor Kazal-Type 5
- Taiwan
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry/methods
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/metabolism, urine"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urinary protein profiling by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry: ADAM28 is overexpressed in bladder transitional cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Tyan YC, Yang MH, Chen SC, Jong SB, Chen WC, Yang YH, Chung TW, Liao PC
**Journal:** Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/rcm.5169](https://doi.org/10.1002/rcm.5169)

## Content

1. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2011 Oct 15;25(19):2851-62. doi: 10.1002/rcm.5169.

Urinary protein profiling by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry:
ADAM28 is overexpressed in bladder transitional cell carcinoma.

Tyan YC(1), Yang MH, Chen SC, Jong SB, Chen WC, Yang YH, Chung TW, Liao PC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Imaging and Radiological Sciences, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Taiwan. yctyan@kmu.edu.tw

Bladder cancer is the most common urological cancer with higher incidence rate
in the endemic areas of Blackfoot disease (BFD) in southern Taiwan. The aim of
this study was to utilize the proteomic approach to establish urinary protein
patterns of bladder cancer. The experimental results showed that most patients
with bladder cancer had proteinuria or albuminuria. The urine arsenic
concentrations of bladder cancer patients in BFD areas were significantly higher
than those patients from non-BFD areas. In the proteomic analysis, the urinary
proteome was identified by nano-high-performance liquid
chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry
(nano-HPLC/ESI-MS/MS) followed by peptide fragmentation pattern analysis. We
categorized 2782 unique proteins of which 89 proteins were identified with at
least three unique matching peptide sequences. Among these 89 proteins, thirteen
of them were not found in the control group and may represent proteins specific
for bladder cancer. In this study, three proteins, SPINK5, ADAM28 and PTP1, were
also confirmed by Western blotting and showed significant differential
expression compared with the control group. ADAM28 may be used as a possible
biomarker of bladder cancer.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rcm.5169
PMID: 21913264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
