---
reference_id: "PMID:2227934"
title: "Identification of a compound heterozygote for adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency (APRT*J/APART*Q0) leading to 2,8-dihydroxyadenine urolithiasis."
authors:
- Kamatani N
- Kuroshima S
- Yamanaka H
- Nakashe S
- Take H
- Hakoda M
journal: Hum Genet
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1007/BF00194224
keywords:
- "Adenine/analogs & derivatives, chemistry"
- "Adenine Phosphoribosyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- Alleles
- B-Lymphocytes/enzymology
- "Blotting, Southern"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Genetic Carrier Screening
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Oligonucleotide Probes
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- T-Lymphocytes/enzymology
- "Urinary Calculi/chemistry, enzymology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a compound heterozygote for adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency (APRT*J/APART*Q0) leading to 2,8-dihydroxyadenine urolithiasis.
**Authors:** Kamatani N, Kuroshima S, Yamanaka H, Nakashe S, Take H, Hakoda M
**Journal:** Hum Genet (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00194224](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00194224)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 1990 Oct;85(5):500-4. doi: 10.1007/BF00194224.

Identification of a compound heterozygote for adenine phosphoribosyltransferase
deficiency (APRT*J/APART*Q0) leading to 2,8-dihydroxyadenine urolithiasis.

Kamatani N(1), Kuroshima S, Yamanaka H, Nakashe S, Take H, Hakoda M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Rheumatology, Tokyo Women's Medical College, Japan.

Homozygous deficiency of a purine salvage enzyme, adenine
phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT), causes urolithiasis and renal failure. There
are two known types of homozygous APRT deficiencies; type I patients completely
lack APRT activity while type II patients only partially lack such activity. All
type II patients possess at least one APRT*J allele with a substitution from ATG
(Met) to ACG (Thr) at codon 136. Type I patients are considered to possess two
alleles (APRT*Q0) both of which code for complete deficiencies. Thus, some
patients with type II APRT deficiencies may have a genotype of APRT*J/APRT*Q0.
As no individuals with such a genotype have previously been identified, we
performed extensive analysis on four members of a family by (1) the T-cell
method for the identification of a homozygote, (2) the B-cell method for the
identification of heterozygotes, and (3) oligonucleotide hybridization after in
vitro amplification of a part of genomic APRT sequence for the identification of
APRT*J and non-APRT*J alleles. We report here the first evidence that
2,8-dihydroxyadenine urolithiasis developed in a boy aged 2 years with a
genotype of APRT*J/APRT*Q0.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00194224
PMID: 2227934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
