---
reference_id: "PMID:8978012"
title: "Prenatal findings in chondrodysplasia punctata, tibia-metacarpal type."
authors:
- Argo KM
- Toriello HV
- Jelsema RD
- Zuidema LJ
journal: Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1046/j.1469-0705.1996.08050350.x
keywords:
- Adult
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Female
- Fetal Diseases/diagnostic imaging
- Follow-Up Studies
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- "Metacarpus/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Pregnancy Outcome
- "Tibia/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal findings in chondrodysplasia punctata, tibia-metacarpal type.
**Authors:** Argo KM, Toriello HV, Jelsema RD, Zuidema LJ
**Journal:** Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1469-0705.1996.08050350.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1469-0705.1996.08050350.x)

## Content

1. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 1996 Nov;8(5):350-4. doi: 
10.1046/j.1469-0705.1996.08050350.x.

Prenatal findings in chondrodysplasia punctata, tibia-metacarpal type.

Argo KM(1), Toriello HV, Jelsema RD, Zuidema LJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, West Michigan Perinatal and Genetic 
Diagnostic Center, Butterworth Hospital, Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA.

Chondrodysplasia punctata, a skeletal dysplasia with craniofacial dysmorphism 
and joint contractures can occur with rhizomelia, mesomelia or both. The 
rhizomelic form is generally lethal, whereas one form of mesomelic 
chondrodysplasia punctata has been described that is associated with a 
presumably normal lifespan and intelligence. We describe a case of a fetus 
suspected prenatally of having rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, who was 
subsequently diagnosed at 1.5 years of age to have the tibia-metacarpal form of 
chondrodysplasia punctata. The prenatal sonographic findings of second-trimester 
micromelic bone shortening and third-trimester proximal femoral stippling may be 
present in the rhizomelic form but are not specific to this condition.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1469-0705.1996.08050350.x
PMID: 8978012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]