---
reference_id: "PMID:39727052"
title: "Key Pathophysiological Role of Skeletal Muscle Disturbance in Post COVID and Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): Accumulated Evidence."
authors:
- Scheibenbogen C
- Wirth KJ
journal: J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jcsm.13669
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/diagnosis, physiopathology, virology"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Muscle, Skeletal/cytology, physiopathology"
- "Post-Acute COVID-19 Syndrome/physiopathology, virology"
- SARS-CoV-2/pathogenicity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Key Pathophysiological Role of Skeletal Muscle Disturbance in Post COVID and Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): Accumulated Evidence.
**Authors:** Scheibenbogen C, Wirth KJ
**Journal:** J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcsm.13669](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcsm.13669)

## Content

1. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2025 Feb;16(1):e13669. doi: 10.1002/jcsm.13669.

Key Pathophysiological Role of Skeletal Muscle Disturbance in Post COVID and
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): Accumulated
Evidence.

Scheibenbogen C(1), Wirth KJ(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt Universität zu Berlin
and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany.
(2)Mitodicure GmbH, Kriftel, Germany.
(3)Institute for General Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital,
Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies provide strong evidence for a key role of skeletal
muscle pathophysiology in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
(ME/CFS). In a 2021 review article on the pathophysiology of ME/CFS, we
postulated that hypoperfusion and ischemia can result in excessive sodium and
calcium overload in skeletal muscles of ME/CFS patients to cause mitochondrial
damage. Since then, experimental evidence has been provided that supports this
concept.
METHODS: We collect, summarize and discuss the current state of knowledge for
the key role of skeletal muscle pathophysiology. We try to explain which risk
factors and mechanisms are responsible for a subgroup of patients with post
COVID syndrome (PCS) to develop ME/CFS (PC-ME/CFS).
RESULTS: Mitochondrial dysfunction is a long-held assumption to explain cardinal
symptoms of ME/CFS. However, mitochondrial dysfunction could not be convincingly
shown in leukocytes. By contrast, recent studies provide strong evidence for
mitochondrial dysfunction in skeletal muscle tissue in ME/CFS. An electron
microscopy study could directly show damage of mitochondria in skeletal muscle
of ME/CFS patients with a preferential subsarcolemmal localization but not in
PCS. Another study shows signs of skeletal muscle damage and regeneration in
biopsies taken one day after exercise in PC-ME/CFS. The simultaneous presence of
necroses and signs of regeneration supports the concept of repeated damage.
Other studies correlated diminished hand grip strength (HGS) with symptom
severity and prognosis. A MRI study showed that intracellular sodium in muscles
of ME/CFS patients is elevated and that levels correlate inversely with HGS.
This finding corroborates our concept of sodium and consecutive calcium overload
as cause of muscular and mitochondrial damage caused by enhanced proton-sodium
exchange due to anaerobic metabolism and diminished activity of the
sodium-potassium-ATPase. The histological investigations in ME/CFS exclude
ischemia by microvascular obstruction, viral presence or immune myositis. The
only known exercise-induced mechanism of damage left is sodium induced calcium
overload. If ionic disturbance and mitochondrial dysfunction is severe enough
the patient may be captured in a vicious circle. This energy deficit is the most
likely cause of exertional intolerance and post exertional malaise and is
further aggravated by exertion.
CONCLUSION: Based on this pathomechanism, future treatment approaches should
focus on normalizing the cause of ionic disbalance. Current treatment strategies
targeting hypoperfusion have the potential to improve the dysfunction of ion
transporters.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle published by
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcsm.13669
PMCID: PMC11671797
PMID: 39727052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Charité holds patents for the use of
beta‐adrenergic receptor antibodies in the diagnosis of CFS and for soluble
guanylate cyclase activators for treating chronic vascular dysfunction. Carmen
Scheibenbogen received honoraria from Celltrend, Roche and Bayer for
consultation. Klaus J. Wirth is the managing director of Mitodicure GmbH, a
startup developing a small molecule therapeutic for the treatment of ME/CFS.
