---
reference_id: "PMID:36980153"
title: "Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency from an Ophthalmologist's Perspective-Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Schittkowski MP
- Naxer S
- Elabbasy M
- Herholz L
- Breitling V
- Finglas A
- Gärtner J
- Schlotawa L
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/children10030595
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency from an Ophthalmologist's Perspective-Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Schittkowski MP, Naxer S, Elabbasy M, Herholz L, Breitling V, Finglas A, Gärtner J, Schlotawa L
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children10030595](https://doi.org/10.3390/children10030595)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2023 Mar 21;10(3):595. doi: 10.3390/children10030595.

Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency from an Ophthalmologist's Perspective-Case Report
and Literature Review.

Schittkowski MP(1), Naxer S(1), Elabbasy M(1), Herholz L(2), Breitling V(2),
Finglas A(3), Gärtner J(2), Schlotawa L(2).

Author information:
(1)Section for Strabismus and Neuroophthalmology, Department of Ophthalmology,
University Medical Centre Goettingen; Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37085 Goettingen,
Germany.
(2)Division for Neuropaediatrics, Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, University Medical Centre Goettingen, 37075 Goettingen, Germany.
(3)MSD Action Foundation, D15 Dublin, Ireland.

Multiple sulfatase deficiency (MSD) is an extremely rare autosomal recessively
inherited disease with a prevalence of 1:500.000 caused by mutations on the
sulfatase-modifying-Factor 1 gene (SUMF1). MSD is most specifically
characterised by a combination of developmentally retarded psychomotoric
functions, neurodegeneration that entails the loss of many already acquired
abilities, and by ichthyosis. Other symptoms include those associated with
mucopolysaccharidosis, i.e., facial dysmorphy, dwarfism, and hepatosplenomegaly.
In 50-75% of all MSD-affected patients, functional or structural ocular damage
is likely. MSD seldom affects the anterior segment of the eye. The main
pathology these patients present is a highly conspicuous tapetoretinal
degeneration, similar to severe Retinitis pigmentosa, that leads to blindness at
an early age. An initially five-year-old boy with MSD, genetically verified at
his first examination in our opthalmology department (SUMF1 mutations c.776A>T,
p.Asn259Ile; c.797A>T, p.Pro266Leu; c.836A>T, p.Ala279Val), and a 4, 5 year
regular follow-up are described. The patient had some visual potential ("tunnel
view"), which deteriorated dramatically after his fifth birthday. We observed no
evidence of worsening retinal involvement in this patient in spite of his
progressively worsening clinical symptoms, extending to total blindness/no light
perception. OCT revealed that the outer retinal layers containing photoreceptors
were diseased; the ellipsoid zone was only partially discernible and the outer
nuclear layer appeared to be thinned out. The inner nuclear layer, ganglion cell
layer, and retinal nerve fibre layer were indistinguishable. These anomalies are
indicative of a severe pathology within the retina's inner layers.
Characteristic anomalies in the fundus should stimulate clinicians to suspect a
case of MSD in their differential diagnosis, and thus to order thorough genetic
and paediatric diagnostics.

DOI: 10.3390/children10030595
PMCID: PMC10047279
PMID: 36980153

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
