---
reference_id: PMID:38612794
title: Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3 Pathophysiology-Implications for Translational Research and Clinical Studies.
authors:
- Stahl F
- Evert BO
- Han X
- Breuer P
- Wüllner U
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25073984
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Machado-Joseph Disease/genetics
- "Translational Research, Biomedical"
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
- "Translational Science, Biomedical"
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3 Pathophysiology-Implications for Translational Research and Clinical Studies.
**Authors:** Stahl F, Evert BO, Han X, Breuer P, Wüllner U
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25073984](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25073984)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Apr 3;25(7):3984. doi: 10.3390/ijms25073984.

Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3 Pathophysiology-Implications for Translational 
Research and Clinical Studies.

Stahl F(1), Evert BO(2), Han X(2), Breuer P(2), Wüllner U(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)German Centre for Neurodegenerative Disease (DZNE), 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(2)Departments of Neurology and Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Bonn, 
53127 Bonn, Germany.

The spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) comprise a group of inherited 
neurodegenerative diseases. Machado-Joseph Disease (MJD) or spinocerebellar 
ataxia 3 (SCA3) is the most common autosomal dominant form, caused by the 
expansion of CAG repeats within the ataxin-3 (ATXN3) gene. This mutation results 
in the expression of an abnormal protein containing long polyglutamine (polyQ) 
stretches that confers a toxic gain of function and leads to misfolding and 
aggregation of ATXN3 in neurons. As a result of the neurodegenerative process, 
SCA3 patients are severely disabled and die prematurely. Several screening 
approaches, e.g., druggable genome-wide and drug library screenings have been 
performed, focussing on the reduction in stably overexpressed ATXN3(polyQ) 
protein and improvement in the resultant toxicity. Transgenic overexpression 
models of toxic ATXN3, however, missed potential modulators of endogenous ATXN3 
regulation. In another approach to identify modifiers of endogenous ATXN3 
expression using a CRISPR/Cas9-modified SK-N-SH wild-type cell line with a 
GFP-T2A-luciferase (LUC) cassette under the control of the endogenous ATXN3 
promotor, four statins were identified as potential activators of expression. We 
here provide an overview of the high throughput screening approaches yet 
performed to find compounds or genomic modifiers of ATXN3(polyQ) toxicity in 
different SCA3 model organisms and cell lines to ameliorate and halt SCA3 
progression in patients. Furthermore, the putative role of cholesterol in 
neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs) in general and SCA3 in particular is 
discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25073984
PMCID: PMC11012515
PMID: 38612794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.