---
reference_id: "PMID:37345656"
title: Hypochondroplasia gain-of-function mutation in FGFR3 causes defective bone mineralization in mice.
authors:
- Loisay L
- Komla-Ebri D
- Morice A
- Heuzé Y
- Viaut C
- de La Seiglière A
- Kaci N
- Chan D
- Lamouroux A
- Baujat G
- Bassett JHD
- Williams GR
- Legeai-Mallet L
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.168796
keywords:
- "Calcification, Physiologic"
- Osteoporosis
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Mice
- Animals
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital"
- Lordosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypochondroplasia gain-of-function mutation in FGFR3 causes defective bone mineralization in mice.
**Authors:** Loisay L, Komla-Ebri D, Morice A, Heuzé Y, Viaut C, de La Seiglière A, Kaci N, Chan D, Lamouroux A, Baujat G, Bassett JHD, Williams GR, Legeai-Mallet L
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.168796](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.168796)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2023 Jun 22;8(12):e168796. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.168796.

Hypochondroplasia gain-of-function mutation in FGFR3 causes defective bone 
mineralization in mice.

Loisay L(1), Komla-Ebri D(2)(3), Morice A(1), Heuzé Y(4), Viaut C(1), de La 
Seiglière A(1), Kaci N(1), Chan D(5), Lamouroux A(6), Baujat G(1)(7), Bassett 
JHD(2), Williams GR(2), Legeai-Mallet L(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Molecular and 
Physiopathological Bases of Osteochondrodysplasia, INSERM UMR1163, Paris, 
France.
(2)Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Metabolism Digestion and 
Reproduction, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)UCB Pharma, Slough, United Kingdom.
(4)UMR5199 PACEA, CNRS, MC, Université de Bordeaux, Pessac, France.
(5)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong 
Kong, China.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, CHU Arnaud De Villeneuve, Montpellier, 
France.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, French Reference Center for Skeletal 
Dysplasia, AP-HP, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France.

Hypochondroplasia (HCH) is a mild dwarfism caused by missense mutations in 
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3), with the majority of cases 
resulting from a heterozygous p.Asn540Lys gain-of-function mutation. Here, we 
report the generation and characterization of the first mouse model 
(Fgfr3Asn534Lys/+) of HCH to our knowledge. Fgfr3Asn534Lys/+ mice exhibited 
progressive dwarfism and impairment of the synchondroses of the cranial base, 
resulting in defective formation of the foramen magnum. The appendicular and 
axial skeletons were both severely affected and we demonstrated an important 
role of FGFR3 in regulation of cortical and trabecular bone structure. 
Trabecular bone mineral density (BMD) of long bones and vertebral bodies was 
decreased, but cortical BMD increased with age in both tibiae and femurs. These 
results demonstrate that bones in Fgfr3Asn534Lys/+ mice, due to FGFR3 
activation, exhibit some characteristics of osteoporosis. The present findings 
emphasize the detrimental effect of gain-of-function mutations in the Fgfr3 gene 
on long bone modeling during both developmental and aging processes, with 
potential implications for the management of elderly patients with 
hypochondroplasia and osteoporosis.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.168796
PMCID: PMC10371252
PMID: 37345656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]