---
reference_id: "PMID:36975777"
title: "Gastrointestinal Symptoms of Monkeypox Infection: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Simadibrata DM
- Lesmana E
- Pratama MIA
- Annisa NG
- Thenedi K
- Simadibrata M
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.28709
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal Symptoms of Monkeypox Infection: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Simadibrata DM, Lesmana E, Pratama MIA, Annisa NG, Thenedi K, Simadibrata M
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.28709](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.28709)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2023 Apr;95(4):e28709. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28709.

Gastrointestinal Symptoms of Monkeypox Infection: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Simadibrata DM(1)(2), Lesmana E(1), Pratama MIA(1), Annisa NG(1), Thenedi K(3), 
Simadibrata M(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(2)Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada, 
Yogyakarta, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia.

Since early May 2022, outbreaks of Monkeypox (Mpox) cases have emerged and 
become a global concern. Studies exploring the gastrointestinal symptoms and/or 
liver injury of Mpox are still very limited. This systematic review and 
meta-analysis is the first to summarize the gastrointestinal symptoms reported 
by Mpox patients. We searched for Mpox studies published until October 21, 2022, 
in MEDLINE, EMBASE, SCOPUS, and organization websites. Mpox studies were 
observational studies that reported at least one of either gastrointestinal 
symptoms and/or liver injury in Mpox patients. Meta-analysis was done to obtain 
the pooled prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms in Mpox patients. Subgroup 
analyses were done based on the study location, age groups, and Mpox Clades. The 
quality of included studies was assessed using the NIH Quality Assessment Tool. 
Overall, 31 studies that reported gastrointestinal symptoms and/or liver injury 
in Mpox patients were included. The reported gastrointestinal symptoms were 
abdominal pain, anorexia, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. There is a lack of 
reporting for liver injury. The most prevalent gastrointestinal symptoms in Mpox 
patients were anorexia (47%; 95% confidence interval [CI] 41%-53%), followed by 
vomiting (12%; 95% CI 11%-13%), nausea (10%; 95% CI 9%-11%), abdominal pain (9%; 
95% CI 8%-10%), and diarrhea (5%; 95% CI 4%-6%). Additionally, the prevalence of 
proctitis, rectal/anal pain, and rectal bleeding were 11% (95% CI 11%-12%), 25% 
(95% CI 24%-27%), and 12% (95% CI 11%-13%), respectively. Anorexia was the most 
frequently reported gastrointestinal symptom in Mpox patients, followed by 
vomiting, nausea, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. Proctitis is a novel 
presentation of Mpox in the 2022 outbreak.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.28709
PMID: 36975777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]