---
reference_id: "PMID:17015545"
title: "Payments to children and adolescents enrolled in research: a pilot study."
authors:
- Iltis AS
- DeVader S
- Matsuo H
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-0821
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Payments to children and adolescents enrolled in research: a pilot study.
**Authors:** Iltis AS, DeVader S, Matsuo H
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2006-0821](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2006-0821)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2006 Oct;118(4):1546-52. doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-0821.

Payments to children and adolescents enrolled in research: a pilot study.

Iltis AS(1), DeVader S, Matsuo H.

Author information:
(1)Center for Health Care Ethics, St Louis University, 221 N Grand Blvd, St 
Louis, MO 63103, USA. iltisas@slu.edu

OBJECTIVES: The goal was to identify current payment practices in research 
involving children.
METHODS: A 4-page survey was mailed to the first author or corresponding author 
of pediatric research studies. Questions concerned whether children enrolled in 
research and/or their parents received any form of payment, values and types of 
remuneration, federal categories of pediatric research under which studies were 
approved, institutional policies regarding payments to children and/or their 
parents, institutional review board review of payment plans, factors that 
influenced payment decisions, prorating of payments, purposes of payments, 
perceived effects of payments on recruitment, and investigators' attitudes 
toward payments and the perceived risks and discomforts of studies.
RESULTS: Payment practices varied, and the reasons for which investigators 
adopted particular payment practices varied. Approximately one half offered 
payment. The most popular form of payment was cash. The number of institutions 
with policies addressing directly payments for children enrolled in research has 
increased, but still only approximately one half of institutions studied had 
such policies in place.
CONCLUSIONS: Awareness of the variations in payment practices and policies and 
additional study of the ethical issues surrounding payments for research 
participation are essential for building consensus and developing the guidelines 
the Institute of Medicine has said are necessary. Additional research also is 
needed to understand why parents enroll their children in research, how payments 
affect research participation decisions, and what the relationship between a 
study's risks and discomforts and payment should be.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2006-0821
PMID: 17015545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]