---
reference_id: "PMID:38837708"
title: Impaired cathepsin D in retinal pigment epithelium cells mediates Stargardt disease pathogenesis.
authors:
- Ng ESY
- Hu J
- Jiang Z
- Radu RA
journal: FASEB J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1096/fj.202400210RR
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired cathepsin D in retinal pigment epithelium cells mediates Stargardt disease pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Ng ESY, Hu J, Jiang Z, Radu RA
**Journal:** FASEB J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.202400210RR](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.202400210RR)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2024 Jun 15;38(11):e23720. doi: 10.1096/fj.202400210RR.

Impaired cathepsin D in retinal pigment epithelium cells mediates Stargardt 
disease pathogenesis.

Ng ESY(1)(2)(3), Hu J(1)(2), Jiang Z(1)(2), Radu RA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)UCLA Stein Eye Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California, 
USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Physiology Interdepartmental Program, 
University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Recessive Stargardt disease (STGD1) is an inherited juvenile maculopathy caused 
by mutations in the ABCA4 gene, for which there is no suitable treatment. Loss 
of functional ABCA4 in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) alone, without 
contribution from photoreceptor cells, was shown to induce STGD1 pathology. 
Here, we identified cathepsin D (CatD), the primary RPE lysosomal protease, as a 
key molecular player contributing to endo-lysosomal dysfunction in STGD1 using a 
newly developed "disease-in-a-dish" RPE model from confirmed STGD1 patients. 
Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived RPE originating from three STGD1 
patients exhibited elevated lysosomal pH, as previously reported in Abca4-/- 
mice. CatD protein maturation and activity were impaired in RPE from STGD1 
patients and Abca4-/- mice. Consequently, STGD1 RPE cells have reduced 
photoreceptor outer segment degradation and abnormal accumulation of 
α-synuclein, the natural substrate of CatD. Furthermore, dysfunctional ABCA4 in 
STGD1 RPE cells results in intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent 
material and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE). The altered distribution of PE 
associated with the internal membranes of STGD1 RPE cells presumably compromises 
LC3-associated phagocytosis, contributing to delayed endo-lysosomal degradation 
activity. Drug-mediated re-acidification of lysosomes in the RPE of STGD1 
restores CatD functional activity and reduces the accumulation of immature CatD 
protein loads. This preclinical study validates the contribution of CatD 
deficiencies to STGD1 pathology and provides evidence for an efficacious 
therapeutic approach targeting RPE cells. Our findings support a cell-autonomous 
RPE-driven pathology, informing future research aimed at targeting RPE cells to 
treat ABCA4-mediated retinopathies.

© 2024 The Author(s). The FASEB Journal published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202400210RR
PMCID: PMC11296957
PMID: 38837708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement ESYN, JH, and ZJ 
declare no conflicts of interest. Unrelated to this study, RAR served as a 
Principal Investigator for Sponsor Initiated Research Programs for: Eudora 
Therapeutics Inc., Biogen Inc., and NightStar Therapeutics. RAR served as a 
consultant for Replay Holdings, LLC; Oak Bay Biosciences, LTD; and Alexion 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc.