---
reference_id: "PMID:17875548"
title: "Seizures in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: data from LUMINA, a multiethnic cohort (LUMINA LIV)."
authors:
- Andrade RM
- Alarcón GS
- González LA
- Fernández M
- Apte M
- Vilá LM
- McGwin G Jr
- Reveille JD
- LUMINA Study Group
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1136/ard.2007.077594
keywords:
- Adult
- Black or African American
- Age of Onset
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Health Status Indicators
- Hispanic or Latino
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, ethnology, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- "Seizures/ethnology, etiology, mortality"
- Socioeconomic Factors
- White People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seizures in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: data from LUMINA, a multiethnic cohort (LUMINA LIV).
**Authors:** Andrade RM, Alarcón GS, González LA, Fernández M, Apte M, Vilá LM, McGwin G Jr, Reveille JD, LUMINA Study Group
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard.2007.077594](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard.2007.077594)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2008 Jun;67(6):829-34. doi: 10.1136/ard.2007.077594. Epub 2007
Sep 17.

Seizures in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: data from LUMINA, a
multiethnic cohort (LUMINA LIV).

Andrade RM(1), Alarcón GS, González LA, Fernández M, Apte M, Vilá LM, McGwin G
Jr, Reveille JD; LUMINA Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Schools of Medicine and Public Health, The University
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the predictors of time-to-seizure occurrence and their
impact on damage accrual and mortality in LUMINA, a multiethnic (Hispanic,
African American and Caucasian) cohort of patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus.
METHODS: Seizures were defined as per the American College of Rheumatology (ARC)
nomenclature and case definitions for neuropsychiatric lupus syndromes. Factors
associated with time-to-seizure occurrence occurring at or after diagnosis (TD)
of systemic lupus erythematosus were examined by univariable and multivariable
Cox proportional hazard regression analyses. The impact of seizures on damage
accrual and mortality was also examined by multivariable analyses after
adjusting for variables known to affect these outcomes.
RESULTS: A total of 600 patients were included in these analyses. Of them, 40
(6.7%) developed seizures at or after TD; by multivariable analyses, disease
activity and younger age were independent predictors of a shorter
time-to-seizure occurrence (HR = 1.10 and 1.04; 95% CI 1.04 to 1.15 and 1.00 to
1.08, p = 0.0004 and 0.0304, respectively) whereas mucocutaneous involvement (HR
= 0.34, 95% CI 0.16 to 0.41, p = 0.0039) and hydroxychloroquine use (HR = 0.35,
95% CI 0.15 to 0.80, p = 0.0131) were independent predictors of a longer
time-to-seizure occurrence. Seizures were an independent contributor to damage
accrual but not to mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Seizures tend to occur early in the course of systemic lupus
erythematosus, and contribute to damage accrual. Younger age and disease
activity are independent predictors of a shorter time-to-seizure occurrence;
antimalarials appear to have a protective role in seizure occurrence.

DOI: 10.1136/ard.2007.077594
PMCID: PMC2735413
PMID: 17875548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
