---
reference_id: "PMID:28972011"
title: "Effective \"activated PI3Kδ syndrome\"-targeted therapy with the PI3Kδ inhibitor leniolisib."
authors:
- Rao VK
- Webster S
- Dalm VASH
- Šedivá A
- van Hagen PM
- Holland S
- Rosenzweig SD
- Christ AD
- Sloth B
- Cabanski M
- Joshi AD
- de Buck S
- Doucet J
- Guerini D
- Kalis C
- Pylvaenaeinen I
- Soldermann N
- Kashyap A
- Uzel G
- Lenardo MJ
- Patel DD
- Lucas CL
- Burkhart C
journal: Blood
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-08-801191
keywords:
- Animals
- Chemokines/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, immunology, metabolism"
- Demography
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin M/blood
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/drug therapy, enzymology, immunology, pathology"
- Infant
- "Lymph Nodes/drug effects, pathology"
- Lymphocyte Activation/drug effects
- Male
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Mutation/genetics
- Organ Size
- Phenotype
- Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Pyridines/pharmacokinetics, pharmacology"
- "Pyrimidines/pharmacokinetics, pharmacology"
- Rats
- "Spleen/drug effects, pathology"
- "T-Lymphocytes/drug effects, immunology"
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effective "activated PI3Kδ syndrome"-targeted therapy with the PI3Kδ inhibitor leniolisib.
**Authors:** Rao VK, Webster S, Dalm VASH, Šedivá A, van Hagen PM, Holland S, Rosenzweig SD, Christ AD, Sloth B, Cabanski M, Joshi AD, de Buck S, Doucet J, Guerini D, Kalis C, Pylvaenaeinen I, Soldermann N, Kashyap A, Uzel G, Lenardo MJ, Patel DD, Lucas CL, Burkhart C
**Journal:** Blood (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2017-08-801191](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2017-08-801191)

## Content

1. Blood. 2017 Nov 23;130(21):2307-2316. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-08-801191. Epub 
2017 Sep 29.

Effective "activated PI3Kδ syndrome"-targeted therapy with the PI3Kδ inhibitor 
leniolisib.

Rao VK(1), Webster S(1), Dalm VASH(2)(3), Šedivá A(4), van Hagen PM(2)(3), 
Holland S(1), Rosenzweig SD(5), Christ AD(6), Sloth B(6), Cabanski M(6), Joshi 
AD(6)(7), de Buck S(6), Doucet J(6), Guerini D(6), Kalis C(6), Pylvaenaeinen 
I(6), Soldermann N(6), Kashyap A(1), Uzel G(1), Lenardo MJ(1), Patel DD(6), 
Lucas CL(1), Burkhart C(6).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and.
(3)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Immunology, Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD.
(6)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, 
Switzerland; and.
(7)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Novartis Pharma AG, Cambridge, 
MA.

Pathogenic gain-of-function variants in the genes encoding phosphoinositide 
3-kinase δ (PI3Kδ) lead to accumulation of transitional B cells and senescent T 
cells, lymphadenopathy, and immune deficiency (activated PI3Kδ syndrome [APDS]). 
Knowing the genetic etiology of APDS afforded us the opportunity to explore 
PI3Kδ inhibition as a precision-medicine therapy. Here, we report in vitro and 
in vivo effects of inhibiting PI3Kδ in APDS. Treatment with leniolisib (CDZ173), 
a selective PI3Kδ inhibitor, caused dose-dependent suppression of PI3Kδ pathway 
hyperactivation (measured as phosphorylation of AKT/S6) in cell lines 
ectopically expressing APDS-causative p110δ variants and in T-cell blasts 
derived from patients. A clinical trial with 6 APDS patients was conducted as a 
12-week, open-label, multisite, within-subject, dose-escalation study of oral 
leniolisib to assess safety, pharmacokinetics, and effects on 
lymphoproliferation and immune dysregulation. Oral leniolisib led to a 
dose-dependent reduction in PI3K/AKT pathway activity assessed ex vivo and 
improved immune dysregulation. We observed normalization of circulating 
transitional and naive B cells, reduction in PD-1+CD4+ and senescent CD57+CD4- T 
cells, and decreases in elevated serum immunoglobulin M and inflammatory markers 
including interferon γ, tumor necrosis factor, CXCL13, and CXCL10 with 
leniolisib therapy. After 12 weeks of treatment, all patients showed 
amelioration of lymphoproliferation with lymph node sizes and spleen volumes 
reduced by 39% (mean; range, 26%-57%) and 40% (mean; range, 13%-65%), 
respectively. Thus, leniolisib was well tolerated and improved laboratory and 
clinical parameters in APDS, supporting the specific inhibition of PI3Kδ as a 
promising new targeted therapy in APDS and other diseases characterized by 
overactivation of the PI3Kδ pathway. This trial was registered at 
www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT02435173.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2017-08-801191
PMCID: PMC5701526
PMID: 28972011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]