---
reference_id: "PMID:37386445"
title: "Breast cancer brain metastasis: from etiology to state-of-the-art modeling."
authors:
- Farahani MK
- Gharibshahian M
- Rezvani A
- Vaez A
journal: J Biol Eng
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13036-023-00352-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Breast cancer brain metastasis: from etiology to state-of-the-art modeling.
**Authors:** Farahani MK, Gharibshahian M, Rezvani A, Vaez A
**Journal:** J Biol Eng (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13036-023-00352-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13036-023-00352-w)

## Content

1. J Biol Eng. 2023 Jun 29;17(1):41. doi: 10.1186/s13036-023-00352-w.

Breast cancer brain metastasis: from etiology to state-of-the-art modeling.

Farahani MK(1), Gharibshahian M(2), Rezvani A(3), Vaez A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tissue Engineering, School of Medicine, Shahroud University of 
Medical Sciences, Shahroud, Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, School of Medicine, Shahroud University of 
Medical Sciences, Shahroud, Iran.
(3)Hematology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran. ar.rezvani@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Tissue Engineering and Applied Cell Sciences, School of 
Advanced Medical Sciences and Technologies, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. ahmadvaez@yahoo.com.

Currently, breast carcinoma is the most common form of malignancy and the main 
cause of cancer mortality in women worldwide. The metastasis of cancer cells 
from the primary tumor site to other organs in the body, notably the lungs, 
bones, brain, and liver, is what causes breast cancer to ultimately be fatal. 
Brain metastases occur in as many as 30% of patients with advanced breast 
cancer, and the 1-year survival rate of these patients is around 20%. Many 
researchers have focused on brain metastasis, but due to its complexities, many 
aspects of this process are still relatively unclear. To develop and test novel 
therapies for this fatal condition, pre-clinical models are required that can 
mimic the biological processes involved in breast cancer brain metastasis 
(BCBM). The application of many breakthroughs in the area of tissue engineering 
has resulted in the development of scaffold or matrix-based culture methods that 
more accurately imitate the original extracellular matrix (ECM) of metastatic 
tumors. Furthermore, specific cell lines are now being used to create 
three-dimensional (3D) cultures that can be used to model metastasis. These 3D 
cultures satisfy the requirement for in vitro methodologies that allow for a 
more accurate investigation of the molecular pathways as well as a more in-depth 
examination of the effects of the medication being tested. In this review, we 
talk about the latest advances in modeling BCBM using cell lines, animals, and 
tissue engineering methods.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13036-023-00352-w
PMCID: PMC10311757
PMID: 37386445

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.