---
reference_id: "PMID:28657417"
title: Aspirin versus Placebo in Pregnancies at High Risk for Preterm Preeclampsia.
authors:
- Rolnik DL
- Wright D
- Poon LC
- "O'Gorman N"
- Syngelaki A
- de Paco Matallana C
- Akolekar R
- Cicero S
- Janga D
- Singh M
- Molina FS
- Persico N
- Jani JC
- Plasencia W
- Papaioannou G
- Tenenbaum-Gavish K
- Meiri H
- Gizurarson S
- Maclagan K
- Nicolaides KH
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1704559
keywords:
- Adult
- "Aspirin/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intention to Treat Analysis
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Pre-Eclampsia/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications
- Pregnancy Outcome
- Risk
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspirin versus Placebo in Pregnancies at High Risk for Preterm Preeclampsia.
**Authors:** Rolnik DL, Wright D, Poon LC, O'Gorman N, Syngelaki A, de Paco Matallana C, Akolekar R, Cicero S, Janga D, Singh M, Molina FS, Persico N, Jani JC, Plasencia W, Papaioannou G, Tenenbaum-Gavish K, Meiri H, Gizurarson S, Maclagan K, Nicolaides KH
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1704559](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1704559)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2017 Aug 17;377(7):613-622. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1704559. Epub
2017  Jun 28.

Aspirin versus Placebo in Pregnancies at High Risk for Preterm Preeclampsia.

Rolnik DL(1), Wright D(1), Poon LC(1), O'Gorman N(1), Syngelaki A(1), de Paco 
Matallana C(1), Akolekar R(1), Cicero S(1), Janga D(1), Singh M(1), Molina 
FS(1), Persico N(1), Jani JC(1), Plasencia W(1), Papaioannou G(1), 
Tenenbaum-Gavish K(1), Meiri H(1), Gizurarson S(1), Maclagan K(1), Nicolaides 
KH(1).

Author information:
(1)From King's College Hospital (D.L.R., L.C.P., N.O., A.S., R.A., K.H.N.), 
Homerton University Hospital (S.C.), North Middlesex University Hospital (D.J.), 
and University College London Comprehensive Clinical Trials Unit (K.M.), London, 
University of Exeter, Exeter (D.W.), Medway Maritime Hospital, Gillingham 
(R.A.), and Southend University Hospital, Westcliff-on-Sea (M.S.) - all in the 
United Kingdom; Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (L.C.P.); Hospital 
Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia (C.P.M.), Hospital 
Universitario San Cecilio, Granada (F.S.M.), and Hospiten Group, Tenerife (W.P.) 
- all in Spain; Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan (N.P.); University Hospital 
Brugmann, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels (J.C.J.); Attikon University 
Hospital, Athens (G.P.); Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva (K.T.-G.), and 
HyLabs Diagnostics, Rehovot (H.M.) - both in Israel; and University of Iceland, 
Reykjavik (S.G.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2017 Aug 17;377(7):690-691. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1708920.
    N Engl J Med. 2017 Dec 14;377(24):2399-400. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1713798.
    Natl Med J India. 2018 Jan-Feb;31(1):26-27. doi: 10.4103/0970-258X.243410.

BACKGROUND: Preterm preeclampsia is an important cause of maternal and perinatal 
death and complications. It is uncertain whether the intake of low-dose aspirin 
during pregnancy reduces the risk of preterm preeclampsia.
METHODS: In this multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, we 
randomly assigned 1776 women with singleton pregnancies who were at high risk 
for preterm preeclampsia to receive aspirin, at a dose of 150 mg per day, or 
placebo from 11 to 14 weeks of gestation until 36 weeks of gestation. The 
primary outcome was delivery with preeclampsia before 37 weeks of gestation. The 
analysis was performed according to the intention-to-treat principle.
RESULTS: A total of 152 women withdrew consent during the trial, and 4 were lost 
to follow up, which left 798 participants in the aspirin group and 822 in the 
placebo group. Preterm preeclampsia occurred in 13 participants (1.6%) in the 
aspirin group, as compared with 35 (4.3%) in the placebo group (odds ratio in 
the aspirin group, 0.38; 95% confidence interval, 0.20 to 0.74; P=0.004). 
Results were materially unchanged in a sensitivity analysis that took into 
account participants who had withdrawn or were lost to follow-up. Adherence was 
good, with a reported intake of 85% or more of the required number of tablets in 
79.9% of the participants. There were no significant between-group differences 
in the incidence of neonatal adverse outcomes or other adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with low-dose aspirin in women at high risk for preterm 
preeclampsia resulted in a lower incidence of this diagnosis than placebo. 
(Funded by the European Union Seventh Framework Program and the Fetal Medicine 
Foundation; EudraCT number, 2013-003778-29 ; Current Controlled Trials number, 
ISRCTN13633058 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1704559
PMID: 28657417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]