---
reference_id: "PMID:32729623"
title: Genetic investigation of nodal melanocytic nevi in cases of giant congenital melanocytic nevus.
authors:
- Cao Y
- Yang X
- Lai YM
- Jia L
- Diao XT
- Zhuang Q
- Lin DM
journal: Histol Histopathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.14670/HH-18-243
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic investigation of nodal melanocytic nevi in cases of giant congenital melanocytic nevus.
**Authors:** Cao Y, Yang X, Lai YM, Jia L, Diao XT, Zhuang Q, Lin DM
**Journal:** Histol Histopathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.14670/HH-18-243](https://doi.org/10.14670/HH-18-243)

## Content

1. Histol Histopathol. 2020 Oct;35(10):1151-1157. doi: 10.14670/HH-18-243. Epub 
2020 Jul 30.

Genetic investigation of nodal melanocytic nevi in cases of giant congenital 
melanocytic nevus.

Cao Y(1), Yang X(2), Lai YM(2), Jia L(2), Diao XT(2), Zhuang Q(3), Lin DM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Phatology, Plastic Surgery Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational 
Research (Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital and 
Institute, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Plastic Surgery Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational 
Research (Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital and 
Institute, Beijing, China. lindm3@163.com.

Nodal melanocytic nevi are common incidental findings in lymph nodes that have 
been removed during sentinel lymph node biopsy for melanoma. They can also occur 
in the local lymph nodes of the giant congenital nevus (GCN), but very little is 
known regarding nodal melanocytic nevi in the giant congenital nevus, especially 
at the genetic level. There are two theories that explain the possible 
pathogenesis of nodal melanocytic nevi, mechanical transport and arrested 
migration during embryogenesis. However, there have been few tests of these two 
theories at the molecular biology level until now. We used whole-exon sequencing 
to test these two theories at the gene level for the first time. In clonal 
evolution analysis of patient 1, whose tumor mutation burden (TMB) value was 
relatively stable, showed that the GCN and nodal nevus had the same initial 
origin and then diverged into two branches as a result of gene mutations. In 
contrast, analysis indicated that in the other patient, whose TMB value declined 
from 68.02/Mb in a GCN to 17.55/Mb in associated nodal nevi, these two samples 
were from different origins at the beginning, each with its own gene mutation. 
These results are consistent with the two respective theories at the molecular 
biological level. We provided the first tests of the two theories of 
pathogenesis of nodal melanocytic nevi at the gene level, and these findings may 
provide some clues for further study. In addition, not all nodal nevi should be 
treated as lymph node metastasis in clinical diagnosis, and we should make a 
comprehensive assessment and judgment of nodal melanocytic nevi based on 
morphology, immunological characteristics and fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) tests.

DOI: 10.14670/HH-18-243
PMID: 32729623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]