---
reference_id: "PMID:11732877"
title: "Sea-blue histiocytosis secondary to Niemann-Pick disease type B: a case report."
authors:
- Candoni A
- Grimaz S
- Doretto P
- Fanin R
- Falcomer F
- Bembi B
journal: Ann Hematol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1007/s002770100354
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Leukocytes/enzymology
- Lysosomes/enzymology
- Male
- "Niemann-Pick Diseases/complications, diagnosis"
- "Sea-Blue Histiocyte Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology"
- Sphingomyelin Phosphodiesterase/blood
- Splenomegaly
- Thrombocytopenia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sea-blue histiocytosis secondary to Niemann-Pick disease type B: a case report.
**Authors:** Candoni A, Grimaz S, Doretto P, Fanin R, Falcomer F, Bembi B
**Journal:** Ann Hematol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s002770100354](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002770100354)

## Content

1. Ann Hematol. 2001 Oct;80(10):620-2. doi: 10.1007/s002770100354.

Sea-blue histiocytosis secondary to Niemann-Pick disease type B: a case report.

Candoni A(1), Grimaz S, Doretto P, Fanin R, Falcomer F, Bembi B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation, University Hospital, Udine, Italy. 
Ematologia@drmm.uniud.it

Sea-blue histiocytosis is a morphological finding that can be associated both 
with acquired conditions of increased cellular turnover and inborn errors of 
lipid metabolism. We report a rare case of sea-blue histiocytosis associated 
with a mild phenotype of Niemann-Pick disease (NPD) type B in a 44-year-old man 
who presented with splenomegaly and mild thrombocytopenia. Diagnosis was guided 
by the morphological finding in bone marrow smears of foamy and sea-blue 
histiocytes and confirmed by the measurement of acid lysosomal sphingomyelinase 
activity below normal values. NPD type B is a rare inborn error of metabolism, 
with a benign course and prognosis, while types A and C are always associated 
with severe neurological involvement. In our patient diagnosis was confirmed by 
the specific enzyme assay of leukocytes (deficiency in sphingomyelinase 
activity). This is a simple and noninvasive method that is useful whenever 
clinical and morphological finding are relevant, and a primary hematological 
disorder has been ruled out.

DOI: 10.1007/s002770100354
PMID: 11732877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]