---
reference_id: "PMID:34649720"
title: "Thalassemias: from gene to therapy."
authors:
- De Simone G
- Quattrocchi A
- Mancini B
- di Masi A
- Nervi C
- Ascenzi P
journal: Mol Aspects Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2021.101028
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thalassemias: from gene to therapy.
**Authors:** De Simone G, Quattrocchi A, Mancini B, di Masi A, Nervi C, Ascenzi P
**Journal:** Mol Aspects Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mam.2021.101028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mam.2021.101028)

## Content

1. Mol Aspects Med. 2022 Apr;84:101028. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2021.101028. Epub 2021
 Oct 11.

Thalassemias: from gene to therapy.

De Simone G(1), Quattrocchi A(2), Mancini B(1), di Masi A(1), Nervi C(3), 
Ascenzi P(4).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze, Università Roma Tre, Viale Guglielmo Marconi 446, 
00146, Roma, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze e Biotecnologie Medico-Chirurgiche, Facoltà di 
Farmacia e Medicina, "Sapienza" Università di Roma, Corso della Repubblica, 79, 
04100, Latina, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze e Biotecnologie Medico-Chirurgiche, Facoltà di 
Farmacia e Medicina, "Sapienza" Università di Roma, Corso della Repubblica, 79, 
04100, Latina, Italy. Electronic address: clara.nervi@uniroma1.it.
(4)Dipartimento di Scienze, Università Roma Tre, Viale Guglielmo Marconi 446, 
00146, Roma, Italy; Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Via della Lungara 10, 00165, 
Roma, Italy. Electronic address: ascenzi@uniroma3.it.

Thalassemias (α, β, γ, δ, δβ, and εγδβ) are the most common genetic disorders 
worldwide and constitute a heterogeneous group of hereditary diseases 
characterized by the deficient synthesis of one or more hemoglobin (Hb) 
chain(s). This leads to the accumulation of unstable non-thalassemic Hb chains, 
which precipitate and cause intramedullary destruction of erythroid precursors 
and premature lysis of red blood cells (RBC) in the peripheral blood. 
Non-thalassemic Hbs display high oxygen affinity and no cooperativity. 
Thalassemias result from many different genetic and molecular defects leading to 
either severe or clinically silent hematologic phenotypes. Thalassemias α and β 
are particularly diffused in the regions spanning from the Mediterranean basin 
through the Middle East, Indian subcontinent, Burma, Southeast Asia, Melanesia, 
and the Pacific Islands, whereas δβ-thalassemia is prevalent in some 
Mediterranean regions including Italy, Greece, and Turkey. Although in the world 
thalassemia and malaria areas overlap apparently, the RBC protection against 
malaria parasites is openly debated. Here, we provide an overview of the 
historical, geographic, genetic, structural, and molecular pathophysiological 
aspects of thalassemias. Moreover, attention has been paid to molecular and 
epigenetic pathways regulating globin gene expression and globin switching. 
Challenges of conventional standard treatments, including RBC transfusions and 
iron chelation therapy, splenectomy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
from normal donors are reported. Finally, the progress made by rapidly evolving 
fields of gene therapy and gene editing strategies, already in pre-clinical and 
clinical evaluation, and future challenges as novel curative treatments for 
thalassemia are discussed.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mam.2021.101028
PMID: 34649720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]