---
reference_id: PMID:9272282
title: Expression of the gastric H/K-ATPase alpha-subunit in the thymus may explain the dominant role of the beta-subunit in the pathogenesis of autoimmune gastritis.
authors:
- Alderuccio F
- Gleeson PA
- Berzins SP
- Martin M
- Van Driel IR
- Toh BH
journal: Autoimmunity
year: '1997'
doi: 10.3109/08916939709008023
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autoimmune Diseases/enzymology, immunology"
- "Gastritis/enzymology, immunology"
- "H(+)-K(+)-Exchanging ATPase/administration & dosage, biosynthesis, immunology"
- Humans
- Immunization
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Stomach/enzymology
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Thymus Gland/enzymology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression of the gastric H/K-ATPase alpha-subunit in the thymus may explain the dominant role of the beta-subunit in the pathogenesis of autoimmune gastritis.
**Authors:** Alderuccio F, Gleeson PA, Berzins SP, Martin M, Van Driel IR, Toh BH
**Journal:** Autoimmunity (1997)
**DOI:** [10.3109/08916939709008023](https://doi.org/10.3109/08916939709008023)

## Content

1. Autoimmunity. 1997;25(3):167-75. doi: 10.3109/08916939709008023.

Expression of the gastric H/K-ATPase alpha-subunit in the thymus may explain the 
dominant role of the beta-subunit in the pathogenesis of autoimmune gastritis.

Alderuccio F(1), Gleeson PA, Berzins SP, Martin M, Van Driel IR, Toh BH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Monash University Medical School, 
Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. franka@cobra.path.monash.edu.au

The two subunits of the gastric H/K ATPase, namely the catalytic alpha-subunit 
and the glycoprotein beta-subunit, are the major targets of parietal cell 
autoantibodies associated with human and murine autoimmune gastritis. The murine 
disease induced by neonatal thymectomy is T cell-mediated. We have previously 
shown that transgenic expression of the H/K ATPase beta-subunit gene in the 
thymus prevented the development of autoimmune gastritis induced by thymectomy. 
However, little is known of the contribution of the H/K ATPase alpha-subunit in 
disease development. Here, we show that (1) in contrast to the gastric H/K 
ATPase beta-subunit, the alpha-subunit gene is expressed in normal BALB/c 
thymus. (2) transgenic expression of the gastric H/K ATPase alpha-subunit gene 
in the thymus failed to prevent the development of autoimmune gastritis and (3) 
normal BALB/c and transgenic mice expressing the alpha-subunit in the thymus 
develop autoimmune gastritis following immunisation with purified murine gastric 
H/K ATPase, whereas transgenic mice expressing the beta-subunit in the thymus do 
not. We propose that the expression of the H/K ATPase alpha-subunit in the 
normal thymus may account for the predominant role of the beta-subunit in the 
development of autoimmune gastritis induced either by thymectomy or by 
immunisation with the ATPase.

DOI: 10.3109/08916939709008023
PMID: 9272282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]