---
reference_id: "PMID:11119728"
title: Thyroid disease and female reproduction.
authors:
- Krassas GE
journal: Fertil Steril
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0015-0282(00)01589-2
keywords:
- Female
- Fertility
- Humans
- "Hyperthyroidism/physiopathology, radiotherapy"
- "Hypothyroidism/physiopathology, radiotherapy"
- Iodine Radioisotopes/therapeutic use
- Menstruation
- Reproduction
- Thyroid Neoplasms/radiotherapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyroid disease and female reproduction.
**Authors:** Krassas GE
**Journal:** Fertil Steril (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0015-0282(00)01589-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0015-0282(00)01589-2)

## Content

1. Fertil Steril. 2000 Dec;74(6):1063-70. doi: 10.1016/s0015-0282(00)01589-2.

Thyroid disease and female reproduction.

Krassas GE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Panagia Hospital, Thessaloniki, 
Greece. Krassas@the.forthnet.gr

OBJECTIVE: To review the menstrual function and fertility in thyroid disease, 
mainly in hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism. Also to register the consequences 
of (131)I therapy, which is used widely in the treatment of Graves' disease and 
thyroid cancer, on subsequent pregnancies and on fertility in these patients.
DESIGN: A MEDLINE computer search was used to identify relevant studies. The 
type of menstrual disturbances and the status of fertility were recorded from 
all the studies found. Also, the fertility and genetic hazard of female patients 
with Graves' disease and thyroid cancer who were treated with (131)I were 
registered.
RESULT(S): Both hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism may result in menstrual 
disturbances. Menstrual abnormalities are less common now than in previous 
series. In a recent study, we found that only 21.5% of 214 thyrotoxic patients 
had some type of menstrual disturbance, compared to 50 to 60% in some older 
series. The most common manifestations are hypomenorrhea and oligomenorrhea. 
According to the results of endometrial biopsies, most thyrotoxic women remain 
ovulatory. Moreover, the genetic hazard incident to radioiodine therapy in 
Graves' disease and thyroid carcinoma is very small; exposure to (131)I does not 
cause reduced fecundity, and the risk of loss of fertility is not a 
contraindication for its use in these patients. mIn hypothyroidism, the 
frequency of menstrual irregularities has very recently been reported to be 
23.4% among 171 hypothyroid patients studied. This is much less than that 
reported in previous studies, which showed that 50 to 70% of hypothyroid female 
patients had menstrual abnormalities. The most common manifestation is 
oligomenorrhea. Severe hypothyroidism is commonly associated with failure of 
ovulation. Ovulation and conception can occur in mild hypothyroidism. These 
pregnancies are, however, often associated with abortions, stillbirths, or 
prematurity. The latter may be of greater clinical importance in infertile women 
with unexplained infertility.
CONCLUSION(S): These new data, mainly concerning menstrual abnormalities in 
hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism, are inconsistent with what is generally 
believed and written in the classic thyroid textbooks and indicate that such 
opinions should be revised.

DOI: 10.1016/s0015-0282(00)01589-2
PMID: 11119728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]