---
reference_id: "PMID:29761634"
title: "Extracephalic manifestations of nonchromosomal, nonsyndromic holoprosencephaly."
authors:
- Martinez AF
- Kruszka PS
- Muenke M
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31616
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism"
- Biomarkers
- Disease Susceptibility
- Endocrine System Diseases/congenital
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Hedgehog Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Holoprosencephaly/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extracephalic manifestations of nonchromosomal, nonsyndromic holoprosencephaly.
**Authors:** Martinez AF, Kruszka PS, Muenke M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31616](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31616)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2018 Jun;178(2):246-257. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31616. Epub 2018 May 15.

Extracephalic manifestations of nonchromosomal, nonsyndromic holoprosencephaly.

Martinez AF(1), Kruszka PS(1), Muenke M(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

Nonchromosomal, nonsyndromic holoprosencephaly (NCNS-HPE) has traditionally been 
considered as a condition of brain and craniofacial maldevelopment. In this 
review, we present the results of a comprehensive literature search supporting a 
wide spectrum of extracephalic manifestations identified in patients with 
NCNS-HPE. These manifestations have been described in case reports and in large 
cohorts of patients with "single-gene" mutations, suggesting that the NCNS-HPE 
phenotype can be more complex than traditionally thought. Likely, a complex 
network of interacting genetic variants and environmental factors is responsible 
for these systemic abnormalities that deviate from the usual brain and 
craniofacial findings in NCNS-HPE. In addition to the systemic consequences of 
pituitary dysfunction (as a direct result of brain midline defects), here we 
describe a number of extracephalic findings of NCNS-HPE affecting various organ 
systems. It is our goal to provide a guide of extracephalic features for 
clinicians given the important clinical implications of these manifestations for 
the management and care of patients with HPE and their mutation-positive 
relatives. The health risks associated with some manifestations (e.g., fatty 
liver disease) may have historically been neglected in affected families.

Published 2018. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31616
PMCID: PMC6125181
PMID: 29761634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTERESTS The authors have no 
conflict of interests to declare.