---
reference_id: "PMID:36604937"
title: Neutrophil-Lymphocyte Ratio for Predicting Coronary Artery Lesions in Children With Kawasaki Disease.
authors:
- Chidambaram AC
- Ramamoorthy JG
- Anantharaj A
journal: Indian Pediatr
year: '2023'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutrophil-Lymphocyte Ratio for Predicting Coronary Artery Lesions in Children With Kawasaki Disease.
**Authors:** Chidambaram AC, Ramamoorthy JG, Anantharaj A
**Journal:** Indian Pediatr (2023)

## Content

1. Indian Pediatr. 2023 Mar 15;60(3):207-211. Epub 2023 Jan 2.

Neutrophil-Lymphocyte Ratio for Predicting Coronary Artery Lesions in Children 
With Kawasaki Disease.

Chidambaram AC(1), Ramamoorthy JG(2), Anantharaj A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical 
Education and Research, Puducherry.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical 
Education and Research, Puducherry. Correspondence to: Dr Jaikumar Govindaswamy 
Ramamoorthy, Assistant Professor, Department of Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Institute 
of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER) Puducherry-605006. 
gr_jaikumar@yahoo.in.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical 
Education and Research, Puducherry.

BACKGROUND: Coronary artery lesions (CAL) are a specific feature of Kawasaki 
disease (KD), and develop during the second week of illness. This study was 
conducted to determine whether Neutrophil: Lymphocyte Ratio (NLR), assessed 
between the fourth and sixth day of fever onset in children with KD, can predict 
coronary artery lesion (CAL) development.
METHODS: In this review of hospital records, data of patients with KD admitted 
at our center between January, 2016 and January, 2020 was retrieved. The 
patients were divided into two groups based on the presence of CAL, and clinical 
characteristics of patients were compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: Out of the 79 patients enrolled, CAL was found in 40 (50.6%) patients 
and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) resistance was seen in 13 (16.5%) 
patients. Multivariate logistic regression revealed NLR as an independent 
predictor of CAL [OR (95% CI) 2.0 (1.2-3.1); P<0.001], and erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR) [OR (95% CI) 1.03 (1.001-1.1) P=0.04], as an 
independent predictor of IVIg resistance. NLR ≥2.08 was 82% sensitive and 80% 
specific in predicting CAL. ESR ≥88 mm/h was 85% sensitive and 64% specific in 
predicting IVIg resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: NLR is an independent predictor of CAL in KD. NLR ³2.08 done 
between the fourth and sixth day of fever onset may identify children with KD at 
risk of CAL.

PMID: 36604937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]