---
reference_id: "PMID:16987820"
title: Skipping of Exon 1 in the KCNQ1 gene causes Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome.
authors:
- Zehelein J
- Kathoefer S
- Khalil M
- Alter M
- Thomas D
- Brockmeier K
- Ulmer HE
- Katus HA
- Koenen M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M603433200
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Jervell-Lange Nielsen Syndrome/genetics
- "KCNQ1 Potassium Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Oocytes
- Pedigree
- "Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated/metabolism"
- Protein Subunits
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- Xenopus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skipping of Exon 1 in the KCNQ1 gene causes Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome.
**Authors:** Zehelein J, Kathoefer S, Khalil M, Alter M, Thomas D, Brockmeier K, Ulmer HE, Katus HA, Koenen M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M603433200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M603433200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 17;281(46):35397-403. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M603433200. Epub
2006 Sep 19.

Skipping of Exon 1 in the KCNQ1 gene causes Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome.

Zehelein J(1), Kathoefer S, Khalil M, Alter M, Thomas D, Brockmeier K, Ulmer HE,
Katus HA, Koenen M.

Author information:
(1)Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Innere Medizin III, Im Neuenheimer Feld 410,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) is a rare autosomal recessive form
of the long QT syndrome linked with a profound hearing loss caused by mutations
affecting both alleles of either the KCNQ1 or the KCNE1 gene. We carried out a
mutant screening of the KCNQ1 and KCNE1 genes in a clinical diagnosed German
family with JLNS. Family members were examined by single strand conformation
polymorphism analysis and PCR and amplified products were characterized by DNA
sequence analysis. We identified a splice donor mutation of exon 1 in the KCNQ1
gene (G477+1A). Analysis of lymphocyte RNA by RT-PCR revealed that two
symptomatic patients, homozygous for the mutant allele, exclusively produce
KCNQ1 transcripts lacking exon 1 leading to a frameshift that introduced a
premature termination codon at exon 4. Mutant subunits, functionally
characterized in Xenpous oocytes, were unable to form homomeric channels but
strongly reduced IKs (slowly activating delayed rectifier potassium current) in
vitro (mutant isoforms 1 and 2 by 62 and 86%, respectively), a fact supposed to
lead to severely affected heterozygous individuals. However, individuals
heterozygous for the mutant allele exhibit an asymptomatic cardiac phenotype.
Thus, the observed dominant-negative effect of mutant subunits in vitro is
absent in vivo leaving heterozygous individuals unaffected. These data suggest
mechanisms that prevent production of truncated KCNQ1 channel subunits in
cardiomyocytes of individuals heterozygous for the mutant allele.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M603433200
PMID: 16987820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
