---
reference_id: "PMID:39441037"
title: Dyspnea and nocturnal cough due to esophageal diffuse leiomyomatosis in a girl with hematuria.
authors:
- Park SW
- Lee M
- Kang HG
- Moon JS
- Kim HY
- Park JS
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.27325
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Child
- "Leiomyomatosis/complications, diagnosis, genetics, diagnostic imaging"
- Cough/etiology
- Dyspnea/etiology
- Hematuria/etiology
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, genetics, diagnostic imaging"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/diagnosis, complications"
- Asthma/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dyspnea and nocturnal cough due to esophageal diffuse leiomyomatosis in a girl with hematuria.
**Authors:** Park SW, Lee M, Kang HG, Moon JS, Kim HY, Park JS
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.27325](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.27325)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2025 Jan;60(1):e27325. doi: 10.1002/ppul.27325. Epub 2024
Oct  23.

Dyspnea and nocturnal cough due to esophageal diffuse leiomyomatosis in a girl
with hematuria.

Park SW(1), Lee M(1), Kang HG(1)(2), Moon JS(1), Kim HY(3), Park JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.
(2)Kidney Research Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

A 7-year-old girl with hematuria and clinical suspicion of Alport syndrome (AS)
presented with dyspnea and nocturnal cough, initially diagnosed and treated as
asthma. Despite inhaled corticosteroid therapy, her symptoms persisted, and
spirometry indicated obstructive lung function without bronchodilator response.
Chest CT revealed diffuse thickening of the esophageal wall, tracheal
compression, with involvement of the gastric cardia, suggestive of diffuse
leiomyomatosis. Subsequent genetic reanalysis confirmed the presence of a
contiguous deletion of COL4A5 and COL4A6 genes, solidifying the diagnosis of AS.
Diffuse leiomyomatosis, a rare benign neoplasm associated with AS, typically
manifests as dysphagia, but in this case, it presented initially with
asthma-like symptoms. This case emphasizes the importance of imaging when asthma
treatment fails, particularly in patients with coexisting conditions of another
system.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.27325
PMID: 39441037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
