---
reference_id: "PMID:37422156"
title: "Fusion-driven Spindle Cell Rhabdomyosarcomas of Bone and Soft Tissue: A Clinicopathologic and Molecular Genetic Study of 25 Cases."
authors:
- Dehner CA
- Broski SM
- Meis JM
- Murugan P
- Chrisinger JSA
- Sosa C
- Petersen M
- Halling KC
- Gupta S
- Folpe AL
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.modpat.2023.100271
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Bone Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
- Aged
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics, analysis"
- Gene Rearrangement
- Gene Fusion
- Myeloid Ecotropic Viral Integration Site 1 Protein/genetics
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fusion-driven Spindle Cell Rhabdomyosarcomas of Bone and Soft Tissue: A Clinicopathologic and Molecular Genetic Study of 25 Cases.
**Authors:** Dehner CA, Broski SM, Meis JM, Murugan P, Chrisinger JSA, Sosa C, Petersen M, Halling KC, Gupta S, Folpe AL
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.modpat.2023.100271](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.modpat.2023.100271)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2023 Oct;36(10):100271. doi: 10.1016/j.modpat.2023.100271. Epub
2023  Jul 7.

Fusion-driven Spindle Cell Rhabdomyosarcomas of Bone and Soft Tissue: A
Clinicopathologic and Molecular Genetic Study of 25 Cases.

Dehner CA(1), Broski SM(2), Meis JM(3), Murugan P(4), Chrisinger JSA(5), Sosa
C(1), Petersen M(1), Halling KC(1), Gupta S(1), Folpe AL(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota.
(2)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(5)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota. Electronic address: folpe.andrew@mayo.edu.

The evolving classification of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) now includes spindle cell
RMS (SRMS). Bone/soft tissue SRMS often harbor TFCP2, or less often MEIS1
rearrangements. We studied 25 fusion-driven SRMS involving bone (n = 19) and
soft tissue (n = 6). Osseous SRMS occurred in 13 women and 6 men (median age: 41
years) and involved the pelvis (5), sacrum (2), spine (4), maxilla (4), mandible
(1), skull (1), and femur (2). Follow-up (median: 5 months) demonstrated local
recurrence in 2/16 and distant metastases in 8/17 patients (median time to
metastasis: 1 month). Eight patients died of disease; 9 were alive with disease.
Soft tissue SRMS occurred in 4 men and 2 women (median: 50 years). Follow-up
(median: 10 months) revealed distant metastasis at diagnosis (1), alive with
unresected tumor (1), and no evidence of disease (4). Next-generation sequencing
demonstrated FUS::TFCP2 (12), EWSR1::TFCP2 (3) and MEIS1::NCOA2 (2); FISH
identified EWSR1 (2) rearrangements. Most TFCP2-rearranged SRMS (13/17) showed
spindled/epithelioid morphology, rarely with rhabdomyoblasts. The bone tumors
were diffusely desmin and MyoD1 positive with limited myogenin; 10/13 were ALK
-positive and 6/15 were keratin positive. Soft tissue SRMS harbored
EWSR1::TFCP2, MEIS1::NCOA2, ZFP64::NCOA2, MEIS1::FOXO1, TCF12::VGLL3 and
DCTN1::ALK, and displayed spindled/epithelioid, leiomyomatous, and
myxofibrosarcoma-like morphologies. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was positive for
MyoD1 (6/6), focal desmin (5/6), myogenin (3/6), and keratin (1/6). We conclude
that TFCP2-rearranged SRMS of bone and soft tissue show consistent morphologic
and IHC features, likely representing a distinct subset of RMS. Non-TFCP2
fusion-positive SRMS could represent a single RMS subset, multiple subtypes of
RMS, or "fusion-defined" sarcomas with rhabdomyoblastic differentiation.

Copyright © 2023 United States & Canadian Academy of Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.modpat.2023.100271
PMID: 37422156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
