---
reference_id: "PMID:38846886"
title: "Complex mitochondrial disease caused by the mutation of COX10 in a toddler: a case-report study."
authors:
- Tavasoli A
- Kachuei M
- Talebi S
- Eghdami S
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000002096
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complex mitochondrial disease caused by the mutation of COX10 in a toddler: a case-report study.
**Authors:** Tavasoli A, Kachuei M, Talebi S, Eghdami S
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MS9.0000000000002096](https://doi.org/10.1097/MS9.0000000000002096)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2024 Apr 29;86(6):3753-3756. doi: 
10.1097/MS9.0000000000002096. eCollection 2024 Jun.

Complex mitochondrial disease caused by the mutation of COX10 in a toddler: a 
case-report study.

Tavasoli A(1), Kachuei M(1), Talebi S(2), Eghdami S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hazrat-e Ali Asghar Hospital, Iran 
University of Medical Sciences.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Iran University of Medical Sciences (IUMS).
(3)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE: Cytochrome C oxidase (COX) deficiency is an 
uncommon inherited metabolic disorder. It is identified by a lack of the COX, 
also known as Complex IV. This enzyme plays a crucial role in the rate-limiting 
and oxygen-accepting step of the respiratory chain within the subcellular 
structures called mitochondria. The deficiency of COX can either be restricted 
to skeletal muscle tissues or can impact multiple tissues throughout the body.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 3-year-old girl was admitted due to muscle weakness and a 
decline in developmental milestones 7 days after a significant stressor. 
Leukodystrophy was observed in the brain magnetic resonance imaging, and genome 
sequencing identified a homozygous mutation in exon 1 and 7 of chromosome 17. 
This mutation led to a deficiency in COX10, which is a component of 
mitochondrial complex IV.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: In the medical field, inherited metabolic disorders can be 
complex to diagnose due to overlapping symptoms with other conditions. 
Mitochondria's oxidative phosphorylation system, including the COX enzyme 
complex, plays a crucial role in energy production. Mitochondrial disorders, 
including COX deficiency, can present at various stages of life with diverse 
symptoms. Treatment options focus on supportive care and potential benefits from 
supplements like coenzyme-Q10 and small-molecule therapies targeting 
mitochondrial function. Identifying genetic mutations is key for advancing 
treatments in this area.
CONCLUSION: This report presents a unique case of developmental regression and 
muscle weakness in a paediatric patient, which can be attributed to a rare 
occurrence of type 3 nuclear mitochondrial complex IV deficiency.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000002096
PMCID: PMC11152868
PMID: 38846886

Conflict of interest statement: There is no ethical problem (approved by the 
research ethics committee of Iran University of Medical Sciences) or conflict of 
interest in our research.Sponsorships or competing interests that may be 
relevant to content are disclosed at the end of this article.