---
reference_id: "PMID:34964109"
title: "A splice site mutation in the TSEN2 causes a new syndrome with craniofacial and central nervous system malformations, and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome."
authors:
- Canpolat N
- Liu D
- Atayar E
- Saygili S
- Kara NS
- Westfall TA
- Ding Q
- Brown BJ
- Braun TA
- Slusarski D
- Karli Oguz K
- Ozluk Y
- Tuysuz B
- Tastemel Ozturk T
- Sever L
- Sezerman OU
- Topaloglu R
- Caliskan S
- Attanasio M
- Ozaltin F
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14105
keywords:
- Animals
- Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/genetics
- Endonucleases/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Microcephaly/complications
- Mutation/genetics
- "RNA, Transfer"
- Zebrafish/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A splice site mutation in the TSEN2 causes a new syndrome with craniofacial and central nervous system malformations, and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
**Authors:** Canpolat N, Liu D, Atayar E, Saygili S, Kara NS, Westfall TA, Ding Q, Brown BJ, Braun TA, Slusarski D, Karli Oguz K, Ozluk Y, Tuysuz B, Tastemel Ozturk T, Sever L, Sezerman OU, Topaloglu R, Caliskan S, Attanasio M, Ozaltin F
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14105](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14105)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2022 Mar;101(3):346-358. doi: 10.1111/cge.14105. Epub 2022 Jan 7.

A splice site mutation in the TSEN2 causes a new syndrome with craniofacial and 
central nervous system malformations, and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.

Canpolat N(1), Liu D(2)(3), Atayar E(4), Saygili S(1), Kara NS(5), Westfall 
TA(6), Ding Q(2), Brown BJ(7), Braun TA(7), Slusarski D(7), Karli Oguz K(8), 
Ozluk Y(9), Tuysuz B(10), Tastemel Ozturk T(11), Sever L(1), Sezerman OU(5), 
Topaloglu R(11), Caliskan S(1), Attanasio M(2), Ozaltin F(4)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, 
Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(3)Department of Vascular Surgery, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(4)Nephrogenetics Laboratory, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Hacettepe 
University, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Biostatistics and Medical Informatics Program, Faculty of Medicine, Graduate 
School of Health Sciences, Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(7)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa, USA.
(8)Department of Radiology, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(9)Department of Pathology, Istanbul University Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(10)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa 
Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(11)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Hacettepe University Faculty of 
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

Recessive mutations in the genes encoding the four subunits of the tRNA splicing 
endonuclease complex (TSEN54, TSEN34, TSEN15, and TSEN2) cause various forms of 
pontocerebellar hypoplasia, a disorder characterized by hypoplasia of the 
cerebellum and the pons, microcephaly, dysmorphisms, and other variable clinical 
features. Here, we report an intronic recessive founder variant in the gene 
TSEN2 that results in abnormal splicing of the mRNA of this gene, in six 
individuals from four consanguineous families affected with microcephaly, 
multiple craniofacial malformations, radiological abnormalities of the central 
nervous system, and cognitive retardation of variable severity. Remarkably, 
unlike patients with previously described mutations in the components of the 
TSEN complex, all the individuals that we report developed atypical hemolytic 
uremic syndrome (aHUS) with thrombotic microangiopathy, microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, proteinuria, severe hypertension, and 
end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) early in life. Bulk RNA sequencing of peripheral 
blood cells of four affected individuals revealed abnormal tRNA transcripts, 
indicating an alteration of the tRNA biogenesis. Morpholino-mediated skipping of 
exon 10 of tsen2 in zebrafish produced phenotypes similar to human patients. 
Thus, we have identified a novel syndrome accompanied by aHUS suggesting the 
existence of a link between tRNA biology and vascular endothelium homeostasis, 
which we propose to name with the acronym TRACK syndrome (TSEN2 Related Atypical 
hemolytic uremic syndrome, Craniofacial malformations, Kidney failure).

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14105
PMCID: PMC10357464
PMID: 34964109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.