---
reference_id: "PMID:34572183"
title: "Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome: Clinical and Genetic Study of 7 New Cases, and Mini Review."
authors:
- Gavril EC
- Luca AC
- Curpan AS
- Popescu R
- Resmerita I
- Panzaru MC
- Butnariu LI
- Gorduza EV
- Gramescu M
- Rusu C
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/children8090751
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome: Clinical and Genetic Study of 7 New Cases, and Mini Review.
**Authors:** Gavril EC, Luca AC, Curpan AS, Popescu R, Resmerita I, Panzaru MC, Butnariu LI, Gorduza EV, Gramescu M, Rusu C
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children8090751](https://doi.org/10.3390/children8090751)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2021 Aug 30;8(9):751. doi: 10.3390/children8090751.

Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome: Clinical and Genetic Study of 7 New Cases, and Mini 
Review.

Gavril EC(1), Luca AC(2)(3), Curpan AS(4), Popescu R(1)(3), Resmerita I(1), 
Panzaru MC(1)(3), Butnariu LI(1)(3), Gorduza EV(1), Gramescu M(1), Rusu C(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa" 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, University Street, No 16, 700115 Iasi, 
Romania.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa" 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, University Street, No 16, 700115 Iasi, 
Romania.
(3)"St. Mary" Children's Hospital, Vasile Lupu Street, No 62-64, 700309 Iasi, 
Romania.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Biology, "Alexandru Ioan Cuza" University 
of Iasi, Bd. Carol I, 20A, 700505 Iasi, Romania.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS), a rare disorder determined by distal 4p 
deletion, is characterized by a pre and postnatal growth retardation, hypotonia, 
intellectual disability, epilepsy, craniofacial dysmorphism, and congenital 
fusion anomalies. The clinical aspects are dependent on the deletion' size. Our 
aim was to identify rare specific characteristics in a cohort of seven cases 
with 4p deletion and to assess the utility of Multiplex ligation-dependent probe 
amplification (MLPA) (cheap and sensitive test)-combined kits-as a diagnostic 
test and selection tool for cases that require other investigations (chromosomal 
microarray analysis-CMA, karyotype). For all cases we conducted a clinical 
examination with the main features identified: facial dysmorphism, intellectual 
disability, postnatal development delay, cardiac defects and hypotonia. In some 
cases, we observed seizures, structural brain abnormalities, immunodeficiencies, 
and renal anomalies. Prenatal growth retardation was detected in a relatively 
small number of cases, but postnatal growth failure was a constant feature. In 
all cases, the clinical diagnosis was confirmed by genetic analyses: karyotype 
and/or MLPA. In conclusion, renal and brain defects, as well as immunodeficiency 
are rare manifestations and should be looked for. Although CMA is the standard 
test, in our experience, MLPA is also a reliable screening method as the 
identified cases were either confirmed by MLPA or selected for further 
investigations.

DOI: 10.3390/children8090751
PMCID: PMC8471045
PMID: 34572183

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.