---
reference_id: "PMID:38540676"
title: "The Dysferlinopathies Conundrum: Clinical Spectra, Disease Mechanism and Genetic Approaches for Treatments."
authors:
- Anwar S
- Yokota T
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14030256
keywords:
- Animals
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle/genetics, therapy, metabolism"
- Muscular Dystrophies/genetics
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Dysferlinopathies Conundrum: Clinical Spectra, Disease Mechanism and Genetic Approaches for Treatments.
**Authors:** Anwar S, Yokota T
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14030256](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14030256)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 Feb 21;14(3):256. doi: 10.3390/biom14030256.

The Dysferlinopathies Conundrum: Clinical Spectra, Disease Mechanism and Genetic 
Approaches for Treatments.

Anwar S(1), Yokota T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University 
of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada.

Dysferlinopathies refer to a spectrum of muscular dystrophies that cause 
progressive muscle weakness and degeneration. They are caused by mutations in 
the DYSF gene, which encodes the dysferlin protein that is crucial for repairing 
muscle membranes. This review delves into the clinical spectra of 
dysferlinopathies, their molecular mechanisms, and the spectrum of emerging 
therapeutic strategies. We examine the phenotypic heterogeneity of 
dysferlinopathies, highlighting the incomplete understanding of 
genotype-phenotype correlations and discussing the implications of various DYSF 
mutations. In addition, we explore the potential of symptomatic, 
pharmacological, molecular, and genetic therapies in mitigating the disease's 
progression. We also consider the roles of diet and metabolism in managing 
dysferlinopathies, as well as the impact of clinical trials on treatment 
paradigms. Furthermore, we examine the utility of animal models in elucidating 
disease mechanisms. By culminating the complexities inherent in 
dysferlinopathies, this write up emphasizes the need for multidisciplinary 
approaches, precision medicine, and extensive collaboration in research and 
clinical trial design to advance our understanding and treatment of these 
challenging disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14030256
PMCID: PMC10968265
PMID: 38540676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.Y. is a co-founder and shareholder of 
OligomicsTx Inc., Calgary, AB, which aims to commercialize antisense technology. 
S.A. declares that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.