---
reference_id: "PMID:37675071"
title: "Global, regional, and national burden of osteoarthritis, 1990-2020 and projections to 2050: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021."
authors:
- GBD 2021 Osteoarthritis Collaborators
journal: Lancet Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00163-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global, regional, and national burden of osteoarthritis, 1990-2020 and projections to 2050: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021.
**Authors:** GBD 2021 Osteoarthritis Collaborators
**Journal:** Lancet Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00163-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00163-7)

## Content

1. Lancet Rheumatol. 2023 Aug 21;5(9):e508-e522. doi:
10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00163-7. eCollection 2023 Sep.

Global, regional, and national burden of osteoarthritis, 1990-2020 and
projections to 2050: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2021.

GBD 2021 Osteoarthritis Collaborators.

Collaborators: Steinmetz JD, Culbreth GT, Haile LM, Rafferty Q, Lo J, Fukutaki
KG, Cruz JA, Smith AE, Vollset SE, Brooks PM, Cross M, Woolf AD, Hagins H,
Abbasi-Kangevari M, Abedi A, Ackerman IN, Amu H, Antony B, Arabloo J, Aravkin
AY, Argaw AM, Artamonov AA, Ashraf T, Barrow A, Bearne LM, Bensenor IM, Berhie
AY, Bhardwaj N, Bhardwaj P, Bhojaraja VS, Bijani A, Briant PS, Briggs AM, Butt
NS, Charan J, Chattu VK, Cicuttini FM, Coberly K, Dadras O, Dai X, Dandona L,
Dandona R, de Luca K, Denova-Gutiérrez E, Dharmaratne SD, Dhimal M, Dianatinasab
M, Dreinhoefer KE, Elhadi M, Farooque U, Farpour HR, Filip I, Fischer F, Freitas
M, Ganesan B, Gemeda BNB, Getachew T, Ghamari SH, Ghashghaee A, Gill TK,
Golechha M, Golinelli D, Gupta B, Gupta VB, Gupta VK, Haddadi R, Hafezi-Nejad N,
Halwani R, Hamidi S, Hanif A, Harlianto NI, Haro JM, Hartvigsen J, Hay SI,
Hebert JJ, Heidari G, Hosseini MS, Hosseinzadeh M, Hsiao AK, Ilic IM, Ilic MD,
Jacob L, Jayawardena R, Jha RP, Jonas JB, Joseph N, Kandel H, Karaye IM, Khan
MJ, Kim YJ, Kolahi AA, Korzh O, Koteeswaran R, Krishnamoorthy V, Kumar GA, Kumar
N, Lee SW, Lim SS, Lobo SW, Lucchetti G, Malekpour MR, Malik AA, Mandarano-Filho
LGG, Martini S, Mentis AA, Mesregah MK, Mestrovic T, Mirrakhimov EM, Misganaw A,
Mohammadpourhodki R, Mokdad AH, Momtazmanesh S, Morrison SD, Murray CJL,
Nassereldine H, Netsere HB, Neupane Kandel S, Owolabi MO, Panda-Jonas S, Pandey
A, Pawar S, Pedersini P, Pereira J, Radfar A, Rashidi MM, Rawaf DL, Rawaf S,
Rawassizadeh R, Rayegani SM, Ribeiro D, Roever L, Saddik B, Sahebkar A, Salehi
S, Sanchez Riera L, Sanmarchi F, Santric-Milicevic MM, Shahabi S, Shaikh MA,
Shaker E, Shannawaz M, Sharma R, Sharma S, Shetty JK, Shiri R, Shobeiri P, Silva
DAS, Singh A, Singh JA, Singh S, Skou ST, Slater H, Soltani-Zangbar MS,
Starodubova AV, Tehrani-Banihashemi A, Valadan Tahbaz S, Valdez PR, Vo B, Vu LG,
Wang YP, Yahyazadeh Jabbari SH, Yonemoto N, Yunusa I, March LM, Ong KL, Vos T,
Kopec JA.

Comment in
    Lancet Rheumatol. 2023 Sep;5(9):e496-e497. doi:
10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00207-2.

BACKGROUND: Osteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis in adults,
characterised by chronic pain and loss of mobility. Osteoarthritis most
frequently occurs after age 40 years and prevalence increases steeply with age.
WHO has designated 2021-30 the decade of healthy ageing, which highlights the
need to address diseases such as osteoarthritis, which strongly affect
functional ability and quality of life. Osteoarthritis can coexist with, and
negatively effect, other chronic conditions. Here we estimate the burden of
hand, hip, knee, and other sites of osteoarthritis across geographies, age, sex,
and time, with forecasts of prevalence to 2050.
METHODS: In this systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study,
osteoarthritis prevalence in 204 countries and territories from 1990 to 2020 was
estimated using data from population-based surveys from 26 countries for knee
osteoarthritis, 23 countries for hip osteoarthritis, 42 countries for hand
osteoarthritis, and US insurance claims for all of the osteoarthritis sites,
including the other types of osteoarthritis category. The reference case
definition was symptomatic, radiographically confirmed osteoarthritis. Studies
using alternative definitions from the reference case definition (for example
self-reported osteoarthritis) were adjusted to reference using regression
models. Osteoarthritis severity distribution was obtained from a pooled
meta-analysis of sources using the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities
Arthritis Index. Final prevalence estimates were multiplied by disability
weights to calculate years lived with disability (YLDs). Prevalence was forecast
to 2050 using a mixed-effects model.
FINDINGS: Globally, 595 million (95% uncertainty interval 535-656) people had
osteoarthritis in 2020, equal to 7·6% (95% UI 6·8-8·4) of the global population,
and an increase of 132·2% (130·3-134·1) in total cases since 1990. Compared with
2020, cases of osteoarthritis are projected to increase 74·9% (59·4-89·9) for
knee, 48·6% (35·9-67·1) for hand, 78·6% (57·7-105·3) for hip, and 95·1%
(68·1-135·0) for other types of osteoarthritis by 2050. The global
age-standardised rate of YLDs for total osteoarthritis was 255·0 YLDs
(119·7-557·2) per 100 000 in 2020, a 9·5% (8·6-10·1) increase from 1990 (233·0
YLDs per 100 000, 109·3-510·8). For adults aged 70 years and older,
osteoarthritis was the seventh ranked cause of YLDs. Age-standardised prevalence
in 2020 was more than 5·5% in all world regions, ranging from 5677·4
(5029·8-6318·1) per 100 000 in southeast Asia to 8632·7 (7852·0-9469·1) per
100 000 in high-income Asia Pacific. Knee was the most common site for
osteoarthritis. High BMI contributed to 20·4% (95% UI -1·7 to 36·6) of
osteoarthritis. Potentially modifiable risk factors for osteoarthritis such as
recreational injury prevention and occupational hazards have not yet been
explored in GBD modelling.
INTERPRETATION: Age-standardised YLDs attributable to osteoarthritis are
continuing to rise and will lead to substantial increases in case numbers
because of population growth and ageing, and because there is no effective cure
for osteoarthritis. The demand on health systems for care of patients with
osteoarthritis, including joint replacements, which are highly effective for
late stage osteoarthritis in hips and knees, will rise in all regions, but might
be out of reach and lead to further health inequity for individuals and
countries unable to afford them. Much more can and should be done to prevent
people getting to that late stage.
FUNDING: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Institute of Bone and Joint Research,
and Global Alliance for Musculoskeletal Health.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article
under the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00163-7
PMCID: PMC10477960
PMID: 37675071

Conflict of interest statement: BA reports an investigator-initiated trial grant
from Rebecca Cooper Foundation and an investigator-initiated trial biomarkers
assessment support grant from Nat Rem, and payment or honoraria for lectures,
presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from
Nat Rem and IRACON, all outside the submitted work. AMB reports grants or
contracts paid to his institution from the Bone and Joint Decade Foundation, AO
Alliance, Canadian Memorial Chiropractic College, Australian Rheumatology
Association, Pan-American League of Associations for Rheumatology, World
Federation of Chiropractic, and Asia Pacific League of Associations for
Rheumatology, consulting fees from WHO, payment or honoraria for lectures,
presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from
the American College of Rheumatology, and support for attending meetings and
travel from WHO, all outside the submitted work. IF and AR report payment or
honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or
educational events from Avicenna Medical and Clinical Research Institute to
provide critical feedback and comments on important intellectual content on
Global Burden of Disease manuscripts before publication. A-FAM reports grants or
contracts for MilkSafe, a novel pipeline to enrich formula milk using omics
technologies, research cofinanced by the European Regional Development Fund of
the EU and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness,
Entrepreneurship, and Innovation, under the call Research, Create, Innovate
(project code T2EDK-02222), and from ELIDEK (Hellenic Foundation for Research
and Innovation, MIMS-860), payment for expert testimony from Fondazione Cariplo,
Italy for having served as an external peer reviewer; leadership, or fiduciary
roles in board, society, committee, or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid with
Sytematic Reviews and Annals of Epidemiology as an Editorial Board Members, and
with Translational Psychiatry as an Associate Editor, stock or stock options in
a family winder, and other financial or non-financial support from BGI Group for
serving as a scientific officer, all outside the submitted work. JAS reports
consulting fees from Crealta-Horizon, Medisys, Fidia, PK Med, Two labs, Adept
Field Solutions, Clinical Care options, Clearview Healthcare Partners, Putnam
associates, Focus Forward, Navigant consulting, Spherix, MedIQ, Jupiter Life
Science, UBM LLC, Trio Health, Medscape, WebMD, and Practice Point
Communications, and the National Institutes of Health and the American College
of Rheumatology, payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers
bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational events from the speaker's bureau of
Simply Speaking, support for attending meetings and travel from the steering
committee of OMERACT, participation on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or
Advisory Board as a member of the FDA Arthritis Advisory Committee, leadership
or fiduciary roles in board, society, committee, or advocacy groups, paid or
unpaid as a steering committee member of the OMERACT, with the Veteran Affairs
Rheumatology Field Advisory Committee as a Chair, and with the UAB Cochrane
Musculoskeletal Group Satellite Center on Network Meta-analysis as an Editor,
stock or stock options in Atai Life Sciences, Kintara Therapeutics, Intelligent
Biosolutions, Acumen pharmaceutical, TPT Global Tech, Vaxart Pharmaceuticals,
Atyu Biopharma, Adaptimmune Therapeutics, GeoVax Labs, Pieris Pharmaceuticals,
Enzolytics, Seres Therapeutics, Tonix Pharmaceuticals Holding Corp., and
Charlotte's Web Holdings, and previously owned stock options in Amarin, Viking,
and Moderna Pharmaceuticals, all outside the submitted work. STS reports grants
or contracts from the European Research Council paid to the university from the
EU Horizon 2020 research innovation program (grant agreement 801790), the EU
Horizon 2020 research innovation program paid to the hospital (grant agreement
945377), Region Zealand paid to the hospital as a program grant from Region
Zealand (Exercise First), royalties from Munksgaard for book chapters and
TrustMe-Ed for an online lecture, an honorarium from Nestlé Health Science for a
webinar presentation on osteoarthritis, and other financial or non-financial
interests as co-founder of GLA:D, a not-for profit initiative hosted at
University of Southern Denmark aimed at implementing clinical guidelines for
osteoarthritis in clinical practice, all outside the submitted work. HS reports
grants or contracts paid to her institution from the Australian Government
(Department of Health Grant), Medical Research Future Fund, Western Australian
Government Department of Health, Bone and Joint Decade Foundation (Sweden),
Curtin University (Australia), Institute for Bone and Joint Research
(Australia), Canadian Memorial Chiropractic College (Canada), and support for
attending meetings and travel from the Australian Pain Society, all outside the
submitted work. All other authors declare no competing interests.
