---
reference_id: "PMID:25122769"
title: Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-regulated interactions between Osterix and Runx2 are critical for the transcriptional osteogenic program.
authors:
- Artigas N
- Ureña C
- Rodríguez-Carballo E
- Rosa JL
- Ventura F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.576793
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-regulated interactions between Osterix and Runx2 are critical for the transcriptional osteogenic program.
**Authors:** Artigas N, Ureña C, Rodríguez-Carballo E, Rosa JL, Ventura F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.576793](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.576793)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 26;289(39):27105-27117. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.576793.
Epub  2014 Aug 13.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-regulated interactions between Osterix 
and Runx2 are critical for the transcriptional osteogenic program.

Artigas N(1), Ureña C(1), Rodríguez-Carballo E(1), Rosa JL(1), Ventura F(2).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, Universitat de Barcelona, 
L'Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), E-08907 L'Hospitalet 
de Llobregat, Spain.
(2)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, Universitat de Barcelona, 
L'Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), E-08907 L'Hospitalet 
de Llobregat, Spain. Electronic address: fventura@ub.edu.

The transcription factors Runx2 and Osx (Osterix) are required for osteoblast 
differentiation and bone formation. Runx2 expression occurs at early stages of 
osteochondroprogenitor determination, followed by Osx induction during 
osteoblast maturation. We demonstrate that coexpression of Osx and Runx2 leads 
to cooperative induction of expression of the osteogenic genes Col1a1, Fmod, and 
Ibsp. Functional interaction of Osx and Runx2 in the regulation of these 
promoters is mediated by enhancer regions with adjacent Sp1 and Runx2 
DNA-binding sites. These enhancers allow formation of a cooperative 
transcriptional complex, mediated by the binding of Osx and Runx2 to their 
specific DNA promoter sequences and by the protein-protein interactions between 
them. We also identified the domains involved in the interaction between Osx and 
Runx2. These regions contain the amino acids in Osx and Runx2 known to be 
phosphorylated by p38 and ERK MAPKs. Inhibition of p38 and ERK kinase activities 
or mutation of their known phosphorylation sites in Osx or Runx2 strongly 
disrupts their physical interaction and cooperative transcriptional effects. 
Altogether, our results provide a molecular description of a mechanism for Osx 
and Runx2 transcriptional cooperation that is subject to further regulation by 
MAPK-activating signals during osteogenesis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.576793
PMCID: PMC4175347
PMID: 25122769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]