---
reference_id: "PMID:29230619"
title: Neuroanatomical and molecular correlates of cognitive and behavioural outcomes in hypogonadal males.
authors:
- Akinola OB
- Gabriel MO
journal: Metab Brain Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s11011-017-0163-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroanatomical and molecular correlates of cognitive and behavioural outcomes in hypogonadal males.
**Authors:** Akinola OB, Gabriel MO
**Journal:** Metab Brain Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11011-017-0163-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-017-0163-5)

## Content

1. Metab Brain Dis. 2018 Apr;33(2):491-505. doi: 10.1007/s11011-017-0163-5. Epub 
2017 Dec 11.

Neuroanatomical and molecular correlates of cognitive and behavioural outcomes 
in hypogonadal males.

Akinola OB(1), Gabriel MO(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Basic Medical 
Sciences, College of Health Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria. 
akinolub@unilorin.edu.ng.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Basic Medical 
Sciences, College of Health Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria.

Robust epidemiological, clinical and laboratory evidence supports emerging roles 
for the sex steroids in such domains as neurodevelopment, behaviour, learning 
and cognition. Regions of the mammalian brain that are involved in cognitive 
development and memory do not only express the classical nuclear androgen 
receptor, but also the non-genomic membrane receptor, which is a G 
protein-coupled receptor that mediates some rapid effects of the androgens on 
neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity. Under physiological conditions, 
hippocampal neurons do express the enzyme aromatase, and therefore actively 
aromatize testosterone to oestradiol. Although glial expression of the aromatase 
enzyme is minimal, increased expression following injury suggests a role for sex 
steroids in neuroprotection. It is therefore plausible to deduce that low levels 
of circulating androgens in males would perturb neuronal functions in relation 
to cognition and memory, as well as neural repair following injury. The present 
review is an overview of some roles of the sex steroids on cognitive function in 
males, and the neuroanatomical and molecular underpinnings of some behavioural 
and cognitive deficits characteristic of such genetic disorders noted for low 
androgen levels, including Klinefelter syndrome, Bardet-Biedl syndrome, Kallman 
syndrome and Prader-Willi syndrome. Recent literature in relation to some 
behavioural and cognitive changes secondary to surgical and pharmacological 
castration are also appraised.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-017-0163-5
PMID: 29230619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]