---
reference_id: "PMID:31972903"
title: Novel variants in COL2A1 causing rare spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita.
authors:
- Zheng WB
- Li LJ
- Zhao DC
- Wang O
- Jiang Y
- Xia WB
- Xing XP
- Li M
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1139
keywords:
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Collagen Type II/chemistry, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Protein Domains
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel variants in COL2A1 causing rare spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita.
**Authors:** Zheng WB, Li LJ, Zhao DC, Wang O, Jiang Y, Xia WB, Xing XP, Li M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.1139](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.1139)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2020 Mar;8(3):e1139. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1139. Epub 2020 
Jan 23.

Novel variants in COL2A1 causing rare spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita.

Zheng WB(1), Li LJ(1), Zhao DC(1), Wang O(1), Jiang Y(1), Xia WB(1), Xing XP(1), 
Li M(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Endocrinology, National Health 
and Family Planning Commission, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC) is an extremely rare 
inherited chondrodysplasia characterized by abnormal epiphyses, short stature, 
and flattened vertebral bodies. We investigate the phenotypes and the 
disease-associated variants of SEDC in two unrelated Chinese families.
METHODS: We identified disease-associated variants in two nonconsanguineous 
families with SEDC using targeted next-generation sequencing and confirmed the 
variants using Sanger sequencing. We investigated the phenotypes of the 
patients, including clinical manifestations, bone turnover biomarkers, bone 
mineral density and skeletal radiographic features.
RESULTS: Two probands were diagnosed as SEDC according to the phenotypes of 
disproportionately short-trunk stature, kyphosis, lumbar lordosis and adduction 
deformity of hips. Radiographs revealed kyphosis and lumbar lordosis, flattened 
vertebral bodies, compressed femoral heads and shortening of the femurs. Bone 
mineral density of the probands was lower than that of age- and gender-matched 
normal children, but bone turnover biomarker levels were within normal range. 
Two novel heterozygous missense variants (NM_001844.5: c.1654 G>A, NP_001835.3: 
p.Gly552Arg; NM_001844.5: c.3518G>T, NP_001835.3: p.Gly1173Val) in collagen type 
II alpha 1 chain (COL2A1) were detected in the two families, which would impair 
the formation of stable triple-helical type II collagen.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified two novel disease-associated variants in COL2A1, 
which led to severe SEDC. Our findings expanded the gene variant spectrum and 
phenotypic spectrum of extremely rare type II collagenopathies.

© 2020 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1139
PMCID: PMC7057085
PMID: 31972903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest.