---
reference_id: "PMID:24030547"
title: LIS1 controls mitosis and mitotic spindle organization via the LIS1-NDEL1-dynein complex.
authors:
- Moon HM
- Youn YH
- Pemble H
- Yingling J
- Wittmann T
- Wynshaw-Boris A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt436
keywords:
- "1-Alkyl-2-acetylglycerophosphocholine Esterase/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Centrosome
- Cerebral Cortex
- Chromosome Segregation
- Dyneins/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Lissencephaly/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Microtubules/metabolism
- Mitosis
- Mutation
- Neurons/metabolism
- Protein Stability
- "Spindle Apparatus/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LIS1 controls mitosis and mitotic spindle organization via the LIS1-NDEL1-dynein complex.
**Authors:** Moon HM, Youn YH, Pemble H, Yingling J, Wittmann T, Wynshaw-Boris A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt436](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt436)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jan 15;23(2):449-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt436. Epub 2013
Sep  12.

LIS1 controls mitosis and mitotic spindle organization via the LIS1-NDEL1-dynein
complex.

Moon HM(1), Youn YH, Pemble H, Yingling J, Wittmann T, Wynshaw-Boris A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Institute for Human Genetics.

Heterozygous LIS1 mutations are responsible for the human neuronal migration
disorder lissencephaly. Mitotic functions of LIS1 have been suggested from many
organisms throughout evolution. However, the cellular functions of LIS1 at
distinct intracellular compartments such as the centrosome and the cell cortex
have not been well defined especially during mitotic cell division. Here, we
used detailed cellular approaches and time-lapse live cell imaging of mitosis
from Lis1 mutant mouse embryonic fibroblasts to reveal critical roles of LIS1 in
mitotic spindle regulation. We found that LIS1 is required for the tight control
of chromosome congression and segregation to dictate kinetochore-microtubule
(MT) interactions and anaphase progression. In addition, LIS1 is essential for
the establishment of mitotic spindle pole integrity by maintaining normal
centrosome number. Moreover, LIS1 plays crucial roles in mitotic spindle
orientation by increasing the density of astral MT plus-end movements toward the
cell cortex, which enhances cortical targeting of LIS1-dynein complex.
Overexpression of NDEL1-dynein and MT stabilization rescues spindle orientation
defects in Lis1 mutants, demonstrating that mouse LIS1 acts via the
LIS1-NDEL1-dynein complex to regulate astral MT plus-ends dynamics and establish
proper contacts of MTs with the cell cortex to ensure precise cell division.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt436
PMCID: PMC3869364
PMID: 24030547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
