---
reference_id: "PMID:40593474"
title: "MCM9 deficiency impairs DNA damage repair during spermatogenesis, leading to Sertoli cell-only syndrome in humans."
authors:
- Sha X
- Zhang X
- Geng H
- Li Y
- Xia X
- Li G
- Hua R
- Li K
- Gao Y
- Shen Q
- Guo R
- Xu Y
- He X
- Cao Y
- Liu M
- Wu H
journal: Cell Death Discov
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41420-025-02581-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MCM9 deficiency impairs DNA damage repair during spermatogenesis, leading to Sertoli cell-only syndrome in humans.
**Authors:** Sha X, Zhang X, Geng H, Li Y, Xia X, Li G, Hua R, Li K, Gao Y, Shen Q, Guo R, Xu Y, He X, Cao Y, Liu M, Wu H
**Journal:** Cell Death Discov (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41420-025-02581-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41420-025-02581-y)

## Content

1. Cell Death Discov. 2025 Jul 1;11(1):292. doi: 10.1038/s41420-025-02581-y.

MCM9 deficiency impairs DNA damage repair during spermatogenesis, leading to 
Sertoli cell-only syndrome in humans.

Sha X(#)(1), Zhang X(#)(2), Geng H(#)(1)(3)(4), Li Y(1), Xia X(1), Li G(1), Hua 
R(3)(4), Li K(1)(5)(6), Gao Y(1), Shen Q(1)(5)(6), Guo R(1)(5)(6), Xu 
Y(1)(5)(6), He X(3)(7), Cao Y(8)(9)(10), Liu M(11), Wu H(12)(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the 
First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health, The 
Affiliated Taizhou People's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Taizhou 
School of Clinical Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 211166, China.
(3)NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract (Anhui 
Medical University), Hefei, 230032, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle (Anhui Medical 
University), Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, Hefei, 
230032, China.
(5)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Reproductive Disorders and Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology Diseases, Hefei, 230032, China.
(6)Biopreservation and Artificial Organs, Anhui Provincial Engineering Research 
Center, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China.
(7)Reproductive Medicine Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, No 
650 Xinsongjiang Road, Shanghai, 200080, China.
(8)Reproductive Medicine Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the 
First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, China. 
caoyunxia5972@ahmu.edu.cn.
(9)NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract (Anhui 
Medical University), Hefei, 230032, China. caoyunxia5972@ahmu.edu.cn.
(10)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle (Anhui Medical 
University), Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, Hefei, 
230032, China. caoyunxia5972@ahmu.edu.cn.
(11)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health, The 
Affiliated Taizhou People's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Taizhou 
School of Clinical Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 211166, China. 
mingxi.liu@njmu.edu.cn.
(12)Reproductive Medicine Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the 
First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, China. 
wu_huan5@163.com.
(13)NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract 
(Anhui Medical University), Hefei, 230032, China. wu_huan5@163.com.
(14)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle (Anhui Medical 
University), Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, Hefei, 
230032, China. wu_huan5@163.com.
(15)Center for Big Data and Population Health of IHM, Anhui Medical University, 
Hefei, 230032, China. wu_huan5@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) represents the most severe form of male 
infertility; however, its genetic etiology remains largely elusive. MCM9 is 
crucial for DNA damage repair in mammalian somatic cells, playing a key role in 
regulating both homologous recombination (HR) and mismatch repair (MMR) 
pathways. In mice, MCM9 deficiency leads to spermatogenic failure characterized 
by progressive germ cell depletion and impaired HR repair. However, the 
underlying mechanism remains unclear in humans. Our study identified two novel 
homozygous loss-of-function (LoF) mutations in MCM9 in two unrelated NOA 
patients presenting with Sertoli cell-only syndrome (SCOS). The absence of 
testicular MCM9 confirmed the pathogenicity of these LoF mutations. Furthermore, 
diminished HR-mediated DNA repair capacity observed in HEK293T cells, either 
lacking MCM9 or overexpressing mutant MCM9 plasmids, highlighted the deleterious 
impact of these LoF mutations on HR repair. Additionally, the confirmed 
interaction between human testicular MCM9 and both MSH2 and MLH1, alongside 
findings that human MCM9 is predominantly expressed in spermatogonial stem cells 
and spermatogonia, provides compelling evidence for the involvement of the 
MCM9-mediated MMR pathway in maintaining genomic integrity and supporting the 
viability and proliferation of spermatogonia in humans. Given the poor outcomes 
of microdissection testicular sperm extraction (micro-TESE) observed in both 
probands, we propose that biallelic LoF mutations in MCM9 may serve as 
non-invasive molecular biomarkers for predicting micro-TESE failure. These 
findings enhance our understanding of the genetic basis of human NOA, 
particularly SCOS, and provide valuable insights for genetic counseling and 
fertility guidance tailored to these patients.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41420-025-02581-y
PMCID: PMC12218035
PMID: 40593474

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests. Ethics: This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of 
the First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University (P2020-12-36), and 
informed consent was obtained from all participants and their family members. 
All methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and 
regulations.