---
reference_id: "PMID:20422687"
title: The value of (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography for staging of primary extranodal head and neck lymphomas.
authors:
- Schrepfer T
- Haerle SK
- Strobel K
- Schaefer N
- Hälg RA
- Huber GF
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/lary.20843
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The value of (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography for staging of primary extranodal head and neck lymphomas.
**Authors:** Schrepfer T, Haerle SK, Strobel K, Schaefer N, Hälg RA, Huber GF
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.20843](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.20843)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2010 May;120(5):937-44. doi: 10.1002/lary.20843.

The value of (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed 
tomography for staging of primary extranodal head and neck lymphomas.

Schrepfer T(1), Haerle SK, Strobel K, Schaefer N, Hälg RA, Huber GF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery,University Hospital 
Zurich, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Using a retrospective approach, the aim of this study was 
to confirm the previously described value of fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose 
positron emission tomography/computed tomography ((18)F-FDG-PET/CT) in patients 
with primary extranodal lymphoma of the head and neck region. Additionally, the 
clinical significance of the semiquantitative analysis of the standardized 
uptake value (SUV), its predictive role in the follow-up setting, and its value 
in detection of synchronous primaries were studied.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective chart review.
METHODS: Twenty-six patients with a primary extranodal head and neck lymphoma 
(22 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, one Hodgkin's lymphoma, three malignant 
T-cell lymphomas) were included. We retrospectively evaluated the clinical 
outcomes according to the maximum standardized uptake values of the primary 
lesion (SUV(max)) and whether a positron emission tomography/computed tomography 
(PET/CT) was performed or not in the follow-up studies. The median SUV(max) was 
chosen as the cutoff value. The patients were then grouped as those with either 
low or high SUV(max), respective to the cutoff value. Event-free survival and 
cumulative survival were endpoints of interest.
RESULTS: Nineteen patients (73%) were above the age of 60 years; the median age 
was 70 years (range, 28-87 years). Most primary sites were in the Waldeyer's 
ring (15 patients, 60%), whereas in four patients (27%) only the palatine tonsil 
was affected. The SUV(max) ranged from 5.8 to 33.9. In one patient, relevant 
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake within the intestine revealed a cecal 
adenocarcinoma as a secondary primary. Twenty of the 25 clinically followed 
patients (80%) achieved complete remission after treatment. Patients with high 
SUV(max) showed favorable survival (log-rank test, P = .044). A tendency for 
longer survival within the group with follow-up PET/CT studies could be noted 
but with no significant statistical difference (P = .349).
CONCLUSIONS: (18)F-FDG-PET/CT imaging is a potent primary staging tool. It also 
has application as an instrument for evaluation of follow-up and response to 
therapy in patients suffering from primary extranodal lymphoma and for detection 
of secondary malignancies. Furthermore, (18)F-FDG uptake by the primary lesion 
may be related to better survival.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.20843
PMID: 20422687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]