---
reference_id: "PMID:36516090"
title: Trial of Beremagene Geperpavec (B-VEC) for Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa.
authors:
- Guide SV
- Gonzalez ME
- Bağcı IS
- Agostini B
- Chen H
- Feeney G
- Steimer M
- Kapadia B
- Sridhar K
- Quesada Sanchez L
- Gonzalez F
- Van Ligten M
- Parry TJ
- Chitra S
- Kammerman LA
- Krishnan S
- Marinkovich MP
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2206663
keywords:
- Humans
- "Administration, Topical"
- "Collagen Type VII/administration & dosage, adverse effects, genetics, metabolism"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Pruritus/chemically induced
- "Wound Healing/drug effects, genetics"
- "Genetic Therapy/adverse effects, methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trial of Beremagene Geperpavec (B-VEC) for Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa.
**Authors:** Guide SV, Gonzalez ME, Bağcı IS, Agostini B, Chen H, Feeney G, Steimer M, Kapadia B, Sridhar K, Quesada Sanchez L, Gonzalez F, Van Ligten M, Parry TJ, Chitra S, Kammerman LA, Krishnan S, Marinkovich MP
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2206663](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2206663)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2022 Dec 15;387(24):2211-2219. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2206663.

Trial of Beremagene Geperpavec (B-VEC) for Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa.

Guide SV(1), Gonzalez ME(1), Bağcı IS(1), Agostini B(1), Chen H(1), Feeney G(1), 
Steimer M(1), Kapadia B(1), Sridhar K(1), Quesada Sanchez L(1), Gonzalez F(1), 
Van Ligten M(1), Parry TJ(1), Chitra S(1), Kammerman LA(1), Krishnan S(1), 
Marinkovich MP(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Mission Dermatology Center, Department of Dermatology, Children's 
Hospital of Orange County, University of California Irvine, Rancho Santa 
Margarita (S.V.G., M.V.L.), the Department of Dermatology, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford (I.S.B., K.S., M.P.M.), and the Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Palo Alto (M.P.M.) - all in California; Pediatric Skin Research, 
Coral Gables, FL (M.E.G., L.Q.S., F.G.); Krystal Biotech, Pittsburgh (B.A., 
H.C., G.F., M.S., B.K., T.J.P., S.K.); Savio Group Analytics, Hockessin, DE 
(S.C.); and Kammerman Consulting, Chevy Chase, MD (L.A.K.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Dec 15;387(24):2281-2284. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2213203.

BACKGROUND: Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa is a rare genetic blistering skin 
disease caused by mutations in COL7A1, which encodes type VII collagen (C7). 
Beremagene geperpavec (B-VEC) is a topical investigational herpes simplex virus 
type 1 (HSV-1)-based gene therapy designed to restore C7 protein by delivering 
COL7A1.
METHODS: We conducted a phase 3, double-blind, intrapatient randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial involving patients 6 months of age or older with 
genetically confirmed dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. For each patient, a 
primary wound pair was selected, with the wounds matched according to size, 
region, and appearance. The wounds within each pair were randomly assigned in a 
1:1 ratio to receive weekly application of either B-VEC or placebo for 26 weeks. 
The primary end point was complete wound healing of treated as compared with 
untreated wounds at 6 months. Secondary end points included complete wound 
healing at 3 months and the change from baseline to weeks 22, 24, and 26 in pain 
severity during changes in wound dressing, assessed with the use of a visual 
analogue scale (scores range from 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating greater 
pain).
RESULTS: Primary wound pairs were exposed to B-VEC and placebo in 31 patients. 
At 6 months, complete wound healing occurred in 67% of the wounds exposed to 
B-VEC as compared with 22% of those exposed to placebo (difference, 46 
percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 24 to 68; P = 0.002). Complete 
wound healing at 3 months occurred in 71% of the wounds exposed to B-VEC as 
compared with 20% of those exposed to placebo (difference, 51 percentage points; 
95% CI, 29 to 73; P<0.001). The mean change from baseline to week 22 in pain 
severity during wound-dressing changes was -0.88 with B-VEC and -0.71 with 
placebo (adjusted least-squares mean difference, -0.61; 95% CI, -1.10 to -0.13); 
similar mean changes were observed at weeks 24 and 26. Adverse events with B-VEC 
and placebo included pruritus and chills.
CONCLUSIONS: Complete wound healing at 3 and 6 months in patients with 
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa was more likely with topical administration of 
B-VEC than with placebo. Pruritus and mild systemic side effects were observed 
in patients treated with B-VEC. Longer and larger trials are warranted to 
determine the durability and side effects of B-VEC for this disease. (Funded by 
Krystal Biotech; GEM-3 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04491604.).

Copyright © 2022 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2206663
PMID: 36516090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]