---
reference_id: "PMID:31424867"
title: Amniotic Band Syndrome.
authors:
- Pape K
- Gorla SR
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amniotic Band Syndrome.
**Authors:** Pape K, Gorla SR

## Content

1. Amniotic Band Syndrome.

Pape K(1), Gorla SR(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026
Jan–.
2025 Jul 7.

Author information:
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine Indianapolis, IN
(2)Texas Tech University HSC

Amniotic band syndrome is a rare diagnosis with variable presentations. Although
the underlying etiology of amniotic band syndrome remains unknown, the clinical
consequences result from fetal parts becoming entangled in the amnion. This
entanglement leads to congenital anomalies by disruption, deformation, and
malformation of organs that otherwise would have likely developed normally (see
Image. Amniotic Band  Syndrome). The severity ranges widely from mild isolated
constriction rings to large abdominal wall defects.  Amniotic band syndrome may
be a misnomer and is better characterized as a sequence than a syndrome, as
anomalies are related to an insult that can result from multiple etiologies. In
contrast, a syndrome refers to patterns of congenital anomalies known to result
from a single etiology (eg, Turner syndrome is due to XO chromosomal anomaly).
Amniotic band syndrome has several synonyms: ADAM-sequence (amniotic
deformity/adhesion/mutilation), amniotic disruption complex, congenital
constricting bands, and Streeter dysplasia.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 31424867

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Kelsey Pape declares no relevant
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Sudheer Gorla
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
