---
reference_id: "PMID:36751263"
title: "Lane-Hamilton Syndrome in an Adult With Down Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Fontes J
- Sousa B
- Moreira M
- Pardal N
- Lopes Freitas R
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.33385
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lane-Hamilton Syndrome in an Adult With Down Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Fontes J, Sousa B, Moreira M, Pardal N, Lopes Freitas R
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.33385](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.33385)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Jan 5;15(1):e33385. doi: 10.7759/cureus.33385. eCollection 2023 
Jan.

Lane-Hamilton Syndrome in an Adult With Down Syndrome: A Case Report.

Fontes J(1), Sousa B(1), Moreira M(2), Pardal N(3), Lopes Freitas R(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Unidade Local de Saúde do Alto Minho - Hospital Conde de 
Bertiandos, Ponte de Lima, PRT.
(2)Gastroenterology, Unidade Local de Saúde do Alto Minho, Viana do Castelo, 
PRT.
(3)Internal Medicine, Unidade Local de Saúde do Alto Minho, Viana do Castelo, 
PRT.

The Lane-Hamilton syndrome (LHS) is an extremely rare association between celiac 
disease (CD) and idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH), with only a few cases 
reported in the literature. The authors report a case of a 32-year-old man with 
Down syndrome who presented to the emergency department with a history of 
hemoptysis and chronic diarrhea. The complementary investigation revealed iron 
deficiency anemia and features suggestive of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage on 
computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest. After excluding all competing 
diagnosis, the IPH diagnosis was made. The biopsy of the small intestine 
confirmed CD and the diagnosis of LHS was established. A gluten-free diet and 
steroids were given to the patient with a very good clinical response. Since 
there is an established association between IPH and CD, if the diagnosis of IPH 
is made, it's recommended to screen for CD even in patients without 
gastrointestinal symptoms.

Copyright © 2023, Fontes et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.33385
PMCID: PMC9898870
PMID: 36751263

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.