---
reference_id: "PMID:29856024"
title: Nonhuman Primate Models of Huntington's Disease and Their Application in Translational Research.
authors:
- Aron Badin R
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7825-0_14
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonhuman Primate Models of Huntington's Disease and Their Application in Translational Research.
**Authors:** Aron Badin R
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4939-7825-0_14](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7825-0_14)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1780:267-284. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7825-0_14.

Nonhuman Primate Models of Huntington's Disease and Their Application in 
Translational Research.

Aron Badin R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique (CEA), Molecular Imaging Research Center 
(MIRCen), Fontenay-aux-Roses, France. romina.aron-badin@cea.fr.
(2)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Université Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, UMR 9199, Neurodegenerative Diseases Laboratory, 
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France. romina.aron-badin@cea.fr.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a monogenic, autosomal dominant inherited fatal 
disease that affects 1 in 10,000 people worldwide. Given its unique genetic 
characteristics, HD would appear as one of the most straightforward 
neurodegenerative diseases to replicate in animal models. Indeed, mutations in 
the HTT gene have been used to generate a variety of animal models that display 
differential pathologies and have significantly increased our understanding of 
the pathological mechanisms of HD. However, decades of efforts have also shown 
the complexity of recapitulating the human condition in other species. Here we 
describe the three different types of models that have been generated in 
nonhuman primate species, stating their advantages and limitations and attempt 
to give a critical perspective of their translational value to test the efficacy 
of novel therapeutic strategies. Obtaining construct, phenotypic, and predictive 
validity has proven to be challenging in most animal models of human diseases. 
In HD in particular, it is hard to assess the predictive validity of a new 
therapeutic strategy when no effective "benchmark" treatment is available in the 
clinic. In this light, only phenotypic/face validity and construct validity are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7825-0_14
PMID: 29856024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]