---
reference_id: "PMID:34755412"
title: Clinicopathologic and survival correlates of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma driven by RAS/RAF mutations.
authors:
- Agaram NP
- Huang SC
- Tap WD
- Wexler LH
- Antonescu CR
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.23010
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Head and Neck Neoplasms/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Embryonal/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- "Urogenital Neoplasms/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Young Adult
- raf Kinases/genetics
- ras Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic and survival correlates of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma driven by RAS/RAF mutations.
**Authors:** Agaram NP, Huang SC, Tap WD, Wexler LH, Antonescu CR
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.23010](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.23010)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2022 Mar;61(3):131-137. doi: 10.1002/gcc.23010. Epub
 2021 Nov 16.

Clinicopathologic and survival correlates of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma driven 
by RAS/RAF mutations.

Agaram NP(1), Huang SC(2), Tap WD(3), Wexler LH(4), Antonescu CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang 
Gung University College of Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Weill 
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York, USA.

Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) is the most common subtype of rhabdomyosarcoma 
(RMS). Among RMS subtypes, ERMS is associated with a favorable outcome with an 
overall survival of 70% at 5 years for localized disease. The molecular profile 
of ERMS is heterogeneous, including mostly point mutations in various genes. 
Therapeutic strategies have remained relatively consistent irrespective of the 
molecular abnormalities. In this study, we focus on a homogeneous RAS/RAF 
mutated ERMS subset and correlate with clinicopathologic findings. Twenty-six 
cases (16 males and 10 females) were identified from screening 98 ERMS, either 
by targeted DNA sequencing (MSK-IMPACT) or by Sanger sequencing. Fourteen (54%) 
cases had NRAS mutations, 6 (23%) had KRAS mutations, 5 (19%) had HRAS 
mutations, and 1 case (4%) had BRAF mutation. Median age at diagnosis was 
8 years (range 1-70) with two-thirds occurring in the children. Tumor sites 
varied with H&N and GU sites accounting for 62% of cases. RAS isoform hot spot 
mutations predominated: NRAS p.Q61K (57%), KRAS p.G12D (67%), and HRAS (codons 
12, 14, and 61). Additional genetic abnormalities were identified in 85% of the 
RAS-mutated cases. At last follow-up, 29% of patients died of disease and 23% 
were alive with disease. The 3-year and 5-year survival rates were 75% and 61% 
respectively. In conclusion, RAS mutations occur in 27% of ERMS, with NRAS 
mutations encompassing half of the cases. Overall RAS-mutant RMS does not 
correlate with age or site, but most tumors show an undifferentiated and spindle 
cell morphology.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.23010
PMCID: PMC8956004
PMID: 34755412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None.