---
reference_id: "PMID:39681572"
title: Renal phenotyping in a hypomorphic murine model of propionic aciduria reveals common pathomechanisms in organic acidurias.
authors:
- Schumann A
- Martinez-Pizarro A
- Richard E
- Schell C
- Kössinger AL
- Zeyer KA
- Tholen S
- Schilling O
- Barry M
- Neubauer B
- Köttgen M
- Hannibal L
- Desviat LR
- Spiekerkötter U
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-79572-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal phenotyping in a hypomorphic murine model of propionic aciduria reveals common pathomechanisms in organic acidurias.
**Authors:** Schumann A, Martinez-Pizarro A, Richard E, Schell C, Kössinger AL, Zeyer KA, Tholen S, Schilling O, Barry M, Neubauer B, Köttgen M, Hannibal L, Desviat LR, Spiekerkötter U
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-79572-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-79572-z)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Dec 16;14(1):30478. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-79572-z.

Renal phenotyping in a hypomorphic murine model of propionic aciduria reveals 
common pathomechanisms in organic acidurias.

Schumann A(1), Martinez-Pizarro A(2), Richard E(2), Schell C(3), Kössinger 
AL(3), Zeyer KA(4), Tholen S(3), Schilling O(3), Barry M(5), Neubauer B(6), 
Köttgen M(6)(7), Hannibal L(8), Desviat LR(2), Spiekerkötter U(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Paediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Faculty of Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Breisacherstr. 62, 
79106, Freiburg, Germany. anke.schumann@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, UAM-CSIC, CIBERER, IdiPaz, IUBM, 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Institute for 
Surgical Pathology, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of General Paediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Faculty of Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Breisacherstr. 62, 
79106, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine IV - Nephrology and Primary Care, Faculty of Medicine 
and Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)CIBSS - Centre for Integrative Biological Signaling Studies, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(8)Department of General Paediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Laboratory of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Medical 
Center, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Mutations in the mitochondrial enzyme propionyl-CoA carboxylase (PCC) cause 
propionic aciduria (PA). Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a known long-term 
complication. However, good metabolic control and standard therapy fail to 
prevent CKD. The pathophysiological mechanisms of CKD are unclear. We 
investigated the renal phenotype of a hypomorphic murine PA model 
(Pcca-/-(A138T)) to identify CKD-driving mechanisms. Pcca-/-(A138T) mice show 
elevated retention parameters and express markers of kidney damage progressing 
with time. Morphological assessment of the Pcca-/-(A138T) mouse kidneys 
indicated partial flattening of tubular epithelial cells and focal 
tubular-cystic dilation. We observed altered renal mitochondrial ultrastructure 
and mechanisms acting against oxidative stress were active. LC-MS/MS analysis 
confirmed disease-specific metabolic signatures and revealed disturbances in 
mitochondrial energy generation via the TCA cycle. Our investigations revealed 
altered mitochondrial networks shifted towards fission and a marked reduction of 
mitophagy. We observed a steep reduction of PGC-1-α, the key mediator modulating 
mitochondrial functions and a counter actor of mitochondrial fission. Our 
results suggest that impairment of mitochondrial homeostasis and quality control 
are involved in CKD development in PA. Therapeutic targeting of the identified 
pathways might help to ameliorate CKD in addition to the current treatment 
strategies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-79572-z
PMCID: PMC11649940
PMID: 39681572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests. Ethical approval: No material of human origin 
was used in this publication. Human and animal rights: All animal studies were 
approved by the Institutional Ethical Committee for Animal Experimentation 
(Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, references CEI 963-A026 and CEI-134-2830) and 
by the Regional Environment Department (Comunidad de Madrid, reference PROEX 
194/19 and PROEX 204.5/24). The work with mice was performed in accordance with 
the ARRIVE guidelines (approval number PROEX 194-2019 and PROEX 204.5/24). 
Animal housing and maintenance protocols followed the local authority 
guidelines.