---
reference_id: "PMID:8565219"
title: Clinical usage recommendations and analytic performance goals for total and free triiodothyronine measurements.
authors:
- Klee GG
journal: Clin Chem
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical usage recommendations and analytic performance goals for total and free triiodothyronine measurements.
**Authors:** Klee GG
**Journal:** Clin Chem (1996)

## Content

1. Clin Chem. 1996 Jan;42(1):155-9.

Clinical usage recommendations and analytic performance goals for total and free 
triiodothyronine measurements.

Klee GG(1).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. klee.george@mayo.edu

The major clinical role for total triiodothyronine (TT3) and (or) free T3 (FT3) 
is the assessment of hyperthyroidism in patients with suppressed sensitive 
thyrotropin (sTSH) concentrations. The assays are particularly important in 
hyperthyroid patients with normal free thyroxine (FT4) concentrations to assess 
potential T3 thyrotoxicosis. Other specialized uses for T3 and FT3 measurements 
are monitoring thyroid hormone replacement therapy, the evaluation of 
amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis, and predicting outcome of antithyroid drug 
therapy in patients with Graves hyperthyroidism. The roles of these tests in 
assessing heart function in cardiopulmonary bypass surgery, evaluation of 
patients with neuropsychiatric disorders, and monitoring of patients on 
anticonvulsant therapy are not well defined. These assays are not recommended 
for diagnosis of hypothyroidism. Analytic recommendations include CV < 5.2% for 
T3 and < 3.8% for FT3; < 0.2% cross-reactivity with L-T4; and < 1.0% 
cross-reactivity with D-T4, D-T3, and reverse T3.

PMID: 8565219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]