---
reference_id: "PMID:659596"
title: Intestinal secretion induced by vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. A comparison with cholera toxin in the canine jejunum in vivo.
authors:
- Krejs GJ
- Barkley RM
- Read NW
- Fordtran JS
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1978'
doi: 10.1172/JCI109051
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intestinal secretion induced by vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. A comparison with cholera toxin in the canine jejunum in vivo.
**Authors:** Krejs GJ, Barkley RM, Read NW, Fordtran JS
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1978)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI109051](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI109051)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1978 May;61(5):1337-45. doi: 10.1172/JCI109051.

Intestinal secretion induced by vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. A comparison 
with cholera toxin in the canine jejunum in vivo.

Krejs GJ, Barkley RM, Read NW, Fordtran JS.

The effect of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) on intestinal water and 
electrolyte transport and transmucosal potential difference was investigated in 
the dog jejunum in vivo and compared to secretion induced by cholera toxin. 
Isolated jejunal loops were perfused with a plasma-like electrolyte solution. 
VIP (0.08 mug/kg per min) was administered directly into the superior mesenteric 
artery by continuous infusion over 1 h. From a dye dilution method, it was 
estimated that a mean plasma VIP concentration of 12,460 pg/ml reached the 
loops. VIP caused secretion of water and electrolytes; for example, chloride: 
control, 8 mueq/cm per h absorption; VIP, 92 mueq/cm per h secretion. A marked 
increase in transmucosal potential difference (control, -1.0 mV; VIP, -5.9 mV, 
lumen negative) occurred within 1 min after starting VIP infusion. Analysis of 
unidirectional fluxes showed increased plasma-to-lumen flux of sodium and 
chloride and decreased lumen-to-plasma flux of sodium. Chloride and bicarbonate 
were actively secreted against an electrochemical gradient. Although sodium 
secretion occurred down an electrochemical gradient, flux ratio analysis 
suggested a component of active sodium secretion. VIP caused a slight increase 
in protein output into the loops; light microscopy revealed capillary dilatation 
and closed intercellular spaces. The effect of VIP was readily reversible. 
Except for the delayed onset of secretion, the effect of cholera toxin was 
qualitatively similar to VIP; however, capillary dilatation and increased 
protein output were not noted with cholera toxin.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI109051
PMCID: PMC372656
PMID: 659596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]