---
reference_id: "PMID:36856349"
title: "Creatine Deficiency Disorders: Phenotypes, Genotypes, Diagnosis, and Treatment Outcomes."
authors:
- Mulik C
- Mercimek-Andrews S
journal: Turk Arch Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5152/TurkArchPediatr.2023.23022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Creatine Deficiency Disorders: Phenotypes, Genotypes, Diagnosis, and Treatment Outcomes.
**Authors:** Mulik C, Mercimek-Andrews S
**Journal:** Turk Arch Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5152/TurkArchPediatr.2023.23022](https://doi.org/10.5152/TurkArchPediatr.2023.23022)

## Content

1. Turk Arch Pediatr. 2023 Mar;58(2):129-135. doi: 
10.5152/TurkArchPediatr.2023.23022.

Creatine Deficiency Disorders: Phenotypes, Genotypes, Diagnosis, and Treatment 
Outcomes.

Mulik C(1), Mercimek-Andrews S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta Faculty of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Edmonton, Alberta; Neurosciences and Mental Health Institute, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta.

Creatine is synthetized from arginine and glycine. There are two enzymes in the 
synthesis: l-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase and guanidinoacetate 
methyltransferase. After the synthesis, it is taken up by high-energy-requiring 
organs using creatine transporter. Biallelic pathogenic variants in GAMT result 
in guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency and biallelic pathogenic 
variants in GATM result in l-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase deficiency. 
Hemizygous pathogenic variant in males and heterozygous pathogenic variant in 
females in SLC6A8 result in creatine transporter deficiency. Patients with these 
disorders present with a wide range of symptoms, including developmental delay, 
seizures, movement disorder, behavioral problems, and hypotonia. The diagnosis 
can be suspected by elevated guanidinoacetate and low creatine levels in body 
fluids in guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency, low guanidinoacetate 
and low creatine levels in body fluids in l-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase 
deficiency, and elevated creatine-to-creatinine ratio in urine in creatine 
transporter deficiency in males as well as absent or significantly decreased 
creatine level in brain proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Genetic 
investigations such as targeted next-generation sequencing panel or exome 
sequencing can also identify these disorders; however, metabolite measurements 
and creatine in proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy are crucial to confirm 
the diagnosis. While all 3 disorders are currently treated with creatine 
supplementation, guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency is also treated 
with ornithine supplementation and a protein- or arginine-restricted diet, and 
creatine transporter deficiency is treated with arginine and glycine 
supplementation (with no proven improvements).

DOI: 10.5152/TurkArchPediatr.2023.23022
PMCID: PMC10081004
PMID: 36856349