---
reference_id: "PMID:25352085"
title: "Osteopoikilosis: report of a familial case and review of the literature."
authors:
- Korkmaz MF
- Elli M
- Özkan MB
- Bilgici MC
- Dağdemir A
- Korkmaz M
- Tosun FC
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-014-3160-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteopoikilosis: report of a familial case and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Korkmaz MF, Elli M, Özkan MB, Bilgici MC, Dağdemir A, Korkmaz M, Tosun FC
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-014-3160-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-014-3160-6)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2015 May;35(5):921-4. doi: 10.1007/s00296-014-3160-6. Epub 2014
 Oct 29.

Osteopoikilosis: report of a familial case and review of the literature.

Korkmaz MF(1), Elli M, Özkan MB, Bilgici MC, Dağdemir A, Korkmaz M, Tosun FC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ondokuz Mayis University, 
Samsun, Turkey, korkmazmfurkan@gmail.com.

Osteopoikilosis (OPK) is a benign, rare, asymptomatic osteosclerotic bone 
dysplasia which is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. It may develop 
during childhood and persists throughout life. Diagnosis is usually made 
incidentally according to radiographs. It may be confused with other conditions, 
such as osteoblastic metastases. OPK must be in differential diagnosis when 
multiple, small, well-defined, symmetric bone lesions are identified on plain 
radiograph to avoid alarming the patient with more serious disease and 
misdiagnosis. Bone scintigraphy is normal and useful for differential diagnosis. 
Although it is usually asymptomatic, effusion and joint pain can be found in 
15-20 % of patients. In this study, we report a 17-year-old boy who suffers from 
low back pain and has a mother with similar involvement. He was diagnosed OPK 
radiologically. We also review the clinical manifestation, pathophysiology, 
diagnosis and treatment of OPK in this paper.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-014-3160-6
PMID: 25352085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]