---
reference_id: "PMID:36713670"
title: "Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection in 80 patients: Primary sutureless repair and outcomes."
authors:
- Li G
- Meng B
- Zhang C
- Zhang W
- Zhou X
- Zhang Q
- Ding Y
journal: Front Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.1086596
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection in 80 patients: Primary sutureless repair and outcomes.
**Authors:** Li G, Meng B, Zhang C, Zhang W, Zhou X, Zhang Q, Ding Y
**Journal:** Front Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fsurg.2022.1086596](https://doi.org/10.3389/fsurg.2022.1086596)

## Content

1. Front Surg. 2023 Jan 11;9:1086596. doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.1086596.
eCollection  2022.

Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection in 80 patients: Primary sutureless 
repair and outcomes.

Li G(1), Meng B(1), Zhang C(2), Zhang W(2), Zhou X(2), Zhang Q(1), Ding Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiothoracic Surgery, Shenzhen Children's Hospital, 
Shenzhen, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, The University of Hong Kong-Shenzhen 
Hospital, Shenzhen, China.

INTRODUCTION: Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) is a rare but 
critical cardiac anomaly, in which pulmonary veins are connected to an abnormal 
location rather than the left atrium. The prognosis can be extremely poor 
without intervention, with a mortality of 80% during infancy. The purpose of 
this research is to summarize the outcomes and relevant risk factors of 80 total 
anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) patients who underwent primary 
TAPVC sutureless repair and discuss the indications and benefits of primary 
sutureless repair.
METHODS: This retrospective review included 80 patients with TAPVC who underwent 
primary sutureless repair at a single institution between January 2015 and 
December 2020. Patients were subdivided into 4 groups according to Darling's 
classification. Risk factors that increase the postoperative pulmonary vein flow 
velocity were explored by Multiple Linear regression.
RESULTS: Anatomic TAPVC subtypes included supracardiac 35 (43.8%), cardiac 24 
(30%), infracardiac 17 (21.2%), and mixed 4 (5%). Median age at repair was 16.5 
days and median weight was 3.5 kg. Preoperative pulmonary venous obstruction 
(PVO)was presented in 20 (25%) patients. There were 2 early deaths and 1 late 
death. 2 patients developed postoperative PVO and none required reintervention. 
Prolonged cardiopulmonary bypass time (CPB) (p = 0.009), preoperative pneumonia 
(p = 0.022) and gender (p = 0.041) were found to be associated with the increase 
of postoperative pulmonary vein flow velocity.
DISCUSSION: Under the primary sutureless technique, no statistical difference 
was observed among the 4 subgroups in terms of postoperative pulmonary vein flow 
velocity (p = 0.589). The primary sutureless technique may eliminate the 
differences between subtypes while decrease the postoperative PVO rate, which 
makes it applicable in any subtypes of TAPVC. Following the favorable outcomes 
in preventing postoperative PVO in all subtypes in this study, we advocate the 
indications for primary sutureless repair may expand further to all the TAPVC 
patients.

© 2023 Li, Meng, Zhang, Zhang, Zhou, Zhang and Ding.

DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.1086596
PMCID: PMC9874290
PMID: 36713670

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.