---
reference_id: "PMID:25113789"
title: The evolution of primary progressive apraxia of speech.
authors:
- Josephs KA
- Duffy JR
- Strand EA
- Machulda MM
- Senjem ML
- Gunter JL
- Schwarz CG
- Reid RI
- Spychalla AJ
- Lowe VJ
- Jack CR Jr
- Whitwell JL
journal: Brain
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awu223
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Brain/pathology
- Cognition/physiology
- Diffusion Tensor Imaging
- Disease Progression
- Educational Status
- Female
- Fluorodeoxyglucose F18
- Humans
- "Image Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neuroimaging
- Neurologic Examination
- Neuropsychological Tests
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- Radiopharmaceuticals
- Speech/physiology
- "Speech Disorders/pathology, psychology"
- "Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive/diagnostic imaging, pathology, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The evolution of primary progressive apraxia of speech.
**Authors:** Josephs KA, Duffy JR, Strand EA, Machulda MM, Senjem ML, Gunter JL, Schwarz CG, Reid RI, Spychalla AJ, Lowe VJ, Jack CR Jr, Whitwell JL
**Journal:** Brain (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awu223](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu223)

## Content

1. Brain. 2014 Oct;137(Pt 10):2783-95. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu223. Epub 2014 Aug
11.

The evolution of primary progressive apraxia of speech.

Josephs KA(1), Duffy JR(2), Strand EA(2), Machulda MM(3), Senjem ML(4), Gunter 
JL(4), Schwarz CG(5), Reid RI(5), Spychalla AJ(5), Lowe VJ(6), Jack CR Jr(5), 
Whitwell JL(5).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Neurology (Behavioural Neurology), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA 2 Department of Neurology (Movement Disorders), Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA Josephs.keith@mayo.edu.
(2)3 Department of Neurology (Speech Pathology), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.
(3)4 Department of Psychiatry and Psychology (Neuropsychology), Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(4)5 Department of Information Technology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA.
(5)6 Department of Radiology (Neuroradiology), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA.
(6)7 Department of Radiology (Nuclear Medicine), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

Primary progressive apraxia of speech is a recently described neurodegenerative 
disorder in which patients present with an isolated apraxia of speech and show 
focal degeneration of superior premotor cortex. Little is known about how these 
individuals progress over time, making it difficult to provide prognostic 
estimates. Thirteen subjects with primary progressive apraxia of speech 
underwent two serial comprehensive clinical and neuroimaging evaluations 2.4 
years apart [median age of onset = 67 years (range: 49-76), seven females]. All 
underwent detailed speech and language, neurological and neuropsychological 
assessments, and magnetic resonance imaging, diffusion tensor imaging and 
(18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography at both baseline and 
follow-up. Rates of change of whole brain, ventricle, and midbrain volumes were 
calculated using the boundary-shift integral and atlas-based parcellation, and 
rates of regional grey matter atrophy were assessed using tensor-based 
morphometry. White matter tract degeneration was assessed on diffusion-tensor 
imaging at each time-point. Patterns of hypometabolism were assessed at the 
single subject-level. Neuroimaging findings were compared with a cohort of 20 
age, gender, and scan-interval matched healthy controls. All subjects developed 
extrapyramidal signs. In eight subjects the apraxia of speech remained the 
predominant feature. In the other five there was a striking progression of 
symptoms that had evolved into a progressive supranuclear palsy-like syndrome; 
they showed a combination of severe parkinsonism, near mutism, dysphagia with 
choking, vertical supranuclear gaze palsy or slowing, balance difficulties with 
falls and urinary incontinence, and one was wheelchair bound. Rates of whole 
brain atrophy (1.5% per year; controls = 0.4% per year), ventricular expansion 
(8.0% per year; controls = 3.3% per year) and midbrain atrophy (1.5% per year; 
controls = 0.1% per year) were elevated (P ≤ 0.001) in all 13, compared to 
controls. Increased rates of brain atrophy over time were observed throughout 
the premotor cortex, as well as prefrontal cortex, motor cortex, basal ganglia 
and midbrain, while white matter tract degeneration spread into the splenium of 
the corpus callosum and motor cortex white matter. Hypometabolism progressed 
over time in almost all subjects. These findings demonstrate that some subjects 
with primary progressive apraxia of speech will rapidly evolve and develop a 
devastating progressive supranuclear palsy-like syndrome ∼ 5 years after onset, 
perhaps related to progressive involvement of neocortex, basal ganglia and 
midbrain. These findings help improve our understanding of primary progressive 
apraxia of speech and provide some important prognostic guidelines.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu223
PMCID: PMC4229741
PMID: 25113789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]