---
reference_id: "PMID:35334234"
title: Emerging insights into the complex genetics and pathophysiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Goutman SA
- Hardiman O
- Al-Chalabi A
- Chió A
- Savelieff MG
- Kiernan MC
- Feldman EL
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00414-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emerging insights into the complex genetics and pathophysiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Goutman SA, Hardiman O, Al-Chalabi A, Chió A, Savelieff MG, Kiernan MC, Feldman EL
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00414-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00414-2)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2022 May;21(5):465-479. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00414-2.
Epub  2022 Mar 22.

Emerging insights into the complex genetics and pathophysiology of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis.

Goutman SA(1), Hardiman O(2), Al-Chalabi A(3), Chió A(4), Savelieff MG(1), 
Kiernan MC(5), Feldman EL(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity 
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Maurice Wohl Clinical 
Neuroscience Institute, and Department of Neurology, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(4)Rita Levi Montalcini Department of Neurosciences, University of Turin, Turin, 
Italy.
(5)Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 
Department of Neurology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
Electronic address: efeldman@umich.edu.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2022 May;21(5):400-401. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00084-9.
    Lancet Neurol. 2022 Sep;21(9):771-772. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00305-2.
    Lancet Neurol. 2022 Sep;21(9):772. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00301-5.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a fatal neurodegenerative disease. The 
discovery of genes associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, commencing 
with SOD1 in 1993, started fairly gradually. Recent advances in genetic 
technology have led to the rapid identification of multiple new genes associated 
with the disease, and to a new understanding of oligogenic and polygenic disease 
risk. The overlap of genes associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with 
those of other neurodegenerative diseases is shedding light on the phenotypic 
spectrum of neurodegeneration, leading to a better understanding of 
genotype-phenotype correlations. A deepening knowledge of the genetic 
architecture is allowing the characterisation of the molecular steps caused by 
various mutations that converge on recurrent dysregulated pathways. Of crucial 
relevance, mutations associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are amenable 
to novel gene-based therapeutic options, an approach in use for other 
neurological illnesses. Lastly, the exposome-the summation of lifetime 
environmental exposures-has emerged as an influential component for amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis through the gene-time-environment hypothesis. Our improved 
understanding of all these aspects will lead to long-awaited therapies and the 
identification of modifiable risks factors.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00414-2
PMCID: PMC9513754
PMID: 35334234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests SAG declares consulting 
fees from Biogen and ITF Pharma, a patent “Methods for treating amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis”, and participation on a Data Safety Monitoring Board for 
Watermark. OH declares consulting fees from Novartis, Cytokinetics, Denali 
Pharma, Stitching Foundation, and La Caixa; payment or honoraria from Biogen; 
participation on a Data Safety Monitoring Board for Accelsiors and steering 
committee for Cytokinetics; and is Editor-in-Chief for the journal Amyotrophic 
Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Dementia. AA-C declares consulting fees 
from Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, Biogen Idec, Cytokinetics, Wave Pharmaceuticals, 
Apellis, Amylyx, Novartis, and Eli Lilly. AC declares grants from Biogen to his 
institution, payments or honoraria from Biogen and Amylyx, and participation on 
a Data Safety Monitoring Board for Ely Lilly and ABScience and advisory board 
for Mitsubishi Tanabe, Roche, Denali Pharma, Cytokinetics, Biogen, and Amylyx. 
MCK has an honorary role as President of the Brain Foundation and as 
Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry. ELF 
declares a patent “Methods for treating amyotrophic lateral sclerosis”. MGS 
declares no competing interests.