---
reference_id: "PMID:30078171"
title: "Association between CTLA-4 + 49A > G and - 318C > T single-nucleotide polymorphisms and susceptibility to thyroid neoplasm."
authors:
- Abtahi S
- Izadi Jahromi F
- Dabbaghmanesh MH
- Malekzadeh M
- Ghaderi A
journal: Endocrine
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-018-1663-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between CTLA-4 + 49A > G and - 318C > T single-nucleotide polymorphisms and susceptibility to thyroid neoplasm.
**Authors:** Abtahi S, Izadi Jahromi F, Dabbaghmanesh MH, Malekzadeh M, Ghaderi A
**Journal:** Endocrine (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-018-1663-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-018-1663-8)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2018 Oct;62(1):159-165. doi: 10.1007/s12020-018-1663-8. Epub 2018
Aug  4.

Association between CTLA-4 + 49A > G and - 318C > T single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms and susceptibility to thyroid neoplasm.

Abtahi S(1), Izadi Jahromi F(1), Dabbaghmanesh MH(2), Malekzadeh M(1), Ghaderi 
A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Shiraz Institute for Cancer Research, School of Medicine, Shiraz University 
of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Endocrine and Metabolism Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Shiraz Institute for Cancer Research, School of Medicine, Shiraz University 
of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. ghaderi@sums.ac.ir.
(4)Department of Immunology, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran. ghaderi@sums.ac.ir.

PURPOSE: Cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte Antigen 4 (CTLA-4 or CD152) is among the immune 
checkpoint molecules and its abnormal expression in cancer predisposed 
individuals might make the person more susceptible to tumor initiation and 
progression. Considering the implication of single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) in CTLA-4 gene expression and probably protein function, one can assume 
the involvement of these SNPs in neoplastic diseases. rs5742909 ( - 318C > T) 
and rs231775 ( + 49 A > G) are among the most commonly studied SNPs and have 
been considered as genetic factors related to thyroid diseases. In this 
cross-sectional study, we aimed to elucidate the association between these SNPs 
and susceptibility to various types of thyroid cancers.
METHODS: We investigated the genetic polymorphisms of - 318C > T and + 49 A > G 
in the CTLA-4 gene by means of ARMS-PCR and RFLP-PCR, respectively, in 167 
patients with thyroid carcinomas (papillary, follicular, and anaplastic). The 
results were then compared with a group of 100 age-sex matched healthy 
individuals.
RESULTS: A statistically significant association was observed between the 
presence of G allele in + 49 A > G locus and thyroid carcinoma, when comparing 
cases and controls (OR = 2.10; 95% CI = 1.35-3.28; P = 0.001) and the frequency 
of heterozygotes (AG) was higher than homozygotes for allele A (AA), in patients 
with and papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). Regarding Hashimoto's thyroiditis, 
the frequencies of A allele and AA genotype in PTC patients were higher than 
Hashimoto patients with no history of cancer (OR = 4.67, 95% CI = 2.70-8.08, 
P < 0.0001; and, OR = 4.68, 95% CI = 1.84-11.91, P = 0.0012; respectively). 
However; we observed no difference among allele/genotype frequencies in regards 
to locus - 318C > T.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we observed that G allele in + 49 A > G and possibly 
lower expression of mutated CTLA-4 molecule, is associated with higher 
susceptibility to thyroid carcinoma. Although the G allele frequency was higher 
in thyroid cancer patients, when justified for the presence of lymphocytic 
thyroiditis, the presence of A allele seemed to increase the odds for PTC in 
patients with Hashimoto's disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-018-1663-8
PMID: 30078171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]