---
reference_id: "PMID:6625621"
title: "[Diagnosis and treatment of renal cell carcinoma]."
authors:
- Machida T
- Ohnishi T
journal: Gan To Kagaku Ryoho
year: '1983'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Diagnosis and treatment of renal cell carcinoma].
**Authors:** Machida T, Ohnishi T
**Journal:** Gan To Kagaku Ryoho (1983)

## Content

1. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1983 Oct;10(10):2103-10.

[Diagnosis and treatment of renal cell carcinoma].

[Article in Japanese]

Machida T, Ohnishi T.

Renal cell carcinoma is one of the most difficult malignant tumors for early 
diagnosis. It is rare that the classic symptoms such as hematuria, a renal mass 
and flank pain appear simultaneously. Only in about 7% of renal cell carcinoma 
patients these symptoms occurred simultaneously. Hematuria is an important 
symptom, and in our series 46% of the patients with renal cell carcinomas were 
conscious of macrohematuria as an initial symptom. As an initial symptom, a mass 
was palpable in 8% and flank pain was felt in 13% of the patients with renal 
cell carcinomas. Nonurologic symptoms were observed as initial symptoms in 33% 
cases, suggesting physician's particular attention on these symptoms. Initial 
diagnosis of renal cell carcinomas begins with urinary tract x-ray examination, 
which is followed by ultrasonography, CT scan, and if necessary, angiography. 
These procedures make definite diagnosis possible and define clinical staging. 
The most basic and reliable treatment method established for renal cell 
carcinomas is surgery--radical nephrectomy. Much cannot be expected from 
chemotherapy or radiotherapy as an adjuvant modality. To what extent 
lymphoadenectomy should be performed at the time of radical surgery is a 
question still to be definitely answered, but the lymph node of the renal 
pedicle should be removed completely. While any chemotherapeutic drug or method 
has not yet been established, an increasing number of useful agents have been 
studied. Radiotherapy is now used exclusively as adjuvant therapy for metastatic 
tumors. In order to improve clinical results, it is necessary to establish an 
appropriate approach according to clinical stage. In particular, establishment 
of approach to progressive carcinomas is imperative.

PMID: 6625621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]