---
reference_id: "PMID:31751012"
title: "Overall Survival with Osimertinib in Untreated, EGFR-Mutated Advanced NSCLC."
authors:
- Ramalingam SS
- Vansteenkiste J
- Planchard D
- Cho BC
- Gray JE
- Ohe Y
- Zhou C
- Reungwetwattana T
- Cheng Y
- Chewaskulyong B
- Shah R
- Cobo M
- Lee KH
- Cheema P
- Tiseo M
- John T
- Lin MC
- Imamura F
- Kurata T
- Todd A
- Hodge R
- Saggese M
- Rukazenkov Y
- Soria JC
- FLAURA Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1913662
keywords:
- "Acrylamides/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Aged
- "Aniline Compounds/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Double-Blind Method
- "ErbB Receptors/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Erlotinib Hydrochloride/therapeutic use
- Female
- Gefitinib/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Proportional Hazards Models
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Indoles
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overall Survival with Osimertinib in Untreated, EGFR-Mutated Advanced NSCLC.
**Authors:** Ramalingam SS, Vansteenkiste J, Planchard D, Cho BC, Gray JE, Ohe Y, Zhou C, Reungwetwattana T, Cheng Y, Chewaskulyong B, Shah R, Cobo M, Lee KH, Cheema P, Tiseo M, John T, Lin MC, Imamura F, Kurata T, Todd A, Hodge R, Saggese M, Rukazenkov Y, Soria JC, FLAURA Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1913662](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1913662)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2020 Jan 2;382(1):41-50. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1913662. Epub 2019
Nov  21.

Overall Survival with Osimertinib in Untreated, EGFR-Mutated Advanced NSCLC.

Ramalingam SS(1), Vansteenkiste J(1), Planchard D(1), Cho BC(1), Gray JE(1), Ohe
Y(1), Zhou C(1), Reungwetwattana T(1), Cheng Y(1), Chewaskulyong B(1), Shah
R(1), Cobo M(1), Lee KH(1), Cheema P(1), Tiseo M(1), John T(1), Lin MC(1),
Imamura F(1), Kurata T(1), Todd A(1), Hodge R(1), Saggese M(1), Rukazenkov Y(1),
Soria JC(1); FLAURA Investigators.

Collaborators: Boyer M, Lee C, Hughes B, O'Byrne K, Briggs P, Milward M, John T,
Demedts I, Vansteenkiste J, Bustin F, Barrios CH, Timcheva C, Butts C, Goss G,
Juergens R, Leighl N, Cheng S, Burkes R, Cheema P, Zhou C, Zhang H, Shu Y, Cheng
Y, Zhou Q, Li W, Feng G, He Y, Wang B, Gao H, Nan K, Zhou X, Fan Y, Hunag JA, Hu
Y, Liu YP, Liu C, Zhang Y, Zhu B, Bartek T, Monnet I, El Kouri C, Perol M,
Berard H, Planchard D, Madelaine J, von Pawel J, Grohe C, Bohnet S, Bischoff H,
Zum Büschenfelde CM, Rückert A, Urban L, Papi-Szekely Z, Csánky E, Böcskei C,
Tehenes S, Gottfried M, Bar J, Peled N, Wollner M, Bertolini A, Ardizzoia A,
Accettura C, Mitella M, Passalacqua R, Novello S, Roila F, Tiseo M, Sekine A,
Imamura F, Ohe Y, Nogami N, Takahashi T, Kurata T, Kasahara K, Okamoto I, Yoh K,
Sugawara S, Kobayashi N, Shimokawa T, Okuda C, Fukuhara T, Sata M, Nagakawa K,
Atagi S, Nakahara Y, Cho BC, Lee JS, Lee KY, Shin SW, Lee KH, Cho EK, Kang JH,
How SH, Voon PJ, Pang YK, Osorio-Sanchez JA, Ladrera GEI, Serwatowski P,
Szczesna A, Zajda K, Ramlau R, Sawka D, Encarnação Teixeira M, Almodovar T,
Soares M, Almeida A, Barroso A, Schenker M, Girgorescu AC, Iorga P, Orlov S,
Karaseva N, Moiseenko V, Campelo RG, Isla Casado MD, Cobo Dois M, Nadal E,
Campayo Guillaumes M, González Larriba JL, Majem Tarruella M, Vázquez Estévez S,
Fuentes Pradera J, Márquez Medina D, Vikstrom A, Gautschi O, Britschgi C,
Mueller A, Tsai YH, Wu MF, Yang CT, Lin MC, Chen CH, Su WC, Chewaskulong B,
Reungwetwattana T, Srimuninnimit V, Dechaphunkul A, Laohavinij S, Sriuranpong V,
Yildiz R, Bondarenko I, Vynnychenko I, Adamchuk H, Shparyk Y, Lee SM, Price A,
Summers Y, Shah R, Dragnev K, Maniam A, McCune S, Ruiz J, Ramalingam S, Jänne P,
Feinstein T, Hamm J, Anderson I, Khan F, Boccia R, Gray J, Tran N, Nguyen N.

Author information:
(1)From Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta
(S.S.R.); the Respiratory Oncology Unit, Department of Respiratory Medicine,
University Hospital KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium (J.V.); the Thoracic Unit,
Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif (D.P.,
J.-C.S.), and University Paris Sud, Orsay (J.-C.S.) - both in France; the
Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei Cancer
Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul (B.C.C.), and the Division
of Medical Oncology, Chungbuk National University Hospital, Chungbuk National
University College of Medicine, Cheong-ju (K.H.L.) - both in South Korea; the
Department of Thoracic Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL (J.E.G.); the Department of Thoracic Oncology, National
Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo (Y.O.), the Department of Thoracic Oncology, Osaka
International Cancer Institute, Osaka (F.I.), and the Department of Thoracic
Oncology, Kansai Medical University Hospital, Osaka (T.K.) - all in Japan;
Pulmonary Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai (C.Z.), and Jilin Provincial
Cancer Hospital, Changchun (Y.C.) - both in China; the Faculty of Medicine,
Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok (T.R.), and the Oncology Unit,
Department of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai (B.C.) - both in
Thailand; Kent Oncology Centre, Maidstone Hospital, and Tunbridge Wells NHS
Trust, Maidstone (R.S.), and Late Oncology Statistics (A.T., R.H.) and Oncology
Research and Development (M.S., Y.R.), AstraZeneca, Cambridge - both in the
United Kingdom; Hospital Regional Universitario Málaga, Instituto de
Investigación Biomédica de Málaga, Malaga, Spain (M.C.); William Osler Health
System, University of Toronto, Toronto (P.C.); the Department of Medicine and
Surgery, University of Parma and Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of
Parma, Parma, Italy (M.T.); the Department of Medical Oncology, Austin Health,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia (T.J.); the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
(M.-C.L.); and Early Oncology Research and Development, AstraZeneca,
Gaithersburg, MD (J.-C.S.).

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2020 Jan;21(1):e15. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30778-8.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2020 Apr;17(4):202-203. doi: 10.1038/s41571-020-0346-6.
    N Engl J Med. 2020 May 7;382(19):1863. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2001514.
    N Engl J Med. 2020 May 7;382(19):1863-1864. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2001514.
    N Engl J Med. 2020 May 7;382(19):1864. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2001514.

BACKGROUND: Osimertinib is a third-generation, irreversible tyrosine kinase
inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR-TKI) that selectively
inhibits both EGFR-TKI-sensitizing and EGFR T790M resistance mutations. A phase
3 trial compared first-line osimertinib with other EGFR-TKIs in patients with
EGFR mutation-positive advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The trial
showed longer progression-free survival with osimertinib than with the
comparator EGFR-TKIs (hazard ratio for disease progression or death, 0.46). Data
from the final analysis of overall survival have not been reported.
METHODS: In this trial, we randomly assigned 556 patients with previously
untreated advanced NSCLC with an EGFR mutation (exon 19 deletion or L858R
allele) in a 1:1 ratio to receive either osimertinib (80 mg once daily) or one
of two other EGFR-TKIs (gefitinib at a dose of 250 mg once daily or erlotinib at
a dose of 150 mg once daily, with patients receiving these drugs combined in a
single comparator group). Overall survival was a secondary end point.
RESULTS: The median overall survival was 38.6 months (95% confidence interval
[CI], 34.5 to 41.8) in the osimertinib group and 31.8 months (95% CI, 26.6 to
36.0) in the comparator group (hazard ratio for death, 0.80; 95.05% CI, 0.64 to
1.00; P = 0.046). At 3 years, 79 of 279 patients (28%) in the osimertinib group
and 26 of 277 (9%) in the comparator group were continuing to receive a trial
regimen; the median exposure was 20.7 months and 11.5 months, respectively.
Adverse events of grade 3 or higher were reported in 42% of the patients in the
osimertinib group and in 47% of those in the comparator group.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with previously untreated advanced NSCLC with an
EGFR mutation, those who received osimertinib had longer overall survival than
those who received a comparator EGFR-TKI. The safety profile for osimertinib was
similar to that of the comparator EGFR-TKIs, despite a longer duration of
exposure in the osimertinib group. (Funded by AstraZeneca; FLAURA
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02296125.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1913662
PMID: 31751012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
