---
reference_id: "PMID:49464"
title: The clinical significance of hepatitis B virus antigens and antibodies.
authors:
- Holland PV
- Alter HJ
journal: Med Clin North Am
year: '1975'
doi: 10.1016/s0025-7125(16)31982-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical significance of hepatitis B virus antigens and antibodies.
**Authors:** Holland PV, Alter HJ
**Journal:** Med Clin North Am (1975)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0025-7125(16)31982-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0025-7125(16)31982-4)

## Content

1. Med Clin North Am. 1975 Jul;59(4):849-55. doi: 10.1016/s0025-7125(16)31982-4.

The clinical significance of hepatitis B virus antigens and antibodies.

Holland PV, Alter HJ.

There are two well-characterized antigen-antibody systems which relate 
specificially to viral hepatitis B. Tests for HBsAg and anti-HBs are readily 
available and of great benefit to the diagnosis, prevention and understanding of 
hepatitis B. Tests for HBcAg and anti-HBc are still research techniques which 
requires further development before they can be used at the level of everyday 
medical practice. HBsAg in an individual indicates that he harbors the virus of 
hepatitis B; it may be present in the absence of liver disease or be found in 
association with both acute and chronic type B hepatitis. The presence of HBsAg 
also suggests that HBV may be causally related to some cases of periarteritis 
nodosa, chronic glomerulonephritis, and hepatoma. Although HBV is readily 
transmitted in blood, the major portion of post-transfusion hepatitis now 
appears to be serologically unrelated to either the hepatitis B virus ("serum") 
or the hepatitis A virus ("infectious"); the etiology of these cases is 
currently undetermined. There is increasing evidence that HBV may be transmitted 
by modes other than blood, but the exact mechanisms of such transmission is not 
established. The combined transmission of HBV by blood and other routes has 
resulted in a large number of persistent carriers of HBsAg in the world. There 
is no current method to alter this carrier state. The hepatitis risk of such 
persistent carriers to their personal and professional contacts is under 
investigation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0025-7125(16)31982-4
PMID: 49464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]