---
reference_id: "PMID:40209611"
title: "Frequency of targetable genetic alterations in resectable lung adenocarcinoma: Results from the LORD project."
authors:
- Bossé Y
- Boudreau DK
- Saavedra Armero V
- Li Z
- Tremblay É
- Gaudreault N
- Gagné A
- Desmeules P
- Joubert P
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108530
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Aged
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, surgery, epidemiology"
- "Adenocarcinoma of Lung/genetics, pathology, surgery, epidemiology"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Neoplasm Staging
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Canada/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of targetable genetic alterations in resectable lung adenocarcinoma: Results from the LORD project.
**Authors:** Bossé Y, Boudreau DK, Saavedra Armero V, Li Z, Tremblay É, Gaudreault N, Gagné A, Desmeules P, Joubert P
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108530](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108530)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2025 May;203:108530. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108530. Epub
2025  Apr 5.

Frequency of targetable genetic alterations in resectable lung adenocarcinoma:
Results from the LORD project.

Bossé Y(1), Boudreau DK(2), Saavedra Armero V(2), Li Z(2), Tremblay É(2),
Gaudreault N(2), Gagné A(2), Desmeules P(2), Joubert P(3).

Author information:
(1)Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec -
Université Laval, Quebec City, Canada; Department of Molecular Medicine,
Université Laval, Quebec City, Canada. Electronic address:
yohan.bosse@criucpq.ulaval.ca.
(2)Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec -
Université Laval, Quebec City, Canada.
(3)Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec -
Université Laval, Quebec City, Canada; Department of Molecular Biology,
Pathology and Medical Biochemistry, Université Laval, Quebec City, Canada.

There is still limited data on the prevalence of actionable molecular
alterations in patients with early-stage resectable lung adenocarcinoma and
prior studies reported important differences across geographic locations,
demographic and pathologic characteristics. The tumors of 1,603 French Canadian
patients with pathologically confirmed lung adenocarcinoma were interrogated
using a 50-gene next-generation sequencing panel. The goal was to assess the
prevalence of genetic alterations in eleven guideline-based oncogenic genes in
resectable lung adenocarcinoma. Age, sex, pathological stage, smoking history
and predominant histologic patterns were associated with molecular subtypes
defined by oncogenic drivers. Age at surgery for the 1,603 patients was 65 ± 8
and includes 61 % of females, 6 % of patients without a smoking history and 70 %
of stage I. The overall prevalence of targetable alterations for approved and
investigational therapies was 65.9 % and 56.7 % of patients had tumors harboring
at least one variant of strong clinical significance (tier I of the AMP/ASCO/CAP
categorization). The most frequently mutated genes were KRAS (45.3 %), EGFR
(11.5 %) and BRAF (3.9 %). MET exon 14 skipping alterations were identified in
47 patients (2.9 %) and oncogenic fusions in ALK, ROS1, RET and MET were found
in 1.7 % of cases. As expected, EGFR activating mutations were associated with
patients who never smoked, females, earlier disease stages, with more
lepidic/acinar and less solid predominant patterns. Quasi similar but inverted
relationships with clinico-pathological features were observed in one third of
patients (n = 534) free of molecular alterations characterized by more males,
patients who smoked, with later stage diagnosis and with more solid and less
lepidic/acinar adenocarcinomas. This study highlights the epidemiology of
guideline-based targetable alterations in French-Canadian patients with
resectable lung adenocarcinoma. The large proportion of patients eligible for
targeted therapies will have important impact on oncological practices in the
current era of neoadjuvant and perioperative treatments.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2025.108530
PMID: 40209611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
