---
reference_id: "PMID:21820096"
title: "Recessive mutations in DOCK6, encoding the guanidine nucleotide exchange factor DOCK6, lead to abnormal actin cytoskeleton organization and Adams-Oliver syndrome."
authors:
- Shaheen R
- Faqeih E
- Sunker A
- Morsy H
- Al-Sheddi T
- Shamseldin HE
- Adly N
- Hashem M
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.009
keywords:
- Actins/metabolism
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cytoskeleton/metabolism, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Embryonic Development/genetics
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- "Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Scalp Dermatoses/congenital, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive mutations in DOCK6, encoding the guanidine nucleotide exchange factor DOCK6, lead to abnormal actin cytoskeleton organization and Adams-Oliver syndrome.
**Authors:** Shaheen R, Faqeih E, Sunker A, Morsy H, Al-Sheddi T, Shamseldin HE, Adly N, Hashem M, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.009)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Aug 12;89(2):328-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.009.
Epub  2011 Aug 4.

Recessive mutations in DOCK6, encoding the guanidine nucleotide exchange factor 
DOCK6, lead to abnormal actin cytoskeleton organization and Adams-Oliver 
syndrome.

Shaheen R(1), Faqeih E, Sunker A, Morsy H, Al-Sheddi T, Shamseldin HE, Adly N, 
Hashem M, Alkuraya FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is defined by the combination of aplasia cutis 
congenita (ACC) and terminal transverse limb defects (TTLD). It is usually 
inherited as an autosomal-dominant trait, but autosomal-recessive inheritance 
has also been documented. In an individual with autosomal-recessive AOS, we 
combined autozygome analysis with exome sequencing to identify a homozygous 
truncating mutation in dedicator of cytokinesis 6 gene (DOCK6) which encodes an 
atypical guanidine exchange factor (GEF) known to activate two members of the 
Rho GTPase family: Cdc42 and Rac1. Another homozygous truncating mutation was 
identified upon targeted sequencing of DOCK6 in an unrelated individual with 
AOS. Consistent with the established role of Cdc42 and Rac1 in the organization 
of the actin cytoskeleton, we demonstrate a cellular phenotype typical of a 
defective actin cytoskeleton in patient cells. These findings, combined with a 
Dock6 expression profile that is consistent with an AOS phenotype as well as the 
very recent demonstration of dominant mutations of ARHGAP31 in AOS, establish 
Cdc42 and Rac1 as key molecules in the pathogenesis of AOS and suggest that 
other regulators of these Rho GTPase proteins might be good candidates in the 
quest to define the genetic spectrum of this genetically heterogeneous 
condition.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.07.009
PMCID: PMC3155174
PMID: 21820096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]