---
reference_id: "PMID:15770590"
title: Transanal pull-through for Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Dasgupta R
- Langer JC
journal: Semin Pediatr Surg
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2004.10.027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transanal pull-through for Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Dasgupta R, Langer JC
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Surg (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2004.10.027](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2004.10.027)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2005 Feb;14(1):64-71. doi:
10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2004.10.027.

Transanal pull-through for Hirschsprung disease.

Dasgupta R(1), Langer JC.

Author information:
(1)Hosptial for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Hirschsprung (HSCR) disease is a relatively common neonatal developmental 
disorder of the enteric nervous system and is characterized by the absence of 
ganglion cells in the myenteric and submucosal plexuses of the distal intestine. 
This results in absent peristalsis in the affected bowel, and the development of 
a functional intestinal obstruction. The pathogenesis and genetic basis of the 
disease is yet unclear. The surgical treatment of HSCR has evolved significantly 
since 1949 when Swenson first proposed a trans-abdominal pull-through procedure. 
The transanal pull-through consists of a rectal mucosectomy, resection of the 
aganglionic bowel and a colo-anal anastomosis. Recent literature and clinically 
controversies of this minimally invasive one-stage procedure are reviewed. 
Although follow up is still relatively short the preliminary results appear very 
favorable and cost effective.

DOI: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2004.10.027
PMID: 15770590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]