---
reference_id: "PMID:22565016"
title: Kidney dysfunction and cadmium exposure--factors influencing dose-response relationships.
authors:
- Nordberg G
- Jin T
- Wu X
- Lu J
- Chen L
- Liang Y
- Lei L
- Hong F
- Bergdahl IA
- Nordberg M
journal: J Trace Elem Med Biol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtemb.2012.03.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kidney dysfunction and cadmium exposure--factors influencing dose-response relationships.
**Authors:** Nordberg G, Jin T, Wu X, Lu J, Chen L, Liang Y, Lei L, Hong F, Bergdahl IA, Nordberg M
**Journal:** J Trace Elem Med Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtemb.2012.03.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtemb.2012.03.007)

## Content

1. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2012 Jun;26(2-3):197-200. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtemb.2012.03.007. Epub 2012 May 5.

Kidney dysfunction and cadmium exposure--factors influencing dose-response 
relationships.

Nordberg G(1), Jin T, Wu X, Lu J, Chen L, Liang Y, Lei L, Hong F, Bergdahl IA, 
Nordberg M.

Author information:
(1)Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Department of Public Health and 
Clinical Medicine, Umea University, SE-90187 Umea, Sweden. 
gunnar.nordberg@envmed.umu.se

Our early toxicological studies showed that metallothionein (MT) is a protein 
that carries cadmium (Cd) to the kidney, explaining why Cd exposures during long 
time periods may give rise to kidney dysfunction. This dysfunction is usually 
considered to be the critical effect, i.e. the adverse effect that occurs at the 
lowest exposure level. MT also provides intracellular protection against cadmium 
toxicity. In studies of population groups in cadmium contaminated areas in 
China, we investigated factors that affected the relationship between internal 
dose of Cd, as indicated by blood Cd (BCd) or urinary Cd (UCd), and the 
prevalence of kidney dysfunction. We found dose-response relationships between 
UCd and the prevalence of increased levels of biomarkers of renal tubular 
dysfunction (urinary beta-2-microglobulin, B2M, or 
N-acetyl-beta-d-glucosaminidase - NAG) or urinary albumin (UAlb), a biomarker of 
glomerular kidney dysfunction. Two years after Cd intake from contaminated rice 
was diminished, renal tubular dysfunction appeared unchanged or aggravated among 
those with higher UCd; Another 8 years later, i.e. 10 years after Cd intake was 
decreased, the prevalence of renal tubular dysfunction was still increased but 
UAlb had returned to normal. Factors that influenced the dose-response 
relationships were: (1) time after maximum exposure. (2) Concomitant exposure to 
other nephrotoxic agents such as inorganic arsenic. (3) Cd induced 
metallothionein mRNA levels in peripheral blood lymphocytes, used as a biomarker 
of the ability of each person, to synthesize MT. (4) The occurrence of increased 
levels in blood plasma of autoantibodies against MT. The two last points further 
support a role in humans of MT as a protective protein against tissue damage 
from cadmium and gives support to previous ideas developed partly in 
experimental systems.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtemb.2012.03.007
PMID: 22565016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]