---
reference_id: "PMID:35565324"
title: "Sinonasal Inverted Papilloma and Squamous Cell Carcinoma: Contemporary Management and Patient Outcomes."
authors:
- Eide JG
- Welch KC
- Adappa ND
- Palmer JN
- Tong CCL
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cancers14092195
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sinonasal Inverted Papilloma and Squamous Cell Carcinoma: Contemporary Management and Patient Outcomes.
**Authors:** Eide JG, Welch KC, Adappa ND, Palmer JN, Tong CCL
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers14092195](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers14092195)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Apr 28;14(9):2195. doi: 10.3390/cancers14092195.

Sinonasal Inverted Papilloma and Squamous Cell Carcinoma: Contemporary 
Management and Patient Outcomes.

Eide JG(1), Welch KC(2), Adappa ND(1), Palmer JN(1), Tong CCL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Inverted papillomas (IP) are the most common sinonasal tumor with a tendency for 
recurrence, potential attachment to the orbit and skull base, and risk of 
malignant degeneration into squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). While the overall 
rate of recurrence has decreased with the widespread adoption of high-definition 
endoscopic optics and advanced surgical tools, there remain challenges in 
managing tumors that are multiply recurrent or involve vital neurovascular 
structures. Here, we review the state-of-the-art diagnostic tools for IP and 
IP-degenerated SCC, contemporary surgical management, and propose a surveillance 
protocol.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14092195
PMCID: PMC9102473
PMID: 35565324

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.