---
reference_id: "PMID:38623364"
title: "Pityriasis following COVID-19 vaccinations: a systematic review."
authors:
- Duzett L
- Mercado G
- Tasouli-Drakou V
- Kane A
- Tam A
journal: Dermatol Reports
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4081/dr.2023.9742
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis following COVID-19 vaccinations: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Duzett L, Mercado G, Tasouli-Drakou V, Kane A, Tam A
**Journal:** Dermatol Reports (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4081/dr.2023.9742](https://doi.org/10.4081/dr.2023.9742)

## Content

1. Dermatol Reports. 2023 Aug 9;16(1):9742. doi: 10.4081/dr.2023.9742.
eCollection  2024 Mar 12.

Pityriasis following COVID-19 vaccinations: a systematic review.

Duzett L(1), Mercado G(1), Tasouli-Drakou V(1), Kane A(1), Tam A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Education, College of Osteopathic Medicine, Touro 
University Nevada, Henderson, NV.
(2)Plastic Surgery Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, USA.

In the wake of a global COVID-19 pandemic, where innovations in vaccination 
technology and the speed of development and distribution have been 
unprecedented, a wide variety of post-vaccination cutaneous reactions have 
surfaced. However, there has not been a systematic review that investigates 
pityriasis eruptions and the associated variants following COVID-19 
inoculations. A PubMed search using Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses was performed to find case reports from the earliest 
record through November 2022. Data including types of vaccination and pityriasis 
were extracted and a quality review was performed; 47 reports with 94 patients 
were found: 64.9% had pityriasis rosea (PR), 3.2% PR-like eruptions, 16.0% 
pityriasis rubra pilaris, 7.4% pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta, 
3.2% pityriasis lichenoides chronica, and 5.3% had reactions described as 
atypical. The top three COVID-19 vaccinations reported were Pfizer-BioNTech 
(47.9%), Oxford-AstraZeneca (11.7%), and Moderna (8.5%). Pityriasis reactivity 
was reported most frequently after the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccination, with 
pityriasis rosea being the most common variant. A large difference was 
additionally found between the ratio of post-vaccination pityriasis reactions 
following Pfizer and Moderna vaccinations (5.63), and the ratio of Pfizer's 
usage in the United States as of December 28, 2022 relative to that of Moderna 
(1.59). Further studies with adequate follow-up periods and diagnostic testing 
will thus need to be performed to elucidate the root of this discrepancy and 
better characterize the association between different pityriasis reactions and 
COVID-19 vaccinations.

Copyright © 2024, the Author(s).

DOI: 10.4081/dr.2023.9742
PMCID: PMC11017724
PMID: 38623364

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: the authors declare no 
potential conflict of interest.