---
reference_id: "PMID:38314870"
title: Defining the Genetic Landscape of Congenital Mirror Movements in 80 Affected Individuals.
authors:
- Collins Hutchinson ML
- St-Onge J
- Schlienger S
- Boudrahem-Addour N
- Mougharbel L
- Michaud JF
- Lloyd C
- Bruneau E
- Roux C
- Sahly AN
- Osterman B
- Myers KA
- Rouleau GA
- Jimenez Cruz DA
- Rivière JB
- Accogli A
- Charron F
- Srour M
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mds.29669
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- Netrin-1/genetics
- DCC Receptor/genetics
- Movement Disorders/genetics
- Dyskinesias
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Rho Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining the Genetic Landscape of Congenital Mirror Movements in 80 Affected Individuals.
**Authors:** Collins Hutchinson ML, St-Onge J, Schlienger S, Boudrahem-Addour N, Mougharbel L, Michaud JF, Lloyd C, Bruneau E, Roux C, Sahly AN, Osterman B, Myers KA, Rouleau GA, Jimenez Cruz DA, Rivière JB, Accogli A, Charron F, Srour M
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.29669](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.29669)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2024 Feb;39(2):400-410. doi: 10.1002/mds.29669. Epub 2024 Feb 5.

Defining the Genetic Landscape of Congenital Mirror Movements in 80 Affected 
Individuals.

Collins Hutchinson ML(1)(2), St-Onge J(1), Schlienger S(3), Boudrahem-Addour 
N(1), Mougharbel L(1), Michaud JF(3), Lloyd C(1), Bruneau E(1), Roux C(4), Sahly 
AN(5)(6), Osterman B(5)(7), Myers KA(1)(5)(7), Rouleau GA(8), Jimenez Cruz 
DA(4), Rivière JB(1)(9), Accogli A(1)(9)(10), Charron F(3)(11)(12), Srour 
M(1)(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(2)Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, State University of New 
York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(3)Montreal Clinical Research Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Bioinformatics Platform, Research Institute of the McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(6)Department of Neurosciences, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Centre, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(8)Montréal Neurological Institute-Hospital, McGill University, Montréal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(9)Department of Specialized Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(10)Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(11)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Division of Experimental Medicine, 
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(12)Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Congenital mirror movements (CMM) is a rare neurodevelopmental 
disorder characterized by involuntary movements from one side of the body that 
mirror voluntary movements on the opposite side. To date, five genes have been 
associated with CMM, namely DCC, RAD51, NTN1, ARHGEF7, and DNAL4.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to characterize the genetic landscape of CMM 
in a large group of 80 affected individuals.
METHODS: We screened 80 individuals with CMM from 43 families for pathogenic 
variants in CMM genes. In large CMM families, we tested for presence of 
pathogenic variants in multiple affected and unaffected individuals. In 
addition, we evaluated the impact of three missense DCC variants on binding 
between DCC and Netrin-1 in vitro.
RESULTS: Causal pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were found in 35% of 
probands overall, and 70% with familial CMM. The most common causal gene was 
DCC, responsible for 28% of CMM probands and 80% of solved cases. RAD51, NTN1, 
and ARHGEF7 were rare causes of CMM, responsible for 2% each. Penetrance of CMM 
in DCC pathogenic variant carriers was 68% and higher in males than females (74% 
vs. 54%). The three tested missense variants (p.Ile164Thr; p.Asn176Ser; and 
p.Arg1343His) bind Netrin-1 similarly to wild type DCC.
CONCLUSIONS: A genetic etiology can be identified in one third of CMM 
individuals, with DCC being the most common gene involved. Two thirds of CMM 
individuals were unsolved, highlighting that CMM is genetically heterogeneous 
and other CMM genes are yet to be discovered. © 2024 The Authors. Movement 
Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International 
Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2024 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.29669
PMID: 38314870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]