---
reference_id: "PMID:37891379"
title: Strong apoptotic response of testis tumor cells following cisplatin treatment.
authors:
- Köberle B
- Usanova S
- Piee-Staffa A
- Heinicke U
- Clauss P
- Brozovic A
- Kaina B
journal: Int Urol Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11255-023-03825-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Strong apoptotic response of testis tumor cells following cisplatin treatment.
**Authors:** Köberle B, Usanova S, Piee-Staffa A, Heinicke U, Clauss P, Brozovic A, Kaina B
**Journal:** Int Urol Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11255-023-03825-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11255-023-03825-5)

## Content

1. Int Urol Nephrol. 2024 Mar;56(3):1007-1017. doi: 10.1007/s11255-023-03825-5. 
Epub 2023 Oct 27.

Strong apoptotic response of testis tumor cells following cisplatin treatment.

Köberle B(1)(2), Usanova S(3), Piee-Staffa A(3), Heinicke U(3)(4), Clauss P(3), 
Brozovic A(5), Kaina B(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Mainz Medical Center, 55131, Mainz, 
Germany. beate.koeberle@kit.edu.
(2)Department of Food Chemistry and Toxicology, Karlsruhe Institute of 
Technology, 76131, Karlsruhe, Germany. beate.koeberle@kit.edu.
(3)Institute of Toxicology, University of Mainz Medical Center, 55131, Mainz, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Intensive Care Medicine and Pain Therapy, 
University Hospital Frankfurt, 60596, Frankfurt Am Main, Germany.
(5)Division of Molecular Biology, Ruđer Bošković Institute, 10000, Zagreb, 
Croatia.
(6)Institute of Toxicology, University of Mainz Medical Center, 55131, Mainz, 
Germany. kaina@uni-mainz.de.

Most solid metastatic cancers are resistant to chemotherapy. However, metastatic 
testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT) are cured in over 80% of patients using 
cisplatin-based combination therapy. Published data suggest that TGCTs are 
sensitive to cisplatin due to limited DNA repair and presumably also to a 
propensity to undergo apoptosis. To further investigate this aspect, 
cisplatin-induced activation of apoptotic pathways was investigated in 
cisplatin-sensitive testis tumor cells (TTC) and compared to cisplatin-resistant 
bladder cancer cells. Apoptosis induction was investigated using flow cytometry, 
caspase activation and PARP-1 cleavage. Immunoblotting and RT-PCR were applied 
to investigate pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins. Transfections were performed to 
target p53- and Fas/FasL-mediated apoptotic signaling. Immunoblotting 
experiments revealed p53 to be induced in TTC, but not bladder cancer cells 
following cisplatin. Higher levels of pro-apoptotic Bax and Noxa were observed 
in TTC, anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 was solely expressed in bladder cancer cells. 
Cisplatin led to translocation of Bax to the mitochondrial membrane in TTC, 
resulting in cytochrome C release. Cisplatin increased the expression of FasR 
mRNA and FasL protein in all tumor cell lines. Targeting the apoptotic pathway 
via siRNA-mediated knockdown of p53 and FAS reduced death receptor-mediated 
apoptosis and increased cisplatin resistance in TTC, indicating the involvement 
of FAS-mediated apoptosis in the cisplatin TTC response. In conclusion, both the 
death receptor and the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway become strongly activated 
in TTC following cisplatin treatment, explaining, together with attenuated DNA 
repair, their unique sensitivity toward platinum-based anticancer drugs.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-023-03825-5
PMCID: PMC10853295
PMID: 37891379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared that there are no conflict 
of interest.