---
reference_id: "PMID:34170466"
title: Ectopic Expression of TRIM25 Restores RIG-I Expression and IFN Production Reduced by Multiple Enteroviruses 3C(pro).
authors:
- Xiao H
- Li J
- Yang X
- Li Z
- Wang Y
- Rui Y
- Liu B
- Zhang W
journal: Virol Sin
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12250-021-00410-x
keywords:
- 3C Viral Proteases
- DEAD Box Protein 58/genetics
- Ectopic Gene Expression
- Enterovirus
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Interferon Type I/metabolism
- "Receptors, Immunologic/genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Tripartite Motif Proteins/genetics
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ectopic Expression of TRIM25 Restores RIG-I Expression and IFN Production Reduced by Multiple Enteroviruses 3C(pro).
**Authors:** Xiao H, Li J, Yang X, Li Z, Wang Y, Rui Y, Liu B, Zhang W
**Journal:** Virol Sin (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12250-021-00410-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12250-021-00410-x)

## Content

1. Virol Sin. 2021 Dec;36(6):1363-1374. doi: 10.1007/s12250-021-00410-x. Epub
2021  Jun 25.

Ectopic Expression of TRIM25 Restores RIG-I Expression and IFN Production
Reduced by Multiple Enteroviruses 3C(pro).

Xiao H(#)(1), Li J(#)(1)(2), Yang X(#)(1), Li Z(1), Wang Y(2), Rui Y(3), Liu
B(4), Zhang W(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology and AIDS Research, Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration
and Transplantation of The Ministry of Education, The First Hospital of Jilin
University, Changchun, 130021, China.
(2)Changchun Institute of Biological Products Co., Ltd, Changchun, 130012,
China.
(3)Cancer Institute (Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Intervention,
Ministry of Education), Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(4)Department of Hand Surgery, First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
130021, China. kjkliubin@163.com.
(5)Institute of Virology and AIDS Research, Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration
and Transplantation of The Ministry of Education, The First Hospital of Jilin
University, Changchun, 130021, China. zhangwenyan@jlu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Enteroviruses (EVs) 3C proteins suppress type I interferon (IFN) responses
mediated by retinoid acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), while an E3 ubiquitin
ligase, tripartite motif protein 25 (TRIM25)-mediated RIG-I ubiquitination is
essential for RIG-I antiviral activity. Therefore, whether the effect of EVs 3C
on RIG-I is associated with TRIM25 expression is worth to be further
investigated. Here, we demonstrate that 3C proteins of EV71 and coxsackievirus
B3 (CVB3) reduced not only RIG-I expression but also TRIM25 expression through
protease cleavage activity, while overexpression of TRIM25 restored RIG-I
expression and IFN-β production reduced by 3C proteins. Further investigation
confirmed that the two amino acids and functional domains in TRIM25 required for
RIG-I ubiquitination and TRIM25 structural conformation were essential for the
recovery of RIG-I expression. Moreover, we also observed that TRIM25 could
rescue RIG-I expression reduced by 3C proteins of CVA6 and EV-D68 but not CVA16.
Our findings provide an insightful interpretation of 3C-mediated host innate
immune suppression and support TRIM25 as an attractive target against multiple
EVs infection.

© 2021. Wuhan Institute of Virology, CAS.

DOI: 10.1007/s12250-021-00410-x
PMCID: PMC8226358
PMID: 34170466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that they have no
conflict of interests.
