---
reference_id: "PMID:24837766"
title: Vaccine use in primary immunodeficiency disorders.
authors:
- Principi N
- Esposito S
journal: Vaccine
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.05.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vaccine use in primary immunodeficiency disorders.
**Authors:** Principi N, Esposito S
**Journal:** Vaccine (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.05.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.05.022)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2014 Jun 24;32(30):3725-31. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.05.022. Epub 
2014 May 14.

Vaccine use in primary immunodeficiency disorders.

Principi N(1), Esposito S(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and 
Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: 
nicola.principi@unimi.it.
(2)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and 
Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Primary immunodeficiency disorders (PIDs) are a heterogeneous group of rare, 
congenital and genetically determined conditions caused by one or more defects 
of innate and/or adaptive immunity. In subjects suffering from PIDs, an 
unusually increased susceptibility to infections is demonstrated. As infections 
condition the final prognosis of most PIDs, clearly defined prophylactic 
practices are essential. In most cases, intravenously or subcutaneously 
administered immunoglobulin remains the mainstay of treatment, although 
antibiotics and antifungals can be added under some conditions, particularly 
when the infections are highly recurrent despite immunoglobulin replacement. 
Vaccines could also play a role, but their administration leads to different 
results depending on the type of PID: in some cases, immune response is not 
impaired, and vaccines can evoke the same protection as that usually induced in 
healthy subjects; in others, the immunodeficiency significantly interferes with 
antigen stimulation of the immune system and, depending on the type and degree 
of impairment, little or no protection is evoked. Moreover, particularly when 
live vaccines are given, significant vaccine-related adverse events can occur, 
including the emergence of disease from vaccine strains. The main aim of this 
paper is to discuss what is currently known about how and when vaccines can be 
used in patients with PIDs in order to facilitate physician choices and assure 
the best possible patient protection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.05.022
PMID: 24837766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]