---
reference_id: "PMID:36767504"
title: Late Diagnosis of Swyer Syndrome in a Patient with Bilateral Germ Cell Tumor Treated with a Contraceptive Due to Primary Amenorrhea.
authors:
- Sowińska-Przepiera E
- Krzyścin M
- Przepiera A
- Brodowska A
- Malanowska E
- Kozłowski M
- Cymbaluk-Płoska A
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph20032139
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Dysgerminoma/diagnosis, surgery, genetics"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/diagnosis, surgery, genetics"
- Amenorrhea/etiology
- Contraceptive Agents
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Sexual Maturation
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis, 46,XY/diagnosis, surgery, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late Diagnosis of Swyer Syndrome in a Patient with Bilateral Germ Cell Tumor Treated with a Contraceptive Due to Primary Amenorrhea.
**Authors:** Sowińska-Przepiera E, Krzyścin M, Przepiera A, Brodowska A, Malanowska E, Kozłowski M, Cymbaluk-Płoska A
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph20032139](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20032139)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2023 Jan 24;20(3):2139. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph20032139.

Late Diagnosis of Swyer Syndrome in a Patient with Bilateral Germ Cell Tumor 
Treated with a Contraceptive Due to Primary Amenorrhea.

Sowińska-Przepiera E(1)(2), Krzyścin M(1), Przepiera A(3), Brodowska A(4), 
Malanowska E(4), Kozłowski M(5), Cymbaluk-Płoska A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolic and Internal Diseases, Pomeranian 
Medical University in Szczecin, Unii Lubelskiej 1, 71-252 Szczecin, Poland.
(2)Pediatric, Adolescent Gynecology Clinic, Department of Gynecology, 
Endocrinology and Gynecological Oncology, Pomeranian Medical University in 
Szczecin, Unii Lubelskiej 1, 71-252 Szczecin, Poland.
(3)Department of Urology and Urologic Oncology, Pomeranian Medical University in 
Szczecin, Al. Powstańców Wielkopolskich 72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland.
(4)Department of Gynecology, Endocrinology and Gynecological Oncology, 
Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Unii Lubelskiej 1, 71-252 Szczecin, 
Poland.
(5)Department of Reconstructive Surgery and Gynecological Oncology, Pomeranian 
Medical University in Szczecin, Al. Powstańców Wielkopolskich 72, 70-111 
Szczecin, Poland.

Swyer syndrome is a special form of DSD (disorders of sex development), 
so-called pure gonadal dysgenesis with a karyotype 46, XY and a female 
phenotype. One of the most important problems in patients with DSD is the risk 
of gonadal tumors. We present a case of a 26-year-old patient with Swyer 
syndrome. The patient had primary amenorrhea and no puberty characteristics. In 
ultrasound imaging in the vicinity of the uterus, there were two homogeneous 
structures. A genetic diagnosis was also performed, which showed karyotype 46, 
XY. The patient underwent a bilateral gonadectomy. Histopathological examination 
revealed the presence of dysgerminoma in both dysgenetic gonads. The follow-up 
of five years now did not show any changes suspected of invasion. We concluded 
that the primary amenorrhea, along with the absence of development of sexual 
characteristics, should prompt an expanded diagnosis for disorders of sex 
development. Gonadal dysgerminoma should be suspected even in the absence of 
tumor features on ultrasound and blood laboratory tests. Early prophylactic 
gonadectomy could protect patients from developing tumors in dysgenetic gonads.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph20032139
PMCID: PMC9916373
PMID: 36767504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.