---
reference_id: "PMID:33457005"
title: Genome-wide association study of the TP53 R249S mutation in hepatocellular carcinoma with aflatoxin B1 exposure and infection with hepatitis B virus.
authors:
- Han C
- Yu T
- Qin W
- Liao X
- Huang J
- Liu Z
- Yu L
- Liu X
- Chen Z
- Yang C
- Wang X
- Mo S
- Zhu G
- Su H
- Li J
- Qin X
- Gui Y
- Mo Z
- Li L
- Peng T
journal: J Gastrointest Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.21037/jgo-20-510
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association study of the TP53 R249S mutation in hepatocellular carcinoma with aflatoxin B1 exposure and infection with hepatitis B virus.
**Authors:** Han C, Yu T, Qin W, Liao X, Huang J, Liu Z, Yu L, Liu X, Chen Z, Yang C, Wang X, Mo S, Zhu G, Su H, Li J, Qin X, Gui Y, Mo Z, Li L, Peng T
**Journal:** J Gastrointest Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.21037/jgo-20-510](https://doi.org/10.21037/jgo-20-510)

## Content

1. J Gastrointest Oncol. 2020 Dec;11(6):1333-1349. doi: 10.21037/jgo-20-510.

Genome-wide association study of the TP53 R249S mutation in hepatocellular
carcinoma with aflatoxin B1 exposure and infection with hepatitis B virus.

Han C(1)(2), Yu T(1), Qin W(1), Liao X(1), Huang J(1), Liu Z(3), Yu L(4), Liu
X(5), Chen Z(6), Yang C(1), Wang X(1), Mo S(1), Zhu G(1), Su H(1), Li J(7), Qin
X(8), Gui Y(8), Mo Z(9), Li L(10), Peng T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, China.
(3)Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, the
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
China.
(4)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, the First Affiliated
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical
University, Zhanjiang, China.
(6)Department of General Surgery, Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital, Yangzhou,
China.
(7)Medical Scientific Research Center, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning,
China.
(8)Department of Clinical Laboratory, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, China.
(9)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi Medical University,
Nanning, China.
(10)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, China.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to dietary aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) induces DNA damage and
mutation in the TP53 gene at codon 249, known as the TP53 R249S mutation, and is
a major risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). AFB1 and the hepatitis B
virus (HBV) together exert synergistic effects that promote carcinogenesis and
TP53 R249S mutation in HCC.
METHODS: A genome-wide association study (GWAS) of whole genome exons was
conducted using 485 HCC patients with chronic HBV infection. This was followed
by an independent replication study conducted using 270 patients with chronic
HBV infection. Immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate TP53 expression in all
samples. This showed a correlation between codon 249 mutations and TP53
expression. Susceptibility variants for the TP53 R249S mutation in HCC were
identified based on both the GWAS and replication study. The associations
between identified variants and the expression levels of their located genes
were analyzed in 20 paired independent samples.
RESULTS: The likelihood of positive TP53 expression was found to be higher in
HCC patients with the R249S mutation both in the GWAS (P<0.001) and the
replication study (P=0.006). The combined analyses showed that the TP53 R249S
mutation was significantly associated with three single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs): ADAMTS18 rs9930984 (adjusted P=4.84×10-6), WDR49 rs75218075 (adjusted
P=7.36×10-5), and SLC8A3 rs8022091 (adjusted P=0.042). The TP53 R249S mutation
was found to be highly associated with the TT genotypes of rs9930984 (additive
model, P=0.01; dominant model, P=6.43×10-5) and rs75218075 (additive model,
P=0.002; dominant model, P=2.16×10-4). Additionally, ADAMTS18 mRNA expression
was significantly higher in HCC tissue compared with its expression in paired
non-tumor tissue (P=0.041), and patients carrying the TT genotype at rs9930984
showed lower ADAMTS18 expression in non-tumor tissue compared with patients
carrying the GT genotype (P=0.0028). WDR49 expression was markedly lower in HCC
tissue compared with paired non-tumor tissue (P=0.0011).
CONCLUSIONS: TP53 expression is significantly associated with the R249S mutation
in HCC. Our collective results suggest that rs9930984, rs75218075, and rs8022091
are associated with R249S mutation susceptibility in HCC patients exposed to
AFB1 and HBV infection.

2020 Journal of Gastrointestinal Oncology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jgo-20-510
PMCID: PMC7807280
PMID: 33457005

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/jgo-20-510). The authors have no conflicts of
interest to declare.
