---
reference_id: "PMID:29995202"
title: The Second Case of Saposin A Deficiency and Altered Autophagy.
authors:
- Kose M
- Demir SA
- Akinci G
- Eraslan C
- Yilmaz U
- Ceylaner S
- Yildirim ES
- Seyrantepe V
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2018_114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Second Case of Saposin A Deficiency and Altered Autophagy.
**Authors:** Kose M, Demir SA, Akinci G, Eraslan C, Yilmaz U, Ceylaner S, Yildirim ES, Seyrantepe V
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2018_114](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2018_114)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2019;44:43-54. doi: 10.1007/8904_2018_114. Epub 2018 Jul 12.

The Second Case of Saposin A Deficiency and Altered Autophagy.

Kose M(1), Demir SA(2), Akinci G(3), Eraslan C(4), Yilmaz U(3), Ceylaner S(5), 
Yildirim ES(6), Seyrantepe V(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Metabolism Department, Behçet Uz Children Research and Training 
Hospital, Izmir, Turkey. drmelisdemir@gmail.com.
(2)Molecular Biology and Genetics, Izmir Institute of Technology, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Pediatric Neurology Department, Behçet Uz Children Research and Training 
Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(4)Neuroradiology Department, Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey.
(5)Intergen Genetic Diagnosis Centre, Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Clinical Chemistry, Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey.

Krabbe disease is a lysosomal storage disease caused by galactosylceramidase 
deficiency, resulting in neurodegeneration with a rapid clinical downhill course 
within the first months of life in the classic infantile form. This process may 
be triggered by the accumulation of galactosylceramide (GalCer) in nervous 
tissues. Both the enzyme galactosylceramidase and its in vivo activator 
molecule, saposin A, are essential during GalCer degradation. A clinical 
manifestation almost identical to Krabbe disease is observed when, instead of 
the galactosylceramidase protein, the saposin A molecule is defective. Saposin A 
results from posttranslational processing of the precursor molecule, prosaposin, 
encoded by the PSAP gene. Clinical and neuroimaging findings in a 7-month-old 
child strongly suggested Krabbe disease, but this condition was excluded by 
enzymatic and genetic testing. However, at whole exome sequencing, the 
previously undescribed homozygous, obviously pathogenic PSAP gene 
NM_002778.3:c.209T>G(p.Val70Gly) variant was determined in the saposin A domain 
of the PSAP gene. Fibroblast studies showed GalCer accumulation and the 
activation of autophagy for the first time in a case of human saposin A 
deficiency. Our patient represents the second known case in the literature and 
provides new information concerning the pathophysiology of saposin A deficiency 
and its intralysosomal effects.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2018_114
PMCID: PMC6323030
PMID: 29995202