---
reference_id: "PMID:3965046"
title: "Hemoglobin S polymerization: primary determinant of the hemolytic and clinical severity of the sickling syndromes."
authors:
- Brittenham GM
- Schechter AN
- Noguchi CT
journal: Blood
year: '1985'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemoglobin S polymerization: primary determinant of the hemolytic and clinical severity of the sickling syndromes.
**Authors:** Brittenham GM, Schechter AN, Noguchi CT
**Journal:** Blood (1985)

## Content

1. Blood. 1985 Jan;65(1):183-9.

Hemoglobin S polymerization: primary determinant of the hemolytic and clinical 
severity of the sickling syndromes.

Brittenham GM, Schechter AN, Noguchi CT.

We examined the extent to which the intracellular polymerization of sickle 
hemoglobin (HbS) can account for the severity of anemia and of vaso-occlusive 
manifestations in the various sickling syndromes. Polymer formation in sickle 
cell disease depends principally on the intraerythrocytic hemoglobin composition 
and concentration. In our studies, the polymer fraction in sickle red cells was 
determined from reported mean values for hemoglobin composition and mean 
corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) in 12 groups of patients with sickle 
hemoglobinopathies (homozygotes for HbS, with and without coexistent 
alpha-thalassemia or various forms of the hereditary persistence of fetal 
hemoglobin [HPFH], beta+-, beta 0-, and delta beta-thalassemia, and 
heterozygotes for HbS with HbA). The calculated HbS polymer fractions at full 
deoxygenation and at physiologic oxygen saturation values were closely 
correlated with mean blood hemoglobin concentrations. In addition, polymer 
fraction correlated with the ranking of the sickling syndromes by vaso-occlusive 
severity. We find that polymer fraction accounts for about 80% of the 
variability in hemolytic and clinical severity. The method of analysis presented 
here provides a quantitative and systematic means of assessing the role of 
polymer formation in the pathophysiologic manifestations of the sickling 
syndromes. Our results support the hypothesis that the intracellular 
polymerization of HbS is the primary determinant of the severity of both anemia 
and clinical symptomatology in the sickle hemoglobinopathies.

PMID: 3965046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]