---
reference_id: "PMID:16172406"
title: "Replica exchange with solute tempering: a method for sampling biological systems in explicit water."
authors:
- Liu P
- Kim B
- Friesner RA
- Berne BJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0506346102
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Dipeptides/chemistry
- "Models, Chemical"
- Monte Carlo Method
- Protein Conformation
- Proteins/chemistry
- Solutions/chemistry
- Water/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Replica exchange with solute tempering: a method for sampling biological systems in explicit water.
**Authors:** Liu P, Kim B, Friesner RA, Berne BJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0506346102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506346102)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Sep 27;102(39):13749-54. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0506346102. Epub 2005 Sep 19.

Replica exchange with solute tempering: a method for sampling biological systems 
in explicit water.

Liu P(1), Kim B, Friesner RA, Berne BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Biomolecular Simulation, Columbia 
University, New York, NY 10027, USA.

An innovative replica exchange (parallel tempering) method called replica 
exchange with solute tempering (REST) for the efficient sampling of aqueous 
protein solutions is presented here. The method bypasses the poor scaling with 
system size of standard replica exchange and thus reduces the number of replicas 
(parallel processes) that must be used. This reduction is accomplished by 
deforming the Hamiltonian function for each replica in such a way that the 
acceptance probability for the exchange of replica configurations does not 
depend on the number of explicit water molecules in the system. For proof of 
concept, REST is compared with standard replica exchange for an alanine 
dipeptide molecule in water. The comparisons confirm that REST greatly reduces 
the number of CPUs required by regular replica exchange and increases the 
sampling efficiency. This method reduces the CPU time required for calculating 
thermodynamic averages and for the ab initio folding of proteins in explicit 
water.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0506346102
PMCID: PMC1236566
PMID: 16172406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]