---
reference_id: "PMID:25430954"
title: Empty nose syndrome.
authors:
- Kuan EC
- Suh JD
- Wang MB
journal: Curr Allergy Asthma Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s11882-014-0493-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Empty nose syndrome.
**Authors:** Kuan EC, Suh JD, Wang MB
**Journal:** Curr Allergy Asthma Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11882-014-0493-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11882-014-0493-x)

## Content

1. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2015 Jan;15(1):493. doi: 10.1007/s11882-014-0493-x.

Empty nose syndrome.

Kuan EC(1), Suh JD, Wang MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 
10833 Le Conte Ave, CHS 62-132, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1624, USA, 
ewu@mednet.ucla.edu.

Empty nose syndrome (ENS) is a rare, late complication of turbinate surgery. The 
most common clinical symptoms are paradoxical nasal obstruction, nasal dryness 
and crusting, and a persistent feeling of dyspnea. Little is known about the 
pathogenesis of ENS, though it is speculated that anatomical changes leading to 
alterations in local environment, disruption of mucosal cooling, and disruption 
of neurosensory mechanisms are strongly implicated. The diagnosis is clinical, 
though often difficult to make due to the poor correlation between subjective 
and objective findings. Medical therapies include mucosal humidification, 
irrigations, and emollients. Surgical therapy should be reserved for refractory 
cases and may involve turbinate reconstruction, most commonly using implantable 
biomaterials. Ultimately, prevention of this feared complication through 
turbinate-sparing techniques is essential.

DOI: 10.1007/s11882-014-0493-x
PMID: 25430954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]