---
reference_id: "PMID:36995778"
title: Modulating fast skeletal muscle contraction protects skeletal muscle in animal models of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Russell AJ
- DuVall M
- Barthel B
- Qian Y
- Peter AK
- Newell-Stamper BL
- Hunt K
- Lehman S
- Madden M
- Schlachter S
- Robertson B
- Van Deusen A
- Rodriguez HM
- Vera C
- Su Y
- Claflin DR
- Brooks SV
- Nghiem P
- Rutledge A
- Juehne TI
- Yu J
- Barton ER
- Luo YE
- Patsalos A
- Nagy L
- Sweeney HL
- Leinwand LA
- Koch K
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/JCI153837
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Dogs
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne/metabolism"
- "Mice, Inbred mdx"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- Dystrophin/genetics
- Muscle Contraction/physiology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Animal/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modulating fast skeletal muscle contraction protects skeletal muscle in animal models of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Russell AJ, DuVall M, Barthel B, Qian Y, Peter AK, Newell-Stamper BL, Hunt K, Lehman S, Madden M, Schlachter S, Robertson B, Van Deusen A, Rodriguez HM, Vera C, Su Y, Claflin DR, Brooks SV, Nghiem P, Rutledge A, Juehne TI, Yu J, Barton ER, Luo YE, Patsalos A, Nagy L, Sweeney HL, Leinwand LA, Koch K
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI153837](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI153837)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2023 May 15;133(10):e153837. doi: 10.1172/JCI153837.

Modulating fast skeletal muscle contraction protects skeletal muscle in animal 
models of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

Russell AJ(1), DuVall M(1), Barthel B(1), Qian Y(1), Peter AK(1), Newell-Stamper 
BL(1), Hunt K(1), Lehman S(1), Madden M(1), Schlachter S(1), Robertson B(1), Van 
Deusen A(1), Rodriguez HM(2), Vera C(3), Su Y(4), Claflin DR(5), Brooks SV(4), 
Nghiem P(6), Rutledge A(6), Juehne TI(7), Yu J(7), Barton ER(8), Luo YE(8), 
Patsalos A(9), Nagy L(9), Sweeney HL(10), Leinwand LA(3), Koch K(1).

Author information:
(1)Edgewise Therapeutics, BioFrontiers Institute, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, Colorado, USA.
(2)BridgeBio Inc., Palo Alto, California, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology and BioFrontiers 
Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
(4)Molecular and Integrative Physiology and.
(5)Department of Surgery, Section of Plastic Surgery, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(6)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, 
USA.
(7)Genome Technology Access Center, Department of Genetics, Washington 
University in Saint Louis School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(8)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology and Myology Institute, 
University of Florida College of Health and Human Performance, Gainesville, 
Florida, USA.
(9)Departments of Medicine and Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Institute for Fundamental Biomedical Research, Johns Hopkins 
All Children's Hospital, St. Petersburg, Florida, USA.
(10)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics and Myology Institute, 
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal muscle disease caused by absence 
of the protein dystrophin, which acts as a structural link between the basal 
lamina and contractile machinery to stabilize muscle membranes in response to 
mechanical stress. In DMD, mechanical stress leads to exaggerated membrane 
injury and fiber breakdown, with fast fibers being the most susceptible to 
damage. A major contributor to this injury is muscle contraction, controlled by 
the motor protein myosin. However, how muscle contraction and fast muscle fiber 
damage contribute to the pathophysiology of DMD has not been well characterized. 
We explored the role of fast skeletal muscle contraction in DMD with a 
potentially novel, selective, orally active inhibitor of fast skeletal muscle 
myosin, EDG-5506. Surprisingly, even modest decreases of contraction (<15%) were 
sufficient to protect skeletal muscles in dystrophic mdx mice from stress 
injury. Longer-term treatment also decreased muscle fibrosis in key 
disease-implicated tissues. Importantly, therapeutic levels of myosin inhibition 
with EDG-5506 did not detrimentally affect strength or coordination. Finally, in 
dystrophic dogs, EDG-5506 reversibly reduced circulating muscle injury 
biomarkers and increased habitual activity. This unexpected biology may 
represent an important alternative treatment strategy for Duchenne and related 
myopathies.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI153837
PMCID: PMC10178848
PMID: 36995778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: AJL, MD, BB, YQ, AKP, 
BLNS, KH, SL, MM, SS, BR, AVD, and KK are employees of and own stock or options 
to purchase stock for Edgewise Therapeutics. LAL and HLS are scientific advisors 
for Edgewise Therapeutics and own options to purchase stock.