---
reference_id: "PMID:19255562"
title: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome.
authors:
- Rossi AC
- "D'addario V"
journal: Minerva Ginecol
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Twin-twin transfusion syndrome.
**Authors:** Rossi AC, D'addario V
**Journal:** Minerva Ginecol (2009)

## Content

1. Minerva Ginecol. 2009 Apr;61(2):153-65.

Twin-twin transfusion syndrome.

Rossi AC(1), D'addario V.

Author information:
(1)IV Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy. 
acristinarossi@yahoo.it

Twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is a condition unique to monochorionic 
pregnancies, although very few case reports described the syndrome in 
dichorionic placentas. The aetiology of TTTS relies in the presence of at least 
1 arterio-venous placental anastomosis, through which unequal blood exchange 
from one twin (donor) to the co-twin (recipient) occurs. The diagnosis of TTTS 
relies on the sonographic detection of oligohydramnios in the donor's sac and 
polyhydramnios in the recipient's sac in the second trimester, although signs of 
TTTS are present since the first trimester. Treatment options for TTTS include 
serial amnioreduction, septostomy, selective feticide of the apparently sick 
twin, and selective photocoagulation of placental vessels (SLPCV). Because of 
the growing evidence that SLPCV is the most efficacious therapy compared to 
amnioreduction with/without septostomy, the authors reviewed in details the 
effects of SLPCV on fetal growth and circulation. The authors further explore 
literature with regard to the prognostic factors. Finally, because Quintero 
staging system is actually under debate, they discuss the most recent findings 
on this topic and propose a new staging system to assess severity of TTTS at 
presentation (Rossi staging system). New topics for future research, which would 
probably further clarify the natural history of TTTS, are also proposed.

PMID: 19255562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]