---
reference_id: "PMID:25524970"
title: A specialized rehabilitation approach improves mobility in children with osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Hoyer-Kuhn H
- Semler O
- Stark C
- Struebing N
- Goebel O
- Schoenau E
journal: J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact
year: '2014'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Bone Density
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exercise Therapy/methods
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/rehabilitation
- Retrospective Studies
- Vibration/therapeutic use
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A specialized rehabilitation approach improves mobility in children with osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Hoyer-Kuhn H, Semler O, Stark C, Struebing N, Goebel O, Schoenau E
**Journal:** J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact (2014)

## Content

1. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 2014 Dec;14(4):445-53.

A specialized rehabilitation approach improves mobility in children with
osteogenesis imperfecta.

Hoyer-Kuhn H(1), Semler O, Stark C, Struebing N, Goebel O, Schoenau E.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare disease leading to recurrent
fractures, hyperlaxicity of ligaments, short stature and muscular weakness.
Physiotherapy is one important treatment approach. The objective of our analysis
was to evaluate the effect of a new physiotherapy approach including side
alternating whole body vibration on motor function in children with OI.
METHODS: In a retrospective analysis data of 53 children were analyzed. The 12
months approach included 6 months of side alternating whole body vibration
training, concomitant physiotherapy, resistance training, treadmill training and
6 months follow up. Primary outcome parameter was the Gross Motor Function
Measure after 12 months (M12).
RESULTS: 53 children (male: 32; age (mean±SEM): 9.1±0.61, range 2.54-24.81
years) participated in the treatment approach. A significant increase of motor
function (GMFM-66 score 55.47±2.45 to 58.67±2.83; p=0.001) and walking distance
(47.04 m±6.52 to 63.36±8.25 m (p<0.01) between M0 and M12 was seen. Total body
without head bone mineral density increased significantly at M12 (p=0.0189).
CONCLUSIONS: In the cohort of OI children which participated in the specialized
treatment approach improvements of motor function were observed. Therefore this
program should be considered as additional therapeutic approach for children
with severe OI.

PMID: 25524970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
