---
reference_id: "PMID:35942364"
title: Management of patients with giant basal cell carcinoma during SARS COV2 outbreak in Italy.
authors:
- Cantisani C
- Rossi R
- Nisticò SP
- Vitiello M
- Farnetani F
- Bennaro L
- Pellacani G
journal: Transl Biophotonics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/tbio.202200009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of patients with giant basal cell carcinoma during SARS COV2 outbreak in Italy.
**Authors:** Cantisani C, Rossi R, Nisticò SP, Vitiello M, Farnetani F, Bennaro L, Pellacani G
**Journal:** Transl Biophotonics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/tbio.202200009](https://doi.org/10.1002/tbio.202200009)

## Content

1. Transl Biophotonics. 2022 Aug;4(3):e202200009. doi: 10.1002/tbio.202200009.
Epub  2022 Jul 26.

Management of patients with giant basal cell carcinoma during SARS COV2 outbreak
in Italy.

Cantisani C(1), Rossi R(1), Nisticò SP(2), Vitiello M(1), Farnetani F(3),
Bennaro L(2), Pellacani G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, UOC of Dermatology, Policlinico
Umberto I Hospital Sapienza Medical School of Rome Rome Italy.
(2)Department of Health Sciences Magna Grecia University Catanzaro Italy.
(3)Dermatology Department University of Modena and Reggio Emilia Modena Italy.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most frequently occurring type of all cancers,
and represents 80% of all skin cancer. The estimated lifetime risk for BCC in
the white population is between 33% and 39% for men and 23% and 28% for women.
Its incidence doubles every 25 years and is increasing in the young population.
Death is uncommon and seems to decrease in the last years, probably due to early
and better diagnosis. BCC arises from abnormal and uncontrolled growth of basal
cells. It is a slow-growing tumor, therefore usually curable at an early stage
with surgery or alternative treatment, such as cryotherapy, laser, photodynamic
therapy, retinoids and topical agent like 5-Fluorouracil cream, imiquimod cream,
and so forth. Topical treatment of superficial basocellular carcinoma is a
viable option, when surgery is not an advisable treatment, especially in the
case of giant basocellular carcinoma. In this subtype, imiquimod 5% cream can be
a safe and effective treatment, but there are few reports in available
literature. We present our case series of eight patients with superficial giant
basocellular carcinoma successfully treated with imiquimod 5% cream, which
showed clinical improvement after 8 weeks of treatment.

© 2022 The Authors. Translational Biophotonics published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/tbio.202200009
PMCID: PMC9350373
PMID: 35942364

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
