---
reference_id: "PMID:33560464"
title: "Asthma in Cystic Fibrosis: Definitions and Implications of This Overlap Syndrome."
authors:
- Marion CR
- Izquierdo M
- Hanes HC
- Barrios C
journal: Curr Allergy Asthma Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s11882-020-00985-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asthma in Cystic Fibrosis: Definitions and Implications of This Overlap Syndrome.
**Authors:** Marion CR, Izquierdo M, Hanes HC, Barrios C
**Journal:** Curr Allergy Asthma Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11882-020-00985-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11882-020-00985-7)

## Content

1. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2021 Feb 9;21(2):9. doi: 10.1007/s11882-020-00985-7.

Asthma in Cystic Fibrosis: Definitions and Implications of This Overlap 
Syndrome.

Marion CR(1)(2), Izquierdo M(1), Hanes HC(3), Barrios C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Wake Forest Baptist Hospital, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Pulmonary, Critical Care and 
Sleep Medicine, W. G. (Bill) Hefner Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salisbury, 
NC, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Section on Pulmonary Medicine, Wake Forest Baptist 
Hospital, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and 
Sleep Medicine, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. 
Christopher.barrios@health.slu.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a multisystem, autosomal recessive 
disease that leads to progressive loss of lung function. Respiratory symptoms 
for both CF and asthma include cough, wheezing, and dyspnea. There is debate 
within the CF community on how to best define and distinguish CF-asthma overlap 
syndrome (CFAOS) from asthma-like features, though CFAOS is well-recognized. We 
aim to review the epidemiology, diagnosis, and treatment of asthma in CF and 
explore areas where further research is needed.
RECENT FINDINGS: There has been considerable improvement in the understanding 
and treatment of asthma over the past two decades leading to novel therapies 
such as biologic agents that target the airway inflammation in asthmatics based 
on their asthma phenotype. These therapies are being studied in CFAOS and are 
promising treatments. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the 
definition, epidemiology, diagnosis, and current treatment of CFAOS.

DOI: 10.1007/s11882-020-00985-7
PMID: 33560464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]