---
reference_id: "PMID:34688020"
title: Systemic effects of IL-6 blockade in rheumatoid arthritis beyond the joints.
authors:
- Jarlborg M
- Gabay C
journal: Cytokine
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155742
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic effects of IL-6 blockade in rheumatoid arthritis beyond the joints.
**Authors:** Jarlborg M, Gabay C
**Journal:** Cytokine (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155742](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155742)

## Content

1. Cytokine. 2022 Jan;149:155742. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155742. Epub 2021 Oct 
20.

Systemic effects of IL-6 blockade in rheumatoid arthritis beyond the joints.

Jarlborg M(1), Gabay C(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University Hospital of Geneva, and Department of 
Pathology and Immunology, University of Geneva School of Medicine, Geneva, 
Switzerland; VIB-UGent Center for Inflammation Research and Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, University Hospital of Geneva, and Department of 
Pathology and Immunology, University of Geneva School of Medicine, Geneva, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: cem.gabay@unige.ch.

Interleukin (IL)-6 is produced locally in response to an inflammatory stimulus, 
and is able to induce systemic manifestations at distance from the site of 
inflammation. Its unique signaling mechanism, including classical and 
trans-signaling pathways, leads to a major expansion in the number of cell types 
responding to IL-6. This pleiotropic cytokine is a key factor in the 
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and is involved in many 
extra-articular manifestations that accompany the disease. Thus, IL-6 blockade 
is associated with various biological effects beyond the joints. In this review, 
the systemic effects of IL-6 in RA comorbidities and the consequences of its 
blockade will be discussed, including anemia of chronic disease, cardiovascular 
risks, bone and muscle functions, and neuro-psychological manifestations.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155742
PMID: 34688020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]