---
reference_id: "PMID:34268556"
title: "Post-acute and long-COVID-19 symptoms in patients with mild diseases: a systematic review."
authors:
- van Kessel SAM
- Olde Hartman TC
- Lucassen PLBJ
- van Jaarsveld CHM
journal: Fam Pract
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/fampra/cmab076
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-acute and long-COVID-19 symptoms in patients with mild diseases: a systematic review.
**Authors:** van Kessel SAM, Olde Hartman TC, Lucassen PLBJ, van Jaarsveld CHM
**Journal:** Fam Pract (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/fampra/cmab076](https://doi.org/10.1093/fampra/cmab076)

## Content

1. Fam Pract. 2022 Jan 19;39(1):159-167. doi: 10.1093/fampra/cmab076.

Post-acute and long-COVID-19 symptoms in patients with mild diseases: a 
systematic review.

van Kessel SAM(1), Olde Hartman TC(1), Lucassen PLBJ(1), van Jaarsveld CHM(1).

Author information:
(1)Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, 
Department of Primary and Community Care, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: It is expected that GPs are increasingly confronted with a large 
group of patients with symptoms persisting three weeks after initial symptoms of 
a mild (managed in the outpatient setting) COVID-19 infection. Currently, 
research on these persistent symptoms mainly focuses on patients with severe 
infections (managed in an inpatient setting) whereas patients with mild disease 
are rarely studied.
OBJECTIVE: The main objective of this systematic review was to create an 
overview of the nature and frequency of persistent symptoms experienced by 
patients after mild COVID-19 infection.
METHODS: Systematic literature searches were performed in Pubmed, Embase and 
PsychINFO on 2 February 2021. Quantitative studies, qualitative studies, 
clinical lessons and case reports were considered eligible designs.
RESULTS: In total, nine articles were included in this literature review. The 
frequency of persistent symptoms in patients after mild COVID-19 infection 
ranged between 10% and 35%. Symptoms persisting after a mild COVID-19 infection 
can be distinguished into physical, mental and social symptoms. Fatigue was the 
most frequently described persistent symptom. Other frequently occurring 
persistent symptoms were dyspnoea, cough, chest pain, headache, decreased mental 
and cognitive status and olfactory dysfunction. In addition, it was found that 
persisting symptoms after a mild COVID-19 infection can have major consequences 
for work and daily functioning.
CONCLUSION: There is already some evidence that symptoms of mild COVID-19 
persist after 3 weeks in a third of patients. However, there is a lack of data 
about symptoms persisting after 3 months (long-COVID). More research is needed 
to help GPs in managing long-COVID.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/fampra/cmab076
PMCID: PMC8414057
PMID: 34268556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]