---
reference_id: "PMID:30740403"
title: Organic acid disorders.
authors:
- Ramsay J
- Morton J
- Norris M
- Kanungo S
journal: Ann Transl Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.21037/atm.2018.12.39
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Organic acid disorders.
**Authors:** Ramsay J, Morton J, Norris M, Kanungo S
**Journal:** Ann Transl Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.21037/atm.2018.12.39](https://doi.org/10.21037/atm.2018.12.39)

## Content

1. Ann Transl Med. 2018 Dec;6(24):472. doi: 10.21037/atm.2018.12.39.

Organic acid disorders.

Ramsay J(1), Morton J(1), Norris M(2), Kanungo S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Western Michigan University 
Homer Stryker MD School of Medicine, Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA.
(2)Biochemical Genetics & Nutrition, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.

Organic acids (OAs) are intermediary products of several amino acid catabolism 
or degradation via multiple biochemical pathways for energy production. Vitamins 
or co-factors are often quintessential elements in such degradation pathways and 
OA metabolism. OAs that result from enzyme defects in these pathways can be 
identified in body fluids utilizing gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
techniques (GC/MS). OAs are silent contributor to acid base imbalance and can 
affect nitrogen balance and recycling. Since OA production occurs in distal 
steps of a specific amino acid catabolism, offending amino acid accumulation is 
not characteristic. OA disorders as inborn errors of metabolism (IEM) are 
included in differential diagnosis of metabolic acidosis, as the common mnemonic 
MUDPILES taught in medical schools. High anion gap metabolic acidosis with 
hyperammonemia is a characteristic OA biochemical finding. VOMIT (valine, odd 
chain fatty acids, methionine, isoleucine, and threonine) is a smart acronym and 
a common clinical presentation of OA disorders and can present as early 
life-threatening illness, prior to Newborn Screening results availability. Easy 
identification and available medical formula make the field of metabolic 
nutrition vital for management of OA disorders. Treatment strategies also 
involve cofactor/vitamin utilization to aid specific pathways and disorder 
management. Optimal metabolic control and regular monitoring is key to long-term 
management and prevention of morbidity, disability and mortality. Prompt 
utilization of acute illness protocol (AIP) or emergency protocol and disorder 
specific education of family members or caregivers, primary care physicians and 
local emergency health care facilities; cautiously addressing common childhood 
illnesses in patients with OA disorders, can help avoid poor short- and 
long-term morbidity, disability and mortality outcomes.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2018.12.39
PMCID: PMC6331355
PMID: 30740403

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.