---
reference_id: "PMID:36700052"
title: Subretinal gene therapy delays vision loss in a Bardet-Biedl Syndrome type 10 mouse model.
authors:
- Hsu Y
- Bhattarai S
- Thompson JM
- Mahoney A
- Thomas J
- Mayer SK
- Datta P
- Garrison J
- Searby CC
- Vandenberghe LH
- Seo S
- Sheffield VC
- Drack AV
journal: Mol Ther Nucleic Acids
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtn.2022.12.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subretinal gene therapy delays vision loss in a Bardet-Biedl Syndrome type 10 mouse model.
**Authors:** Hsu Y, Bhattarai S, Thompson JM, Mahoney A, Thomas J, Mayer SK, Datta P, Garrison J, Searby CC, Vandenberghe LH, Seo S, Sheffield VC, Drack AV
**Journal:** Mol Ther Nucleic Acids (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtn.2022.12.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtn.2022.12.007)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2022 Dec 12;31:164-181. doi:
10.1016/j.omtn.2022.12.007.  eCollection 2023 Mar 14.

Subretinal gene therapy delays vision loss in a Bardet-Biedl Syndrome type 10 
mouse model.

Hsu Y(1), Bhattarai S(1), Thompson JM(1), Mahoney A(1), Thomas J(1), Mayer 
SK(1)(2), Datta P(1), Garrison J(3), Searby CC(3), Vandenberghe LH(4), Seo S(1), 
Sheffield VC(1)(3), Drack AV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, USA.
(2)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetics, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(4)Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Grousbeck Gene Therapy Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Blindness in Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is caused by dysfunction and loss of 
photoreceptor cells in the retina. BBS10, mutations of which account for 
approximately 21% of all BBS cases, encodes a chaperonin protein indispensable 
for the assembly of the BBSome, a cargo adaptor important for ciliary 
trafficking. The loss of BBSome function in the eye causes a reduced light 
sensitivity of photoreceptor cells, photoreceptor ciliary malformation, 
dysfunctional ciliary trafficking, and photoreceptor cell death. Cone 
photoreceptors lacking BBS10 have congenitally low electrical function in 
electroretinography. In this study, we performed gene augmentation therapy by 
injecting a viral construct subretinally to deliver the coding sequence of the 
mouse Bbs10 gene to treat retinal degeneration in a BBS10 mouse model. Long-term 
efficacy was assessed by measuring the electrical functions of the retina over 
time, imaging of the treated regions to visualize cell survival, conducting 
visually guided swim assays to measure functional vision, and performing retinal 
histology. We show that subretinal gene therapy slowed photoreceptor cell death 
and preserved retinal function in treated eyes. Notably, cone photoreceptors 
regained their electrical function after gene augmentation. Measurement of 
functional vision showed that subretinal gene therapy provided a significant 
benefit in delaying vision loss.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2022.12.007
PMCID: PMC9841241
PMID: 36700052

Conflict of interest statement: L.H.V. is an inventor on patents that have been 
licensed to various biopharmaceutical companies and for which he may receive 
payments, including vector technologies herein described. L.H.V. is a paid 
advisor to Novartis, Akouos, and Affinia Therapeutics and serves on the Board of 
Directors of Affinia, Addgene, and Odylia Therapeutics, and he is an employee of 
ciendias bio. L.H.V. holds equity in ciendias bio, Akouos, and Affinia.