---
reference_id: "PMID:38869089"
title: "Left ventricular hypertrophy: do not forget Fabry disease. Diagnostic work-up and differential diagnosis."
authors:
- Paelinck BP
- Bondue A
- Robyns T
- Eyskens F
journal: Acta Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/00015385.2024.2346873
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Left ventricular hypertrophy: do not forget Fabry disease. Diagnostic work-up and differential diagnosis.
**Authors:** Paelinck BP, Bondue A, Robyns T, Eyskens F
**Journal:** Acta Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00015385.2024.2346873](https://doi.org/10.1080/00015385.2024.2346873)

## Content

1. Acta Cardiol. 2024 Aug;79(6):642-649. doi: 10.1080/00015385.2024.2346873. Epub
 2024 Jun 13.

Left ventricular hypertrophy: do not forget Fabry disease. Diagnostic work-up 
and differential diagnosis.

Paelinck BP(1)(2), Bondue A(3), Robyns T(4), Eyskens F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Department of Cardiac Surgery, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Erasme and IRIBHM, Université 
Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy is a common clinical finding. 
Differential diagnosis includes Fabry disease, a rare and progressive, but 
treatable storage disease caused by deficiency of α-galactosidase A. However, 
diagnosis of Fabry is often hampered by its clinical heterogeneity, LV 
hypertrophy phenocopies and unawareness of the clinician.
METHODS: This review summarises clinical data, family history, electrocardiogram 
(ECG) and imaging (echocardiogram and cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR)) 
characteristics to differentiate aetiologies of LV hypertrophy including clues 
for the diagnosis of Fabry.
RESULTS: LV hypertrophy is a consequence of pressure overload mostly, but 
differential diagnosis includes hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and infiltrative 
diseases. Clinical data, ECG, type and degree of LV hypertrophy, functional and 
tissue characteristics differ among aetiologies. LV hypertrophy in Fabry is 
progressive and mostly concentric but may copy any hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
Dependent on residual alfa-galactosidase A enzyme activity, degree of LV 
hypertrophy in Fabry may vary. Initially, low myocardial CMR T1-map values are 
calculated. At a later stage, midwall late gadolinium enhancement of the 
inferolateral LV wall may occur. Global longitudinal strain may be depressed in 
the inferolateral wall. Voltage criteria for LV hypertrophy and short PQ 
interval are common. Right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy is frequent. In 
addition, multisystemic symptoms including neuropathic pain, hypohidrosis, 
proteinuria, renal insufficiency and familial young stroke are pointing to 
Fabry.
CONCLUSIONS: LV hypertrophy should raise suspicion of Fabry disease, especially 
if LV hypertrophy is unexplained and/or associated with RV hypertrophy. In 
Fabry, LV hypertrophy may be heterogeneous and mimic any hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. ECG, multisystemic symptoms and imaging may provide clues for 
Fabry.

DOI: 10.1080/00015385.2024.2346873
PMID: 38869089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]