---
reference_id: "PMID:30386345"
title: EBV Negative Lymphoma and Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome Like Phenotype Extend the Clinical Spectrum of Primary Immunodeficiency Caused by STK4 Deficiency.
authors:
- Schipp C
- Schlütermann D
- Hönscheid A
- Nabhani S
- Höll J
- Oommen PT
- Ginzel S
- Fleckenstein B
- Stork B
- Borkhardt A
- Stepensky P
- Fischer U
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02400
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Computational Biology/methods
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/complications, virology"
- Female
- "Herpesvirus 4, Human"
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/diagnosis, etiology"
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- "Lymphoma/diagnosis, etiology"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/deficiency
- Exome Sequencing
- Hippo Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EBV Negative Lymphoma and Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome Like Phenotype Extend the Clinical Spectrum of Primary Immunodeficiency Caused by STK4 Deficiency.
**Authors:** Schipp C, Schlütermann D, Hönscheid A, Nabhani S, Höll J, Oommen PT, Ginzel S, Fleckenstein B, Stork B, Borkhardt A, Stepensky P, Fischer U
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2018.02400](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.02400)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2018 Oct 16;9:2400. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02400. eCollection 
2018.

EBV Negative Lymphoma and Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome Like Phenotype 
Extend the Clinical Spectrum of Primary Immunodeficiency Caused by STK4 
Deficiency.

Schipp C(1), Schlütermann D(2), Hönscheid A(1), Nabhani S(1), Höll J(1), Oommen 
PT(1), Ginzel S(1)(3), Fleckenstein B(4), Stork B(2), Borkhardt A(1), Stepensky 
P(5), Fischer U(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Medical 
Faculty, University Children's Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, 
Germany.
(2)Medical Faculty, Institute of Molecular Medicine I, 
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University of Applied 
Sciences, Sankt Augustin, Germany.
(4)Department of Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander-University 
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(5)Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cancer Immunotherapy, Hadassah 
University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel.

Serine/threonine kinase 4 (STK4) deficiency is an autosomal recessive genetic 
condition that leads to primary immunodeficiency (PID) typically characterized 
by lymphopenia, recurrent infections and Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) induced 
lymphoproliferation and -lymphoma. State-of-the-art treatment regimens consist 
of prevention or treatment of infections, immunoglobulin substitution (IVIG) and 
restoration of the immune system by hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. 
Here, we report on two patients from two consanguineous families of Turkish 
(patient P1) and Moroccan (patient P2) decent, with PID due to homozygous STK4 
mutations. P1 harbored a previously reported frameshift (c.1103 delT, 
p.M368RfsX2) and P2 a novel splice donor site mutation (P2; c.525+2 T>G). Both 
patients presented in childhood with recurrent infections, CD4 lymphopenia and 
dysregulated immunoglobulin levels. Patient P1 developed a highly malignant B 
cell lymphoma at the age of 10 years and a second, independent Hodgkin lymphoma 
5 years later. To our knowledge she is the first STK4 deficient case reported 
who developed lymphoma in the absence of detectable EBV or other common viruses. 
Lymphoma development may be due to the lacking tumor suppressive function of 
STK4 or the perturbed immune surveillance due to the lack of CD4+ T cells. Our 
data should raise physicians' awareness of [1] lymphoma proneness of STK4 
deficient patients even in the absence of EBV infection and [2] possibly 
underlying STK4 deficiency in pediatric patients with a history of recurrent 
infections, CD4 lymphopenia and lymphoma and unknown genetic make-up. Patient P2 
experienced recurrent otitis in childhood, but when she presented at the age of 
14, she showed clinical and immunological characteristics similar to patients 
suffering from Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome (ALPS): elevated DNT cell 
number, non-malignant lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly, hematolytic 
anemia, hypergammaglobulinemia. Also patient P1 presented with ALPS-like 
features (lymphadenopathy, elevated DNT cell number and increased Vitamin B12 
levels) and both were initially clinically diagnosed as ALPS-like. Closer 
examination of P2, however, revealed active EBV infection and genetic testing 
identified a novel STK4 mutation. None of the patients harbored typically 
ALPS-associated mutations of the Fas receptor mediated apoptotic pathway and 
Fas-mediated apoptosis was not affected. The presented case reports extend the 
clinical spectrum of STK4 deficiency.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02400
PMCID: PMC6198654
PMID: 30386345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]