---
reference_id: "PMID:8657282"
title: GDNF signalling through the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase.
authors:
- Durbec P
- Marcos-Gutierrez CV
- Kilkenny C
- Grigoriou M
- Wartiowaara K
- Suvanto P
- Smith D
- Ponder B
- Costantini F
- Saarma M
journal: Nature
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1038/381789a0
keywords:
- Animals
- Drosophila Proteins
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian/cytology, metabolism"
- Glial Cell Line-Derived Neurotrophic Factor
- Glial Cell Line-Derived Neurotrophic Factor Receptors
- Humans
- "Kidney/cytology, embryology"
- Mesoderm/cytology
- Mice
- Nerve Growth Factors
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neuroglia/metabolism
- "Neurons/cytology, metabolism"
- Phosphorylation
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/metabolism
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Rats
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/metabolism
- Recombinant Proteins/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Xenopus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GDNF signalling through the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase.
**Authors:** Durbec P, Marcos-Gutierrez CV, Kilkenny C, Grigoriou M, Wartiowaara K, Suvanto P, Smith D, Ponder B, Costantini F, Saarma M
**Journal:** Nature (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/381789a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/381789a0)

## Content

1. Nature. 1996 Jun 27;381(6585):789-93. doi: 10.1038/381789a0.

GDNF signalling through the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase.

Durbec P(1), Marcos-Gutierrez CV, Kilkenny C, Grigoriou M, Wartiowaara K,
Suvanto P, Smith D, Ponder B, Costantini F, Saarma M, et al.

Author information:
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 1996 Jul 4;382(6586):29-30. doi: 10.1038/382029a0.

Mutational analysis in humans and mice has demonstrated that the Ret, the
product of the c-ret proto-oncogene, a member of the receptor tyrosine kinase
(RTK) superfamily, is essential for development of the enteric nervous system
and kidney. Despite the established role of Ret in mammalian embryogenesis, its
cognate ligand(s) is currently unknown. Here we demonstrate, by using a Xenopus
embryo bioassay, that glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), a
distant member of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta superfamily, signals
through the Ret RTK. Furthermore, using explant cultures from wild-type and
Ret-deficient mouse embryos, we show that normal c-ret function is necessary for
GDNF signalling in the peripheral nervous system. Our data strongly suggest that
Ret is a functional receptor for GDNF, and that GDNF, in addition to its
potential role in the differentiation and survival of central nervous system
neurons, has profound effects on kidney organogenesis and the development of the
peripheral nervous system.

DOI: 10.1038/381789a0
PMID: 8657282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
