---
reference_id: "PMID:29980278"
title: Epithelial origin of eosinophilic esophagitis.
authors:
- Rochman M
- Azouz NP
- Rothenberg ME
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.05.008
keywords:
- Eosinophilic Esophagitis
- "Epithelial Cells/enzymology, immunology, pathology"
- "Epithelium/enzymology, immunology, pathology"
- Humans
- Peptide Hydrolases/metabolism
- Protease Inhibitors/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epithelial origin of eosinophilic esophagitis.
**Authors:** Rochman M, Azouz NP, Rothenberg ME
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2018.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2018.05.008)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2018 Jul;142(1):10-23. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2018.05.008.

Epithelial origin of eosinophilic esophagitis.

Rochman M(1), Azouz NP(1), Rothenberg ME(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(2)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio. Electronic address: rothenberg@cchmc.org.

Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic, allergen-driven inflammatory 
disease of the esophagus characterized predominantly by eosinophilic 
inflammation, leading to esophageal dysfunction. Converging data have placed the 
esophageal epithelium at the center of disease pathogenesis. In particular, the 
main EoE disease susceptibility loci at 2p23 and 5p22 encode for gene products 
that are produced by the esophageal epithelium: the intracellular protease 
calpain 14 and thymic stromal lymphopoietin, respectively. Furthermore, genetic 
and functional data establish a primary role for impaired epithelial barrier 
function in disease susceptibility and pathoetiology. Additionally, the EoE 
transcriptome, a set of genes dysregulated in the esophagi of patients with EoE, 
is enriched in genes that encode for proteins involved in esophageal epithelial 
cell differentiation. This transcriptome has a high proportion of 
esophagus-specific epithelial genes that are notable for the unexpected 
enrichment in genes encoding for proteases and protease inhibitors, as well as 
in IL-1 family genes, demonstrating a previously unappreciated role for innate 
immunity responses in the esophagus under homeostatic conditions. Among these 
pathways, basal production of the serine protease inhibitor, Kazal-type 7 
(SPINK7) has been demonstrated to be part of the normal differentiation program 
of esophageal epithelium. Profound lost expression of SPINK7 occurs in patients 
with EoE and is sufficient for unleashing increased proteolytic activity 
(including urokinase plasminogen activator), impaired barrier function, and 
production of large quantities of proinflammatory and proallergic cytokines, 
including thymic stromal lymphopoietin. Collectively, we put forth a model in 
which the esophagus is normally equipped as an anti-inflammatory sensing organ 
and that defects in this pathway, mediated by epithelial protease/protease 
inhibitor imbalances, unleash inflammatory responses resulting in disorders, 
such as EoE.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.05.008
PMCID: PMC8034427
PMID: 29980278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: M. 
E. Rothenberg is a consultant for PulmOne, Spoon Guru, ClostraBio, Celgene, 
Shire, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Allakos, Adare, Regeneron, and Novartis; 
has an equity interest in the first 4 listed companies and Immune 
Pharmaceuticals; and has received royalties from reslizumab (Teva 
Pharmaceuticals) and UpToDate. M. Rochman, N. P. Azouz, and M. E. Rothenberg are 
inventors of patents owned by Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.