---
reference_id: "PMID:12002813"
title: "Oro-facial gangrene (noma/cancrum oris): pathogenetic mechanisms."
authors:
- Enwonwu CO
- Falkler WA
- Idigbe EO
journal: Crit Rev Oral Biol Med
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1177/10454411000110020201
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Africa South of the Sahara
- Bacteroidaceae Infections/complications
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Communicable Diseases/complications, immunology"
- Cytotoxins/physiology
- Dermotoxins/physiology
- Disease Progression
- Endotoxins/physiology
- Fusobacterium Infections/complications
- Fusobacterium necrophorum/physiology
- "Gingivitis, Necrotizing Ulcerative/complications"
- Hemolysin Proteins/physiology
- Humans
- "Noma/etiology, immunology, microbiology"
- "Nutrition Disorders/complications, immunology"
- Oral Hygiene
- Poverty
- Prevotella intermedia/physiology
- Residence Characteristics
- Risk Factors
- Sanitation
- "Stomatitis, Herpetic/complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oro-facial gangrene (noma/cancrum oris): pathogenetic mechanisms.
**Authors:** Enwonwu CO, Falkler WA, Idigbe EO
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oral Biol Med (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10454411000110020201](https://doi.org/10.1177/10454411000110020201)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med. 2000;11(2):159-71. doi: 10.1177/10454411000110020201.

Oro-facial gangrene (noma/cancrum oris): pathogenetic mechanisms.

Enwonwu CO(1), Falkler WA, Idigbe EO.

Author information:
(1)Department of OCBS, School of Dentistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore
21201-1586, USA. coe001@dental.umaryland.edu

Cancrum oris (Noma) is a devastating infectious disease which destroys the soft
and hard tissues of the oral and para-oral structures. The dehumanizing
oro-facial gangrenous lesion affects predominantly children ages 2 to 16 years,
particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, where the estimated frequency in some
communities varies from 1 to 7 cases per 1000 population. The risk factors are
poverty, malnutrition, poor oral hygiene, residential proximity to livestock in
unsanitary environments, and infectious diseases, particularly measles and those
due to the herpesviridae. Infections and malnutrition impair the immune system,
and this is the common denominator for the occurrence of noma. Acute necrotizing
gingivitis (ANG) and oral herpetic ulcers are considered the antecedent lesions,
and ongoing studies suggest that the rapid progression of these precursor
lesions to noma requires infection by a consortium of micro-organisms, with
Fusobacterium necrophorum (Fn) and Prevotella intermedia (Pi) as the suspected
key players. Additional to production of a growth-stimulating factor for Pi, Fn
displays a classic endotoxin, a dermonecrotic toxin, a cytoplasmic toxin, and a
hemolysin. Without appropriate treatment, the mortality rate from noma is
70-90%. Survivors suffer the two-fold afflictions of oro-facial mutilation and
functional impairment, which require a time-consuming, financially prohibitive
surgical reconstruction.

DOI: 10.1177/10454411000110020201
PMID: 12002813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
