---
reference_id: "PMID:38791996"
title: "Clinical Characteristics, Patterns of Care, and Treatment Outcomes of Radiation-Associated Sarcomas."
authors:
- Raj R
- Kim HG
- Xu M
- Roach T
- Liebner D
- Konieczkowski D
- Tinoco G
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16101918
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characteristics, Patterns of Care, and Treatment Outcomes of Radiation-Associated Sarcomas.
**Authors:** Raj R, Kim HG, Xu M, Roach T, Liebner D, Konieczkowski D, Tinoco G
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16101918](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16101918)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 May 18;16(10):1918. doi: 10.3390/cancers16101918.

Clinical Characteristics, Patterns of Care, and Treatment Outcomes of
Radiation-Associated Sarcomas.

Raj R(1), Kim HG(2), Xu M(2), Roach T(3), Liebner D(2), Konieczkowski D(1),
Tinoco G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The Ohio State University Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, The Ohio State University Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical
Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Radiation-associated sarcomas (RASs) are rare tumors with limited contemporary
data to inform prognostication and management. We sought to identify the
clinical presentation, patterns of care, and prognostic factors of RASs. RAS
patients treated at a single institution from 2015 to 2021 were retrospectively
reviewed for clinicopathologic variables, treatment strategies, and outcomes.
Thirty-eight patients were identified with a median follow-up of 30.5 months.
The median age at RAS diagnosis was 68.4 years (27.9-85.4), with a median
latency from index radiotherapy (RT) of 9.1 years (3.7-46.3). RAS histologies
included angiosarcoma (26%), undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (21%), and
osteosarcoma (18%). Most were high-grade (76%). Genomic profiling revealed low
tumor mutational burden, frequent inactivating TP53 mutations (44%), CDKN2A
deletions (26%), and MYC amplifications (22%), particularly in breast
angiosarcomas. Of 38 patients, 33 presented with localized disease, 26 of whom
were treated with curative intent. Overall, the median progression-free survival
(PFS) was 9.5 months (1.4-34.7), and the overall survival (OS) was 11.1 months
(0.6-31.6). Patients with localized vs. metastatic RASs had a longer PFS (HR,
3.0 [1.1-8.5]; p = 0.03) and OS (HR, 3.0 [1.04-8.68]; p = 0.03). Among localized
RAS patients, high grade was associated with shorter OS (HR, 4.6 [1.04-20.30]; p
= 0.03) and resection with longer OS (mean 58.8 vs. 6.1 months, HR, 0.1
[0.03-0.28]; p < 0.001). Among patients undergoing resection, negative margins
were associated with improved OS (mean 71.0 vs. 15.5 months, HR, 5.1 [1.4-18.2];
p = 0.006). Patients with localized disease, particularly those undergoing R0
resection, demonstrated significantly better outcomes. Novel strategies are
urgently needed to improve treatment outcomes in this challenging group of
diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16101918
PMCID: PMC11119080
PMID: 38791996

Conflict of interest statement: D.L. reports an intellectual property
relationship as the holder of a patent (Methods for Predicting Prognosis)
licensed to MatchTX LLC. The other authors declare no conflicts of interest.
