---
reference_id: "PMID:34831081"
title: "Management of Rheumatoid Arthritis: An Overview."
authors:
- Radu AF
- Bungau SG
journal: Cells
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cells10112857
keywords:
- "Antirheumatic Agents/chemistry, therapeutic use"
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/epidemiology, pathology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Rheumatoid Arthritis: An Overview.
**Authors:** Radu AF, Bungau SG
**Journal:** Cells (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells10112857](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10112857)

## Content

1. Cells. 2021 Oct 23;10(11):2857. doi: 10.3390/cells10112857.

Management of Rheumatoid Arthritis: An Overview.

Radu AF(1), Bungau SG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Doctoral School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, University of Oradea, 
410087 Oradea, Romania.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of 
Oradea, 410028 Oradea, Romania.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a multifactorial autoimmune disease of unknown 
etiology, primarily affecting the joints, then extra-articular manifestations 
can occur. Due to its complexity, which is based on an incompletely elucidated 
pathophysiological mechanism, good RA management requires a multidisciplinary 
approach. The clinical status of RA patients has improved in recent years due to 
medical advances in diagnosis and treatment, that have made it possible to 
reduce disease activity and prevent systemic complications. The most promising 
results were obtained by developing disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs 
(DMARDs), the class to which conventional synthetic, biologic, and targeted 
synthetic drugs belong. Furthermore, ongoing drug development has led to 
obtaining molecules with improved efficacy and safety profiles, but further 
research is needed until RA turns into a curable pathology. In the present work, 
we offer a comprehensive perspective on the management of RA, by centralizing 
the existing data provided by significant literature, emphasizing the importance 
of an early and accurate diagnosis associated with optimal personalized 
treatment in order to achieve better outcomes for RA patients. In addition, this 
study suggests future research perspectives in the treatment of RA that could 
lead to higher efficacy and safety profiles and lower financial costs.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10112857
PMCID: PMC8616326
PMID: 34831081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.