---
reference_id: "PMID:39307568"
title: "Diagnostic utility of direct immunofluorescence test panels for cutaneous vasculitis: A scoping review."
authors:
- Lehman JS
- Ferringer TC
- Fung MA
- Cassarino DS
- Shalin SC
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/cup.14722
keywords:
- Humans
- Biopsy/methods
- "Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Direct/methods"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Skin/pathology
- "Skin Diseases, Vascular/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Vasculitis/diagnosis, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic utility of direct immunofluorescence test panels for cutaneous vasculitis: A scoping review.
**Authors:** Lehman JS, Ferringer TC, Fung MA, Cassarino DS, Shalin SC
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cup.14722](https://doi.org/10.1111/cup.14722)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2024 Dec;51(12):987-999. doi: 10.1111/cup.14722. Epub 2024 Sep
 22.

Diagnostic utility of direct immunofluorescence test panels for cutaneous
vasculitis: A scoping review.

Lehman JS(1)(2), Ferringer TC(3)(4), Fung MA(5)(6), Cassarino DS(7), Shalin
SC(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Geisinger Medical Center, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Geisinger Medical Center, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Dermatology, University of California Davis, Sacramento,
California, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of California Davis, Sacramento,
California, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(8)Department of Dermatology, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences, Little
Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences, Little
Rock, Arkansas, USA.

BACKGROUND: Due to the immune-mediated nature of non-infectious cutaneous
vasculitis, skin biopsy specimens are often submitted for direct
immunofluorescence (DIF) testing when vasculitis is considered clinically.
However, evidence regarding the clinical value of DIF has not been rigorously
appraised.
OBJECTIVE: In this scoping review, we aimed to systematically evaluate the
peer-reviewed literature on the utility of DIF in vasculitis to assist with the
development of appropriate use criteria by the American Society of
Dermatopathology.
METHODS: Two electronic databases were searched for articles on DIF and
vasculitis (January 1975-October 2023). Relevant case series involving more than
or equal to three patients, published in English, and with full-text
availability were included. Additional articles were identified manually via
reference review. Due to study heterogeneity, findings were analyzed
descriptively.
RESULTS: Of 255 articles identified, 61 met the inclusion criteria. Cumulatively
representing over 1000 DIF specimens, several studies estimated DIF sensitivity
to be 75%. While vascular immunoglobulin A (IgA) deposits on DIF were associated
with renal disease, other systemic associations were inconsistent. Vascular IgG
deposition may be overrepresented in ANCA-associated vasculitis. Granular
vascular and epidermal basement membrane zone Ig deposition differentiated
hypocomplementemic from normocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis. Few studies
have assessed the added value of DIF over routine microscopy alone in
vasculitis.
CONCLUSIONS: This scoping review discovered that DIF testing for vasculitis has
been performed not only for diagnostic confirmation of vasculitis but also for
disease subtype classification and prediction of systemic associations. Future
studies on test sensitivity of DIF compared to that of histopathology are
needed.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.14722
PMID: 39307568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
