---
reference_id: "PMID:26362507"
title: Diagnostic Methods in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
authors:
- Lucas JS
- Paff T
- Goggin P
- Haarman E
journal: Paediatr Respir Rev
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2015.07.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic Methods in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Lucas JS, Paff T, Goggin P, Haarman E
**Journal:** Paediatr Respir Rev (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.prrv.2015.07.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prrv.2015.07.017)

## Content

1. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2016 Mar;18:8-17. doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2015.07.017. Epub 
2015 Aug 19.

Diagnostic Methods in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.

Lucas JS(1), Paff T(2), Goggin P(3), Haarman E(4).

Author information:
(1)Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Centre, University Hospital Southampton NHS 
Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK; Academic Unit of Clinical and Experimental 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. 
Electronic address: jlucas1@soton.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands; Department of Pulmonary Diseases, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Centre, University Hospital Southampton NHS 
Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK; Academic Unit of Clinical and Experimental 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(4)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands.

Diagnosing primary ciliary dyskinesia is difficult. With no reference standard, 
a combination of tests is needed; most tests require expensive equipment and 
specialist scientists. We review the advances in diagnostic testing over the 
past hundred years, with emphasis on recent advances. We particularly focus on 
use of high-speed video analysis, transmission electron microscopy, nasal nitric 
oxide and genetic testing. We discuss the international efforts that are in 
place to advance the evidence base for diagnostic tests.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prrv.2015.07.017
PMID: 26362507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]