---
reference_id: "PMID:39185018"
title: "Clinical features and GCDH gene variants in three Chinese families with glutaric aciduria type 1: A case series and literature review."
authors:
- Chen Y
- Zhang Q
- Cao L
- Feng X
- Lin P
- Zhu S
- Liu F
- Wang X
- Hao S
- Cao Y
- Wang H
- Ni Y
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101123
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and GCDH gene variants in three Chinese families with glutaric aciduria type 1: A case series and literature review.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Zhang Q, Cao L, Feng X, Lin P, Zhu S, Liu F, Wang X, Hao S, Cao Y, Wang H, Ni Y
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101123](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101123)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2024 Jul 30;40:101123. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101123. 
eCollection 2024 Sep.

Clinical features and GCDH gene variants in three Chinese families with glutaric 
aciduria type 1: A case series and literature review.

Chen Y(1)(2), Zhang Q(3)(4), Cao L(5), Feng X(3)(4), Lin P(3)(4), Zhu S(3)(4), 
Liu F(3)(4), Wang X(3)(4), Hao S(3)(4), Cao Y(1)(2), Wang H(5), Ni Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)First School of Clinical Medical, Gansu University of Chinese Medicine, 
Lanzhou 730000, Gansu Province, China.
(2)Reproductive Medicine Center, Gansu Provincial Maternity and Child-care 
Hospital(Gansu Provincial Central Hospital), Lanzhou 730050, Gansu Province, 
China.
(3)Medical Genetics Center, Gansu Provincial Maternity and Child-care 
Hospital(Gansu Provincial Central Hospital), Lanzhou 730050, Gansu Province, 
China.
(4)Clinical Research Center for Birth Defects and Rare Diseases in Gansu 
Province, Lanzhou 730050, Gansu Province, China.
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Gansu Provincial Maternity and Child-care 
Hospital(Gansu Provincial Central Hospital), Lanzhou 730050, Gansu Province, 
China.

AIM: To analyze the clinical phenotype and genetic etiology of three cases of 
glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1) in Chinese children.
METHODS: We performed genetic and metabolic testing using tandem mass 
spectrometry (MS/MS) and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC/MS), followed 
by trio whole-exome sequencing (trio-WES) and Sanger sequencing. A literature 
review on glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1) in Chinese patients was also conducted.
RESULTS: Sequencing results showed each case had compound heterozygous variants 
in GCDH(NM_000159.4): c.214C > G (p.Arg72Gly) and c.411C > G (p.Tyr137Term) 
(Case 1), c.214C > G (p.Arg72Gly) and c.1204C > T (p.Arg402Trp) (Case 2), and 
c.1228G > T (p.Val410Leu) and c.395G > A (p.Arg132Gln) (Case 3). These variants 
were inherited from their respective parents. Notably, the c.214C > G variant 
found in two children was a novel variant not previously reported. A review of 
the literature revealed that, clinically, the majority of patients experienced 
onset in infancy and early childhood (82%). Additionally, 38.36% were diagnosed 
through newborn screening, with the primary reasons for the initial visit being 
delayed development (32.43%) and infections (21.61%). The most common clinical 
manifestations included increased head circumference (77.19%) and motor 
developmental delay (65.15%). Biochemically, patients exhibited significant 
elevations in C5DC (98.51%) and C5DC/C8 (94.87%) in blood, as well as GA 
(94.37%) and 3OHGA (69.39%) in urine. Radiographically, patients showed a high 
prevalence of abnormalities in cranial MRI (86.15%) and EEG (73.33%). 
Genetically, 67 distinct GCDH gene variants were identified among 73 patients, 
with missense variants being the most prevalent type (73.97%). The most frequent 
variant was c.1244-2 A > C, observed in 17.12% of cases. Additionally, the 
majority of variant sites were located in exons 11 (25.37%) and 6 (22.39%).
CONCLUSION: GCDH variants were identified as the causative factors in the three 
children. The discovery of the novel variant (c.214C > G) expands the spectrum 
of pathogenic GCDH variants. These findings facilitate the diagnosis and 
treatment of affected children and provide a basis for genetic counseling and 
prenatal diagnosis for their families.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101123
PMCID: PMC11344010
PMID: 39185018

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that we have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.