---
reference_id: "PMID:28757335"
title: "Imaging in cutis laxa syndrome caused by a dominant negative ALDH18A1 mutation, with hypotheses for intracranial vascular tortuosity and wide perivascular spaces."
authors:
- Sinnige PF
- van Ravenswaaij-Arts CMA
- Caruso P
- Lin AE
- Boon M
- Rahikkala E
- Callewaert B
- Meiners LC
journal: Eur J Paediatr Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2017.07.003
keywords:
- Aldehyde Dehydrogenase/genetics
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Cutis Laxa/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Neuroimaging/methods
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging in cutis laxa syndrome caused by a dominant negative ALDH18A1 mutation, with hypotheses for intracranial vascular tortuosity and wide perivascular spaces.
**Authors:** Sinnige PF, van Ravenswaaij-Arts CMA, Caruso P, Lin AE, Boon M, Rahikkala E, Callewaert B, Meiners LC
**Journal:** Eur J Paediatr Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpn.2017.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2017.07.003)

## Content

1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2017 Nov;21(6):912-920. doi:
10.1016/j.ejpn.2017.07.003.  Epub 2017 Jul 18.

Imaging in cutis laxa syndrome caused by a dominant negative ALDH18A1 mutation,
with hypotheses for intracranial vascular tortuosity and wide perivascular
spaces.

Sinnige PF(1), van Ravenswaaij-Arts CMA(2), Caruso P(3), Lin AE(3), Boon M(4),
Rahikkala E(5), Callewaert B(6), Meiners LC(7).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of
Radiology, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of
Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Radiology and the Medical Genetics Unit, Department of
Pediatrics, Massachusetts General Hospital, USA.
(4)University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of
Neurology, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)PEDEGO Research Unit, Medical Research Center, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Oulu University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(6)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(7)University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of
Radiology, Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: l.c.meiners@umcg.nl.

The autosomal dominant progeroid form of cutis laxa is a recently identified
multiple congenital anomaly disorder characterized by thin, wrinkled skin, a
progeroid appearance, intra-uterine growth retardation, postnatal growth
restriction, psychomotor developmental delay, microcephaly, cataract, hypotonia
and contractures. De novo heterozygous mutations in ALDH18A1 have been described
in this condition. We present neuroimaging abnormalities in three patients. One
patient had intracranial arterial and venous tortuosity, widened ventricular and
extra-axial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) spaces, wide perivascular spaces and
increased T2 signal intensity in the cerebral white matter over time. The second
patient had vascular tortuosity. The third patient had prominent ventricular and
extra-axial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) spaces on CT. We propose an embryological
mechanism for the development of intracranial vascular tortuosity and discuss
the anatomical basis of wide perivascular spaces in relation to this syndrome.
Although we do not know the clinical implications of these cerebral vascular
anomalies, we suggest inclusion of neuroimaging in the baseline evaluation of
these patients.

Copyright © 2017 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2017.07.003
PMID: 28757335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
