---
reference_id: "PMID:23541872"
title: Entry inhibitors and their use in the treatment of HIV-1 infection.
authors:
- Haqqani AA
- Tilton JC
journal: Antiviral Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.017
keywords:
- Animals
- "Drug Resistance, Viral"
- HIV Fusion Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "HIV Infections/drug therapy, virology"
- "HIV-1/drug effects, physiology"
- Humans
- Virus Internalization/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Entry inhibitors and their use in the treatment of HIV-1 infection.
**Authors:** Haqqani AA, Tilton JC
**Journal:** Antiviral Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.017)

## Content

1. Antiviral Res. 2013 May;98(2):158-70. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.017.
Epub  2013 Mar 28.

Entry inhibitors and their use in the treatment of HIV-1 infection.

Haqqani AA(1), Tilton JC.

Author information:
(1)Case Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Entry of HIV into target cells is a complex, multi-stage process involving 
sequential attachment and CD4 binding, coreceptor binding, and membrane fusion. 
HIV entry inhibitors are a complex group of drugs with multiple mechanisms of 
action depending on the stage of the viral entry process they target. Two entry 
inhibitors are currently approved for the treatment of HIV-infected patients. 
Maraviroc, a CCR5 antagonist, blocks interactions between the viral envelope 
proteins and the CCR5 coreceptor. Enfuvirtide, a fusion inhibitor, disrupts 
conformational changes in gp41 that drive membrane fusion. A wide array of 
additional agents are in various stages of development. This review covers the 
entry inhibitors and their use in the treatment of HIV-infected patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.017
PMID: 23541872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]