---
reference_id: "PMID:36936732"
title: "Idiopathic Acroosteolysis: A Novel Cutaneous Sign Can Help Identify the Condition Early."
authors:
- Shrestha S
- Regmi B
- Pathak R
- Kroumpouzos G
journal: Case Rep Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000529727
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idiopathic Acroosteolysis: A Novel Cutaneous Sign Can Help Identify the Condition Early.
**Authors:** Shrestha S, Regmi B, Pathak R, Kroumpouzos G
**Journal:** Case Rep Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000529727](https://doi.org/10.1159/000529727)

## Content

1. Case Rep Dermatol. 2023 Mar 15;15(1):51-55. doi: 10.1159/000529727.
eCollection  2023 Jan-Dec.

Idiopathic Acroosteolysis: A Novel Cutaneous Sign Can Help Identify the 
Condition Early.

Shrestha S(1), Regmi B(2), Pathak R(3), Kroumpouzos G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Rapti Province Hospital, Tulsipur, India.
(2)Department of Radiology, Rapti Province Hospital, Tulsipur, India.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Lumbini Province Hospital, Butwal, India.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Warren Alpert Medical School at Brown University, 
Providence, RI, USA.

Acroosteolysis (AO) is a rare condition characterized by resorption of the 
distal phalanges of the fingers and/or toes. It can be familial, idiopathic 
(IAO), occupational, or secondary. Other authors suggest a classification into 
primary (genetic disorders, lysosomal storage disorders) or secondary AO. 
Various skin and nail changes have been reported in this condition. However, the 
cutaneous change on the affected digit(s)/toe(s) during the natural course of AO 
has been poorly documented. A 5-year-old girl presented with a 3-month history 
of a distinct transverse boundary between normal skin proximally and affected 
crusted skin overlying osteolysis distally ("split" sign) on the plantar surface 
of the third toe. This boundary gradually elongated circumferentially to involve 
the dorsal surface. The mother gave a similar history of a delimitation line on 
the 2nd, 4th, and 5th toes of the right foot with durations of 3 months, 1 year, 
and 2 years, respectively, that disappeared before she noticed a shortening of 
those toes. X-rays revealed partial resorption of the terminal phalanx of the 
third toe and several lytic changes in the middle and terminal phalanx of the 
second, fourth, and fifth toes. The clinical features, radiology findings, and a 
workup that helped rule out conditions associated with AO (secondary AO) helped 
establish the diagnosis of IAO in our patient. This case study highlights that 
the natural course of IAO includes distinct skin findings, such as the "split" 
sign that we describe. This sign can help identify the condition early.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000529727
PMCID: PMC10018418
PMID: 36936732

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.