---
reference_id: "PMID:20301771"
title: "Spondylocostal Dysostosis, Autosomal Recessive."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Turnpenny PD
- Sloman M
- Dunwoodie S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spondylocostal Dysostosis, Autosomal Recessive.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Turnpenny PD, Sloman M, Dunwoodie S

## Content

1. Spondylocostal Dysostosis, Autosomal Recessive.

Turnpenny PD(1), Sloman M(2), Dunwoodie S(3)(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2009 Aug 25 [updated 2023 Aug 17].

Author information:
(1)Peninsula Clinical Genetics and Honorary Clinical Professor, University of 
Exeter Medical School, Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, 
Exeter, United Kingdom
(2)Genomics Laboratory, Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, 
Exeter, United Kingdom
(3)Developmental and Regenerative Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac 
Research Institute, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
(4)School of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of 
New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Spondylocostal dysostosis (SCDO), defined 
radiographically as multiple segmentation defects of the vertebrae in 
combination with abnormalities of the ribs, is characterized clinically by a 
short trunk in proportion to height; short neck; and non-progressive mild 
scoliosis in most affected individuals – rarely, more significant scoliosis 
occurs. Respiratory function in neonates with severe disease may be compromised 
by reduced size of the thorax. By age two years lung growth may improve 
sufficiently to support relatively normal growth and development. In severely 
affected individuals with restricted pulmonary capacity, there is a possibility 
that pulmonary hypertension may eventually impact cardiac function. Males with 
SCDO appear to be at increased risk for inguinal hernia.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SCDO is based on radiographic features. 
Identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in DLL3, HES7, LFNG, MESP2, 
RIPPLY2, or TBX6 can confirm the diagnosis of autosomal recessive SCDO.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgical intervention may be necessary 
when scoliosis is significant; external bracing (e.g., by use of a vertical 
expandable prosthetic titanium rib) may be considered, as well as growing rods 
and other devices as appropriate. Respiratory support, including intensive care, 
is provided as needed for the small proportion of individuals with acute 
respiratory distress and chronic respiratory failure. Expert management is 
indicated for chronic respiratory failure, which can result in pulmonary 
hypertension and cardiac failure. Standard treatment of neurologic problems 
associated with LFNG-related SCDO. Inguinal hernias are treated per routine. 
Surveillance: Growth, spinal curvature, respiratory function, neurologic and 
motor function, and development should be monitored. The parents / care 
providers of young males need to be alert for the signs of inguinal hernia and 
its potential complications.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SCDO caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in DLL3, HES7, 
LFNG, MESP2, RIPPLY2, or TBX6 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. 
(Autosomal dominant inheritance of TBX6-related SCDO has been reported in a 
three-generation family.) If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an 
autosomal recessive SCDO-causing pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected 
individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of 
being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a 
carrier. Once the autosomal recessive SCDO-related pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives, 
prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible. In experienced hands, detailed fetal ultrasound scanning 
is sensitive enough to detect multiple segmentation defects of the vertebrae as 
early as 13 weeks' gestation, especially when the malformation is anticipated 
and looked for specifically. However, molecular genetic testing of an at-risk 
pregnancy is considered the gold standard for accurate prenatal diagnosis.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301771