---
reference_id: "PMID:37798732"
title: "Prevalence of Neurolathyrism and its associated factors in Grass pea cultivation areas of Dawunt District, North-eastern Ethiopia; 2022: a community based multilevel analysis."
authors:
- Bimerew M
- Gebremeskel T
- Beletew B
- Ayalneh M
- Ayaliew W
- Wodaje M
journal: BMC Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12883-023-03379-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Lathyrism/epidemiology, etiology"
- Lathyrus
- Pisum sativum
- Multilevel Analysis
- Ethiopia/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Neurolathyrism and its associated factors in Grass pea cultivation areas of Dawunt District, North-eastern Ethiopia; 2022: a community based multilevel analysis.
**Authors:** Bimerew M, Gebremeskel T, Beletew B, Ayalneh M, Ayaliew W, Wodaje M
**Journal:** BMC Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12883-023-03379-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12883-023-03379-0)

## Content

1. BMC Neurol. 2023 Oct 5;23(1):357. doi: 10.1186/s12883-023-03379-0.

Prevalence of Neurolathyrism and its associated factors in Grass pea cultivation 
areas of Dawunt District, North-eastern Ethiopia; 2022: a community based 
multilevel analysis.

Bimerew M(1), Gebremeskel T(2), Beletew B(3), Ayalneh M(4), Ayaliew W(5), Wodaje 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric and Child Health Nursing, College of Medicine and 
Health Science, Injibara University, Injibara, Ethiopia. mebiget@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Human Anatomy, College of Health Science, Woldia University, 
Woldia, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Nursing, College of Health Science, Woldia University, Woldia, 
Ethiopia.
(4)Department of Pediatric and Child Health Nursing, College of Medicine and 
Health Science, Injibara University, Injibara, Ethiopia.
(5)Department of Plant Biotechnology, Woldia University, Woldia, Ethiopia.
(6)Department of Midwifery, College of Health Science, Woldia University, 
Woldia, Ethiopia.

INTRODUCTION: Neurolathyrism is an upper motor neuron disorder characterized by 
spastic paraparesis, which is caused by the prolonged over-consumption of grass 
pea. It is a devastating disease with great impacts on physical, social, mental, 
and economical health.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of neurolathyrism and its associated 
factors in grass pea cultivation areas of Dawunt wereda.
METHODS: Community based cross-sectional study design was conducted from 
February 01- March 30, 2021 on 631 Households with a total of 3,350 individuals. 
Two-stage random sampling technique was used to select participants. Multilevel 
binary logistic regression was used to identify factors associated with 
neurolathyrism. Statistical significance was declared at p < 0.05; and AOR with 
95% CI was used to interpret the results.
RESULTS: The household and population level prevalence of neurolathyrism in 
Dawunt district were 9.2% (7.2-11.7%) and 2.4% (2.0-2.3.0%) respectively. Age 
(AOR = 7.4 ( 2.6-20.6)), male sex (AOR = 7.8 (3.9, 15.4)), and marital status 
(AOR = 4.0 (1.3-12.8)) were the individual level variables; family size 
(AOR = 12.6 (3.0-52.8)), annual grass pea production (AOR = 5.0 (2.3-11.0)), 
ever feeding only grass pea (AOR = 8.8(3.5-22.2)), ever feeding immature seeds 
of grass pea (AOR = 6.28 (2.80, 14.08)), high grass pea to other cereals mixing 
ratio (> 3:1) (AOR = 6.1 (1.1, 33.5)) were the household level variables found 
to have significant association with neurolathyrism.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of neurolathyrism was found to be high. Ever feeding 
only grass pea, Grass pea to other cereals mixing ratio (using ratio of 1:1 or 
more), and Ever feeding immature grass pea seeds were the modifiable risk 
factors for neurolathyrism.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-023-03379-0
PMCID: PMC10552212
PMID: 37798732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.