---
reference_id: "PMID:38179410"
title: Identification of two novel and one rare mutation in DYRK1A and prenatal diagnoses in three Chinese families with intellectual Disability-7.
authors:
- Huang C
- Luo H
- Zeng B
- Feng C
- Chen J
- Yuan H
- Huang S
- Yang B
- Zou Y
- Liu Y
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1290949
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of two novel and one rare mutation in DYRK1A and prenatal diagnoses in three Chinese families with intellectual Disability-7.
**Authors:** Huang C, Luo H, Zeng B, Feng C, Chen J, Yuan H, Huang S, Yang B, Zou Y, Liu Y
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1290949](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1290949)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Dec 20;14:1290949. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1290949. 
eCollection 2023.

Identification of two novel and one rare mutation in DYRK1A and prenatal 
diagnoses in three Chinese families with intellectual Disability-7.

Huang C(#)(1), Luo H(#)(1), Zeng B(1), Feng C(1), Chen J(1), Yuan H(1), Huang 
S(1), Yang B(1), Zou Y(1), Liu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Jiangxi Key Laboratory of Birth Defect 
Prevention and Control, Jiangxi Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanchang, 
Jiangxi, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Background and purpose: Intellectual disability-7 (MRD7) is a subtype disorder 
of intellectual disability (MRD) involving feeding difficulties, hypoactivity, 
and febrile seizures at an age of early onset, then progressive intellectual and 
physical development deterioration. We purposed to identify the underlying 
causative genetic factors of three individuals in each Chinese family who 
presented with symptoms of intellectual disability and facial dysmorphic 
features. We provided prenatal diagnosis for the three families and genetic 
counseling for the prevention of this disease. Methods: We collected 
retrospective clinical diagnostic evidence for the three probands in our study, 
which included magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computerized tomography (CT), 
electroencephalogram (EEG), and intelligence tests for the three probands in our 
study. Genetic investigation of the probands and their next of kin was performed 
by Trio-whole exome sequencing (WES). Sanger sequencing or quantitative PCR 
technologies were then used as the next step to verify the variants confirmed 
with Trio-WES for the three families. Moreover, we performed amniocentesis to 
explore the state of the three pathogenic variants in the fetuses by prenatal 
molecular genetic diagnosis at an appropriate gestational period for the three 
families. Results: The three probands and one fetus were clinically diagnosed 
with microcephaly and exhibited intellectual developmental disability, postnatal 
feeding difficulties, and facial dysmorphic features. Combining probands' 
clinical manifestations, Trio-WES uncovered the three heterozygous variants in 
DYRK1A: a novel variant exon3_exon4del p.(Gly4_Asn109del), a novel variant 
c.1159C>T p.(Gln387*), and a previously presented but rare pathogenic variant 
c.1309C>T p.(Arg437*) (NM_001396.5) in three families, respectively. In light of 
the updated American College of Medical Genetic and Genomics (ACMG) criterion, 
the variant of exon3_exon4del and c.1159C>T were both classified as likely 
pathogenic (PSV1+PM6), while c1309C>T was identified as pathogenic 
(PVS1+PS2_Moderate+PM2). Considering clinical features and molecular testimony, 
the three probands were confirmed diagnosed with MRD7. These three discovered 
variants were considered as the three causal mutations for MRD7. Prenatal 
diagnosis detected the heterozygous dominant variant of c.1159C>T p.(Gln387*) in 
one of the fetuses, indicating a significant probability of MRD7, subsequently 
the gestation was intervened by the parents' determination and professional 
obstetrical operation. On the other side, prenatal molecular genetic testing 
revealed wild-type alleles in the other two fetuses, and their parents both 
decided to sustain the gestation. Conclusion: We identified two novel and one 
rare mutation in DYRK1A which has broadened the spectrum of DYRK1A and provided 
evidence for the diagnosis of MRD7 at the molecular level. Besides, this study 
has supported the three families with MRD7 to determine the causative genetic 
factors efficiently and provide concise genetic counseling for the three 
families by using Trio-WES technology.

Copyright © 2023 Huang, Luo, Zeng, Feng, Chen, Yuan, Huang, Yang, Zou and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1290949
PMCID: PMC10765505
PMID: 38179410

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.