---
reference_id: "PMID:31430425"
title: Prevalence of chronic rhinosinusitis in bronchiectasis patients suspected of ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- McCormick JP
- Weeks CG
- Rivers NJ
- Owen JD
- Kelly DR
- Rowe SM
- Solomon GM
- Woodworth BA
- Cho DY
journal: Int Forum Allergy Rhinol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/alr.22414
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of chronic rhinosinusitis in bronchiectasis patients suspected of ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** McCormick JP, Weeks CG, Rivers NJ, Owen JD, Kelly DR, Rowe SM, Solomon GM, Woodworth BA, Cho DY
**Journal:** Int Forum Allergy Rhinol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/alr.22414](https://doi.org/10.1002/alr.22414)

## Content

1. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2019 Dec;9(12):1430-1435. doi: 10.1002/alr.22414.
Epub  2019 Aug 20.

Prevalence of chronic rhinosinusitis in bronchiectasis patients suspected of 
ciliary dyskinesia.

McCormick JP(1), Weeks CG(1), Rivers NJ(1), Owen JD(1), Kelly DR(2), Rowe 
SM(3)(4)(5)(6), Solomon GM(3)(4), Woodworth BA(1)(3), Cho DY(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(2)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital of Alabama, Birmingham, AL.
(3)Gregory Fleming James Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL.
(6)Department of Cell Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.

BACKGROUND: Mucociliary clearance is a main defense mechanism of the airway and 
is impaired in ciliary dyskinesia. The objective of this study was to evaluate 
the prevalence of chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) and its characteristics in 
bronchiectasis patients suspected of harboring ciliary dyskinesia.
METHODS: Bronchiectasis patients referred to a rhinology clinic for nasal brush 
biopsy (NBB) were included in this study. NBB was performed using a curettage 
technique whereby ciliated epithelial cells were obtained from the surface of 
the inferior nasal turbinate. Results of transmission electron microscopy 
findings, primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) gene (35 genes) analyses (Invitae), 
and sinus computed tomography (CT) scans were reviewed.
RESULTS: Twenty-three patients (age, 54 ± 2.9 years) were referred for NBB 
between 2015 and 2018. Thirteen patients (56.5%) met the criteria for diagnosis 
of CRS. Nineteen patients had ciliary ultrastructural defects. The most common 
finding was compound cilia (n = 11, 47.8%). Five patients (21.7%) had central 
microtubule defects (CMD) with higher forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1 
) at the time of referral than those without CMD (CMD+ , 91 ± 3.7%; CMD- , 73.5 
± 5.7%; p = 0.023). Of 15 subjects with a PCD gene panel, 67% (9 of 15) carried 
at least 1 gene associated with PCD. Only 1 patient reached diagnosis of PCD. 
Approximately 50% of non-PCD carriers had a smoking history (p < 0.05). 
Lund-Mackay scores did not significantly differ between PCD and non-PCD carriers 
(p = 0.72).
CONCLUSION: Nearly half of bronchiectasis patients referred for NBB had 
concurrent CRS. The presence of ciliary abnormalities was not amplified in 
bronchiectasis patients with CRS compared to those without CRS. Extrinsic 
factors may be related to ciliary structural abnormalities in non-PCD gene 
carriers.

© 2019 ARS-AAOA, LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/alr.22414
PMCID: PMC6901752
PMID: 31430425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]