---
reference_id: "PMID:38494163"
title: Resection Arthroplasty Is a Valuable Strategy for Humeroradial Synostosis - A Case Report.
authors:
- Almeida M
- Takagi T
- Torii A
- Takayama S
journal: J Hand Surg Asian Pac Vol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1142/S2424835524720044
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Adolescent
- Ulna/surgery
- Quality of Life
- Treatment Outcome
- Osteotomy
- Arthroplasty
- Humerus/abnormalities
- Radius/abnormalities
- Synostosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resection Arthroplasty Is a Valuable Strategy for Humeroradial Synostosis - A Case Report.
**Authors:** Almeida M, Takagi T, Torii A, Takayama S
**Journal:** J Hand Surg Asian Pac Vol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1142/S2424835524720044](https://doi.org/10.1142/S2424835524720044)

## Content

1. J Hand Surg Asian Pac Vol. 2024 Apr;29(2):148-151. doi: 
10.1142/S2424835524720044. Epub 2024 Mar 15.

Resection Arthroplasty Is a Valuable Strategy for Humeroradial Synostosis - A 
Case Report.

Almeida M(1), Takagi T(1), Torii A(1), Takayama S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Department of Surgical Specialties, National 
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

A 15-year-old girl with humeroradial synostosis since birth underwent a 
resection arthroplasty. A trapezoidal resection osteotomy of approximately 2 cm 
was performed at the anterior part of the bone flexure. This resulted at 18 
months in an elbow arc of motion of 60°-110° and forearm pronation/supination of 
40° and 60° without postoperative complications and improved disabilities of the 
arm, shoulder and hand and Hand 20 scores. Radiographic analysis revealed a 
humeroradial joint with a maintained pseudarthrosis and hinged motion at the 
humeroulnar joint. When performed by an experienced surgeon, resection 
arthroplasty corrects humeroradial synostosis, resulting in improvement in range 
of motion and quality of life. Level of Evidence: Level V (Therapeutic).

DOI: 10.1142/S2424835524720044
PMID: 38494163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]