---
reference_id: "PMID:34836779"
title: "Clinical perspectives of Treponema pallidum subsp. Endemicum infection in adults, particularly men who have sex with men in the Kansai area, Japan: A case series."
authors:
- Shinohara K
- Furubayashi K
- Kojima Y
- Mori H
- Komano J
- Kawahata T
journal: J Infect Chemother
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jiac.2021.11.012
keywords:
- Adult
- "Homosexuality, Male"
- Humans
- Japan/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Sexual and Gender Minorities
- "Syphilis/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Treponema
- Treponema pallidum/genetics
- Treponemal Infections
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical perspectives of Treponema pallidum subsp. Endemicum infection in adults, particularly men who have sex with men in the Kansai area, Japan: A case series.
**Authors:** Shinohara K, Furubayashi K, Kojima Y, Mori H, Komano J, Kawahata T
**Journal:** J Infect Chemother (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jiac.2021.11.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiac.2021.11.012)

## Content

1. J Infect Chemother. 2022 Mar;28(3):444-450. doi: 10.1016/j.jiac.2021.11.012.
Epub 2021 Nov 23.

Clinical perspectives of Treponema pallidum subsp. Endemicum infection in
adults, particularly men who have sex with men in the Kansai area, Japan: A case
series.

Shinohara K(1), Furubayashi K(2), Kojima Y(3), Mori H(3), Komano J(4), Kawahata
T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan; Department of Infectious Diseases, Kyoto City
Hospital, Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: shinoharakoh@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Sonezaki Furubayashi Clinic, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Osaka Institute of Public Health, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Osaka University of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Takatsuki, Japan.

Bejel, caused by Treponema pallidum subsp. Endemicum (TEN), is a locally
transmitted disease among children and juveniles in hot and dry regions. The
number of adult cases of TEN infection outside of endemic areas has recently
increased. We clinically examined five cases of TEN infection among adult cases
previously reported in Japan. TEN infection mainly developed among young to
middle-aged men who have sex with men (MSM). The clinical features of cases of
TEN infection were similar to those of primary- and secondary-stage T. pallidum
subsp. pallidum (TPA) infection. Genital lesions were common as the primary
lesion. The clinical features and laboratory parameters of cases of TEN
infection were similar to those of TPA infection. Most of the isolated strains
had the A2058G mutation in 23S rDNA, which is responsible for resistance to
macrolides. We also performed the systemic literature review of the TEN cases
outside the endemic countries. The recent reported cases diagnosed with
molecular methods shared the clinical features, occurred in young-to middle-aged
sexually active persons in urban areas of developed countries and often
accompanied with genital lesions, which were distinct from the classic
description of bejel. This case series and the literature review provides
important clinical insights and will contribute to the clinical detection of
this rarely identified disease in developed countries. The surveillance of
treponematoses, including TEN infection, using molecular diagnostic techniques
is also warranted in developed countries, for the purpose of grasping the
epidemic situation and control the local transmission.

Copyright © 2021 Japanese Society of Chemotherapy and The Japanese Association
for Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiac.2021.11.012
PMID: 34836779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
