---
reference_id: "PMID:36813169"
title: Clinical outcomes and toxicities of 100 patients treated with proton therapy for chordoma on the proton collaborative group prospective registry.
authors:
- Chhabra AM
- Rice SR
- Holtzman A
- Choi JI
- Hasan S
- Press RH
- Chang J
- Halasz L
- Tsai HK
- Wang CJ
- Kabolizadeh P
- Gondi V
- Hartsell WF
- Vora SA
- Vargas CE
- Simone CB 2nd
journal: Radiother Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2023.109551
keywords:
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Proton Therapy/adverse effects
- Protons
- Treatment Outcome
- Chordoma/radiotherapy
- Pain/etiology
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical outcomes and toxicities of 100 patients treated with proton therapy for chordoma on the proton collaborative group prospective registry.
**Authors:** Chhabra AM, Rice SR, Holtzman A, Choi JI, Hasan S, Press RH, Chang J, Halasz L, Tsai HK, Wang CJ, Kabolizadeh P, Gondi V, Hartsell WF, Vora SA, Vargas CE, Simone CB 2nd
**Journal:** Radiother Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.radonc.2023.109551](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2023.109551)

## Content

1. Radiother Oncol. 2023 Jun;183:109551. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2023.109551. Epub 
2023 Feb 20.

Clinical outcomes and toxicities of 100 patients treated with proton therapy for 
chordoma on the proton collaborative group prospective registry.

Chhabra AM(1), Rice SR(2), Holtzman A(3), Choi JI(4), Hasan S(5), Press RH(6), 
Chang J(7), Halasz L(8), Tsai HK(9), Wang CJ(10), Kabolizadeh P(11), Gondi 
V(12), Hartsell WF(12), Vora SA(13), Vargas CE(13), Simone CB 2nd(4).

Author information:
(1)New York Proton Center, Department of Radiation Oncology, New York, USA; 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Radiation Oncology, NY, 
USA.
(2)Cancer Centers of Northern Arizona, Department of Radiation Oncology, AZ, 
USA.
(3)University of Florida, Proton Therapy Institute, Department of Radiation 
Oncology, Jacksonville, USA.
(4)New York Proton Center, Department of Radiation Oncology, New York, USA; 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Department of Radiation Oncology, NY, 
USA.
(5)New York Proton Center, Department of Radiation Oncology, New York, USA; 
Montefiore Medical Center, Department of Radiation Oncology, NY, USA.
(6)Miami Cancer Institute, Baptist Health South Florida, Department of Radiation 
Oncology, Miami, USA.
(7)Oklahoma Proton Center, Department of Radiation Oncology, Oklahoma City, USA.
(8)University of Washington, Department of Radiation Oncology, Seattle, USA.
(9)ProCure Proton Therapy Center, Department of Radiation Oncology, Somerset, 
USA.
(10)Willis Knighton Cancer Center, Department of Radiation Oncology, Shreveport, 
USA.
(11)Beaumont, Department of Radiation Oncology, Royal Oak, USA.
(12)Proton Therapy Center- Northwestern University, Department of Radiation 
Oncology, Chicago, USA.
(13)Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, Department of Radiation Oncology, Scottsdale, USA.

BACKGROUND: We present efficacy and toxicity outcomes among patients with 
chordoma treated on the Proton Collaborative Group prospective registry.
METHODS: Consecutive chordoma patients treated between 2010-2018 were evaluated. 
One hundred fifty patients were identified, 100 had adequate follow-up 
information. Locations included base of skull (61%), spine (23%), and sacrum 
(16%). Patients had a performance status of ECOG 0-1 (82%) and median age of 
58 years. Eighty-five percent of patients underwent surgical resection. The 
median proton RT dose was 74 Gy (RBE) (range 21-86 Gy (RBE)) using passive 
scatter proton RT (PS-PBT) (13%), uniform scanning proton RT (US-PBT) (54%) and 
pencil beam scanning proton RT (PBS-PBT) (33%). Rates of local control (LC), 
progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and acute and late 
toxicities were assessed.
RESULTS: 2/3-year LC, PFS, and OS rates are 97%/94%, 89%/74%, and 89%/83%, 
respectively. LC did not differ based on surgical resection (p = 0.61), though 
this is likely limited by most patients having undergone a prior resection. 
Eight patients experienced acute grade 3 toxicities, most commonly pain (n = 3), 
radiation dermatitis (n = 2), fatigue (n = 1), insomnia (n = 1) and dizziness 
(n = 1). No grade ≥ 4 acute toxicities were reported. No grade ≥ 3 late 
toxicities were reported, and most common grade 2 toxicities were fatigue 
(n = 5), headache (n = 2), CNS necrosis (n = 1), and pain (n = 1).
CONCLUSIONS: In our series, PBT achieved excellent safety and efficacy outcomes 
with very low rates of treatment failure. CNS necrosis is exceedingly low (<1%) 
despite the high doses of PBT delivered. Further maturation of data and larger 
patient numbers are necessary to optimize therapy in chordoma.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2023.109551
PMID: 36813169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]