---
reference_id: "PMID:39833329"
title: A potential VEGF-driven hypothesis of calvarial centripetal proliferation in cerebral proliferative angiopathy.
authors:
- Miyake S
- Krings T
- Kee TP
- Huisman TAGM
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-86525-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Child
- Aged
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Skull/pathology, diagnostic imaging, metabolism, blood supply"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/metabolism
- "Intracranial Arteriovenous Malformations/pathology, metabolism, diagnostic imaging"
- Cell Proliferation
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A potential VEGF-driven hypothesis of calvarial centripetal proliferation in cerebral proliferative angiopathy.
**Authors:** Miyake S, Krings T, Kee TP, Huisman TAGM
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-025-86525-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86525-7)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2025 Jan 20;15(1):2502. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-86525-7.

A potential VEGF-driven hypothesis of calvarial centripetal proliferation in 
cerebral proliferative angiopathy.

Miyake S(1), Krings T(2)(3), Kee TP(4)(5), Huisman TAGM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)Division of Neurointerventional Radiology, UMass Chan School of Medicine, 
Lahey Hospital, Beth Israel Lahey Health, Boston, USA. timo.krings@lahey.org.
(3)University Health Network and Toronto Western Hospital, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, CA, USA. timo.krings@lahey.org.
(4)University Health Network and Toronto Western Hospital, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Neuroradiology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(6)Edward B. Singleton Department of Radiology, Texas Children's Hospital, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Cerebral proliferative angiopathy (CPA) is a rare subtype of cerebral 
arteriovenous malformation, characterized by unique angiographic features and 
clinical presentations. Although the clinical and angiographic characteristics 
of CPA have been well described, their impact on the surrounding tissues remains 
underexplored. Herein, we investigated the presence of calvarial thickening in 
patients with CPA, and discuss its potential pathogenesis. This retrospective 
multicenter cohort study enrolled 16 CPA patients from our institutions. 
Patients were identified by a search of the hospital medical records for key 
words related to "cerebral proliferative angiopathy." Data on demographics, CPA 
characteristics, clinical symptoms, and calvarial thickening were collected and 
analyzed using CT and MRI. Statistical analyses were performed using t-tests and 
Fisher's exact tests, with significance set at P < 0.05. Patients with CPA 
ranged from 4 to 69 years of age and underwent skull evaluation at a median age 
of 26.5 years. Calvarial thickening was present in 43.8% of cases, predominantly 
affecting the frontal bone, and extending bilaterally. A trend toward calvarial 
thickening was observed in patients with concomitant signs of cerebral venous 
congestion (p = 0.06), while no significant association with age, sex, or 
symptoms was found. Calvarial thickening displayed centripetal proliferation 
with trabecular formation extending from the inner table. This study identified 
Calvarial centripetal proliferation in a significant proportion of patients with 
CPA. We hypothesized that this may be related to elevated vascular endothelial 
growth factor levels due to the proangiogenic nature of CPA.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-86525-7
PMCID: PMC11747462
PMID: 39833329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests. Ethical approval: This study obtained ethics approval from 
the research ethics board of the University Health Network with ID-number: 
23-5609.0. Informed consent: The requirement for informed consent was waived by 
the research ethics board of the University Health Network due to the 
retrospective nature of the study. Ethical statement: This study was performed 
in accordance with the declaration of Helsinki.