---
reference_id: "PMID:39839160"
title: "Dieulafoy's Lesion in the Esophagus Causing Gastrointestinal Bleeding: A Concise Review."
authors:
- Bathobakae L
- Russo J
- Adalja D
- Mohtadi M
- Wilkinson T
- Mekheal N
- Yuridullah R
- Amer K
- Cavanagh Y
- Baddoura W
journal: J Community Hosp Intern Med Perspect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.55729/2000-9666.1425
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dieulafoy's Lesion in the Esophagus Causing Gastrointestinal Bleeding: A Concise Review.
**Authors:** Bathobakae L, Russo J, Adalja D, Mohtadi M, Wilkinson T, Mekheal N, Yuridullah R, Amer K, Cavanagh Y, Baddoura W
**Journal:** J Community Hosp Intern Med Perspect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.55729/2000-9666.1425](https://doi.org/10.55729/2000-9666.1425)

## Content

1. J Community Hosp Intern Med Perspect. 2024 Nov 2;14(6):82-88. doi: 
10.55729/2000-9666.1425. eCollection 2024.

Dieulafoy's Lesion in the Esophagus Causing Gastrointestinal Bleeding: A Concise 
Review.

Bathobakae L(1), Russo J(1), Adalja D(1), Mohtadi M(1), Wilkinson T(2), Mekheal 
N(1), Yuridullah R(3), Amer K(3), Cavanagh Y(3)(4), Baddoura W(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, St. Joseph's University Medical Center, Paterson, USA.
(2)Medical Education, St. George's University School of Medicine, Grenada, West 
Indies.
(3)Gastroenterology & Hepatology, St. Joseph's University Medical Center, 
Paterson, USA.
(4)Advanced & Surgical Endoscopy, St. Joseph's University Medical Center, 
Paterson, USA.

Dieulafoy's lesion (DL) is an uncommon cause of life-threatening 
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. It can occur in any part of the GI tract, 
including the stomach, duodenum, colon, and esophagus. Dieulafoy's lesion in the 
esophagus (DLE) is an exceedingly rare entity, with only 23 case reports/series 
(27 patients) reported to date. We performed a systematic search of published 
case reports on DLE in PubMed, Google Scholar, and Embase, from inception 
through January 2024. The search terms for the review were "Dieulafoy's lesion," 
"esophagus," "oesophagus," "hematemesis," "melena," "hematochezia," and 
"gastrointestinal bleeding." Articles were eligible for inclusion in the study 
if they were published in English, described a case of DLE noted on endoscopy or 
histopathology, and were available as full text. Our literature search yielded 
23 articles consisting of 27 patients. Of the 27 patients, eight (30%) were 
female and 19 (70%) were male. The patients' age ranged from 13 years to 87 
years, with an average age of 54.1 years. Twenty-five patients (92.6%) presented 
with hematemesis and melena as chief complaints. DLE was found in the distal 
esophagus in 19/27 (70.4%) of the patients and the mid-esophagus in 6/27 (22.2%) 
of the patients. Two patients had no information about the lesion site. 
Endoscopic hemoclips were employed in 12 (44.4%) patients, endoscopic band 
ligation (EBL) in six and electrocautery was used in one patient. Early 
diagnosis and prompt treatment are crucial for managing DLE, as they can cause 
recurrent bleeding and potentially lead to complications or death.

© 2024 Greater Baltimore Medical Center.

DOI: 10.55729/2000-9666.1425
PMCID: PMC11745175
PMID: 39839160

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: No conflicts of interest 
to declare.