---
reference_id: "PMID:38859884"
title: Clinical and Molecular Characterization of Hyperinsulinism in Kabuki Syndrome.
authors:
- Rosenfeld E
- Mitteer LM
- Boodhansingh K
- Sanders VR
- McKnight H
- De Leon DD
journal: J Endocr Soc
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvae101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Molecular Characterization of Hyperinsulinism in Kabuki Syndrome.
**Authors:** Rosenfeld E, Mitteer LM, Boodhansingh K, Sanders VR, McKnight H, De Leon DD
**Journal:** J Endocr Soc (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jendso/bvae101](https://doi.org/10.1210/jendso/bvae101)

## Content

1. J Endocr Soc. 2024 May 21;8(7):bvae101. doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvae101.
eCollection  2024 May 23.

Clinical and Molecular Characterization of Hyperinsulinism in Kabuki Syndrome.

Rosenfeld E(1)(2), Mitteer LM(1), Boodhansingh K(1), Sanders VR(1), McKnight 
H(1), De Leon DD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Congenital Hyperinsulinism Center, Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

CONTEXT: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is associated with congenital hyperinsulinism 
(HI).
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the clinical and molecular features of HI in children 
with KS.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study of children with KS and HI evaluated between 
1998 and 2023.
SETTING: The Congenital Hyperinsulinism Center of the Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia.
PATIENTS: Thirty-three children with KS and HI.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: HI presentation, treatment, course, and genotype.
RESULTS: Hypoglycemia was recognized on the first day of life in 25 children 
(76%). Median age at HI diagnosis was 1.8 months (interquartile range [IQR], 
0.6-6.1 months). Median age at KS diagnosis was 5 months (IQR, 2-14 months). 
Diagnosis of HI preceded KS diagnosis in 20 children (61%). Twenty-four children 
(73%) had a pathogenic variant in KMT2D, 5 children (15%) had a pathogenic 
variant in KDM6A, and 4 children (12%) had a clinical diagnosis of KS. Diazoxide 
trial was conducted in 25 children, 92% of whom were responsive. HI treatment 
was discontinued in 46% of the cohort at median age 2.8 years (IQR, 1.3-5.7 
years).
CONCLUSION: Hypoglycemia was recognized at birth in most children with KS and 
HI, but HI diagnosis was often delayed. HI was effectively managed with 
diazoxide in most children. In contrast to prior reports, the frequency of 
variants in KMT2D and KDM6A were similar to their overall prevalence in 
individuals with KS. Children diagnosed with KS should undergo evaluation for 
HI, and, because KS features may not be recognized in infancy, KMT2D and KDM6A 
should be included in the genetic evaluation of HI.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jendso/bvae101
PMCID: PMC11163021
PMID: 38859884