---
reference_id: "PMID:25257665"
title: "Diagnosis of pediatric hyperthyroidism: technetium 99 uptake versus thyroid stimulating immunoglobulins."
authors:
- Baskaran C
- Misra M
- Levitsky LL
journal: Thyroid
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1089/thy.2014.0266
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of pediatric hyperthyroidism: technetium 99 uptake versus thyroid stimulating immunoglobulins.
**Authors:** Baskaran C, Misra M, Levitsky LL
**Journal:** Thyroid (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.2014.0266](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.2014.0266)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2015 Jan;25(1):37-42. doi: 10.1089/thy.2014.0266.

Diagnosis of pediatric hyperthyroidism: technetium 99 uptake versus thyroid 
stimulating immunoglobulins.

Baskaran C(1), Misra M, Levitsky LL.

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital for Children , Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, 
Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Treatment with antithyroid drugs is effective in conditions of 
increased thyroid hormone production (mostly Graves' Disease; GD), but not in 
subacute thyroiditis (SAT) or autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT). Positive thyroid 
stimulating immunoglobulins (TSI) make GD likely. However, not all children with 
GD have increased TSI. Uptake studies with (123)I or (99)Tc ((99m)Tc) provide 
accurate and rapid diagnosis but are expensive and involve radiation exposure. 
Our objective was to compare TSI with (99m)Tc uptake for diagnosis of pediatric 
hyperthyroidism.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective chart review of hyperthyroid children who 
had both TSI estimation and (99m)Tc uptake assessment at presentation. Based on 
subsequent laboratory studies and follow-up, 37 had GD and 10 had non-GD 
thyroiditis. The TSI index was considered positive (TSI+) when it was above the 
upper limit of normal. (99m)Tc uptake was considered positive (Tc+) for any 
uptake >0.4% and negative (and low) (Tc-) for uptake ≤0.4%.
RESULTS: Forty-seven youth (83% females), aged 12.3±4.6 years, presented with a 
suppressed thyrotropin (TSH) and elevated free thyroxine and total 
triiodothyronine. All 37 patients with GD were Tc+ (100% sensitivity and 
specificity). The sensitivity of TSI for diagnosing GD was 84%, and the 
specificity was 100%. Six patients with GD were discordant with Tc+ but TSI-. 
Elevated TSI correlated with Tc+ (p=0.01) with a degree of agreement (kappa) of 
0.69.
CONCLUSION: (99m)Tc has excellent specificity and sensitivity in diagnosing GD. 
Given additional costs of (99m)Tc (two and a half times as much as TSI), it is 
reasonable to reserve (99m)Tc uptake assessment for hyperthyroidism of unclear 
etiology and negative TSI.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2014.0266
PMCID: PMC4291090
PMID: 25257665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]