---
reference_id: "PMID:24369458"
title: "Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: review of the literature."
authors:
- Kopáčová M
- Urban O
- Cyrany J
- Laco J
- Bureš J
- Rejchrt S
- Bártová J
- Tachecí I
journal: Gastroenterol Res Pract
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1155/2013/856873
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: review of the literature.
**Authors:** Kopáčová M, Urban O, Cyrany J, Laco J, Bureš J, Rejchrt S, Bártová J, Tachecí I
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Res Pract (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2013/856873](https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/856873)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2013;2013:856873. doi: 10.1155/2013/856873. Epub 2013
 Nov 28.

Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: review of the literature.

Kopáčová M(1), Urban O(2), Cyrany J(1), Laco J(3), Bureš J(1), Rejchrt S(1), 
Bártová J(1), Tachecí I(1).

Author information:
(1)2nd Department of Medicine, Charles University in Praha, Faculty of Medicine 
at Hradec Králové, University Teaching Hospital, Sokolska 581, 500 05 Hradec 
Králové, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Vitkovice Hospital, Zalužanského 1192/15, 703 
00 Ostrava-Vítkovice, Czech Republic.
(3)The Fingerland Department of Pathology, Charles University in Praha, Faculty 
of Medicine at Hradec Králové, University Teaching Hospital, Sokolska 581, 500 
05 Hradec Králové, Czech Republic.

Cronkhite-Canada syndrome is a rare disease characterised by diffuse polyposis 
of the gastrointestinal tract, diarrhoea, weight loss, abdominal pain, cutaneous 
hyperpigmentation, dystrophic changes of fingernails, and alopecia. The etiology 
is probably autoimmune and diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, 
endoscopic findings of gastrointestinal polyposis, and histology. The disease is 
very rare; about 450 cases have been described in the literature so far. We 
present a review of the literature with our own picture documentation of this 
rare condition.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/856873
PMCID: PMC3863521
PMID: 24369458