---
reference_id: "PMID:36306459"
title: Screening for Genetic Mutations Associated with Early-Onset Alzheimer's Disease in Han Chinese.
authors:
- Liu C
- Cong L
- Zhu M
- Wang Y
- Tang S
- Han X
- Zhang Q
- Tian N
- Liu K
- Liang X
- Fa W
- Wang N
- Hou T
- Du Y
journal: Curr Alzheimer Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2174/1567205020666221028112915
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening for Genetic Mutations Associated with Early-Onset Alzheimer's Disease in Han Chinese.
**Authors:** Liu C, Cong L, Zhu M, Wang Y, Tang S, Han X, Zhang Q, Tian N, Liu K, Liang X, Fa W, Wang N, Hou T, Du Y
**Journal:** Curr Alzheimer Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1567205020666221028112915](https://doi.org/10.2174/1567205020666221028112915)

## Content

1. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2022;19(10):724-733. doi:
10.2174/1567205020666221028112915.

Screening for Genetic Mutations Associated with Early-Onset Alzheimer's Disease 
in Han Chinese.

Liu C(1)(2)(3), Cong L(2)(3), Zhu M(2)(3), Wang Y(2)(3), Tang S(2)(3), Han 
X(2)(3), Zhang Q(2)(3), Tian N(2)(3), Liu K(2)(3), Liang X(1)(3), Fa W(2)(3), 
Wang N(1)(3), Hou T(1)(2)(3), Du Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shandong Provincial Hospital, Shandong University, 
Jinan, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
First Medical University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(3)Shandong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases, 
Jinan, Shandong, China.

BACKGROUND: Early-onset Alzheimer's disease (EOAD) is highly influenced by 
genetic factors. Numerous mutations in amyloid precursor protein (APP) and 
presenilin 1 and 2 (PSEN1 and PSEN2) have been identified for EOAD, but they can 
only account for a small proportion of EOAD cases.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to screen genetic mutations and variants associated 
with EOAD among Han Chinese adults.
METHODS: This study included 34 patients with EOAD and 26 controls from a 
population-based study and neurological ward. We first sequenced mutations in 
APP/PSENs and then performed whole-exome sequencing in the remaining patients 
with negative mutations in APP/PSENs to screen for additional potential genetic 
variants. Among patients who were negative in genetic screening tests, we 
further evaluated the risk burden of genes related to the Aβ metabolism-centered 
network to search for other probable causes of EOAD.
RESULTS: We identified 7 functional variants in APP/PSENs in 8 patients, 
including 1 APP mutation (p. Val715Met), 3 PSEN1 mutations (p. Phe177Ser; p. 
Arg377Met; p. Ile416Thr), and 3 PSEN2 mutations (p. Glu24Lys; p. Gly34Ser; p. 
Met239Thr). Of the remaining 26 EOAD cases without mutations in APP/PSENs, the 
proportion of carrying rare variants of genes involved in Aβ and APP metabolism 
was significantly higher than that of controls (84.6% vs. 73.1%, P=0.042). 
Thirty-one risk genes with 47 variants were identified in 22 patients. However, 
in 26 normal subjects, only 20 risk genes with 29 variants were identified in 19 
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate the role of APP/PSENs mutations in EOAD, 
identifying a new PSEN2 missense mutation, and further offer valuable insights 
into the potential genetic mechanisms of EOAD without APP/PSENs mutations among 
Han Chinese.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1567205020666221028112915
PMID: 36306459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]