---
reference_id: "PMID:24647968"
title: Small-fiber neuropathy with cardiac denervation in postural tachycardia syndrome.
authors:
- Haensch CA
- Tosch M
- Katona I
- Weis J
- Isenmann S
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/mus.24245
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small-fiber neuropathy with cardiac denervation in postural tachycardia syndrome.
**Authors:** Haensch CA, Tosch M, Katona I, Weis J, Isenmann S
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.24245](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.24245)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2014 Dec;50(6):956-61. doi: 10.1002/mus.24245. Epub 2014 Aug 29.

Small-fiber neuropathy with cardiac denervation in postural tachycardia 
syndrome.

Haensch CA(1), Tosch M, Katona I, Weis J, Isenmann S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kliniken Maria Hilf Mönchengladbach, Faculty of 
Health, University of Witten/Herdecke, Viersenerstrasse 450, D-41063, 
Mönchengladbach, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a disorder of orthostatic 
intolerance characterized by excessive tachycardia of unknown etiology. Our 
objective in this study was to evaluate the correlation between C-fiber 
involvement as shown by skin biopsy and adrenergic cardiac 
metaiodobenzylguanadine (MIBG) uptake in POTS patients.
METHODS: Skin biopsies of 84 patients with POTS were examined by Protein Gene 
Product 9.5 (PGP9.5) immunohistochemistry and were compared with MIBG myocardial 
scintigraphy imaging data.
RESULTS: Mean intraepidermal nerve fiber (IENF) density was in the lower normal 
age-adjusted range, 7.2 ± 2.9/mm (normal ≥ 7/mm), and was slightly below the 
normal range in 45% of POTS patients. MIBG uptake was reduced in 21% of 
patients. Low IENF density correlated with reduced cardiac MIBG uptake (r = 
0.39, P = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: A subset of neuropathic POTS patients may harbor mild small fiber 
neuropathy with abnormalities of unmyelinated nerve fibers in the skin 
associated with reduced myocardial postganglionic sympathetic innervation.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.24245
PMID: 24647968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]