---
reference_id: "PMID:24266913"
title: Chronic hepatitis B virus infection.
authors:
- McMahon BJ
journal: Med Clin North Am
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2013.08.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic hepatitis B virus infection.
**Authors:** McMahon BJ
**Journal:** Med Clin North Am (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcna.2013.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcna.2013.08.004)

## Content

1. Med Clin North Am. 2014 Jan;98(1):39-54. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2013.08.004. Epub
 2013 Oct 20.

Chronic hepatitis B virus infection.

McMahon BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Liver Disease and Hepatitis Program, Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium, 
4315 Diplomacy Drive, Anchorage, AK 99508, USA. Electronic address: 
bmcmahon@anthc.org.

All providers, regardless of specialty, should perform screening for HBV on 
high-risk persons, especially those born in endemic countries. The primary care 
physician can perform the initial evaluation and follow-up of patients with 
chronic HBV by following the algorithm in this article and consulting with 
specialists when appropriate. Chronically infected patients should be followed 
on a regular basis, preferably every 6 months, with liver function tests, and 
when appropriate, HBV DNA levels. Those who meet the criteria for high risk for 
HCC should undergo liver ultrasound every 6 months. Powerful antiviral 
medications are available that can suppress but not cure HBV and result in 
resolution of liver inflammation and fibrosis, even cirrhosis, as well as 
decrease the risk of developing HCC. They should be used in those patients who 
meet the criteria outlined in the practice guidelines of the major liver 
societies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcna.2013.08.004
PMID: 24266913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]