---
reference_id: "PMID:20301584"
title: X-Linked Severe Combined Immunodeficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Allenspach EJ
- Rawlings DJ
- Petrovic A
- Chen K
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-Linked Severe Combined Immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Allenspach EJ, Rawlings DJ, Petrovic A, Chen K

## Content

1. X-Linked Severe Combined Immunodeficiency.

Allenspach EJ(1), Rawlings DJ(1), Petrovic A(1), Chen K(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Aug 26 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The phenotypic spectrum of X-linked severe combined 
immunodeficiency (X-SCID) ranges from typical X-SCID (early-onset disease in 
males that is fatal if not treated with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
[HSCT] or gene therapy) to atypical X-SCID (later-onset disease comprising 
phenotypes caused by variable immunodeficiency, immune dysregulation, and/or 
autoimmunity). Typical X-SCID. Prior to universal newborn screening (NBS) for 
SCID most males with typical X-SCID came to medical attention between ages three 
and six months because of recurrent infections, persistent infections, and 
infections with opportunistic organisms. With universal NBS for SCID, the common 
presentation for typical X-SCID is now an asymptomatic, healthy-appearing male 
infant. Atypical X-SCID, which usually is not detected by NBS, can manifest in 
the first years of life or later with one of the following: recurrent upper and 
lower respiratory tract infections with bronchiectasis; Omenn syndrome, a 
clinical phenotype caused by immune dysregulation; X-SCID combined 
immunodeficiency (often with recurrent infections, warts, and dermatitis); 
immune dysregulation and autoimmunity; or Epstein-Barr virus-related 
lymphoproliferative complications.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of typical and atypical X-SCID is established 
in a male proband with suggestive findings and a hemizygous pathogenic variant 
in IL2RG identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Typical X-SCID. Newborns with an 
abnormal NBS require immediate subspecialty immunology evaluation at a center 
with expertise in the diagnosis of SCID and its genetic causes, and in SCID 
treatment protocols, including HSCT or gene therapy. While clinical practices 
and protocols can vary depending on the center, treatment goals include ensuring 
the safety of the infant/child, prophylaxis for infections, and preemptive HSCT 
to establish a functional immune system prior to the development of symptoms. 
Atypical X-SCID. Treatment depends on the degree of infectious complications and 
the presence of immune dysregulation and/or autoimmunity, and requires 
subspecialty immunologic care to assist in the diagnosis and choice of 
antimicrobial and immune-suppressive therapies. Surveillance: After successful 
HSCT, routine monitoring of affected males every six to 12 months regarding 
lineage-specific donor cell engraftment; growth, immune, and lung function; and 
any gastrointestinal and/or dermatologic issues. If HSCT involved conditioning 
chemotherapy, long-term monitoring of vital organ function and 
neurodevelopmental progress is also warranted. Agents/circumstances to avoid: To 
ensure the safety of affected individuals of all ages pending definitive 
treatment to achieve immunocompetence, parents and other care providers need to 
assure that the following are avoided: breast-feeding and breast milk (pending 
clarification of maternal CMV status); exposure to young children, sick persons, 
or individuals with cold sores; crowded enclosed spaces; live viral vaccines for 
the affected individual as well as household contacts; transfusion of 
non-irradiated blood products; areas of construction or soil manipulation. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: When the IL2RG pathogenic variant causing 
X-SCID in the family is known, prenatal testing of at-risk male fetuses may be 
performed to help prepare for optimal management of an affected infant at birth. 
If prenatal testing has not been performed, an at-risk newborn male should 
immediately be placed in a safe environment and tested for the familial IL2RG 
pathogenic variant to allow earliest possible diagnosis and treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: X-SCID is inherited in an X-linked manner. The chance that a 
female who is heterozygous (i.e., a carrier) for the familial IL2RG pathogenic 
variant will transmit the variant in each pregnancy is 50%: males who inherit 
the pathogenic variant will be affected; females who inherit the pathogenic 
variant will be carriers and will be clinically asymptomatic. Affected males 
transmit the IL2RG pathogenic variant to all of their daughters and none of 
their sons. Once the IL2RG pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301584