---
reference_id: PMID:37454339
title: An International Survey of Allogeneic Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation for X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia.
authors:
- Nishimura A
- Uppuluri R
- Raj R
- Swaminathan VV
- Cheng Y
- Abu-Arja RF
- Fu B
- Laberko A
- Albert MH
- Hauck F
- Bucciol G
- Bigley V
- Elcombe S
- Kharya G
- Pronk CJH
- Wehr C
- Neven B
- Warnatz K
- Meyts I
- Morio T
- Gennery AR
- Kanegane H
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-023-01551-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/methods
- "Agammaglobulinemia/diagnosis, therapy, etiology"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/therapy, etiology"
- Melphalan
- Transplantation Conditioning/methods
- Graft vs Host Disease/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An International Survey of Allogeneic Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation for X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia.
**Authors:** Nishimura A, Uppuluri R, Raj R, Swaminathan VV, Cheng Y, Abu-Arja RF, Fu B, Laberko A, Albert MH, Hauck F, Bucciol G, Bigley V, Elcombe S, Kharya G, Pronk CJH, Wehr C, Neven B, Warnatz K, Meyts I, Morio T, Gennery AR, Kanegane H
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-023-01551-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-023-01551-2)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2023 Nov;43(8):1827-1839. doi: 10.1007/s10875-023-01551-2.
Epub  2023 Jul 16.

An International Survey of Allogeneic Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation for 
X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia.

Nishimura A(1), Uppuluri R(2), Raj R(2), Swaminathan VV(2), Cheng Y(3), Abu-Arja 
RF(4), Fu B(5), Laberko A(6), Albert MH(7), Hauck F(7), Bucciol G(8), Bigley 
V(9)(10), Elcombe S(9), Kharya G(11), Pronk CJH(12), Wehr C(13), Neven B(14), 
Warnatz K(13)(15)(16), Meyts I(8)(17), Morio T(1), Gennery AR(18), Kanegane 
H(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University (TMDU), Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, Blood and Marrow 
Transplantation, Apollo Hospitals, Chennai, India.
(3)Institute of Hematology, People's Hospital, Peking University, Beijing, 
China.
(4)Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, Nationwide Children's 
Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(5)Department of Hematology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(6)Department of Immunology, Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Research Center of 
Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russia.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital, University 
Hospital, LMU, Munich, Germany.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)Department of Immunology, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(10)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(11)Center for Bone Marrow Transplant and Cellular Therapy, Indraprastha Apollo 
Hospital, New Delhi, India.
(12)Childhood Cancer Center, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(13)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(14)Pediatric Hematology-Immunology and Rheumatology Unit, Necker-Enfants 
Malades Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP), Paris, France.
(15)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency (CCI), Faculty of Medicine, Medical 
Center - University of Freiburg, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(16)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(17)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Laboratory for 
Inborn Errors of Immunity, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(18)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University, and 
Paediatric Stem Cell Transplant Unit, Great North Children's Hospital, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, UK.
(19)Department of Child Health and Development, Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), 1-5-45, Yushima, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8519, Japan. hkanegane.ped@tmd.ac.jp.

Erratum in
    J Clin Immunol. 2026 Jan 21;46(1):11. doi: 10.1007/s10875-026-01982-7.

PURPOSE: X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) is an inborn error of immunity caused 
by variants in Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK). XLA patients require lifelong 
immunoglobulin replacement therapy (IgRT). Only few XLA patients are indicated 
for allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) because of severe 
complications. Accordingly, the published transplantation experience in XLA is 
minimal. We aimed to collect clinical data of XLA patients who received HCT in 
an international framework and to establish appropriate transplantation criteria 
and methods for XLA patients.
METHODS: XLA patients were recruited through a questionnaire and a literature 
review. The data are on patient characteristics and transplantation methods and 
outcomes.
RESULTS: In this study, twenty-two XLA patients who underwent HCT were 
recruited. The indication for HCT was recurrent or life-threatening infection in 
sixteen patients, malignancy in three, and other factors in three. A 
myeloablative conditioning, reduced toxicity myeloablative conditioning 
(RT-MAC), and reduced intensity conditioning (RIC) were selected in four, ten, 
and eight patients, respectively. Engraftment was achieved in 21 patients (95%). 
In all patients, 2-year overall survival (OS) and event-free survival (EFS) were 
86% and 77%, respectively. In patients who received RT-MAC or RIC using 
treosulfan, busulfan, or melphalan, 2-year OS and EFS were 82% and 71%, 
respectively. Finally, twenty-one patients (95%) obtained complete or stable 
high-level mixed chimerism (50-95%), and the 1-year discontinuation rate of IgRT 
was 89%.
CONCLUSION: Based on the concept in which IgRT is the standard treatment for 
XLA, HCT may be an effective and safe alternative treatment option for XLA 
patients, and IgRT can be discontinued following transplantation. It is ideal to 
perform HCT in XLA patients for whom transplantation is indicated before they 
develop organ damage.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-023-01551-2
PMID: 37454339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]