---
reference_id: "PMID:36609186"
title: "Fetal anemia in monochorionic twins: a review on diagnosis, management, and outcome."
authors:
- Tollenaar LSA
- Slaghekke F
- Middeldorp JM
- Lopriore E
journal: Expert Rev Hematol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/17474086.2023.2166921
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fetal anemia in monochorionic twins: a review on diagnosis, management, and outcome.
**Authors:** Tollenaar LSA, Slaghekke F, Middeldorp JM, Lopriore E
**Journal:** Expert Rev Hematol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17474086.2023.2166921](https://doi.org/10.1080/17474086.2023.2166921)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Hematol. 2023 Jan;16(1):9-16. doi: 10.1080/17474086.2023.2166921. 
Epub 2023 Jan 19.

Fetal anemia in monochorionic twins: a review on diagnosis, management, and 
outcome.

Tollenaar LSA(1), Slaghekke F(1), Middeldorp JM(1), Lopriore E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Division of Fetal therapy, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Monochorionic twins may develop fetal anemia when blood is 
unequally distributed via the placental vascular anastomoses. This review 
focuses on the causes of fetal anemia in complicated monochorionic twins and 
highlights the differences in management and outcome.
AREAS COVERED: Fetal anemia can occur in the context of twin anemia polycythemia 
sequence (TAPS), chronic twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) and acute 
peripartum TTTS, and in cotwins after single fetal demise. Diagnosis of fetal 
anemia is based on abnormal Doppler ultrasound measurements. Management options 
include fetoscopic laser surgery, intrauterine blood transfusion, or expectant 
management, depending on the type of complication and the severity of the 
disease. In all complications, fetal anemia may lead to perinatal mortality, 
neonatal morbidity, severe cerebral injury, and long-term neurodevelopmental 
impairment. In TAPS specifically, anemic donors may also show bilateral 
deafness.
EXPERT OPINION: Knowledge on the diagnosis and optimal treatment in TTTS is 
nowadays widespread, but caregivers often fail to distinguish TAPS from acute 
peripartum TTTS at birth. A full blood count including reticulocyte count is 
required, and placental dye injection is extremely helpful to reach the correct 
diagnosis and establish the optimal management.

DOI: 10.1080/17474086.2023.2166921
PMID: 36609186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]