---
reference_id: "PMID:34040195"
title: SNORD116 and growth hormone therapy impact IGFBP7 in Prader-Willi syndrome.
authors:
- Eddiry S
- Diene G
- Molinas C
- Salles J
- Auriol FC
- Gennero I
- Bieth E
- Skryabin BV
- Rozhdestvensky TS
- Burnett LC
- Leibel RL
- Tauber M
- Salles JP
journal: Genet Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-021-01185-y
keywords:
- Animals
- Growth Hormone
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Mice
- Neurons
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics"
- "RNA, Small Nucleolar"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SNORD116 and growth hormone therapy impact IGFBP7 in Prader-Willi syndrome.
**Authors:** Eddiry S, Diene G, Molinas C, Salles J, Auriol FC, Gennero I, Bieth E, Skryabin BV, Rozhdestvensky TS, Burnett LC, Leibel RL, Tauber M, Salles JP
**Journal:** Genet Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-021-01185-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-021-01185-y)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2021 Sep;23(9):1664-1672. doi: 10.1038/s41436-021-01185-y. Epub
2021  May 26.

SNORD116 and growth hormone therapy impact IGFBP7 in Prader-Willi syndrome.

Eddiry S(1)(2), Diene G(3)(4), Molinas C(1)(3)(4), Salles J(1)(5), Auriol 
FC(1)(2), Gennero I(1), Bieth E(6), Skryabin BV(7), Rozhdestvensky TS(7), 
Burnett LC(8), Leibel RL(9), Tauber M(1)(3)(4), Salles JP(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, CPTP, UMR INSERM 1043 CNRS 
5828, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.
(2)Unité de Recherche Clinique Pédiatrique CIC 1436, Hôpital des Enfants, CHU de 
Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(3)Centre de Référence du Syndrome de Prader-Willi, Toulouse, France.
(4)Unité d'Endocrinologie, Hôpital des Enfants, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, 
France.
(5)Service de Psychiatrie et Psychologie, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(6)Génétique Médicale, CHU Toulouse-Purpan, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France.
(7)Medical Faculty, Core Facility Transgenic Animal and Genetic Engineering 
Models (TRAM), University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(8)Levo Therapeutics, Skokie, IL, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Molecular Genetics, Columbia 
University, NY, New York, USA.
(10)Centre de Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, CPTP, UMR INSERM 1043 CNRS 
5828, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France. salles.jp@chu-toulouse.fr.
(11)Unité de Recherche Clinique Pédiatrique CIC 1436, Hôpital des Enfants, CHU 
de Toulouse, Toulouse, France. salles.jp@chu-toulouse.fr.
(12)Unité d'Endocrinologie, Hôpital des Enfants, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, 
France. salles.jp@chu-toulouse.fr.

PURPOSE: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with 
hypothalamic dysfunction due to deficiency of imprinted genes located on the 
15q11-q13 chromosome. Among them, the SNORD116 gene appears critical for the 
expression of the PWS phenotype. We aimed to clarify the role of SNORD116 in 
cellular and animal models with regard to growth hormone therapy (GHT), the main 
approved treatment for PWS.
METHODS: We collected serum and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from 
GH-treated PWS patients to differentiate into dopaminergic neurons, and in 
parallel used a Snord116 knockout mouse model. We analyzed the expression of 
factors potentially linked to GH responsiveness.
RESULTS: We found elevated levels of circulating IGFBP7 in naive PWS patients, 
with IGFBP7 levels normalizing under GHT. We found elevated IGFBP7 levels in the 
brains of Snord116 knockout mice and in iPSC-derived neurons from a 
SNORD116-deleted PWS patient. High circulating levels of IGFBP7 in PWS patients 
may result from both increased IGFBP7 expression and decreased IGFBP7 cleavage, 
by downregulation of the proconvertase PC1.
CONCLUSION: SNORD116 deletion affects IGFBP7 levels, while IGFBP7 decreases 
under GHT in PWS patients. Modulation of the IGFBP7 level, which interacts with 
IGF1, has implications in the pathophysiology and management of PWS under GHT.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-021-01185-y
PMCID: PMC8460435
PMID: 34040195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.