---
reference_id: "PMID:33242578"
title: Epigenetic regulation in the pathogenesis of non-melanoma skin cancer.
authors:
- Kashyap MP
- Sinha R
- Mukhtar MS
- Athar M
journal: Semin Cancer Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2020.11.009
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/genetics"
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Humans
- "RNA, Long Noncoding"
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Ultraviolet Rays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic regulation in the pathogenesis of non-melanoma skin cancer.
**Authors:** Kashyap MP, Sinha R, Mukhtar MS, Athar M
**Journal:** Semin Cancer Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semcancer.2020.11.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2020.11.009)

## Content

1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2022 Aug;83:36-56. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2020.11.009.
Epub  2020 Nov 23.

Epigenetic regulation in the pathogenesis of non-melanoma skin cancer.

Kashyap MP(1), Sinha R(1), Mukhtar MS(2), Athar M(3).

Author information:
(1)UAB Research Center of Excellence in Arsenicals, Department of Dermatology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.
(3)UAB Research Center of Excellence in Arsenicals, Department of Dermatology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. Electronic
address: mohammadathar@uabmc.edu.

Understanding of cancer with the help of ever-expanding cutting edge
technological tools and bioinformatics is revolutionizing modern cancer research
by broadening the space of discovery window of various genomic and epigenomic
processes. Genomics data integrated with multi-omics layering have advanced
cancer research. Uncovering such layers of genetic mutations/modifications,
epigenetic regulation and their role in the complex pathophysiology of cancer
progression could lead to novel therapeutic interventions. Although a plethora
of literature is available in public domain defining the role of various tumor
driver gene mutations, understanding of epigenetic regulation of cancer is still
emerging. This review focuses on epigenetic regulation association with the
pathogenesis of non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC). NMSC has higher prevalence in
Caucasian populations compared to other races. Due to lack of proper reporting
to cancer registries, the incidence rates for NMSC worldwide cannot be
accurately estimated. However, this is the most common neoplasm in humans, and
millions of new cases per year are reported in the United States alone. In organ
transplant recipients, the incidence of NMSC particularly of squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) is very high and these SCCs frequently become metastatic and
lethal. Understanding of solar ultraviolet (UV) light-induced damage and
impaired DNA repair process leading to DNA mutations and nuclear instability
provide an insight into the pathogenesis of metastatic neoplasm. This review
discusses the recent advances in the field of epigenetics of NMSCs.
Particularly, the role of DNA methylation, histone hyperacetylation and
non-coding RNA such as long-chain noncoding (lnc) RNAs, circular RNAs and miRNA
in the disease progression are summarized.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2020.11.009
PMID: 33242578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
