---
reference_id: "PMID:18620963"
title: Viral hemorrhagic fever-induced acute kidney injury.
authors:
- Lima EQ
- Nogueira ML
journal: Semin Nephrol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2008.04.009
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/etiology, physiopathology"
- Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome/physiopathology
- Humans
- Severe Dengue/physiopathology
- Yellow Fever/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Viral hemorrhagic fever-induced acute kidney injury.
**Authors:** Lima EQ, Nogueira ML
**Journal:** Semin Nephrol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semnephrol.2008.04.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semnephrol.2008.04.009)

## Content

1. Semin Nephrol. 2008 Jul;28(4):409-415. doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2008.04.009.

Viral hemorrhagic fever-induced acute kidney injury.

Lima EQ(1), Nogueira ML(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Sao Jose do Rio Preto Medical School, Sao Jose do Rio 
Preto, Sao Paulo, Brazil.. Electronic address: equintino@uol.com.br.
(2)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Infectious Diseases, Sao Jose do Rio 
Preto Medical School, Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Viral hemorrhagic fevers (VHFs) are diseases caused by the RNA virus from 4 
different families (Flaviridiae, Arenaviridae, Bunyaviridae, and Filoviridae) 
that are acquired through the bite of an infected arthropod or by the inhalation 
of particles of rodent excreta. Among the VHFs, dengue and yellow fever are the 
most prevalent in tropical regions worldwide. The clinical presentation is 
characterized by fever, malaise, increased vascular permeability, and 
coagulation defects that can result in bleeding. Acute kidney injury is an 
uncommon complication but renal dysfunction has been associated with various 
VHFs. In this article we review the renal manifestations of dengue and yellow 
fever infections.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2008.04.009
PMID: 18620963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]