---
reference_id: "PMID:22729223"
title: De novo somatic mutations in components of the PI3K-AKT3-mTOR pathway cause hemimegalencephaly.
authors:
- Lee JH
- Huynh M
- Silhavy JL
- Kim S
- Dixon-Salazar T
- Heiberg A
- Scott E
- Bafna V
- Hill KJ
- Collazo A
- Funari V
- Russ C
- Gabriel SB
- Mathern GW
- Gleeson JG
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2329
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exome
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mosaicism
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/genetics
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De novo somatic mutations in components of the PI3K-AKT3-mTOR pathway cause hemimegalencephaly.
**Authors:** Lee JH, Huynh M, Silhavy JL, Kim S, Dixon-Salazar T, Heiberg A, Scott E, Bafna V, Hill KJ, Collazo A, Funari V, Russ C, Gabriel SB, Mathern GW, Gleeson JG
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2329](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2329)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2012 Jun 24;44(8):941-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.2329.

De novo somatic mutations in components of the PI3K-AKT3-mTOR pathway cause 
hemimegalencephaly.

Lee JH(1), Huynh M, Silhavy JL, Kim S, Dixon-Salazar T, Heiberg A, Scott E, 
Bafna V, Hill KJ, Collazo A, Funari V, Russ C, Gabriel SB, Mathern GW, Gleeson 
JG.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomic Medicine, Rady Children's Hospital, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.

De novo somatic mutations in focal areas are well documented in diseases such as 
neoplasia but are rarely reported in malformation of the developing brain. 
Hemimegalencephaly (HME) is characterized by overgrowth of either one of the two 
cerebral hemispheres. The molecular etiology of HME remains a mystery. The 
intractable epilepsy that is associated with HME can be relieved by the surgical 
treatment hemispherectomy, allowing sampling of diseased tissue. Exome 
sequencing and mass spectrometry analysis in paired brain-blood samples from 
individuals with HME (n = 20 cases) identified de novo somatic mutations in 30% 
of affected individuals in the PIK3CA, AKT3 and MTOR genes. A recurrent PIK3CA 
c.1633G>A mutation was found in four separate cases. Identified mutations were 
present in 8-40% of sequenced alleles in various brain regions and were 
associated with increased neuronal S6 protein phosphorylation in the brains of 
affected individuals, indicating aberrant activation of mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR) signaling. Thus HME is probably a genetically mosaic disease 
caused by gain of function in phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT3-mTOR 
signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2329
PMCID: PMC4417942
PMID: 22729223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]