---
reference_id: "PMID:19183216"
title: Coprophenomena in Tourette syndrome.
authors:
- Freeman RD
- Zinner SH
- Müller-Vahl KR
- Fast DK
- Burd LJ
- Kano Y
- Rothenberger A
- Roessner V
- Kerbeshian J
- Stern JS
- Jankovic J
- Loughin T
- Janik P
- Shady G
- Robertson MM
- Lang AE
- Budman C
- Magor A
- Bruun R
- Berlin CM Jr
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2008.03135.x
keywords:
- Behavioral Symptoms/complications
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Language
- Male
- Social Behavior
- Tics/complications
- "Tourette Syndrome/complications, psychology"
- Verbal Behavior
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coprophenomena in Tourette syndrome.
**Authors:** Freeman RD, Zinner SH, Müller-Vahl KR, Fast DK, Burd LJ, Kano Y, Rothenberger A, Roessner V, Kerbeshian J, Stern JS, Jankovic J, Loughin T, Janik P, Shady G, Robertson MM, Lang AE, Budman C, Magor A, Bruun R, Berlin CM Jr
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1469-8749.2008.03135.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8749.2008.03135.x)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2009 Mar;51(3):218-27. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-8749.2008.03135.x. Epub 2008 Dec 4.

Coprophenomena in Tourette syndrome.

Freeman RD(1), Zinner SH, Müller-Vahl KR, Fast DK, Burd LJ, Kano Y, Rothenberger
A, Roessner V, Kerbeshian J, Stern JS, Jankovic J, Loughin T, Janik P, Shady G,
Robertson MM, Lang AE, Budman C, Magor A, Bruun R, Berlin CM Jr.

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. rfreeman@cw.bc.ca

The aims of this descriptive study were to examine the prevalence and
associations of coprophenomena (involuntary expression of socially unacceptable
words or gestures) in individuals with Tourette syndrome. Participant data were
obtained from the Tourette Syndrome International Database Consortium. A
specialized data collection form was completed for each of a subset of 597
consecutive new patients with Tourette syndrome from 15 sites in seven
countries. Coprolalia occurred at some point in the lifetime of 19.3% of males
and 14.6% of females, and copropraxia in 5.9% of males and 4.9% of females.
Coprolalia was three times as frequent as copropraxia, with a mean onset of each
at about 11 years, 5 years after the onset of tics. In 11% of those with
coprolalia and 12% of those with copropraxia these coprophenomena were one of
the initial symptoms of Tourette syndrome. The onsets of tics, coprophenomena,
smelling of non-food objects, and spitting were strongly intercorrelated. Early
onset of coprophenomena was not associated with its longer persistence. The most
robust associations of coprophenomena were with the number of non-tic repetitive
behaviors, spitting, and inappropriate sexual behavior. Although coprophenomena
are a frequently feared possibility in the course of Tourette syndrome, their
emergence occurs in only about one in five referred patients. Because the course
and actual impact of coprophenomena are variable, additional prospective
research is needed to provide better counseling and prognostic information.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2008.03135.x
PMID: 19183216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
