---
reference_id: "PMID:37565840"
title: Comprehensive genomic profiling of penile squamous cell carcinoma and the impact of human papillomavirus status on immune-checkpoint inhibitor-related biomarkers.
authors:
- Nazha B
- Zhuang T
- Wu S
- Brown JT
- Magee D
- Carthon BC
- Kucuk O
- Nabhan C
- Barata PC
- Heath EI
- Ryan CJ
- McKay RR
- Master VA
- Bilen MA
journal: Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.34982
keywords:
- Brain Neoplasms
- Male
- Human papillomavirus 16
- Retrospective Studies
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- "B7-H1 Antigen/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary"
- Mutation
- "Papillomavirus Infections/complications, genetics"
- Human Papillomavirus Viruses
- Humans
- Human papillomavirus 18
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Penile Neoplasms/genetics
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Colorectal Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive genomic profiling of penile squamous cell carcinoma and the impact of human papillomavirus status on immune-checkpoint inhibitor-related biomarkers.
**Authors:** Nazha B, Zhuang T, Wu S, Brown JT, Magee D, Carthon BC, Kucuk O, Nabhan C, Barata PC, Heath EI, Ryan CJ, McKay RR, Master VA, Bilen MA
**Journal:** Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.34982](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.34982)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2023 Dec 15;129(24):3884-3893. doi: 10.1002/cncr.34982. Epub 2023 Aug 
11.

Comprehensive genomic profiling of penile squamous cell carcinoma and the impact 
of human papillomavirus status on immune-checkpoint inhibitor-related 
biomarkers.

Nazha B(1)(2), Zhuang T(3), Wu S(4), Brown JT(1)(2), Magee D(4), Carthon 
BC(1)(2), Kucuk O(1)(2), Nabhan C(4), Barata PC(5), Heath EI(6), Ryan CJ(7), 
McKay RR(8), Master VA(1)(9), Bilen MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
(5)University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(6)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan, USA.
(7)Division of Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(8)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(9)Department of Urology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Advanced penile squamous cell carcinoma (pSCC) is a rare and 
aggressive malignancy with limited success of immune-checkpoint inhibitors 
(ICIs). Approximately half of pSCC cases are associated with human 
papillomavirus (HPV) infection.
METHODS: Evaluation was done retrospectively of the landscape of somatic 
alterations and ICI-related biomarkers in pSCC by using the Caris Life Sciences 
data set with the aim to establish signatures for HPV-dependent oncogenesis. The 
pSCC tumors were analyzed by using next-generation sequencing (NGS) of DNA and 
RNA. Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression was evaluated by 
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Microsatellite instability (MSI) was tested by 
fragment analysis, IHC (SP142; ≥1%), and NGS. Tumor mutational burden (TMB)-high 
was defined as ≥10 mutations/Mb. HPV16/18 status was determined by using 
whole-exome sequencing (WES) when available. Significance was adjusted for 
multiple comparisons (q value < .05).
RESULTS: NGS of the overall cohort (N = 108) revealed TP53 (46%), CDKN2A (26%), 
and PIK3CA (25%) to be the most common mutations. Overall, 51% of tumors were 
PD-L1+, 10.7% had high TMB, and 1.1% had mismatch repair-deficient 
(dMMR)/MSI-high status. Twenty-nine patients had their HPV status made available 
by WES (HPV16/18+, n = 13; HPV16/18-, n = 16). KMT2C mutations (33% vs. 0%) and 
FGF3 amplifications (30.8% vs. 0%) were specific to HPV16/18+ tumors, whereas 
CDKN2A mutations (0% vs. 37.5%) were exclusive to HPV16/18- tumors. TMB-high was 
exclusively found in the HPV16/18+ group (30.8%). The two groups had comparable 
PD-L1 and dMMR/MSI-H status.
CONCLUSIONS: In a large and comprehensive NGS-based evaluation of somatic 
alterations in pSCC, HPV16/18+ versus HPV16/18- pSCCs were molecularly distinct 
tumors. Our finding that TMB-high is exclusive to HPV16/18+ tumors requires 
confirmation in larger data sets.
PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY: Penile squamous cell carcinoma (pSCC) is a rare and 
aggressive malignancy in the advanced setting, with poor prognosis and little 
success with immune-checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) in an unselected patient 
approach. Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is a known risk factor for pSCC; 
its impact on genomic tumor profiling is less defined. Using next-generation 
sequencing, we explored the genetic landscape and ICI-related biomarkers of pSCC 
and HPV-driven oncogenic molecular signatures. Our results indicate that 
HPV-positive and HPV-negative pSCCs are molecularly distinct tumors. Increased 
tumor mutational burden is associated with HPV-positive tumors, and could serve 
as a biomarker for predicting therapeutic response to ICI-based therapies. Our 
results support the growing literature indicating that HPV status in pSCC can be 
used to guide patient stratification in ICI-based clinical trials.

© 2023 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.34982
PMID: 37565840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]