---
reference_id: "PMID:20671626"
title: "Modafinil for narcolepsy: systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Golicki D
- Bala MM
- Niewada M
- Wierzbicka A
journal: Med Sci Monit
year: '2010'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modafinil for narcolepsy: systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Golicki D, Bala MM, Niewada M, Wierzbicka A
**Journal:** Med Sci Monit (2010)

## Content

1. Med Sci Monit. 2010 Aug;16(8):RA177-86.

Modafinil for narcolepsy: systematic review and meta-analysis.

Golicki D(1), Bala MM, Niewada M, Wierzbicka A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacoeconomics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland. dominik.golicki@wum.edu.pl

BACKGROUND: To assess the effectiveness and safety of modafinil vs. no active 
treatment or other drugs in the treatment of narcolepsy.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The following electronic databases were searched throughout 
January 2009: MEDLINE, EMBASE and The Cochrane Library. Additional references 
were obtained from reviewed articles. Only randomized controlled trials were 
included.
RESULTS: We included 9 trials involving 1,054 patients in the study. Modafinil 
in comparison with placebo brings significant benefit in terms of elimination of 
excessive daytime sleepiness assessed by: ESS scale--weighted mean difference 
(WMD) -2.73 points (95%CI -3.39, -2.08), MSLT test--WMD 1.11 minutes (95%CI 
0.55, 1.66) and MWT test--WMD 2.82 minutes (95%CI 2.40, 3.24), as well as the 
number and duration of somnolence, sleep attacks and naps per day, but was not 
different from placebo in the number of attacks of cataplexy per day. Modafinil 
in comparison with placebo improved quality of life of narcoleptic patients 
according to SF-36 questionnaire, but was associated with more common nausea. It 
had similar effect on excessive daytime sleepiness as sodium oxybate and was 
associated with less common nausea.
CONCLUSIONS: In narcoleptic patients, modafinil in comparison with placebo is 
effective in the treatment of excessive daytime sleepiness, but not cataplexy.

PMID: 20671626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]