---
reference_id: "PMID:39970477"
title: "Castleman's disease: one disease, multiple etiologies."
authors:
- Esteban-Sampedro J
- Martín-Portugués M
- Campo PD
- Fernández-Güitián R
- Ruiz-Becerra JE
- Moreno-Torres V
journal: AIDS Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.24875/AIDSRev.M25000079
keywords:
- "Castleman Disease/pathology, virology"
- Humans
- "Herpesvirus 8, Human"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Castleman's disease: one disease, multiple etiologies.
**Authors:** Esteban-Sampedro J, Martín-Portugués M, Campo PD, Fernández-Güitián R, Ruiz-Becerra JE, Moreno-Torres V
**Journal:** AIDS Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.24875/AIDSRev.M25000079](https://doi.org/10.24875/AIDSRev.M25000079)

## Content

1. AIDS Rev. 2024;26(4):158-172. doi: 10.24875/AIDSRev.M25000079.

Castleman's disease: one disease, multiple etiologies.

Esteban-Sampedro J(1), Martín-Portugués M(1), Campo PD(1), Fernández-Güitián
R(1), Ruiz-Becerra JE(2), Moreno-Torres V(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Health Research Institute Puerta de
Hierro-Segovia de Arana (IDIPHIM), Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro,
Majadahonda.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro de
Majadahonda, Majadahonda.
(3)UNIR Health Sciences School and Medical Center, Universidad Internacional de
La Rioja. Madrid, Spain.

Castleman disease (CD) comprises a heterogeneous group of rare
lymphoproliferative disorders characterized by similar morphological features in
nodal biopsies. Since Benjamin Castleman's initial description in 1956, our
understanding of CD has progressed substantially. The intricate mechanisms
underlying the four recognized subtypes of multicentric CD (MCD) have been
studied thoroughly during recent decades. Major disease contributors include the
identification of certain viral infections, namely human herpes virus-8 (HHV-8)
and HIV; and the discovery of molecular and genetic mechanisms driving disease
development and progression and the consequent development of biological
targeted therapies, notably siltuximab and rituximab. The CD has been associated
with autoimmune, autoinflammatory, and hematological disorders. Along with
epidemiological data, the current classification of CD encompasses unicentric CD
and MCD. MCD is further subdivided into HHV-8-associated MCD, polyneuropathy,
organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal protein, skin (POEMS)-associated MCD,
and idiopathic MCD (iMCD), which includes thrombocytopenia, anasarca, fever,
reticulin TAFRO-iMCD, and iMCD-not-otherwise-specified (iMCD-NOS). While these
subtypes share common histological and similar clinical manifestations, they
represent distinct conditions. In this review, we discuss the differences in
epidemiology, pathophysiology, histology, clinical presentation, and treatment
for all distinct CD subtypes. We focus on the role of viral infections in CD
development and epidemiology. We finally end by acknowledging areas where
further research is needed to uncover the complex nature of CD.

Copyright: © 2024 Permanyer.

DOI: 10.24875/AIDSRev.M25000079
PMID: 39970477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
