---
reference_id: "PMID:19732857"
title: A physiologically based mathematical model of integrated calcium homeostasis and bone remodeling.
authors:
- Peterson MC
- Riggs MM
journal: Bone
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.08.053
keywords:
- Bone Remodeling/physiology
- Calcitriol/metabolism
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Theoretical"
- Parathyroid Hormone/blood
- Phosphates/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A physiologically based mathematical model of integrated calcium homeostasis and bone remodeling.
**Authors:** Peterson MC, Riggs MM
**Journal:** Bone (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2009.08.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2009.08.053)

## Content

1. Bone. 2010 Jan;46(1):49-63. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.08.053. Epub 2009 Sep 2.

A physiologically based mathematical model of integrated calcium homeostasis and
bone remodeling.

Peterson MC(1), Riggs MM.

Author information:
(1)Amgen, Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, MS 28-3-B, Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA.
mark.peterson@biogenidec.com

Bone biology is physiologically complex and intimately linked to calcium
homeostasis. The literature provides a wealth of qualitative and/or quantitative
descriptions of cellular mechanisms, bone dynamics, associated organ dynamics,
related disease sequela, and results of therapeutic interventions. We present a
physiologically based mathematical model of integrated calcium homeostasis and
bone biology constructed from literature data. The model includes relevant
cellular aspects with major controlling mechanisms for bone remodeling and
calcium homeostasis and appropriately describes a broad range of clinical and
therapeutic conditions. These include changes in plasma parathyroid hormone
(PTH), calcitriol, calcium and phosphate (PO4), and bone-remodeling markers as
manifested by hypoparathyroidism and hyperparathyroidism, renal insufficiency,
daily PTH 1-34 administration, and receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand
(RANKL) inhibition. This model highlights the utility of systems approaches to
physiologic modeling in the bone field. The presented bone and calcium
homeostasis model provides an integrated mathematical construct to conduct
hypothesis testing of influential system aspects, to visualize elements of this
complex endocrine system, and to continue to build upon iteratively with the
results of ongoing scientific research.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.08.053
PMID: 19732857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
