---
reference_id: "PMID:33739452"
title: "The inflammatory markers of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) and adolescents associated with COVID-19: A meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhao Y
- Yin L
- Patel J
- Tang L
- Huang Y
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.26951
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The inflammatory markers of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) and adolescents associated with COVID-19: A meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhao Y, Yin L, Patel J, Tang L, Huang Y
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.26951](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.26951)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2021 Jul;93(7):4358-4369. doi: 10.1002/jmv.26951. Epub 2021 Apr
1.

The inflammatory markers of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children 
(MIS-C) and adolescents associated with COVID-19: A meta-analysis.

Zhao Y(1), Yin L(2)(3)(4)(5), Patel J(6)(7), Tang L(1), Huang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, People's Hospital of Chongqing Banan District, 
Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, National Clinical 
Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Chongqing, China.
(4)Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Ministry of Education 
Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing, China.
(5)Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, China International 
Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Child Development and Critical 
Disorders, Chongqing, China.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston (UTHealth) School of Public Health, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, Fay W. Boozman College of Public Health, 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.

To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis to characterize inflammatory 
markers in comparisons of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) 
versus severe/non-severe COVID-19, severe MIS-C versus non-severe MIS-C, and 
among age groups of MIS-C. Nine databases were searched for studies on 
inflammatory markers of MIS-C. After quality checks, data were pooled using a 
fixed or random effects model. Inflammatory markers included white blood cell 
count (WBC) or leukocytes, absolute lymphocyte count (ALC), absolute neutrophil 
count (ANC), platelet count (PLT), C-reactive protein (CRP), procalcitonin 
(PCT), ferritin, D-dimer, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), fibrinogen, and 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) for comparisons by severity and age. 
Twenty-one studies with 1735 participants yielded 787 MIS-C patients. Compared 
to non-severe COVID-19 patients, MIS-C patients had lower ALC and higher ANC, 
CRP, and D-dimer levels. Compared to severe COVID-19 patients, MIS-C patients 
had lower LDH and PLT counts and higher ESR levels. Severe MIS-C patients had 
higher levels of WBC, ANC, CRP, D-dimer, and ferritin than non-severe MIS-C 
patients. For MIS-C, younger children (0-5 years) had lower CRP and ferritin 
levels than middle-aged/older children/adolescents. Measurement of inflammatory 
markers might assist clinicians in accurate evaluation and diagnosis of MIS-C 
and the associated disorders.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.26951
PMCID: PMC8250955
PMID: 33739452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflict 
of interests.