---
reference_id: "PMID:16675368"
title: Medical and psychiatric casualties caused by conventional and radiological (dirty) bombs.
authors:
- Hall RC
- Hall RC
- Chapman MJ
journal: Gen Hosp Psychiatry
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2006.03.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medical and psychiatric casualties caused by conventional and radiological (dirty) bombs.
**Authors:** Hall RC, Hall RC, Chapman MJ
**Journal:** Gen Hosp Psychiatry (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2006.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2006.03.001)

## Content

1. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2006 May-Jun;28(3):242-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2006.03.001.

Medical and psychiatric casualties caused by conventional and radiological 
(dirty) bombs.

Hall RC(1), Hall RC, Chapman MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins Hospital, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. rcwh@att.net

Erratum in
    Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2006 Nov-Dec;28(6):546.

Bombing is the preferred method of terrorist attack. Unfortunately, the 
frequency and prevalence of this form of terrorism/criminal act/means of 
extortion are increasing in the United States. These attacks result in specific 
physical and psychiatric trauma, and produce both acute and long-term 
psychiatric sequelae. It will become increasingly important for trauma surgeons, 
emergency physicians and psychiatrists to be familiar with the special needs and 
treatment of these patients. This paper reviews the physical and psychiatric 
consequences of high explosive and radiological (dirty) bombs, and makes 
recommendations for the psychiatric management of bombing victims.

DOI: 10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2006.03.001
PMID: 16675368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]