---
reference_id: "PMID:34473675"
title: Disconnected Motor Intention and Spatial Attention in a Case of Probable Marchiafava-Bignami Disease.
authors:
- Kobayashi S
- Hirose M
- Akutsu Y
- Hirayama K
- Ishida Y
- Ugawa Y
journal: Cogn Behav Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/WNN.0000000000000274
keywords:
- Alcoholism/complications
- Attention
- Corpus Callosum/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Intention
- Male
- Marchiafava-Bignami Disease/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disconnected Motor Intention and Spatial Attention in a Case of Probable Marchiafava-Bignami Disease.
**Authors:** Kobayashi S, Hirose M, Akutsu Y, Hirayama K, Ishida Y, Ugawa Y
**Journal:** Cogn Behav Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WNN.0000000000000274](https://doi.org/10.1097/WNN.0000000000000274)

## Content

1. Cogn Behav Neurol. 2021 Sep 2;34(3):226-232. doi:
10.1097/WNN.0000000000000274.

Disconnected Motor Intention and Spatial Attention in a Case of Probable 
Marchiafava-Bignami Disease.

Kobayashi S(1), Hirose M(2), Akutsu Y(3), Hirayama K(4), Ishida Y(2), Ugawa 
Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Teikyo University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Departments of Neurology.
(3)Rehabilitation, Takeda General Hospital, Fukushima, Japan.
(4)Department of Occupational Therapy, Yamagata Prefectural University of Health 
Sciences, Yamagata, Japan.
(5)Department of Human Neurophysiology, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima, 
Japan.

Marchiafava-Bignami disease (MBD) is a rare complication of chronic alcoholism 
that typically causes demyelination and necrosis of the corpus callosum. Here, 
we report a man with probable MBD with callosal and right medial paracentral 
lesions who presented with abnormal reaching behavior and ideomotor apraxia of 
the left hand. He exhibited difficulty in reaching with the left hand when a 
target object was placed on his right-hand side, and he exhibited rightward bias 
when using his right hand in a line bisection task. These disturbances in 
reaching suggest disruption of the top-down control of motor intention and 
spatial attention at the corpus callosum.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/WNN.0000000000000274
PMID: 34473675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.