---
reference_id: "PMID:38718796"
title: ARID1B controls transcriptional programs of axon projection in an organoid model of the human corpus callosum.
authors:
- Martins-Costa C
- Wiegers A
- Pham VA
- Sidhaye J
- Doleschall B
- Novatchkova M
- Lendl T
- Piber M
- Peer A
- Möseneder P
- Stuempflen M
- Chow SYA
- Seidl R
- Prayer D
- Höftberger R
- Kasprian G
- Ikeuchi Y
- Corsini NS
- Knoblich JA
journal: Cell Stem Cell
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2024.04.014
keywords:
- Humans
- Corpus Callosum/metabolism
- "Transcription Factors/metabolism, genetics"
- Organoids/metabolism
- Axons/metabolism
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Matrix Attachment Region Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Neurons/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ARID1B controls transcriptional programs of axon projection in an organoid model of the human corpus callosum.
**Authors:** Martins-Costa C, Wiegers A, Pham VA, Sidhaye J, Doleschall B, Novatchkova M, Lendl T, Piber M, Peer A, Möseneder P, Stuempflen M, Chow SYA, Seidl R, Prayer D, Höftberger R, Kasprian G, Ikeuchi Y, Corsini NS, Knoblich JA
**Journal:** Cell Stem Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stem.2024.04.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2024.04.014)

## Content

1. Cell Stem Cell. 2024 Jun 6;31(6):866-885.e14. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2024.04.014.
 Epub 2024 May 7.

ARID1B controls transcriptional programs of axon projection in an organoid model 
of the human corpus callosum.

Martins-Costa C(1), Wiegers A(2), Pham VA(2), Sidhaye J(2), Doleschall B(1), 
Novatchkova M(2), Lendl T(2), Piber M(2), Peer A(2), Möseneder P(2), Stuempflen 
M(3), Chow SYA(4), Seidl R(5), Prayer D(3), Höftberger R(6), Kasprian G(3), 
Ikeuchi Y(4), Corsini NS(7), Knoblich JA(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences 
(IMBA), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria; Vienna BioCenter PhD 
Program, Doctoral School of the University of Vienna and Medical University of 
Vienna, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences 
(IMBA), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-Guided Therapy, Medical University 
of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(4)Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, 153-8505 Tokyo, 
Japan; Institute for AI and Beyond, The University of Tokyo, 113-0032 Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(6)Division of Neuropathology and Neurochemistry, Department of Neurology, 
Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(7)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences 
(IMBA), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
nina.corsini@imba.oeaw.ac.at.
(8)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences 
(IMBA), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria; Department of Neurology, 
Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
juergen.knoblich@imba.oeaw.ac.at.

Mutations in ARID1B, a member of the mSWI/SNF complex, cause severe 
neurodevelopmental phenotypes with elusive mechanisms in humans. The most common 
structural abnormality in the brain of ARID1B patients is agenesis of the corpus 
callosum (ACC), characterized by the absence of an interhemispheric white matter 
tract that connects distant cortical regions. Here, we find that neurons 
expressing SATB2, a determinant of callosal projection neuron (CPN) identity, 
show impaired maturation in ARID1B+/- neural organoids. Molecularly, a reduction 
in chromatin accessibility of genomic regions targeted by TCF-like, NFI-like, 
and ARID-like transcription factors drives the differential expression of genes 
required for corpus callosum (CC) development. Through an in vitro model of the 
CC tract, we demonstrate that this transcriptional dysregulation impairs the 
formation of long-range axonal projections, causing structural 
underconnectivity. Our study uncovers new functions of the mSWI/SNF during human 
corticogenesis, identifying cell-autonomous axonogenesis defects in SATB2+ 
neurons as a cause of ACC in ARID1B patients.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2024.04.014
PMID: 38718796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests J.A.K. is an inventor 
on patents describing the cerebral organoid technology (patent numbers: 
US10407664B2, EP12196954.7A) and co-founder and scientific advisory board member 
of a:head bio AG.