---
reference_id: "PMID:37792075"
title: "Behavioral Treatment for Speech and Language in Primary Progressive Aphasia and Primary Progressive Apraxia of Speech: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Wauters LD
- Croot K
- Dial HR
- Duffy JR
- Grasso SM
- Kim E
- Schaffer Mendez K
- Ballard KJ
- Clark HM
- Kohley L
- Murray LL
- Rogalski EJ
- Figeys M
- Milman L
- Henry ML
journal: Neuropsychol Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11065-023-09607-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Aphasia, Primary Progressive/therapy, psychology, complications"
- "Apraxias/psychology, therapy"
- Behavior Therapy/methods
- Language Therapy/methods
- Speech Therapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Behavioral Treatment for Speech and Language in Primary Progressive Aphasia and Primary Progressive Apraxia of Speech: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Wauters LD, Croot K, Dial HR, Duffy JR, Grasso SM, Kim E, Schaffer Mendez K, Ballard KJ, Clark HM, Kohley L, Murray LL, Rogalski EJ, Figeys M, Milman L, Henry ML
**Journal:** Neuropsychol Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11065-023-09607-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11065-023-09607-1)

## Content

1. Neuropsychol Rev. 2024 Sep;34(3):882-923. doi: 10.1007/s11065-023-09607-1.
Epub  2023 Oct 4.

Behavioral Treatment for Speech and Language in Primary Progressive Aphasia and 
Primary Progressive Apraxia of Speech: A Systematic Review.

Wauters LD(#)(1), Croot K(#)(2), Dial HR(3), Duffy JR(4), Grasso SM(1), Kim 
E(5), Schaffer Mendez K(6), Ballard KJ(7), Clark HM(4), Kohley L(1), Murray 
LL(8), Rogalski EJ(9)(10), Figeys M(11), Milman L(12), Henry ML(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, University of Texas at 
Austin, 2504A Whitis Ave. (A1100), 78712, Austin, TX, USA.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Sydney, 2006, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of Houston, 
Houston, TX, 77204, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Division of Speech Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, 55902, USA.
(5)US Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Faculty of 
Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Alberta, T6G 2R3, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(6)The University of St. Augustine, Austin, TX, 78712, USA.
(7)Faculty of Medicine & Health and Brain & Mind Centre, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.
(8)School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Western University, London, 
ON, N6A 3K7, Canada.
(9)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University, 
Feinberg School of Medicine, 60611, Chicago, IL, USA.
(10)Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease, Northwestern 
University, Feinberg School of Medicine, 60611, Chicago, IL, USA.
(11)Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 
2R3, Canada.
(12)Department of Communicative Disorders and Deaf Education, Utah State 
University, Logan, UT, 84322, USA.
(13)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, University of Texas at 
Austin, 2504A Whitis Ave. (A1100), 78712, Austin, TX, USA. 
maya.henry@austin.utexas.edu.
(14)Department of Neurology, Dell Medical School, University of Texas at Austin, 
78712, Austin, TX, USA. maya.henry@austin.utexas.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Primary progressive aphasia (PPA) and primary progressive apraxia of speech 
(PPAOS) are neurodegenerative syndromes characterized by progressive decline in 
language or speech. There is a growing number of studies investigating 
speech-language interventions for PPA/PPAOS. An updated systematic evaluation of 
the treatment evidence is warranted to inform best clinical practice and guide 
future treatment research. We systematically reviewed the evidence for 
behavioral treatment for speech and language in this population. Reviewed 
articles were published in peer-reviewed journals through 31 May 2021. We 
evaluated level of evidence, reporting quality, and risk of bias using a 
modified version of the American Speech-Language Hearing Association (ASHA) 
Levels of Evidence, an appraisal point system, additional reporting quality and 
internal/external validity items, and, as appropriate, the Single Case 
Experimental Design Scale or the Physiotherapy Evidence Database - PsycBITE 
Rating Scale for Randomized and Non-Randomized Controlled Trials. Results were 
synthesized using quantitative summaries and narrative review. A total of 103 
studies reported treatment outcomes for 626 individuals with PPA; no studies 
used the diagnostic label PPAOS. Most studies evaluated interventions for word 
retrieval. The highest-quality evidence was provided by 45 experimental and 
quasi-experimental studies (16 controlled group studies, 29 single-subject 
designs). All (k = 45/45) reported improvement on a primary outcome measure; 
most reported generalization (k = 34/43), maintenance (k = 34/39), or social 
validity (k = 17/19) of treatment for at least one participant. The available 
evidence supports speech-language intervention for persons with PPA; however, 
treatment for PPAOS awaits systematic investigation. Implications and 
limitations of the evidence and the review are discussed.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11065-023-09607-1
PMCID: PMC11473583
PMID: 37792075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This work was organized and completed by the 
Academy of Neurologic Communication Sciences and Disorders (ANCDS). All authors 
(Lisa Wauters, Karen Croot, Heather Dial, Joseph Duffy, Stephanie Grasso, Esther 
Kim, Kristin Schaffer Mendez, Kirrie Ballard, Heather Clark, Leeah Kohley, Laura 
Murray, Emily Rogalski, Mathieu Figeys, Lisa Milman, and Maya Henry) completed 
work on this manuscript as members of or on behalf of the Progressive Neurogenic 
Communication Disorders writing group of the ANCDS.