---
reference_id: "PMID:15831824"
title: "Clostridium difficile toxins: mechanism of action and role in disease."
authors:
- Voth DE
- Ballard JD
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.18.2.247-263.2005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clostridium difficile toxins: mechanism of action and role in disease.
**Authors:** Voth DE, Ballard JD
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.18.2.247-263.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.18.2.247-263.2005)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2005 Apr;18(2):247-63. doi: 10.1128/CMR.18.2.247-263.2005.

Clostridium difficile toxins: mechanism of action and role in disease.

Voth DE(1), Ballard JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

As the leading cause of hospital-acquired diarrhea, Clostridium difficile 
colonizes the large bowel of patients undergoing antibiotic therapy and produces 
two toxins, which cause notable disease pathologies. These two toxins, TcdA and 
TcdB, are encoded on a pathogenicity locus along with negative and positive 
regulators of their expression. Following expression and release from the 
bacterium, TcdA and TcdB translocate to the cytosol of target cells and 
inactivate small GTP-binding proteins, which include Rho, Rac, and Cdc42. 
Inactivation of these substrates occurs through monoglucosylation of a single 
reactive threonine, which lies within the effector-binding loop and coordinates 
a divalent cation critical to binding GTP. By glucosylating small GTPases, TcdA 
and TcdB cause actin condensation and cell rounding, which is followed by death 
of the cell. TcdA elicits effects primarily within the intestinal epithelium, 
while TcdB has a broader cell tropism. Important advances in the study of these 
toxins have been made in the past 15 years, and these are detailed in this 
review. The domains, subdomains, and residues of these toxins important for 
receptor binding and enzymatic activity have been elegantly studied and are 
highlighted herein. Furthermore, there have been major advances in defining the 
role of these toxins in modulating the inflammatory events involving the 
disruption of cell junctions, neuronal activation, cytokine production, and 
infiltration by polymorphonuclear cells. Collectively, the present review 
provides a comprehensive update on TcdA and TcdB's mechanism of action as well 
as the role of these toxins in disease.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.18.2.247-263.2005
PMCID: PMC1082799
PMID: 15831824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]