---
reference_id: "PMID:10760477"
title: Genetic evidence for a multi-subunit complex in the O-methyltransferase steps of coenzyme Q biosynthesis.
authors:
- Hsu AY
- Do TQ
- Lee PT
- Clarke CF
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00019-6
keywords:
- Enzyme Stability/genetics
- Gene Deletion
- Genotype
- "Methyltransferases/biosynthesis, chemistry, metabolism"
- Mutation
- RNA/biosynthesis
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/enzymology, genetics"
- "Ubiquinone/biosynthesis, chemistry, deficiency"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic evidence for a multi-subunit complex in the O-methyltransferase steps of coenzyme Q biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Hsu AY, Do TQ, Lee PT, Clarke CF
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00019-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00019-6)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Apr 12;1484(2-3):287-97. doi:
10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00019-6.

Genetic evidence for a multi-subunit complex in the O-methyltransferase steps of
coenzyme Q biosynthesis.

Hsu AY(1), Do TQ, Lee PT, Clarke CF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Molecular Biology Institute,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1569, USA.

Coq3 O-methyltransferase carries out both O-methylation steps in coenzyme Q
(ubiquinone) biosynthesis. The degree to which Coq3 O-methyltransferase activity
and expression are dependent on the other seven COQ gene products has been
investigated. A panel of yeast mutant strains harboring null mutations in each
of the genes required for coenzyme Q biosynthesis (COQ1-COQ8) have been
prepared. Mitochondria have been isolated from each member of the yeast coq
mutant collection, from the wild-type parental strains and from respiratory
deficient mutants harboring deletions in ATP2 or COR1 genes. These latter
strains constitute Q-replete, respiratory deficient controls. Each of these
mitochondrial preparations has been analyzed for COQ3-encoded
O-methyltransferase activity and steady state levels of Coq3 polypeptide. The
findings indicate that the presence of the other COQ gene products is required
to observe normal levels of O-methyltransferase activity and the Coq3
polypeptide. However, COQ3 steady state RNA levels are not decreased in any of
the coq mutants, relative to either wild-type or respiratory deficient control
strains, suggesting either a decreased rate of translation or a decreased
stability of the Coq3 polypeptide. These data are consistent with the
involvement of the Coq polypeptides (or the Q-intermediates formed by the Coq
polypeptides) in a multi-subunit complex. It is our hypothesis that a deficiency
in any one of the COQ gene products results in a defective complex in which the
Coq3 polypeptide is rendered unstable.

DOI: 10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00019-6
PMID: 10760477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
