---
reference_id: "PMID:15146390"
title: "Mutations in the transmembrane natriuretic peptide receptor NPR-B impair skeletal growth and cause acromesomelic dysplasia, type Maroteaux."
authors:
- Bartels CF
- Bükülmez H
- Padayatti P
- Rhee DK
- van Ravenswaaij-Arts C
- Pauli RM
- Mundlos S
- Chitayat D
- Shih LY
- Al-Gazali LI
- Kant S
- Cole T
- Morton J
- Cormier-Daire V
- Faivre L
- Lees M
- Kirk J
- Mortier GR
- Leroy J
- Zabel B
- Kim CA
- Crow Y
- Braverman NE
- van den Akker F
- Warman ML
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1086/422013
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Adult
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- "Bone and Bones/abnormalities, pathology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Cell Membrane/physiology
- Dwarfism
- Female
- Guanylate Cyclase/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Protein Binding
- Protein Folding
- "Receptors, Atrial Natriuretic Factor/genetics"
- Atrial Natriuretic Factor Receptor B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the transmembrane natriuretic peptide receptor NPR-B impair skeletal growth and cause acromesomelic dysplasia, type Maroteaux.
**Authors:** Bartels CF, Bükülmez H, Padayatti P, Rhee DK, van Ravenswaaij-Arts C, Pauli RM, Mundlos S, Chitayat D, Shih LY, Al-Gazali LI, Kant S, Cole T, Morton J, Cormier-Daire V, Faivre L, Lees M, Kirk J, Mortier GR, Leroy J, Zabel B, Kim CA, Crow Y, Braverman NE, van den Akker F, Warman ML
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1086/422013](https://doi.org/10.1086/422013)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Jul;75(1):27-34. doi: 10.1086/422013. Epub 2004 May 14.

Mutations in the transmembrane natriuretic peptide receptor NPR-B impair 
skeletal growth and cause acromesomelic dysplasia, type Maroteaux.

Bartels CF(1), Bükülmez H, Padayatti P, Rhee DK, van Ravenswaaij-Arts C, Pauli 
RM, Mundlos S, Chitayat D, Shih LY, Al-Gazali LI, Kant S, Cole T, Morton J, 
Cormier-Daire V, Faivre L, Lees M, Kirk J, Mortier GR, Leroy J, Zabel B, Kim CA, 
Crow Y, Braverman NE, van den Akker F, Warman ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The homodimeric transmembrane receptor natriuretic peptide receptor B (NPR-B 
[also known as guanylate cyclase B, GC-B, and GUC2B]; gene name NPR2) produces 
cytoplasmic cyclic GMP from GTP on binding its extracellular ligand, C-type 
natriuretic peptide (CNP). CNP has previously been implicated in the regulation 
of skeletal growth in transgenic and knockout mice. The autosomal recessive 
skeletal dysplasia known as "acromesomelic dysplasia, type Maroteaux" (AMDM) 
maps to an interval that contains NPR2. We sequenced DNA from 21 families 
affected by AMDM and found 4 nonsense mutations, 4 frameshift mutations, 2 
splice-site mutations, and 11 missense mutations. Molecular modeling was used to 
examine the putative protein change brought about by each missense mutation. 
Three missense mutations were tested in a functional assay and were found to 
have markedly deficient guanylyl cyclase activity. We also found that obligate 
carriers of NPR2 mutations have heights that are below the mean for matched 
controls. We conclude that, although NPR-B is expressed in a number of tissues, 
its major role is in the regulation of skeletal growth.

DOI: 10.1086/422013
PMCID: PMC1182004
PMID: 15146390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]