---
reference_id: "PMID:26779811"
title: Neutrophil extracellular traps enriched in oxidized mitochondrial DNA are interferogenic and contribute to lupus-like disease.
authors:
- Lood C
- Blanco LP
- Purmalek MM
- Carmona-Rivera C
- De Ravin SS
- Smith CK
- Malech HL
- Ledbetter JA
- Elkon KB
- Kaplan MJ
journal: Nat Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nm.4027
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Antigen-Antibody Complex
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/metabolism"
- "Extracellular Traps/immunology, metabolism"
- Female
- "Granulomatous Disease, Chronic/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunoprecipitation
- In Vitro Techniques
- Interferon Type I/immunology
- Jurkat Cells
- "Kidney/immunology, metabolism"
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/immunology, metabolism"
- Male
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- NADPH Oxidases/genetics
- Neutrophils/immunology
- Oxidation-Reduction
- Peroxidase/metabolism
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Ribonucleoproteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutrophil extracellular traps enriched in oxidized mitochondrial DNA are interferogenic and contribute to lupus-like disease.
**Authors:** Lood C, Blanco LP, Purmalek MM, Carmona-Rivera C, De Ravin SS, Smith CK, Malech HL, Ledbetter JA, Elkon KB, Kaplan MJ
**Journal:** Nat Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.4027](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4027)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2016 Feb;22(2):146-53. doi: 10.1038/nm.4027. Epub 2016 Jan 18.

Neutrophil extracellular traps enriched in oxidized mitochondrial DNA are
interferogenic and contribute to lupus-like disease.

Lood C(1), Blanco LP(2), Purmalek MM(2), Carmona-Rivera C(2), De Ravin SS(3),
Smith CK(2), Malech HL(3), Ledbetter JA(4), Elkon KB(1)(4), Kaplan MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Systemic Autoimmunity Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2016 Feb;22(2):126-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.4044.
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2016 Apr;12(4):195-6. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2016.24.

Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are implicated in autoimmunity, but how
they are generated and their roles in sterile inflammation remain unclear.
Ribonucleoprotein immune complexes (RNP ICs), inducers of NETosis, require
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) for maximal NET stimulation. After
RNP IC stimulation of neutrophils, mitochondria become hypopolarized and
translocate to the cell surface. Extracellular release of oxidized mitochondrial
DNA is proinflammatory in vitro, and when this DNA is injected into mice, it
stimulates type I interferon (IFN) signaling through a pathway dependent on the
DNA sensor STING. Mitochondrial ROS are also necessary for spontaneous NETosis
of low-density granulocytes from individuals with systemic lupus erythematosus.
This was also observed in individuals with chronic granulomatous disease, who
lack NADPH oxidase activity but still develop autoimmunity and type I IFN
signatures. Mitochondrial ROS inhibition in vivo reduces disease severity and
type I IFN responses in a mouse model of lupus. Together, these findings
highlight a role for mitochondria in the generation not only of NETs but also of
pro-inflammatory oxidized mitochondrial DNA in autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.4027
PMCID: PMC4742415
PMID: 26779811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no conflicts of
interest exist.
