---
reference_id: "PMID:39403121"
title: Giant Erythema in a Child with Lyme Disease.
authors:
- Banadyha N
- Rogalskyy I
- Komorovsky R
journal: Infect Drug Resist
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2147/IDR.S489845
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giant Erythema in a Child with Lyme Disease.
**Authors:** Banadyha N, Rogalskyy I, Komorovsky R
**Journal:** Infect Drug Resist (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2147/IDR.S489845](https://doi.org/10.2147/IDR.S489845)

## Content

1. Infect Drug Resist. 2024 Oct 10;17:4343-4348. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S489845. 
eCollection 2024.

Giant Erythema in a Child with Lyme Disease.

Banadyha N(1), Rogalskyy I(2), Komorovsky R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Postgraduate Education, Ivan 
Horbachevsky Ternopil National Medical University, Ternopil, Ukraine.
(2)Main Administration, State Service of Ukraine for Food Safety and Consumers 
Protection, Ternopil, Ukraine.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine II, Ivan Horbachevsky Ternopil National 
Medical University, Ternopil, Ukraine.

Herein we report a case of Lyme borreliosis in a pediatric patient, highlighting 
the diagnostic challenges associated with this condition. An 11-year-old girl 
was admitted with high fever, headaches, abdominal pain, and a progressing rash. 
Initial symptoms included small rashes that vanished with antihistamine 
treatment, but maculopapular rashes later emerged on the trunk and limbs, 
prompting further investigation. Differential diagnosis included toxic erythema, 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and Lyme borreliosis. Despite no reported tick bite 
and initial doubt due to the season, Lyme borreliosis was confirmed by serologic 
testing, diagnosing the patient with early disseminated Lyme disease. The 
diagnostic complexity was increased by the rash's atypical presentation - large, 
homogeneous papular rashes. This case emphasizes the necessity for physicians to 
adeptly gather detailed histories and employ thorough, up-to-date diagnostic 
methods. Effective correlation of clinical findings with laboratory results and 
ongoing patient observation proved critical for an accurate diagnosis. This 
report underscores the importance of recognizing atypical presentations of Lyme 
borreliosis in children and the need for careful differential diagnosis.

Plain Language Summary: We report the case of a 11-year-old girl diagnosed with 
Lyme disease, caused by tick bites that are often painless and hard to detect. 
This makes diagnosis challenging, especially in children. Her illness began with 
a small rash that disappeared with treatment. Over a few days, she developed a 
high fever, headaches, abdominal pain, and extensive rashes on her body. 
Initially, we considered other conditions like toxic erythema. However, new 
rashes kept appearing, prompting reconsideration. Despite no known tick bite, 
Lyme disease was suspected. A blood test confirmed Lyme disease, and she was 
treated with the antibiotic doxycycline. She improved significantly within 10 
days, and no new rashes appeared after 2 weeks. This case highlights the need to 
consider Lyme disease even without a known tick bite. It underscores the 
importance of careful observation, detailed patient histories, and thorough 
testing to accurately diagnose and treat this disease in children.

© 2024 Banadyha et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S489845
PMCID: PMC11472734
PMID: 39403121

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors declare that they have no 
conflicts of interest in this medical case report and have not received any 
financial support.