---
reference_id: "PMID:32175165"
title: "Pleuropulmonary blastoma: A report of two cases."
authors:
- Demir ÖF
- Önal Ö
- Hasdıraz L
- Oğuzkaya F
- Kontaş O
- Ülgey A
journal: Turk Gogus Kalp Damar Cerrahisi Derg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5606/tgkdc.dergisi.2020.18215
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pleuropulmonary blastoma: A report of two cases.
**Authors:** Demir ÖF, Önal Ö, Hasdıraz L, Oğuzkaya F, Kontaş O, Ülgey A
**Journal:** Turk Gogus Kalp Damar Cerrahisi Derg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5606/tgkdc.dergisi.2020.18215](https://doi.org/10.5606/tgkdc.dergisi.2020.18215)

## Content

1. Turk Gogus Kalp Damar Cerrahisi Derg. 2020 Jan 23;28(1):209-212. doi:
10.5606/tgkdc.dergisi.2020.18215. eCollection 2020 Jan.

Pleuropulmonary blastoma: A report of two cases.

Demir ÖF(1), Önal Ö(1), Hasdıraz L(1), Oğuzkaya F(1), Kontaş O(2), Ülgey A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Erciyes University Faculty of Medicine,
Kayseri, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pathology, Erciyes University Faculty of Medicine, Kayseri,
Turkey.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Reanimation, Erciyes University Faculty of
Medicine, Kayseri, Turkey.

Pleuropulmonary blastoma is a rare and aggressive childhood tumor of mesenchymal
origin. It has a poor prognosis and mainly classified as cystic (type 1), mixed
type (type 2), and solid (type 3). Herein, we present two cases of
pleuropulmonary blastoma type 3 presenting with pneumothorax, a rare clinical
presentation of pleuropulmonary blastoma, which was successfully treated with
surgery.

Copyright © 2020, Turkish Society of Cardiovascular Surgery.

DOI: 10.5606/tgkdc.dergisi.2020.18215
PMCID: PMC7067010
PMID: 32175165

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declared no
conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship and/or publication of this
article.
