---
reference_id: "PMID:41596275"
title: The Importance of Ear Canal Microbiota and Earwax in the Prevention of Outer Ear Infections.
authors:
- Paprocka P
- Spałek J
- Daniluk T
- Kaliniak S
- Durnaś B
- Okła S
- Bucki R
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2026'
doi: 10.3390/ijms27020622
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Importance of Ear Canal Microbiota and Earwax in the Prevention of Outer Ear Infections.
**Authors:** Paprocka P, Spałek J, Daniluk T, Kaliniak S, Durnaś B, Okła S, Bucki R
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2026)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms27020622](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27020622)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2026 Jan 8;27(2):622. doi: 10.3390/ijms27020622.

The Importance of Ear Canal Microbiota and Earwax in the Prevention of Outer Ear 
Infections.

Paprocka P(1), Spałek J(2)(3), Daniluk T(4), Kaliniak S(2), Durnaś B(2)(3), Okła 
S(2)(3), Bucki R(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Medical Science, 
Collegium Medicum, Jan Kochanowski University, IX Wieków Kielc 19A, 25-317 
Kielce, Poland.
(2)Holy-Cross Cancer Center, Artwińskiego 3, 25-734 Kielce, Poland.
(3)Institute of Medical Science, Collegium Medicum, Jan Kochanowski University, 
IX Wieków Kielce 19A, 25-317 Kielce, Poland.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Nanobiomedical Engineering, Medical 
University of Białystok, 15-089 Białystok, Poland.

This article describes the microbiome of the outer ear and the earwax in the ear 
canal, which performs various protective functions against bacterial infections. 
This article is based on an analysis of literature gathered from databases 
including PubMed, Google Scholar, Web of Science, and Scopus, primarily from the 
last 15 years. The search strategy included MeSH terms: ear canal, microbiome, 
earwax, cerumen, antibacterial peptides, ear infections, biofilm. Only 
peer-reviewed articles were included. The natural ear canal microbiota provides 
so-called colonization resistance, which protects against invasion by pathogenic 
microorganisms. Earwax is composed primarily of keratin secreted by epithelial 
cells and substances secreted by sweat and apocrine glands. It plays a key role 
in the physiology of the ear canal, maintaining a low pH, limiting moisture, and 
exhibiting antimicrobial properties. Both an excess and a deficiency of earwax 
can lead to dysbiosis of the outer ear, and consequently to the development of 
various infections. In an era of increasing antibiotic resistance and the search 
for new solutions in the fight against pathogenic microorganisms, understanding 
the natural properties of earwax is becoming increasingly important.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms27020622
PMCID: PMC12841003
PMID: 41596275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.