---
reference_id: "PMID:30054636"
title: "Association of Circulating Tumor Cells With Late Recurrence of Estrogen Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer: A Secondary Analysis of a Randomized Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Sparano J
- "O'Neill A"
- Alpaugh K
- Wolff AC
- Northfelt DW
- Dang CT
- Sledge GW
- Miller KD
journal: JAMA Oncol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.2574
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Circulating Tumor Cells With Late Recurrence of Estrogen Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer: A Secondary Analysis of a Randomized Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Sparano J, O'Neill A, Alpaugh K, Wolff AC, Northfelt DW, Dang CT, Sledge GW, Miller KD
**Journal:** JAMA Oncol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.2574](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.2574)

## Content

1. JAMA Oncol. 2018 Dec 1;4(12):1700-1706. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.2574.

Association of Circulating Tumor Cells With Late Recurrence of Estrogen 
Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer: A Secondary Analysis of a Randomized Clinical 
Trial.

Sparano J(1), O'Neill A(2), Alpaugh K(3), Wolff AC(4), Northfelt DW(5), Dang 
CT(6), Sledge GW(7), Miller KD(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York.
(2)Department of Biostatistics & Computational Biology, Dana Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(4)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Mayo 
Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(6)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Oncology, Stanford Cancer Center, Palo 
Alto, California.
(8)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University 
Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis.

Comment in
    JAMA Oncol. 2019 Apr 1;5(4):574. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.7236.
    JAMA Oncol. 2019 Apr 1;5(4):573-574. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.7217.

IMPORTANCE: Late recurrence 5 or more years after diagnosis accounts for at 
least one-half of all cases of recurrent hormone receptor-positive breast 
cancer.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the presence of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) 
in a peripheral blood sample obtained approximately 5 years after diagnosis was 
associated with late clinical recurrence of operable human epidermal growth 
factor receptor 2-negative breast cancer.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This per-protocol secondary analysis of the 
Double-Blind Phase III Trial of Doxorubicin and Cyclophosphamide Followed by 
Paclitaxel With Bevacizumab or Placebo in Patients With Lymph Node Positive and 
High Risk Lymph Node Negative Breast Cancer enrolled patients from 2007 to 2011 
who were without clinical evidence of recurrence between 4.5 and 7.5 years after 
primary surgical treatment of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative 
stage II-III breast cancer followed by adjuvant systemic therapy. Patients were 
enrolled in a subprotocol for secondary analysis from February 25, 2013, to July 
29, 2016, after signing consent for the subprotocol. The analysis was performed 
in April 2018.
INTERVENTIONS: A blood sample was obtained for identification and enumeration of 
CTCs.
MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURES: The association between a positive CTC assay result 
(at least 1 CTC per 7.5 mL of blood) and clinical recurrence.
RESULTS: Among 547 women included in this analysis, the results of the CTC assay 
were positive for 18 of 353 with hormone receptor-positive disease (5.1% [95% 
CI, 3.0%-7.9%]); 23 of 353 patients (6.5% [95% CI, 4.2%-9.6%]) had a clinical 
recurrence. The recurrence rates per person-year of follow-up in the 
CTC-positive and CTC-negative groups were 21.4% (7 recurrences per 32.7 
person-years) and 2.0% (16 recurrences per 796.3 person-years), respectively. In 
multivariate models including clinical covariates, a positive CTC assay result 
was associated with a 13.1-fold higher risk of recurrence (hazard ratio point 
estimate, 13.1; 95% CI, 4.7-36.3). Seven of 23 patients (30.4% [95% CI, 
13.2%-52.9%]) with recurrence had a positive CTC assay result at a median of 2.8 
years (range, 0.1-2.8 years) before clinical recurrence. The CTC assay result 
was also positive for 8 of 193 patients (4.1% [95% CI, 1.8%-8.0%]) with hormone 
receptor-negative disease, although only 1 patient (0.5% [95% CI, 0%-2.9%]) 
experienced disease recurrence (this patient was CTC negative).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: A single positive CTC assay result 5 years after 
diagnosis of hormone receptor-positive breast cancer provided independent 
prognostic information for late clinical recurrence, which provides proof of 
concept that liquid-based biomarkers may be used to risk stratify for late 
recurrence and guide therapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00433511.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.2574
PMCID: PMC6385891
PMID: 30054636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.