---
reference_id: "PMID:39423724"
title: "The role of NMDA-receptor type glutamatergic antagonists dextromethorphan or ketamine in the treatment of nonketotic hyperglycinemia: A critical reassessment."
authors:
- Van Hove JLK
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108594
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of NMDA-receptor type glutamatergic antagonists dextromethorphan or ketamine in the treatment of nonketotic hyperglycinemia: A critical reassessment.
**Authors:** Van Hove JLK
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108594](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108594)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2024 Nov;143(3):108594. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108594.
Epub  2024 Oct 12.

The role of NMDA-receptor type glutamatergic antagonists dextromethorphan or 
ketamine in the treatment of nonketotic hyperglycinemia: A critical 
reassessment.

Van Hove JLK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, 
University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic address: 
johan.vanhove@childrenscolorado.org.

The recognition of glycine as an endogenous ligand at the allosteric activation 
site of the NMDA-type glutamatergic receptor led to the assumption that the 
excess glycine in nonketotic hyperglycinemia would result in overactivation of 
these receptors, and of the proposed use of inhibitors such as dextromethorphan 
or ketamine as a therapeutic agent. Years later it was recognized that these 
same receptors have an alternative endogenous activator d-serine, which is 
markedly decreased in nonketotic hyperglycinemia. This may result in 
underactivation of these NMDA-type glutamatergic receptors, challenging the 
earlier hypothesis. Clear clinical evidence of an added therapeutic benefit 
beyond the use of glycine reduction strategies from use of either 
dextromethorphan or ketamine in nonketotic hyperglycinemia has not been 
documented. The systematic use of these NMDA-type receptor antagonists in 
nonketotic hyperglycinemia should be reevaluated, particularly in light of 
emerging potential adverse effects.

Copyright © 2024 The Author. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108594
PMID: 39423724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The University 
of Colorado has the intention of filing intellectual property related to the 
treatment of nonketotic hyperglycinemia.