---
reference_id: "PMID:36748936"
title: The molecular pathogenesis of craniopharyngiomas.
authors:
- Campanini ML
- Almeida JP
- Martins CS
- de Castro M
journal: Arch Endocrinol Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.20945/2359-3997000000600
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Humans
- "Craniopharyngioma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Pituitary Neoplasms/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The molecular pathogenesis of craniopharyngiomas.
**Authors:** Campanini ML, Almeida JP, Martins CS, de Castro M
**Journal:** Arch Endocrinol Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.20945/2359-3997000000600](https://doi.org/10.20945/2359-3997000000600)

## Content

1. Arch Endocrinol Metab. 2023 Mar 10;67(2):266-275. doi: 
10.20945/2359-3997000000600. Epub 2023 Feb 7.

The molecular pathogenesis of craniopharyngiomas.

Campanini ML(1), Almeida JP(2), Martins CS(3)(4), de Castro M(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Clínica Médica, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, 
Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brasil, mlanciotti@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, United States.
(3)Departamento de Clínica Médica, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, 
Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brasil.
(4)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal do Mato Grosso do Sul, Campo 
Grande, RS, Brasil.

Research from the last 20 years has provided important insights into the 
molecular pathogenesis of craniopharyngiomas (CPs). Besides the well-known 
clinical and histological differences between the subtypes of CPs, 
adamantinomatous (ACP) and papillary (PCP) craniopharyngiomas, other molecular 
differences have been identified, further elucidating pathways related to the 
origin and development of such tumors. The present minireview assesses current 
knowledge on embryogenesis and the genetic, epigenetic, transcriptomic, and 
signaling pathways involved in the ACP and PCP subtypes, revealing the 
similarities and differences in their profiles. ACP and PCP subtypes can be 
identified by the presence of mutations in CTNNB1 and BRAF genes, with 
prevalence around 60% and 90%, respectively. Therefore, β-catenin accumulates in 
the nucleus-cytoplasm of cell clusters in ACPs and, in PCPs, cell immunostaining 
with specific antibody against the V600E-mutated protein can be seen. Distinct 
patterns of DNA methylation further differentiate ACPs and PCPs. In addition, 
research on genetic and epigenetic changes and tumor microenvironment 
specificities have further clarified the development and progression of the 
disease. No relevant transcriptional differences in ACPs have emerged between 
children and adults. In conclusion, ACPs and PCPs present diverse genetic 
signatures and each subtype is associated with specific signaling pathways. A 
better understanding of the pathways related to the growth of such tumors is 
paramount for the development of novel targeted therapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.20945/2359-3997000000600
PMCID: PMC10689043
PMID: 36748936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: no potential conflict of interest 
relevant to this article was reported.