---
reference_id: "PMID:23202933"
title: Molecular pathogenesis of neuromyelitis optica.
authors:
- Bukhari W
- Barnett MH
- Prain K
- Broadley SA
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2012'
doi: 10.3390/ijms131012970
keywords:
- Animals
- "Aquaporin 4/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Cytokines/metabolism
- "HLA Antigens/immunology, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/metabolism, pathology"
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Th17 Cells/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular pathogenesis of neuromyelitis optica.
**Authors:** Bukhari W, Barnett MH, Prain K, Broadley SA
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2012)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms131012970](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms131012970)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2012 Oct 11;13(10):12970-93. doi: 10.3390/ijms131012970.

Molecular pathogenesis of neuromyelitis optica.

Bukhari W(1), Barnett MH, Prain K, Broadley SA.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Gold Coast Campus, Griffith University, QLD 4222, 
Australia. w.bukhari@griffith.edu.au.

Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is a rare autoimmune disorder, distinct from multiple 
sclerosis, causing inflammatory lesions in the optic nerves and spinal cord. An 
autoantibody (NMO IgG) against aquaporin-4 (AQP4), a water channel expressed on 
astrocytes is thought to be causative. Peripheral production of the antibody is 
triggered by an unknown process in genetically susceptible individuals. 
Anti-AQP4 antibody enters the central nervous system (CNS) when the blood brain 
barrier is made permeable and has high affinity for orthogonal array particles 
of AQP4. Like other autoimmune diseases, Th17 cells and their effector cytokines 
(such as interleukin 6) have been implicated in pathogenesis. AQP4 expressing 
peripheral organs are not affected by NMO IgG, but the antibody causes extensive 
astrocytic loss in specific regions of the CNS through complement mediated 
cytotoxicity. Demyelination occurs during the inflammatory process and is 
probably secondary to oligodendrocyte apoptosis subsequent to loss of trophic 
support from astrocytes. Ultimately, extensive axonal injury leads to severe 
disability. Despite rapid advances in the understanding of NMO pathogenesis, 
unanswered questions remain, particularly with regards to disease mechanisms in 
NMO IgG seronegative cases. Increasing knowledge of the molecular pathology is 
leading to improved treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms131012970
PMCID: PMC3497307
PMID: 23202933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]