---
reference_id: "PMID:37409452"
title: Long-Term Prevalence of Systolic Dysfunction in MYBPC3 Versus MYH7-Related Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Beltrami M
- Fedele E
- Fumagalli C
- Mazzarotto F
- Girolami F
- Ferrantini C
- Coppini R
- Tofani L
- Bertaccini B
- Poggesi C
- Olivotto I
journal: Circ Genom Precis Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCGEN.122.003832
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Prevalence of Systolic Dysfunction in MYBPC3 Versus MYH7-Related Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Beltrami M, Fedele E, Fumagalli C, Mazzarotto F, Girolami F, Ferrantini C, Coppini R, Tofani L, Bertaccini B, Poggesi C, Olivotto I
**Journal:** Circ Genom Precis Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCGEN.122.003832](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCGEN.122.003832)

## Content

1. Circ Genom Precis Med. 2023 Aug;16(4):363-371. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGEN.122.003832.  Epub 2023 Jul 6.

Long-Term Prevalence of Systolic Dysfunction in MYBPC3 Versus MYH7-Related 
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.

Beltrami M(1), Fedele E(2), Fumagalli C(1)(3), Mazzarotto F(4), Girolami F(5), 
Ferrantini C(6), Coppini R(7), Tofani L(8), Bertaccini B(8), Poggesi C(6), 
Olivotto I(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Cardiomyopathy Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy (M.B., 
C.F.).
(2)Department of Cardiology, Policlinico Casilino, Rome, Italy (E.F.).
(3)Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences, Università degli Studi 
della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli," Naples, Italy (C.F.).
(4)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, 
Italy (F.M.).
(5)Meyer Children's Hospital, IRCSS, Florence, Italy (F.G., I.O.).
(6)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine (C.F., C.P., I.O.), 
University of Florence, Italy.
(7)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug 
Sciences and Child Health (NeuroFarBa) (R.C.), University of Florence, Italy.
(8)Department of Statistics, Computer Science, Applications (L.T., B.B.), 
University of Florence, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The 2 sarcomere genes most commonly associated with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy (HCM), MYBPC3 (myosin-binding protein C3) and MYH7 (β-myosin 
heavy chain), are indistinguishable at presentation, and genotype-phenotype 
correlations have been elusive. Based on molecular and pathophysiological 
differences, however, it is plausible to hypothesize a different behavior in 
myocardial performance, impacting lifetime changes in left ventricular (LV) 
function.
METHODS: We reviewed the initial and final echocardiograms of 402 consecutive 
HCM patients with pathogenic or likely pathogenic MYBPC3 (n=251) or MYH7 (n=151) 
mutations, followed over 9±8 years.
RESULTS: At presentation, MYBPC3 patients were less frequently obstructive (15% 
versus 26%; P=0.005) and had lower LV ejection fraction compared with MYH7 
(66±8% versus 68±8%, respectively; P=0.03). Both HCM patients harboring MYBPC3 
and MYH7 mutations exhibited a small but significant decline in LV systolic 
function during follow-up; however, new onset of severe LV systolic dysfunction 
(LV ejection fraction, <50%) was greater among MYBPC3 patients (15% versus 5% 
among MYH7; P=0.013). Prevalence of grade II/III diastolic dysfunction at final 
evaluation was comparable between MYBPC3 and MYH7 patients (P=0.509). In a Cox 
multivariable analysis, MYBPC3-positive status (hazard ratio, 2.53 [95% CI, 
1.09-5.82]; P=0.029), age (hazard ratio, 1.03 [95% CI, 1.00-1.06]; P=0.027), and 
atrial fibrillation (hazard ratio, 2.39 [95% CI, 1.14-5.05]; P=0.020) were 
independent predictors of severe systolic dysfunction. No statistically 
significant differences occurred with regard to incidence of atrial 
fibrillation, heart failure, appropriate implanted cardioverter defibrillator 
shock, or cardiovascular death.
CONCLUSIONS: MYBPC3-related HCM showed increased long-term prevalence of 
systolic dysfunction compared with MYH7, in spite of similar outcome. Such 
observations suggest different pathophysiology of clinical progression in the 2 
subsets and may prove relevant for understanding of genotype-phenotype 
correlations in HCM.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCGEN.122.003832
PMID: 37409452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Dr Olivotto has received research 
grants from and has served on the advisory board for Bristol Meyer Squibb, 
Cytokinetics, Amicus, Genzyme, Shire Takeda, Tenaya, Rocket Pharma, and Chiesi. 
The other authors report no conflicts.