---
reference_id: "PMID:39063116"
title: "Liver Fibrosis: From Basic Science towards Clinical Progress, Focusing on the Central Role of Hepatic Stellate Cells."
authors:
- Akkız H
- Gieseler RK
- Canbay A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25147873
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver Fibrosis: From Basic Science towards Clinical Progress, Focusing on the Central Role of Hepatic Stellate Cells.
**Authors:** Akkız H, Gieseler RK, Canbay A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25147873](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25147873)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 18;25(14):7873. doi: 10.3390/ijms25147873.

Liver Fibrosis: From Basic Science towards Clinical Progress, Focusing on the 
Central Role of Hepatic Stellate Cells.

Akkız H(1), Gieseler RK(2), Canbay A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Bahçeşehir, 
Beşiktaş, Istanbul 34353, Turkey.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Knappschaftskrankenhaus, 
Ruhr University Bochum, In der Schornau 23-25, 44892 Bochum, Germany.

The burden of chronic liver disease is globally increasing at an alarming rate. 
Chronic liver injury leads to liver inflammation and fibrosis (LF) as critical 
determinants of long-term outcomes such as cirrhosis, liver cancer, and 
mortality. LF is a wound-healing process characterized by excessive deposition 
of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins due to the activation of hepatic stellate 
cells (HSCs). In the healthy liver, quiescent HSCs metabolize and store 
retinoids. Upon fibrogenic activation, quiescent HSCs transdifferentiate into 
myofibroblasts; lose their vitamin A; upregulate α-smooth muscle actin; and 
produce proinflammatory soluble mediators, collagens, and inhibitors of ECM 
degradation. Activated HSCs are the main effector cells during hepatic 
fibrogenesis. In addition, the accumulation and activation of profibrogenic 
macrophages in response to hepatocyte death play a critical role in the 
initiation of HSC activation and survival. The main source of myofibroblasts is 
resident HSCs. Activated HSCs migrate to the site of active fibrogenesis to 
initiate the formation of a fibrous scar. Single-cell technologies revealed that 
quiescent HSCs are highly homogenous, while activated HSCs/myofibroblasts are 
much more heterogeneous. The complex process of inflammation results from the 
response of various hepatic cells to hepatocellular death and inflammatory 
signals related to intrahepatic injury pathways or extrahepatic mediators. 
Inflammatory processes modulate fibrogenesis by activating HSCs and, in turn, 
drive immune mechanisms via cytokines and chemokines. Increasing evidence also 
suggests that cellular stress responses contribute to fibrogenesis. Recent data 
demonstrated that LF can revert even at advanced stages of cirrhosis if the 
underlying cause is eliminated, which inhibits the inflammatory and 
profibrogenic cells. However, despite numerous clinical studies on plausible 
drug candidates, an approved antifibrotic therapy still remains elusive. This 
state-of-the-art review presents cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in 
hepatic fibrogenesis and its resolution, as well as comprehensively discusses 
the drivers linking liver injury to chronic liver inflammation and LF.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25147873
PMCID: PMC11277292
PMID: 39063116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.