---
reference_id: "PMID:29462390"
title: "Segmental Resection versus Total Proctocolectomy for Crohn's Colitis: What is the Best Operation in the Setting of Medically Refractory Disease or Dysplasia?"
authors:
- Lightner AL
journal: Inflamm Bowel Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/ibd/izx064
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Segmental Resection versus Total Proctocolectomy for Crohn's Colitis: What is the Best Operation in the Setting of Medically Refractory Disease or Dysplasia?
**Authors:** Lightner AL
**Journal:** Inflamm Bowel Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ibd/izx064](https://doi.org/10.1093/ibd/izx064)

## Content

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2018 Feb 15;24(3):532-538. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izx064.

Segmental Resection versus Total Proctocolectomy for Crohn's Colitis: What is 
the Best Operation in the Setting of Medically Refractory Disease or Dysplasia?

Lightner AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN.

Crohn's disease (CD) may affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract. When 
isolated to the colon, and patients become medically refractory, there are 
several surgical options - segmental resection, subtotal colectomy with 
ileorectal anastomosis, or a total proctocolectomy and end ileostomy. 
Unfortunately, surgery does not cure CD, and, regardless of the extent of bowel 
removed, recurrence may be seen in the small bowel. This may lead to need for 
further immunosuppression or surgery. Therefore, when appropriate, a segmental 
colectomy or subtotal colectomy may prevent a permanent ostomy required with a 
total proctocolectomy. In the setting of dysplasia identified on colonoscopy, 
low quality evidence guides our treatment paradigms. Even though identification 
of dysplasia has greatly improved with chromoendoscopy, rates of synchronous or 
metachronous neoplasm remain high. Thus, a total proctocolectomy and end 
ileostomy, whereas a larger operation, may be best for the patient to remove all 
at risk tissue. Further research with prospective or randomized control trials 
is needed to improve our practice guidelines of both scenarios.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izx064
PMID: 29462390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]