---
reference_id: "PMID:7719344"
title: Apert syndrome results from localized mutations of FGFR2 and is allelic with Crouzon syndrome.
authors:
- Wilkie AO
- Slaney SF
- Oldridge M
- Poole MD
- Ashworth GJ
- Hockley AD
- Hayward RD
- David DJ
- Pulleyn LJ
- Rutland P
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1038/ng0295-165
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Apert syndrome results from localized mutations of FGFR2 and is allelic with Crouzon syndrome.
**Authors:** Wilkie AO, Slaney SF, Oldridge M, Poole MD, Ashworth GJ, Hockley AD, Hayward RD, David DJ, Pulleyn LJ, Rutland P
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0295-165](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0295-165)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1995 Feb;9(2):165-72. doi: 10.1038/ng0295-165.

Apert syndrome results from localized mutations of FGFR2 and is allelic with 
Crouzon syndrome.

Wilkie AO(1), Slaney SF, Oldridge M, Poole MD, Ashworth GJ, Hockley AD, Hayward 
RD, David DJ, Pulleyn LJ, Rutland P, et al.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, 
UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1995 Feb;9(2):101-3. doi: 10.1038/ng0295-101.

Apert syndrome is a distinctive human malformation comprising craniosynostosis 
and severe syndactyly of the hands and feet. We have identified specific 
missense substitutions involving adjacent amino acids (Ser252Trp and Pro253Arg) 
in the linker between the second and third extracellular immunoglobulin (Ig) 
domains of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) in all 40 unrelated cases 
of Apert syndrome studied. Crouzon syndrome, characterized by craniosynostosis 
but normal limbs, was previously shown to result from allelic mutations of the 
third Ig domain of FGFR2. The contrasting effects of these mutations provide a 
genetic resource for dissecting the complex effects of signal transduction 
through FGFRs in cranial and limb morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0295-165
PMID: 7719344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]