---
reference_id: "PMID:11771667"
title: "Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI: a form of brittle bone disease with a mineralization defect."
authors:
- Glorieux FH
- Ward LM
- Rauch F
- Lalic L
- Roughley PJ
- Travers R
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.1.30
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alkaline Phosphatase/blood
- Bone Density
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/classification, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI: a form of brittle bone disease with a mineralization defect.
**Authors:** Glorieux FH, Ward LM, Rauch F, Lalic L, Roughley PJ, Travers R
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.1.30](https://doi.org/10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.1.30)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2002 Jan;17(1):30-8. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.1.30.

Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI: a form of brittle bone disease with a 
mineralization defect.

Glorieux FH(1), Ward LM, Rauch F, Lalic L, Roughley PJ, Travers R.

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, and Department of Surgery, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Dec;26(12):2795-7. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.540.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable disease of bone in which the 
hallmark is bone fragility. Usually, the disorder is divided into four groups on 
clinical grounds. We previously described a group of patients initially 
classified with OI type IV who had a discrete phenotype including hyperplastic 
callus formation without evidence of mutations in type I collagen. We called 
that disease entity OI type V. In this study, we describe another group of 8 
patients initially diagnosed with OI type IV who share unique, common 
characteristics. We propose to name this disorder "OI type VI." Fractures were 
first documented between 4 and 18 months of age. Patients with OI type VI 
sustained more frequent fractures than patients with OI type IV. Sclerae were 
white or faintly blue and dentinogenesis imperfecta was uniformly absent. All 
patients had vertebral compression fractures. No patients showed radiological 
signs of rickets. Lumbar spine areal bone mineral density (aBMD) was low and 
similar to age-matched patients with OI type IV. Serum alkaline phosphatase 
levels were elevated compared with age-matched patients with type IV OI (409 +/- 
145 U/liter vs. 295 +/- 95 U/liter; p < 0.03 by t-test). Other biochemical 
parameters of bone and mineral metabolism were within the reference range. 
Mutation screening of the coding regions and exon/intron boundaries of both 
collagen type I genes did not reveal any mutations, and type I collagen protein 
analyses were normal. Qualitative histology of iliac crest bone biopsy specimens 
showed an absence of the birefringent pattern of normal lamellar bone under 
polarized light, often with a "fish-scale" pattern. Quantitative 
histomorphometry revealed thin cortices, hyperosteoidosis, and a prolonged 
mineralization lag time in the presence of a decreased mineral apposition rate. 
We conclude that type VI OI is a moderate to severe form of brittle bone disease 
with accumulation of osteoid due to a mineralization defect, in the absence of a 
disturbance of mineral metabolism. The underlying genetic defect remains to be 
elucidated.

DOI: 10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.1.30
PMID: 11771667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]