---
reference_id: "PMID:7004293"
title: "Calcium channel blocking agents in the treatment of cardiovascular disorders. Part II: Hemodynamic effects and clinical applications."
authors:
- Stone PH
- Antman EM
- Muller JE
- Braunwald E
journal: Ann Intern Med
year: '1980'
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-93-6-886
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calcium channel blocking agents in the treatment of cardiovascular disorders. Part II: Hemodynamic effects and clinical applications.
**Authors:** Stone PH, Antman EM, Muller JE, Braunwald E
**Journal:** Ann Intern Med (1980)
**DOI:** [10.7326/0003-4819-93-6-886](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-93-6-886)

## Content

1. Ann Intern Med. 1980 Dec;93(6):886-904. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-93-6-886.

Calcium channel blocking agents in the treatment of cardiovascular disorders. 
Part II: Hemodynamic effects and clinical applications.

Stone PH, Antman EM, Muller JE, Braunwald E.

The calcium channel blocking agents have multiple hemodynamic effects that make 
them potentially valuable in treating many cardiovascular disorders. They are 
potent dilators of coronary and peripheral arteries and in isolated tissue 
preparations exert potent negative inotropic, chronotropic, and dromotropic 
effects. In intact animals the peripheral arterial vasodilatation induces 
reflex-mediated adrenergic activity, which opposes the direct negative 
inotropic, chronotropic, dromotropic, and hypotensive effects. The individual 
calcium channel blockers have different relative potencies on various 
cardiovascular functions. The net hemodynamic and electrophysiologic effect of 
each agent, therefore, results from a complex interplay of direct and reflex 
phenomena. The clinical efficacy of these agents in classic angina pectoris 
relates to their ability to decrease afterload, myocardial contractility, and 
heart rate and increase coronary blood flow. The agents have been used to 
prevent coronary spasm in Prinzmetal's variant angina. The negative inotropic 
effects of verapamil are valuable in improving the symptoms and hemodynamic 
disturbances of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The role of these agents in 
treating arterial hypertension, unstable angina pectoris, acute myocardial 
infarction, and ischemia during cardiopulmonary bypass needs to be determined.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-93-6-886
PMID: 7004293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]