---
reference_id: "PMID:29914392"
title: Three novel mutations in the ATP7B gene of unrelated Vietnamese patients with Wilson disease.
authors:
- Huong NTM
- Lien NTK
- Ngoc ND
- Mai NTP
- Hoa NPA
- Hai LT
- Van Chi P
- Van TT
- Van Khanh T
- Hoang NH
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0619-4
keywords:
- Child
- Copper-Transporting ATPases/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Hepatolenticular Degeneration/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three novel mutations in the ATP7B gene of unrelated Vietnamese patients with Wilson disease.
**Authors:** Huong NTM, Lien NTK, Ngoc ND, Mai NTP, Hoa NPA, Hai LT, Van Chi P, Van TT, Van Khanh T, Hoang NH
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-018-0619-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-018-0619-4)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2018 Jun 18;19(1):104. doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0619-4.

Three novel mutations in the ATP7B gene of unrelated Vietnamese patients with
Wilson disease.

Huong NTM(1), Lien NTK(2), Ngoc ND(1), Mai NTP(1), Hoa NPA(3), Hai LT(4), Van
Chi P(5), Van TT(6), Van Khanh T(6), Hoang NH(7).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Department, Vietnam National Children's Hospital, Ministry of
Health, 18/879 La Thanh str., Dongda, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(2)Institute of Genome Research, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, 18 -
Hoang Quoc Viet str., Caugiay, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(3)Hepatology Department, Vietnam National Children's Hospital, Ministry of
Health, 18/879 La Thanh str., Dongda, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(4)Vietnam National Children's Hospital, Ministry of Health, 18/879 La Thanh
str., Dongda, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(5)Institute of Biotechnology, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, 18 -
Hoang Quoc Viet str., Caugiay, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(6)Hanoi Medical University, Ministry of Education and Training, 1 - Ton That
Tung str., Dongda, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(7)Institute of Genome Research, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, 18 -
Hoang Quoc Viet str., Caugiay, Hanoi, Vietnam. nhhoang@igr.ac.vn.

BACKGROUND: Wilson disease (OMIM # 277900) is a autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by accumulation of copper in liver and brain. The accumulation of
copper resulting in oxidative stress and eventually cell death. The disease has
an onset in a childhood and result in a significant neurological impairment or
require lifelong treatment. Another serious consequence of the disease is the
development of liver damage and acute liver failure leading to liver transplant.
The disorder is caused by mutations in the ATP7B gene, encoding a P-type copper
transporting ATPase.
CASE PRESENTATION: We performed genetic analysis of three unrelated patients
from three different Vietnamese families. These patients had clinical features
such as numbness of hands and feet, vomiting, insomnia, palsy, liver failure and
Kayser-Fleischer (K-F) rings and were diagnosed with Wilson disease in the Human
Genetics Department, Vietnam National Children's Hospital. The entire coding
region and adjacent splice sites of ATP7B gene were amplified and sequenced by
Sanger method. Sequencing data were analyzed and compared with the ATP7B gene
sequence published in Ensembl (ENSG00000123191) by using BioEdit software to
detect mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, five mutations in the ATP7B gene were found. Among
of these, three mutations were novel: c.750_751insG (p.His251Alafs*19) in exon
2, c.2604delC (p.Pro868Profs*5) in exon 11, and c.3077 T > A (p.Phe1026Tyr) in
exon 14. Our results of the mutations associated with Wilson disease might
facilitate the development of effective treatment plans.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-018-0619-4
PMCID: PMC6006946
PMID: 29914392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The
study was approved by the Scientific Committee of Institute of Genome Research
under reference number 12/QD-NCHG. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed
consent for the publication of the patient’s medical data was obtained from the
parents before collecting samples. A copy of the written consent is available
for review by the editor of this journal. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.
