---
reference_id: "PMID:33416044"
title: A systematic review on the role of microbiota in the pathogenesis and treatment of eating disorders.
authors:
- Carbone EA
- "D'Amato P"
- Vicchio G
- De Fazio P
- Segura-Garcia C
journal: Eur Psychiatry
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2020.109
keywords:
- Affect
- "Anorexia Nervosa/microbiology, psychology, therapy"
- "Binge-Eating Disorder/microbiology, psychology, therapy"
- Brain/physiopathology
- "Bulimia Nervosa/microbiology, psychology, therapy"
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/microbiology, psychology, therapy"
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome/physiology
- Humans
- Psychopathology
- Satiety Response
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review on the role of microbiota in the pathogenesis and treatment of eating disorders.
**Authors:** Carbone EA, D'Amato P, Vicchio G, De Fazio P, Segura-Garcia C
**Journal:** Eur Psychiatry (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1192/j.eurpsy.2020.109](https://doi.org/10.1192/j.eurpsy.2020.109)

## Content

1. Eur Psychiatry. 2020 Dec 16;64(1):e2. doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2020.109.

A systematic review on the role of microbiota in the pathogenesis and treatment
of eating disorders.

Carbone EA(1)(2), D'Amato P(3), Vicchio G(4), De Fazio P(1), Segura-Garcia
C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro88100,
Italy.
(2)Outpatient Service for Clinical Research and Treatment of Eating Disorders,
University Hospital Mater Domini, Catanzaro88100, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University "Magna Graecia",
Catanzaro88100, Italy.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of
Calabria, Rende87036, Italy.

BACKGROUND: There is growing interest in new factors contributing to the genesis
of eating disorders (EDs). Research recently focused on the study of microbiota.
Dysbiosis, associated with a specific genetic susceptibility, may contribute to
the development of anorexia nervosa (AN), bulimia nervosa, or binge eating
disorder, and several putative mechanisms have already been identified. Diet
seems to have an impact not only on modification of the gut microbiota,
facilitating dysbiosis, but also on its recovery in patients with EDs.
METHODS: This systematic review based on the PICO strategy searching into
PubMed, EMBASE, PsychINFO, and Cochrane Library examined the literature on the
role of altered microbiota in the pathogenesis and treatment of EDs.
RESULTS: Sixteen studies were included, mostly regarding AN. Alpha diversity and
short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) levels were lower in patients with AN, and
affective symptoms and ED psychopathology seem related to changes in gut
microbiota. Microbiota-derived proteins stimulated the autoimmune system,
altering neuroendocrine control of mood and satiety in EDs. Microbial richness
increased in AN after weight regain on fecal microbiota transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: Microbiota homeostasis seems essential for a healthy communication
network between gut and brain. Dysbiosis may promote intestinal inflammation,
alter gut permeability, and trigger immune reactions in the hunger/satiety
regulation center contributing to the pathophysiological development of EDs. A
restored microbial balance may be a possible treatment target for EDs. A better
and more in-depth characterization of gut microbiota and gut-brain crosstalk is
required. Future studies may deepen the therapeutic and preventive role of
microbiota in EDs.

DOI: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2020.109
PMCID: PMC8057489
PMID: 33416044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
