---
reference_id: "PMID:39758591"
title: "Transcriptionally Active Human Papillomavirus in Male Genital Lichen Sclerosus, Penile Intraepithelial Neoplasia, and Penile Squamous Cell Carcinoma."
authors:
- Kravvas G
- Xie B
- Haider A
- Millar M
- Alnajjar HM
- Freeman A
- Muneer A
- Bunker CB
- Ahmed A
journal: JID Innov
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.xjidi.2024.100320
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptionally Active Human Papillomavirus in Male Genital Lichen Sclerosus, Penile Intraepithelial Neoplasia, and Penile Squamous Cell Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Kravvas G, Xie B, Haider A, Millar M, Alnajjar HM, Freeman A, Muneer A, Bunker CB, Ahmed A
**Journal:** JID Innov (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xjidi.2024.100320](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xjidi.2024.100320)

## Content

1. JID Innov. 2024 Oct 26;5(1):100320. doi: 10.1016/j.xjidi.2024.100320. 
eCollection 2025 Jan.

Transcriptionally Active Human Papillomavirus in Male Genital Lichen Sclerosus, 
Penile Intraepithelial Neoplasia, and Penile Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Kravvas G(1), Xie B(2), Haider A(3), Millar M(4), Alnajjar HM(5), Freeman A(3), 
Muneer A(5), Bunker CB(1), Ahmed A(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicince, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Histopathology, University College London Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(4)The Queen's Medical Research Institute, College of Medicine & Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Edinburg, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Urology, University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.

Penile intraepithelial neoplasia (PeIN) and penile squamous cell carcinoma 
(PeSCC) are both thought to be associated with male genital lichen sclerosus and 
human papillomavirus (HPV) infection through dichotomous pathways: (i) 
undifferentiated PeIN and warty/basaloid PeSCC are thought to be HPV related, 
whereas (ii) differentiated PeIN and usual PeSCC are considered HPV independent. 
Tissue arrays were constructed from male genital lichen sclerosus, 
undifferentiated and differentiated PeIN, usual-type PeSCC, and unaffected 
tissues. Staining for p16 and for high-risk and low-risk HPV subtypes through 
RNAscope was performed. The expression of HPV RNA and p16 were quantified, and 
appropriate statistical comparisons were undertaken. High-risk HPV was prevalent 
in undifferentiated PeIN (77%) and less so in PeSCC (46%) and was exiguous or 
absent in all other tissues. LR HPV was only observed in 2 tissue cores. Strong 
p16 staining exhibited 96.15% sensitivity and 100% specificity for high-risk 
HPV. Transcriptionally active HPV is unlikely to be implicated in male genital 
lichen sclerosus and differentiated PeIN, although it is clearly important in 
undifferentiated PeIN. The high prevalence of high-risk HPV in usual PeSCC 
challenges the existing paradigm. Strong p16 positivity was a reliable surrogate 
marker for the detection of transcriptionally active high-risk HPV.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xjidi.2024.100320
PMCID: PMC11696787
PMID: 39758591