---
reference_id: "PMID:18261745"
title: "Madras motor neuron disease (MMND): clinical description and survival pattern of 116 patients from Southern India seen over 36 years (1971-2007)."
authors:
- Nalini A
- Thennarasu K
- Yamini BK
- Shivashankar D
- Krishna N
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.12.026
keywords:
- Disability Evaluation
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- India/epidemiology
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- "Motor Neuron Disease/complications, epidemiology, mortality, pathology"
- "Optic Atrophy/etiology, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Sex Factors
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Madras motor neuron disease (MMND): clinical description and survival pattern of 116 patients from Southern India seen over 36 years (1971-2007).
**Authors:** Nalini A, Thennarasu K, Yamini BK, Shivashankar D, Krishna N
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2007.12.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2007.12.026)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2008 Jun 15;269(1-2):65-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.12.026. Epub
 2008 Feb 7.

Madras motor neuron disease (MMND): clinical description and survival pattern of 
116 patients from Southern India seen over 36 years (1971-2007).

Nalini A(1), Thennarasu K, Yamini BK, Shivashankar D, Krishna N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences, Bangalore, India. atchayaramnalini@yahoo.co.in

Madras motor neuron disease (MMND), MMND variant (MMNDV) and Familial MMND 
(FMMND) have a unique geographic distribution predominantly reported from 
Southern India. The characteristic features are onset in young, weakness and 
wasting of limbs, multiple lower cranial nerve palsies and sensorineural hearing 
loss. We describe the clinical features and survival pattern in 116 patients 
with Sporadic MMND, MMND variant and FMMND. A retrospective review of patients' 
medical records for clinical manifestations, electromyography, imaging, 
audiological and histopathology findings was performed. Over 36 years (1971 to 
2007) 116 patients (men: 59; women: 57) particularly hailing from Southern India 
were seen. Mean age of onset was 15.8+/-7.9 years. Predominant initial 
manifestations were impaired hearing with wasting and weakness of distal limb 
muscles and pyramidal dysfunction. All patients had clinical and/or audiological 
evidence of hearing impairment. Patients with MMNDV in addition had optic 
atrophy. The overall mean survival duration was 334.9+/-27.9 months. Thus, 
Madras motor neuron disease is clinically a distinct entity with features of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis but with young age of onset and presence of 
auditory neuropathy. Studies to look for environmental and genetic basis of this 
intriguing disease are necessary to find the causation of this rare disorder.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.12.026
PMID: 18261745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]