---
reference_id: "PMID:28034555"
title: "Impact of dengue virus (serotype DENV-2) infection on liver of BALB/c mice: A histopathological analysis."
authors:
- Sakinah S
- Priya SP
- Kumari S
- Amira F
- K P
- Alsaeedy H
- Ling MP
- Chee HY
- Higuchi A
- Alarfaj AA
- Munusamy MA
- Murugan K
- Taib CN
- Arulselvan P
- Rajan M
- Neela VK
- Hamat RA
- Benelli G
- Kumar SS
journal: Tissue Cell
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2016.11.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of dengue virus (serotype DENV-2) infection on liver of BALB/c mice: A histopathological analysis.
**Authors:** Sakinah S, Priya SP, Kumari S, Amira F, K P, Alsaeedy H, Ling MP, Chee HY, Higuchi A, Alarfaj AA, Munusamy MA, Murugan K, Taib CN, Arulselvan P, Rajan M, Neela VK, Hamat RA, Benelli G, Kumar SS
**Journal:** Tissue Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tice.2016.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tice.2016.11.005)

## Content

1. Tissue Cell. 2017 Feb;49(1):86-94. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2016.11.005. Epub 2016 
Nov 23.

Impact of dengue virus (serotype DENV-2) infection on liver of BALB/c mice: A 
histopathological analysis.

Sakinah S(1), Priya SP(1), Kumari S(1), Amira F(1), K P(1), Alsaeedy H(1), Ling 
MP(2), Chee HY(1), Higuchi A(3), Alarfaj AA(4), Munusamy MA(4), Murugan K(5), 
Taib CN(6), Arulselvan P(7), Rajan M(8), Neela VK(1), Hamat RA(1), Benelli G(9), 
Kumar SS(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Universiti Putra 
Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM 
Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia; Genetics and Regenerative Medicine Research Centre, 
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, National Central 
University, Jhong-li, Taoyuan 32001, Taiwan; Department of Reproduction, 
National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, 
Japan; Department of Botany and Microbiology, King Saud University, Riyadh 
11451, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Botany and Microbiology, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, 
Saudi Arabia.
(5)Division of Entomology, Department of Zoology, School of Life Sciences, 
Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(6)Department of Human Anatomy, Universiti Putra Malaysia 43400 UPM Serdang 
Selangor, Malaysia.
(7)Laboratory of Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics, Institute of Bioscience, 
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(8)Biomaterials in Medicinal Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Natural 
Products Chemistry, School of Chemistry, Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai-21, 
Tamil Nadu, India.
(9)Department of Agriculture, Food and Environment, University of Pisa, via 
delBorghetto 80, 56124 Pisa, Italy; The BioRobotics Institute, Sant'Anna School 
of Advanced Studies, VialeRinaldoPiaggio 34, 56025 Pontedera, Italy.
(10)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Universiti Putra 
Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia; Genetics and Regenerative 
Medicine Research Centre, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, 
Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address: sureshkudsc@gmail.com.

In this research, we characterized the histopathological impact of dengue virus 
(serotype DENV-2) infection in livers of BALB/c mice. The mice were infected 
with different doses of DENV-2 via intraperitoneal injection and liver tissues 
were processed for histological analyses and variation was documented. In the 
BALB/c mouse model, typical liver tissues showed regular hepatocyte 
architecture, with normal endothelial cells surrounding sinusoid capillary. 
Based on histopathological observations, the liver sections of BALB/c mice 
infected by DENV-2 exhibited a loss of cell integrity, with a widening of the 
sinusoidal spaces. There were marked increases in the infiltration of 
mononuclear cells. The areas of hemorrhage and micro- and macrovesicular 
steatosis were noted. Necrosis and apoptosis were abundantly present. The 
hallmark of viral infection, i.e., cytopathic effects, included intracellular 
edema and vacuole formation, cumulatively led to sinusoidal and lobular collapse 
in the liver. The histopathological studies on autopsy specimens of fatal human 
DENV cases are important to shed light on tissue damage for preventive and 
treatment modalities, in order to manage future DENV infections. In this 
framework, the method present here on BALB/c mouse model may be used to study 
not only the effects of infections by other DENV serotypes, but also to 
investigate the effects of novel drugs, such as recently developed 
nano-formulations, and the relative recovery ability with intact immune 
functions of host.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tice.2016.11.005
PMID: 28034555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]