---
reference_id: "PMID:9718653"
title: "Hirschsprung's disease: genetic and functional associations of Down's and Waardenburg syndromes."
authors:
- Moore SW
- Johnson AG
journal: Semin Pediatr Surg
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s1055-8586(98)70011-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschsprung's disease: genetic and functional associations of Down's and Waardenburg syndromes.
**Authors:** Moore SW, Johnson AG
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Surg (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1055-8586(98)70011-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1055-8586(98)70011-3)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Surg. 1998 Aug;7(3):156-61. doi: 10.1016/s1055-8586(98)70011-3.

Hirschsprung's disease: genetic and functional associations of Down's and 
Waardenburg syndromes.

Moore SW(1), Johnson AG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Stellenbosch, Tygerberg, South Africa.

Despite significant advances in understanding the genetic background in 
Hirschsprung's disease (HD), the majority of cases are believed to be multigenic 
and multifactorial. Conditions associated with an increased risk of HD suggest 
some common inherited factor and include Down's syndrome, Waardenburg syndrome 
(WS), dominant sensorineural deafness, neurofibromatosis, neuroblastoma, 
phaechromocytoma, the MEN type 2B syndrome, and other abnormalities. The 
reported incidence of Down's syndrome in HD is approximately 2%, but the range 
varies from 2% to 15%. WS, on the other hand, is one of a number of uncommon 
human conditions in which pigmentary disturbances are associated with 
sensorineural deafness. HD mutations have been mapped to a number of genes, 
i.e., RET proto-oncogene, at 10q11.2; the recessive EDNRB gene, located at 
13q22; its ligand endothelin 3 (EDN3); and the glial cell line-derived 
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) in humans. Mutations of known genes appear to account 
for only a relatively small number of HD cases (20% in the case of RET). GDNF 
may modulate the disease phenotype by interacting with other susceptibility loci 
(e.g., RET). The genetic aspects of HD occurring in association with trisomy 21 
and WS are reviewed. Clinical presentation, diagnosis, treatment and long-term 
outcome in this patient group are evaluated. Additional data are presented on 12 
children with Down's syndrome out of 408 surgically treated HD patients. The 
role of associated anomalies is evaluated, and an increased susceptibility to 
severe enterocolitis associated with a high mortality rate is reported. Surgical 
correction can be achieved, but patients may require some form of ongoing help 
to facilitate acceptable bowel function. The decision as to the nature and 
timing of the surgical correction must be individualized.

DOI: 10.1016/s1055-8586(98)70011-3
PMID: 9718653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]