---
reference_id: "PMID:35278209"
title: Distinct Epileptogenic Mechanisms Associated with Seizures in Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome.
authors:
- Corrêa T
- Mayndra M
- Santos-Rebouças CB
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02792-9
keywords:
- "Epilepsy/complications, genetics"
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- Phenotype
- "Seizures/complications, genetics"
- "Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct Epileptogenic Mechanisms Associated with Seizures in Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome.
**Authors:** Corrêa T, Mayndra M, Santos-Rebouças CB
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-022-02792-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-022-02792-9)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2022 May;59(5):3159-3169. doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02792-9. Epub
 2022 Mar 12.

Distinct Epileptogenic Mechanisms Associated with Seizures in Wolf-Hirschhorn 
Syndrome.

Corrêa T(1)(2), Mayndra M(3), Santos-Rebouças CB(4).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Department, Institute of Biosciences, Federal University of Rio 
Grande Do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil. thiagocorrea@ufrgs.br.
(2)Estácio | IDOMED, Jaraguá do Sul, Brazil. thiagocorrea@ufrgs.br.
(3)Children's Hospital Jeser Amarante Faria, Joinville, Brazil.
(4)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biology Roberto Alcantara Gomes, State 
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Seizures are one of the clinical hallmarks of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS), 
causing a significant impact on the life quality, still in the first years of 
life. Even that the knowledge about WHS-related seizure candidate genes has 
grown, cumulative evidence suggests synergic haploinsufficiency of distinct 
genes within cellular networks that should be better elucidated. Herein, we 
evaluated common mechanisms between candidate genes from WHS 
seizure-susceptibility regions (SSR) and genes globally associated with 
epilepsy. For this purpose, data from 94 WHS patients delineated by chromosomal 
microarray analysis were integrated into a tissue-specific gene network with 
gene expression, drugs, and biological processes. We found functional modules 
and signaling pathways involving candidate and new genes with potential 
involvement in the WHS-related seizure phenotype. The proximity among the 
previous reported haploinsufficient candidate genes (PIGG, CPLX1, CTBP1, LETM1) 
and disease genes associated with epilepsy suggests not just one, but different 
impaired mechanisms in cellular networks responsible for the balance of neuronal 
activity in WHS patients, from which neuron communication is the most impaired 
in WHS-related seizures. Furthermore, CTBP1 obtained the largest number of drug 
associations, reinforcing its importance for adaptations of brain circuits and 
its putative use as a pharmacological target for treating seizures/epilepsy in 
patients with WHS.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-022-02792-9
PMID: 35278209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]