---
reference_id: "PMID:11359963"
title: Thunderstorm outflows preceding epidemics of asthma during spring and summer.
authors:
- Marks GB
- Colquhoun JR
- Girgis ST
- Koski MH
- Treloar AB
- Hansen P
- Downs SH
- Car NG
journal: Thorax
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1136/thorax.56.6.468
keywords:
- Allergens/adverse effects
- "Asthma/epidemiology, etiology"
- Australia/epidemiology
- Case-Control Studies
- "Data Interpretation, Statistical"
- Disease Outbreaks
- Humans
- Pollen/adverse effects
- Weather
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thunderstorm outflows preceding epidemics of asthma during spring and summer.
**Authors:** Marks GB, Colquhoun JR, Girgis ST, Koski MH, Treloar AB, Hansen P, Downs SH, Car NG
**Journal:** Thorax (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1136/thorax.56.6.468](https://doi.org/10.1136/thorax.56.6.468)

## Content

1. Thorax. 2001 Jun;56(6):468-71. doi: 10.1136/thorax.56.6.468.

Thunderstorm outflows preceding epidemics of asthma during spring and summer.

Marks GB(1), Colquhoun JR, Girgis ST, Koski MH, Treloar AB, Hansen P, Downs SH, 
Car NG.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Respiratory Medicine, University of Sydney, NSW 2050, Australia. 
g.marks@unsw.edu.au

BACKGROUND: A study was undertaken to assess the importance of thunderstorms as 
a cause of epidemics of asthma exacerbations and to investigate the underlying 
mechanism.
METHODS: A case control study was performed in six towns in south eastern 
Australia. Epidemic case days (n = 48) and a random sample of control days (n = 
191) were identified by reference to the difference between the observed and 
expected number of emergency department attendances for asthma. The occurrence 
of thunderstorms, their associated outflows and cold fronts were ascertained, 
blind to case status, for each of these days. In addition, the relation of 
hourly pollen counts to automatic weather station data was examined in detail 
for the period around one severe epidemic of asthma exacerbations. The main 
outcome measure was the number of epidemics of asthma exacerbations.
RESULTS: Thunderstorm outflows were detected on 33% of epidemic days and only 3% 
of control days (odds ratio 15.0, 95% confidence interval 6.0 to 37.6). The 
association was strongest in late spring and summer. Detailed examination of one 
severe epidemic showed that its onset coincided with the arrival of the 
thunderstorm outflow and a 4-12 fold increase in the ambient concentration of 
grass pollen grains.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that some 
epidemics of exacerbations of asthma are caused by high concentrations of 
allergenic particles produced by an outflow of colder air, associated with the 
downdraught from a thunderstorm, sweeping up pollen grains and particles and 
then concentrating them in a shallow band of air at ground level. This is a 
common cause of exacerbations of asthma during the pollen season.

DOI: 10.1136/thorax.56.6.468
PMCID: PMC1746065
PMID: 11359963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]