---
reference_id: "PMID:25969693"
title: "HPV prevalence and risk of pre-cancer and cancer in regular immigrants in Italy: results from HPV DNA test-based screening pilot programs."
authors:
- Campari C
- Fedato C
- Petrelli A
- Zorzi M
- Cogo C
- Caprioglio A
- Gallo F
- Giordano L
- Domenighini S
- Pasquale L
- Prandi S
- Zappa M
- Giorgi Rossi P
- GISCi Migrant Working Group
journal: Infect Agent Cancer
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13027-015-0009-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HPV prevalence and risk of pre-cancer and cancer in regular immigrants in Italy: results from HPV DNA test-based screening pilot programs.
**Authors:** Campari C, Fedato C, Petrelli A, Zorzi M, Cogo C, Caprioglio A, Gallo F, Giordano L, Domenighini S, Pasquale L, Prandi S, Zappa M, Giorgi Rossi P, GISCi Migrant Working Group
**Journal:** Infect Agent Cancer (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13027-015-0009-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13027-015-0009-x)

## Content

1. Infect Agent Cancer. 2015 May 7;10:14. doi: 10.1186/s13027-015-0009-x. 
eCollection 2015.

HPV prevalence and risk of pre-cancer and cancer in regular immigrants in Italy: 
results from HPV DNA test-based screening pilot programs.

Campari C(1), Fedato C(2), Petrelli A(3), Zorzi M(4), Cogo C(4), Caprioglio 
A(5), Gallo F(5), Giordano L(5), Domenighini S(6), Pasquale L(6), Prandi S(7), 
Zappa M(8), Giorgi Rossi P(9); GISCi Migrant Working Group.

Author information:
(1)Staff Programmazione e Controllo, AUSL, Reggio Emilia, Italy ; 
IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(2)Coordinamento regionale screening oncologici, Regione Veneto, Venezia, Italy.
(3)INMP Istituto Nazionale per la promozione della salute delle popolazioni 
Migranti ed il contrasto delle malattie della Povertà, Rome, Italy.
(4)Registro Tumori del Veneto, Regione Veneto, Padova, Italy.
(5)Unità di Epidemiologia - CPO Piemonte, Torino, Italy.
(6)ASL Valle Camonica Sebino, Breno, BS Italy.
(7)Patologia IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(8)ISPO - Istituto per lo Studio e la Prevenzione Oncologica, Florence, Italy.
(9)IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy ; Servizio 
Interaziendale di Epidemiologia, AUSL, Reggio Emilia, Italy.

ᅟ: Immigrants from low- and medium-income countries have a higher risk of 
cervical cancer due both to barriers in access to screening and to higher human 
papillomavirus (HPV) prevalence. In the near future many screening programmes in 
industrialised countries will replace Pap test with HPV as primary test. In 
order to plan future interventions, it is essential to understand how the HPV 
screening performs in immigrant women.
METHODS: We conducted a survey on the main performance indicators from some of 
the HPV DNA-based pilot programmes in Italy, comparing regular immigrant women, 
identified as women resident in Italy who were born abroad, with women who were 
born in Italy. All the programmes applied the same protocol, with HPV as 
stand-alone test starting for women of 25 or 35 to 64 years of age. Cytology 
triage is performed for positive women; those ASC-US or more severe are referred 
directly to colposcopy; negative women are referred to repeat HPV after one 
year.
RESULTS: Overall, 162,829 women were invited, of whom 22,814 were born abroad. 
Participation was higher for Italy-born than born abroad (52.2% vs. 43.6%), 
particularly for women over 45 years. HPV positivity rate was higher in 
immigrants: 7.8% vs. 6.1%, age-adjusted Relative Risk (age-adj RR) 1.18, 95% 
confidence interval (95% CI) 1.13-1.22. The proportion of women with positive 
cytology triage was similar in the two groups (42%). Cervical Intraepithelial 
Neoplasia (CIN) grade 2 or more severe detection rate was higher for born abroad 
(age-adj RR 1.65, 95% CI 1.45-1.89). The difference was stronger when 
considering only CIN3 or more severe (age-adj RR 2.29, 95% CI 1.90-2.75). Both 
HPV positivity and CIN2 or more severe detection rate had a different age curve 
in born abroad compared with Italy-born: in the former, the risk was almost 
flat, while in the latter it declined rapidly with age.
CONCLUSION: Compliance with HPV screening is lower for migrant women, who are 
affected by higher HPV positivity and CIN3 cancer detection rates.

DOI: 10.1186/s13027-015-0009-x
PMCID: PMC4427984
PMID: 25969693