---
reference_id: "PMID:20508621"
title: A conceptual framework for the identification of candidate drugs and drug targets in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Marstrand TT
- Borup R
- Willer A
- Borregaard N
- Sandelin A
- Porse BT
- Theilgaard-Mönch K
journal: Leukemia
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.95
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Granulocyte Precursor Cells/drug effects
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Tretinoin/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A conceptual framework for the identification of candidate drugs and drug targets in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Marstrand TT, Borup R, Willer A, Borregaard N, Sandelin A, Porse BT, Theilgaard-Mönch K
**Journal:** Leukemia (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/leu.2010.95](https://doi.org/10.1038/leu.2010.95)

## Content

1. Leukemia. 2010 Jul;24(7):1265-75. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.95. Epub 2010 May 27.

A conceptual framework for the identification of candidate drugs and drug
targets in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Marstrand TT(1), Borup R, Willer A, Borregaard N, Sandelin A, Porse BT,
Theilgaard-Mönch K.

Author information:
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Center, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Chromosomal translocations of transcription factors generating fusion proteins
with aberrant transcriptional activity are common in acute leukemia. In acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), the promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic-acid receptor
alpha (PML-RARA) fusion protein, which emerges as a consequence of the t(15;17)
translocation, acts as a transcriptional repressor that blocks neutrophil
differentiation at the promyelocyte (PM) stage. In this study, we used publicly
available microarray data sets and identified signatures of genes dysregulated
in APL by comparison of gene expression profiles of APL cells and normal PMs
representing the same stage of differentiation. We next subjected our identified
APL signatures of dysregulated genes to a series of computational analyses
leading to (i) the finding that APL cells show stem cell properties with respect
to gene expression and transcriptional regulation, and (ii) the identification
of candidate drugs and drug targets for therapeutic interventions.
Significantly, our study provides a conceptual framework that can be applied to
any subtype of AML and cancer in general to uncover novel information from
published microarray data sets at low cost. In a broader perspective, our study
provides strong evidence that genomic strategies might be used in a clinical
setting to prospectively identify candidate drugs that subsequently are
validated in vitro to define the most effective drug combination for individual
cancer patients on a rational basis.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2010.95
PMID: 20508621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
