---
reference_id: "PMID:24262022"
title: An in vivo mouse model of metastatic human thyroid cancer.
authors:
- Zhang L
- Gaskins K
- Yu Z
- Xiong Y
- Merino MJ
- Kebebew E
journal: Thyroid
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0149
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Follicular/genetics, pathology, secondary"
- "Adenoma, Oxyphilic/pathology, secondary"
- Animals
- "Bone Neoplasms/pathology, secondary"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Heterografts
- Humans
- Indoles/therapeutic use
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, secondary"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- Neoplasm Transplantation
- Sulfonamides/therapeutic use
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Vemurafenib
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An in vivo mouse model of metastatic human thyroid cancer.
**Authors:** Zhang L, Gaskins K, Yu Z, Xiong Y, Merino MJ, Kebebew E
**Journal:** Thyroid (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.2013.0149](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.2013.0149)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2014 Apr;24(4):695-704. doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0149. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

An in vivo mouse model of metastatic human thyroid cancer.

Zhang L(1), Gaskins K, Yu Z, Xiong Y, Merino MJ, Kebebew E.

Author information:
(1)1 Endocrine Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute , National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: Mouse models of metastatic human cancers are important tools in
preclinical studies for testing new systematic therapies and studying effectors
of cancer metastasis. The major drawbacks of current mouse models for metastatic
thyroid cancer are that they have low metastasis rates and do not allow in vivo
tumor detection. Here, we report and characterize an in vivo detectable
metastasis mouse model of human thyroid cancer using multiple thyroid cancer
cell lines.
METHODS: Human anaplastic thyroid cancer cell lines 8505C, C-643, SW-1736, and
THJ-16T; follicular thyroid cancer cell lines FTC-133, FTC-236, and FTC-238; and
Hürthle cell carcinoma cell line XTC-1 were transfected with a linearized
pGL4.51[luc2/CMV/Neo] vector or transduced with lentivirus containing Luc2-eGFP
reporter genes. The stably transfected cells were injected intravenously into
NOD.Cg-Prkdc(scid) Il2rg(tm1Wjl)/SzJ mice. Tumors were detected with an in vivo
imaging system-Xenogen IVIS. Vemurafenib, a BRAF inhibitor, was used to treat
lung metastases generated from 8505C-Luc2 cells with a BRAF(V600E) mutation to
test the accuracy of the model to evaluate response to therapy.
RESULTS: Intravenous injection of as few as 30,000 8505C-Luc2 cells produced
lung metastases in 100% of the injected mice, and many of these mice also
developed bone metastases at a later stage of the disease. Similarly, metastatic
tumors also developed in all mice injected with C-643-Luc2, THJ-16T-Luc2,
FTC-133-Luc2, FTC-236-Luc2, FTC-238-Luc2, and XTC-1-Luc2 cells. The metastases
were easily detectable in vivo, and tumor progression could be dynamically and
accurately followed and correlated with the actual tumor burden. Furthermore,
disease progression could be easily controlled by adjusting the number of
injected cells. The in vivo treatment of 8505C xenograft lung metastases with
vemurafenib dramatically reduced the growth and signal intensity with good
correlation with actual tumor burden.
CONCLUSIONS: Herein we report an in vivo detectable mouse model of metastatic
human thyroid cancer that is reliable and reproducible. It will serve as a
useful tool in the preclinical testing of alternative systematic therapies for
metastatic thyroid cancer, and for functional studies of thyroid cancer tumor
biology in vivo.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2013.0149
PMCID: PMC3993065
PMID: 24262022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
