---
reference_id: "PMID:26415585"
title: Genomic analyses reveal recurrent mutations in epigenetic modifiers and the JAK-STAT pathway in Sézary syndrome.
authors:
- Kiel MJ
- Sahasrabuddhe AA
- Rolland DCM
- Velusamy T
- Chung F
- Schaller M
- Bailey NG
- Betz BL
- Miranda RN
- Porcu P
- Byrd JC
- Medeiros LJ
- Kunkel SL
- Bahler DW
- Lim MS
- Elenitoba-Johnson KSJ
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ncomms9470
keywords:
- CARD Signaling Adaptor Proteins/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/genetics"
- Exome
- Genomics
- Guanylate Cyclase/genetics
- Humans
- Janus Kinases/genetics
- Jumonji Domain-Containing Histone Demethylases/genetics
- Jurkat Cells
- Multigene Family
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Phospholipase C gamma/genetics
- STAT Transcription Factors/genetics
- Sezary Syndrome/genetics
- ras Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic analyses reveal recurrent mutations in epigenetic modifiers and the JAK-STAT pathway in Sézary syndrome.
**Authors:** Kiel MJ, Sahasrabuddhe AA, Rolland DCM, Velusamy T, Chung F, Schaller M, Bailey NG, Betz BL, Miranda RN, Porcu P, Byrd JC, Medeiros LJ, Kunkel SL, Bahler DW, Lim MS, Elenitoba-Johnson KSJ
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms9470](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9470)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 29;6:8470. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9470.

Genomic analyses reveal recurrent mutations in epigenetic modifiers and the
JAK-STAT pathway in Sézary syndrome.

Kiel MJ(1), Sahasrabuddhe AA(1), Rolland DCM(2), Velusamy T(1), Chung F(1),
Schaller M(1), Bailey NG(1), Betz BL(1), Miranda RN(3), Porcu P(4), Byrd JC(4),
Medeiros LJ(3), Kunkel SL(1), Bahler DW(5), Lim MS(2), Elenitoba-Johnson
KSJ(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine
at University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(4)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, The University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.
(6)Center for Personalized Diagnostics, Perelman School of Medicine at
University of Pennsylvania., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Sézary syndrome (SS) is an aggressive leukaemia of mature T cells with poor
prognosis and limited options for targeted therapies. The comprehensive genetic
alterations underlying the pathogenesis of SS are unknown. Here we integrate
whole-genome sequencing (n=6), whole-exome sequencing (n=66) and array
comparative genomic hybridization-based copy-number analysis (n=80) of primary
SS samples. We identify previously unknown recurrent loss-of-function
aberrations targeting members of the chromatin remodelling/histone modification
and trithorax families, including ARID1A in which functional loss from nonsense
and frameshift mutations and/or targeted deletions is observed in 40.3% of SS
genomes. We also identify recurrent gain-of-function mutations targeting PLCG1
(9%) and JAK1, JAK3, STAT3 and STAT5B (JAK/STAT total ∼11%). Functional studies
reveal sensitivity of JAK1-mutated primary SS cells to JAK inhibitor treatment.
These results highlight the complex genomic landscape of SS and a role for
inhibition of JAK/STAT pathways for the treatment of SS.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms9470
PMCID: PMC4598843
PMID: 26415585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
