---
reference_id: "PMID:12749662"
title: "Successful management of an extreme example of neonatal hyperprostaglandin-E syndrome (Bartter's syndrome) with the new cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor rofecoxib."
authors:
- Haas NA
- Nossal R
- Schneider CH
- Lewin MA
- Ocker V
- Holder M
- Uhlemann F
journal: Pediatr Crit Care Med
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1097/01.PCC.0000059422.26706.64
keywords:
- "Bartter Syndrome/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lactones/therapeutic use
- Sulfones
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful management of an extreme example of neonatal hyperprostaglandin-E syndrome (Bartter's syndrome) with the new cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor rofecoxib.
**Authors:** Haas NA, Nossal R, Schneider CH, Lewin MA, Ocker V, Holder M, Uhlemann F
**Journal:** Pediatr Crit Care Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.PCC.0000059422.26706.64](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.PCC.0000059422.26706.64)

## Content

1. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2003 Apr;4(2):249-51. doi:
10.1097/01.PCC.0000059422.26706.64.

Successful management of an extreme example of neonatal hyperprostaglandin-E
syndrome (Bartter's syndrome) with the new cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor rofecoxib.

Haas NA(1), Nossal R, Schneider CH, Lewin MA, Ocker V, Holder M, Uhlemann F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Pediatric Intensive Care, Olgahospital
Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the successful treatment of an unusual case of severe
neonatal Bartter's syndrome refractory to treatment with indomethacin.
DESIGN: Case report, clinical.
SETTING: Tertiary care intensive care unit.
PATIENTS: A patient with neonatal hyperprostaglandin-E syndrome and excessive
requirements of intravenous (via central venous catheter) water and salt
supplementation, failure to thrive, vomiting, and massive growth retardation,
despite adequate treatment with indomethacin.
MAIN RESULT: Four weeks after induction of the new cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor
rofecoxib, the patient was well, on full enteral feeds, thriving, and had gained
600 g in weight. A lower supplementary potassium, magnesium, and sodium intake
was required. Reinstitution of indomethacin therapy resulted in severe
deterioration, despite high indomethacin doses; symptoms improved again after
rofecoxib administration. No side effects have been seen thus far.
CONCLUSION: This report shows that in selected patients with a severe form of
neonatal Bartter's syndrome, the new cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor rofecoxib may
control the clinical symptoms of hyperprostaglandin-E syndrome after ineffective
indomethacin therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/01.PCC.0000059422.26706.64
PMID: 12749662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
