---
reference_id: "PMID:32487785"
title: "Clinical aspects of Ebola virus disease: a review."
authors:
- Batra S
- Ochani RK
- Diwan MN
- Yasmin F
- Qureshi SS
- Bhimani S
- Shaikh S
- Tariq MA
- Ahmed Ashraf M
- Farooqi HA
- Dodani SK
journal: Infez Med
year: '2020'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical aspects of Ebola virus disease: a review.
**Authors:** Batra S, Ochani RK, Diwan MN, Yasmin F, Qureshi SS, Bhimani S, Shaikh S, Tariq MA, Ahmed Ashraf M, Farooqi HA, Dodani SK
**Journal:** Infez Med (2020)

## Content

1. Infez Med. 2020 Jun 1;28(2):212-222.

Clinical aspects of Ebola virus disease: a review.

Batra S(1), Ochani RK(1), Diwan MN(1), Yasmin F(1), Qureshi SS(2), Bhimani S(3), 
Shaikh S(4), Tariq MA(4), Ahmed Ashraf M(2), Farooqi HA(2), Dodani SK(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Ziauddin Medical University, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Jinnah Sindh Medical University, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Dow International Medical College, DUHS, 
Karachi, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Sindh Institute of Urology and 
Transplantation, Karachi, Pakistan.

Ebola Virus Disease (EVD), also known as Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever (EHF), 
initially emerged over 40 years ago in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Endemic 
to Africa, outbreaks have been recorded in six African countries since its 
detection in 1976. Fruit bats are believed to be the natural hosts of Ebola 
viruses (EBoV), with humans and other mammals serving as accidental hosts. 
Transmission of EBoV has been reported in various ways, including human to human 
transmission through close contact with blood and bodily fluids. The virus has 
an incubation period ranging from two to twenty-one days, followed by a 
multitude of clinical manifestations such as the sudden onset of high fever, 
chills and myalgia depicting a flu-like syndrome. It is usually diagnosed based 
on several clinical symptoms such as the sudden onset of illness, high fevers 
for less than three weeks, and at least two hemorrhagic symptoms despite no 
predisposing factors. This generally provides enough evidence for clinicians to 
consider EHF and begin supportive treatment until the virus is confirmed through 
laboratory findings. Management of patients involves supportive care such as 
maintaining fluid along with electrolyte balance, blood pressure and oxygen 
saturation. This also includes treating complications arising from secondary 
infections. The main options include: prophylactic strategies, anti-viral 
therapy for EVD, immunotherapies, vaccines, and ZMapp. Finally, the key to 
managing EBoV epidemics is to stop the transmission of disease in the most 
severely affected population, as prevention has become of utmost importance to 
alleviate the significant physical and economic burden.

PMID: 32487785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]