---
reference_id: "PMID:21883901"
title: "Systematic review: kidney transplantation compared with dialysis in clinically relevant outcomes."
authors:
- Tonelli M
- Wiebe N
- Knoll G
- Bello A
- Browne S
- Jadhav D
- Klarenbach S
- Gill J
journal: Am J Transplant
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-6143.2011.03686.x
keywords:
- Canada
- Humans
- Kidney Transplantation
- Renal Dialysis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic review: kidney transplantation compared with dialysis in clinically relevant outcomes.
**Authors:** Tonelli M, Wiebe N, Knoll G, Bello A, Browne S, Jadhav D, Klarenbach S, Gill J
**Journal:** Am J Transplant (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-6143.2011.03686.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-6143.2011.03686.x)

## Content

1. Am J Transplant. 2011 Oct;11(10):2093-109. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-6143.2011.03686.x. Epub 2011 Aug 30.

Systematic review: kidney transplantation compared with dialysis in clinically 
relevant outcomes.

Tonelli M(1), Wiebe N, Knoll G, Bello A, Browne S, Jadhav D, Klarenbach S, Gill 
J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 
no_reprints@med.ualberta.ca

Individual studies indicate that kidney transplantation is associated with lower 
mortality and improved quality of life compared with chronic dialysis treatment. 
We did a systematic review to summarize the benefits of transplantation, aiming 
to identify characteristics associated with especially large or small relative 
benefit. Results were not pooled because of expected diversity inherent to 
observational studies. Risk of bias was assessed using the Downs and Black 
checklist and items related to time-to-event analysis techniques. MEDLINE and 
EMBASE were searched up to February 2010. Cohort studies comparing adult chronic 
dialysis patients with kidney transplantation recipients for clinical outcomes 
were selected. We identified 110 eligible studies with a total of 1 922 300 
participants. Most studies found significantly lower mortality associated with 
transplantation, and the relative magnitude of the benefit seemed to increase 
over time (p < 0.001). Most studies also found that the risk of cardiovascular 
events was significantly reduced among transplant recipients. Quality of life 
was significantly and substantially better among transplant recipients. Despite 
increases in the age and comorbidity of contemporary transplant recipients, the 
relative benefits of transplantation seem to be increasing over time. These 
findings validate current attempts to increase the number of people worldwide 
that benefit from kidney transplantation.

©2011 The Authors Journal compilation©2011 The American Society of 
Transplantation and the American Society of Transplant Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-6143.2011.03686.x
PMID: 21883901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]