---
reference_id: "PMID:37262391"
title: Prevalence and Clinical Implications of Mismatch Repair-Proficient Colorectal Cancer in Patients With Lynch Syndrome.
authors:
- Ranganathan M
- Sacca RE
- Trottier M
- Maio A
- Kemel Y
- Salo-Mullen E
- Catchings A
- Kane S
- Wang C
- Ravichandran V
- Ptashkin R
- Mehta N
- Garcia-Aguilar J
- Weiser MR
- Donoghue MTA
- Berger MF
- Mandelker D
- Walsh MF
- Carlo M
- Liu YL
- Cercek A
- Yaeger R
- Saltz L
- Segal NH
- Mendelsohn RB
- Markowitz AJ
- Offit K
- Shia J
- Stadler ZK
- Latham A
journal: JCO Precis Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1200/PO.22.00675
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and Clinical Implications of Mismatch Repair-Proficient Colorectal Cancer in Patients With Lynch Syndrome.
**Authors:** Ranganathan M, Sacca RE, Trottier M, Maio A, Kemel Y, Salo-Mullen E, Catchings A, Kane S, Wang C, Ravichandran V, Ptashkin R, Mehta N, Garcia-Aguilar J, Weiser MR, Donoghue MTA, Berger MF, Mandelker D, Walsh MF, Carlo M, Liu YL, Cercek A, Yaeger R, Saltz L, Segal NH, Mendelsohn RB, Markowitz AJ, Offit K, Shia J, Stadler ZK, Latham A
**Journal:** JCO Precis Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1200/PO.22.00675](https://doi.org/10.1200/PO.22.00675)

## Content

1. JCO Precis Oncol. 2023 May;7:e2200675. doi: 10.1200/PO.22.00675.

Prevalence and Clinical Implications of Mismatch Repair-Proficient Colorectal 
Cancer in Patients With Lynch Syndrome.

Ranganathan M(1), Sacca RE(1), Trottier M(1), Maio A(1), Kemel Y(2), Salo-Mullen 
E(1), Catchings A(1), Kane S(1), Wang C(3), Ravichandran V(2), Ptashkin R(3), 
Mehta N(3), Garcia-Aguilar J(4)(5), Weiser MR(4)(5), Donoghue MTA(6), Berger 
MF(3)(6)(7), Mandelker D(3), Walsh MF(1)(2)(8), Carlo M(1)(2)(8), Liu 
YL(1)(2)(8), Cercek A(1)(8), Yaeger R(1)(8), Saltz L(1)(8), Segal NH(1)(8), 
Mendelsohn RB(1)(8), Markowitz AJ(1)(8), Offit K(1)(2)(8), Shia J(3), Stadler 
ZK(1)(2)(8), Latham A(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(2)Niehaus Center for Inherited Cancer Genomics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY.
(3)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY.
(4)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(5)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY.
(6)Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(7)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY.
(8)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY.

PURPOSE: Lynch syndrome (LS)-associated colorectal cancer (CRC) is characterized 
by mismatch repair-deficiency (MMR-D) and/or microsatellite instability (MSI). 
However, with increasing utilization of germline testing, MMR-proficient (MMR-P) 
and/or microsatellite stable (MSS) CRC has also been observed. We sought to 
characterize MMR-P/MSS CRC among patients with LS.
METHODS: Patients with solid tumors with germline MMR pathogenic/likely 
pathogenic (P/LP) variants were identified on a prospective matched tumor-normal 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) protocol. CRCs were evaluated for MMR-D via 
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining and/or MSI via NGS. Clinical variables were 
correlated with MMR status using nonparametric tests.
RESULTS: Among 17,617 patients with solid tumors, 1.4% (n = 242) had LS. A total 
of 36% (86 of 242) of patients with LS had at least one CRC that underwent NGS 
profiling, amounting to 99 pooled CRCs assessed. A total of 10% (10 of 99) of 
CRCs were MMR-P, with 100% concordance between MSS status and retained MMR 
protein staining. A total of 89% (8 of 9) of patients in the MMR-P group had 
MSH6 or PMS2 variants, compared with 30% (23 of 77) in the MMR-D group (P = 
.001). A total of 46% (6 of 13) of PMS2+ patients had MMR-P CRC. The median age 
of onset was 58 and 43 years for MMR-P and MMR-D CRC, respectively (P = .07). 
Despite the later median age of onset, 40% (4 of 10) of MMR-P CRCs were 
diagnosed <50. A total of 60% (6 of 10) of MMR-P CRCs were metastatic compared 
with 13% (12 of 89) of MMR-D CRCs (P = .002). A total of 33% (3 of 9) of 
patients with MMR-P CRC did not meet LS testing criteria.
CONCLUSION: Patients with LS remained at risk for MMR-P CRC, which was more 
prevalent among patients with MSH6 and PMS2 variants. MMR-P CRC was later onset 
and more commonly metastatic compared with MMR-D CRC. Confirmation of tumor 
MMR/MSI status is critical for patient management and familial risk estimation.

DOI: 10.1200/PO.22.00675
PMCID: PMC10309569
PMID: 37262391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information 
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered 
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I 
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate 
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's 
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
ascopubs.org/po/author-center. Open Payments is a public database containing 
information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed physicians 
(Open Payments).