---
reference_id: "PMID:14757596"
title: Application of a latent class analysis to empirically define eating disorder phenotypes.
authors:
- Keel PK
- Fichter M
- Quadflieg N
- Bulik CM
- Baxter MG
- Thornton L
- Halmi KA
- Kaplan AS
- Strober M
- Woodside DB
- Crow SJ
- Mitchell JE
- Rotondo A
- Mauri M
- Cassano G
- Treasure J
- Goldman D
- Berrettini WH
- Kaye WH
journal: Arch Gen Psychiatry
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.61.2.192
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Body Weight
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
- Feeding Behavior
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/classification, diagnosis, psychology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Models, Statistical"
- "Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder/classification, psychology"
- Phenotype
- Sensitivity and Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Application of a latent class analysis to empirically define eating disorder phenotypes.
**Authors:** Keel PK, Fichter M, Quadflieg N, Bulik CM, Baxter MG, Thornton L, Halmi KA, Kaplan AS, Strober M, Woodside DB, Crow SJ, Mitchell JE, Rotondo A, Mauri M, Cassano G, Treasure J, Goldman D, Berrettini WH, Kaye WH
**Journal:** Arch Gen Psychiatry (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archpsyc.61.2.192](https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.61.2.192)

## Content

1. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004 Feb;61(2):192-200. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.61.2.192.

Application of a latent class analysis to empirically define eating disorder
phenotypes.

Keel PK(1), Fichter M, Quadflieg N, Bulik CM, Baxter MG, Thornton L, Halmi KA,
Kaplan AS, Strober M, Woodside DB, Crow SJ, Mitchell JE, Rotondo A, Mauri M,
Cassano G, Treasure J, Goldman D, Berrettini WH, Kaye WH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
pamela-keel@uiowa.edu

CONTEXT: Diagnostic criteria for eating disorders influence how we recognize,
research, and treat eating disorders, and empirically valid phenotypes are
required for revealing their genetic bases.
OBJECTIVE: To empirically define eating disorder phenotypes.
DESIGN: Data regarding eating disorder symptoms and features from 1179
individuals with clinically significant eating disorders were submitted to a
latent class analysis. The resulting latent classes were compared on non-eating
disorder variables in a series of validation analyses.
SETTING: Multinational, collaborative study with cases ascertained through
diverse clinical settings (inpatient, outpatient, and community).
PARTICIPANTS: Members of affected relative pairs recruited for participation in
genetic studies of eating disorders in which probands met DSM-IV-TR criteria for
anorexia nervosa (AN) or bulimia nervosa and had at least 1 biological relative
with a clinically significant eating disorder. Main Outcome Measure Number and
clinical characterization of latent classes.
RESULTS: A 4-class solution provided the best fit. Latent class 1 (LC1)
resembled restricting AN; LC2, AN and bulimia nervosa with the use of multiple
methods of purging; LC3, restricting AN without obsessive-compulsive features;
and LC4, bulimia nervosa with self-induced vomiting as the sole form of purging.
Biological relatives were significantly likely to belong to the same latent
class. Across validation analyses, LC2 demonstrated the highest levels of
psychological disturbance, and LC3 demonstrated the lowest.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of obsessive-compulsive features differentiates among
individuals with restricting AN. Similarly, the combination of low weight and
multiple methods of purging distinguishes among individuals with binge eating
and purging behaviors. These results support some of the distinctions drawn
within the DSM-IV-TR among eating disorder subtypes, while introducing new
features to define phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1001/archpsyc.61.2.192
PMID: 14757596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
