---
reference_id: "PMID:12732128"
title: "[Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome: molecular diagnosis in two families]."
authors:
- Cambronero R
- Cámara C
- López-Granados E
- Ferreira A
- Fontán G
- García Rodríguez MC
journal: Med Clin (Barc)
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0025-7753(03)73790-7
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, immunology"
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Family Health
- Female
- "Genes, T-Cell Receptor alpha/genetics"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin E/metabolism
- Immunoglobulin G/metabolism
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Lymphocytes/immunology, pathology"
- "Lymphoma, Non-Hodgkin/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Lymphoproliferative Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, immunology"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid"
- "Splenomegaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome: molecular diagnosis in two families].
**Authors:** Cambronero R, Cámara C, López-Granados E, Ferreira A, Fontán G, García Rodríguez MC
**Journal:** Med Clin (Barc) (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0025-7753(03)73790-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0025-7753(03)73790-7)

## Content

1. Med Clin (Barc). 2003 May 3;120(16):622-5. doi: 10.1016/s0025-7753(03)73790-7.

[Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome: molecular diagnosis in two families].

[Article in Spanish]

Cambronero R(1), Cámara C, López-Granados E, Ferreira A, Fontán G, García
Rodríguez MC.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Inmunología. Hospital La Paz. Madrid. Spain.
mcruzgracia.hulp@salud.madrid.org

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is
a disorder caused by a defect in lymphocytes' apoptosis and characterized by non
malignant lymphoproliferation, autoimmune features and increased TCR alpha +
CD4CD8 cells. Most patients have a mutation in the TNFRSF6 gene, which encodes
the Fas protein. Our aim was to identify mutations in this gene in two families
with possible ALPS cases.
PATIENTS AND METHOD: Two patients with suspicion of ALPS, belonging to two
unrelated families, were studied. To confirm such a diagnosis, immunoglobulin
quantification, cellular phenotypic analysis by flow cytometry, IL-10
quantification, an apoptosis study, and molecular analysis were performed.
RESULTS: Both patients showed hypergammaglobulinemia and an increased percentage
of TCR alpha + CD4CD8 cells (family A patient: 14%; family B patient: 4.25%). In
family A, in vitro Fas-mediated apoptosis was absent in the patient and markedly
reduced in his father. In this family, both the patient and his father were
heterozygous for the Fas mutation T1045C (Leu 268 Pro). The family B patient and
her mother showed the Fas mutation G943T (Arg 234 Leu), both being heterozygous
for it too. Both mutations are located in exon 9 of TNFRSF6 gene, affecting the
death domain of the Fas protein.
CONCLUSIONS: The molecular study of these families confirms a diagnosis of ALPS
and suggests that the causing defect of this syndrome is compatible with an
autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance.

DOI: 10.1016/s0025-7753(03)73790-7
PMID: 12732128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
