---
reference_id: "PMID:18097445"
title: "The BCL-2 protein family: opposing activities that mediate cell death."
authors:
- Youle RJ
- Strasser A
journal: Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/nrm2308
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/physiology
- Humans
- Mitochondria/physiology
- "Models, Molecular"
- Phylogeny
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary/physiology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-bcl-2/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The BCL-2 protein family: opposing activities that mediate cell death.
**Authors:** Youle RJ, Strasser A
**Journal:** Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrm2308](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm2308)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;9(1):47-59. doi: 10.1038/nrm2308.

The BCL-2 protein family: opposing activities that mediate cell death.

Youle RJ(1), Strasser A.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Section, Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, The National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA. youler@ninds.nih.gov

BCL-2 family proteins, which have either pro- or anti-apoptotic activities, have 
been studied intensively for the past decade owing to their importance in the 
regulation of apoptosis, tumorigenesis and cellular responses to anti-cancer 
therapy. They control the point of no return for clonogenic cell survival and 
thereby affect tumorigenesis and host-pathogen interactions and regulate animal 
development. Recent structural, phylogenetic and biological analyses, however, 
suggest the need for some reconsideration of the accepted organizational 
principles of the family and how the family members interact with one another 
during programmed cell death. Although these insights into interactions among 
BCL-2 family proteins reveal how these proteins are regulated, a unifying 
hypothesis for the mechanisms they use to activate caspases remains elusive.

DOI: 10.1038/nrm2308
PMID: 18097445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]