---
reference_id: "PMID:32461308"
title: Taenia solium Cysticercosis and Its Impact in Neurological Disease.
authors:
- Garcia HH
- Gonzalez AE
- Gilman RH
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00085-19
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Taenia solium Cysticercosis and Its Impact in Neurological Disease.
**Authors:** Garcia HH, Gonzalez AE, Gilman RH
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00085-19](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00085-19)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2020 May 27;33(3):e00085-19. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00085-19. 
Print 2020 Jun 17.

Taenia solium Cysticercosis and Its Impact in Neurological Disease.

Garcia HH(1)(2), Gonzalez AE(3)(4), Gilman RH(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Global Health, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru 
hgarcia@jhsph.edu.
(2)Cysticercosis Unit, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Neurológicas, Lima, Peru.
(3)Center for Global Health, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru.
(4)School of Veterinary Medicine, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, 
Lima, Peru.
(5)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Taenia solium neurocysticercosis (NCC) is endemic in most of the world and 
contributes significantly to the burden of epilepsy and other neurological 
morbidity. Also present in developed countries because of immigration and 
travel, NCC is one of few diseases targeted for eradication. This paper reviews 
all aspects of its life cycle (taeniasis, porcine cysticercosis, human 
cysticercosis), with a focus on recent advances in its diagnosis, management, 
and control. Diagnosis of taeniasis is limited by poor availability of 
immunological or molecular assays. Diagnosis of NCC rests on neuroimaging 
findings, supported by serological assays. The treatment of NCC should be 
approached in the context of the particular type of infection (intra- or 
extraparenchymal; number, location, and stage of lesions) and has evolved toward 
combined symptomatic and antiparasitic management, with particular attention to 
modulating inflammation. Research on NCC and particularly the use of recently 
available genome data and animal models of infection should help to elucidate 
mechanisms of brain inflammation, damage, and epileptogenesis.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00085-19
PMCID: PMC7254859
PMID: 32461308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]