---
reference_id: "PMID:25184918"
title: Vitiligo--Part 2--classification, histopathology and treatment.
authors:
- Faria AR
- Tarlé RG
- Dellatorre G
- Mira MT
- Castro CC
journal: An Bras Dermatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20142717
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitiligo--Part 2--classification, histopathology and treatment.
**Authors:** Faria AR, Tarlé RG, Dellatorre G, Mira MT, Castro CC
**Journal:** An Bras Dermatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1590/abd1806-4841.20142717](https://doi.org/10.1590/abd1806-4841.20142717)

## Content

1. An Bras Dermatol. 2014 Sep-Oct;89(5):784-90. doi:
10.1590/abd1806-4841.20142717.

Vitiligo--Part 2--classification, histopathology and treatment.

Faria AR(1), Tarlé RG(1), Dellatorre G(1), Mira MT(2), Castro CC(1).

Author information:
(1)Santa Casa de Misericórdia Hospital, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
(2)Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.

In an unprecedented effort in the field of vitiligo, a global consensus resulted 
on a suggested new classification protocol for the disease. The main 
histopathological finding in vitiligo is the total absence of functioning 
melanocytes in the lesions, while the inflammatory cells most commonly found on 
the edges of the lesions are CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes. Physical and 
pharmacological treatment strategies aim to control the autoimmune damage and 
stimulate melanocyte migration from the unaffected edges of lesions and the 
outer hair follicle root sheath to the affected skin; moreover, surgical 
treatments can be combined with topical and physical treatments.

DOI: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20142717
PMCID: PMC4155957
PMID: 25184918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None