---
reference_id: "PMID:39651462"
title: "Nemaline Myopathy Type 6 Caused by Variants in the KBTBD13 Gene: A Cross-Sectional Study of 24 Patients."
authors:
- van Kleef ESB
- Bouman K
- Molenaar JPF
- Küsters B
- Groothuis JT
- Olivé M
- Malfatti E
- Kamsteeg EJ
- Van Engelen BGM
- Ottenheijm CAC
- Doorduin J
- Voermans NC
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200214
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nemaline Myopathy Type 6 Caused by Variants in the KBTBD13 Gene: A Cross-Sectional Study of 24 Patients.
**Authors:** van Kleef ESB, Bouman K, Molenaar JPF, Küsters B, Groothuis JT, Olivé M, Malfatti E, Kamsteeg EJ, Van Engelen BGM, Ottenheijm CAC, Doorduin J, Voermans NC
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200214](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200214)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2024 Dec 5;10(6):e200214. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200214. 
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Nemaline Myopathy Type 6 Caused by Variants in the KBTBD13 Gene: A 
Cross-Sectional Study of 24 Patients.

van Kleef ESB(1), Bouman K(1), Molenaar JPF(1), Küsters B(1), Groothuis JT(1), 
Olivé M(1), Malfatti E(1), Kamsteeg EJ(1), Van Engelen BGM(1), Ottenheijm 
CAC(1), Doorduin J(1), Voermans NC(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (E.S.B.K., K.B., J.P.F.M., B.G.M.V.E., J.D., 
N.C.V.), Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour; Department of 
Pathology (B.K.); Department of Rehabilitation (J.T.G.), Donders Institute for 
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands; Neuromuscular Diseases Unit (M.O.), Department of Neurology, 
Hospital de La Santa Creu i Sant Pau; Biomedical Research Institute Sant Pau 
(IIB Sant Pau) Spain; Centro para la Investigación Biomédica en Red en 
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona; Univ Paris Est Créteil (E.M.), INSERM, 
U955 IMRB; AP-HP, Hopital Mondor, Neuromuscular Reference Center, Créteil, 
France; Department of Human Genetics (E.-J.K.), Radboud University Medical 
Center; and Department of Physiology (C.A.C.O.), Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Nemaline myopathy type 6 (NEM6) is the most prevalent 
type of nemaline myopathy in the Netherlands. Because a detailed clinical 
characterization is not available yet, we here provide a detailed assessment of 
24 patients.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, we performed a full clinical assessment 
(medical history and neurologic examination) in patients with NEM6. Patient 
demographics, causative variants in the KBTBD13 gene, creatine kinase levels, 
and the results of previous muscle biopsies were collected. We evaluated 
experienced health-related quality of life, fatigue severity, prevalence of 
falls, balance control (Mini-Balance Evaluation Systems Test [Mini-BESTest]), 
functional motor score (Motor Function Measure [MFM]), and 6-minute walk 
distance. We used transcranial magnetic stimulation to assess muscle relaxation 
kinetics.
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients were included (19 women [19-76 years]; 5 men 
[25-57 years]). Key patient-reported symptoms since childhood were muscle 
weakness (n = 23; 96%), slowness of movements (n = 23; 96%), and difficulties 
with running (n = 20; 83%). Axial, proximal, and distal muscles showed mild 
weakness in most patients. Health-related quality of life was significantly 
lower, and there was a significantly increased fatigue severity compared with 
controls. Prospectively, in a period of 100 days, 8 patients (33%) fell at least 
1 time, of whom 5 patients (21%) fell 2 times or more. The median total score on 
the Mini-BESTest was 24 (21.0-26.0 [interquartile range]) of 28 and the median 
total percentage on the MFM was 91% (83.5-95.3), both considered to be mildly 
abnormal. The 6-minute walk distance was below the lower limit of normal in 4 
patients (17%). All patients with NEM6 showed a markedly reduced muscle 
relaxation rate with a median of 6.5 [4.9-8.1] s-1 (lower limit of normal is 
10.1 s-1).
DISCUSSION: This cross-sectional study in patients with NEM6 shows a relatively 
mild clinical phenotype and mildly abnormal functional tests. However, patients 
report an important impact on the daily activities, which is illustrated by 
functional difficulties, reduced quality of life, increased fatigue severity, 
and increased prevalence of falls. This might be related to delayed muscle 
relaxation. This study provides a comprehensive overview of the clinical 
presentation and functional limitations in patients with NEM6.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200214
PMCID: PMC11623396
PMID: 39651462

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/NG for full disclosures.