---
reference_id: "PMID:38313897"
title: Concomitant Lymphocytic Colitis With Recurrent Clostridium difficile Infection.
authors:
- Suleiman NM
- Baiyasi M
- Al-Saghir T
- Daines B
- Patel F
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.51606
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concomitant Lymphocytic Colitis With Recurrent Clostridium difficile Infection.
**Authors:** Suleiman NM, Baiyasi M, Al-Saghir T, Daines B, Patel F
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.51606](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.51606)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jan 3;16(1):e51606. doi: 10.7759/cureus.51606. eCollection 2024 
Jan.

Concomitant Lymphocytic Colitis With Recurrent Clostridium difficile Infection.

Suleiman NM(1), Baiyasi M(1), Al-Saghir T(2), Daines B(3), Patel F(4).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Henry Ford Health, Detroit, USA.
(3)Dermatology, Beaumont Hospital, Dearborn, USA.
(4)Internal Medicine, Beaumont Hospital, Dearborn, USA.

Microscopic colitis is a clinicopathological diagnosis that is characterized by 
chronic microscopic inflammation of the colon and presents with chronic watery 
diarrhea. There are following two subtypes of microscopic colitis: lymphocytic 
colitis and collagenous colitis. This is a case of a 70-year-old female with a 
history of Clostridium difficile infections who presented with persistent watery 
diarrhea and was diagnosed with lymphocytic colitis in the setting of a 
concomitant C. difficile infection. Given her clinical presentation, the patient 
was initiated on empiric treatment for C. difficile infection and showed a lack 
of clinical improvement with persistent watery diarrhea and elevated white blood 
cell count. The patient's symptoms resolved upon the confirmatory diagnosis and 
treatment of lymphocytic colitis. This study illustrates the importance of 
assessing for, diagnosing, and treating lymphocytic colitis in patients with 
chronic non-resolving watery diarrhea, especially in the setting of concomitant 
or recurrent C. difficile infections. Additionally, it emphasizes the need for 
further characterization of the relationship between C. difficile infection and 
microscopic colitis.

Copyright © 2024, Suleiman et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.51606
PMCID: PMC10837037
PMID: 38313897

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.