---
reference_id: "PMID:23818708"
title: "Dactylitis in psoriatic arthritis: prevalence and response to therapy in the biologic era."
authors:
- Gladman DD
- Ziouzina O
- Thavaneswaran A
- Chandran V
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.130163
keywords:
- Adult
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Arthritis, Psoriatic/drug therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- Biological Products/therapeutic use
- Cohort Studies
- Comorbidity
- Female
- Finger Joint/pathology
- Humans
- "Inflammation/drug therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dactylitis in psoriatic arthritis: prevalence and response to therapy in the biologic era.
**Authors:** Gladman DD, Ziouzina O, Thavaneswaran A, Chandran V
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3899/jrheum.130163](https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.130163)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2013 Aug;40(8):1357-9. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.130163. Epub 2013 Jul
1.

Dactylitis in psoriatic arthritis: prevalence and response to therapy in the
biologic era.

Gladman DD(1), Ziouzina O, Thavaneswaran A, Chandran V.

Author information:
(1)University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. dafna.gladman@utoronto.ca

OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of acute dactylitis in patients with
psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and to compare the response of new acute dactylitis to
treatment with traditional disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) and
anti-tumor necrosis factor-α (anti-TNF) agents in a longitudinal PsA cohort.
METHODS: Patients with PsA followed at 6 months according to a standard protocol
from January 2000 to January 2010 were included in our study. Acute dactylitis
was defined as the presence of painful swelling of an entire digit. Response was
defined as either complete resolution of dactylitis or > 50% improvement in the
number of dactylitic digits. A multivariate generalized estimating equations
analysis using a negative binomial model to account for repeated measures was
conducted to determine predictors for response to treatment of dactylitis.
RESULTS: Of the 752 patients seen in the clinic during this period, 294 had
dactylitis in at least 1 visit, giving a prevalence of 39%. Patients with acute
dactylitis and data available for response at 6 and 12 months (n = 252; 34%
women, mean age 47 yrs, PsA duration 11 yrs) were included in the study on
predictors of response to treatment. Multivariate analysis showed that treatment
with anti-TNF agents was a significant predictor of improvement in dactylitis at
12 months (relative risk 0.528, 95% CI 0.283-0.985, p = 0.045).
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of dactylitis on at least 1 visit was 39%. Treatment
was associated with improvement of dactylitis. Patients treated with biologics
had better response to treatment compared with those treated with nonbiologic
DMARD alone.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.130163
PMID: 23818708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
