---
reference_id: "PMID:41762022"
title: "Burden of hidradenitis suppurativa in Germany: a retrospective claims data analysis and comparison with non-HS patients."
authors:
- Bechara FG
- Melnik S
- Möllers T
- Pannen HD
- Bley R
- Krampe J
- Möckel L
journal: J Dtsch Dermatol Ges
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1111/ddg.70103
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Burden of hidradenitis suppurativa in Germany: a retrospective claims data analysis and comparison with non-HS patients.
**Authors:** Bechara FG, Melnik S, Möllers T, Pannen HD, Bley R, Krampe J, Möckel L
**Journal:** J Dtsch Dermatol Ges (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ddg.70103](https://doi.org/10.1111/ddg.70103)

## Content

1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2026 Feb 28. doi: 10.1111/ddg.70103. Online ahead of 
print.

Burden of hidradenitis suppurativa in Germany: a retrospective claims data 
analysis and comparison with non-HS patients.

Bechara FG(1), Melnik S(2), Möllers T(3), Pannen HD(3), Bley R(3), Krampe J(2), 
Möckel L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venerology, and Allergology, ICH - International 
Centre for Hidradenitis suppurativa/Acne inversa, St. Josef-Hospital, 
Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(2)Gesundheitsforen Leipzig GmbH, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)UCB, Monheim am Rhein, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this analysis was to assess the burden of hidradenitis 
suppurativa (HS) in Germany.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a retrospective German statutory health insurance 
claims data analysis covering the years 2020-2022 and 4.1 million individuals. 
An HS prevalence cohort and matched non-HS cohort representing the general 
population were analyzed regarding burden of disease indicators. An HS incidence 
cohort was analyzed regarding flare occurrences.
RESULTS: Adult HS patients showed a significantly higher prevalence of 
comorbidities including a 3.58 (95% CI: 3.30; 3.85) higher prevalence for a 
mental/behavioral disorder due to tobacco, 2.72 (95% CI: 2.61; 2.83) for 
obesity, 2.56 (95% CI: 2.40; 2.73) for diabetes, 2.00 (95% CI: 1.86; 2.14) for 
pain and 1.69 (95% CI: 1.62; 1.76) for depression compared to matched non-HS 
individuals, respectively. HS patients aged ≥ 50 years had a numerically higher 
risk of death (risk ratio 1.57; 95% CI 0.96-2.17). Among deceased HS patients, 
the mean number of years of life lost ranged from 20.46 to 25.91 during the 
period 2020-2022. Finally, 24.4% experienced at least one HS flare requiring 
medical treatment within 24 months following their initial HS diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: The results of this analysis reveal that HS patients experience a 
substantial burden of disease compared to non-HS patients.

© 2026 Deutsche Dermatologische Gesellschaft (DDG).

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.70103
PMID: 41762022