---
reference_id: "PMID:38214665"
title: "Genetic Analysis, Phenotypic Spectrum and Functional Study of Rare Osteogenesis Imperfecta Caused by CRTAP Variants."
authors:
- Zhou B
- Gao P
- Hu J
- Lin X
- Sun L
- Zhang Q
- Jiang Y
- Wang O
- Xia W
- Xing X
- Li M
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgae025
keywords:
- Humans
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, pathology"
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Female
- Phenotype
- Molecular Chaperones/genetics
- Mutation
- Child
- Pedigree
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Collagen Type I/genetics, metabolism"
- Genotype
- "Osteoblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- Adult
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Analysis, Phenotypic Spectrum and Functional Study of Rare Osteogenesis Imperfecta Caused by CRTAP Variants.
**Authors:** Zhou B, Gao P, Hu J, Lin X, Sun L, Zhang Q, Jiang Y, Wang O, Xia W, Xing X, Li M
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgae025](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgae025)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2024 Jun 17;109(7):1803-1813. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgae025.

Genetic Analysis, Phenotypic Spectrum and Functional Study of Rare Osteogenesis 
Imperfecta Caused by CRTAP Variants.

Zhou B(1), Gao P(2), Hu J(1), Lin X(1), Sun L(1), Zhang Q(1), Jiang Y(1), Wang 
O(1), Xia W(1), Xing X(1), Li M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, National Health 
and Family Planning Commission, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, 
China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking 
Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Beijing 100730, 
China.

OBJECTIVE: Deficiency of cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP) can cause 
extremely rare autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type VII. We 
investigated the pathogenic mechanisms of CRTAP variants through functional 
studies on bones of patients with OI.
METHODS: Two nonconsanguineous families with CRTAP mutations were included and 
their phenotypes and genotypes were evaluated. Bone specimens were obtained from 
1 patient with OI and a normal control during orthopedic surgery. The impacts of 
the novel variant on the CRTAP transcript were confirmed. The expression levels 
of CRTAP mRNA and CRTAP protein were analyzed. The quantification of prolyl 
3-hydroxylation in the α1 chain of type I collagen was evaluated.
RESULTS: Patients with OI type VII had early-onset recurrent fractures, severe 
osteoporosis, and bone deformities. The c.621 + 1G > A and c.1153-3C > G 
mutations were identified in CRTAP in the patients with OI. The c.621 + 1G > A 
variant was a novel mutation that could impair mRNA transcription, leading to a 
truncated CRTAP protein. In a patient with c.621 + 1G > A and c.1153-3C > G 
mutations in CRTAP, the mRNA and protein levels of CRTAP in osteoblasts were 
significantly decreased and the osteoid volume and osteoblast numbers were 
markedly reduced compared with those in the normal control individual. This was 
simultaneously accompanied by significantly reduced prolyl 3-hydroxylation at 
Pro986 in the α1 chain of type I collagen and invisible active bone formation in 
bone.
CONCLUSION: The novel c.621 + 1G > A mutation in CRTAP expands the genotypic 
spectrum of type VII OI. Biallelic mutations of c.621 + 1G > A and c.1153-3C > G 
in CRTAP can lead to reduced CRTAP mRNA and deficient CRTAP protein in 
osteoblasts, which reduces 3-hydroxylation in Pro986 of the α1 chain of type I 
collagen and impairs bone formation, thus contributing to severe OI type VII.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgae025
PMCID: PMC11180511
PMID: 38214665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]