---
reference_id: PMID:33909043
title: Protein instability associated with AARS1 and MARS1 mutations causes trichothiodystrophy.
authors:
- Botta E
- Theil AF
- Raams A
- Caligiuri G
- Giachetti S
- Bione S
- Accadia M
- Lombardi A
- Smith DEC
- Mendes MI
- Swagemakers SMA
- van der Spek PJ
- Salomons GS
- Hoeijmakers JHJ
- Yesodharan D
- Nampoothiri S
- Ogi T
- Lehmann AR
- Orioli D
- Vermeulen W
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab123
keywords:
- "Alanine-tRNA Ligase/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- Enzyme Stability/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "Methionine-tRNA Ligase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Trichothiodystrophy Syndromes/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Whole Genome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein instability associated with AARS1 and MARS1 mutations causes trichothiodystrophy.
**Authors:** Botta E, Theil AF, Raams A, Caligiuri G, Giachetti S, Bione S, Accadia M, Lombardi A, Smith DEC, Mendes MI, Swagemakers SMA, van der Spek PJ, Salomons GS, Hoeijmakers JHJ, Yesodharan D, Nampoothiri S, Ogi T, Lehmann AR, Orioli D, Vermeulen W
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddab123](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddab123)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2021 Aug 28;30(18):1711-1720. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab123.

Protein instability associated with AARS1 and MARS1 mutations causes 
trichothiodystrophy.

Botta E(1), Theil AF(2), Raams A(2), Caligiuri G(1), Giachetti S(1), Bione S(1), 
Accadia M(3), Lombardi A(1), Smith DEC(4), Mendes MI(4), Swagemakers SMA(5), van 
der Spek PJ(5), Salomons GS(4)(6), Hoeijmakers JHJ(2)(7)(8), Yesodharan D(9), 
Nampoothiri S(9), Ogi T(10)(11), Lehmann AR(12), Orioli D(1), Vermeulen W(2).

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Genetica Molecolare 'Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza' (IGM) CNR, Via 
Abbiategrasso 207, Pavia 27100, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Oncode Institute, Erasmus MC, University 
Medical Center Rotterdam, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, Rotterdam 3015 GD, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Medical Genetics Service, Hospital 'Cardinale G. Panico', Via San Pio X 
Tricase 73039, Italy.
(4)Metabolic Unit, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije 
Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam Gastroenterology & 
Metabolism, Amsterdam 1081 HZ, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pathology, Clinical Bioinformatics Unit, Erasmus University 
Medical Center Rotterdam, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, Rotterdam 3015 GD, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Laboratory of Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam UMC, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands.
(7)Oncode Institute, Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht 3584 
CS, The Netherlands.
(8)Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease, CECAD 
Forschungszentrum, University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & 
Research Centre, AIMS Ponekkara PO, Cochin 682041, Kerala, India.
(10)Department of Genetics, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine (RIEM), 
Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.
(11)Department of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya University, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.
(12)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, School of Life Sciences, University of 
Sussex, Famer, Brighton BN1 9RQ, UK.

Trichothiodystrophy (TTD) is a rare hereditary neurodevelopmental disorder 
defined by sulfur-deficient brittle hair and nails and scaly skin, but with 
otherwise remarkably variable clinical features. The photosensitive TTD (PS-TTD) 
forms exhibits in addition to progressive neuropathy and other features of 
segmental accelerated aging and is associated with impaired genome maintenance 
and transcription. New factors involved in various steps of gene expression have 
been identified for the different non-photosensitive forms of TTD (NPS-TTD), 
which do not appear to show features of premature aging. Here, we identify 
alanyl-tRNA synthetase 1 and methionyl-tRNA synthetase 1 variants as new gene 
defects that cause NPS-TTD. These variants result in the instability of the 
respective gene products alanyl- and methionyl-tRNA synthetase. These findings 
extend our previous observations that TTD mutations affect the stability of the 
corresponding proteins and emphasize this phenomenon as a common feature of TTD. 
Functional studies in skin fibroblasts from affected individuals demonstrate 
that these new variants also impact on the rate of tRNA charging, which is the 
first step in protein translation. The extension of reduced abundance of TTD 
factors to translation as well as transcription redefines TTD as a syndrome in 
which proteins involved in gene expression are unstable.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddab123
PMCID: PMC8411986
PMID: 33909043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]