---
reference_id: "PMID:23086801"
title: A novel regulatory defect in the branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase complex due to a mutation in the PPM1K gene causes a mild variant phenotype of maple syrup urine disease.
authors:
- Oyarzabal A
- Martínez-Pardo M
- Merinero B
- Navarrete R
- Desviat LR
- Ugarte M
- Rodríguez-Pombo P
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22242
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel regulatory defect in the branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase complex due to a mutation in the PPM1K gene causes a mild variant phenotype of maple syrup urine disease.
**Authors:** Oyarzabal A, Martínez-Pardo M, Merinero B, Navarrete R, Desviat LR, Ugarte M, Rodríguez-Pombo P
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22242](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22242)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Feb;34(2):355-62. doi: 10.1002/humu.22242. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

A novel regulatory defect in the branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase
complex due to a mutation in the PPM1K gene causes a mild variant phenotype of
maple syrup urine disease.

Oyarzabal A(1), Martínez-Pardo M, Merinero B, Navarrete R, Desviat LR, Ugarte M,
Rodríguez-Pombo P.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Centro de Biología
Molecular Severo Ochoa CSIC-UAM, Departamento de Biología Molecular, Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, CIBERER U746, IDIPAZ, Madrid, Spain.

This article describes a hitherto unreported involvement of the phosphatase
PP2Cm, a recently described member of the branched-chain α-keto acid
dehydrogenase (BCKDH) complex, in maple syrup urine disease (MSUD). The
disease-causing mutation was identified in a patient with a mild variant
phenotype, involving a gene not previously associated with MSUD. SNP array-based
genotyping showed a copy-neutral homozygous pattern for chromosome 4 compatible
with uniparental isodisomy. Mutation analysis of the candidate gene, PPM1K,
revealed a homozygous c.417_418delTA change predicted to result in a truncated,
unstable protein. No PP2Cm mutant protein was detected in immunocytochemical or
Western blot expression analyses. The transient expression of wild-type PPM1K in
PP2Cm-deficient fibroblasts recovered 35% of normal BCKDH activity. As PP2Cm has
been described essential for cell survival, apoptosis and metabolism, the impact
of its deficiency on specific metabolic stress variables was evaluated in
PP2Cm-deficient fibroblasts. Increases were seen in ROS levels along with the
activation of specific stress-signaling MAP kinases. Similar to that described
for the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, a defect in the regulation of BCKDH
caused the aberrant metabolism of its substrate, contributing to the patient's
MSUD phenotype--and perhaps others.

© 2012 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22242
PMID: 23086801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
