---
reference_id: "PMID:32290873"
title: Clinical significance of family history and bicuspid aortic valve in children and young adult patients with Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Monda E
- Fusco A
- Melis D
- Caiazza M
- Gragnano F
- Mauriello A
- Cirillo A
- Rubino M
- Esposito A
- Grammegna A
- Nistri S
- Pepe G
- Calabrò P
- Strisciuglio P
- Della Corte A
- Oppido G
- Russo M
- Limongelli G
journal: Cardiol Young
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1017/S1047951120000748
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical significance of family history and bicuspid aortic valve in children and young adult patients with Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Monda E, Fusco A, Melis D, Caiazza M, Gragnano F, Mauriello A, Cirillo A, Rubino M, Esposito A, Grammegna A, Nistri S, Pepe G, Calabrò P, Strisciuglio P, Della Corte A, Oppido G, Russo M, Limongelli G
**Journal:** Cardiol Young (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1047951120000748](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1047951120000748)

## Content

1. Cardiol Young. 2020 May;30(5):663-667. doi: 10.1017/S1047951120000748. Epub
2020  Apr 15.

Clinical significance of family history and bicuspid aortic valve in children 
and young adult patients with Marfan syndrome.

Monda E(#)(1), Fusco A(#)(1), Melis D(2), Caiazza M(1), Gragnano F(1), Mauriello 
A(1), Cirillo A(1), Rubino M(1), Esposito A(1), Grammegna A(2), Nistri S(3), 
Pepe G(4), Calabrò P(1), Strisciuglio P(2), Della Corte A(5), Oppido G(6), Russo 
M(1), Limongelli G(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Inherited and Rare Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Translational 
Medical Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Monaldi Hospital, 
Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(3)Cardiology Service, CMSR Veneto Medica, Altavilla Vicentina, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence - 
Regional (Tuscany) Referral Center for Marfan Syndrome and Related Disorders, 
Careggi Hospital, Firenze, Italy.
(5)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi 
Vanvitelli", Monaldi Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(6)Monaldi Hospital, AORN Colli, Naples, Italy.
(7)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, University College of London and St. 
Bartholomew's Hospital, London, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder of the connective 
tissue, whose cardinal features affect eyes, musculoskeletal, and cardiovascular 
system. Despite prevalence and natural history of cardiovascular manifestation 
are well known in adults, little is known about children and young adult 
patients. The aim of this study was to describe a well-characterised cohort of 
consecutive children and young patients with marfan syndrome, looking at the 
impact of family history and presence of bicuspid aortic valve on disease 
severity.
METHODS: A total of 30 consecutive children and young patients with Marfan 
syndrome were evaluated. All patients underwent a comprehensive 
clinical-instrumental-genetic evaluation. Particular attention was posed to 
identify differences in prevalence of cardiovascular abnormalities between 
patients with and without family history of Marfan syndrome or bicuspid aortic 
valve.
RESULTS: Of these 30 patients, family history of Marfan syndrome and bicuspid 
aortic valve were present in 76 and 13%, respectively. Compared to patients with 
family history of Marfan syndrome, those without showed higher prevalence of 
aortic sinus dilation (87 versus 32%, p-value = 0.009), greater aortic sinus 
diameters (4.2 ± 2.1 versus 1.9 ± 1.1 z score, p-value = 0.002), and higher rate 
of aortic surgery during follow-up (37 versus 0%, p-value = 0.002). Compared to 
patients with tricuspid aortic valve, those with bicuspid aortic valve were 
younger (3.2 ± 4.3 versus 10.7 ± 6.8 years old, p-value = 0.043), showed greater 
aortic sinus diameters (4.2 ± 0.9 versus 2.2 ± 1.6 z score, p-value = 0.033), 
and underwent more frequently aortic root replacement (50 versus 4%, p-value = 
0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: In our cohort of patients with Marfan syndrome, the absence of 
family history and the presence of bicuspid aortic valve were associated to 
severe aortic phenotype and worse prognosis.

DOI: 10.1017/S1047951120000748
PMID: 32290873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]