---
reference_id: "PMID:17391418"
title: "The cost-effectiveness of expanding newborn screening for up to 21 inherited metabolic disorders using tandem mass spectrometry: results from a decision-analytic model."
authors:
- Cipriano LE
- Rupar CA
- Zaric GS
journal: Value Health
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1524-4733.2006.00156.x
keywords:
- Cost-Benefit Analysis
- Decision Support Techniques
- Female
- Health Policy
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant Mortality
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Life Expectancy
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/classification, diagnosis, mortality"
- "Models, Econometric"
- "Neonatal Screening/economics, methods"
- Ontario/epidemiology
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Survival Analysis
- "Tandem Mass Spectrometry/economics, statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The cost-effectiveness of expanding newborn screening for up to 21 inherited metabolic disorders using tandem mass spectrometry: results from a decision-analytic model.
**Authors:** Cipriano LE, Rupar CA, Zaric GS
**Journal:** Value Health (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1524-4733.2006.00156.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1524-4733.2006.00156.x)

## Content

1. Value Health. 2007 Mar-Apr;10(2):83-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1524-4733.2006.00156.x.

The cost-effectiveness of expanding newborn screening for up to 21 inherited
metabolic disorders using tandem mass spectrometry: results from a
decision-analytic model.

Cipriano LE(1), Rupar CA, Zaric GS.

Author information:
(1)Richard Ivey School of Business, University of Western Ontario, London, ON,
Canada.

OBJECTIVES: In 2005, in Ontario, Canada, newborns were only screened for
phenylketonuria (PKU) and hypothyroidism. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) has
since been implemented as a new screening technology because it can screen for
PKU and many other diseases simultaneously. We estimated the cost-effectiveness
of using this technology to expand the Ontario newborn screening program to
screen for each disease independently and for hypothetical bundles of up to 21
metabolic diseases.
METHODS: We constructed a decision-analytic model to estimate the incremental
costs and life-years of survival that can be gained by screening or changing
screening technologies. Costs and health benefits were estimated for a cohort of
babies born in Ontario in 1 year. Secondary sources and expert opinion were used
to estimate the test characteristics, disease prevalence, treatment
effectiveness, disease progression rates, and mortality. The London Health
Sciences Centre Case Costing Initiative, the Ontario Health Insurance Plan
Schedule, and the Ontario Drug Benefits plan formulary were used to estimate
costs.
RESULTS: Changing screening technologies, from the Guthrie test to MS/MS, for
PKU detection had an incremental cost of $5,500,000 per life-year (LY) gained.
We identified no diseases for which the incremental cost of screening for just
that disease was less than $100,000 per LY gained. The incremental costs of
screening ranged from $222,000 (HMG-CoA lyase deficiency) to $142,500,000
(glutaric acidemia type II) per LY gained. Screening for a bundle of diseases
including PKU and the 14 most cost-effective diseases to screen for cost less
than $70,000 per LY gained, and the incremental cost-effectiveness of adding
each of the 14 diseases to the bundle was less than $100,000 per LY gained. The
incremental cost of adding the 15th most cost-effective disease was $309,400 per
LY gained.
CONCLUSIONS: Early diagnosis and treatment of metabolic disease is important to
reduce disease severity and delay or prevent the onset of the disease. Screening
at birth reduces the morbidity, mortality, and social burden associated with the
irreversible effects of disease on the population. Our analysis suggests that
the cost-efficiencies gained by using MS/MS to screen for bundles of diseases
rather than just one disease are sufficient to warrant consideration of an
expanded screening program. It is, however, not cost-effective to screen for all
diseases that can be screened for using this technology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-4733.2006.00156.x
PMID: 17391418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
