---
reference_id: "PMID:20301574"
title: Cystinosis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Nesterova G
- Gahl WA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystinosis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Nesterova G, Gahl WA

## Content

1. Cystinosis.

Nesterova G(1), Gahl WA(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Mar 22 [updated 2025 Aug 14].

Author information:
(1)Medical Advisor, Cystinosis Research Network
(2)Senior Investigator, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Cystinosis comprises three allelic clinical phenotypes 
caused by pathogenic variants in CTNS. Nephropathic (infantile) cystinosis: 
Characterized in untreated infants/children by renal Fanconi syndrome, poor 
growth, hypophosphatemic/calcipenic rickets, impaired glomerular function 
resulting in complete glomerular failure, and accumulation of cystine in almost 
all cells, leading to cellular dysfunction with tissue and organ impairment. 
This is the most common form (95% of individuals with cystinosis). The typical 
untreated child has short stature, rickets, and photophobia. Failure to gain 
weight is generally noticed after approximately age six months; signs of renal 
tubular Fanconi syndrome (polyuria, polydipsia, dehydration, and acidosis) 
appear as early as age six months and progress to end-stage kidney disease 
within the first 12 years of life if untreated; corneal crystals can be present 
before age one year and are typically present after age 16 months. Laboratory 
findings include hypochloremic metabolic acidosis; increased urinary excretion 
of electrolytes (sodium, potassium, bicarbonate), minerals (calcium, phosphate, 
magnesium), glucose, amino acids, and tubular protein including 
β2-microglobulin; elevated serum alkaline phosphatase; and hypocalcemia, 
hypophosphatemia, and hypokalemia. Prior to cystine-depleting drug therapy and 
kidney transplantation the life span in nephropathic cystinosis was less than 
ten years. With these treatment interventions, some affected individuals can 
survive at least into the mid-forties or fifties with satisfactory quality of 
life. Later-onset (juvenile) cystinosis: Characterized by the typical 
manifestations of nephropathic cystinosis, but onset is at a later age. Renal 
glomerular failure occurs in untreated affected individuals, usually between 
ages 15 and 25 years. This form accounts for ~5% of individuals with cystinosis. 
Non-nephropathic adult (ocular) cystinosis: Characterized by photophobia 
resulting from corneal cystine crystal accumulation.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of cystinosis is established in a proband with 
cystine crystals in the cornea identified on slit lamp examination, elevated 
cystine concentration in polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and/or demonstration of 
increased cystine content in cultured fibroblasts or in the placenta at the time 
of birth, and biallelic pathogenic variants in CTNS identified by molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Early treatment with cystine depletion therapy 
(cysteamine bitartrate) significantly delays progression of glomerular damage. 
Cysteamine ophthalmic drops can relieve photophobia. Kidney transplantation is 
indicated when other medical treatments are no longer effective. Supportive 
care: Nutrition and feeding support; growth hormone therapy as needed; education 
regarding nutrition and avoidance of dehydration. Renal Fanconi syndrome is 
treated by replacement of tubular losses of electrolytes, bicarbonate, minerals, 
and other small-molecular-weight nutrients; children should have free access to 
water and bathroom privileges and supplementation with citrate to alkalinize the 
blood; fluid and nutrient replacement during episodes of dehydration. Phosphate 
replacement to prevent and treat rickets; vitamin D supplementation; treatment 
of skeletal deformities per orthopedist; additional treatment of renal 
glomerular disease include dialysis and kidney transplant; additional treatments 
for photophobia include sun avoidance, dark glasses and lubrication; 
anti-inflammatory agents or other local treatments for corneal complications; 
L-thyroxine as needed for hypothyroidism; diuretics or CSF drainage may be 
necessary for intracranial hypertension. Other treatments may include insulin 
for diabetes mellitus, testosterone for hypogonadism in males, and referral for 
fertility care; regular exercise and physical therapy for muscle deterioration; 
L-carnitine may improve muscle strength; treatment per pulmonologist for 
respiratory manifestations; proton pump inhibitors for gastric acid 
hypersecretion; treatment of other GI complications per gastroenterologist; 
treatment of cardiovascular and coagulation complications per cardiologist, 
vascular specialist, and/or hematologist; developmental and educational support; 
speech therapy, physical therapy, and occupational therapy for neurologic 
complications; treatment of immune dysfunction due to anti-rejection medications 
per transplant specialist; sunscreen and sun-protective clothing; dental care; 
psychosocial support. Surveillance: Growth assessment every three to six months 
throughout childhood, including evaluations of weight, nutrition, and feeding 
difficulties; evaluation for progressive muscle weakness and swallowing 
difficulties in those with advanced disease; evaluation by a nephrologist 
including kidney function tests every three to six months, depending on the 
severity of kidney impairment; evaluation by metabolic specialist including 
serum electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, and intact 
parathyroid hormone annually or more frequently as needed; skeletal radiographs 
and DXA scan annually or as needed beginning at age two years; kidney ultrasound 
every one to two years beginning at age six years; dental exams every six 
months; detailed ophthalmologic evaluation every six to twelve months with 
fundoscopic examination to screen for increased intracranial pressure; 
endocrinology evaluation including thyroid function tests every six months; 
testosterone, inhibin B, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone 
(in males) annually starting before puberty, then as indicated; fasting blood 
glucose concentration every six to 12 months beginning in adolescence. 
Neurologic, neurocognitive, and physical and occupational therapy evaluations 
include visual-motor integration, visual memory, planning, sustained attention, 
and motor speed every six to 12 months beginning at age seven to eight years. 
Brain CT or MRI for evaluation of cerebral atrophy or calcifications every two 
to three years in those with advanced disease. Electroneuromyography, six-minute 
walk test, and motor function measurement as recommended by neurologist; assess 
for respiratory manifestations annually; pulmonary function tests as needed; 
gastroenterologist evaluation every six to 12 months with liver and pancreatic 
function tests, clinical exam for hepatomegaly and splenomegaly, and assessment 
for symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease annually or more frequently as 
needed; abdominal ultrasound as needed; annual assessment for cardiac 
manifestations; chest CT and EKG for detection of coronary and other vascular 
calcification every two to three years in those with advanced disease; assess 
for signs and symptoms of coagulation disorder at each visit in adults; assess 
for signs and symptoms of immunodeficiency due to anti-rejection medications at 
each visit after kidney transplant; annual dermatology exam in adults especially 
following kidney transplant; psychosocial assessment including assessment for 
depression and anxiety annually or more frequently as needed. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Dehydration; sun exposure if photophobia is 
present. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Biochemical or molecular genetic 
testing of all at-risk sibs of any age is warranted to allow for early diagnosis 
and treatment. Pregnancy management: Pregnancies in females with cystinosis are 
at increased risk for premature delivery and must be monitored. Fluid and 
electrolyte status require careful management. Females should be counseled that 
they will need to stop cysteamine treatment during pregnancy. Pregnancy should 
be managed by an experienced obstetrician and nephrologist due to high incidence 
of polypharmacy and comorbidities associated with cystinosis, such as chronic 
kidney disease, hypothyroidism, hypertension, diabetes, and pulmonary and 
neuromuscular complications.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Cystinosis is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If 
both parents are known to be heterozygous for a CTNS pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, 
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the CTNS pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected individual, carrier testing for at-risk family members 
and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing for cystinosis are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301574