---
reference_id: "PMID:27502793"
title: "Phototherapy for Pityriasis Lichenoides in the Pediatric Population: A Review of the Published Literature."
authors:
- Maranda EL
- Smith M
- Nguyen AH
- Patel VN
- Schachner LA
- Joaquin JJ
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s40257-016-0216-2
keywords:
- "Adrenal Cortex Hormones/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Child
- Humans
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/etiology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Ultraviolet Therapy/adverse effects, methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phototherapy for Pityriasis Lichenoides in the Pediatric Population: A Review of the Published Literature.
**Authors:** Maranda EL, Smith M, Nguyen AH, Patel VN, Schachner LA, Joaquin JJ
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40257-016-0216-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40257-016-0216-2)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2016 Dec;17(6):583-591. doi: 10.1007/s40257-016-0216-2.

Phototherapy for Pityriasis Lichenoides in the Pediatric Population: A Review of 
the Published Literature.

Maranda EL(1), Smith M(2), Nguyen AH(2), Patel VN(3), Schachner LA(3), Joaquin 
JJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, 1475 NW 12th Ave., Miami, FL, 33136, USA. 
emaranda@med.miami.edu.
(2)Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, NE, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, 1475 NW 12th Ave., Miami, FL, 33136, USA.

BACKGROUND: Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) is a dermatologic disorder that 
manifests in either the acute (pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta) or 
the chronic form (pityriasis lichenoides chronica, also known as parapsoriasis 
chronica). Traditional first-line therapy consists of corticosteroids or 
antibiotics; however, these treatments are often accompanied with multiple side 
effects and may be ineffective.
OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to review the use of phototherapy for 
treating PL in the pediatric population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a systematic review of the literature in the 
National Library of Medicine's PubMed database and the SCOPUS database 
discussing phototherapy for treatment of PL in the pediatric population. The 
following search terms were used: 'pityriasis lichenoides', 'pityriasis 
lichenoides chronica', 'pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta', and 
'febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease'.
RESULTS: The systematic search and screening of articles resulted in 14 articles 
including a total of 64 patients with PL treated with phototherapy. Three 
different modalities were utilized, with five studies using broadband 
ultraviolet B (BB-UVB) radiation, nine studies utilizing narrowband UVB 
(NB-UVB), and two studies employing psoralen with ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy. 
Overall, the use of BB-UVB had an initial clearance rate of 89.6 % with 23.1 % 
recurrence, whereas NB-UVB cleared 73 % of the lesions with no recurrence, and 
PUVA therapy initially cleared 83 % of the lesions with 60 % recurrence. The 
side-effect profiles were similar and revealed limited toxicity.
CONCLUSION: Phototherapy shows promising results and a favorable side-effect 
profile in the treatment of PL. Ultimately, large randomized controlled trials 
are needed to determine optimal treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-016-0216-2
PMID: 27502793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]