---
reference_id: "PMID:18849966"
title: A key role for autophagy and the autophagy gene Atg16l1 in mouse and human intestinal Paneth cells.
authors:
- Cadwell K
- Liu JY
- Brown SL
- Miyoshi H
- Loh J
- Lennerz JK
- Kishi C
- Kc W
- Carrero JA
- Hunt S
- Stone CD
- Brunt EM
- Xavier RJ
- Sleckman BP
- Li E
- Mizushima N
- Stappenbeck TS
- Virgin HW 4th
journal: Nature
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/nature07416
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A key role for autophagy and the autophagy gene Atg16l1 in mouse and human intestinal Paneth cells.
**Authors:** Cadwell K, Liu JY, Brown SL, Miyoshi H, Loh J, Lennerz JK, Kishi C, Kc W, Carrero JA, Hunt S, Stone CD, Brunt EM, Xavier RJ, Sleckman BP, Li E, Mizushima N, Stappenbeck TS, Virgin HW 4th
**Journal:** Nature (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature07416](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07416)

## Content

1. Nature. 2008 Nov 13;456(7219):259-63. doi: 10.1038/nature07416. Epub 2008 Oct
5.

A key role for autophagy and the autophagy gene Atg16l1 in mouse and human 
intestinal Paneth cells.

Cadwell K(1), Liu JY, Brown SL, Miyoshi H, Loh J, Lennerz JK, Kishi C, Kc W, 
Carrero JA, Hunt S, Stone CD, Brunt EM, Xavier RJ, Sleckman BP, Li E, Mizushima 
N, Stappenbeck TS, Virgin HW 4th.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2009 Oct;137(4):1527-9. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.08.021.

Susceptibility to Crohn's disease, a complex inflammatory disease involving the 
small intestine, is controlled by over 30 loci. One Crohn's disease risk allele 
is in ATG16L1, a gene homologous to the essential yeast autophagy gene ATG16 
(ref. 2). It is not known how ATG16L1 or autophagy contributes to intestinal 
biology or Crohn's disease pathogenesis. To address these questions, we 
generated and characterized mice that are hypomorphic for ATG16L1 protein 
expression, and validated conclusions on the basis of studies in these mice by 
analysing intestinal tissues that we collected from Crohn's disease patients 
carrying the Crohn's disease risk allele of ATG16L1. Here we show that ATG16L1 
is a bona fide autophagy protein. Within the ileal epithelium, both ATG16L1 and 
a second essential autophagy protein ATG5 are selectively important for the 
biology of the Paneth cell, a specialized epithelial cell that functions in part 
by secretion of granule contents containing antimicrobial peptides and other 
proteins that alter the intestinal environment. ATG16L1- and ATG5-deficient 
Paneth cells exhibited notable abnormalities in the granule exocytosis pathway. 
In addition, transcriptional analysis revealed an unexpected gain of function 
specific to ATG16L1-deficient Paneth cells including increased expression of 
genes involved in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signalling 
and lipid metabolism, of acute phase reactants and of two adipocytokines, leptin 
and adiponectin, known to directly influence intestinal injury responses. 
Importantly, Crohn's disease patients homozygous for the ATG16L1 Crohn's disease 
risk allele displayed Paneth cell granule abnormalities similar to those 
observed in autophagy-protein-deficient mice and expressed increased levels of 
leptin protein. Thus, ATG16L1, and probably the process of autophagy, have a 
role within the intestinal epithelium of mice and Crohn's disease patients by 
selective effects on the cell biology and specialized regulatory properties of 
Paneth cells.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07416
PMCID: PMC2695978
PMID: 18849966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]