---
reference_id: "PMID:24664614"
title: "X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED): clinical and diagnostic insights from an international patient registry."
authors:
- Fete M
- Hermann J
- Behrens J
- Huttner KM
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36436
keywords:
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Ectodysplasins/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED): clinical and diagnostic insights from an international patient registry.
**Authors:** Fete M, Hermann J, Behrens J, Huttner KM
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36436](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36436)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Oct;164A(10):2437-42. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36436. Epub 
2014 Mar 24.

X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED): clinical and diagnostic 
insights from an international patient registry.

Fete M(1), Hermann J, Behrens J, Huttner KM.

Author information:
(1)National Foundation for Ectodermal Dysplasia, Mascoutah, Illinois.

The web-based Ectodermal Dysplasia International Registry (EDIR) is a 
comprehensive patient-reported survey contributing to an understanding of 
ectodermal dysplasia (ED). XLHED is the most common of the genetic ED syndromes 
and was the primary diagnosis reported by 223/835 respondents (141 males and 82 
females). Overall, 96% of XLHED registrants reported as least one other affected 
family member and 21% reported a family history of infant or childhood deaths, 
consistent with the published mortality data in this disorder. In general, XLHED 
is diagnosed by the triad of decreased sweating, reduced hair, and hypodontia 
(present in 89%, 74%, and 74% of XLHED respondents). Additionally, the registry 
dataset confirmed a spectrum of life-long XLHED clinical complications including 
recurrent sinus infections (49% males, 52% females), nasal congestion often foul 
smelling and interfering with feeding (73% males, 27% females), eczema (66% 
males, 40% females), wheezing (66% males, 45% females), and a hoarse, raspy 
voice (67% males, 23% females). The Registry results also highlighted features 
consistently differentiating XLHED from the non-hypohidrotic ED syndromes 
including the frequency of infant/childhood deaths, the presence of limb/digit 
abnormalities, feeding issues related to nasal discharge, dentures, and a 
diagnosis of asthma. These results represent the largest collection of data on a 
broad-spectrum of health-related issues affecting ED patients. This project 
provides information for expanding knowledge of the natural history of XLHED, 
and as such may facilitate the diagnosis and treatment of its varied and 
lifelong medical challenges.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36436
PMID: 24664614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]