---
reference_id: "PMID:16650841"
title: "Interactions between Sox10, Edn3 and Ednrb during enteric nervous system and melanocyte development."
authors:
- Stanchina L
- Baral V
- Robert F
- Pingault V
- Lemort N
- Pachnis V
- Goossens M
- Bondurand N
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.031
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Ear, Inner/pathology"
- "Endothelin-3/genetics, metabolism"
- "Enteric Nervous System/embryology, growth & development, metabolism, pathology"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Hair Color/genetics
- "High Mobility Group Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Melanocytes/pathology, physiology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Mortality
- Neural Crest/pathology
- "Receptor, Endothelin B/genetics, metabolism"
- SOXE Transcription Factors
- Signal Transduction
- "Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interactions between Sox10, Edn3 and Ednrb during enteric nervous system and melanocyte development.
**Authors:** Stanchina L, Baral V, Robert F, Pingault V, Lemort N, Pachnis V, Goossens M, Bondurand N
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.031)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):232-49. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.031. Epub
2006  Apr 3.

Interactions between Sox10, Edn3 and Ednrb during enteric nervous system and
melanocyte development.

Stanchina L(1), Baral V, Robert F, Pingault V, Lemort N, Pachnis V, Goossens M,
Bondurand N.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U654, Bases moléculaires et cellulaires des maladies génétiques,
Hôpital Henri Mondor, Creteil, F-94000, France; Université Paris 12, Faculté de
Médecine, IFR10, Créteil, F-94000, France.

The requirement for SOX10 and endothelin-3/EDNRB signalling pathway during
enteric nervous system (ENS) and melanocyte development, as well as their
alterations in Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease (hypopigmentation, deafness and
absence of enteric ganglia) are well established. Here, we analysed the genetic
interactions between these genes during ENS and melanocyte development. Through
phenotype analysis of Sox10;Ednrb and Sox10;Edn3 double mutants, we show that a
coordinate and balanced interaction between these molecules is required for
normal ENS and melanocyte development. Indeed, double mutants present with a
severe increase in white spotting, absence of melanocytes within the inner ear,
and in the stria vascularis in particular, and more severe ENS defects.
Moreover, we show that partial loss of Ednrb in Sox10 heterozygous mice impairs
colonisation of the gut by enteric crest cells at all stages observed. However,
compared to single mutants, we detected no apoptosis, cell proliferation or
overall neuronal or glial differentiation defects in neural crest cells within
the stomach of double mutants, but apoptosis was increased in vagal neural crest
cells outside of the gut. These data will contribute to the understanding of the
molecular basis of ENS, pigmentation and hearing defects observed in mouse
mutants and patients carrying SOX10, EDN3 and EDNRB mutations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.031
PMID: 16650841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
