---
reference_id: "PMID:29761339"
title: "[Syncope in hypertrophic (obstructive) cardiomyopathy]."
authors:
- Seggewiß H
- Koljaja-Batzner A
- Seggewiß K
- Meesmann M
journal: Herzschrittmacherther Elektrophysiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00399-018-0567-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Syncope in hypertrophic (obstructive) cardiomyopathy].
**Authors:** Seggewiß H, Koljaja-Batzner A, Seggewiß K, Meesmann M
**Journal:** Herzschrittmacherther Elektrophysiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00399-018-0567-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00399-018-0567-x)

## Content

1. Herzschrittmacherther Elektrophysiol. 2018 Jun;29(2):178-182. doi: 
10.1007/s00399-018-0567-x. Epub 2018 May 14.

[Syncope in hypertrophic (obstructive) cardiomyopathy].

[Article in German]

Seggewiß H(1), Koljaja-Batzner A(2), Seggewiß K, Meesmann M(2).

Author information:
(1)Standort Juliusspital, Medizinische Klinik - Kardiologie & Internistische 
Intensivmedizin, Klinikum Würzburg-Mitte, Juliuspromenade 19, 97070, Würzburg, 
Deutschland. seggewiss.hubert@t-online.de.
(2)Standort Juliusspital, Medizinische Klinik - Kardiologie & Internistische 
Intensivmedizin, Klinikum Würzburg-Mitte, Juliuspromenade 19, 97070, Würzburg, 
Deutschland.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common genetic cardiac disease. The most 
important pathophysiological finding is dynamic (outflow tract) obstruction of 
the left ventricle in about 70% of affected patients. Especially in younger 
patients, an increased risk of sudden cardiac death has been observed. Syncope 
and presyncope-in addition to extremely variable cardiac symptoms (dyspnea and 
angina)-are common. The etiology of syncope is complex. The most important 
aspect for diagnosis is a detailed history regarding the accompanying 
circumstances of the syncope. In principle, an attempt must be made to 
distinguish between rhythmogenic and hemodynamic causes. Diagnostic work-up 
should be performed under the criteria of a possible prognostic-with 
implantation of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) in patients at 
increased risk of sudden cardiac death-and symptomatic therapy. Depending on the 
underlying morphology and the experience of the surgeon, percutaneous septal 
ablation and operative myectomy are complementary options for symptomatic 
treatment if medical therapy with beta-blockers and/or verapamil is inadequate.

DOI: 10.1007/s00399-018-0567-x
PMID: 29761339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]