---
reference_id: "PMID:40295800"
title: Complete omission of exon 21 from Slc12a2 transcripts in mice results in hearing loss.
authors:
- Mutai H
- Kuroda Y
- Noji S
- Ichikawa S
- Matsuo K
- Tanaka S
- Kataoka N
- Fujioka M
- Matsunaga T
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-99827-7
keywords:
- Animals
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 2/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- "Evoked Potentials, Auditory, Brain Stem"
- "Stria Vascularis/pathology, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Male
- "Cochlea/metabolism, pathology"
- Endolymph/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complete omission of exon 21 from Slc12a2 transcripts in mice results in hearing loss.
**Authors:** Mutai H, Kuroda Y, Noji S, Ichikawa S, Matsuo K, Tanaka S, Kataoka N, Fujioka M, Matsunaga T
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-025-99827-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-99827-7)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2025 Apr 28;15(1):14790. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-99827-7.

Complete omission of exon 21 from Slc12a2 transcripts in mice results in hearing 
loss.

Mutai H(1)(2), Kuroda Y(3), Noji S(3), Ichikawa S(4)(5)(6), Matsuo K(3), Tanaka 
S(5), Kataoka N(5), Fujioka M(7)(8), Matsunaga T(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hearing and Balance Research, National Institute of Sensory 
Organs, NHO Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan. mutai.hideki@kitasato-u.ac.jp.
(2)Molecular Genetics, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1, Kitazato, 
Minami-ku, Sagamihara, 252-0374, Kanagawa, Japan. mutai.hideki@kitasato-u.ac.jp.
(3)Laboratory of Cell and Tissue Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo , Japan.
(4)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo , Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Animal Resource Sciences/ 
Veterinary Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo , Japan.
(6)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo , 
Japan.
(7)Molecular Genetics, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1, Kitazato, 
Minami-ku, Sagamihara, 252-0374, Kanagawa, Japan.
(8)Department of Otolaryngology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo , 
Japan.
(9)Division of Hearing and Balance Research, National Institute of Sensory 
Organs, NHO Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Medical Genetics Center, NHO Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo , Japan.

Hereditary hearing loss is highly heterogeneous. SLC12A2 is linked to autosomal 
dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss, DFNA78, with all the pathogenic variants 
affecting the exon 21. The gene encodes a cotransporter NKCC1 crucial for 
regulating intracellular osmotic pressure and producing endolymph in the 
cochlea. We generated two mouse strains with heterologous Slc12a2 variants in 
the splice site of the exon 21 (Em1: NM_009194.3:c.2912-2 A > G and 
Em2: c.2912-4_2913del). Slc12a2Em2/Em2 mice with complete skip of the exon 21 
showed reduced endolymph on postnatal day 1 (P1), reduced stria vascularis (StV) 
and no auditory brainstem responses at 4 weeks. Reduced StV size was considered 
to be due to rebalance osmotic pressure, and upregulation of Cldn9 revealed by 
RNA-seq was considered as tissue response to repair the gaps from reduced cell 
sizes in the Slc12a2Em2/Em2 cochlea. Female Slc12a2Em2/+ mice also exhibited 
mild elevation of ABR thresholds in several sound frequencies. Slc12a2Em1/Em1 
mice showed normal hearing, presumably due to sufficient cotransporter activity 
from the 9 bases shorter transcript by cryptic splicing. Minigene assays 
indicated that a single nucleotide difference between humans and mice at the 5' 
end of the exon 21 affects exon 21 splicing. Slc12a2Em2 mouse is proposed as a 
model for studying DFNA78 pathology.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-99827-7
PMCID: PMC12038040
PMID: 40295800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests. Ethics declarations and approval for animal 
experiments: All experimental protocols were approved by Institutional Animal 
Care and Use Committee of NHO Tokyo Medical Center (23-animal-01, 18-animal-02). 
All experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and 
regulations. Authors complied with the ARRIVE guidelines ( 
https://arriveguidelines.org ).