---
reference_id: "PMID:35088870"
title: "Capillary Malformation-arteriovenous Malformation Type 2: A Case Report and Review."
authors:
- Brix ATH
- Tørring PM
- Bygum A
journal: Acta Derm Venereol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2340/actadv.v102.1126
keywords:
- "Arteriovenous Malformations/genetics, pathology"
- Capillaries/abnormalities
- Humans
- "Port-Wine Stain/diagnosis, genetics"
- p120 GTPase Activating Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Capillary Malformation-arteriovenous Malformation Type 2: A Case Report and Review.
**Authors:** Brix ATH, Tørring PM, Bygum A
**Journal:** Acta Derm Venereol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2340/actadv.v102.1126](https://doi.org/10.2340/actadv.v102.1126)

## Content

1. Acta Derm Venereol. 2022 Mar 8;102:adv00662. doi: 10.2340/actadv.v102.1126.

Capillary Malformation-arteriovenous Malformation Type 2: A Case Report and 
Review.

Brix ATH(1), Tørring PM, Bygum A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, J. B. 
Winsløwsvej 19, 3, DK-5000 Odense, Denmark. anna.trier.heiberg.brix@rsyd.dk.

Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome is a rare 
genodermatosis with cutaneous capillary malformations and a risk of associated 
fast-flow malformations. We describe here a four-generation family with a novel 
heterozygous pathogenic variant in the EPHB4 gene (NM_004444.5 (EPHB4): 
c.2224G>C, p.(Ala742Pro)). A review of the literature retrieved 127 patients 
with capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome and confirmed 
variants in EPHB4. Multiple capillary malformations were present in 114 (89.76%) 
patients, and 12 (9.44%) patients had a solitary capillary malformation. 
Arteriovenous malformations/fistulas were present in 23 (18.1%) patients, and 
were located within the central nervous system in 5 (3.9%) patients. Not all 
papers included description of epistaxis. Telangiectasias were reported in 28 
(22%) patients, and Bier spots were described in 20 (15.7%) patients. The 
clinical characteristics of capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation 
syndrome are diverse and often discrete, which can make it difficult to 
distinguish capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome from 
hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia.

DOI: 10.2340/actadv.v102.1126
PMCID: PMC9558756
PMID: 35088870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare