---
reference_id: "PMID:38500810"
title: "Case report: A novel ACTA1 variant in a patient with nemaline rods and increased glycogen deposition."
authors:
- Piga D
- Rimoldi M
- Magri F
- Zanotti S
- Napoli L
- Ripolone M
- Pagliarani S
- Ciscato P
- Velardo D
- "D'Amico A"
- Bertini E
- Comi GP
- Ronchi D
- Corti S
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1340693
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: A novel ACTA1 variant in a patient with nemaline rods and increased glycogen deposition.
**Authors:** Piga D, Rimoldi M, Magri F, Zanotti S, Napoli L, Ripolone M, Pagliarani S, Ciscato P, Velardo D, D'Amico A, Bertini E, Comi GP, Ronchi D, Corti S
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2024.1340693](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2024.1340693)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2024 Mar 4;15:1340693. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1340693. 
eCollection 2024.

Case report: A novel ACTA1 variant in a patient with nemaline rods and increased 
glycogen deposition.

Piga D(#)(1), Rimoldi M(#)(2)(3), Magri F(1), Zanotti S(2), Napoli L(2), 
Ripolone M(2), Pagliarani S(1), Ciscato P(2), Velardo D(2), D'Amico A(4), 
Bertini E(4), Comi GP(1)(5), Ronchi D(#)(1)(5), Corti S(#)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Fondazione Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Neurology Unit, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)IRCCS Fondazione Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Neuromuscular and 
Rare Disease Unit, Milan, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Fondazione Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Medical Genetics 
Unit, Milan, Italy.
(4)Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Bambino Gesu' 
Children's Research Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Dino Ferrari Center, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Congenital myopathies are a group of heterogeneous inherited 
disorders, mainly characterized by early-onset hypotonia and muscle weakness. 
The spectrum of clinical phenotype can be highly variable, going from very mild 
to severe presentations. The course also varies broadly resulting in a fatal 
outcome in the most severe cases but can either be benign or lead to an 
amelioration even in severe presentations. Muscle biopsy analysis is crucial for 
the identification of pathognomonic morphological features, such as core areas, 
nemaline bodies or rods, nuclear centralizations and congenital type 1 fibers 
disproportion. However, multiple abnormalities in the same muscle can be 
observed, making more complex the myopathological scenario.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here, we describe an Italian newborn presenting with severe 
hypotonia, respiratory insufficiency, inability to suck and swallow, requiring 
mechanical ventilation and gastrostomy feeding. Muscle biopsy analyzed by light 
microscopy showed the presence of vacuoles filled with glycogen, suggesting a 
metabolic myopathy, but also fuchsinophilic inclusions. Ultrastructural studies 
confirmed the presence of normally structured glycogen, and the presence of 
minirods, directing the diagnostic hypothesis toward a nemaline myopathy. An 
expanded Next Generation Sequencing analysis targeting congenital myopathies 
genes revealed the presence of a novel heterozygous c.965 T > A p. (Leu322Gln) 
variant in the ACTA1 gene, which encodes the skeletal muscle alpha-actin.
CONCLUSION: Our case expands the repertoire of molecular and pathological 
features observed in actinopathies. We highlight the value of ultrastructural 
examination to investigate the abnormalities detected at the histological level. 
We also emphasized the use of expanded gene panels in the molecular analysis of 
neuromuscular patients, especially for those ones presenting multiple bioptic 
alterations.

Copyright © 2024 Piga, Rimoldi, Magri, Zanotti, Napoli, Ripolone, Pagliarani, 
Ciscato, Velardo, D’Amico, Bertini, Comi, Ronchi and Corti.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1340693
PMCID: PMC10944937
PMID: 38500810

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.