---
reference_id: "PMID:11899747"
title: Advances in anti-inflammatory therapy.
authors:
- Aletaha D
- Smolen JS
journal: Acta Med Austriaca
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1046/j.1563-2571.2002.01037.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in anti-inflammatory therapy.
**Authors:** Aletaha D, Smolen JS
**Journal:** Acta Med Austriaca (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1563-2571.2002.01037.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1563-2571.2002.01037.x)

## Content

1. Acta Med Austriaca. 2002;29(1):1-6. doi: 10.1046/j.1563-2571.2002.01037.x.

Advances in anti-inflammatory therapy.

Aletaha D(1), Smolen JS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of 
Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna. Daniel.Aletaha@akh-wien.ac.at

Our goal was to evaluate the state of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), before the introduction 
of the coxibs. The prerequisite for inclusion was the presence of RA (ACR 
criteria) plus therapy with an NSAID with or without a disease modifying 
antirheumatic drug (DMARD). A total of 368 consecutive RA patients (81% women) 
from the outpatient clinic at the Vienna General Hospital were included. 
Rheumatoid factor was positive in 62%, the patients' mean age was 60 +/- 14 
years. The period of observation was 1972-1998. Seventy-seven per cent of the 
patients had DMARD and NSAID therapy. NSAID therapy was dominated by diclofenac, 
accounting for 60% of all therapies. Eighteen other substances were applied more 
rarely. All NSAIDs together were given for 768 patient years (with a mean 
duration of therapy of 17 years +/- 21 months). Seventy-two per cent of the 
patients received GI-protective therapy mainly with histamine antagonists and 
sucralfate while on nonsteroidal therapy. NSAID toxicity mostly affected the GI 
tract. There was a similar incidence of GI-related adverse events between 
patients with and patients without GI protection, mainly dyspepsia and nausea. 
NSAIDs have the potential to cause adverse events in the GI tract. Therapy with 
histamine antagonists or sucralfate did not reduce the patients' rate of 
gastrointestinal adverse events.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1563-2571.2002.01037.x
PMID: 11899747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]