---
reference_id: "PMID:24998601"
title: "Looking for a new panacea in ALK-rearranged NSCLC: may be Ceritinib?"
authors:
- Rolfo C
- Passiglia F
- Russo A
- Pauwels P
journal: Expert Opin Ther Targets
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1517/14728222.2014.936383
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Looking for a new panacea in ALK-rearranged NSCLC: may be Ceritinib?
**Authors:** Rolfo C, Passiglia F, Russo A, Pauwels P
**Journal:** Expert Opin Ther Targets (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1517/14728222.2014.936383](https://doi.org/10.1517/14728222.2014.936383)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2014 Sep;18(9):983-5. doi: 
10.1517/14728222.2014.936383. Epub 2014 Jul 5.

Looking for a new panacea in ALK-rearranged NSCLC: may be Ceritinib?

Rolfo C(1), Passiglia F, Russo A, Pauwels P.

Author information:
(1)Antwerp University Hospital, Oncology Department, Phase I-Early Clinical 
Trials Unit , Wilrijkstraat 10, 2650 Edegem , Belgium +3238213646 ; +3238251592 
; christian.rolfo@uza.be.

In the past decade, the advent of targeted therapy led to a silent revolution in 
the war against lung cancer and a significant evolution on the concept of Phase 
I clinical trials design. Thanks to the specificity of their target, the new 
drugs have radically changed NSCLC treatment, leading to the development of 
personalized strategies. The accelerated approval of the first ALK-inhibitor, 
Crizotinib and more recently Ceritinib, without a Phase III randomized, clinical 
trial, has been an amazing success story in lung cancer research, marking the 
beginning of a new decade of targeted drugs development, characterized by 
modern, biomarker-driven, early clinical trial design and shorter times for 
clinical approval. Is Ceritinib a new panacea for the treatment of 
ALK-rearranged NSCLC? We aimed to discuss the reasons of such success, including 
the new emerging questions, regarding mechanisms of acquired resistance, and the 
best treatment algorithm for ALK-rearranged NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1517/14728222.2014.936383
PMID: 24998601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]