---
reference_id: "PMID:33597727"
title: Genetic analysis of 20 patients with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy by trio-based whole-exome sequencing.
authors:
- Yan H
- Ji H
- Kubisiak T
- Wu Y
- Xiao J
- Gu Q
- Yang Y
- Xie H
- Ji T
- Gao K
- Li D
- Xiong H
- Shi Z
- Li M
- Zhang Y
- Duan R
- Bao X
- Jiang Y
- Burmeister M
- Wang J
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-020-00896-5
keywords:
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA-Directed RNA Polymerases/genetics
- Fatty Acid Desaturases/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing
- Genetic Variation
- "Hereditary Central Nervous System Demyelinating Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- RNA Polymerase III/genetics
- RNA Splicing
- SOXE Transcription Factors/genetics
- Tubulin/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic analysis of 20 patients with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy by trio-based whole-exome sequencing.
**Authors:** Yan H, Ji H, Kubisiak T, Wu Y, Xiao J, Gu Q, Yang Y, Xie H, Ji T, Gao K, Li D, Xiong H, Shi Z, Li M, Zhang Y, Duan R, Bao X, Jiang Y, Burmeister M, Wang J
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-020-00896-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-020-00896-5)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2021 Aug;66(8):761-768. doi: 10.1038/s10038-020-00896-5. Epub
2021  Feb 18.

Genetic analysis of 20 patients with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy by 
trio-based whole-exome sequencing.

Yan H(#)(1)(2)(3), Ji H(#)(1), Kubisiak T(2), Wu Y(1), Xiao J(4), Gu Q(1), Yang 
Y(1), Xie H(1), Ji T(1), Gao K(1), Li D(1), Xiong H(1), Shi Z(1), Li M(1), Zhang 
Y(1), Duan R(1), Bao X(1), Jiang Y(1)(3)(5), Burmeister M(6)(7), Wang 
J(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Molecular & Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Joint International Research Center of Translational and Clinical Research, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(5)Key Laboratory for Neuroscience, Ministry of Education/National Health and 
Family Planning Commission, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(6)Molecular & Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA. margit@umich.edu.
(7)Departments of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, Psychiatry and Human 
Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. margit@umich.edu.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China. 
wang66jm@163.com.
(9)Joint International Research Center of Translational and Clinical Research, 
Beijing, China. wang66jm@163.com.
(10)Key Laboratory for Neuroscience, Ministry of Education/National Health and 
Family Planning Commission, Peking University, Beijing, China. wang66jm@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HLDs) are a rare group of disorders 
characterized by myelin deficit of the brain-based on MRI. Here, we studied 20 
patients with unexplained HLD to uncover their genetic etiology through 
whole-exome sequencing (WES). Trio-based WES was performed for 20 unresolved 
HLDs families after genetic tests for the PLP1 duplication and a panel of 115 
known leukodystrophy-related genes. Variants in both known genes that related to 
HLDs and promising candidate genes were analyzed. Minigene splicing assay was 
conducted to confirm the effect of splice region variant. All 20 patients were 
diagnosed with HLDs clinically based on myelin deficit on MRI and impaired motor 
ability. Through WES, in 11 of 20 trios, 15 causative variants were detected in 
seven genes TUBB4A, POLR1C, POLR3A, SOX10, TMEM106B, DEGS1, and TMEM63A. The 
last three genes have just been discovered. Of 15 variants, six were novel. 
Using minigene splicing assay, splice variant POLR3A c.1770 + 5 G > C was proved 
to disrupt the normal splicing of intron 13 and led to a premature stop codon at 
position 618 (p.(P591Vfs*28)). Our analysis determined the molecular diagnosis 
of 11 HLDs patients. It emphasizes the heterogenicity of HLDs, the diagnostic 
power of trio-based WES for HLDs. Comprehensive analysis including a focus on 
candidate genes helps to discover novel disease-causing genes, determine the 
diagnosis for the first time, and improve the yield of WES. Moreover, novel 
mutations identified in TUBB4A, POLR3A, and POLR1C expand the mutation spectrum 
of these genes.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-020-00896-5
PMCID: PMC8310791
PMID: 33597727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.