---
reference_id: "PMID:31922295"
title: Early-Motor Phenotype Relates to Neuropsychiatric and Cognitive Disorders in Huntington's Disease.
authors:
- Julayanont P
- Heilman KM
- McFarland NR
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/mds.27980
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-Motor Phenotype Relates to Neuropsychiatric and Cognitive Disorders in Huntington's Disease.
**Authors:** Julayanont P, Heilman KM, McFarland NR
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.27980](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.27980)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2020 May;35(5):781-788. doi: 10.1002/mds.27980. Epub 2020 Jan 10.

Early-Motor Phenotype Relates to Neuropsychiatric and Cognitive Disorders in 
Huntington's Disease.

Julayanont P(1), Heilman KM(1)(2), McFarland NR(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Neurology, Department of Neurology, 
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Malcom Randall Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(3)Fixel Institute for Neurological Diseases, Movement Disorders and 
Neurorestoration Program, Department of Neurology, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the relationships between the motor phenotype and the 
presence of specific neuropsychiatric and neuropsychological disorders in 
patients with early motor-manifest Huntington's disease (HD).
METHODS: From the Enroll-HD study, 3,505 individuals with HD who had ≤5 years of 
motor symptoms were classified based on the predefined parkinsonism/chorea index 
into chorea-dominant (n = 1125), parkinsonism-dominant (n = 867), and 
mixed-motor phenotype (n = 1513) groups. An analysis was performed on the 
results of the short Problem Behaviors Assessment. This test assesses patients 
for neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression, irritability/aggression, 
apathy, obsessive-compulsive behaviors, and psychosis as well as cognitive 
disorders by using neuropsychological tests such as the Stroop Interference 
test, Trail Making Test Part A and B, letter fluency, Symbol Digit Modality 
test, and animal fluency test.
RESULTS: In these early motor-manifest HD individuals, motor phenotype was 
associated with neuropsychiatric and cognitive changes. Independent of the age 
of motor onset, motor duration and severity, CAG repeat expansion, and 
medication use, the parkinsonism-dominant group had more severe neuropsychiatric 
disorders (depression, apathy, obsessive-compulsive behaviors, and psychosis) 
and poorer performance on all cognitive tests than those patients in the 
mixed-motor phenotype and chorea-dominant groups. The patients in the 
chorea-dominant group had less apathy and depression than those in the 
mixed-motor phenotype group.
CONCLUSIONS: In the early stage of motor-manifest HD, parkinsonism-dominant 
patients appear to have more severe neuropsychiatric disturbances and more 
cognitive impairments than those HD patients with chorea-dominant and 
mixed-motor phenotypes. Future studies should explore the brain mechanisms of 
these disorders and the possible treatments. © 2020 International Parkinson and 
Movement Disorder Society.

© 2020 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.27980
PMID: 31922295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]