---
reference_id: "PMID:29183396"
title: "Indirect estimation of the prevalence of spinal muscular atrophy Type I, II, and III in the United States"
authors:
- Lally C
- Jones C
- Farwell W
- Reyna SP
- Cook SF
- Flanders WD
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0724-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Indirect estimation of the prevalence of spinal muscular atrophy Type I, II, and III in the United States
**Authors:** Lally C, Jones C, Farwell W, Reyna SP, Cook SF, Flanders WD
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-017-0724-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-017-0724-z)

## Content

Indirect estimation of the prevalence of spinal muscular atrophy Type I, II,
and III in the United States.

Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017 Nov 28;12(1):175. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0724-z.

Background: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a progressive, devastating disease
and a leading inherited cause of infant mortality. The limited population-based
literature is confined to small regional studies. Estimates of prevalence are
needed to characterize the burden of SMA and to understand trends in prevalence
by disease type as new treatments become available. The reported estimates of
SMA genotype prevalence at birth consistently range from 8.5-10.3 per 100,000
live births, with a mid-range estimate of 9.4 per 100,000. Among infants born
with an SMA genotype, it is reported that ~58% will develop SMA Type I, 29%
will develop Type II, and 13% will develop Type III, respectively.

Results: Using evidence from peer-reviewed literature for SMA birth prevalence,
age at symptom onset, and SMA type-specific survival, and incorporating United
States vital statistics, we constructed life tables to estimate prevalence for
SMA Types I, II, and III in the United States. We estimated the number of
prevalent cases in the US to be 8526, 9429, and 10,333 based on a birth
prevalence of 8.5, 9.4, and 10.3, respectively (the lower, midpoint, and upper
ends of the reported range). Assuming the midpoint of 9.4 and US-reported
survival, the type-specific population prevalence estimates were 1610 for SMA
Type I, 3944 for SMA Type II, and 3875 for SMA Type III.

