---
reference_id: "PMID:34365433"
title: THE MOLECULAR MECHANISM OF DIABETES MELLITUS - RELATED IMPAIRMENT OF CARDIOVASCULAR HOMEOSTASIS (REVIEW).
authors:
- Avagimyan A
- Sukiasyan L
- Sahakyan K
- Gevorgyan T
- Aznauryan A
journal: Georgian Med News
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# THE MOLECULAR MECHANISM OF DIABETES MELLITUS - RELATED IMPAIRMENT OF CARDIOVASCULAR HOMEOSTASIS (REVIEW).
**Authors:** Avagimyan A, Sukiasyan L, Sahakyan K, Gevorgyan T, Aznauryan A
**Journal:** Georgian Med News (2021)

## Content

1. Georgian Med News. 2021 Jun;(315):99-103.

THE MOLECULAR MECHANISM OF DIABETES MELLITUS - RELATED IMPAIRMENT OF 
CARDIOVASCULAR HOMEOSTASIS (REVIEW).

Avagimyan A(1), Sukiasyan L(2), Sahakyan K(1), Gevorgyan T(1), Aznauryan A(1).

Author information:
(1)1Yerevan State Medical University after M. Heratsi; Armenia.
(2)1Yerevan State Medical University after M. Heratsi; 2L.A. Orbeli Institute of 
Physiology of National Academy of Science of RA, Yerevan, Armenia.

Today, diabetes mellitus is an urgent and topical medical and social problem of 
modern medicine. In the era of industrialization, this endocrine disorder's 
incidence increases exponentially, affecting more broadly, especially the young 
cohorts of the population, thereby exerting a substantial burden on the health 
system. Comprehension and full-fledged study of the pathophysiological 
mechanisms and remodeling dynamics in the diabetic continuum will ensure further 
advances in modern diabetology to set it to a potentially new level. It is 
noteworthy that diabetes mellitus triggers various vicious cycles that impair 
cardiovascular homeostasis and becomes an independent risk factor for such 
comorbidities as coronary heart disease, arterial hypertension, diabetic 
cardiomyopathy, etc. Unfavorable prognosis common manifestations are the 
micro-and macroangiopathies, particularly the diabetic angio-, neuro-, and 
nephropathy. In this respect, the vision impairment associated with angiopathy 
becomes a predictor of the early onset and/or exacerbation of already developed 
cardiovascular pathology. Summing up the mentioned above, a study of the 
molecular mechanisms of diabetes-driven impairment of the cardiovascular system 
is becoming a fundamentally relevant research area. Simultaneously, it will 
serve as the driving force for finding new pharmacological influences with 
improving both the quality of life and the prognosis of diabetic patients.

PMID: 34365433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]