---
reference_id: "PMID:24494618"
title: Multiple sclerosis update.
authors:
- Markowitz CE
journal: Am J Manag Care
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple sclerosis update.
**Authors:** Markowitz CE
**Journal:** Am J Manag Care (2013)

## Content

1. Am J Manag Care. 2013 Nov;19(16 Suppl):s294-300.

Multiple sclerosis update.

Markowitz CE(1).

Author information:
(1)cmarkowi@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic but incurable disease of the central 
nervous system (CNS) that is often diagnosed in the second or third decade of 
life. It is more common among women than men, significantly impairs patient 
quality of life, and is associated with substantial costs to patients, 
healthcare systems, and society. Of the approximately 2.3 million individuals 
worldwide that have MS, more than 400,000 reside in the United States. Although 
the etiology of MS is not completely understood, a great deal of evidence 
suggests a complex relationship between environmental and genetic factors. The 
pathophysiology of MS involves an aberrant attack by the host immune system on 
oligodendrocytes, which synthesize and maintain myelin sheaths in the CNS. There 
are 4 identified disease courses in MS, and approximately 85% of people with MS 
present with relapsing-remitting MS, which is characterized by discrete acute 
attacks followed by periods of remission. Signs and symptoms of MS are dependent 
on the demyelinated area(s) of the CNS and often involve sensory disturbances, 
limb weakness, fatigue, and increased body temperature. The criteria for a 
diagnosis of MS include evidence of damage in at least 2 separate areas of the 
CNS, evidence that the damage occurred at different time points, and the ruling 
out of other possible diagnoses. Diseasemodifying drugs (DMDs) that reduce the 
frequency of relapses, development of brain lesions, and progression of 
disability are the standard of care for relapsing forms of MS, and the use of 
DMDs should be initiated as early as possible.

PMID: 24494618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]