---
reference_id: "PMID:39116800"
title: "From cytokines to chemokines: Understanding inflammatory signaling in bacterial meningitis."
authors:
- Ibrahim A
- Saleem N
- Naseer F
- Ahmed S
- Munawar N
- Nawaz R
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2024.07.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From cytokines to chemokines: Understanding inflammatory signaling in bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Ibrahim A, Saleem N, Naseer F, Ahmed S, Munawar N, Nawaz R
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molimm.2024.07.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2024.07.004)

## Content

1. Mol Immunol. 2024 Sep;173:117-126. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2024.07.004. Epub
2024  Aug 8.

From cytokines to chemokines: Understanding inflammatory signaling in bacterial 
meningitis.

Ibrahim A(1), Saleem N(1), Naseer F(2), Ahmed S(3), Munawar N(4), Nawaz R(5).

Author information:
(1)Shifa College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shifa Tameer e Millat 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)Shifa College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shifa Tameer e Millat 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan; Department of Biosciences, Shifa Tameer e 
Millat University, Islamabad, Pakistan. Electronic address: 
faiza.naseer@ymail.com.
(3)Shifa College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shifa Tameer e Millat 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan. Electronic address: sagheer.scps@stmu.edu.pk.
(4)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, United Arab Emirates University, 
Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(5)Department of Clinical Psychology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.

Bacterial meningitis is a serious central nervous system (CNS) infection, 
claiming millions of human lives annually around the globe. The deadly infection 
involves severe inflammation of the protective sheath of the brain, i.e., 
meninges, and sometimes also consists of the brain tissue, called 
meningoencephalitis. Several inflammatory pathways involved in the pathogenesis 
of meningitis caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, 
Escherichia coli, Haemophilus influenzae, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 
Streptococcus suis, etc. are mentioned in the scientific literature. Many 
in-vitro and in-vivo analyses have shown that after the disruption of the 
blood-brain barrier (BBB), these pathogens trigger several inflammatory pathways 
including Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) signaling in response to Pathogen-Associated 
Molecular Patterns (PAMPs), Nucleotide oligomerization domain (NOD)-like 
receptor-mediated signaling, pneumolysin related signaling, NF-κB signaling and 
many other pathways that lead to pro-inflammatory cascade and subsequent 
cytokine release including interleukine (IL)-1β, tumor necrosis factor(TNF)-α, 
IL-6, IL-8, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 (CXCL1) along with other mediators, 
leading to neuroinflammation. The activation of another protein complex, 
nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich-containing family, pyrin 
domain-containing-3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, also takes place resulting in the 
maturation and release of IL-1β and IL-18, hence potentiating neuroinflammation. 
This review aims to outline the inflammatory signaling pathways associated with 
the pathogenesis of bacterial meningitis leading to extensive pathological 
changes in neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and other central nervous 
system cells.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2024.07.004
PMID: 39116800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]