---
reference_id: "PMID:23172002"
title: The myth of schizophrenia as a progressive brain disease.
authors:
- Zipursky RB
- Reilly TJ
- Murray RM
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbs135
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The myth of schizophrenia as a progressive brain disease.
**Authors:** Zipursky RB, Reilly TJ, Murray RM
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/sbs135](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbs135)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 2013 Nov;39(6):1363-72. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbs135. Epub 2012 
Nov 20.

The myth of schizophrenia as a progressive brain disease.

Zipursky RB(1), Reilly TJ, Murray RM.

Author information:
(1)To whom correspondence should be addressed; St Joseph's Healthcare Hamilton, 
100 West 5th Street, Hamilton, Ontario L8N3K7, Canada; tel: 905-522-1155 x 
36250, fax: 905-381-5633, e-mail: bzipursk@stjosham.on.ca.

Schizophrenia has historically been considered to be a deteriorating disease, a 
view reinforced by recent MRI findings of progressive brain tissue loss over the 
early years of illness. On the other hand, the notion that recovery from 
schizophrenia is possible is increasingly embraced by consumer and family 
groups. This review critically examines the evidence from longitudinal studies 
of (1) clinical outcomes, (2) MRI brain volumes, and (3) cognitive functioning. 
First, the evidence shows that although approximately 25% of people with 
schizophrenia have a poor long-term outcome, few of these show the incremental 
loss of function that is characteristic of neurodegenerative illnesses. Second, 
MRI studies demonstrate subtle developmental abnormalities at first onset of 
psychosis and then further decreases in brain tissue volumes; however, these 
latter decreases are explicable by the effects of antipsychotic medication, 
substance abuse, and other secondary factors. Third, while patients do show 
cognitive deficits compared with controls, cognitive functioning does not appear 
to deteriorate over time. The majority of people with schizophrenia have the 
potential to achieve long-term remission and functional recovery. The fact that 
some experience deterioration in functioning over time may reflect poor access, 
or adherence, to treatment, the effects of concurrent conditions, and social and 
financial impoverishment. Mental health professionals need to join with patients 
and their families in understanding that schizophrenia is not a malignant 
disease that inevitably deteriorates over time but rather one from which most 
people can achieve a substantial degree of recovery.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbs135
PMCID: PMC3796078
PMID: 23172002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]