---
reference_id: "PMID:18374843"
title: Social anxiety disorder.
authors:
- Stein MB
- Stein DJ
journal: Lancet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60488-2
keywords:
- Anti-Anxiety Agents/therapeutic use
- "Anxiety Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Diagnostic Imaging
- Humans
- "Phobic Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- Prevalence
- Psychiatric Status Rating Scales
- Psychotherapy/methods
- Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Social anxiety disorder.
**Authors:** Stein MB, Stein DJ
**Journal:** Lancet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60488-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60488-2)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2008 Mar 29;371(9618):1115-25. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60488-2.

Social anxiety disorder.

Stein MB(1), Stein DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego 92093-0855, USA.
mstein@ucsd.edu

Our understanding of social anxiety disorder (also known as social phobia) has
moved from rudimentary awareness that it is not merely shyness to a much more
sophisticated appreciation of its prevalence, its chronic and pernicious nature,
and its neurobiological underpinnings. Social anxiety disorder is the most
common anxiety disorder; it has an early age of onset--by age 11 years in about
50% and by age 20 years in about 80% of individuals--and it is a risk factor for
subsequent depressive illness and substance abuse. Functional neuroimaging
studies point to increased activity in amygdala and insula in patients with
social anxiety disorder, and genetic studies are increasingly focusing on this
and other (eg, personality trait neuroticism) core phenotypes to identify risk
loci. A range of effective cognitive behavioural and pharmacological treatments
for children and adults now exists; the challenges lie in optimum integration
and dissemination of these treatments, and learning how to help the 30-40% of
patients for whom treatment does not work.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60488-2
PMID: 18374843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
