---
reference_id: "PMID:40068508"
title: Familial chylomicronemia syndrome and treatments to target hepatic APOC3 mRNA.
authors:
- Brinton EA
- Eckel RH
- Gaudet D
- Ballantyne CM
- Baker BF
- Ginsberg HN
- Witztum JL
journal: Atherosclerosis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2025.119114
keywords:
- Humans
- "Apolipoprotein C-III/genetics, metabolism"
- "Hyperlipoproteinemia Type I/genetics, therapy, blood, drug therapy"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism, genetics"
- "Liver/metabolism, drug effects"
- "RNA, Small Interfering/therapeutic use"
- Triglycerides/blood
- Animals
- Oligonucleotides/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- Genetic Therapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial chylomicronemia syndrome and treatments to target hepatic APOC3 mRNA.
**Authors:** Brinton EA, Eckel RH, Gaudet D, Ballantyne CM, Baker BF, Ginsberg HN, Witztum JL
**Journal:** Atherosclerosis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2025.119114](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2025.119114)

## Content

1. Atherosclerosis. 2025 Apr;403:119114. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2025.119114. Epub 2025 Jan 29.

Familial chylomicronemia syndrome and treatments to target hepatic APOC3 mRNA.

Brinton EA(1), Eckel RH(2), Gaudet D(3), Ballantyne CM(4), Baker BF(5), Ginsberg 
HN(6), Witztum JL(7).

Author information:
(1)The Utah Lipid Center, 421 S Wakara Way, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 12801 
East 17th Ave, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Université de Montréal, PO Box 6128, Montréal, QC, 
H3C 3J7, ECOGENE-21, 930 Rue Jacques-Cartier E, Chicoutimi, QC, G7H 7K9, Canada.
(4)Center for Cardiometabolic Disease Prevention, Baylor College of Medicine, 
6655 Travis Street, and the Texas Heart Institute, 6770 Bertner Ave, Houston, 
TX, USA.
(5)Ionis, 2855 Gazelle Ct, Carlsbad, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, 622 West 168th St, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, M0682, 
University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr, La Jolla, CA, USA. 
Electronic address: jwitztum@health.ucsd.edu.

Erratum in
    Atherosclerosis. 2025 Jun;405:119210. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2025.119210.

Familial chylomicronemia syndrome (FCS) is a rare, recessive monogenic disorder 
characterized by severely elevated plasma triglyceride (TG) levels due to absent 
or markedly impaired lipoprotein lipase activity, leading to a greatly increased 
risk of acute pancreatitis. Naturally occurring very low levels of apoC-III are 
associated with low TG levels; thus, apoC-III is a target for TG lowering, and 
therapies have been developed to reduce apoC-III. Strategies to inhibit hepatic 
apoC-III synthesis include antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) and small 
interfering RNAs (siRNAs). In the last decade, technologies have been developed 
to enhance hepatic delivery of these potential therapeutic agents by conjugation 
of the ligand triantennary N-acetyl galactosamine to ASO and siRNA for 
receptor-mediated uptake by hepatocytes, where apoC-III is predominantly 
expressed. Enhanced delivery of these pharmacological agents to the target 
tissue has been found to support lower and/or less frequent dosing with 
consequent lower total systemic exposure. One antisense agent, the ASO 
olezarsen, is now approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as an 
adjunct to diet to lower triglycerides in adults with FCS, and the other, the 
siRNA plozasiran, is in late-stage clinical development. Both agents have shown 
effectiveness in reducing both apoC-III and TG levels across several study 
populations. Reduced TG, lower rates of acute pancreatitis events, and similar 
proportions of adverse events in placebo and treated patients were recently 
demonstrated in placebo-controlled phase 3 trials of patients with FCS treated 
with olezarsen in Balance and with plozasiran in PALISADE. This review discusses 
causes and consequences of FCS and the rationale and progress made in developing 
APOC3 RNA-targeted therapeutics for the treatment of FCS.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2025.119114
PMID: 40068508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests. Brenda F. Baker is an employee of 
Ionis. Christie Ballantyne receives grant/research support from Abbott 
Diagnostics, Akcea, Amgen, Arrowhead, Eli Lilly, Ionis, Merck, Novartis, Novo 
Nordisk, Regeneron, Roche Diagnostic, NIH, AHA, and ADA; and is a consultant for 
89Bio, Abbott Diagnostics, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Amgen, Arrowhead, 
AstraZeneca, Denka Seiken, Eli Lilly, Esperion, Genentech, Illumina, Ionis, 
Merck, New Amsterdam, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Regeneron, and Roche Diagnostic. 
Eliot A. Brinton is a consultant and/or speaker for 89bio, Amgen, Chiesi, CSL 
Behring, GSK, Immunovant, Ionis, Madrigal, Merck, New Amsterdam, and Novo 
Nordisk; and has received research support from Regeneron. Robert H. Eckel is a 
consultant for Amgen, Better Co, Janssen, Kowa, Lexicon, Precision BioSciences, 
The Healthy Aging Co, Tolmar, and Weight Watchers; is on a Data and Safety 
Monitoring Board for Arrowhead; is an expert witness for Regeneron; and is on 
advisory boards for Ionis and Novo Nordisk. Daniel Gaudet received research 
grants, honoraria, or consulting fees for professional input and/or lectures 
from Arrowhead, Eli Lilly, Ionis, Kowa, National Research Council Canada, 
Pfizer, Regeneron, Ultragenyx, and uniQure. Henry Ginsberg receives research 
funds from Ionis. Joseph L. Witztum is a co-inventor and receives royalties from 
patents owned by UCSD on oxidation-specific antibodies and of biomarkers related 
to oxidized lipoproteins, is a co-founder and has an equity interest in Kleanthi 
Diagnostics and Oxitope Pharma, and is a consultant to Ionis.