---
reference_id: "PMID:27890816"
title: Pathophysiology of hemophilic arthropathy and potential targets for therapy.
authors:
- Pulles AE
- Mastbergen SC
- Schutgens RE
- Lafeber FP
- van Vulpen LF
journal: Pharmacol Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.11.032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of hemophilic arthropathy and potential targets for therapy.
**Authors:** Pulles AE, Mastbergen SC, Schutgens RE, Lafeber FP, van Vulpen LF
**Journal:** Pharmacol Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.phrs.2016.11.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2016.11.032)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Res. 2017 Jan;115:192-199. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.11.032. Epub
2016  Nov 24.

Pathophysiology of hemophilic arthropathy and potential targets for therapy.

Pulles AE(1), Mastbergen SC(2), Schutgens RE(3), Lafeber FP(2), van Vulpen 
LF(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands; Van 
Creveldkliniek, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX 
Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: a.e.pulles-3@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Department of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Van Creveldkliniek, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 
3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands; Van 
Creveldkliniek, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Hemophilia is a congenital clotting factor deficiency characterized by 
spontaneous and trauma-related bleeding. Spontaneous bleeding shows a 
predilection for joints, and repeated hemarthroses lead to a disabling condition 
called hemophilic arthropathy. Treatment of this condition consists of 
preventing joint bleeding on the one hand and orthopedic surgery as a last 
resort on the other. Up till now, there is no disease modifying therapy 
available to fill the gap between these extremes. This review provides an 
overview of the pathogenesis of hemophilic arthropathy in order to identify 
potential targets for therapy. Joint bleeding induces synovial inflammation, 
cartilage degeneration and bone damage. These processes interact with each other 
and result in a vicious circle. Hemarthrosis promotes synovial hypertrophy and 
neoangiogenesis, increasing the susceptibility to mechanical damage and 
subsequent bleeding. The inflamed synovium affects the cartilage, while 
cartilage is also directly affected by blood via the release of cytokines and 
metalloproteinases, and via hydroxyl radical formation inducing chondrocyte 
apoptosis. Apart from the inflammatory pathways, iron plays a pivotal role in 
this process, as does the fibrinolytic system. Considering its pathogenesis, 
potential targets for disease modifying therapy in hemophilic arthropathy are 
iron, inflammation, vascular remodeling, hyperfibrinolysis, bone remodeling and 
cartilage regeneration. So far, iron chelators, anti-inflammatory therapy, 
anti-fibrinolytics and bone remodeling agents have demonstrated beneficial 
effects, predominantly in a preclinical setting. There is still a long way to go 
before these interventions will translate into clinical practice. The most 
important challenges are: establishing a universal outcome measure to predict 
efficacy in humans, and determination of the optimal route and timing to 
administer disease modifying therapy.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.11.032
PMID: 27890816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]