---
reference_id: "PMID:27278642"
title: The Promise and Limitations of Anti-Inflammatory Agents for the Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder.
authors:
- Raison CL
journal: Curr Top Behav Neurosci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/7854_2016_26
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Promise and Limitations of Anti-Inflammatory Agents for the Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder.
**Authors:** Raison CL
**Journal:** Curr Top Behav Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/7854_2016_26](https://doi.org/10.1007/7854_2016_26)

## Content

1. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2017;31:287-302. doi: 10.1007/7854_2016_26.

The Promise and Limitations of Anti-Inflammatory Agents for the Treatment of 
Major Depressive Disorder.

Raison CL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, School of Human Ecology, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1300 Linden Drive, Room 4174, Madison, WI, 
53705, USA. raison@wisc.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53705, USA. raison@wisc.edu.

This review provides a critical perspective on recent meta-analyses suggesting 
that several anti-inflammatory modalities, including nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), omega-3 fatty acids, and cytokine antagonist, 
possess generalizable antidepressant properties. By examining confounds and 
limitations in the available literature it is suggested that current data 
suggest that only a sub-group of individuals with major depressive disorder 
(MDD) have evidence of increased inflammatory biomarkers and it is in these 
individuals that anti-inflammatory agents show promise for reducing depressive 
symptoms. The treatment implications of this cautionary perspective are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/7854_2016_26
PMID: 27278642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]