---
reference_id: "PMID:3650679"
title: Antibodies to the human immunodeficiency virus in needles and syringes used by intravenous drug abusers.
authors:
- Wodak A
- Dolan K
- Imrie AA
- Gold J
- Wolk J
- Whyte BM
- Cooper DA
journal: Med J Aust
year: '1987'
doi: 10.5694/j.1326-5377.1987.tb133453.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antibodies to the human immunodeficiency virus in needles and syringes used by intravenous drug abusers.
**Authors:** Wodak A, Dolan K, Imrie AA, Gold J, Wolk J, Whyte BM, Cooper DA
**Journal:** Med J Aust (1987)
**DOI:** [10.5694/j.1326-5377.1987.tb133453.x](https://doi.org/10.5694/j.1326-5377.1987.tb133453.x)

## Content

1. Med J Aust. 1987 Sep 21;147(6):275-6. doi:
10.5694/j.1326-5377.1987.tb133453.x.

Antibodies to the human immunodeficiency virus in needles and syringes used by 
intravenous drug abusers.

Wodak A, Dolan K, Imrie AA, Gold J, Wolk J, Whyte BM, Cooper DA.

The sharing of needles and syringes by intravenous drug abusers has been 
recognized as a critical factor in the transmission of the human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). In an attempt to reduce the sharing of needles and 
syringes among intravenous drug abusers, a pilot sterile needle-and-syringe 
exchange programme was established in an inner city neighbourhood in Sydney. The 
contents of exchanged syringes were screened for antibody to HIV by the 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); reactive and borderline samples were 
tested further by the Western Blot method. Of a sample of 300 
needles-and-syringes that were exchanged, three (1%) needles-and-syringes were 
confirmed as containing antibody-seropositive blood by both ELISA and Western 
Blot methods and thus as being potentially infectious. As only 70% of known 
positive-control syringes were detected in this study, the proportion of 
potentially infectious needles-and-syringes that was found may have 
underestimated the proportion of infectious injection equipment that was 
returned. These findings highlight the importance of the removal of used needles 
and syringes from circulation in addition to the supply of sterile equipment. 
This method of monitoring exchanged needles-and-syringes is suggested as a means 
to evaluate measures that are designed to reduce the transmission of HIV among 
intravenous drug abusers. The rapid implementation of sterile needle-and-syringe 
exchange programmes is imperative to stem the spread of HIV infection.

DOI: 10.5694/j.1326-5377.1987.tb133453.x
PMID: 3650679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]