---
reference_id: "PMID:34659846"
title: "Immunotherapy in Metastatic Mucosal Melanoma with Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation: A Case of Success."
authors:
- Luna Pais H
- Luz P
- Lobo-Martins S
- Mansinho A
- Sousa R
- Luís R
- Presa D
- Gomes D
- Costa L
- Teixeira de Sousa R
journal: Case Reports Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1155/2021/5516004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunotherapy in Metastatic Mucosal Melanoma with Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation: A Case of Success.
**Authors:** Luna Pais H, Luz P, Lobo-Martins S, Mansinho A, Sousa R, Luís R, Presa D, Gomes D, Costa L, Teixeira de Sousa R
**Journal:** Case Reports Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2021/5516004](https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5516004)

## Content

1. Case Reports Immunol. 2021 Oct 8;2021:5516004. doi: 10.1155/2021/5516004. 
eCollection 2021.

Immunotherapy in Metastatic Mucosal Melanoma with Disseminated Intravascular 
Coagulation: A Case of Success.

Luna Pais H(1), Luz P(2)(3), Lobo-Martins S(1), Mansinho A(1), Sousa R(4), Luís 
R(5), Presa D(5), Gomes D(6), Costa L(1), Teixeira de Sousa R(1).

Author information:
(1)Serviço de Oncologia, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Serviço de Oncologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Algarve, Faro, 
Portugal.
(3)CBIOS-Universidade Lusófona's Research Center for Biosciences & Health 
Technologies, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Serviço de Imagiologia, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Serviço Anatomia Patológica, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, Lisbon, 
Portugal.
(6)Serviço de Medicina Interna, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, Lisbon, 
Portugal.

Mucosal melanoma accounts for 1% of all melanomas. It is more aggressive than 
cutaneous melanoma, and local excision provides the best disease-free survival. 
The vast majority of patients eventually develop metastases, with a metastatic 
pattern independent of the primary tumor site. While studies show that BRAF and 
KIT inhibitors have a role in the management of these patients, the actual 
treatment focus is on immunotherapy. Herein is described the case of a 
79-year-old woman with metastatic mucosal melanoma and bone marrow infiltration 
causing disseminated intravascular coagulation, who was treated with an 
immunotherapy combination (anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 antibodies), achieving 
complete disease remission. This is the third case of melanoma with disseminated 
intravascular coagulation at presentation and the second case treated with 
immunotherapy in the literature, but the only one achieving disease remission.

Copyright © 2021 Helena Luna Pais et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5516004
PMCID: PMC8519692
PMID: 34659846

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.