---
reference_id: "PMID:24846800"
title: "Detection rates and phenotypic spectrum of m.3243A>G in the MT-TL1 gene: a molecular diagnostic laboratory perspective."
authors:
- Chin J
- Marotta R
- Chiotis M
- Allan EH
- Collins SJ
journal: Mitochondrion
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2014.05.005
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- Female
- "Genes, Mitochondrial"
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- "MELAS Syndrome/epidemiology, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Point Mutation
- Prevalence
- "RNA, Transfer, Leu/genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection rates and phenotypic spectrum of m.3243A>G in the MT-TL1 gene: a molecular diagnostic laboratory perspective.
**Authors:** Chin J, Marotta R, Chiotis M, Allan EH, Collins SJ
**Journal:** Mitochondrion (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mito.2014.05.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mito.2014.05.005)

## Content

1. Mitochondrion. 2014 Jul;17:34-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2014.05.005. Epub 2014
May  17.

Detection rates and phenotypic spectrum of m.3243A>G in the MT-TL1 gene: a 
molecular diagnostic laboratory perspective.

Chin J(1), Marotta R(2), Chiotis M(2), Allan EH(2), Collins SJ(3).

Author information:
(1)St Vincent's Melbourne Neuromuscular Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of 
Clinical Neurosciences, Level 5 Daly Wing, St Vincent's Hospital, 35 Victoria 
Parade, Fitzroy, VIC 3065, Australia. Electronic address: judy.chin@svhm.org.au.
(2)St Vincent's Melbourne Neuromuscular Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of 
Clinical Neurosciences, Level 5 Daly Wing, St Vincent's Hospital, 35 Victoria 
Parade, Fitzroy, VIC 3065, Australia.
(3)St Vincent's Melbourne Neuromuscular Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of 
Clinical Neurosciences, Level 5 Daly Wing, St Vincent's Hospital, 35 Victoria 
Parade, Fitzroy, VIC 3065, Australia. Electronic address: 
stevenjc@unimelb.edu.au.

The nucleotide change A to G at position m.3243 in the mitochondrial tRNA 
leucine (UUR) gene (MT-TL1) is the most common point mutation reported in 
association with the Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathy, Lactic Acidosis and 
Stroke-like episodes (MELAS) syndrome. Since the original description of this 
disorder, factors including random mitochondrial segregation and consequent 
variable tissue heteroplasmy are recognised to contribute to a much broader 
phenotypic spectrum associated with the MT-TL1 m.3243A>G mutation, often 
rendering the process of making a diagnosis complex. Reliance on clinicians' 
referral patterns means that for most molecular diagnostic laboratories, their 
positive identification rates for the common pathogenic mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA) mutations, including MT-TL1 m.3243A>G, is often relatively low compared 
to those reported in clinically targeted research studies. Herein, we report our 
results of consecutive prospective screening of 745 patients with a clinically 
suspected mitochondrial syndrome encompassing features associated with MT-TL1 
m.3243A>G mutation.

Copyright © 2014 © Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mito.2014.05.005
PMID: 24846800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]