---
reference_id: "PMID:30143794"
title: Lafora disease - from pathogenesis to treatment strategies.
authors:
- Nitschke F
- Ahonen SJ
- Nitschke S
- Mitra S
- Minassian BA
journal: Nat Rev Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41582-018-0057-0
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Humans
- Hypoglycemic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Lafora Disease/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Metformin/therapeutic use
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases
- Vagus Nerve Stimulation/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lafora disease - from pathogenesis to treatment strategies.
**Authors:** Nitschke F, Ahonen SJ, Nitschke S, Mitra S, Minassian BA
**Journal:** Nat Rev Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41582-018-0057-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-018-0057-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Neurol. 2018 Oct;14(10):606-617. doi: 10.1038/s41582-018-0057-0.

Lafora disease - from pathogenesis to treatment strategies.

Nitschke F(1), Ahonen SJ(1), Nitschke S(1), Mitra S(2), Minassian BA(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Southwestern, Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
berge.minassian@utsouthwestern.edu.
(4)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Southwestern, Dallas, TX, USA. berge.minassian@utsouthwestern.edu.

Lafora disease is a severe, autosomal recessive, progressive myoclonus epilepsy.
The disease usually manifests in previously healthy adolescents, and death
commonly occurs within 10 years of symptom onset. Lafora disease is caused by
loss-of-function mutations in EPM2A or NHLRC1, which encode laforin and malin,
respectively. The absence of either protein results in poorly branched,
hyperphosphorylated glycogen, which precipitates, aggregates and accumulates
into Lafora bodies. Evidence from Lafora disease genetic mouse models indicates
that these intracellular inclusions are a principal driver of neurodegeneration
and neurological disease. The integration of current knowledge on the function
of laforin-malin as an interacting complex suggests that laforin recruits malin
to parts of glycogen molecules where overly long glucose chains are forming, so
as to counteract further chain extension. In the absence of either laforin or
malin function, long glucose chains in specific glycogen molecules extrude
water, form double helices and drive precipitation of those molecules, which
over time accumulate into Lafora bodies. In this article, we review the genetic,
clinical, pathological and molecular aspects of Lafora disease. We also discuss
traditional antiseizure treatments for this condition, as well as exciting
therapeutic advances based on the downregulation of brain glycogen synthesis and
disease gene replacement.

DOI: 10.1038/s41582-018-0057-0
PMCID: PMC6317072
PMID: 30143794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
