---
reference_id: "PMID:3277268"
title: "Pathogenesis of dengue: challenges to molecular biology."
authors:
- Halstead SB
journal: Science
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1126/science.3277268
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of dengue: challenges to molecular biology.
**Authors:** Halstead SB
**Journal:** Science (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.3277268](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.3277268)

## Content

1. Science. 1988 Jan 29;239(4839):476-81. doi: 10.1126/science.3277268.

Pathogenesis of dengue: challenges to molecular biology.

Halstead SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, NY 10036.

Dengue viruses occur as four antigenically related but distinct serotypes 
transmitted to humans by Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. These viruses generally cause 
a benign syndrome, dengue fever, in the American and African tropics, and a 
severe syndrome, dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome (DHF/DSS), in 
Southeast Asian children. This severe syndrome, which recently has also been 
identified in children infected with the virus in Puerto Rico, is characterized 
by increased vascular permeability and abnormal hemostasis. It occurs in infants 
less than 1 year of age born to dengue-immune mothers and in children 1 year and 
older who are immune to one serotype of dengue virus and are experiencing 
infection with a second serotype. Dengue viruses replicate in cells of 
mononuclear phagocyte lineage, and subneutralizing concentrations of dengue 
antibody enhance dengue virus infection in these cells. This antibody-dependent 
enhancement of infection regulates dengue disease in human beings, although 
disease severity may also be controlled genetically, possibly by permitting and 
restricting the growth of virus in monocytes. Monoclonal antibodies show 
heterogeneous distribution of antigenic epitopes on dengue viruses. These 
epitopes serve to regulate disease: when antibodies to shared antigens partially 
neutralize heterotypic virus, infection and disease are dampened; enhancing 
antibodies alone result in heightened disease response. Further knowledge of the 
structure of dengue genomes should permit rapid advances in understanding the 
pathogenetic mechanisms of dengue.

DOI: 10.1126/science.3277268
PMID: 3277268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]