---
reference_id: "PMID:23777101"
title: "[The biomarker and treatment in Hashimoto's encephalopahty]."
authors:
- Kishitani T
- Matsunaga A
- Yoneda M
journal: Nihon Rinsho
year: '2013'
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- Encephalitis
- "Hashimoto Disease/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- Humans
- Phosphopyruvate Hydratase/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [The biomarker and treatment in Hashimoto's encephalopahty].
**Authors:** Kishitani T, Matsunaga A, Yoneda M
**Journal:** Nihon Rinsho (2013)

## Content

1. Nihon Rinsho. 2013 May;71(5):893-7.

[The biomarker and treatment in Hashimoto's encephalopahty].

[Article in Japanese]

Kishitani T(1), Matsunaga A, Yoneda M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Fukui Hospital.

Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE) is a treatable disease based on autoimmune 
mechanisms associated with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. We recently discovered the 
serum autoantibodies (Abs) against the NH2-terminal of alpha-enolase (NAE) as a 
diagnostic biomarker for HE. The serum anti-NAE Abs are not detected in normal 
individuals and other disorders such as infections, collagen diseases, multiple 
sclerosis and other autoimmune conditions. The specificity of the serum anti-NAE 
Abs is 91% for HE whereas the sensitivity is 50%. In our clinical study of 80 
cases of HE with anti-NAE Abs, the acute encephalopathic form was the most 
common clinical feature, and followed by chronic psychiatric form and 
progressive ataxia form. The common neuropsychiatric features were consciousness 
disturbance, psychosis (especially delirium and hallucination), seizures and 
dementia. Abnormalities on EEG and decreased blood flow on SPECT were common 
while abnormalities on brain MRI were rare. The early diagnosis and treatment 
for HE could lead to good recovery from the disease. Taken together, the serum 
anti-NAE Abs are a useful diagnostic biomarker for HE.

PMID: 23777101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]