---
reference_id: "PMID:28658158"
title: "Neonatal-onset carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency: A case report."
authors:
- Yang X
- Shi J
- Lei H
- Xia B
- Mu D
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000007365
keywords:
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- Carbamoyl-Phosphate Synthase (Ammonia)/genetics
- "Carbamoyl-Phosphate Synthase I Deficiency Disease/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Early Diagnosis
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Treatment Refusal
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal-onset carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency: A case report.
**Authors:** Yang X, Shi J, Lei H, Xia B, Mu D
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000007365](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000007365)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017 Jun;96(26):e7365. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000007365.

Neonatal-onset carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency: A case report.

Yang X(1), Shi J, Lei H, Xia B, Mu D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, West China Second University Hospital Key
Laboratory of Obstetric & Gynaecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth Defects
of Ministry of Education, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

RATIONALE: The carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency (CPS1D) was rare and
hard to diagnose due to its atypical symptoms. Brain magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) was typically unavailable in other reports because most patients died
before diagnosis was confirmed. Furthermore, it was found a new mutation that
had not been described previously.
PATIENT CONCERNS: This is a case of neonatal-onset CPS1D with nonspecific
clinical manifestations and deteriorating rapidly. Poor feeding, low activity,
and tachypnoea were observed, with rapid progression on day 2 after birth.
Severe systematic infection was considered first. However, blood culture and
cerebrospinal fluid examination were negative. Symptoms were relief temporarily.
Then seizure and tachypnoea reappeared as intravenous amino acids were provided.
Further examination indicated severe hyperammonemia (serum ammonia level
>500mmol/L). Brain MRI showed diffused white matter lesions.
DIAGNOSES: Genetic analysis revealed 2 heterozygous mutations in the CPS1 gene:
c.2407C>G (p.803, R>G) in exon 20 and C.323G>A (p.108, G>E) in exon 4. The
diagnosis of CSP1D was confirmed.
INTERVENTIONS: Fasting, the withdrawal of amino acids and plans to treat
hyperammonemia were immediately implemented.
OUTCOMES: The parents decided to discontinue medical care.
LESSONS: Many CPS1D patients died before the diagnoses are confirmed due to its
sudden onset, rapid deterioration, atypical symptoms, and low morbidity. Once
hyperammonemia is confirmed, blood and urea amino acid analysis in combination
with genetic examinations should be performed as early as possible, this
approach would help establish diagnoses at an early stage and thus contribute to
reducing mortality and improving prognosis.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000007365
PMCID: PMC5500080
PMID: 28658158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
