---
reference_id: "PMID:20301415"
title: Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Wang LL
- Plon SE
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Wang LL, Plon SE

## Content

1. Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome.

Wang LL(1), Plon SE(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Oct 6 [updated 2020 Jun 4].

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor, Division of Hematology/Oncology Department of Pediatrics 
Texas Children's Cancer Center Texas Children's Hospital Baylor College of 
Medicine Houston, Texas
(2)Professor, Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular and Human Genetics Texas 
Children's Hospital Baylor College of Medicine Houston, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS) is characterized by a 
rash that progresses to poikiloderma; sparse hair, eyelashes, and/or eyebrows; 
small size; skeletal and dental abnormalities; juvenile cataracts; and an 
increased risk for cancer, especially osteosarcoma. A variety of benign and 
malignant hematologic abnormalities have been reported in affected individuals. 
The rash of RTS typically develops between ages three and six months 
(occasionally as late as age two years) as erythema, swelling, and blistering on 
the face, subsequently spreading to the buttocks and extremities. The rash 
evolves over months to years into the chronic pattern of reticulated hypo- and 
hyperpigmentation, telangiectasias, and punctate atrophy (collectively known as 
poikiloderma) that persist throughout life. Hyperkeratotic lesions occur in 
approximately one third of individuals. Skeletal abnormalities can include 
radial ray defects, ulnar defects, absent or hypoplastic patella, and 
osteopenia.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of RTS is established by clinical findings (in 
particular, the characteristic rash) and/or the identification of biallelic 
pathogenic variants in ANAPC1 or RECQL4 on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Pulsed dye laser to the telangiectatic 
component of the rash for cosmetic management; surgical removal of cataracts; 
standard treatment for cancer and/or hematologic concerns. Surveillance: Annual 
general physical, dermatologic, and eye examination; monitoring of health and 
growth, skin for lesions with unusual color or texture, for cataracts. Prompt 
skeletal radiographic examination when clinical suspicion of osteosarcoma is 
present (bone pain, swelling or enlarging lesion on a limb); however, 
surveillance screening for osteosarcoma is not routinely recommended. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Excessive exposure to heat or sunlight; growth 
hormone for those with short stature with normal growth hormone levels.
GENETIC COUNSELING: RTS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives, 
prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible if the ANAPC1 or RECQL4 pathogenic variants in the family 
are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301415