---
reference_id: "PMID:31958088"
title: Aluminum and Amyloid-β in Familial Alzheimer's Disease.
authors:
- Mold M
- Linhart C
- Gómez-Ramírez J
- Villegas-Lanau A
- Exley C
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-191140
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aluminum and Amyloid-β in Familial Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Mold M, Linhart C, Gómez-Ramírez J, Villegas-Lanau A, Exley C
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-191140](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-191140)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;73(4):1627-1635. doi: 10.3233/JAD-191140.

Aluminum and Amyloid-β in Familial Alzheimer's Disease.

Mold M(1), Linhart C(2), Gómez-Ramírez J(3), Villegas-Lanau A(3), Exley C(1).

Author information:
(1)The Birchall Centre, Lennard-Jones Laboratories, Keele University, 
Staffordshire, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Pharmacy/Pharmacognosy, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria.
(3)Grupo de Neurociencias de Antioquia, Sede de Investigación Universitaria SIU, 
Medellín, Colombia.

Genetic predispositions associated with metabolism of the amyloid-β protein 
precursor underlie familial Alzheimer's disease; a form of dementia 
characterized by early disease onset and elevated levels of cortical amyloid-β. 
Human exposure to aluminum is linked to the etiology of Alzheimer's disease and 
recent research measured a high content of aluminum in brain tissue in familial 
Alzheimer's disease. To elaborate upon this finding, we have obtained brain 
tissues from a Colombian cohort of donors with familial Alzheimer's disease. We 
have used established methods to measure the aluminum content of these tissues 
and we have compared the data with a recently measured dataset for control brain 
tissues. We report significantly higher levels of aluminum in brain tissues in 
donors with familial Alzheimer's disease than in control tissues from donors 
without neurological impairment or neurodegeneration. We have used 
aluminum-specific fluorescence microscopy along with complementary imaging for 
amyloid-β to demonstrate a very high degree of co-localization of these two risk 
factors in brain tissue in familial Alzheimer's disease. Aluminum and amyloid-β 
were co-located in senile plaques as well as vasculature, the latter resembling 
cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Aluminum was also found separately from amyloid-β 
in intracellular compartments including glia and neuronal axons. The research 
has identified an arguably unique association between high brain aluminum 
content and amyloid-β and allows postulation that genetic predispositions 
defining familial Alzheimer's disease underlie this relationship.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-191140
PMID: 31958088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]