---
reference_id: "PMID:41430624"
title: Silver-Russell syndrome secondary to rare (epi)genotypes exhibits phenotypic heterogeneity challenging clinical diagnosis.
authors:
- Kurup U
- Lim DBN
- Maharaj AV
- Ishida M
- Davies JH
- Storr HL
journal: Clin Epigenetics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13148-025-02023-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Silver-Russell Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis"
- HMGA2 Protein/genetics
- Phenotype
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor II/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p57/genetics
- Male
- Genotype
- Female
- Genomic Imprinting
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Silver-Russell syndrome secondary to rare (epi)genotypes exhibits phenotypic heterogeneity challenging clinical diagnosis.
**Authors:** Kurup U, Lim DBN, Maharaj AV, Ishida M, Davies JH, Storr HL
**Journal:** Clin Epigenetics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13148-025-02023-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13148-025-02023-7)

## Content

1. Clin Epigenetics. 2025 Dec 22;17(1):208. doi: 10.1186/s13148-025-02023-7.

Silver-Russell syndrome secondary to rare (epi)genotypes exhibits phenotypic 
heterogeneity challenging clinical diagnosis.

Kurup U(1), Lim DBN(2), Maharaj AV(1), Ishida M(1), Davies JH(3)(4), Storr 
HL(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute (WHRI), John Vane 
Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, Barts and the London School of Medicine, 
London, EC1M 6BQ , UK.
(2)Paediatric Endocrinology, University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation 
Trust, Southampton, SO16 6YD, UK.
(3)Paediatric Endocrinology, University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation 
Trust, Southampton, SO16 6YD, UK. justin.davies@uhs.nhs.uk.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. 
justin.davies@uhs.nhs.uk.
(5)Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute (WHRI), John Vane 
Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, Barts and the London School of Medicine, 
London, EC1M 6BQ , UK. h.l.storr@qmul.ac.uk.

CONTEXT: Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a complex multisystem condition 
requiring timely diagnosis for appropriate management. A clinical diagnosis is 
made in individuals scoring ≥ 4 Netchine-Harbison Clinical Scoring System 
(NH-CSS) criteria, with (epi)genetic investigations undertaken in those with 
NH-CSS ≥ 3 and strong clinical suspicion. Monogenic variants in imprinted 
(CDKN1C and IGF2) and non-imprinted (HMGA2 and PLAG1) genes are recognised as 
rare causes of SRS. The frequency of associated phenotypes is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the suitability of SRS as an umbrella term for these 
(epi)genotypes by identifying key clinical features and assessing the validity 
of NH-CSS.
METHODS: An extensive literature search identified 22 IGF2, 18 HMGA2, 11 CDKN1C 
and 11 PLAG1 published reports.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Clinical phenotypes including the NH-CSS criteria were 
interrogated to assess (dis)similarity between the molecular subgroups of SRS.
RESULTS: Strict adherence to the NH-CSS identified clinical SRS in 91% IGF2, 82% 
CDKN1C, 78% HMGA2 and 45% PLAG1 affected individuals. Relative macrocephaly was 
observed in 82% IGF2, 82% CDKN1C, 44% HMGA2, and 27% PLAG1 affected individuals. 
Prominent forehead was reported in 100% CDKN1C, 91% IGF2, 72% HMGA2, and 64% 
PLAG1 and body asymmetry in 23% IGF2 and 11% HMGA2 affected individuals. 
Clinical features not typically associated with SRS included: microcephaly, 
challenging behaviour, cardiac abnormalities, cleft palate, and asthma.
CONCLUSIONS: The NH-CSS missed 9-55% of monogenic SRS. The diverse phenotypes of 
PLAG1, CDKN1C, HMGA2 and IGF2 variants may hinder a clinical diagnosis of SRS. 
These rarer (epi)genotypes could be considered as distinct entities.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-025-02023-7
PMCID: PMC12723925
PMID: 41430624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Competing interests: JHD has received travel 
bursaries from Pfizer, Novo Nordisk and Sandoz, HLS has received consultancies 
from Pfizer, Novo Nordisk, Ipsen, Sandoz and Merck and travel bursaries from 
Pfizer and Novo Nordisk.