---
reference_id: "PMID:23043385"
title: "Interferon therapy of acute hepatitis C in dialysis patients: meta-analysis."
authors:
- Fabrizi F
- Dixit V
- Messa P
- Martin P
journal: J Viral Hepat
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2012.01607.x
keywords:
- "Antiviral Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Female
- "Hepatitis C/complications, drug therapy"
- Humans
- "Interferon-alpha/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Male
- Renal Dialysis
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interferon therapy of acute hepatitis C in dialysis patients: meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Fabrizi F, Dixit V, Messa P, Martin P
**Journal:** J Viral Hepat (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2893.2012.01607.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2893.2012.01607.x)

## Content

1. J Viral Hepat. 2012 Nov;19(11):784-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2012.01607.x.
Epub 2012 Mar 30.

Interferon therapy of acute hepatitis C in dialysis patients: meta-analysis.

Fabrizi F(1), Dixit V, Messa P, Martin P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Maggiore Hospital, IRCCS Foundation,
Milano, Italy. fabrizi@policlinico.mi.it

The efficacy and safety of antiviral therapy in patients with acute hepatitis C
on long-term dialysis remains unclear, although a number of small clinical
studies have been published addressing this issue. We evaluated the efficacy and
safety of interferon therapy in chronic dialysis patients with acute hepatitis C
by performing a systematic review of the literature with a meta-analysis of
clinical studies. The primary outcome was sustained virological response (SVR,
as a measure of efficacy); the secondary outcome was dropout rate (as a measure
of tolerability). We used the random effects model of DerSimonian and Laird,
with heterogeneity and sensitivity analyses. We identified eight clinical
studies (173 unique patients), three (37.5%) being controlled clinical trials
(CCTs). Among CCTs, the viral response was much more common in study (patients
on antiviral therapy) than control (patients who did not receive therapy)
groups; the pooled odds ratio of SVR being 27.06, 95% Confidence Intervals (95%
CI), 9.26; 79.1 (P = 0.00001). No difference in the dropout rate between study
and control patients was shown, odds ratio = 0.920 (95% CI, 0.367; 1.92), NS.
Pooling all study results (n = 8 studies) demonstrated that the summary estimate
for SVR and dropout rate was 58% (95% CI, 38; 77) and 9% (95% CI, 4; 14),
respectively. The most frequent side-effects requiring interruption of the
treatment were flu-like symptoms (n = 4, 18%), followed by haematological
changes and loss to follow-up. A strong relationship between increasing age and
reported dropout rate was recognized (P = 0.001). The studies were heterogeneous
with regard to SVR but not to dropout rate. Our meta-analysis of CCTs showed
that the viral response after antiviral therapy was more common than the
spontaneous viral clearance in dialysis patients with acute hepatitis C. Pooled
analysis demonstrated that IFN-based therapy of acute hepatitis C in dialysis
populations gives SVR in around one half of patients. These results support
IFN-based therapy for acute hepatitis C in patients on maintenance dialysis.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2012.01607.x
PMID: 23043385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
