---
reference_id: "PMID:26432019"
title: "UBA1: At the Crossroads of Ubiquitin Homeostasis and Neurodegeneration."
authors:
- Groen EJN
- Gillingwater TH
journal: Trends Mol Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2015.08.003
keywords:
- Animals
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/etiology, therapy"
- Ubiquitin-Activating Enzymes/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# UBA1: At the Crossroads of Ubiquitin Homeostasis and Neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Groen EJN, Gillingwater TH
**Journal:** Trends Mol Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmed.2015.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2015.08.003)

## Content

1. Trends Mol Med. 2015 Oct;21(10):622-632. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2015.08.003.

UBA1: At the Crossroads of Ubiquitin Homeostasis and Neurodegeneration.

Groen EJN(1), Gillingwater TH(2).

Author information:
(1)Euan MacDonald Centre for Motor Neurone Disease Research, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK; Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Euan MacDonald Centre for Motor Neurone Disease Research, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK; Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. Electronic address: t.gillingwater@ed.ac.uk.

Neurodegenerative diseases are a leading cause of disability and early death. A 
common feature of these conditions is disruption of protein homeostasis. 
Ubiquitin-like modifier activating enzyme 1 (UBA1), the E1 ubiquitin-activating 
enzyme, sits at the apex of the ubiquitin cascade and represents an important 
regulator of cellular protein homeostasis. Critical contributions of 
UBA1-dependent pathways to the regulation of homeostasis and degeneration in the 
nervous system are emerging, including specific disruption of UBA1 in spinal 
muscular atrophy (SMA) and Huntington's disease (HD). In this review we discuss 
recent findings that put UBA1 at the centre of cellular homeostasis and 
neurodegeneration, highlighting the potential for UBA1 to act as a promising 
therapeutic target for a range of neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmed.2015.08.003
PMCID: PMC4596250
PMID: 26432019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]