---
reference_id: "PMID:18395099"
title: "ATP7B copper-regulated traffic and association with the tight junctions: copper excretion into the bile."
authors:
- Hernandez S
- Tsuchiya Y
- García-Ruiz JP
- Lalioti V
- Nielsen S
- Cassio D
- Sandoval IV
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.01.043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ATP7B copper-regulated traffic and association with the tight junctions: copper excretion into the bile.
**Authors:** Hernandez S, Tsuchiya Y, García-Ruiz JP, Lalioti V, Nielsen S, Cassio D, Sandoval IV
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2008.01.043](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2008.01.043)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2008 Apr;134(4):1215-23. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.01.043. 
Epub 2008 Jan 17.

ATP7B copper-regulated traffic and association with the tight junctions: copper 
excretion into the bile.

Hernandez S(1), Tsuchiya Y, García-Ruiz JP, Lalioti V, Nielsen S, Cassio D, 
Sandoval IV.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Centro de Investigación Biomédica 
en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2008 Apr;134(4):1255-7. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.02.073.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The copper transporter ATP7B plays a central role in the 
elimination of excess copper by the liver into the bile, yet the site of its 
action remains controversial. The studies reported here examine the 
correspondence between the site of ATP7B action and distribution and the 
pathways of copper disposal by the liver.
METHODS: Microscopy and cell fractionation studies of polarized Can 10 cells 
forming long-branched bile canaliculi have been used to study the cellular 
distribution of ATP7B. Copper excretion into the bile was studied in perfused 
rat liver.
RESULTS: Copper excess provokes a massive download of the ATP7B retained in the 
trans-Golgi network into the bile canalicular membrane. Furthermore, a stable 
ATP7B pool is localized to the tight junctions that seal the bile canaliculi. 
The profile of Cu(64) excretion into the bile by isolated rat livers perfused 
under one-pass conditions provides evidence of copper excretion by 2 separate 
mechanisms, transcytosis across the hepatocyte and paracellular transport 
throughout the tight junctions.
CONCLUSIONS: Whereas the ATP7B retained in the trans-Golgi-network is massively 
translocated to the bile canalicular membrane in response to increased copper 
levels, a pool of ATP7B associated with the tight junctions remains stable. In 
situ studies indicate that copper is excreted into the bile by 2 separate 
pathways. The results are discussed in the frame of the normal and impeded 
excretion of copper into the bile.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.01.043
PMID: 18395099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]