---
reference_id: "PMID:20378277"
title: Epidemiology of chronic hepatitis B virus infection, hepatocellular carcinoma, and hepatitis B virus-induced hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Kew MC
journal: Pathol Biol (Paris)
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.patbio.2010.01.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of chronic hepatitis B virus infection, hepatocellular carcinoma, and hepatitis B virus-induced hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Kew MC
**Journal:** Pathol Biol (Paris) (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.patbio.2010.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patbio.2010.01.005)

## Content

1. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2010 Aug;58(4):273-7. doi: 10.1016/j.patbio.2010.01.005. 
Epub 2010 Apr 7.

Epidemiology of chronic hepatitis B virus infection, hepatocellular carcinoma, 
and hepatitis B virus-induced hepatocellular carcinoma.

Kew MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. 
Michael.Kew@uct.ac.za

Approximately 360 million people worldwide are chronically infected with 
hepatitis B virus (HBV) and are at high risk of developing hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC). Chronic HBV infection is the most prevalent cause of this 
tumour, accounting for 55% of global cases, and 89% of those in endemic regions 
for HBV infection. Relative risks for developing HCC in the presence of chronic 
HBV infection may be as high as 49 in case-control studies, and 98 in cohort 
studies. HCC is the sixth most common cancer in the world today, with 
approximately 630,000 new cases occurring each year. It ranks third in annual 
cancer mortality rates. Approximately 80% of HCCs occur in developing countries 
where HBV infection is endemic, with the highest incidences being in the 
Asia-Pacific region, and sub-Saharan Africa. In the chronic carriers of the 
virus who are at greatest risk of developing HCC, the infection is acquired at 
birth or in the early months or years of life, either perinatally or 
horizontally, and frequently becomes chronic. The risks are greater in males, 
and older individuals, and are increased by co-exposure to aflatoxin B(1), the 
presence of cirrhosis, obesity, or diabetes mellitus, and possibly co-infection 
with hepatitis C virus. Viral factors that influence the risk of HCC are high 
viral load, the presence of certain mutations, and genotypes. Although the 
incidence of chronic HBV infection is beginning to decrease as a result of the 
universal infant immunization programme, HBV-induced HCC incidence is projected 
to increase for at least another two decades.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.patbio.2010.01.005
PMID: 20378277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]