---
reference_id: "PMID:23297263"
title: Human rhinoviruses.
authors:
- Jacobs SE
- Lamson DM
- St George K
- Walsh TJ
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00077-12
keywords:
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Otitis Media/epidemiology, virology"
- "Picornaviridae Infections/epidemiology, virology"
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/epidemiology, virology"
- "Rhinovirus/classification, genetics, pathogenicity"
- "Sinusitis/epidemiology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human rhinoviruses.
**Authors:** Jacobs SE, Lamson DM, St George K, Walsh TJ
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00077-12](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00077-12)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2013 Jan;26(1):135-62. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00077-12.

Human rhinoviruses.

Jacobs SE(1), Lamson DM, St George K, Walsh TJ.

Author information:
(1)Transplantation-Oncology Infectious Diseases Program, Division of Infectious 
Diseases, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA.

Human rhinoviruses (HRVs), first discovered in the 1950s, are responsible for 
more than one-half of cold-like illnesses and cost billions of dollars annually 
in medical visits and missed days of work. Advances in molecular methods have 
enhanced our understanding of the genomic structure of HRV and have led to the 
characterization of three genetically distinct HRV groups, designated groups A, 
B, and C, within the genus Enterovirus and the family Picornaviridae. HRVs are 
traditionally associated with upper respiratory tract infection, otitis media, 
and sinusitis. In recent years, the increasing implementation of PCR assays for 
respiratory virus detection in clinical laboratories has facilitated the 
recognition of HRV as a lower respiratory tract pathogen, particularly in 
patients with asthma, infants, elderly patients, and immunocompromised hosts. 
Cultured isolates of HRV remain important for studies of viral characteristics 
and disease pathogenesis. Indeed, whether the clinical manifestations of HRV are 
related directly to viral pathogenicity or secondary to the host immune response 
is the subject of ongoing research. There are currently no approved antiviral 
therapies for HRVs, and treatment remains primarily supportive. This review 
provides a comprehensive, up-to-date assessment of the basic virology, 
pathogenesis, clinical epidemiology, and laboratory features of and treatment 
and prevention strategies for HRVs.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00077-12
PMCID: PMC3553670
PMID: 23297263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]