---
reference_id: "PMID:36930111"
title: Impending central retinal vein occlusion and granulomatous uveitis in a patient with Satoyoshi syndrome.
authors:
- Saima Y
- Tanaka Y
- Kakehashi A
- Kaburaki T
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000033284
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impending central retinal vein occlusion and granulomatous uveitis in a patient with Satoyoshi syndrome.
**Authors:** Saima Y, Tanaka Y, Kakehashi A, Kaburaki T
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000033284](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000033284)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Mar 17;102(11):e33284. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000033284.

Impending central retinal vein occlusion and granulomatous uveitis in a patient 
with Satoyoshi syndrome.

Saima Y(1)(2), Tanaka Y(1), Kakehashi A(1), Kaburaki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Jichi Medical University Saitama Medical Center, 
Saitama, Japan.
(2)Division of Ophthalmology, Department of Visual Sciences, Nihon University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

RATIONALE: Satoyoshi syndrome is a rare systemic autoimmune disease that 
presents with painful muscle spasms. We report a case of impending central 
retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) secondary to granulomatous pan-uveitis in a 
32-year-old woman with Satoyoshi syndrome.
PATIENT CONCERNS: At the age of 7 years, she developed generalized hair loss and 
painful spasms and was diagnosed with Satoyoshi syndrome. Her current symptoms 
included sudden metamorphopsia and decreased visual acuity in the left eye. She 
visited our hospital with extensive intraretinal hemorrhage (including the 
macula), meandering of the retinal veins, and swelling of the optic disc. 
Fluorescence fundus angiography demonstrated hyper fluorescence of the optic 
disc and leakage from the retinal veins, suggesting CRVO associated with optic 
papillitis and segmental periphlebitis.
DIAGNOSES: In the left eye, there were 2 + cells in the anterior chamber and 1 + 
in the anterior vitreous.
INTERVENTIONS: We increased the existing dose of prednisolone for the treatment 
of uveitis and started her on oral aspirin and kallidinogenase for CRVO.
OUTCOMES: The impending CRVO gradually subsided, and her visual acuity improved. 
However, during the subsequent treatment course, angle nodules were observed in 
the left eye, and the intraocular pressure (IOP) gradually increased. Although 
the angled nodules disappeared with topical corticosteroid treatment, the IOP 
did not reduce and became uncontrolled. Therefore, we performed trabeculotomy 
first, followed by trabeculectomy, after which the IOP decreased to 
approximately 10 mm Hg.
LESSONS: Unilateral granulomatous pan-uveitis and impending CRVO were observed 
in this patient. Several cases of Satoyoshi syndrome complicated by various 
autoimmune or immunological disorders have been reported. However, to the best 
of our knowledge, no reports of Satoyoshi syndrome presenting with uveitis or 
CRVO have been published. Physicians should consider uveitis as a complication 
of Satoyoshi syndrome.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000033284
PMCID: PMC10019272
PMID: 36930111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.