---
reference_id: "PMID:9326398"
title: "Loricrin mutation in Vohwinkel's keratoderma is unique to the variant with ichthyosis."
authors:
- Korge BP
- Ishida-Yamamoto A
- Pünter C
- Dopping-Hepenstal PJ
- Iizuka H
- Stephenson A
- Eady RA
- Munro CS
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12337534
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loricrin mutation in Vohwinkel's keratoderma is unique to the variant with ichthyosis.
**Authors:** Korge BP, Ishida-Yamamoto A, Pünter C, Dopping-Hepenstal PJ, Iizuka H, Stephenson A, Eady RA, Munro CS
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1523-1747.ep12337534](https://doi.org/10.1111/1523-1747.ep12337534)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 1997 Oct;109(4):604-10. doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12337534.

Loricrin mutation in Vohwinkel's keratoderma is unique to the variant with 
ichthyosis.

Korge BP(1), Ishida-Yamamoto A, Pünter C, Dopping-Hepenstal PJ, Iizuka H, 
Stephenson A, Eady RA, Munro CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University of Cologne, Köln, 
Germany.

A mutation in the glycine-rich cornified envelope protein loricrin has recently 
been reported in Vohwinkel's keratoderma (honeycomb keratoderma with 
pseudoainhum), in a pedigree amongst whom ichthyosis was also a feature. We have 
studied two further families with Vohwinkel's keratoderma for evidence 
ofloricrin mutations. Our first family (VK1) also had ichthyosis but not 
deafness. In lesional and nonlesional skin, granular and transitional cell 
layers were increased. In immunoelectron-microscopic studies cornified envelopes 
were abnormally thin and were labeled densely by anti-involucrin antibodies, but 
only sparsely by antiloricrin antibodies; however, abnormal intranuclear 
granules seen in granular and cornified layer cells were labeled by antibodies 
to both C- and N-terminal loricrin. Microsatellite markers in VK1 supported 
linkage to the loricrin locus in the epidermal differentiation complex at 1q21 
(Zmax = 2.48). The loricrin gene was sequenced, identifying a heterozygous 
mutation as previously reported: a G insertion producing a frameshift after 
codon 231 and an abnormal C-terminal peptide lacking residues necessary for 
cross-linking. In our second family (VK2), affected members had sensorineural 
deafness but not ichthyosis. Immunoelectron-microscopic studies showed normal 
loricrin distribution, and assuming complete penetrance, linkage to 1q21 was 
excluded. Vohwinkel's keratoderma is thus clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous. Only the variant with ichthyosis appears to be due to loricrin 
mutation. As the arginine-rich domain in C-terminal loricrin caused by the 
frameshift contains several potential bipartite nuclear localization signals, we 
suggest that the intranuclear accumulation of loricrin in VK1 is due to these 
motifs, and may be unique to insertional mutation.

DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12337534
PMID: 9326398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]