---
reference_id: "PMID:1439810"
title: Absence of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein in individuals with abetalipoproteinemia.
authors:
- Wetterau JR
- Aggerbeck LP
- Bouma ME
- Eisenberg C
- Munck A
- Hermier M
- Schmitz J
- Gay G
- Rader DJ
- Gregg RE
journal: Science
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1126/science.1439810
keywords:
- Abetalipoproteinemia/etiology
- Chylomicrons/metabolism
- "Duodenum/chemistry, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- "Intestines/chemistry, ultrastructure"
- "Jejunum/chemistry, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Lipoproteins, VLDL/biosynthesis"
- "Microsomes/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Microsomes, Liver/chemistry"
- Triglycerides/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Absence of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein in individuals with abetalipoproteinemia.
**Authors:** Wetterau JR, Aggerbeck LP, Bouma ME, Eisenberg C, Munck A, Hermier M, Schmitz J, Gay G, Rader DJ, Gregg RE
**Journal:** Science (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1439810](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1439810)

## Content

1. Science. 1992 Nov 6;258(5084):999-1001. doi: 10.1126/science.1439810.

Absence of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein in individuals with
abetalipoproteinemia.

Wetterau JR(1), Aggerbeck LP, Bouma ME, Eisenberg C, Munck A, Hermier M, Schmitz
J, Gay G, Rader DJ, Gregg RE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ
08543-4000.

Abetalipoproteinemia is a human genetic disease that is characterized by a
defect in the assembly or secretion of plasma very low density lipoproteins and
chylomicrons. The microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP), which is
located in the lumen of microsomes isolated from the liver and intestine, has
been proposed to function in lipoprotein assembly. MTP activity and the
88-kilodalton component of MTP were present in intestinal biopsy samples from
eight control individuals but were absent in four abetalipoproteinemic subjects.
This finding suggests that a defect in MTP is the basis for abetalipoproteinemia
and that MTP is indeed required for lipoprotein assembly.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1439810
PMID: 1439810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
