---
reference_id: "PMID:22445352"
title: "Haemoglobinopathies and the clinical epidemiology of malaria: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Taylor SM
- Parobek CM
- Fairhurst RM
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70055-5
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Haemoglobinopathies and the clinical epidemiology of malaria: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Taylor SM, Parobek CM, Fairhurst RM
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70055-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70055-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2012 Jun;12(6):457-68. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70055-5. 
Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Haemoglobinopathies and the clinical epidemiology of malaria: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Taylor SM(1), Parobek CM, Fairhurst RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. taylo115@email.unc.edu

Comment in
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2012 Jun;12(6):427-8. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70067-1.

BACKGROUND: Haemoglobinopathies can reduce the risk of malaria syndromes. We 
aimed to quantify the relation between different haemoglobin mutations and 
malaria protection to strengthen the foundation for translational studies of 
malaria pathogenesis and immunity.
METHODS: We systematically searched the Medline and Embase databases for studies 
that estimated the risk of malaria in patients with and without 
haemoglobinopathies up to Sept 9, 2011, and identified additional studies from 
reference lists. We included studies that enrolled mainly children or pregnant 
women and had the following outcomes: Plasmodium falciparum severe malaria, 
uncomplicated malaria, asymptomatic parasitaemia, or pregnancy-associated 
malaria, and Plasmodium vivax malaria. Two reviewers identified studies 
independently, assessed quality of the studies, and extracted data. We produced 
odds ratios (ORs; 95% CIs) for case-control studies and incidence rate ratios 
(IRRs; 95% CIs) for prospective studies. We did the meta-analysis with a 
random-effects model when equivalent outcomes were reported in more than one 
study.
FINDINGS: Of 62 identified studies, 44 reported data for haemoglobin AS, 19 for 
haemoglobin AC and CC, and 18 for α-thalassaemia. Meta-analysis of case-control 
studies showed a decreased risk of severe P. falciparum malaria in individuals 
with haemoglobin AS (OR 0·09, 95% CI 0·06-0·12), haemoglobin CC (0·27, 
0·11-0·63), haemoglobin AC (0·83, 0·67-0·96), homozygous α-thalassaemia (0·63, 
0·48-0·83), and heterozygous α-thalassaemia (0·83, 0·74-0·92). In meta-analysis 
of prospective trials only haemoglobin AS was consistently associated with 
protection from uncomplicated malaria (IRR 0·69, 95% CI 0·61-0·79); no 
haemoglobinopathies led to consistent protection from asymptomatic parasitaemia. 
Few clinical studies have investigated β-thalassaemia, haemoglobin E, P. vivax 
malaria, or pregnancy-associated malaria.
INTERPRETATION: Haemoglobin AS, CC, and AC genotypes and homozygous and 
heterozygous α-thalassaemia provide significant protection from severe malaria 
syndromes, but these haemoglobinopathies differ substantially in the degree of 
protection provided and confer mild or no protection against uncomplicated 
malaria and asymptomatic parasitaemia. Through attenuation of severity of 
malaria, haemoglobinopathies could serve as a model for investigation of the 
mechanisms of malaria pathogenesis and immunity.
FUNDING: US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70055-5
PMCID: PMC3404513
PMID: 22445352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest All authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest relevant to the subject of this manuscript.

Haemoglobinopathies are highly prevalent in some human populations currently or historically exposed to the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. In the major haemoglobinopathies, adult haemoglobin – normally composed of two α-globin and two β-globin chains – is altered by genetic polymorphisms that encode single amino acid substitutions in β-globin (as in HbS, HbC, and HbE) or reduce production of α- and β-globin chains (in α- and β-thalassaemia, respectively).1 These haemoglobin variants and thalassaemias are postulated to have been naturally selected for their protection from malaria, as evidenced by a broad spectrum of investigations. These include experimental P. falciparum infection protocols, in vitro laboratory experimentation, ecological epidemiologic studies, and cartographic modeling.2 Nevertheless, confirmation and quantification of malaria risk reductions due to haemoglobinopathies requires clinical studies.

Correlates of both malaria pathogenesis and immunity to disease can be identified by studying patterns of differential susceptibility to malaria. Investigations of increased susceptibility to P. falciparum malaria during pregnancy3,4 and resistance to P. vivax infection in West Africans lacking erythrocyte expression of Duffy Antigen Receptor for Chemokines (DARC)5,6 have unearthed fundamental mechanisms of both malaria pathogenesis and acquired immunity. These molecular mechanisms – adumbrated by careful epidemiologic studies – are foundations for leading vaccine candidates against pregnancy-associated malaria7 and vivax malaria.8 While some falciparum malaria vaccines are showing partial efficacy,9,10 malaria’s pathogenic mechanisms are not understood sufficiently to inform the rational design of future therapeutics and preventive measures.

The clinical manifestations of P. falciparum malaria display a broad spectrum of severity from asymptomatic parasitaemia to severe malaria syndromes.11 Differential protection from specific syndromes owing to genetic resistance may constitute a “natural experiment” that helps to identify the mechanisms of malaria pathogenesis that cause clinical morbidity. Toward this end, we conducted a systematic review of published studies to estimate the direct clinical effects of haemoglobinopathies on malaria syndromes.

We performed our review and meta-analysis in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines (Supplementary methods, Table S1).12 Two authors (SMT and CMP) independently performed the database searches (through September 9, 2011), appraised study quality, and extracted study data. Additional references were selected from the reference lists of identified studies. To appraise the quality of the observational studies, we adapted the principles of the Newcastle-Ottawa scale;13 in order to base analyses on robust data, we only included studies that scored at least seven stars on the scale’s assessment of patient selection, comparability, and exposure/outcome. When reported data were not sufficient for estimation of desired comparisons, we contacted study authors. Overall, we selected studies that reported the frequency of clinical outcomes in patients with and without a haemoglobinopathy.

We included studies that principally enrolled children; the exceptions were studies that investigated pregnancy-associated malaria. We included studies conducted in any level of malaria endemicity, but did not consider studies of non-immune travelers.

For the incident outcomes of severe malaria, uncomplicated malaria, asymptomatic parasitaemia, and vivax malaria, we included data from both prospective cohort and case-control studies. For asymptomatic parasitaemia (with either Plasmodium species), we also included data from cross-sectional studies. For pregnancy-associated malaria outcomes, we included data from cross-sectional studies of pregnant women. For case-control studies, we required a clear description of the selection of controls. We excluded case reports.

We only considered papers in which haemoglobin typing employed electrophoresis, chromatography, or DNA analysis.

We investigated clinical outcomes owing to infection with either P. falciparum or P. vivax. P. falciparum-related outcomes were severe malaria (including cerebral malaria and severe malarial anaemia),14 uncomplicated malaria, asymptomatic parasitaemia, and pregnancy-associated malaria; vivax malaria was also included (Supplementary methods).

The human genome normally contains four copies of the α-globin gene and two copies of the β-globin gene. Individuals with deletions of one a-globin gene (–α/αα) and two α-globin genes (–α/-α or αα/--) are referred to as α-thalassaemia heterozygotes and homozygotes, respectively. β-thalassaemia refers to individuals with impaired production of a single β-globin gene (β-thalassaemia trait, or β-thalassaemia minor). We did not investigate HbSS, HbSC, the deletion of three α-globin genes (α−/−-), or the impaired production of two β-globin genes (β-thalassaemia major) because these genotypes typically manifest severe clinical sequelae which complicate any assessment of malaria-specific clinical morbidity. Additionally, we did not explore haemoglobin mutations with low global population prevalences, including haemoglobins D, Constant Spring, and Lepore. Odds Ratios (ORs) and Incidence Rate Ratios (IRRs) reflect comparisons between patients with haemoglobin variants and those with HbAA, or between patients with thalassaemias and those without.

For studies that did not report comparisons of interest, we extracted raw data to either 1) compare prevalences of parasitaemia between patient groups with the chi-squared test (in cross-sectional studies); 2) compare prevalences of haemoglobin variants between groups of patients with malaria syndromes with unadjusted ORs (in case-control studies); or 3) compute Risk Ratios (RRs) or IRRs of malaria syndromes between groups of patients with and without haemoglobinopathies (in prospective studies). All comparisons were calculated with exact confidence intervals.

Because case-control and prospective cohort studies estimate relative risk using distinct statistical methodologies, we employed separate analyses to meta-analyze ORs and IRRs. When individual-level case-control data were available for two or more studies that compared the prevalence of a haemoglobinopathy for the same case and control groups, we meta-analyzed the data to produce summary ORs. Meta-analyses were computed using random-effects models employing the DerSimonian & Laird method (metan in Stata/IC); the I2 statistic for heterogeneity was calculated using the Mantel-Haenszel method for meta-analyzed data within subgroups (haemoglobinopathy and malaria syndrome). Similarly, when data were available for two or more prospective studies which compared incidence rates of the same outcome, we meta-analyzed the data to produce summary IRRs. Meta-analyses of IRRs were computed using random-effects Poisson meta-regression.15. We assessed publication bias in case-control studies using funnel plots and Begg’s test (Supplementary methods). All single-study and summary analyses were calculated with Stata/IC (version 11, Stata Corp, College Station, TX).

The sponsor of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding author (SMT) had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

The search strategy identified 2664 studies for review, and we selected 62 for inclusion (Figure 1): 44 studies of HbAS, 19 of HbAC, eight of HbCC, 18 of α-thalassaemia (all except one included homozygotes), three of HbE, and two of β-thalassaemia (some studies examined more than one haemoglobinopathy). Of the 62 studies, 18 were prospective cohorts, 15 were case-control, and 31 were cross-sectional studies (two studies reported more than one design). Five studies investigated pregnancy-associated malaria, and two studies included patients with P. vivax malaria. There was no evidence of reporting bias amongst comparable studies (Supplementary methods, Figure S1).

Compared to healthy controls, the summary OR for severe malaria was 0.09 (95% CI 0.06 – 0.12; I2 10.6%) across five studies which together enrolled more than 10,000 patients,16–20 and was similar to summary ORs for the specific syndromes of cerebral malaria (0.07; 95% CI 0.04 – 0.14; I2 0%)18,19 and severe malarial anaemia (0.09; 95% CI 0.06 – 0.13; I2 0%)(Figure 2, Table 1).18,19 Compared to children with uncomplicated malaria, ORs for severe malaria in three studies17,21,22 were heterogeneous and a summary OR estimate was non-significant (0.52; 95% CI 0.20 – 0.38; I2 50.0%).

Only two cohort studies have reported the incidence of severe malaria (Figure 3, Table 2). The incidence of severe malaria was reduced by 71% (95% CI 38% – 88%)23 and 83% (95% CI 60% – 93%)24 in similar cohorts of Kenyan children. In the second cohort, the incidence of cerebral malaria was nonsignificantly reduced by 86% (95% CI -17% – 98%), while that of severe malarial anaemia was reduced by 60% (95% CI 40% – 70%)25 and 89% (95% CI 3% – 99%).24 Taken together, data from both case-control and prospective cohort studies indicate that HbAS is consistently associated with large reductions in the risk of severe malaria syndromes.

HbC appears to protect against severe malaria to a lesser degree than HbAS and in proportion to allele frequency (Figure 2). Compared to healthy children in four studies16,17,19,20 that together enrolled over 9,000 patients, the summary ORs for severe malaria were 0.27 (95% CI 0.11 – 0.63; I2 0%) for HbCC and 0.83 (95% CI 0.74 – 0.92; I2 10.2%) for HbAC (Figure 2; Table S1). Protection from specific severe malaria syndromes has not been fully investigated in HbCC; in one study,19 HbAC showed mild protection from cerebral malaria (OR 0.64; 95% CI 0.45 – 0.91) and severe malarial anaemia (OR 0.87; 95% CI 0.68 – 0.11). When compared to children with uncomplicated malaria, protection from severe malaria is inconsistent: non-significant protection is reported from severe malaria in three studies17,21,26 of HbCC (summary OR 0.12; 95% CI 0.12 – 10.70; I2 0.7%) and HbAC (summary OR 0.76; 95% CI 0.32 – 0.79; I2 60.7%), and from severe malarial anaemia in two studies21,26 that combined homozygotes and heterozygotes (summary OR 0.35; 95% CI 0.04 – 0.73; I2 0%). Significant protection from cerebral malaria was reported in one study of Malian children that combined homo- and heterozygotes (OR 0.15; 95% CI 0.004 – 0.93).21

Prospective studies have not reported the incidence of severe syndromes in HbC children (Table 2). Thus, convincing evidence for protection from severe malaria owing to HbC derives largely from few case-control studies.

Meta-analysis of two studies27,28 in Myanmar and Thailand that compared the prevalence of HbE in severe and uncomplicated malaria cases demonstrated no evidence of protection (summary OR 0.41; 95% CI 0.04 – 0.95), though this should be interpreted cautiously given the significant heterogeneity of the findings (I2 70.5%, p=0.027) and the highly-selected settings of the studies.

Four studies19,29–31 investigated α-thalassaemia in healthy children and children with severe malaria: summary ORs were 0.63 (95% CI 0.48 – 0.83; I2 20.6%) for homozygotes and 0.83 (95% CI 0.74 – 0.92; I2 0%) for heterozygotes. Protection from cerebral malaria was nonsignificant in one study19 for heterozygotes (OR 0.80; 95% CI 0.64 – 1); protection from severe malarial anaemia was reported in two studies,19,29 with summary ORs of 0.50 (95% CI 0.35 – 0.72; I2 0%) for homozygotes and 0.86 (95% CI 0.75 – 0.996; I2 0%) for heterozygotes. One prospective study from Kenya documented a decreased incidence of severe disease in α-thalassaemia homozygotes (IRR 0.54; 95% CI 0.30 – 0.99) and heterozygotes (IRR 0.60; 95% CI 0.39 – 0.90) (Table 2; Figure 3).23 Additionally, protection from severe malarial anaemia among heterozygotes (IRR 0.33; 95% CI 0.14 – 0.78) was similar to protection from cerebral malaria (IRR 0.48; 95% CI 0.24 – 0.97).32

No studies have investigated the risk of severe malaria in patients with β-thalassaemia.

In two West African studies,17,33 compared to healthy children the summary OR for children with uncomplicated malaria was 0.30 (95% CI 0.20 – 0.45; I2 0.8%) (Table 1; Figure 2). Multiple prospective studies have characterized the risk reduction in malaria attributable to HbS (Table 2; Figure 3). Meta-analysis of five studies23,34–37 produced a summary IRR estimate of 0.69 (95% CI 0.61 – 0.79), which likely approximates the risk reduction owing to HbAS more closely in these malaria hyperendemic settings.38

Few studies have reported the risk of uncomplicated malaria associated with HbC. Two studies in West Africa compared healthy children and children with uncomplicated malaria: for HbCC, the OR for malaria was 0 (95% CI 0 – 0.41) owing to the absence of HbCC in the case patients,17 and for HbAC the summary OR was 0.16 (95% CI 0.26 – 0.23; I2 80.9%).17,33 Three prospective studies have yielded conflicting results (Table 2; Figure 3): meta-analysis of two studies35,37 yielded a summary OR of 0.05 (95% CI 0.88 – 0.26). Thus, definitive evidence of protection from uncomplicated malaria afforded by HbCC and HbAC has not been established.

No identified studies quantified susceptibility to malaria by HbE.

Several prospective studies have assessed the incidence of uncomplicated malaria in α-thalassaemic children (Table 2; Figure 3), with conflicting results. In Vanuatu, the incidence of falciparum malaria was higher in α-thalassaemia homozygotes (IRR 0.3; 95% CI 0.32 – 0.07) and heterozygotes (IRR 0.1; 95% CI 0.77 – 0.61);39 in contrast, the incidence of uncomplicated malaria was lower in homozygotes (IRR 0.83; 95% CI 0.70 – 0.97) and heterozygotes (IRR 0.93; 95% CI 0.82 – 0.04) in Kenya,23 as well as homozygotes (RR 0.12; 95% CI 0.02 – 0.83) and heterozygotes (RR 0.30; 95% CI 0.10 – 0.85) in Tanzania.40 Meta-analysis of three studies23,35,39 suggests lack of protection for both homozygotes (summary IRR 0.12; 95% C.I. 0.69 – 0.81) and heterozygotes (summary IRR 0.98; 95% C.I. 0.87 – 0.11).

In one case-control study in Liberia, the prevalence of β-thalassaemia was lower in cases of uncomplicated malaria than in community controls (OR 0.56; 95% CI 0.36 – 0.86) (Table 1; Figure 2).33

Cross-sectional studies have reported conflicting data on the prevalence of P. falciparum parasitaemia in asymptomatic HbAS children (Table S3). Compared with HbAA children, a lower prevalence of parasitaemia in HbAS children was reported in four studies,41–44 similar prevalence in ten studies,45–54 and higher prevalence in two studies.55,56 In these surveys, parasite densities were reported in HbAS children as lower41,46,49,56,57 or similar45,50,52,55 to those in HbAA children. One case-control study reported similar prevalences of HbAS in parasitized (23%) and unparasitized (24%) asymptomatic children (Table 1).20 In two prospective studies,58,59 parasitaemia rates were similar in HbAS and HbAA children (Table 2). Taken together, HbAS does not consistently protect from P. falciparum parasitaemia.

In cross-sectional surveys of adults and of children, HbC has not been associated with a reduced prevalence of P. falciparum parasitaemia45–47,49,55,60 or P. falciparum density.37,45,46,49,55 The incidence of asymptomatic parasitaemia did not differ between HbAC and HbAA children in Mali.37 Thus, HbC does not appear to modify the risk of P. falciparum parasitaemia.

One cross-sectional study in India reported a significantly lower prevalence of P. falciparum parasitaemia in patients with HbE (AE or EE) (0.6%) compared with patients with HbAA (20.5%; p = 0.005 by chi-squared test).61

In cross-sectional studies, α-thalassaemia was not associated with the prevalence of parasitaemia in children32,62–66 or, in several studies, the density of parasitaemias.56,62–64 In one prospective study of children in Papua New Guinea, both α-thalassaemia homozygotes (IRR 0.51; 95% CI 0.32 – 0.81) and heterozygotes (IRR 0.56; 95% CI 0.36 – 0.87) had fewer episodes of PCR-detectable parasitaemia than those without α-thalassaemia,67 though this outcome has not been investigated in other studies.

In one cross sectional study in Liberia, P. falciparum prevalence was similar in children with (78%) and without (82%) β-thalassaemia.68

Compared to women with HbAA, the prevalence of peripheral P. falciparum parasitaemia was similar in women with HbAS among Nigerian primigravidae69 and Gabonese primi- and secundigravidae,70 and significantly higher in Ugandan women of all gravidities (Table S4).71 In two studies in Ghana there was no association between HbS, HbC, or α-thalassaemia and P. falciparum prevalence.72 In one study in Papua New Guinea that assessed birth outcomes, α-thalassaemia was not associated with placental malaria, birth weight, placental parasite density, maternal peripheral parasitaemia, or maternal anaemia.73 On the whole, there are few data on the effect of haemoglobin variants on pregnancy-associated malaria or placental parasitization.

No studies investigated an effect of HbAS, HbAC, or HbCC on P. vivax infection. In a prospective study in Vanuatu, the incidence of P. vivax malaria was significantly increased in homozygous α-thalassaemic children less than 5 years old (IRR 0.4; 95% CI 0.40 – 0.30) and nonsignificantly increased in children greater than 5 years old (IRR 0.0; 95% CI 0.42 – 0.14) (a similar pattern of increased malaria susceptibility was reported for P. falciparum malaria).39 In a cross-sectional study investigating HbE in India, P. vivax parasitaemia was significantly less prevalent in HbEE/AE (0.7%) than in HbAA individuals (20.1%; p < 0.001).61

Genetic polymorphisms that affect the structure and production of the β- or α-chains of haemoglobin are variously associated with protection from a range of clinical manifestations of P. falciparum infection. The degree of protection varies between haemoglobinopathies, but in general is greatest against severe malaria, moderate against uncomplicated malaria, and absent against asymptomatic P. falciparum parasitaemia. The degrees of protection against severe malaria by HbAS (91%; 95% CI 88 – 94), HbCC (73%; 95% CI 37 – 89), and homozygous α-thalassaemia (37%; 95% CI 17 – 52) compare favorably with those reported for current large-scale malaria-control efforts, including intermittent preventive antimalarial therapy in children (87% to 69%)74,75 or infants (38%)76 and the use of insecticide-treated bed nets (45%).77

HbS and to a lesser extent HbC protect from malaria but not from parasitaemia, suggesting that these haemoglobin variants prevent the transition from asymptomatic parasitaemia to malaria. This transition is poorly understood. This protective effect may derive from the abnormal display of parasite virulence factors on the surface of parasitized HbC and HbS erythrocytes,78,79 possibly owing to the disruption of the parasite’s remodeling of erythrocyte’s intracellular trafficking network by HbS and HbC.80 Additionally, the age-dependent nature of malaria protection owing to HbAS81,82 and α-thalassaemia83 among children in recent reports support a protective mechanism based upon an enhanced acquisition of malaria immunity. Though HbS does not generally enhance IgG responses to a diverse array of P. falciparum proteins,84 HbS may yet enhance IgG responses specifically to the parasite’s major cytoadherence ligand and virulence factor Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein (PfEMP1).85 Additional possible mechanisms for protection owing to haemoglobinopathies include an enhanced clearance of parasitized erythrocytes,86 impaired parasite growth,87 or the induction of protective immunomodulatory mechanisms by parasitized erythrocytes.88 Data supporting these various molecular mechanisms are complex [reviewed in 89,90], and because these possibilities are not mutually-exclusive, the relative contribution of mechanisms may vary between haemoglobinopathies. By allowing parasitization while attenuating the pathogenic mechanisms that lead to disease and fatal outcomes, haemoglobin variants offer a model system to explore the cellular events involved in causing morbidity (Panel 1).

Does HbCC protect from uncomplicated malaria and asymptomatic parasitaemia, or only from severe falciparum malaria?

Does α-thalassaemia reduce the risk of disease from specific non-Plasmodium pathogens?

Do haemoglobinopathies influence the risk of uncomplicated or severe P. vivax malaria?

Do haemoglobinopathies influence the risk of pregnancy-associated malaria?

Do HbE and β-thalassaemia confer protection from uncomplicated or severe falciparum malaria?

Does α-thalassaemia exert negative epistatic effects on malaria protection by HbC and HbE?

Do haemoglobinopathies confer malaria protection to non-immune populations?

How do co-inherited G6PD deficiency variants and ABO blood groups influence the malaria-protective effects of haemoglobinopathies? 9. Does HbAS confer protection against falciparum malaria outside of sub-Saharan Africa, (e.g., India)?

The attenuation of malaria by haemoglobinopathies has important implications for non-randomised analyses of clinical malaria studies. While randomised trials may achieve balance of underlying protective polymorphisms, comparisons of non-randomised groups may be compromised by differential prevalences of haemoglobinopathies or other risk modifiers.91 Such potential bias could impact the differential efficacy of therapies, vaccines, or other preventive measures in ecological analyses that compare populations that are not defined by randomisation and in analyses of predictors of individual-level risk. Our data endorse HbS as an important covariate in such analyses owing to its consistent protection from uncomplicated malaria (IRR 0.69; 95% CI 0.61 – 0.79), which is a common outcome in vaccine trials.9,10

Our review highlights several gaps in our basic understanding of how Plasmodium parasites cause the symptoms and life-threatening manifestations of malaria. The paucity of outcome investigations of pregnancy-associated malaria is striking, considering that this disease model has revealed fundamental mechanisms of both parasite virulence and host adaptive immunity.92 Similarly, the effect of haemoglobinopathies on P. vivax parasitaemia and malaria incidence is relatively unknown despite geographic overlap in South Asia. Additionally, given the measurable incidence of severe P. vivax malaria,93 case-control studies may explore associations between haemoglobinopathies and severe vivax malaria syndromes. Finally, clinical investigations have relatively neglected HbE, β-thalassaemia, and HbCC. This is surprising given the high prevalence (up to 50%) of HbE in Cambodia and HbC in parts of West Africa, as well as Haldane’s 60-year-old ‘malaria hypothesis’ that heterozygous β-thalassaemia protects against severe and fatal falciparum malaria.94

Two further points merit attention. First, though our systematic review was specifically designed to assess malaria outcomes, within the identified studies we found some evidence that while HbAS conferred malaria-specific protection22,24 α-thalassaemia protected against other mild and severe infectious syndromes, including pneumonia.29,32 Because malaria itself may counfound the relationship between haemoglobinopathies and other infections – as recently reported for the effect of HbAS on bacteremia95 – myriad individual and epidemiologic factors could account for this difference, in addition to biological differences in the mechanisms of protection. The identification of these mechanisms may be aided if this phenomenon is confirmed by future clinical studies or meta-analyses. Second, the dissimilarity of estimates from prospective studies of the risk of uncomplicated falciparum malaria in homozygous α-thalassaemic children is striking, with significantly increased risk on the southwestern Pacific island of Vanuatu39 but either slightly decreased or unchanged risk in Africa and Papua New Guinea (Table 2).31,35,40,67,96 Other data have suggested an increased Plasmodium prevalence in homozygous α-thalassaemics in Papua New Guinea,97 underscoring that haemoglobinopathies may have variable effects in different settings upon different outcomes. Future studies are needed to more definitively characterize these effects and define their relationship with host genetics, malaria epidemiology, and acquired immunity to malaria.

This systematic review is subject to several limitations. We may have failed to identify relevant studies, though the independent selection of studies by two independent reviewers who each assessed over 2600 studies suggests adequate identification. Secondly, risk estimates for malaria may be influenced by unmeasured or unreported host factors, such as G6PD deficiency and ABO blood groups. Nevertheless, heterogeneity was low for most meta-analyzed comparisons, suggesting a consistent effect of haemoglobinopathies upon malaria risk. Finally, the clinical epidemiology of malaria results from poorly-understood interactions between host, parasite, and environmental factors which vary between included studies. We therefore employed random-effects meta-analysis models, and heterogeneity in risk estimates was generally low.

Despite previous successes in exploiting innate malaria protective-factors to investigate malaria pathogenesis, recent reports highlight the complexity of the co-evolution of host and parasite. P. vivax infection is now recognized in Malagasy individuals who lack DARC expression on their erythrocytes that were previously thought to be resistant to vivax malaria,98 suggesting alternate erythrocyte invasion pathways. Additionally, a-thalassaemia can attenuate the malaria-protective effect of HbAS when co-inherited,23 emphasizing the need to integrate investigations of genetic resistance. Nevertheless, by attenuating the virulence of malaria parasites, haemoglobinopathies offer an attractive “natural experiment” to help elucidate malaria’s pathogenic mechanisms and potentially translate models of pathogenesis and immunity into clinical application.