---
reference_id: "PMID:24733629"
title: Isoforms of receptors of fibroblast growth factors.
authors:
- Gong SG
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/jcp.24649
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isoforms of receptors of fibroblast growth factors.
**Authors:** Gong SG
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.24649](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.24649)

## Content

1. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Dec;229(12):1887-95. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24649.

Isoforms of receptors of fibroblast growth factors.

Gong SG(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The breadth and scope of Fibroblast Growth Factor signaling is immense, with 
documentation of its role in almost every organism and system studied so far. 
FGF ligands signal through a family of four distinct tyrosine kinase receptors, 
the FGF receptors (FGFRs). One contribution to the diversity of function and 
signaling of FGFs and their receptors arises from the numerous alternative 
splicing variants that have been documented in the FGFR literature. The present 
review discusses the types and roles of alternatively spliced variants of the 
FGFR family members and the significant impact of alternative splicing on the 
physiological functions of five broad classes of FGFR isoforms. Some 
characterized known regulatory mechanisms of alternative splicing and future 
directions in studies of FGFR alternative splicing are also discussed. Presence, 
absence, and/or the combination of specific exons within each FGFR protein 
impart upon each individual isoform its unique function and expression pattern 
during normal function and in diseased states (e.g., in cancers and birth 
defects). A better understanding of the diversity of FGF signaling in different 
developmental contexts and diseased states can be achieved through increased 
knowledge of the presence of specific FGFR isoforms and their impact on 
downstream signaling and functions. Modern high-throughput techniques afford an 
opportunity to explore the distribution and function of isoforms of FGFR during 
development and in diseases.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.24649
PMID: 24733629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]