---
reference_id: "PMID:1825339"
title: "Clinical manifestations, disability and use of folk medicine in dracunculus infection in Nigeria."
authors:
- Ilegbodu VA
- Ilegbodu AE
- Wise RA
- Christensen BL
- Kale OO
journal: J Trop Med Hyg
year: '1991'
keywords:
- Animals
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Dracunculiasis/epidemiology, parasitology, therapy, transmission"
- Humans
- "Medicine, Traditional"
- Nigeria/epidemiology
- Religion
- Rural Population
- Water Supply
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical manifestations, disability and use of folk medicine in dracunculus infection in Nigeria.
**Authors:** Ilegbodu VA, Ilegbodu AE, Wise RA, Christensen BL, Kale OO
**Journal:** J Trop Med Hyg (1991)

## Content

1. J Trop Med Hyg. 1991 Feb;94(1):35-41.

Clinical manifestations, disability and use of folk medicine in dracunculus
infection in Nigeria.

Ilegbodu VA(1), Ilegbodu AE, Wise RA, Christensen BL, Kale OO.

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston
77225-0186.

A cross-sectional survey of households was carried out in a dracunculiasis
endemic village in Oyo state Nigeria. Data were collected on history of
dracunculiasis, occupational and domestic sources of drinking water, clinical
manifestations, disability, use of folk medicine, and incorporation of previous
dracunculiasis control programmes. The findings indicated that dracunculiasis
patients were usually unaware of their infection 3-5 days before the appearance
of a bleb; that religious affiliation appeared to be positively related to
increasing morbidity; and that ulcers were predominantly in the ankles and feet,
particularly among young children. Severe disability was related to age, site
and number of ulcers, and the form of selected treatment. Indigenous remedy was
the treatment of choice, although traditional healers in the community indicated
no knowledge of any efficacious remedy. Mortality from secondary tetanus
infection was associated with outbreak of dracunculiasis. The impact of
dracunculiasis on agricultural, economic and recreational activities was
considerable, with the infected farmers being unable to attend to their farms at
the critical farming period. Sixty-one per cent of the residents were opposed on
religious and aesthetic grounds to the treatment of the local surface water
which contained cyclops species. Sixty-three per cent regarded the boiling and
filtration of portions of their domestic water as an additional burden,
cumbersome and impracticable.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1825339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
