---
reference_id: "PMID:16155193"
title: "CHARGE syndrome: the phenotypic spectrum of mutations in the CHD7 gene."
authors:
- Jongmans MC
- Admiraal RJ
- van der Donk KP
- Vissers LE
- Baas AF
- Kapusta L
- van Hagen JM
- Donnai D
- de Ravel TJ
- Veltman JA
- Geurts van Kessel A
- De Vries BB
- Brunner HG
- Hoefsloot LH
- van Ravenswaaij CM
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.036061
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Choanal Atresia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Coloboma/diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Testing
- Gestational Age
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mouth Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Spinal Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Syndrome
- "Vestibular Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHARGE syndrome: the phenotypic spectrum of mutations in the CHD7 gene.
**Authors:** Jongmans MC, Admiraal RJ, van der Donk KP, Vissers LE, Baas AF, Kapusta L, van Hagen JM, Donnai D, de Ravel TJ, Veltman JA, Geurts van Kessel A, De Vries BB, Brunner HG, Hoefsloot LH, van Ravenswaaij CM
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2005.036061](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2005.036061)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2006 Apr;43(4):306-14. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.036061. Epub 2005
Sep  9.

CHARGE syndrome: the phenotypic spectrum of mutations in the CHD7 gene.

Jongmans MC(1), Admiraal RJ, van der Donk KP, Vissers LE, Baas AF, Kapusta L, 
van Hagen JM, Donnai D, de Ravel TJ, Veltman JA, Geurts van Kessel A, De Vries 
BB, Brunner HG, Hoefsloot LH, van Ravenswaaij CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: CHARGE syndrome is a non-random clustering of congenital anomalies 
including coloboma, heart defects, choanal atresia, retarded growth and 
development, genital hypoplasia, ear anomalies, and deafness. A consistent 
feature in CHARGE syndrome is semicircular canal hypoplasia resulting in 
vestibular areflexia. Other commonly associated congenital anomalies are facial 
nerve palsy, cleft lip/palate, and tracheo-oesophageal fistula. Specific 
behavioural problems, including autistic-like behaviour, have been described. 
The CHD7 gene on chromosome 8q12.1 was recently discovered as a major gene 
involved in the aetiology of this syndrome.
METHODS: The coding regions of CHD7 were screened for mutations in 107 index 
patients with clinical features suggestive of CHARGE syndrome. Clinical data of 
the mutation positive patients were sampled to study the phenotypic spectrum of 
mutations in the CHD7 gene.
RESULTS: Mutations were identified in 69 patients. Here we describe the clinical 
features of 47 of these patients, including two sib pairs. Most mutations were 
unique and were scattered throughout the gene. All patients but one fulfilled 
the current diagnostic criteria for CHARGE syndrome. No genotype-phenotype 
correlations were apparent in this cohort, which is best demonstrated by the 
differences in clinical presentation in sib pairs with identical mutations. 
Somatic mosaicism was detected in the unaffected mother of a sib pair, 
supporting the existence of germline mosaicism.
CONCLUSIONS: CHD7 mutations account for the majority of the cases with CHARGE 
syndrome, with a broad clinical variability and without an obvious 
genotype-phenotype correlation. In one case evidence for germline mosaicism was 
provided.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2005.036061
PMCID: PMC2563221
PMID: 16155193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: none declared