---
reference_id: "PMID:38791166"
title: "New Case of Spinocerebellar Ataxia, Autosomal Recessive 4, Due to VPS13D Variants."
authors:
- Kistol D
- Tsygankova P
- Bostanova F
- Orlova M
- Zakharova E
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25105127
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, diagnosis, congenital"
- Vesicular Transport Proteins/genetics
- Adult
- Phenotype
- Mutation
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Pedigree
- Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Case of Spinocerebellar Ataxia, Autosomal Recessive 4, Due to VPS13D Variants.
**Authors:** Kistol D, Tsygankova P, Bostanova F, Orlova M, Zakharova E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25105127](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25105127)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 8;25(10):5127. doi: 10.3390/ijms25105127.

New Case of Spinocerebellar Ataxia, Autosomal Recessive 4, Due to VPS13D 
Variants.

Kistol D(1), Tsygankova P(1), Bostanova F(1), Orlova M(1), Zakharova E(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Medical Genetics, 115522 Moscow, Russia.

Movement disorders such as bradykinesia, tremor, dystonia, chorea, and myoclonus 
most often arise in several neurodegenerative diseases with basal ganglia and 
white matter involvement. While the pathophysiology of these disorders remains 
incompletely understood, dysfunction of the basal ganglia and related brain 
regions is often implicated. The VPS13D gene, part of the VPS13 family, has 
emerged as a crucial player in neurological pathology, implicated in diverse 
phenotypes ranging from movement disorders to Leigh syndrome. We present a 
clinical case of VPS13D-associated disease with two variants in the VPS13D gene 
in an adult female. This case contributes to our evolving understanding of 
VPS13D-related diseases and underscores the importance of genetic screening in 
diagnosing and managing such conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25105127
PMCID: PMC11121673
PMID: 38791166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.