---
reference_id: "PMID:36303074"
title: Adult human kidney organoids originate from CD24(+) cells and represent an advanced model for adult polycystic kidney disease.
authors:
- Xu Y
- Kuppe C
- Perales-Patón J
- Hayat S
- Kranz J
- Abdallah AT
- Nagai J
- Li Z
- Peisker F
- Saritas T
- Halder M
- Menzel S
- Hoeft K
- Kenter A
- Kim H
- van Roeyen CRC
- Lehrke M
- Moellmann J
- Speer T
- Buhl EM
- Hoogenboezem R
- Boor P
- Jansen J
- Knopp C
- Kurth I
- Smeets B
- Bindels E
- Reinders MEJ
- Baan C
- Gribnau J
- Hoorn EJ
- Steffens J
- Huber TB
- Costa I
- Floege J
- Schneider RK
- Saez-Rodriguez J
- Freedman BS
- Kramann R
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41588-022-01202-z
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Dominant/genetics"
- TRPP Cation Channels/genetics
- Organoids
- Kidney
- Cysts
- CD24 Antigen/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult human kidney organoids originate from CD24(+) cells and represent an advanced model for adult polycystic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Xu Y, Kuppe C, Perales-Patón J, Hayat S, Kranz J, Abdallah AT, Nagai J, Li Z, Peisker F, Saritas T, Halder M, Menzel S, Hoeft K, Kenter A, Kim H, van Roeyen CRC, Lehrke M, Moellmann J, Speer T, Buhl EM, Hoogenboezem R, Boor P, Jansen J, Knopp C, Kurth I, Smeets B, Bindels E, Reinders MEJ, Baan C, Gribnau J, Hoorn EJ, Steffens J, Huber TB, Costa I, Floege J, Schneider RK, Saez-Rodriguez J, Freedman BS, Kramann R
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41588-022-01202-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01202-z)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2022 Nov;54(11):1690-1701. doi: 10.1038/s41588-022-01202-z. Epub
2022  Oct 27.

Adult human kidney organoids originate from CD24(+) cells and represent an
advanced model for adult polycystic kidney disease.

Xu Y(#)(1), Kuppe C(#)(1)(2), Perales-Patón J(1)(3), Hayat S(1), Kranz
J(1)(4)(5), Abdallah AT(6), Nagai J(7), Li Z(7), Peisker F(1), Saritas T(1)(2),
Halder M(1), Menzel S(1), Hoeft K(1)(2), Kenter A(8)(9)(10), Kim H(1), van
Roeyen CRC(1), Lehrke M(11), Moellmann J(11), Speer T(12), Buhl EM(13),
Hoogenboezem R(14), Boor P(2)(13), Jansen J(1)(15), Knopp C(16), Kurth I(16),
Smeets B(15), Bindels E(14), Reinders MEJ(10), Baan C(10), Gribnau J(8)(9),
Hoorn EJ(10), Steffens J(17), Huber TB(18), Costa I(7), Floege J(2), Schneider
RK(8)(19), Saez-Rodriguez J(3)(20)(21), Freedman BS(22)(23), Kramann
R(24)(25)(26).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine and Systems Biology, Medical Faculty, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany.
(3)Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, Heidelberg
University and Heidelberg University Hospital, Bioquant, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Urology and Pediatric Urology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany.
(5)Department of Urology and Kidney Transplantation, Martin-Luther-University,
Halle, Germany.
(6)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany.
(7)Institute of Computational Genomics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(8)Department of Developmental Biology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Nephrology and
Transplantation, Erasmus Medical Center Transplant Institute, University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Cardiology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(12)Department of Nephrology, University Hospital Homburg, Homburg, Germany.
(13)Institute of Pathology and Electron Microscopy Facility, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany.
(14)Department of Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.
(15)Department of Pathology, RIMLS, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(16)Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(17)Department of Urology, St Antonius Hospital, Eschweiler, Germany.
(18)III Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.
(19)Institute of Cell and Tumor Biology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany.
(20)Joint Research Center for Computational Biomedicine, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany.
(21)Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit (MMPU), European Molecular Biology
Laboratory and Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(22)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Kidney Research Institute
and Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA.
(23)Department of Bioengineering (Adjunct), and Department of Laboratory
Medicine & Pathology (Adjunct), University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(24)Institute of Experimental Medicine and Systems Biology, Medical Faculty,
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. rkramann@gmx.net.
(25)Division of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany. rkramann@gmx.net.
(26)Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Nephrology and
Transplantation, Erasmus Medical Center Transplant Institute, University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. rkramann@gmx.net.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2023 Sep;104(3):409-411. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2023.03.021.

Adult kidney organoids have been described as strictly tubular epithelia and
termed tubuloids. While the cellular origin of tubuloids has remained elusive,
here we report that they originate from a distinct CD24+ epithelial
subpopulation. Long-term-cultured CD24+ cell-derived tubuloids represent a
functional human kidney tubule. We show that kidney tubuloids can be used to
model the most common inherited kidney disease, namely autosomal dominant
polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), reconstituting the phenotypic hallmark of
this disease with cyst formation. Single-cell RNA sequencing of CRISPR-Cas9
gene-edited PKD1- and PKD2-knockout tubuloids and human ADPKD and control tissue
shows similarities in upregulation of disease-driving genes. Furthermore, in a
proof of concept, we demonstrate that tolvaptan, the only approved drug for
ADPKD, has a significant effect on cyst size in tubuloids but no effect on a
pluripotent stem cell-derived model. Thus, tubuloids are derived from a tubular
epithelial subpopulation and represent an advanced system for ADPKD disease
modeling.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-022-01202-z
PMCID: PMC7613830
PMID: 36303074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests All authors declare no
competing interests. Disclosures: R.K. reports unrelated funding from Travere
Therapeutics, Galapagos and Novo Nordisk and unrelated honoraria from Bayer,
Pfizer, Grünenthal and Novo Nordisk. SH reports unrelated funding from Novo
Nordisk. J.S.R. reports unrelated funding from GSK and Sanofi and unrelated fees
from Travere Therapeutics and Astex Therapeutics. All other authors have nothing
to disclose.
