---
reference_id: "PMID:10564734"
title: Time course and temperature dependence of allethrin modulation of sodium channels in rat dorsal root ganglion cells.
authors:
- Ginsburg K
- Narahashi T
journal: Brain Res
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(99)02029-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Time course and temperature dependence of allethrin modulation of sodium channels in rat dorsal root ganglion cells.
**Authors:** Ginsburg K, Narahashi T
**Journal:** Brain Res (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-8993(99)02029-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-8993(99)02029-6)

## Content

1. Brain Res. 1999 Nov 13;847(1):38-49. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(99)02029-6.

Time course and temperature dependence of allethrin modulation of sodium 
channels in rat dorsal root ganglion cells.

Ginsburg K(1), Narahashi T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Northwestern University Medical School, 
303 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL, USA. kginsbu@luc.edu

Key effects of the pyrethroid insecticide allethrin, delivered to or washed out 
from cells at 10 or 100 microM in 0.1% DMSO, on neuronal Na(+) channel currents 
were studied in rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) cells under whole-cell patch 
clamp. Tetrodotoxin-resistant (TTX-R) Na(+) channels were more responsive to 
allethrin than tetrodotoxin-sensitive (TTX-S) Na(+) channels. On application of 
10 or 100 microM allethrin to cells with TTX-R Na(+) channels, the Na(+) tail 
current during repolarization developed a large slowly decaying component within 
10 min. This slow tail developed multiphasically, suggesting that allethrin 
gains access to Na(+) channels by a multiorder process. On washout (with 0.1% 
DMSO present), the slow tail current disappeared monophasically (exponential 
tau=188+/-44 s). Development and washout rates did not depend systematically on 
temperature (12 degrees, 18 degrees, or 27 degrees C), but washout was slowed 
severely if DMSO was absent. As the duration of a depolarizing pulse was 
increased (range 0.32-10 ms), the amplitude of the slow component of the 
succeeding tail conductance first increased then decreased. Tail current 
amplitude had the same dependence on preceding pulse duration (at 18 degrees ) 
at 10 or 100 microM, consistent with allethrin modification of Na(+) channels at 
rest before opening. At 10 microM, slow tail conductance was at maximum 40% of 
the peak conductance during the previous depolarization, independent of 
temperature; evidently, the fraction of open modified channels did not change. 
However, at low temperature, the tail is more prolonged, bringing more Na(+) 
ions into a cell. In functioning neurons, this Na(+) influx would cause a larger 
depolarizing afterpotential, a condition favoring the repetitive discharges, 
which are signatory of pyrethroid intoxication.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(99)02029-6
PMID: 10564734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]