---
reference_id: "PMID:22344197"
title: "Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: an extensive longitudinal study in Sardinian patients."
authors:
- Meloni A
- Willcox N
- Meager A
- Atzeni M
- Wolff AS
- Husebye ES
- Furcas M
- Rosatelli MC
- Cao A
- Congia M
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-2461
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: an extensive longitudinal study in Sardinian patients.
**Authors:** Meloni A, Willcox N, Meager A, Atzeni M, Wolff AS, Husebye ES, Furcas M, Rosatelli MC, Cao A, Congia M
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2011-2461](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2011-2461)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Apr;97(4):1114-24. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-2461.
Epub  2012 Feb 16.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: an extensive longitudinal study in 
Sardinian patients.

Meloni A(1), Willcox N, Meager A, Atzeni M, Wolff AS, Husebye ES, Furcas M, 
Rosatelli MC, Cao A, Congia M.

Author information:
(1)Clinica Pediatrica II and Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, 
Ospedale Microcitemico, Via Jenner s/n, 09121 Cagliari, Sardinia, Italy. 
ameloni@mcweb.unica.it

CONTEXT: Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1) is a childhood-onset 
monogenic disorder caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, 
including the distinctive R139X in Sardinia. Its rarity and great variability in 
manifestations/onset ages make early diagnosis difficult. To date, very few 
longitudinal studies of APS1 patients have been reported.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to describe the features and clinical 
course of APS1 and correlate them with AIRE and HLA class II genotypes in a 
large homogeneous cohort of Sardinian patients followed for up to 25 yr.
PATIENTS: Twenty-two pediatric APS1 patients were studied prospectively.
RESULTS: This Sardinian series (female/male ratio, 1.44; median current age, 
30.7 yr; range, 1.8-46 yr) showed early disease onset (age range, 0.3-10 yr; 
median, 3.5 yr) and severe phenotype (on average, seven manifestations per 
patient). Besides the classic triad of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 
hypoparathyroidism, and Addison's disease, autoimmune hepatitis was a serious 
and surprisingly common/early/presenting feature (27%; two deaths), with a 5:1 
female bias (median age, 6 yr; range, 2.5-11 yr). By contrast, type 1 diabetes 
was rare (one patient), and hypothyroidism was not seen. Additional disease 
components (several of them potentially life-threatening) appeared in adulthood. 
The major nonsense mutation, R139X, was found in 93% of the mutant AIRE alleles. 
High-titer interferon (IFN)-ω and IFN-α autoantibodies were detected in all 
patients tested, even preclinically at 4 months of age in one sibling. HLA 
alleles appear to influence the exact phenotype-the most interesting apparent 
association being between HLA-DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201, liver-kidney microsome 
autoantibodies (anti-CYP1A2), and autoimmune hepatitis.
CONCLUSION: APS1 in Sardinia is characterized by severe phenotype, marked 
clinical heterogeneity, and relative genetic homogeneity. The single AIRE 
mutation, R139X, and the anti-IFN-ω and IFN-α autoantibodies are helpful for 
earlier diagnosis, especially when APS1 presents unusually. HLA genotypes can 
modify the phenotype.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2011-2461
PMID: 22344197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]