---
reference_id: "PMID:8370150"
title: "Marden-Walker syndrome: case report, literature review and nosologic discussion."
authors:
- Schrander-Stumpel C
- de Die-Smulders C
- de Krom M
- Schyns-Fleuran S
- Hamel B
- Jaeken D
- Fryns JP
journal: Clin Genet
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.1993.tb03823.x
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Dandy-Walker Syndrome/genetics
- Growth Disorders/genetics
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Psychomotor Performance
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Marden-Walker syndrome: case report, literature review and nosologic discussion.
**Authors:** Schrander-Stumpel C, de Die-Smulders C, de Krom M, Schyns-Fleuran S, Hamel B, Jaeken D, Fryns JP
**Journal:** Clin Genet (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1399-0004.1993.tb03823.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0004.1993.tb03823.x)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 1993 Jun;43(6):303-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.1993.tb03823.x.

Marden-Walker syndrome: case report, literature review and nosologic discussion.

Schrander-Stumpel C(1), de Die-Smulders C, de Krom M, Schyns-Fleuran S, Hamel B, 
Jaeken D, Fryns JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Hospital, The 
Netherlands.

The Marden-Walker syndrome is characterized by psychomotor retardation, a 
mask-like face with blepharophimosis, micrognathia and a high-arched or cleft 
palate, low-set ears, kyphoscoliosis and joint contractures. We report on a male 
patient with the clinical features of the syndrome. In addition, he had a 
Dandy-Walker malformation with hydrocephalus and vertebral abnormalities. During 
pregnancy, there were feeble fetal movements and polyhydramnios. We propose that 
Marden-Walker syndrome is one of the etiologic possibilities in children with 
the heterogeneous fetal a(hypo)kinesia deformation sequence (FADS). Differential 
diagnosis is discussed. The etiology is probably heterogeneous.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.1993.tb03823.x
PMID: 8370150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]