---
reference_id: "PMID:37718634"
title: Expert consensus on the diagnosis and treatment of RET gene fusion non-small cell lung cancer in China.
authors:
- Pu X
- Xu C
- Wang Q
- Wang W
- Wu F
- Cai X
- Song Z
- Yu J
- Zhong W
- Wang Z
- Zhang Y
- Liu J
- Zhang S
- Liu A
- Li W
- Zhan P
- Liu H
- Lv T
- Miao L
- Min L
- Lin G
- Huang L
- Yuan J
- Jiang Z
- Rao C
- Lv D
- Yu Z
- Li X
- Tang C
- Zhou C
- Zhang J
- Guo H
- Chu Q
- Meng R
- Liu X
- Wu J
- Zhou J
- Zhu Z
- Pan W
- Pang F
- Huang J
- Wang K
- Wu F
- Shen T
- Zou S
- Xu B
- Wang L
- Zhu Y
- Lin X
- Cai J
- Xu L
- Li J
- Jiao X
- Li K
- Feng H
- Wang L
- Du Y
- Yao W
- Shi X
- Niu X
- Yuan D
- Yao Y
- Kang J
- Zhang J
- Zhang C
- Fu J
- Huang J
- Zhang Y
- Sun P
- Wang H
- Ye M
- Wang D
- Wang Z
- Hao Y
- Wang Z
- Wan B
- Lv D
- Lan G
- Yang S
- Shi L
- Wang Y
- Li B
- Zhang Z
- Li Z
- Li Y
- Liu Z
- Yang N
- Wang H
- Huang W
- Hong Z
- Wang G
- Wang J
- Fang M
- Fang Y
- Zhu X
- Shen Y
- Zhang Y
- Ma S
- Song Y
- Lu Y
- Fang W
- Li Z
- Wu L
journal: Thorac Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.15105
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Gene Fusion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expert consensus on the diagnosis and treatment of RET gene fusion non-small cell lung cancer in China.
**Authors:** Pu X, Xu C, Wang Q, Wang W, Wu F, Cai X, Song Z, Yu J, Zhong W, Wang Z, Zhang Y, Liu J, Zhang S, Liu A, Li W, Zhan P, Liu H, Lv T, Miao L, Min L, Lin G, Huang L, Yuan J, Jiang Z, Rao C, Lv D, Yu Z, Li X, Tang C, Zhou C, Zhang J, Guo H, Chu Q, Meng R, Liu X, Wu J, Zhou J, Zhu Z, Pan W, Pang F, Huang J, Wang K, Wu F, Shen T, Zou S, Xu B, Wang L, Zhu Y, Lin X, Cai J, Xu L, Li J, Jiao X, Li K, Feng H, Wang L, Du Y, Yao W, Shi X, Niu X, Yuan D, Yao Y, Kang J, Zhang J, Zhang C, Fu J, Huang J, Zhang Y, Sun P, Wang H, Ye M, Wang D, Wang Z, Hao Y, Wang Z, Wan B, Lv D, Lan G, Yang S, Shi L, Wang Y, Li B, Zhang Z, Li Z, Li Y, Liu Z, Yang N, Wang H, Huang W, Hong Z, Wang G, Wang J, Fang M, Fang Y, Zhu X, Shen Y, Zhang Y, Ma S, Song Y, Lu Y, Fang W, Li Z, Wu L
**Journal:** Thorac Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1759-7714.15105](https://doi.org/10.1111/1759-7714.15105)

## Content

1. Thorac Cancer. 2023 Nov;14(31):3166-3177. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.15105. Epub
2023 Sep 18.

Expert consensus on the diagnosis and treatment of RET gene fusion non-small
cell lung cancer in China.

Pu X(1), Xu C(2)(3), Wang Q(4), Wang W(5), Wu F(6), Cai X(7), Song Z(5), Yu
J(8), Zhong W(9), Wang Z(10), Zhang Y(11), Liu J(12), Zhang S(13), Liu A(14), Li
W(15), Zhan P(3), Liu H(3), Lv T(3), Miao L(16), Min L(17), Lin G(18), Huang
L(14), Yuan J(19), Jiang Z(20), Rao C(21), Lv D(22), Yu Z(23), Li X(24), Tang
C(25), Zhou C(26), Zhang J(27), Guo H(28), Chu Q(29), Meng R(30), Liu X(31), Wu
J(32), Zhou J(33), Zhu Z(34), Pan W(35), Pang F(36), Huang J(36), Wang K(36), Wu
F(37), Shen T(38), Zou S(38), Xu B(39), Wang L(40), Zhu Y(41), Lin X(26), Cai
J(14), Xu L(42), Li J(43), Jiao X(44), Li K(45), Feng H(27), Wang L(46), Du
Y(47), Yao W(48), Shi X(49), Niu X(50), Yuan D(3), Yao Y(3), Kang J(9), Zhang
J(9), Zhang C(9), Fu J(51), Huang J(52), Zhang Y(53), Sun P(54), Wang H(55), Ye
M(3), Wang D(3), Wang Z(3), Hao Y(5), Wang Z(56), Wan B(57), Lv D(58), Lan
G(41), Yang S(59), Shi L(60), Wang Y(61), Li B(62), Zhang Z(63), Li Z(64), Li
Y(65), Liu Z(55), Yang N(11), Wang H(66), Huang W(67), Hong Z(68), Wang G(69),
Wang J(70), Fang M(5), Fang Y(71), Zhu X(56), Shen Y(72), Zhang Y(5), Ma S(73),
Song Y(3), Lu Y(74), Fang W(75), Li Z(50), Wu L(1).

Author information:
(1)The Second Department of Thoracic Oncology, Hunan Cancer Hospital/The
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Central South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(2)Institute of Cancer and Basic Medicine (ICBM), Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Jinling Hospital, Medical
School of Nanjing University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University
of Chinese Medicine, Jiangsu Province Hospital of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing,
People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Chemotherapy, Chinese Academy of Sciences University Cancer
Hospital (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Oncology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of VIP Inpatient, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(8)Department of Cancer Molecular Diagnostics Core, Tianjin Medical University
Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(9)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial Laboratory of
Translational Medicine in Lung Cancer, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital,
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Guangzhou, People's
Republic of China.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Lung Cancer and Gastrointestinal Unit, Hunan
Cancer Hospital/The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(12)Department of Thoracic Cancer, Jilin Cancer Hospital, Jilin, People's
Republic of China.
(13)Translational Medicine Research Center, Key Laboratory of Clinical Cancer
Pharmacology and Toxicology Research of Zhejiang Province, Affiliated Hangzhou
First People's Hospital, Cancer Center, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(14)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, People's Republic of China.
(15)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease of Zhejiang Province, Department of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Cancer Center, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
People's Republic of China.
(16)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital, Medical
School of Nanjing University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(17)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Clinical Medical School of Yangzhou
University, Subei People's Hospital of Jiangsu Province, Yangzhou, People's
Republic of China.
(18)Department of Medical Oncology, Fujian Medical University Cancer Hospital &
Fujian Cancer Hospital, Fuzhou, People's Republic of China.
(19)Department of Pathology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan,
People's Republic of China.
(20)Department of Integrative Oncology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(21)Department of Radiotherapy and Chemotherapy, Hwamei Hospital, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, People's Republic of China.
(22)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Taizhou Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Taizhou, People's Republic of China.
(23)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the 900th Hospital of the Joint
Logistics Team (the Former Fuzhou General Hospital), Fujian Medical University,
Fuzhou, People's Republic of China.
(24)Department of Oncology, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(25)Department of Medical Oncology, Peking University International Hospital,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(26)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research
Center for Respiratory Disease; Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University (The First Affiliated
Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University), Guangzhou, People's Republic of
China.
(27)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Shanxi Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanxi
Bethune Hospital, Taiyuan, People's Republic of China.
(28)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, People's Republic of China.
(29)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(30)Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(31)Department of Oncology, the Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(32)Department of Medical Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Medicine,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, People's Republic of China.
(33)Department of Medical Oncology, Sichuan Cancer Hospital & Institute, Sichuan
Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of Electronic Science and
Technology, Chengdu, People's Republic of China.
(34)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(35)Department of Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Jiaxing University,
Jiaxing, People's Republic of China.
(36)Department of Medical, Shanghai OrigiMed Co, Ltd, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China.
(37)Department of Medical, Menarini Silicon Biosystems Spa, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China.
(38)Department of Medical, Stone Pharmaceuticals (Suzhou) Co., Ltd., Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.
(39)Department of Biotherapy, Cancer Institute, First Affiliated Hospital of
China Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.
(40)Department of Oncology, Baotou Cancer Hospital, Baotou, People's Republic of
China.
(41)Department of Thoracic Disease Diagnosis and Treatment Center, Zhejiang
Rongjun Hospital, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University, Jiaxing,
People's Republic of China.
(42)Department of Interventional Pulmonary Diseases, Anhui Chest Hospital,
Hefei, People's Republic of China.
(43)Department of Medical Oncology, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine,
Shandong University, Jinnan, People's Republic of China.
(44)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, Naval Medical
University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(45)Department of Oncology, Shandong Provincial Third Hospital, Cheeloo College
of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, People's Republic of China.
(46)Department of Pathology, Shanxi Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanxi Bethune
Hospital, Taiyuan, People's Republic of China.
(47)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, People's Republic of China.
(48)Department of Interventional Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(49)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Huzhou Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Huzhou, People's Republic of China.
(50)Department of Shanghai Lung Cancer Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(51)Department of Medical Oncology, Affiliated Jinhua Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Jinhua, People's Republic of China.
(52)Department of Oncology, Lishui Municipal Central Hospital, Lishui, People's
Republic of China.
(53)Department of Oncology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, People's Republic of China.
(54)Department of Pathology, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
People's Republic of China.
(55)Senior Department of Oncology, The 5th Medical Center of PLA General
Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(56)Department of Radiation Oncology, Affiliated Jinling Hospital, Medical
School of Nanjing, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(57)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Jiangning Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(58)Department of Clinical Oncology, The 901 Hospital of Joint Logistics Support
Force of People Liberation Army, Hefei, People's Republic of China.
(59)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Chuxiong Yi Autonomous Prefecture People's
Hospital, Chuxiong, People's Republic of China.
(60)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(61)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(62)Department of Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical
University, Guilin, People's Republic of China.
(63)International Cooperative Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Modernization and Innovative Drug Discovery of Chinese Ministry of Education
(MOE), Guangzhou City Key Laboratory of Precision Chemical Drug Development,
School of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(64)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education/Beijing), Department of Pathology, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(65)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.
(66)Department of Medical Oncology, The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Henan Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of China.
(67)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Henan University
of Science and Technology, Luoyang, People's Republic of China.
(68)Department of Medical Oncology, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(69)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(70)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Jinling Hospital, Medical School of
Nanjing University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(71)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(72)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Affiliated Jinling Hospital, Medical School
of Nanjing University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(73)Department of Oncology, Key Laboratory of Clinical Cancer Pharmacology and
Toxicology Research of Zhejiang Province, Affiliated Hangzhou Cancer Hospital,
Cancer Center, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, People's
Republic of China.
(74)Department of Clinical Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(75)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

The rearranged during transfection (RET) gene is one of the receptor tyrosine
kinases and cell-surface molecules responsible for transmitting signals that
regulate cell growth and differentiation. In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
RET fusion is a rare driver gene alteration associated with a poor prognosis.
Fortunately, two selective RET inhibitors (sRETi), namely pralsetinib and
selpercatinib, have been approved for treating RET fusion NSCLC due to their
remarkable efficacy and safety profiles. These inhibitors have shown the ability
to overcome resistance to multikinase inhibitors (MKIs). Furthermore, ongoing
clinical trials are investigating several second-generation sRETis that are
specifically designed to target solvent front mutations, which pose a challenge
for first-generation sRETis. The effective screening of patients is the first
crucial step in the clinical application of RET-targeted therapy. Currently,
four methods are widely used for detecting gene rearrangements: next-generation
sequencing (NGS), reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR),
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Each
of these methods has its advantages and limitations. To streamline the clinical
workflow and improve diagnostic and treatment strategies for RET fusion NSCLC,
our expert group has reached a consensus. Our objective is to maximize the
clinical benefit for patients and promote standardized approaches to RET fusion
screening and therapy.

© 2023 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.15105
PMCID: PMC10626248
PMID: 37718634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest to disclose.
