---
reference_id: "PMID:29541850"
title: Hirayama disease.
authors:
- Kieser DC
- Cox PJ
- Kieser SCJ
journal: Eur Spine J
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00586-018-5545-9
keywords:
- Braces
- Cervical Cord/pathology
- Cervical Vertebrae/pathology
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Neck/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Spinal Cord Compression/etiology, therapy"
- "Spinal Muscular Atrophies of Childhood/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirayama disease.
**Authors:** Kieser DC, Cox PJ, Kieser SCJ
**Journal:** Eur Spine J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00586-018-5545-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00586-018-5545-9)

## Content

1. Eur Spine J. 2018 Jun;27(6):1201-1206. doi: 10.1007/s00586-018-5545-9. Epub
2018  Mar 14.

Hirayama disease.

Kieser DC(1), Cox PJ(2), Kieser SCJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Musculoskeletal Medicine, Canterbury 
School of Medicine, Canterbury District Health Board, University of Otago, 2 
Riccarton Avenue, Christchurch, 8011, New Zealand. kieserdavid@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Neuroradiology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Department of Radiology, Canterbury District Health Board, Christchurch, New 
Zealand.

Comment in
    Eur Spine J. 2018 Jun;27(6):1207-1208. doi: 10.1007/s00586-018-5610-4.

PURPOSE: Hirayama disease is an initially progressive disease caused by cervical 
neck flexion compressing the anterior horns of the lower cervical spinal cord. 
It is primarily seen in young males of Indian or Asian descent. With increasing 
dispersion of these populations this condition is increasingly being encountered 
internationally. This grand round reviews this rare but increasingly recognized 
condition.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We present a classic case of a young Indian male with 
progressive hand and forearm weakness. We discuss the typical clinical 
presentation, appropriate investigations and management of this condition.
RESULTS: Our patient presented with oblique amyotrophy and underwent a 
diagnostic flexion MRI scan which revealed anterior translation of the posterior 
dura with compression of the anterior horns of the lower cervical cord. He has 
been successfully treated in a cervical collar.
CONCLUSIONS: This case illustrates the typical presentation, diagnostic 
investigations and treatment of Hirayama syndrome. It is hoped that this review 
will alert clinicians of this condition and optimize the management of affected 
individuals.

DOI: 10.1007/s00586-018-5545-9
PMID: 29541850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]