---
reference_id: "PMID:34087844"
title: Analysis of the curative effect of percutaneous kyphoplasty in the treatment of osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture with intravertebral clefts.
authors:
- Li D
- Zhou Y
- Cui H
- Kong L
- Zhu W
- Chai X
- Zhuo H
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000025996
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of the curative effect of percutaneous kyphoplasty in the treatment of osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture with intravertebral clefts.
**Authors:** Li D, Zhou Y, Cui H, Kong L, Zhu W, Chai X, Zhuo H
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000025996](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000025996)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Jun 4;100(22):e25996. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000025996.

Analysis of the curative effect of percutaneous kyphoplasty in the treatment of 
osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture with intravertebral clefts.

Li D(1), Zhou Y, Cui H, Kong L, Zhu W, Chai X, Zhuo H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, Luoyang Orthopedic Hospital of Henan Province, 
South Qiming Road, Luoyang, China.

Kummell's disease is a delayed vertebral collapse fracture caused by 
posttraumatic osteonecrosis. It is a special type of osteoporotic vertebral 
fracture in the elderly. This study compares and analyzes the difference in the 
curative effect of 2 kinds of osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture (OVCF) 
in the presence of fracture or not in the vertebral body, and provides a 
clinical reference for the application of percutaneous kyphoplasty (PKP).This 
research is a kind of retrospective analysis from January 2012 to January 2015, 
PKP was used to treat 165 patients with osteoporotic vertebral compression 
fracture. The patients were divided into 2 groups: Intravertebral clefts group 
(group A) and none-intravertebral clefts group in vertebral body (group B). Bone 
mineral density (BMD), bone cement injection (BCI), Visual analogue scale (VAS) 
score before and after surgery, anterior, central and posterior height of 
vertebral body (before and after surgery) and Cobb angle of injured vertebra 
(before and after surgery) were compared between the 2 groups.Surgeries for 165 
patients in the 2 groups were successfully completed, and 226 fractured 
vertebrae were performed through bilateral puncture approach to strengthen the 
vertebral body. Intraoperative injection of bone cement (ml) was 4.25 + 1.29 
(range: 2.6-7.8). There were statistically significant differences in bone 
cement injection quantity between the 2 groups (P < .05), and in bone cement 
leakage (P > .05) as well as the Postoperative VAS score (P < .05). However, 
There was no statistical difference in VAS score before surgery between the 2 
groups (P > .05). The results indicated that the pain relief degree of OVCF 
patients without intravertebral clefts is better than that in the vertebral 
body. No statistical difference was found in Cobb Angle before and after surgery 
(P > .05), as well as the correction rate of the injured vertebrae before and 
after surgery (P > .05). There was no statistical difference in the degree of 
recovery of the anterior, middle and posterior margins of the injured vertebrae 
after surgery (P > .05).PKP treatment led to better degree of pain relief in 
OVCF patients without intravertebral clefts, and less bone cement was injected 
into the surgery.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000025996
PMCID: PMC8183815
PMID: 34087844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interests to disclose.