---
reference_id: "PMID:35839362"
title: Acute Diarrhea in Adults.
authors:
- "Meisenheimer ES MD, MBA"
- Epstein C DO
- "Thiel D MD, MPH"
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Diarrhea in Adults.
**Authors:** Meisenheimer ES MD, MBA, Epstein C DO, Thiel D MD, MPH
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2022)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2022 Jul;106(1):72-80.

Acute Diarrhea in Adults.

Meisenheimer ES MD, MBA, Epstein C DO, Thiel D MD, MPH.

Acute diarrheal disease accounts for 179 million outpatient visits annually in 
the United States. Diarrhea can be categorized as inflammatory or 
noninflammatory, and both types have infectious and noninfectious causes. 
Infectious noninflammatory diarrhea is often viral in etiology and is the most 
common presentation; however, bacterial causes are also common and may be 
related to travel or foodborne illness. History for patients with acute diarrhea 
should include onset and frequency of symptoms, stool character, a focused 
review of systems including fever and other symptoms, and evaluation of 
exposures and risk factors. The physical examination should include evaluation 
for signs of dehydration, sepsis, or potential surgical processes. Most episodes 
of acute diarrhea in countries with adequate food and water sanitation are 
uncomplicated and self-limited, requiring only an initial evaluation and 
supportive treatment. Additional diagnostic evaluation and management may be 
warranted when diarrhea is bloody or mucoid or when risk factors are present, 
including immunocompromise or recent hospitalization. Unless an outbreak is 
suspected, molecular studies are preferred over traditional stool cultures. In 
all cases, management begins with replacing water, electrolytes, and nutrients. 
Oral rehydration is preferred; however, signs of severe dehydration or sepsis 
warrant intravenous rehydration. Antidiarrheal agents can be symptomatic therapy 
for acute watery diarrhea and can help decrease inappropriate antibiotic use. 
Empiric antibiotics are rarely warranted, except in sepsis and some cases of 
travelers' or inflammatory diarrhea. Targeted antibiotic therapy may be 
appropriate following microbiologic stool assessment. Hand hygiene, personal 
protective equipment, and food and water safety measures are integral to 
preventing infectious diarrheal illnesses.

PMID: 35839362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]