---
reference_id: "PMID:35445468"
title: A novel desmoplakin mutation causes dilated cardiomyopathy with palmoplantar keratoderma as an early clinical sign.
authors:
- Karvonen V
- Harjama L
- Heliö K
- Kettunen K
- Elomaa O
- Koskenvuo JW
- Kere J
- Weckström S
- Holmström M
- Saarela J
- Ranki A
- Heliö T
- Hannula-Jouppi K
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.18164
keywords:
- Adult
- "Cardiomyopathies/complications, genetics"
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/complications, genetics"
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel desmoplakin mutation causes dilated cardiomyopathy with palmoplantar keratoderma as an early clinical sign.
**Authors:** Karvonen V, Harjama L, Heliö K, Kettunen K, Elomaa O, Koskenvuo JW, Kere J, Weckström S, Holmström M, Saarela J, Ranki A, Heliö T, Hannula-Jouppi K
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.18164](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.18164)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2022 Aug;36(8):1349-1358. doi:
10.1111/jdv.18164.  Epub 2022 May 6.

A novel desmoplakin mutation causes dilated cardiomyopathy with palmoplantar
keratoderma as an early clinical sign.

Karvonen V(#)(1), Harjama L(#)(1), Heliö K(2), Kettunen K(3)(4), Elomaa O(5),
Koskenvuo JW(6), Kere J(5)(7), Weckström S(2), Holmström M(8), Saarela
J(3)(4)(9), Ranki A(1), Heliö T(2), Hannula-Jouppi K(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Cardiology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)HUS Diagnostic Center, Division of Genetics and Clinical Pharmacology,
Laboratory of Genetics, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki Institute of Life
Science (HiLIFE), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland and Research Programs Unit,
Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
(6)Blueprint Genetics, Espoo, Finland.
(7)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden.
(8)Radiology, HUS Diagnostic Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(9)Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM), University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: PPKs represent a heterogeneous group of disorders with
hyperkeratosis of palmar and/or plantar skin. PPK, hair shaft abnormalities,
cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias can be caused by mutations in desmosomal genes,
e.g. desmoplakin (DSP). PPK should trigger genetic testing to reveal mutations
with possible related cardiac disease.
OBJECTIVES: To report a large multigenerational family with a novel DSP mutation
associated with early-onset PPK and adult-onset cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias.
METHODS: A custom-designed in-house panel of 35 PPK related genes was used to
screen mutations in the index patient with focal PPK. The identified DSP
mutation was verified by Sanger sequencing. DNA samples from 20 members of the
large multigenerational family were sequenced for the DSP mutation. Medical
records were reviewed. Clinical dermatological evaluation was performed,
including light microscopy of hair samples. Cardiac evaluation included clinical
examination, echocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR),
electrocardiogram (ECG), Holter monitoring and laboratory tests.
RESULTS: We identified a novel autosomal dominant truncating DSP c.2493delA
p.(Glu831Aspfs*33) mutation associated with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) with
arrhythmia susceptibility and focal PPK as an early cutaneous sign. The mutation
was found in nine affected family members, but not in any unaffected members.
Onset of dermatological findings preceded cardiac symptoms which were variable
and occurred at adult age.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a novel truncating DSP mutation causing focal PPK with
varying severity and left ventricular dilatation and ventricular extrasystoles.
This finding emphasizes the importance of genetic diagnosis in patients with PPK
for clinical counselling and management of cardiomyopathies and arrhythmias.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and
Venereology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of
Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.18164
PMCID: PMC9545885
PMID: 35445468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
