---
reference_id: "PMID:28426432"
title: Surface as a motion surrogate for gated re-scanned pencil beam proton therapy.
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Huth I
- Wegner M
- Weber DC
- Lomax AJ
journal: Phys Med Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1088/1361-6560/aa66c5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surface as a motion surrogate for gated re-scanned pencil beam proton therapy.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Huth I, Wegner M, Weber DC, Lomax AJ
**Journal:** Phys Med Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1088/1361-6560/aa66c5](https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6560/aa66c5)

## Content

1. Phys Med Biol. 2017 May 21;62(10):4046-4061. doi: 10.1088/1361-6560/aa66c5.
Epub  2017 Apr 20.

Surface as a motion surrogate for gated re-scanned pencil beam proton therapy.

Zhang Y(1), Huth I, Wegner M, Weber DC, Lomax AJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Proton Therapy, Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen-PSI, Switzerland. 
Varian Medical Systems-Particle Therapy GmbH, Troisdorf, Germany.

This simulation study investigated the dosimetric effectiveness and treatment 
efficiency of surface motion guided gating of pencil beam scanning (PBS) proton 
therapy for liver tumour treatments. Dedicated 4D dose calculations were 
performed for simulating gated treatments using 4DCT data for six patients 
derived from 4DMRI (4DCT(MRI)). Surface motion as a surrogate for tumour motion 
was extracted from the 4DMRI images and a linear internal-external correlation 
model applied to derive amplitude-based gating windows (GWs) of 10 and 5 mm. 4D 
treatments were simulated using gating and layered/volumetric rescanning (either 
alone or combined) and four assumed system latencies (50/100/200/500 ms) for the 
response time of the beam gating to the surrogate. Resulting 4D plans were 
compared using D5-D95 and V95 in the CTV as the primary metrics, as well as dose 
to the healthy liver and total treatment time. With no motion mitigation, 
interplay effects deteriorate the dose homogeneity by more than 30% with respect 
to the static reference plan, whereas with surface motion guided gating alone, 
this could be reduced to 12/20% and 5/10% (mean/max over all cases) for 10 mm 
and 5 mm GWs, respectively. Furthermore, by combining  ×5 layered rescans with 
5 mm GW, plan homogeneities to within 1/5% of the static references could be 
achieved. Dose inhomogeneities were however still pronounced for 
latencies  ⩾200 ms but limited when  ⩽100 ms. ITV volumes could be decreased by 
19/25% when 10/5 mm GW was employed, leading to reductions in mean dose to the 
healthy liver tissue of 2.6/3.3%. Our results confirm the potential of combining 
gating and re-scanning (re-gating) for mitigating large tumor motions, and the 
potential of surface motion monitoring as a gating signal.

DOI: 10.1088/1361-6560/aa66c5
PMID: 28426432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]