---
reference_id: "PMID:38892775"
title: "Vestibular Schwannoma and Tinnitus: A Systematic Review of Microsurgery Compared to Gamma Knife Radiosurgery."
authors:
- King AM
- Cooper JN
- Oganezova K
- Mittal J
- McKenna K
- Godur DA
- Zalta M
- Danesh AA
- Mittal R
- Eshraghi AA
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13113065
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vestibular Schwannoma and Tinnitus: A Systematic Review of Microsurgery Compared to Gamma Knife Radiosurgery.
**Authors:** King AM, Cooper JN, Oganezova K, Mittal J, McKenna K, Godur DA, Zalta M, Danesh AA, Mittal R, Eshraghi AA
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13113065](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13113065)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 May 23;13(11):3065. doi: 10.3390/jcm13113065.

Vestibular Schwannoma and Tinnitus: A Systematic Review of Microsurgery Compared 
to Gamma Knife Radiosurgery.

King AM(1), Cooper JN(1)(2), Oganezova K(1), Mittal J(1), McKenna K(1), Godur 
DA(1), Zalta M(1), Danesh AA(1)(3)(4), Mittal R(1), Eshraghi AA(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Hearing Research and Cochlear Implant 
Laboratory, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(2)School of Medicine, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.
(3)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Florida Atlantic 
University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA.
(4)Department of Integrated Medical Sciences, Schmidt College of Medicine, 
Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA.
(5)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 
33143, USA.

Background: Vestibular schwannoma (VS) is a benign tumor of the eighth cranial 
nerve formed from neoplastic Schwann cells. Although VS can cause a variety of 
symptoms, tinnitus is one of the most distressing symptoms for patients and can 
greatly impact quality of life. The objective of this systematic review is to 
comprehensively examine and compare the outcomes related to tinnitus in patients 
undergoing treatment for VS. Specifically, it evaluates patient experiences with 
tinnitus following the removal of VS using the various surgical approaches of 
traditional surgical resection and gamma knife radiosurgery (GKS). By delving 
into various aspects such as the severity of tinnitus post-treatment, the 
duration of symptom relief, patient quality of life, new onset of tinnitus after 
VS treatment, and any potential complications or side effects, this review aims 
to provide a detailed analysis of VS treatment on tinnitus outcomes. Methods: 
Following PRISMA guidelines, articles were included from PubMed, Science Direct, 
Scopus, and EMBASE. Quality assessment and risk of bias analysis were performed 
using a ROBINS-I tool. Results: Although VS-associated tinnitus is variable in 
its intensity and persistence post-resection, there was a trend towards a 
decreased tinnitus burden in patients. Irrespective of the surgical approach or 
the treatment with GKS, there were cases of persistent or worsened tinnitus 
within the studied cohorts. Conclusion: The findings of this systematic review 
highlight the complex relationship between VS resection and tinnitus outcomes. 
These findings underscore the need for individualized patient counseling and 
tailored treatment approaches in managing VS-associated tinnitus. The findings 
of this systematic review may help in guiding clinicians towards making more 
informed and personalized healthcare decisions. Further studies must be 
completed to fill gaps in the current literature.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13113065
PMCID: PMC11173275
PMID: 38892775

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.