---
reference_id: "PMID:30584088"
title: LAMP-2B regulates human cardiomyocyte function by mediating autophagosome-lysosome fusion.
authors:
- Chi C
- Leonard A
- Knight WE
- Beussman KM
- Zhao Y
- Cao Y
- Londono P
- Aune E
- Trembley MA
- Small EM
- Jeong MY
- Walker LA
- Xu H
- Sniadecki NJ
- Taylor MR
- Buttrick PM
- Song K
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1808618116
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/genetics, metabolism"
- "Autophagosomes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Autophagy-Related Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lysosomes/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Membrane Fusion
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism, pathology"
- "Qa-SNARE Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "R-SNARE Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LAMP-2B regulates human cardiomyocyte function by mediating autophagosome-lysosome fusion.
**Authors:** Chi C, Leonard A, Knight WE, Beussman KM, Zhao Y, Cao Y, Londono P, Aune E, Trembley MA, Small EM, Jeong MY, Walker LA, Xu H, Sniadecki NJ, Taylor MR, Buttrick PM, Song K
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1808618116](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1808618116)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Jan 8;116(2):556-565. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1808618116. Epub 2018 Dec 24.

LAMP-2B regulates human cardiomyocyte function by mediating
autophagosome-lysosome fusion.

Chi C(1)(2)(3), Leonard A(4)(5)(6), Knight WE(1)(2)(3), Beussman KM(4)(5)(6),
Zhao Y(1)(2)(3), Cao Y(1)(2)(3), Londono P(1)(2)(3), Aune E(1), Trembley
MA(7)(8), Small EM(7)(8)(9), Jeong MY(1), Walker LA(1), Xu H(10), Sniadecki
NJ(4)(5)(6)(11), Taylor MR(1), Buttrick PM(1), Song K(12)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
Auschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045.
(2)Gates Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology, University of
Colorado Auschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045.
(3)The Consortium for Fibrosis Research & Translation, University of Colorado
Auschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195.
(5)Center for Cardiovascular Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195.
(6)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195.
(7)Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14624.
(8)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14624.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14624.
(10)Department of Population Health Sciences, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta University, Augusta, GA 30912.
(11)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195.
(12)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
Auschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045; kunhua.song@ucdenver.edu.

Mutations in lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP-2) gene are
associated with Danon disease, which often leads to cardiomyopathy/heart failure
through poorly defined mechanisms. Here, we identify the LAMP-2 isoform B
(LAMP-2B) as required for autophagosome-lysosome fusion in human cardiomyocytes
(CMs). Remarkably, LAMP-2B functions independently of syntaxin 17 (STX17), a
protein that is essential for autophagosome-lysosome fusion in non-CMs. Instead,
LAMP-2B interacts with autophagy related 14 (ATG14) and vesicle-associated
membrane protein 8 (VAMP8) through its C-terminal coiled coil domain (CCD) to
promote autophagic fusion. CMs derived from induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSC-CMs) from Danon patients exhibit decreased colocalization between ATG14
and VAMP8, profound defects in autophagic fusion, as well as mitochondrial and
contractile abnormalities. This phenotype was recapitulated by LAMP-2B knockout
in non-Danon hiPSC-CMs. Finally, gene correction of LAMP-2 mutation rescues the
Danon phenotype. These findings reveal a STX17-independent autophagic fusion
mechanism in human CMs, providing an explanation for cardiomyopathy in Danon
patients and a foundation for targeting defective LAMP-2B-mediated autophagy to
treat this patient population.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1808618116
PMCID: PMC6329949
PMID: 30584088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: E.M.S. is the
recipient of a research grant from Novartis Pharmaceuticals that is not related
to the present study.
