---
reference_id: "PMID:39958354"
title: "Case report: Novel multi-exon homozygous deletion of ZBTB24 causes immunodeficiency, centromeric instability, and facial anomalies syndrome 2."
authors:
- Long Y
- Wang C
- Xiao J
- Huang Y
- Ling X
- Huang C
- Chen Y
- Luo J
- Tang R
- Lin F
- Huang Y
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1517417
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Face/abnormalities
- Exons/genetics
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Sequence Deletion
- Centromere/genetics
- Homozygote
- Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases/genetics
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Novel multi-exon homozygous deletion of ZBTB24 causes immunodeficiency, centromeric instability, and facial anomalies syndrome 2.
**Authors:** Long Y, Wang C, Xiao J, Huang Y, Ling X, Huang C, Chen Y, Luo J, Tang R, Lin F, Huang Y
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2025.1517417](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2025.1517417)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2025 Jan 31;16:1517417. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1517417.
eCollection 2025.

Case report: Novel multi-exon homozygous deletion of ZBTB24 causes
immunodeficiency, centromeric instability, and facial anomalies syndrome 2.

Long Y(1), Wang C(1), Xiao J(2), Huang Y(1), Ling X(1), Huang C(1), Chen Y(1),
Luo J(1), Tang R(1), Lin F(1), Huang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Key Laboratory of Clinical Laboratory Medicine of Guangxi
Department of Education, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Rong'an County People's Hospital, Liuzhou, Guangxi,
China.

Immunodeficiency, centromeric instability, and facial anomalies syndrome (ICF)
is a rare genetic disease characterized by hypogammaglobulinemia, T cell immune
deficiency with age, pericentromeric hypomethylation, facial abnormalities, and
intellectual disability. This study aimed to investigate the phenotype and
immune function of a girl with ICF2, identify her genetic defect, and explore
the potential pathogenic mechanisms of the disease. We identified a homologous
deletion mutation in this girl, which involves exons 1-5 and part of introns 1
and 6 of the ZBTB24 gene (NG_029388.1: g.2831_18,995del). This ZBTB24 variant
produces a severely truncated ZBTB24 protein that lacks the BTB, A-T hook and
eight zinc fingers. The above changes may lead to abnormal transcriptional
function of the ZBTB24 protein. Karyotype analysis showed fragile sites and
entire arm deletions were detected on chromosomes 1 and 16 and triradials on
chromosome 16. The novel multi-exon deletion of ZBTB24 causes immunodeficiency,
severe pneumonia and centromeric instability in the patient. During the
follow-up, the patient's pneumonia continued to progress despite receiving
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) replacement and anti-infective therapy. These
results indicated that this novel multi-exon deletion variant of ZBTB24 may be
the genetic etiology of ICF2. The discovery of this novel mutation expands the
mutation spectrum of the ZBTB24 gene and improves our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms underlying ICF.

Copyright © 2025 Long, Wang, Xiao, Huang, Ling, Huang, Chen, Luo, Tang, Lin and
Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1517417
PMCID: PMC11825828
PMID: 39958354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
