---
reference_id: "PMID:23522954"
title: Establishment of a novel experimental model of human angiosarcoma and a VEGF-targeting therapeutic experiment.
authors:
- Hoshina D
- Abe R
- Yoshioka N
- Saito N
- Hata H
- Fujita Y
- Aoyagi S
- Shimizu H
journal: J Dermatol Sci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.02.008
keywords:
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Angiogenesis Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Anti-Idiotypic/immunology, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Bevacizumab
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/drug therapy, pathology"
- Heterografts
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- "Indoles/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Pyrroles/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Sunitinib
- "Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/antagonists & inhibitors, drug effects, immunology"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishment of a novel experimental model of human angiosarcoma and a VEGF-targeting therapeutic experiment.
**Authors:** Hoshina D, Abe R, Yoshioka N, Saito N, Hata H, Fujita Y, Aoyagi S, Shimizu H
**Journal:** J Dermatol Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.02.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.02.008)

## Content

1. J Dermatol Sci. 2013 May;70(2):116-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.02.008.
Epub  2013 Mar 6.

Establishment of a novel experimental model of human angiosarcoma and a
VEGF-targeting therapeutic experiment.

Hoshina D(1), Abe R, Yoshioka N, Saito N, Hata H, Fujita Y, Aoyagi S, Shimizu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Angiosarcoma is one of the most life-threatening neoplasms with
strong resistance to conventional chemotherapy/radiotherapy; consequently,
alternative therapeutic agents are urgently required. One factor in delaying the
therapy development is the limitation of experimental models.
OBJECTIVE: We established a novel experimental angiosarcoma model.
METHODS: From surgically resected tissue, human AS cell line was established.
Using xenograft of AS cell line, we performed therapeutic experiments with the
anti-human VEGF Ab or the receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
RESULTS: First we generated an angiosarcoma cell line, HAMON (human
angiosarcoma, monoclonal), which expresses CD31 and produces tumors in
immunodeficient mice. HAMON expresses VEGFR2 and that exogenous VEGF leads to
HAMON proliferation in vitro. Anti-human VEGF Ab bevacizumab treatment failed to
suppress HAMON proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, the receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib did not suppress HAMON proliferation in
vitro. Similarly, in in vivo therapeutic experiments, even high doses of
sunitinib failed to inhibit tumor growth. Finally, we checked whether
compensatory activation of VEGF signaling occurred after sunitinib addition.
VEGF protein secretion, VEGF mRNA synthesis and VEGFR2 phosphorylation all were
unaffected in HAMON after sunitinib treatment.
CONCLUSION: A novel in vitro and in vivo experimental model of human
angiosarcoma has been successfully established. With this model, we were able to
perform therapeutic experiments. In addition, our angiosarcoma cell line, HAMON,
is quite useful for identifying key molecules in angiosarcoma.

Copyright © 2013 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.02.008
PMID: 23522954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
