---
reference_id: "PMID:36529507"
title: Molecular and immunological diagnosis of Monkeypox virus in the clinical laboratory.
authors:
- Liao H
- Qu J
- Lu H
journal: Drug Discov Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.5582/ddt.2022.01093
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and immunological diagnosis of Monkeypox virus in the clinical laboratory.
**Authors:** Liao H, Qu J, Lu H
**Journal:** Drug Discov Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.5582/ddt.2022.01093](https://doi.org/10.5582/ddt.2022.01093)

## Content

1. Drug Discov Ther. 2022 Dec 26;16(6):300-304. doi: 10.5582/ddt.2022.01093. Epub
 2022 Dec 18.

Molecular and immunological diagnosis of Monkeypox virus in the clinical 
laboratory.

Liao H(1), Qu J(1), Lu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shenzhen Third People's Hospital, Southern 
University of Science and Technology, National Clinical Research Center for 
Infectious Diseases, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.

The 2022 monkeypox outbreak outside Africa is ongoing. Cases have been reported 
in Hong Kong and Chongqing, China. In order to better prevent and control the 
potential spread of monkeypox virus in China, the development of sensitive and 
reliable detection commercial kits is imminent. This correspondence reviews the 
existing laboratory assays and related technologies for nucleic acid (PCR) and 
serological assays for the diagnosis of monkeypox virus to provide reference for 
the management and decision-making departments. Due to the serological 
cross-reactivity of orthopoxviruses, PCR is the laboratory test of choice to 
confirm monkeypox virus infection. We recommend a dual-target PCR approach in 
which one assay targets a conserved sequence of the Orthopoxvirus genus and the 
other targets a monkeypox virus specific sequence.

DOI: 10.5582/ddt.2022.01093
PMID: 36529507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]