---
reference_id: "PMID:34049606"
title: Interferon-gamma release assays for latent tuberculosis infection screening in Canadian federal correctional facilities.
authors:
- Agostinis A
- Heffernan C
- Long R
- Beckon A
- Cockburn S
- Ahmed R
journal: Int J Tuberc Lung Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.5588/ijtld.20.0801
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interferon-gamma release assays for latent tuberculosis infection screening in Canadian federal correctional facilities.
**Authors:** Agostinis A, Heffernan C, Long R, Beckon A, Cockburn S, Ahmed R
**Journal:** Int J Tuberc Lung Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.5588/ijtld.20.0801](https://doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.20.0801)

## Content

1. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2021 Jun 1;25(6):447-452. doi: 10.5588/ijtld.20.0801.

Interferon-gamma release assays for latent tuberculosis infection screening in 
Canadian federal correctional facilities.

Agostinis A(1), Heffernan C(1), Long R(2), Beckon A(3), Cockburn S(3), Ahmed 
R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, TB 
Services, Alberta Health Services, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(3)TB Services, Alberta Health Services, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The correctional setting presents an opportunity for latent TB 
infection (LTBI) screening in an otherwise difficult to reach demographic. We 
evaluate factors associated with the fidelity of the tuberculin skin test (TST) 
and interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA), specifically the QuantiFERON®-TB Gold 
In-Tube assay (QFT-GIT), explain factors associated with discordance, and report 
LTBI treatment outcomes.METHODS: We describe the association between demographic 
and clinical variables, and predictors of concordance with IGRA using univariate 
logistic regression in a population of TST-positive inmates. We report outcomes 
among those offered LTBI treatment.RESULTS: We observed concordance between TST 
and QFT-GIT in 90 of 306 (29.4%) inmates. Persons with TST+/QFT-GIT+ results 
were less likely to be male (OR 3.94, 95% CI 1.73-8.97) or have a BCG 
vaccination history (OR 0.34, 95% CI 0.12-0.95), and more likely to be 
foreign-born (P < 0.001). Of the 108 inmates offered LTBI treatment, 65 (60.1%) 
accepted and 51 (78.0%) completed. TST/QFT-GIT discordance has not been 
associated with disease during follow-up.CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that 
TST/QFT-GIT discordance in Canadian federal inmates is common; however, low-risk 
of disease progression in those with discordance suggests that a shift towards 
IGRA-based screening is warranted and feasible.

DOI: 10.5588/ijtld.20.0801
PMID: 34049606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]