---
reference_id: "PMID:7706951"
title: Markedly increased tissue concentrations of 7-dehydrocholesterol combined with low levels of cholesterol are characteristic of the Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.
authors:
- Tint GS
- Seller M
- Hughes-Benzie R
- Batta AK
- Shefer S
- Genest D
- Irons M
- Elias E
- Salen G
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '1995'
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Adipose Tissue/metabolism
- Adrenal Glands/metabolism
- Cerebral Cortex/metabolism
- Cholesterol/blood
- Dehydrocholesterols/metabolism
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intellectual Disability
- Liver/metabolism
- Male
- Muscles/metabolism
- Oxidoreductases/deficiency
- Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors
- Syndrome
- Thymus Gland/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Markedly increased tissue concentrations of 7-dehydrocholesterol combined with low levels of cholesterol are characteristic of the Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.
**Authors:** Tint GS, Seller M, Hughes-Benzie R, Batta AK, Shefer S, Genest D, Irons M, Elias E, Salen G
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (1995)

## Content

1. J Lipid Res. 1995 Jan;36(1):89-95.

Markedly increased tissue concentrations of 7-dehydrocholesterol combined with
low levels of cholesterol are characteristic of the Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.

Tint GS(1), Seller M, Hughes-Benzie R, Batta AK, Shefer S, Genest D, Irons M,
Elias E, Salen G.

Author information:
(1)Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, East Orange, NJ.

The Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is an autosomal recessive birth defect (frequency
1:20,000-1:40,000) that results in profound mental retardation, physical
deformities, and failure to thrive. It is characterized biochemically by low
plasma cholesterol and greatly elevated levels of two dehydrocholesterols, one
of which is the cholesterol precursor 7-dehydrocholesterol. To determine whether
the block in cholesterol biosynthesis affects tissue sterols, we assayed several
organs from two affected individuals, a female who died at 27 hours and a
20-week male fetus. Cholesterol concentrations in abdominal wall, adrenal gland,
and kidney from two or three unaffected fetuses, who served as controls,
averaged 2.0, 1.5, and 1.4 mg/g wet weight, compared to 0.08, 0.44, and 0.14,
respectively, for the homozygous fetus. Cerebral cortex cholesterol
concentrations were 2.2 mg/g for two 20-22-week fetal controls but only 0.21 and
0.09 mg/g, respectively, for the homozygous child and fetus. Similarly, tissue
cholesterol levels were abnormally low in the homozygous child being less than 1
mg/g in liver, adipose, thymus, muscle, and adrenal and 6.2 mg/dl in plasma.
Dehydrocholesterols could not be detected by conventional means in any controls
but were elevated enough in tissues from affected individuals to make total
sterol concentrations nearly normal. These results suggest that a defect in 3
beta-hydroxysterol delta 7-reductase leads to both a profound lack of
cholesterol and its replacement by dehydrocholesterols. Such a combination may
be lethal in the most severely affected individuals.

PMID: 7706951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
