---
reference_id: "PMID:37405735"
title: Severe Mpox Infection of the Eye and Periocular Region.
authors:
- Bacorn C
- Majidi S
- Schultz H
- Sulewski ME
- Eberhart CG
- Mahoney NR
journal: Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000002425
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe Mpox Infection of the Eye and Periocular Region.
**Authors:** Bacorn C, Majidi S, Schultz H, Sulewski ME, Eberhart CG, Mahoney NR
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IOP.0000000000002425](https://doi.org/10.1097/IOP.0000000000002425)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2023 Nov-Dec 01;39(6):e176-e179. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0000000000002425. Epub 2023 Jul 4.

Severe Mpox Infection of the Eye and Periocular Region.

Bacorn C(1), Majidi S(2), Schultz H(2), Sulewski ME(2), Eberhart CG(3), Mahoney 
NR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Division of Oculoplastic Surgery, Johns Hopkins 
Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Departments of Pathology, Oncology and Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Mpox is an emerging zoonotic infection with potentially severe ocular and 
periocular consequences, particularly in immunocompromised patients. This report 
summarizes 2 cases of fulminant mpox presenting in patients with AIDS. In the 
first case, confluent lesions resulted in orbital compartment syndrome and total 
eyelid necrosis. In the second case, eyelid involvement was accompanied by 
corneal melt and perforation. Despite aggressive medical and surgical treatment, 
both patients developed permanent loss of vision and ultimately expired.

Copyright © 2023 The American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive 
Surgery, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000002425
PMID: 37405735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial or conflicts of 
interest to disclose.