---
reference_id: "PMID:12140558"
title: Post-translational disruption of dystroglycan-ligand interactions in congenital muscular dystrophies.
authors:
- Michele DE
- Barresi R
- Kanagawa M
- Saito F
- Cohn RD
- Satz JS
- Dollar J
- Nishino I
- Kelley RI
- Somer H
- Straub V
- Mathews KD
- Moore SA
- Campbell KP
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/nature00837
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/abnormalities, metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Movement
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Dystroglycans
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Eye/metabolism
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Ligands
- Male
- "Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Muscles/metabolism
- "Muscular Dystrophies/congenital, metabolism"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-translational disruption of dystroglycan-ligand interactions in congenital muscular dystrophies.
**Authors:** Michele DE, Barresi R, Kanagawa M, Saito F, Cohn RD, Satz JS, Dollar J, Nishino I, Kelley RI, Somer H, Straub V, Mathews KD, Moore SA, Campbell KP
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature00837](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature00837)

## Content

1. Nature. 2002 Jul 25;418(6896):417-22. doi: 10.1038/nature00837.

Post-translational disruption of dystroglycan-ligand interactions in congenital
muscular dystrophies.

Michele DE(1), Barresi R, Kanagawa M, Saito F, Cohn RD, Satz JS, Dollar J,
Nishino I, Kelley RI, Somer H, Straub V, Mathews KD, Moore SA, Campbell KP.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242-1101, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Jul 25;418(6896):376-7. doi: 10.1038/418376a.

Muscle eye brain disease (MEB) and Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD)
are congenital muscular dystrophies with associated, similar brain
malformations. The FCMD gene, fukutin, shares some homology with fringe-like
glycosyltransferases, and the MEB gene, POMGnT1, seems to be a new
glycosyltransferase. Here we show, in both MEB and FCMD patients, that
alpha-dystroglycan is expressed at the muscle membrane, but similar
hypoglycosylation in the diseases directly abolishes binding activity of
dystroglycan for the ligands laminin, neurexin and agrin. We show that this
post-translational biochemical and functional disruption of alpha-dystroglycan
is recapitulated in the muscle and central nervous system of mutant myodystrophy
(myd) mice. We demonstrate that myd mice have abnormal neuronal migration in
cerebral cortex, cerebellum and hippocampus, and show disruption of the basal
lamina. In addition, myd mice reveal that dystroglycan targets proteins to
functional sites in brain through its interactions with extracellular matrix
proteins. These results suggest that at least three distinct mammalian genes
function within a convergent post-translational processing pathway during the
biosynthesis of dystroglycan, and that abnormal dystroglycan-ligand interactions
underlie the pathogenic mechanism of muscular dystrophy with brain
abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1038/nature00837
PMID: 12140558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
