---
reference_id: "PMID:18583169"
title: Auto-immune cerebellar ataxia with anti-GAD antibodies accompanied by de novo late-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Bayreuther C
- Hieronimus S
- Ferrari P
- Thomas P
- Lebrun C
journal: Diabetes Metab
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2008.02.002
keywords:
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Autoimmune Diseases/complications, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/complications, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1/complications, diagnosis, immunology"
- Female
- Glutamate Decarboxylase/immunology
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Middle Aged
- Myoclonic Cerebellar Dyssynergia/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Auto-immune cerebellar ataxia with anti-GAD antibodies accompanied by de novo late-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Bayreuther C, Hieronimus S, Ferrari P, Thomas P, Lebrun C
**Journal:** Diabetes Metab (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diabet.2008.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabet.2008.02.002)

## Content

1. Diabetes Metab. 2008 Sep;34(4 Pt 1):386-8. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2008.02.002. 
Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Auto-immune cerebellar ataxia with anti-GAD antibodies accompanied by de novo 
late-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Bayreuther C(1), Hieronimus S, Ferrari P, Thomas P, Lebrun C.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Pasteur Hospital, 30, voie Romaine, 06002 Nice, France. 
bayreuther.c@chu-nice.fr

Autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD-Ab) have been described in 
stiff-man syndrome, type 1 diabetes mellitus and in patients with auto-immune 
polyglandular failure. In addition, a few patients with progressive cerebellar 
ataxia show high titres of GAD-Ab, suggesting an auto-immune origin.
AIM: This is a report of a patient presenting with cerebellar ataxia associated 
to late-onset type 1 diabetes and polyendocrine auto-immunity.
CASE REPORT: A 47-year-old woman with a past medical history of vitiligo and 
Graves' disease presented with late-onset type 1 diabetes. For two years, she 
had complained of progressive gait instability and oscillopsia. Neurological 
examination revealed multidirectional, horizontal rotatory fixation and gaze 
nystagmus, gait ataxia and mild limb ataxia in the left upper arm.
METHODS: Imaging studies, electrophysiological studies, routine biological and 
detailed immunological screening as well as a study of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
were performed.
RESULTS: Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed cerebellar atrophy. Routine 
biological screening was normal. Immunological screening showed positivity for 
numerous antibodies (Ab), including GAD-Ab, thyroid peroxidase-Ab, 
thyroglobulin-Ab, 21-hydroxylase (adrenal)-Ab, gastric parietal cell-Ab and GM1 
ganglioside IgG-Ab. CSF was normal, with no oligoclonal bands detected. GAD-Ab 
were positive in CSF, suggesting an auto-immune origin of the cerebellar ataxia. 
Treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin led to a slight improvement in 
nystagmus and gait instability.
CONCLUSION: Auto-immune cerebellar ataxia related to GAD-Ab is a rare condition 
that typically affects women with late-onset type 1 diabetes or other 
auto-immune disorders, including auto-immune polyendocrinopathy. 
Immunomodulatory treatment may be effective.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabet.2008.02.002
PMID: 18583169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]