---
reference_id: "PMID:31253823"
title: Cross-serotype interactions and disease outcome prediction of dengue infections in Vietnam.
authors:
- Aguas R
- Dorigatti I
- Coudeville L
- Luxemburger C
- Ferguson NM
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-45816-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cross-serotype interactions and disease outcome prediction of dengue infections in Vietnam.
**Authors:** Aguas R, Dorigatti I, Coudeville L, Luxemburger C, Ferguson NM
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-019-45816-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45816-6)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2019 Jun 28;9(1):9395. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-45816-6.

Cross-serotype interactions and disease outcome prediction of dengue infections 
in Vietnam.

Aguas R(1)(2)(3), Dorigatti I(4), Coudeville L(5), Luxemburger C(5), Ferguson 
NM(4).

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, Faculty of Medicine, Norfolk Place, London, W2 1PG, UK. 
r.aguas@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. r.aguas@imperial.ac.uk.
(3)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. r.aguas@imperial.ac.uk.
(4)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, Faculty of Medicine, Norfolk Place, London, W2 1PG, UK.
(5)Sanofi Pasteur, 14 espace Henry Vallée, 69007, Lyon, France.

Dengue pathogenesis is extremely complex. Dengue infections are thought to 
induce life-long immunity from homologous challenges as well as a 
multi-factorial heterologous risk enhancement. Here, we use the data collected 
from a prospective cohort study of dengue infections in schoolchildren in 
Vietnam to disentangle how serotype interactions modulate clinical disease risk 
in the year following serum collection. We use multinomial logistic regression 
to correlate the yearly neutralizing antibody measurements obtained with each 
infecting serotype in all dengue clinical cases collected over the course of 6 
years (2004-2009). This allowed us to extrapolate a fully discretised matrix of 
serotype interactions, revealing clear signals of increased risk of clinical 
illness in individuals primed with a previous dengue infection. The sequences of 
infections which produced a higher risk of dengue fever upon secondary infection 
are: DEN1 followed by DEN2; DEN1 followed by DEN4; DEN2 followed by DEN3; and 
DEN4 followed by DEN3. We also used this longitudinal data to train a machine 
learning algorithm on antibody titre differences between consecutive years to 
unveil asymptomatic dengue infections and estimate asymptomatic infection to 
clinical case ratios over time, allowing for a better characterisation of the 
population's past exposure to different serotypes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-45816-6
PMCID: PMC6598999
PMID: 31253823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.