---
reference_id: "PMID:37579205"
title: "Controlled Human Infection Model for Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine Development: Is It Time to Be Real?"
authors:
- Liang TJ
- Feld JJ
- Shoukry NH
- Thomas DL
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciad343
keywords:
- Humans
- Hepacivirus
- "Hepatitis C/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing"
- Vaccines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Controlled Human Infection Model for Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine Development: Is It Time to Be Real?
**Authors:** Liang TJ, Feld JJ, Shoukry NH, Thomas DL
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciad343](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciad343)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2023 Aug 14;77(Suppl 3):S215. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciad343.

Controlled Human Infection Model for Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine Development: Is
It Time to Be Real?

Liang TJ(1), Feld JJ(2)(3), Shoukry NH(4), Thomas DL(5).

Author information:
(1)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetics and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Toronto Centre for Liver Disease, Toronto General Hospital, University Health
Network, Toronto, Canada.
(3)The Toronto Viral Hepatitis Care Network (VIRCAN), Toronto, Canada.
(4)Département de Médecine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciad343
PMCID: PMC10893913
PMID: 37579205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. D. L. T.
reports funding support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and
National Institute on Drug Abuse; royalties or licenses from UpToDate;
consulting fees from Merck and Co, Excision Bio, and Evrys; payments from the
Masur et al Infectious Diseases Board Review; payments for testimony from
various entities; participation in a Merck and Co Data and Safety Monitoring
Board; and holding a leadership role with the Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections (CROI) Program Committee and African Mission
Healthcare. N. H. S. reports grant support from the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR) (PJT-173467) and the NIH (U01AI131313, R01AI136533, and
U19AI159819). J. J. F. reports funding support from CIHR Planning and
Dissemination grant 183426, grants or contracts from AbbVie and Gilead, and
consulting fees from AbbVie and Gilead, and is the president of the Canadian
Association for the Study of the Liver. T. J. L. reports no potential conflicts.
All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts
of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content of the
manuscript have been disclosed.
