---
reference_id: "PMID:33593823"
title: Mutations in PRDM15 Are a Novel Cause of Galloway-Mowat Syndrome.
authors:
- Mann N
- Mzoughi S
- Schneider R
- Kühl SJ
- Schanze D
- Klämbt V
- Lovric S
- Mao Y
- Shi S
- Tan W
- Kühl M
- Onuchic-Whitford AC
- Treimer E
- Kitzler TM
- Kause F
- Schumann S
- Nakayama M
- Buerger F
- Shril S
- van der Ven AT
- Majmundar AJ
- Holton KM
- Kolb A
- Braun DA
- Rao J
- Jobst-Schwan T
- Mildenberger E
- Lennert T
- Kuechler A
- Wieczorek D
- Gross O
- Ermisch-Omran B
- Werberger A
- Skalej M
- Janecke AR
- Soliman NA
- Mane SM
- Lifton RP
- Kadlec J
- Guccione E
- Schmeisser MJ
- Zenker M
- Hildebrandt F
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2020040490
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Cell Line
- "Child, Preschool"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- "Hernia, Hiatal/genetics"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Microcephaly/genetics
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nephrosis/genetics
- Nephrotic Syndrome/genetics
- Podocytes/metabolism
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Pronephros/embryology, metabolism"
- Protein Stability
- "Transcription Factors/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- "Xenopus laevis/embryology, genetics"
- Zinc Fingers/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in PRDM15 Are a Novel Cause of Galloway-Mowat Syndrome.
**Authors:** Mann N, Mzoughi S, Schneider R, Kühl SJ, Schanze D, Klämbt V, Lovric S, Mao Y, Shi S, Tan W, Kühl M, Onuchic-Whitford AC, Treimer E, Kitzler TM, Kause F, Schumann S, Nakayama M, Buerger F, Shril S, van der Ven AT, Majmundar AJ, Holton KM, Kolb A, Braun DA, Rao J, Jobst-Schwan T, Mildenberger E, Lennert T, Kuechler A, Wieczorek D, Gross O, Ermisch-Omran B, Werberger A, Skalej M, Janecke AR, Soliman NA, Mane SM, Lifton RP, Kadlec J, Guccione E, Schmeisser MJ, Zenker M, Hildebrandt F
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2020040490](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2020040490)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2021 Mar;32(3):580-596. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2020040490. Epub
2021  Feb 16.

Mutations in PRDM15 Are a Novel Cause of Galloway-Mowat Syndrome.

Mann N(1), Mzoughi S(2)(3), Schneider R(1), Kühl SJ(4), Schanze D(5), Klämbt
V(1), Lovric S(1), Mao Y(1), Shi S(6), Tan W(1), Kühl M(4), Onuchic-Whitford
AC(1)(7), Treimer E(8), Kitzler TM(1), Kause F(1), Schumann S(8), Nakayama M(1),
Buerger F(1), Shril S(1), van der Ven AT(1), Majmundar AJ(1), Holton KM(9), Kolb
A(1), Braun DA(1), Rao J(1), Jobst-Schwan T(1), Mildenberger E(10), Lennert
T(11), Kuechler A(12), Wieczorek D(13), Gross O(14), Ermisch-Omran B(15),
Werberger A(4), Skalej M(16), Janecke AR(17), Soliman NA(18)(19), Mane SM(20),
Lifton RP(20)(21), Kadlec J(6), Guccione E(2)(3), Schmeisser MJ(8)(22), Zenker
M(23), Hildebrandt F(24).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Methyltransferases in Development and Disease Group, Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore.
(3)Mount Sinai Center for Therapeutics Discovery, Departments of Pharmacological
Sciences and Oncological Sciences, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ulm University, Ulm,
Germany.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg,
Germany.
(6)Grenoble Alpes University, National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS),
French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), Institute of
Structural Biology, Grenoble, France.
(7)Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(8)Institute for Microscopic Anatomy and Neurobiology, University Medical
Center, Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(9)Research Computing, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(10)Division of Neonatology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg
University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(12)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(14)Clinic of Nephrology and Rheumatology, University Medical Center Goettingen,
University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.
(15)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Children's Hospital, Münster,
Germany.
(16)Institute of Neuroradiology, Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg,
Magdeburg, Germany.
(17)Department of Pediatrics I, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck,
Austria.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, Center of Pediatric Nephrology and
Transplantation, Kasr Al Ainy School of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo,
Egypt.
(19)The Egyption Group for Orphan Renal Diseases (EGORD), Cairo, Egypt.
(20)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut.
(21)Laboratory of Human Genetics and Genomics, The Rockefeller University, New
York, New York.
(22)Focus Program Translational Neurosciences, University Medical Center,
Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(23)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg,
Germany martin.zenker@med.ovgu.de friedhelm.hildebrandt@childrens.harvard.edu.
(24)Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts martin.zenker@med.ovgu.de
friedhelm.hildebrandt@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GAMOS) is characterized by
neurodevelopmental defects and a progressive nephropathy, which typically
manifests as steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome. The prognosis of GAMOS is
poor, and the majority of children progress to renal failure. The discovery of
monogenic causes of GAMOS has uncovered molecular pathways involved in the
pathogenesis of disease.
METHODS: Homozygosity mapping, whole-exome sequencing, and linkage analysis were
used to identify mutations in four families with a GAMOS-like phenotype, and
high-throughput PCR technology was applied to 91 individuals with GAMOS and 816
individuals with isolated nephrotic syndrome. In vitro and in vivo studies
determined the functional significance of the mutations identified.
RESULTS: Three biallelic variants of the transcriptional regulator PRDM15 were
detected in six families with proteinuric kidney disease. Four families with a
variant in the protein's zinc-finger (ZNF) domain have additional GAMOS-like
features, including brain anomalies, cardiac defects, and skeletal defects. All
variants destabilize the PRDM15 protein, and the ZNF variant additionally
interferes with transcriptional activation. Morpholino oligonucleotide-mediated
knockdown of Prdm15 in Xenopus embryos disrupted pronephric development. Human
wild-type PRDM15 RNA rescued the disruption, but the three PRDM15 variants did
not. Finally, CRISPR-mediated knockout of PRDM15 in human podocytes led to
dysregulation of several renal developmental genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants in PRDM15 can cause either isolated nephrotic syndrome or
a GAMOS-type syndrome on an allelic basis. PRDM15 regulates multiple
developmental kidney genes, and is likely to play an essential role in renal
development in humans.

Copyright © 2021 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2020040490
PMCID: PMC7920168
PMID: 33593823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
