---
reference_id: "PMID:12150847"
title: Occult hepatitis B.
authors:
- Torbenson M
- Thomas DL
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00345-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Occult hepatitis B.
**Authors:** Torbenson M, Thomas DL
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00345-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00345-6)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2002 Aug;2(8):479-86. doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00345-6.

Occult hepatitis B.

Torbenson M(1), Thomas DL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Gastrointestinal and Hepatic Pathology, 
Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Worldwide, chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is the primary cause of 
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma and is one of the ten leading causes of 
death. Traditionally, people with chronic HBV infection have been identified 
with blood tests for HBV antigens and antibodies. Recently, another group of 
patients with chronic HBV infection has been identified by sensitive, molecular 
testing for HBV DNA. Members of this group are often referred to as having 
occult hepatitis B because they are HBV-DNA positive, but hepatitis B surface 
antigen negative. Occult hepatitis B occurs in a number of clinical settings. In 
this review, we examine occult hepatitis B in people co-infected with hepatitis 
C, in whom occult hepatitis B has been associated with advanced fibrosis and 
diminished response to interferon alpha. Although much more research is needed, 
existing reports justify a heightened awareness of the medical importance and 
means of testing for occult hepatitis B.

DOI: 10.1016/s1473-3099(02)00345-6
PMID: 12150847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]