---
reference_id: "PMID:38563820"
title: "Individuals with JAK1 variants are affected by syndromic features encompassing autoimmunity, atopy, colitis, and dermatitis."
authors:
- Horesh ME
- Martin-Fernandez M
- Gruber C
- Buta S
- Le Voyer T
- Puzenat E
- Lesmana H
- Wu Y
- Richardson A
- Stein D
- Hodeib S
- Youssef M
- Kurowski JA
- Feuille E
- Pedroza LA
- Fuleihan RL
- Haseley A
- Hovnanian A
- Quartier P
- Rosain J
- Davis G
- Mullan D
- Stewart O
- Patel R
- Lee AE
- Rubinstein R
- Ewald L
- Maheshwari N
- Rahming V
- Chinn IK
- Lupski JR
- Orange JS
- Sancho-Shimizu V
- Casanova JL
- Abul-Husn NS
- Itan Y
- Milner JD
- Bustamante J
- Bogunovic D
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20232387
keywords:
- Humans
- Autoimmunity
- Colitis/genetics
- Hypersensitivity
- Inflammation
- Dermatitis
- Janus Kinase 1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Individuals with JAK1 variants are affected by syndromic features encompassing autoimmunity, atopy, colitis, and dermatitis.
**Authors:** Horesh ME, Martin-Fernandez M, Gruber C, Buta S, Le Voyer T, Puzenat E, Lesmana H, Wu Y, Richardson A, Stein D, Hodeib S, Youssef M, Kurowski JA, Feuille E, Pedroza LA, Fuleihan RL, Haseley A, Hovnanian A, Quartier P, Rosain J, Davis G, Mullan D, Stewart O, Patel R, Lee AE, Rubinstein R, Ewald L, Maheshwari N, Rahming V, Chinn IK, Lupski JR, Orange JS, Sancho-Shimizu V, Casanova JL, Abul-Husn NS, Itan Y, Milner JD, Bustamante J, Bogunovic D
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20232387](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20232387)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2024 Jun 3;221(6):e20232387. doi: 10.1084/jem.20232387. Epub 2024
Apr  2.

Individuals with JAK1 variants are affected by syndromic features encompassing 
autoimmunity, atopy, colitis, and dermatitis.

Horesh ME(1)(2)(3), Martin-Fernandez M(1)(2)(3)(4), Gruber C(1)(2)(3)(5), Buta 
S(1)(2)(3), Le Voyer T(6)(7)(8), Puzenat E(9), Lesmana H(10)(11), Wu Y(12), 
Richardson A(1)(2)(3), Stein D(12), Hodeib S(13)(14), Youssef M(15), Kurowski 
JA(16), Feuille E(17), Pedroza LA(18), Fuleihan RL(18), Haseley A(19), Hovnanian 
A(7)(20), Quartier P(21)(22), Rosain J(6)(7)(23), Davis G(24), Mullan D(24), 
Stewart O(1)(2)(3), Patel R(1)(2)(3)(5), Lee AE(1)(2)(3), Rubinstein R(1), Ewald 
L(1), Maheshwari N(1)(2)(3), Rahming V(25), Chinn IK(26)(27), Lupski 
JR(26)(28)(29), Orange JS(18), Sancho-Shimizu V(13)(14), Casanova 
JL(6)(7)(30)(31)(32), Abul-Husn NS(33), Itan Y(12)(34), Milner JD(#)(15), 
Bustamante J(#)(6)(7)(23)(30), Bogunovic D(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(18)(35)(36).

Author information:
(1)Center for Inborn Errors of Immunity, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai 
, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai , New York, NY, USA.
(3)Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai , New 
York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.
(6)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, INSERM UMR1163, Paris, 
France.
(7)Imagine Institute, University of Paris , Paris, France.
(8)Clinical Immunology Department, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris 
(AP-HP), Saint-Louis Hospital, Paris, France.
(9)Department of Dermatology and INSERM 1098, University of Bourgogne-Franche 
Comté, Besançon, France.
(10)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation , Cleveland, OH, 
USA.
(11)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Bone Marrow 
Transplantation, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(12)The Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai , New York, NY, USA.
(13)Department of Paediatric Infectious Diseases and Virology, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(14)Imperial College London, Centre for Paediatrics and Child Health , London, 
UK.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology and 
Rheumatology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(17)Weill Cornell Medicine , New York, NY, USA.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(19)Center for Personalized Genetic Healthcare, Cleveland Clinic Foundation , 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(20)Laboratory of Genetic Skin Diseases, INSERM U1163, Paris, France.
(21)Université Paris-Cité , Paris, France.
(22)Paediatric Hematology-Immunology and Rheumatology Unit, Hopital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Paris, Fance.
(23)Center for the Study of Primary Immunodeficiencies, Necker Hospital for Sick 
Children , Paris, France.
(24)Department of Immunology, Derriford Hospital, Plymouth, UK.
(25)Columbia University Irving Medical Center , New York, NY, USA.
(26)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(27)Division of Immunology, Allergy, and Retrovirology, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(28)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(29)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine , Houston, TX, 
USA.
(30)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, The 
Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(31)Howard Hughes Medical Institute , New Yor, NY, USA.
(32)Department of Pediatrics, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France.
(33)Department of Medicine, Division of Genomic Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, Institute for Genomic Health, New York, NY, USA.
(34)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(35)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(36)Department of Pediatrics, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2024 Jun 3;221(6):e2023238704302024c. doi: 
10.1084/jem.2023238704302024c.

Inborn errors of immunity lead to autoimmunity, inflammation, allergy, 
infection, and/or malignancy. Disease-causing JAK1 gain-of-function (GoF) 
mutations are considered exceedingly rare and have been identified in only four 
families. Here, we use forward and reverse genetics to identify 59 individuals 
harboring one of four heterozygous JAK1 variants. In vitro and ex vivo analysis 
of these variants revealed hyperactive baseline and cytokine-induced STAT 
phosphorylation and interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) levels compared with 
wild-type JAK1. A systematic review of electronic health records from the BioME 
Biobank revealed increased likelihood of clinical presentation with 
autoimmunity, atopy, colitis, and/or dermatitis in JAK1 variant-positive 
individuals. Finally, treatment of one affected patient with severe atopic 
dermatitis using the JAK1/JAK2-selective inhibitor, baricitinib, resulted in 
clinically significant improvement. These findings suggest that individually 
rare JAK1 GoF variants may underlie an emerging syndrome with more common 
presentations of autoimmune and inflammatory disease (JAACD syndrome). More 
broadly, individuals who present with such conditions may benefit from genetic 
testing for the presence of JAK1 GoF variants.

© 2024 Bogunovic et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20232387
PMCID: PMC10986756
PMID: 38563820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: D. Bogunovic reported being owner 
and part owner of Lab11 Therapeutics. R.L. Fuleihan reported personal fees from 
Horizon, Takeda, Pharming, and Grifols outside the submitted work. I.K. Chinn 
reported other from Wolters Kluwer (UpToDate), Pharming, and Sumitomo Pharma 
America outside the submitted work. J.R. Lupski reported other from 23andMe and 
personal fees from Genome International, Inc, during the conduct of the study. 
N.S. Abul-Husn reported other from 23andMe and Allelica outside the submitted 
work. J.D. Milner reported personal fees from Blueprint Medicines outside the 
submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.