---
reference_id: "PMID:38380189"
title: "Anorexia Nervosa and Osteoporosis: A Possible Complication to Remember."
authors:
- Rosas Pereira A
- Costa M
- Costa GG
- Carvalho AS
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.52670
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anorexia Nervosa and Osteoporosis: A Possible Complication to Remember.
**Authors:** Rosas Pereira A, Costa M, Costa GG, Carvalho AS
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.52670](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.52670)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jan 21;16(1):e52670. doi: 10.7759/cureus.52670. eCollection 2024
Jan.

Anorexia Nervosa and Osteoporosis: A Possible Complication to Remember.

Rosas Pereira A(1), Costa M(2), Costa GG(3), Carvalho AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Family Medicine, USF Cidade Jardim, Viseu Dão Lafões, PRT.
(2)Internal Medicine, Centro Hospitalar Tondela-Viseu, Viseu Dão Lafões, PRT.
(3)Family Medicine, UCSP Fornos de Algodres, Guarda, PRT.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) belongs to the spectrum of food disorders and affects
approximately 2.9 million people worldwide. It is responsible for numerous and
serious medical complications. Osteoporosis is a common complication, and the
decrease in bone mineral density (BMD) is one of the few potentially
irreversible consequences of AN. When associated with AN, it can manifest at a
very young age, possibly leading to irreparable damage. We describe the case of
a 30-year-old woman with a one-year evolution diagnosis of AN, complaining
of back pain. Physical examination revealed a slight elevation of the right
shoulder and pain at compression of paravertebral right dorsal musculature with
a palpable strained muscle. Full-length X-ray imaging of the dorsal spine
revealed a slight dextroconvex dorsolumbar scoliosis. A dorsal spine
computerized tomography (CT) was performed, confirming a fracture of the upper
platform of the sixth dorsal vertebrae. Osteodensitometry showed lumbar spine
osteoporosis and femoral osteopenia. The decrease in BMD and, later on, the
development of osteoporosis can occur in both types of AN. It is a severe
complication that affects up to 50% of these patients. It can be irreversible
and increase the lifetime risk of bone fractures and, therefore, morbimortality.
Low body weight and body mass index (BMI) strongly correlate with the decrease
in BMD. Treatment of osteoporosis associated with AN is not standardized and
clearly labeled. Weight gain is described as the strategy with the most impact
in reversing the loss of bone mass and increasing the BMD. The regularization of
gonadal function also seems to independently potentiate the increase of BMD. The
occurrence of long bone and vertebrae fractures frequently results in a decrease
in height and chronic back pain, culminating in greater morbimortality and
healthcare costs. This clinical case aims to show theclose relationship between
restrictive food disorders and the decrease of BMD and the subsequent
development of osteoporosis and its complications. Although rare in young and
healthy people, when associated with restrictive food disorders, it should raise
a red flag in its clinical evaluation. Preventing osteoporosis development and
reduction of fracture risk in this population is essential. The current absence
of consistent evidence regarding screening of osteoporosis in this particular
group should raise awareness and promote further larger-scale studies to
establish standardized recommendations concerning not only screening but also
pharmacological treatment of osteoporosis in patients with AN.

Copyright © 2024, Rosas Pereira et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.52670
PMCID: PMC10877225
PMID: 38380189

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
