---
reference_id: "PMID:23612438"
title: Genotype-phenotype study in type V osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Balasubramanian M
- Parker MJ
- Dalton A
- Giunta C
- Lindert U
- Peres LC
- Wagner BE
- Arundel P
- Offiah A
- Bishop NJ
journal: Clin Dysmorphol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e32836032f0
keywords:
- "5' Untranslated Regions/genetics"
- Adult
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- "Calcification, Physiologic/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Facies
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Osteoblasts/metabolism
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis, genetics"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype study in type V osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Balasubramanian M, Parker MJ, Dalton A, Giunta C, Lindert U, Peres LC, Wagner BE, Arundel P, Offiah A, Bishop NJ
**Journal:** Clin Dysmorphol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCD.0b013e32836032f0](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCD.0b013e32836032f0)

## Content

1. Clin Dysmorphol. 2013 Jul;22(3):93-101. doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e32836032f0.

Genotype-phenotype study in type V osteogenesis imperfecta.

Balasubramanian M(1), Parker MJ, Dalton A, Giunta C, Lindert U, Peres LC, Wagner 
BE, Arundel P, Offiah A, Bishop NJ.

Author information:
(1)Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service Sheffield Diagnostic Genetics Service 
Department of Histopathology, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust Electron 
Microscopy Unit, Department of Histopathology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital 
Academic Unit of Child Health, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK Division 
of Metabolism, Connective Tissue Unit and Children's Research Centre, University 
Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.

Type V osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) presents with moderate-to-severe skeletal 
deformity and is characterized by hyperplastic callus formation at fracture 
sites and calcification of the interosseous membranes of the forearm and lower 
leg. The facial dysmorphism is not well characterized and has not been described 
in previous reports. Inheritance is autosomal dominant, although the genetic 
aetiology remained unknown until very recently. The aims of this study were to 
establish the genetic aetiology in patients with type V OI and further 
characterize patients with this condition, and to ascertain whether they have a 
similar clinical phenotype and facial dysmorphism. Three families (one 
mother-daughter pair and two singletons) were identified with the above features 
and further investigations (molecular genetic analysis and skin biopsy including 
electron microscopy, histology and collagen species analysis) were performed. 
Accurate phenotyping of patients with type V OI was performed. PCR amplification 
was performed using the Sheffield Diagnostic Genetics Service pyrosequencing 
assay for the interferon-induced transmembrane protein-5 (IFITM5) gene. All the 
patients had been confirmed to have a heterozygous variant, c.[-14C>T];[=], in 
the 5'-UTR of the IFITM5 gene, which is located in the transcribed region of 
this gene. This recurrent mutation, in IFITM5, also known as bone-restricted 
interferon-induced transmembrane protein-like protein or BRIL, encodes a protein 
with a function in bone formation and plays an important role in osteoblast 
formation. All four patients in this study appear to have similar clinical 
features and facial dysmorphism, including a short, up-turned nose, a small 
mouth, a prominent chin and greyish-blue sclerae. Skin biopsy in one patient 
showed clumping of elastic fibres and normal biochemical analysis of collagen. 
We have been able to characterize patients with type V OI further and confirm 
the genetic aetiology in this distinct form of OI. Accurate phenotyping 
(including describing the common facial features) before investigations is 
important to enable the useful interpretation of genetic results and/or 
target-specific gene testing.

DOI: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e32836032f0
PMID: 23612438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]