---
reference_id: "PMID:34997889"
title: Final results of the Choroid Plexus Tumor study CPT-SIOP-2000.
authors:
- Wolff JE
- Van Gool SW
- Kutluk T
- Diez B
- Kebudi R
- Timmermann B
- Garami M
- Sterba J
- Fuller GN
- Bison B
- Kordes UR
journal: J Neurooncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11060-021-03942-0
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Carcinoma/drug therapy
- Choroid Plexus Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Etoposide/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Registries
- Treatment Outcome
- Vincristine/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Final results of the Choroid Plexus Tumor study CPT-SIOP-2000.
**Authors:** Wolff JE, Van Gool SW, Kutluk T, Diez B, Kebudi R, Timmermann B, Garami M, Sterba J, Fuller GN, Bison B, Kordes UR
**Journal:** J Neurooncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11060-021-03942-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11060-021-03942-0)

## Content

1. J Neurooncol. 2022 Feb;156(3):599-613. doi: 10.1007/s11060-021-03942-0. Epub
2022 Jan 8.

Final results of the Choroid Plexus Tumor study CPT-SIOP-2000.

Wolff JE(1)(2), Van Gool SW(3), Kutluk T(4), Diez B(5), Kebudi R(6), Timmermann
B(7), Garami M(8), Sterba J(9)(10), Fuller GN(11), Bison B(12), Kordes UR(13).

Author information:
(1)University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(2)Oncology Development, AbbVie, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)IOZK Immune Oncological Centre Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hacettepe University Medical School and
Cancer Institute, Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Neuro Oncology Program, Institute of Neurological Research, FLENI, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
(6)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Oncology Institute, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey.
(7)Department of Particle Therapy, University Hospital Essen, West German Proton
Therapy Centre Essen (WPE), West German Cancer Center (WTZ), German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK), Essen, Germany.
(8)2nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(9)Department of Pediatric Oncology, University Hospital Brno and Faculty of
Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(10)International Clinical Research Center, St. Anne's University Hospital,
Brno, Czech Republic.
(11)Departments of Neuropathology and Neuroradiology, MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, USA.
(12)Department of Neuroradiology, University Hospital of Augsburg, Augsburg,
Germany.
(13)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center
Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. u.kordes@uke.de.

Erratum in
    J Neurooncol. 2025 Oct 20;176(1):26. doi: 10.1007/s11060-025-05298-1.

INTRODUCTION: Standards for chemotherapy against choroid plexus tumors (CPT)
have not yet been established.
METHODS: CPT-SIOP-2000 (NCT00500890) was an international registry for all CPT
nesting a chemotherapy randomization for high-risk CPT with
Carboplatin/Etoposide/Vincristine (CarbEV) versus
Cyclophosphamide/Etoposide/Vincristine (CycEV). Patients older than three years
were recommended to receive irradiation: focal fields for non-metastatic CPC,
incompletely resected atypical choroid plexus papilloma (APP) or metastatic
choroid plexus papilloma (CPP); craniospinal fields for metastatic CPC/APP and
non-responsive CPC. High risk was defined as choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC),
incompletely resected APP, and all metastatic CPT. From 2000 until 2010, 158 CPT
patients from 23 countries were enrolled.
RESULTS: For randomized CPC, the 5/10 year progression free survival (PFS) of
patients on CarbEV (n = 20) were 62%/47%, respectively, compared to 27%/18%, on
CycEV (n = 15), (intention-to-treat, HR 2.6, p = 0.032). Within the registry,
histological grading was the most influential prognostic factor: for CPP
(n = 55) the 5/10 year overall survival (OS) and the event free survival (EFS)
probabilities were 100%/97% and 92%/92%, respectively; for APP (n = 49) 96%/96%
and 76%/76%, respectively; and for CPC (n = 54) 65%/51% and 41%/39%,
respectively. Without irradiation, 12 out of 33 patients with CPC younger than
three years were alive for a median of 8.52 years. Extent of surgery and
metastases were not independent prognosticators.
CONCLUSIONS: Chemotherapy for Choroid Plexus Carcinoma is feasible and
effective. CarbEV is superior to CycEV. A subset of CPC can be cured without
irradiation.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-021-03942-0
PMCID: PMC8860833
PMID: 34997889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare not to have any relevant
financial or non-financial conflict of interest with this work.
