---
reference_id: "PMID:24403307"
title: "Identification of past and recent parvovirus B19 infection in immunocompetent individuals by quantitative PCR and enzyme immunoassays: a dual-laboratory study."
authors:
- Maple PA
- Hedman L
- Dhanilall P
- Kantola K
- Nurmi V
- Söderlund-Venermo M
- Brown KE
- Hedman K
journal: J Clin Microbiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1128/JCM.02613-13
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of past and recent parvovirus B19 infection in immunocompetent individuals by quantitative PCR and enzyme immunoassays: a dual-laboratory study.
**Authors:** Maple PA, Hedman L, Dhanilall P, Kantola K, Nurmi V, Söderlund-Venermo M, Brown KE, Hedman K
**Journal:** J Clin Microbiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JCM.02613-13](https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.02613-13)

## Content

1. J Clin Microbiol. 2014 Mar;52(3):947-56. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02613-13. Epub 2014 
Jan 8.

Identification of past and recent parvovirus B19 infection in immunocompetent 
individuals by quantitative PCR and enzyme immunoassays: a dual-laboratory 
study.

Maple PA(1), Hedman L, Dhanilall P, Kantola K, Nurmi V, Söderlund-Venermo M, 
Brown KE, Hedman K.

Author information:
(1)Virus Reference Department, Public Health England, London, United Kingdom.

Parvovirus B19 (B19V) is a member of the family Parvoviridae, genus 
Erythrovirus. B19V-specific IgG and IgM react differently against conformational 
and linear epitopes of VP1 and VP2 antigens, leading to the development of IgG 
avidity and epitope type specificity (ETS) enzyme immunoassays (EIAs) for 
distinguishing past from recent infection. Additionally, B19V viral load 
determination (by quantitative PCR [qPCR]) is increasingly used in the staging 
of B19V infection. In this study, the utility of these methods is compared. A 
panel of 78 sera was jointly tested by the Virus Reference Department (VRD), 
London, United Kingdom, and the Haartman Institute (HI), Helsinki, Finland, 
using a number of EIAs, e.g., B19V-specific IgG and IgM, IgG avidity, and ETS 
EIAs. At VRD, the sera were also tested by a B19V viral load PCR (qPCR). By 
consensus analysis, 43 (55.1%) sera represented past infection, 28 (35.9%) sera 
represented recent infection, and 7 (9.0%) sera were indeterminate. Both VRD 
B19V qPCR and HI B19V VP2 IgM EIA gave the highest agreement with consensus 
interpretation for past or recent infection, with an overall agreement of 99% 
(95% confidence interval [CI], 92 to 100) and positive predictive value (PPV) of 
100% (95% CI, 87 to 100). Nine sera designated as representing past infection by 
consensus analysis were B19V IgM positive by a commercial VRD B19V IgM EIA and 
B19V IgM negative by a new HI in-house B19V VP2 IgM EIA. A new VRD B19V IgG 
avidity EIA showed good (>95%) agreement (excluding equivocal results) with 
consensus interpretations for past or recent infection. Correct discrimination 
of past from recent B19V infection was achieved through application of qPCR or 
by appropriate selection of EIAs.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02613-13
PMCID: PMC3957764
PMID: 24403307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]