---
reference_id: "PMID:19345001"
title: "A model of interaction: aflatoxins and hepatitis viruses in liver cancer aetiology and prevention."
authors:
- Wild CP
- Montesano R
journal: Cancer Lett
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.02.053
keywords:
- Aflatoxins/toxicity
- Animals
- Hepacivirus/pathogenicity
- Hepatitis B virus/pathogenicity
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, epidemiology, etiology, virology"
- "Models, Theoretical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A model of interaction: aflatoxins and hepatitis viruses in liver cancer aetiology and prevention.
**Authors:** Wild CP, Montesano R
**Journal:** Cancer Lett (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canlet.2009.02.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2009.02.053)

## Content

1. Cancer Lett. 2009 Dec 1;286(1):22-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.02.053. Epub
2009 Apr 2.

A model of interaction: aflatoxins and hepatitis viruses in liver cancer
aetiology and prevention.

Wild CP(1), Montesano R.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Light
Laboratories, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. c.p.wild@leeds.ac.uk

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide and
has an extremely poor prognosis. The majority of cases occur in south-east Asia
and sub-Saharan Africa where the major risk factors are chronic infection with
hepatitis B and C viruses (HBV and HCV) as well as dietary exposure to
aflatoxins. Aflatoxin B1, the most commonly occurring and potent of the
aflatoxins is associated with a specific AGG to AGT transversion mutation at
codon 249 of the p53 gene in human HCC, providing mechanistic support to a
causal link between exposure and disease. Prospective epidemiological studies
have shown a more than multiplicative interaction between HBV and aflatoxins in
terms of HCC risk. However, the biology underlying this statistical interaction
is not fully understood. There are a number of potential mechanisms including,
among others: the fixation of AFB1-induced mutations in the presence of liver
regeneration and hyperplasia induced by chronic HBV infection; the
predisposition of HBV-infected hepatocytes to aflatoxin-induced DNA damage; an
increase in susceptibility to chronic HBV infection in aflatoxin-exposed
individuals; and oxidative stress exacerbated by co-exposure to aflatoxins and
chronic hepatitis infection. Priorities for prevention are global HBV
vaccination, primary and secondary prevention strategies against aflatoxin and
the avoidance of transmission of HCV through good hygiene practices.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.02.053
PMID: 19345001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
