---
reference_id: "PMID:6894450"
title: "Triiodothyronine generation from thyroxine in human thyroid: enhanced conversion in Graves' thyroid tissue."
authors:
- Ishii H
- Inada M
- Tanaka K
- Mashio Y
- Naito K
- Nishikawa M
- Imura H
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '1981'
doi: 10.1210/jcem-52-6-1211
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Triiodothyronine generation from thyroxine in human thyroid: enhanced conversion in Graves' thyroid tissue.
**Authors:** Ishii H, Inada M, Tanaka K, Mashio Y, Naito K, Nishikawa M, Imura H
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (1981)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem-52-6-1211](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem-52-6-1211)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1981 Jun;52(6):1211-7. doi: 10.1210/jcem-52-6-1211.

Triiodothyronine generation from thyroxine in human thyroid: enhanced conversion 
in Graves' thyroid tissue.

Ishii H, Inada M, Tanaka K, Mashio Y, Naito K, Nishikawa M, Imura H.

Conversion of T4 to T3 was studied in normal, Graves', and neoplastic thyroid 
tissues obtained at surgery. Homogenates of human thyroid follicular adenoma and 
carcinomas were incubated with [125I]T4 and dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 C for 60 
min under N2 gas. T3 formation was assessed by measuring [125I]T3 formed, using 
paper chromatography. In the second series of experiments, the suspensions of 
the 100,000 X g pellet of normal thyroid tissues adjacent to the tumor and 
Graves' thyroid tissues were incubated with unlabeled T4 and DTT at 37 C for 60 
min under N2 gas. T3 generated was measured by RIA. T3 generation in the thyroid 
tissue was dependent on incubation time, amount of the tissue used, 
concentration of DTT, temperature, and pH. Propylthioracil inhibited T3 
formation, while methimazole had no effect. A kinetic study with the homogenate 
of a thyroid adenoma and 100,000 X g pellet suspensions of two normal and three 
Graves' thyroids gave apparent Km values of 2.7, 4.9, and 4.1 microM for T4, 
respectively, and Vmax values of 0.8, 3.0, and 10.9 pmol T3/mg protein.min, 
respectively. Conversion of T4 to T3 was observed in two of three tumor tissues 
studied and was markedly enhanced in Graves' thyroid tissues (mean +/- SE, 11.9 
+/- 2.0 pmol/mg protein.min) compared to that of normal thyroid tissues (3.2 +/- 
0.6 pmol/mg protein.min; P less than 0.01). It is concluded that T4 is 
enzymatically converted to T3 in normal and Graves' thyroids and differentiated 
thyroid neoplasms. Moreover, enhanced conversion of T4 to T3 was found in 
Graves' thyroid tissue.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem-52-6-1211
PMID: 6894450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]