---
reference_id: PMID:36473045
title: "Ocular Paraneoplastic Syndromes: A Critical Review of Diffuse Uveal Melanocytic Proliferation and Autoimmune Retinopathy."
authors:
- Weppelmann TA
- Khalil S
- Zafrullah N
- Amir S
- Margo CE
journal: Cancer Control
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/10732748221144458
keywords:
- Humans
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Ocular/diagnosis, therapy"
- Autoimmune Diseases
- Retinal Diseases
- Cell Proliferation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular Paraneoplastic Syndromes: A Critical Review of Diffuse Uveal Melanocytic Proliferation and Autoimmune Retinopathy.
**Authors:** Weppelmann TA, Khalil S, Zafrullah N, Amir S, Margo CE
**Journal:** Cancer Control (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10732748221144458](https://doi.org/10.1177/10732748221144458)

## Content

1. Cancer Control. 2022 Jan-Dec;29:10732748221144458. doi: 
10.1177/10732748221144458.

Ocular Paraneoplastic Syndromes: A Critical Review of Diffuse Uveal Melanocytic 
Proliferation and Autoimmune Retinopathy.

Weppelmann TA(1), Khalil S(1), Zafrullah N(1), Amir S(1), Margo CE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology, 33697Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.
(2)Departments of Pathology and Molecular Biology, 33697Morsani College of 
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.

Background: Dozens of paraneoplastic syndromes affect the visual system ranging 
from conjunctival pemphigoid to encephalopathy of the occipital cortex. The most 
profiled ocular syndromes are bilateral diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation 
(BDUMP) and the autoimmune retinopathies.Purpose: To review the critical 
features of these 2 entities then concentrate on advancements in treatment made 
within the last 10 years.Study Design: Literature review with structured data 
abstraction.Results: Major insights into pathogenesis have been wanting. 
Plasmapheresis appears to improve vision in a substantial proportion of patients 
with BDUMP. The number of clinical variables that influence visual outcome in 
paraneoplastic retinopathies combined with the variety of local and systemic 
treatment options makes interpretation of clinical effectiveness 
difficult.Conclusions: The rarity of these disorders makes randomized clinical 
trials unlikely. It may be time for a clinical professional organization to use 
a modified Delphi method to establish a consensus algorithm for the diagnosis 
and management of retinal paraneoplastic syndromes to augment clinical 
communications and clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1177/10732748221144458
PMCID: PMC9732803
PMID: 36473045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.