---
reference_id: "PMID:24529291"
title: Challenges for academic investigator-initiated pediatric trials for rare diseases.
authors:
- Ahmed R
- Duerr U
- Gavenis K
- Hilgers R
- Gross O
journal: Clin Ther
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2014.01.013
keywords:
- Academic Medical Centers
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Clinical Trials, Phase III as Topic/economics, legislation & jurisprudence, methods"
- Humans
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/drug therapy"
- Physicians
- Ramipril/therapeutic use
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Challenges for academic investigator-initiated pediatric trials for rare diseases.
**Authors:** Ahmed R, Duerr U, Gavenis K, Hilgers R, Gross O
**Journal:** Clin Ther (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinthera.2014.01.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2014.01.013)

## Content

1. Clin Ther. 2014 Feb 1;36(2):184-90. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2014.01.013.

Challenges for academic investigator-initiated pediatric trials for rare
diseases.

Ahmed R(1), Duerr U(1), Gavenis K(2), Hilgers R(3), Gross O(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Applied Research and Clinical Trials GmbH, Georg August
University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany; Institute for Applied Research and
Clinical Trials GmbH, Georg August University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Applied Research and Clinical Trials GmbH, Georg August
University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)University Medical Center Göttingen, Institute of Medical Statistics,
Göttingen, Germany.
(4)University Medical Center Göttingen, Clinic for Nephrology and Rheumatology,
Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address: gross.oliver@med.uni-goettingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Clinical trials require great effort, time, expertise, and money.
For clinicians at university hospitals with their full work load of teaching and
medical care, the planning of an investigator-initiated clinical trial seems
almost unthinkable. Despite their expertise in distinct diseases, university
clinicians lack the time necessary to organize the funding and to initiate and
conduct Phase III clinical trials in adults or in children.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine whether the difficulties faced by a clinician
conducting a pediatric clinical trial can be overcome by passionate motivation
and external support.
METHODS: Critical aspects of the application process of the world's first
clinical trial in children with the rare hereditary kidney disease Alport
syndrome treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (Early
Prospective Therapy Trial to Delay Renal Failure in Children With Alport
Syndrome [EARLY PRO-TECT Alport]; http://www.clinicaltrials.gov NCT01485978;
EudraCT 2010-024300-10) are described.
RESULTS: The following crucial factors enabled the investigator to complete this
trial: (1) support through clinical trial, biometrician, and regulatory experts
(Institute for Applied Research and Clinical Studies [IFS], Göttingen, Germany);
(2) advice from the university's ethics committee (University Medicine
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany); (3) public funding (€1 million from the German
Federal Ministry of Education and Research); (4) support from the respective
medical society, aiming at the resolution of an important clinical problem
(German Society of Pediatric Nephrology); and (5) support from the
investigator's university as the official sponsor of the trial, providing
long-term commitment and covering financial risks (University Medical Center
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany).
CONCLUSIONS: The study could pave the way for approval of ramipril as a drug to
treat children with Alport syndrome. Even though the study might not result in
label changes, the EARLY PRO-TECT Alport trial provides the basis of an
educational campaign to sensitize physicians, especially pediatricians, general
practitioners, and nephrologists, to pay special attention to the early
detection of kidney diseases in children, which could improve medical care for
all children with kidney diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2014.01.013
PMID: 24529291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
