---
reference_id: "PMID:11138011"
title: "Mutations in GFAP, encoding glial fibrillary acidic protein, are associated with Alexander disease."
authors:
- Brenner M
- Johnson AB
- Boespflug-Tanguy O
- Rodriguez D
- Goldman JE
- Messing A
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/83679
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age of Onset
- Asian People/genetics
- "Astrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Base Sequence
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA Restriction Enzymes/metabolism
- Europe/ethnology
- Female
- "Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Psychomotor Disorders/genetics
- Seizures/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in GFAP, encoding glial fibrillary acidic protein, are associated with Alexander disease.
**Authors:** Brenner M, Johnson AB, Boespflug-Tanguy O, Rodriguez D, Goldman JE, Messing A
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/83679](https://doi.org/10.1038/83679)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Jan;27(1):117-20. doi: 10.1038/83679.

Mutations in GFAP, encoding glial fibrillary acidic protein, are associated with 
Alexander disease.

Brenner M(1), Johnson AB, Boespflug-Tanguy O, Rodriguez D, Goldman JE, Messing 
A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Alabama-Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2001 Jan;27(1):10-1. doi: 10.1038/83657.

Alexander disease is a rare disorder of the central nervous system of unknown 
etiology. Infants with Alexander disease develop a leukoencephalopathy with 
macrocephaly, seizures and psychomotor retardation, leading to death usually 
within the first decade; patients with juvenile or adult forms typically 
experience ataxia, bulbar signs and spasticity, and a more slowly progressive 
course. The pathological hallmark of all forms of Alexander disease is the 
presence of Rosenthal fibers, cytoplasmic inclusions in astrocytes that contain 
the intermediate filament protein GFAP in association with small heat-shock 
proteins. We previously found that overexpression of human GFAP in astrocytes of 
transgenic mice is fatal and accompanied by the presence of inclusion bodies 
indistinguishable from human Rosenthal fibers. These results suggested that a 
primary alteration in GFAP may be responsible for Alexander disease. Sequence 
analysis of DNA samples from patients representing different Alexander disease 
phenotypes revealed that most cases are associated with non-conservative 
mutations in the coding region of GFAP. Alexander disease therefore represents 
the first example of a primary genetic disorder of astrocytes, one of the major 
cell types in the vertebrate CNS.

DOI: 10.1038/83679
PMID: 11138011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]