---
reference_id: "PMID:31269364"
title: Rituximab or Cyclosporine in the Treatment of Membranous Nephropathy.
authors:
- Fervenza FC
- Appel GB
- Barbour SJ
- Rovin BH
- Lafayette RA
- Aslam N
- Jefferson JA
- Gipson PE
- Rizk DV
- Sedor JR
- Simon JF
- McCarthy ET
- Brenchley P
- Sethi S
- Avila-Casado C
- Beanlands H
- Lieske JC
- Philibert D
- Li T
- Thomas LF
- Green DF
- Juncos LA
- Beara-Lasic L
- Blumenthal SS
- Sussman AN
- Erickson SB
- Hladunewich M
- Canetta PA
- Hebert LA
- Leung N
- Radhakrishnan J
- Reich HN
- Parikh SV
- Gipson DS
- Lee DK
- da Costa BR
- Jüni P
- Cattran DC
- MENTOR Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1814427
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Cyclosporine/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Female
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/drug therapy"
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/therapeutic use
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- Intention to Treat Analysis
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Proteinuria/drug therapy
- Remission Induction
- "Rituximab/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Treatment Failure
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rituximab or Cyclosporine in the Treatment of Membranous Nephropathy.
**Authors:** Fervenza FC, Appel GB, Barbour SJ, Rovin BH, Lafayette RA, Aslam N, Jefferson JA, Gipson PE, Rizk DV, Sedor JR, Simon JF, McCarthy ET, Brenchley P, Sethi S, Avila-Casado C, Beanlands H, Lieske JC, Philibert D, Li T, Thomas LF, Green DF, Juncos LA, Beara-Lasic L, Blumenthal SS, Sussman AN, Erickson SB, Hladunewich M, Canetta PA, Hebert LA, Leung N, Radhakrishnan J, Reich HN, Parikh SV, Gipson DS, Lee DK, da Costa BR, Jüni P, Cattran DC, MENTOR Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1814427](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1814427)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2019 Jul 4;381(1):36-46. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1814427.

Rituximab or Cyclosporine in the Treatment of Membranous Nephropathy.

Fervenza FC(1), Appel GB(1), Barbour SJ(1), Rovin BH(1), Lafayette RA(1), Aslam 
N(1), Jefferson JA(1), Gipson PE(1), Rizk DV(1), Sedor JR(1), Simon JF(1), 
McCarthy ET(1), Brenchley P(1), Sethi S(1), Avila-Casado C(1), Beanlands H(1), 
Lieske JC(1), Philibert D(1), Li T(1), Thomas LF(1), Green DF(1), Juncos LA(1), 
Beara-Lasic L(1), Blumenthal SS(1), Sussman AN(1), Erickson SB(1), Hladunewich 
M(1), Canetta PA(1), Hebert LA(1), Leung N(1), Radhakrishnan J(1), Reich HN(1), 
Parikh SV(1), Gipson DS(1), Lee DK(1), da Costa BR(1), Jüni P(1), Cattran DC(1); 
MENTOR Investigators.

Collaborators: Fervenza FC, Lieske JC, Leung N, Erickson SB, Radhakrishnan J, 
Bomback A, Hogan J, Canetta P, Ahn W, Lafayette R, Arora N, Nargund P, Rovin B, 
Alvarado A, Parikh S, Aslam N, Porter I, Gipson P, Kretzler M, Plattner B, 
Gipson D, Mariani L, Garg P, Rao P, Sedor J, O'Toole J, Jefferson JA, Nelson PJ, 
McCarthy E, Yarlagadda S, Jain N, Rizk D, Simon J, Gebreselassie S, Blumenthal 
S, Beara-Lasic L, Zhdanova O, Thomas L, Cohen I, Keddis M, Sussman A, Thajudeen 
B, Juncos L, Fulop T, Craici I, Wagner S, Dreisbach A, Monga D, Green D, 
Mattiazzi A, Nayer A, Thomas D, Barisoni L, Li T, Vijayan A, Cattran DC, Reich 
H, Hladunewich M, Barbour S, Levin A, Philibert D, Mac-Way F, Desmeules S.

Author information:
(1)From the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (F.C.F., S.S., J.C.L., S.B.E., N.L.); 
Columbia University (G.B.A., P.A.C., J.R.) and the New York University Medical 
Center (L.B.-L.) - both in New York; the University of British Columbia, 
Division of Nephrology, Vancouver (S.J.B.), the University Health Network, 
Toronto General Hospital (C.A.-C., H.N.R., D.C.C.), the Faculty of Community 
Services, Ryerson University (H.B.), and the Sunnybrook Health Science Centre 
(M.H.), the Applied Health Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of 
St. Michael's Hospital (D.K.L., B.R.C., P.J.), and the Department of Medicine 
and Institute of Health Policy, Management, and Evaluation, University of 
Toronto (B.R.C., P.J.), Toronto, and Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, 
Quebec, QC (D.P.) - all in Canada; Ohio State University, Columbus (B.H.R., 
L.A.H., S.V.P.); Stanford University, Stanford, CA (R.A.L.); the Mayo Clinic, 
Jacksonville (N.A.), and Florida International University, Miami (D.F.G.) - both 
in Florida; the University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle (J.A.J.); the 
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor (P.E.G., D.S.G.); the 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham (D.V.R.); Case Western Reserve 
University (J.R.S.) and the Cleveland Clinic (J.F.S.) - both in Cleveland; 
Kansas University Medical Center, Kansas City (E.T.M.); Manchester University, 
Manchester, United Kingdom (P.B.); Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis (T.L.); the Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale (L.F.T.), and the University of 
Arizona, Tucson (A.N.S.) - both in Arizona; the University of Mississippi 
Medical Center, Jackson (L.A.J.); and the Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Froedtert Hospital, Milwaukee (S.S.B.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Jul 4;381(1):86-88. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1906666.
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2019 Nov;15(11):664-666. doi: 10.1038/s41581-019-0200-1.
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Oct 24;381(17):1688. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1910393.
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Oct 24;381(17):1688-1689. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1910393.

BACKGROUND: B-cell anomalies play a role in the pathogenesis of membranous 
nephropathy. B-cell depletion with rituximab may therefore be noninferior to 
treatment with cyclosporine for inducing and maintaining a complete or partial 
remission of proteinuria in patients with this condition.
METHODS: We randomly assigned patients who had membranous nephropathy, 
proteinuria of at least 5 g per 24 hours, and a quantified creatinine clearance 
of at least 40 ml per minute per 1.73 m2 of body-surface area and had been 
receiving angiotensin-system blockade for at least 3 months to receive 
intravenous rituximab (two infusions, 1000 mg each, administered 14 days apart; 
repeated at 6 months in case of partial response) or oral cyclosporine (starting 
at a dose of 3.5 mg per kilogram of body weight per day for 12 months). Patients 
were followed for 24 months. The primary outcome was a composite of complete or 
partial remission of proteinuria at 24 months. Laboratory variables and safety 
were also assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 130 patients underwent randomization. At 12 months, 39 of 65 
patients (60%) in the rituximab group and 34 of 65 (52%) in the cyclosporine 
group had a complete or partial remission (risk difference, 8 percentage points; 
95% confidence interval [CI], -9 to 25; P = 0.004 for noninferiority). At 24 
months, 39 patients (60%) in the rituximab group and 13 (20%) in the 
cyclosporine group had a complete or partial remission (risk difference, 40 
percentage points; 95% CI, 25 to 55; P<0.001 for both noninferiority and 
superiority). Among patients in remission who tested positive for 
anti-phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) antibodies, the decline in autoantibodies 
to anti-PLA2R was faster and of greater magnitude and duration in the rituximab 
group than in the cyclosporine group. Serious adverse events occurred in 11 
patients (17%) in the rituximab group and in 20 (31%) in the cyclosporine group 
(P = 0.06).
CONCLUSIONS: Rituximab was noninferior to cyclosporine in inducing complete or 
partial remission of proteinuria at 12 months and was superior in maintaining 
proteinuria remission up to 24 months. (Funded by Genentech and the Fulk Family 
Foundation; MENTOR ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01180036.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1814427
PMID: 31269364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]