---
reference_id: "PMID:8252616"
title: The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer.
authors:
- Fishel R
- Lescoe MK
- Rao MR
- Copeland NG
- Jenkins NA
- Garber J
- Kane M
- Kolodner R
journal: Cell
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90546-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer.
**Authors:** Fishel R, Lescoe MK, Rao MR, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Garber J, Kane M, Kolodner R
**Journal:** Cell (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(93)90546-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(93)90546-3)

## Content

1. Cell. 1993 Dec 3;75(5):1027-38. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90546-3.

The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary 
nonpolyposis colon cancer.

Fishel R(1), Lescoe MK, Rao MR, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Garber J, Kane M, 
Kolodner R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics Markey Center for Molecular 
Genetics University of Vermont Medical School Burlington 05405.

Erratum in
    Cell. 1994 Apr 8;77(1):1 p following 166.

We have identified a human homolog of the bacterial MutS and S. cerevisiae MSH 
proteins, called hMSH2. Expression of hMSH2 in E. coli causes a dominant mutator 
phenotype, suggesting that hMSH2, like other divergent MutS homologs, interferes 
with the normal bacterial mismatch repair pathway. hMSH2 maps to human 
chromosome 2p22-21 near a locus implicated in hereditary nonpolyposis colon 
cancer (HNPCC). A T to C transition mutation has been detected in the -6 
position of a splice acceptor site in sporadic colon tumors and in affected 
individuals of two small HNPCC kindreds. These data and reports indicating that 
S. cerevisiae msh2 mutations cause an instability of dinucleotide repeats like 
those associated with HNPCC suggest that hMSH2 is the HNPCC gene.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90546-3
PMID: 8252616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]