---
reference_id: "PMID:7493034"
title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) transmembrane mutation in Crouzon syndrome with acanthosis nigricans.
authors:
- Meyers GA
- Orlow SJ
- Munro IR
- Przylepa KA
- Jabs EW
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1038/ng1295-462
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) transmembrane mutation in Crouzon syndrome with acanthosis nigricans.
**Authors:** Meyers GA, Orlow SJ, Munro IR, Przylepa KA, Jabs EW
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1295-462](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1295-462)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1995 Dec;11(4):462-4. doi: 10.1038/ng1295-462.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) transmembrane mutation in Crouzon 
syndrome with acanthosis nigricans.

Meyers GA(1), Orlow SJ, Munro IR, Przylepa KA, Jabs EW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland 21287-3914, USA.

Crouzon syndrome, an autosomal dominant condition characterized by 
craniosynostosis, ocular proptosis and midface hypoplasia, is associated with 
mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) (refs 1-3). For 
example, we have identified 10 different mutations in the FGFR2 extracellular 
immunoglobulin III (IgIII) domain in 50% (16/32) of our Crouzon syndrome 
patients. All mutations described so far for other craniosynostotic syndromes 
with associated limb anomalies--Jackson-Weiss, Pfeiffer, and Apert--also occur 
in the extracellular domain of FGFR2, as well as FGFR1 for Pfeiffer syndrome. In 
contrast, only FGFR3 mutations have been reported in dwarfing 
conditions--achondroplasia, thanatophoric dysplasia, and hypochondroplasia. For 
achondroplasia, greater than 99% of mutations occur in the FGFR3 transmembrane 
domain. We now report the unexpected observation of a FGFR3 transmembrane domain 
mutation, Ala391Glu, in three unrelated families with Crouzon syndrome and 
acanthosis nigricans, a specific skin disorder of hyperkeratosis and 
hyperpigmentation. The association of non-dwarfing and even non-skeletal 
conditions with FGFR3 mutations reveals the potential for a wide range of FGFR 
pleiotropic effects as well as locus heterogeneity in Crouzon syndrome. Our 
study underscores the biologic complexity of the FGFR gene family.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1295-462
PMID: 7493034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]