---
reference_id: "PMID:37185055"
title: Tobacco use in first-episode psychosis, a multinational EU-GEI study.
authors:
- Sánchez-Gutiérrez T
- Rodríguez-Toscano E
- Roldán L
- Ferraro L
- Parellada M
- Calvo A
- López G
- Rapado-Castro M
- La Barbera D
- La Cascia C
- Tripoli G
- Di Forti M
- Murray RM
- Quattrone D
- Morgan C
- van Os J
- García-Portilla P
- Al-Halabí S
- Bobes J
- de Haan L
- Bernardo M
- Santos JL
- Sanjuán J
- Arrojo M
- Ferchiou A
- Szoke A
- Rutten BP
- Stilo S
- D'Andrea G
- Tarricone I
- EU-GEI WP2 Group
- Díaz-Caneja CM
- Arango C
journal: Psychol Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1017/S0033291723000806
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tobacco use in first-episode psychosis, a multinational EU-GEI study.
**Authors:** Sánchez-Gutiérrez T, Rodríguez-Toscano E, Roldán L, Ferraro L, Parellada M, Calvo A, López G, Rapado-Castro M, La Barbera D, La Cascia C, Tripoli G, Di Forti M, Murray RM, Quattrone D, Morgan C, van Os J, García-Portilla P, Al-Halabí S, Bobes J, de Haan L, Bernardo M, Santos JL, Sanjuán J, Arrojo M, Ferchiou A, Szoke A, Rutten BP, Stilo S, D'Andrea G, Tarricone I, EU-GEI WP2 Group, Díaz-Caneja CM, Arango C
**Journal:** Psychol Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0033291723000806](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291723000806)

## Content

1. Psychol Med. 2023 Nov;53(15):7265-7276. doi: 10.1017/S0033291723000806. Epub 
2023 Apr 26.

Tobacco use in first-episode psychosis, a multinational EU-GEI study.

Sánchez-Gutiérrez T(1), Rodríguez-Toscano E(2)(3), Roldán L(4), Ferraro L(5), 
Parellada M(6), Calvo A(4), López G(1), Rapado-Castro M(6)(7), La Barbera D(5), 
La Cascia C(5), Tripoli G(5), Di Forti M(8)(9), Murray RM(8), Quattrone D(8), 
Morgan C(10), van Os J(11)(12)(13), García-Portilla P(14), Al-Halabí S(15), 
Bobes J(14), de Haan L(16), Bernardo M(17), Santos JL(18), Sanjuán J(19), Arrojo 
M(20), Ferchiou A(21)(22), Szoke A(21)(22), Rutten BP(23), Stilo S(24), D'Andrea 
G(25), Tarricone I(25); EU-GEI WP2 Group; Díaz-Caneja CM(6), Arango C(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Science, Universidad Internacional de la Rioja (UNIR), 
Logroño, Spain.
(2)Grupo de investigación en Psiquiatría, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, IdISSC, 
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, Cognitive Processes and Speech Therapy 
at the Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Faculty of Psychology, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Biomedicine, Neuroscience and Advanced Diagnostics (BiND), 
Psychiatry Section, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(6)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry and 
Mental Health, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, IiSGM, CIBERSAM, 
School of Medicine, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, Department of Psychiatry, The University of 
Melbourne and Melbourne Health, 161 Barry Street, Carlton South, Victoria 3053, 
Australia.
(8)Department of Social Genetics and Developmental Psychiatry, Institute of 
Psychiatry Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(9)South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Mental Health Trust, London, UK.
(10)ESRC Centre for Society and Mental Health, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(11)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(12)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, School for Mental Health and 
Neuroscience, South Limburg Mental Health Research and Teaching Network, 
Maastricht University Medical Centre, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(13)Department Psychiatry, Brain Centre Rudolf Magnus, Utrecht University 
Medical Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(14)Department of Medicine-Psychiatry, Universidad de Oviedo, ISPA, INEUROPA, 
CIBERSAM, Oviedo, Spain.
(15)Department of Psychology, University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.
(16)Early Psychosis Department, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Academic 
Psychiatric Centre, Arkin, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(17)Barcelona Clinic Schizophrenia Unit, Hospital Clinic, Departament de 
Medicina, Institut de Neurociències (UBNeuro), Universitat de Barcelona (UB), 
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), CIBERSAM, 
ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain.
(18)Department of Psychiatry, Servicio de Psiquiatría Hospital 'Virgen de la 
Luz', Cuenca, Spain.
(19)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valencia, 
INCLIVA, CIBERSAM, School of Medicine, Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(20)Department of Psychiatry, Psychiatric Genetic Group, Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela, Complejo Hospitalario 
Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(21)Fondation FondaMental, Univ Paris Est Creteil, INSERM, IMRB, 
F-94010 Creteil, France.
(22)AP-HP, Hopitaux Universitaires 'H. Mondor', DMU IMPACT, F-94010 Creteil, 
France.
(23)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, School for Mental Health and 
Neuroscience, South Limburg Mental Health Research and Teaching Network, 
Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(24)Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, ASP Crotone, Crotone, 
Italy.
(25)Department of Medical and Surgical Science, Psychiatry Unit, Alma Mater 
Studiorum Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Tobacco is a highly prevalent substance of abuse in patients with 
psychosis. Previous studies have reported an association between tobacco use and 
schizophrenia. The aim of this study was to analyze the relationship between 
tobacco use and first-episode psychosis (FEP), age at onset of psychosis, and 
specific diagnosis of psychosis.
METHODS: The sample consisted of 1105 FEP patients and 1355 controls from the 
European Network of National Schizophrenia Networks Studying Gene-Environment 
Interactions (EU-GEI) study. We assessed substance use with the Tobacco and 
Alcohol Questionnaire and performed a series of regression analyses using 
case-control status, age of onset of psychosis, and diagnosis as outcomes and 
tobacco use and frequency of tobacco use as predictors. Analyses were adjusted 
for sociodemographic characteristics, alcohol, and cannabis use.
RESULTS: After controlling for cannabis use, FEP patients were 2.6 times more 
likely to use tobacco [p ⩽ 0.001; adjusted odds ratio (AOR) 2.6; 95% confidence 
interval (CI) [2.1-3.2]] and 1.7 times more likely to smoke 20 or more 
cigarettes a day (p = 0.003; AOR 1.7; 95% CI [1.2-2.4]) than controls. Tobacco 
use was associated with an earlier age at psychosis onset (β = -2.3; p ⩽ 0.001; 
95% CI [-3.7 to -0.9]) and was 1.3 times more frequent in FEP patients with a 
diagnosis of schizophrenia than in other diagnoses of psychosis (AOR 1.3; 95% CI 
[1.0-1.8]); however, these results were no longer significant after controlling 
for cannabis use.
CONCLUSIONS: Tobacco and heavy-tobacco use are associated with increased odds of 
FEP. These findings further support the relevance of tobacco prevention in young 
populations.

DOI: 10.1017/S0033291723000806
PMID: 37185055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]