---
reference_id: "PMID:39456156"
title: "Adipose Tissue Plasticity: A Comprehensive Definition and Multidimensional Insight."
authors:
- Mo YY
- Han YX
- Xu SN
- Jiang HL
- Wu HX
- Cai JM
- Li L
- Bu YH
- Xiao F
- Liang HD
- Wen Y
- Liu YZ
- Yin YL
- Zhou HD
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14101223
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adipose Tissue Plasticity: A Comprehensive Definition and Multidimensional Insight.
**Authors:** Mo YY, Han YX, Xu SN, Jiang HL, Wu HX, Cai JM, Li L, Bu YH, Xiao F, Liang HD, Wen Y, Liu YZ, Yin YL, Zhou HD
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14101223](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14101223)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 Sep 27;14(10):1223. doi: 10.3390/biom14101223.

Adipose Tissue Plasticity: A Comprehensive Definition and Multidimensional 
Insight.

Mo YY(1), Han YX(1), Xu SN(1), Jiang HL(1), Wu HX(1), Cai JM(1), Li L(1), Bu 
YH(2), Xiao F(1), Liang HD(1), Wen Y(1), Liu YZ(3), Yin YL(4), Zhou HD(1).

Author information:
(1)National Clinical Research Center for Metabolic Diseases, Hunan Provincial 
Key Laboratory for Metabolic Bone Diseases, Department of Metabolism and 
Endocrinology, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha 
410011, China.
(2)Department of Blood Transfusion, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha 410012, China.
(3)Pediatric Cardiac Surgery Centre, Fuwai Hospital, National Centre for 
Cardiovascular Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, 
China.
(4)Institute of Subtropical Agriculture, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changsha 
410125, China.

Adipose tissue is composed of adipocytes, stromal vascular fraction, nerves, 
surrounding immune cells, and the extracellular matrix. Under various 
physiological or pathological conditions, adipose tissue shifts cellular 
composition, lipid storage, and organelle dynamics to respond to the stress; 
this remodeling is called "adipose tissue plasticity". Adipose tissue plasticity 
includes changes in the size, species, number, lipid storage capacity, and 
differentiation function of adipocytes, as well as alterations in the 
distribution and cellular composition of adipose tissue. This plasticity has a 
major role in growth, obesity, organismal protection, and internal environmental 
homeostasis. Moreover, certain thresholds exist for this plasticity with 
significant individualized differences. Here, we comprehensively elaborate on 
the specific connotation of adipose tissue plasticity and the relationship 
between this plasticity and the development of many diseases. Meanwhile, we 
summarize possible strategies for treating obesity in response to adipose tissue 
plasticity, intending to provide new insights into the dynamic changes in 
adipose tissue and contribute new ideas to relevant clinical problems.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14101223
PMCID: PMC11505740
PMID: 39456156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.