---
reference_id: "PMID:35499229"
title: Evidence of hepatitis B infection and co-infection with enteric fever among febrile patients in a primary health facility in Kogi State, Nigeria.
authors:
- Oseni Okolo ML
- Omatola CA
- Samson SO
- Idache BM
journal: J Immunoassay Immunochem
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/15321819.2022.2071127
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence of hepatitis B infection and co-infection with enteric fever among febrile patients in a primary health facility in Kogi State, Nigeria.
**Authors:** Oseni Okolo ML, Omatola CA, Samson SO, Idache BM
**Journal:** J Immunoassay Immunochem (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15321819.2022.2071127](https://doi.org/10.1080/15321819.2022.2071127)

## Content

1. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2022 Sep 3;43(5):516-525. doi: 
10.1080/15321819.2022.2071127. Epub 2022 May 2.

Evidence of hepatitis B infection and co-infection with enteric fever among 
febrile patients in a primary health facility in Kogi State, Nigeria.

Oseni Okolo ML(1), Omatola CA(1), Samson SO(1)(2), Idache BM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kogi State University, Anyigba, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering, Warsaw University of 
Technology, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Human Kinetic and Public Health Education, Prince Abubakar Audu 
University, Anyigba, Nigeria.

Hepatitis B and enteric fever remain infectious diseases of major health concern 
and the etiologic agents share overlapping regions of high endemicity worldwide. 
This study determined the seroprevalence of hepatitis B and enteric fever among 
febrile patients in Ejule metropolis, North-central Nigeria. In a 
cross-sectional study, blood samples obtained from 200 consenting patients were 
screened for hepatitis B and enteric fever with standard diagnostics ABON 
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and Widal agglutination tests, respectively. 
A structured questionnaire was used to collect socio-demographic and risk factor 
information. Of the 200 sera tested, 20 (10%) had HBV alone, 35 (17.5%) enteric 
fever while 6 (3%) had both HBV/enteric fever. Males recorded more HBV (12% vs 
6.7%), enteric fever (20% vs 13.3%), and co-infection (3.2% vs 2.7%) than their 
counterpart females. Ages 18-30 years were more predisposed to single and dual 
infections compared to older categories. Although sex, ages as well as the 
participants' occupation were not significantly linked to both infections 
(p > .05). The prevalence of enteric fever differed significantly with being 
married (p = .01). The illiterate had a higher prevalence of HBV, enteric fever, 
and dual infection (16.7%, 25%, and 8.3%) compared to higher educational levels. 
The study confirms the endemicity of hepatitis B and enteric fever in the area. 
Their concurrent rate highlights the need for clinicians to always consider the 
laboratory diagnosis of both diseases among febrile patients in endemic regions 
for proper management in events of co-morbidity. The high prevalence of both 
infections in connection with illiteracy shows the need to further intensify 
education of masses on the predisposing risk factors.

DOI: 10.1080/15321819.2022.2071127
PMID: 35499229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]