---
reference_id: "PMID:6862997"
title: "Multiple acyl-Co A dehydrogenation deficiency (MADD) in a boy with nonketotic hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, muscle hypotonia and cardiomyopathy. Detection of N-isovalerylglutamic acid and its monoamide."
authors:
- Niederwieser A
- Steinmann B
- Exner U
- Neuheiser F
- Redweik U
- Wang M
- Rampini S
- Wendel U
journal: Helv Paediatr Acta
year: '1983'
keywords:
- "Cardiomyopathies/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Fatty Acid Desaturases/deficiency
- Glutamates/urine
- "Hepatomegaly/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Hypoglycemia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Infant
- Jews
- Male
- "Muscle Hypotonia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple acyl-Co A dehydrogenation deficiency (MADD) in a boy with nonketotic hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, muscle hypotonia and cardiomyopathy. Detection of N-isovalerylglutamic acid and its monoamide.
**Authors:** Niederwieser A, Steinmann B, Exner U, Neuheiser F, Redweik U, Wang M, Rampini S, Wendel U
**Journal:** Helv Paediatr Acta (1983)

## Content

1. Helv Paediatr Acta. 1983 Mar;38(1):9-26.

Multiple acyl-Co A dehydrogenation deficiency (MADD) in a boy with nonketotic
hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, muscle hypotonia and cardiomyopathy. Detection of
N-isovalerylglutamic acid and its monoamide.

Niederwieser A, Steinmann B, Exner U, Neuheiser F, Redweik U, Wang M, Rampini S,
Wendel U.

A boy, aged 7 months, of consanguineous parents presented with an acute onset of
vomiting, fever, nonketotic hypoglycemia and acidosis and died from cardiac
arrest after ventricular fibrillation. He had hepatomegaly and
echocardiographically a non-obstructive cardiomyopathy. Autopsy was not allowed.
After birth the child had suffered from a severe respiratory distress syndrome,
transient metabolic acidosis and had a sweaty feet odour. Later on, development
was retarded with a severe muscular hypotonia. Post mortem, numerous unusual
organic acids were found in high concentrations in urine, e.g. dicarbonic acids,
2-hydroxyisobutyric, isovaleric, 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid, N-acyl glycines,
isovalerylglutamic acid and sarcosine. This pattern indicated deficiencies of
several acyl-Co A dehydrogenases in the metabolism of leucine, isoleucine,
valine, lysine, short-chain fatty acids and sarcosine. This could be confirmed
using cultured skin fibroblasts which were shown to degrade the corresponding
labeled substrates insufficiently to 14CO2. It is assumed that the functional
multiple acyl-Co A dehydrogenation deficiency is caused by a deficiency of a
common link in the electron transfer system of these dehydrogenases which is
inherited autosomal recessively in this family. Among the 12 patients reported,
7 died within the first 5 days of age.

PMID: 6862997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
