---
reference_id: "PMID:36765055"
title: Structural insights into pathogenic mechanism of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia caused by ectodysplasin A variants.
authors:
- Yu K
- Huang C
- Wan F
- Jiang C
- Chen J
- Li X
- Wang F
- Wu J
- Lei M
- Wu Y
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36367-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/genetics"
- "Ectodysplasins/genetics, metabolism"
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Signal Transduction
- Ectoderm/metabolism
- Mutation
- Edar Receptor/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural insights into pathogenic mechanism of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia caused by ectodysplasin A variants.
**Authors:** Yu K, Huang C, Wan F, Jiang C, Chen J, Li X, Wang F, Wu J, Lei M, Wu Y
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-36367-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36367-6)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Feb 11;14(1):767. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36367-6.

Structural insights into pathogenic mechanism of hypohidrotic ectodermal 
dysplasia caused by ectodysplasin A variants.

Yu K(#)(1)(2)(3), Huang C(#)(2)(3), Wan F(#)(2)(3), Jiang C(1)(2)(3), Chen 
J(2)(3), Li X(2)(3), Wang F(4), Wu J(5)(6), Lei M(7)(8)(9), Wu Y(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Second Dental Center, Ninth People's Hospital Affiliated with 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine, Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Stomatology, National Clinical Research Center of Stomatology, Shanghai, China.
(2)Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, 200011, China.
(3)Shanghai Institute of Precision Medicine, Shanghai, 200125, China.
(4)Department of Oral Implantology, Ninth People's Hospital Affiliated with 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine, Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Stomatology, National Clinical Research Center of Stomatology, Shanghai, China. 
diana_wangfeng@aliyun.com.
(5)Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, 200011, China. wujian@shsmu.edu.cn.
(6)Shanghai Institute of Precision Medicine, Shanghai, 200125, China. 
wujian@shsmu.edu.cn.
(7)Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, 200011, China. leim@shsmu.edu.cn.
(8)Shanghai Institute of Precision Medicine, Shanghai, 200125, China. 
leim@shsmu.edu.cn.
(9)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025, China. leim@shsmu.edu.cn.
(10)Department of Second Dental Center, Ninth People's Hospital Affiliated with 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine, Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Stomatology, National Clinical Research Center of Stomatology, Shanghai, China. 
yiqunwu@hotmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

EDA is a tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family member, which functions together 
with its cognate receptor EDAR during ectodermal organ development. Mutations of 
EDA have long been known to cause X-linked hypohidrotic dysplasia in humans 
characterized by primary defects in teeth, hair and sweat glands. However, the 
structural information of EDA interaction with EDAR is lacking and the 
pathogenic mechanism of EDA variants is poorly understood. Here, we report the 
crystal structure of EDA C-terminal TNF homology domain bound to the N-terminal 
cysteine-rich domains of EDAR. Together with biochemical, cellular and mouse 
genetic studies, we show that different EDA mutations lead to varying degrees of 
ectodermal developmental defects in mice, which is consistent with the clinical 
observations on human patients. Our work extends the understanding of the EDA 
signaling mechanism, and provides important insights into the molecular 
pathogenesis of disease-causing EDA variants.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-36367-6
PMCID: PMC9918506
PMID: 36765055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.