---
reference_id: "PMID:28785360"
title: Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus (GCMN) - A New Hope for Targeted Therapy?
authors:
- Tchernev G
- Lozev I
- Pidakev I
- Lotti T
- Wollina U
- Gianfaldoni S
- Lotti J
- França K
- Batashki A
- Maximov GK
- Chokoeva A
journal: Open Access Maced J Med Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3889/oamjms.2017.121
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus (GCMN) - A New Hope for Targeted Therapy?
**Authors:** Tchernev G, Lozev I, Pidakev I, Lotti T, Wollina U, Gianfaldoni S, Lotti J, França K, Batashki A, Maximov GK, Chokoeva A
**Journal:** Open Access Maced J Med Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3889/oamjms.2017.121](https://doi.org/10.3889/oamjms.2017.121)

## Content

1. Open Access Maced J Med Sci. 2017 Jul 22;5(4):549-550. doi: 
10.3889/oamjms.2017.121. eCollection 2017 Jul 25.

Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus (GCMN) - A New Hope for Targeted Therapy?

Tchernev G(1), Lozev I(2), Pidakev I(2), Lotti T(3), Wollina U(4), Gianfaldoni 
S(5), Lotti J(6), França K(7), Batashki A(8), Maximov GK(9), Chokoeva A(10).

Author information:
(1)Medical Institute of Ministry of Interior (MVR), Department of Dermatology 
and Dermatologic Surgery, General Skobelev 79, 1606 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(2)Medical Institute of Ministry of Interior, Department of General, Vascular 
and Abdominal Surgery, General Skobelev 79, 1606 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)University of Rome "G. Marconi", Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Academic Teaching Hospital 
Dresden-Friedrichstadt, Friedrichstrasse 41, 01067 Dresden, Germany.
(5)University G. Marconi of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Nuclear, Subnuclear and Radiation Physics, University of Rome 
"G. Marconi", Rome, Italy.
(7)Institute for Bioethics & Health Policy; Department of Dermatology & 
Cutaneous Surgery; Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine - Miami, FL, USA.
(8)Abdominal and Thoracic Surgery, Department of Special Surgery, Medical 
University of Plovdiv, bul. "Peshtersko shose" Nr 66, 4000 Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
(9)Onkoderma/ADCRSTR cooperation Group- Policlinic for Dermatology, Venereology 
and Dermatologic Surgery, General Skobelev 26, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(10)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Medical University of Plovdiv, 
15A Vasil Aprilov blvd., 4002 Plovdiv, Bulgaria.

We present a 6-month-old male patient, who was consulted with dermatologist by 
his parents, because of a pigmented lesion, present since birth, covering almost 
the all skin of the back and buttocks. A sharply bordered, unequally coloured 
congenital pigmented nevus, measuring approximately 21 cm in diameter was 
observed in the whole body skin examination. The lesion was affecting the lower 
2/3 of the skin of the back and the top half of the gluteus area, extending to 
the lateral part of the tors, forward the abdomen and the upper lateral part of 
the hips, composed by multiple darker-pigmented nests and several lighter areas, 
with single depigmented zones, hairy surface, irregularly infiltrated on 
palpation. Congenital melanocytic nevi are presented in approximately 1% of 
newborns, while giant congenital melanocytic nevi (GCMN) are the most uncommon 
subtype of them; with occurrence rate 1 in 50,000 births. They affect 2% of a 
total body surface or presenting in a diameter larger than 20 cm in older 
children. Although not common, the possible malignant transformation remains one 
of the most important considerations related to them, as the related lifetime 
risk of melanoma is 4% to 10%. Treatment recommendations include non-surgical 
methods as dermabrasion only within the first two weeks of life, for prevention 
the possible melanocytic deeper migration, while serial surgical excisions or 
tissue expanders could be useful treatment tool even in later stages. 
Nevertheless, cosmetic result is not always satisfactory, and the risk of 
malignant changes remains, in cases of previous melanocytic migration in deeper 
layer. Recent article suggests the potential role in the treatment of GCMN with 
NRAS inhibitor trametinib, approved for treatment of advanced melanoma, 
associated with underlying NRAS mutations. Although promising, the drug could be 
useful in paediatric patients, only with associated NRAS gene mutation. It is 
still unclear whether it could be helpful, independent of the NRAS status.

DOI: 10.3889/oamjms.2017.121
PMCID: PMC5535685
PMID: 28785360

We present a 6-month-old male patient, who was consulted with dermatologist by his parents, because of a pigmented lesion, present since birth, covering almost the all skin of the back and buttocks. A sharply bordered, unequally coloured pigmented nevus, measuring approximately 21 cm in diameter was observed in the whole body skin examination. The lesion was affecting the lower 2/3 of the skin of the back and the top half of the gluteus area, extending to the lateral part of the tors, forward the abdomen and the upper lateral part of the hips, composed by multiple darker-pigmented nests and several lighter areas, with single depigmented zones, hairy surface, irregularly infiltrated on palpation (Fig. 1a, 1b, 1c, 1d). Several satellite pigmented lesions were also observed on the upper and lower extremities, measuring from one to 3-4 cm in diameter, most of them- hairy surfaced. Atopic dermatitis was also seen as an additional abnormality. The performed screening procedures, including MRI and CT, did not reveal any abnormalities, neither data for neurologic involvement.

– Clinical manifestation of a giant congenital melanocytic nevus in 6-month-old child, affecting the lower 2/3 of the skin of the back and the top half of the gluteus area (1a), extending to the lateral part of the tors, forward the abdomen and the upper lateral part of the hips (1c, 1d), composed by multiple darker-pigmented nests and several lighter areas, with single depigmented zones, hairy surface, irregularly infiltrated on palpation and several satellite lesions (1b)

Congenital melanocytic nevi are presented in approximately 1% of newborns, while giant congenital melanocytic nevi (GCMN) are the most uncommon subtype of them; with occurrence rate 1 in 50,000 births [1]. They affect 2% of a total body surface or presenting in a diameter larger than 20 cm in older children [1]. Although not common, the possible malignant transformation remains one of the most important considerations related to them, as the related lifetime risk of melanoma is 4% to 10% [2]. Treatment recommendations include non-surgical methods as dermabrasion only within the first two weeks of life, for prevention the possible melanocytic deeper migration, while serial surgical excisions or tissue expanders could be useful treatment tool even in later stages [1]. Nevertheless, cosmetic result is not always satisfactory, and the risk of malignant changes remains, in cases of previous melanocytic migration in deeper layer [3].

Recent article suggests the potential role in the treatment of GCMN with NRAS inhibitor trametinib, approved for treatment of advanced melanoma, associated with underlying NRAS mutations [3]. Although promising, the drug could be useful in paediatric patients, only with associated NRAS gene mutation. It is still unclear whether it could be helpful, independent of the NRAS status. Meanwhile, the future following up of these patients is mandatory [1].

Despite some of the patient could undergo screening by dermatoscopy, this tool is not useful in cases with full-size infiltration and equally dark-brown to black colour, as the remarkable dermoscopic finding could be noted only in the hypopigmented areas, as in the presented cases [4]. The clinical examination could note sigh of infiltration, while PET-scan and reflect confocal microscopy should be added as helpful tools in the following up period. Excision biopsy could be performed in infiltrated areas, but it is not sure and safety enough method for observation of malignant transformation. Therefore, total surgical excisions, by serial operations or tissue expanders remain the most effective treatment option, with minimal risk of malignant transformation and maximal therapeutic effectiveness.