---
reference_id: "PMID:35491795"
title: "PSEN2 Mutation Spectrum and Novel Functionally Validated Mutations in Alzheimer's Disease: Data from PUMCH Dementia Cohort."
authors:
- Dong L
- Liu C
- Sha L
- Mao C
- Li J
- Huang X
- Wang J
- Chu S
- Peng B
- Cui L
- Xu Q
- Gao J
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-220194
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PSEN2 Mutation Spectrum and Novel Functionally Validated Mutations in Alzheimer's Disease: Data from PUMCH Dementia Cohort.
**Authors:** Dong L, Liu C, Sha L, Mao C, Li J, Huang X, Wang J, Chu S, Peng B, Cui L, Xu Q, Gao J
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-220194](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-220194)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;87(4):1549-1556. doi: 10.3233/JAD-220194.

PSEN2 Mutation Spectrum and Novel Functionally Validated Mutations in 
Alzheimer's Disease: Data from PUMCH Dementia Cohort.

Dong L(1), Liu C(1), Sha L(2), Mao C(1), Li J(1), Huang X(1), Wang J(1), Chu 
S(1), Peng B(1), Cui L(1), Xu Q(2), Gao J(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China.

BACKGROUND: The established causative mutations in the APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2 can 
explain less than 1%,Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. Of the identified 
variants, the PSEN2 mutations are even less common.
OBJECTIVE: With the genetic study from the dementia cohort of Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital (PUMCH), we aim to illustrate the PSEN2 mutation 
spectrum and novel functionally validated mutations in Chinese AD patients.
METHODS: 702 AD participants, aged 30-85, were identified in PUMCH dementia 
cohort. They all received history inquiry, physical examination, biochemical 
test, cognitive evaluation, brain CT/MRI, and next-generation DNA sequencing. 
Functional analysis was achieved by transfection of the HEK293 cells with 
plasmids harboring the wild-type PSEN2 or candidate mutations.
RESULTS: Nine PSEN2 rare variants were found, including two reported (M239T, 
R62C) and seven novel variants (N141S, I368F, L396I, G117X, I146T, S147N, 
H220Y). The HEK293 cells transfected with the PSEN2 N141S, M239T, I368F plasmids 
showed higher Aβ42 and Aβ42/Aβ40 levels relative to the wild-type PSEN2. The 
PSEN2 L396I, G117X, S147N, H220Y, and R62C did not alter Aβ42, Aβ40 levels, or 
Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio. 1.9%,(13/702) subjects harbored rare PSEN2 variants. 
0.4%,(3/702) subjects carried pathogenic/likely pathogenic PSEN2 mutations. The 
three subjects with the functionally validated PSEN2 mutations were all familial 
early-onset AD patients. The common symptoms included amnesia and mental 
symptom. Additionally, the M239T mutation carrier presented with dressing 
apraxia, visuospatial agraphia, dyscalculia and visual mislocalization.
CONCLUSION: The PSEN2 N141S, M239T, and I368F are functionally validated 
mutations.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-220194
PMCID: PMC9277672
PMID: 35491795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors’ disclosures available online 
(https://www.j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/22-0194r1).