---
reference_id: "PMID:30104335"
title: Posterior Parietal Cortex Dysfunction Is Central to Working Memory Storage and Broad Cognitive Deficits in Schizophrenia.
authors:
- Hahn B
- Robinson BM
- Leonard CJ
- Luck SJ
- Gold JM
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0913-18.2018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Posterior Parietal Cortex Dysfunction Is Central to Working Memory Storage and Broad Cognitive Deficits in Schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Hahn B, Robinson BM, Leonard CJ, Luck SJ, Gold JM
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0913-18.2018](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0913-18.2018)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2018 Sep 26;38(39):8378-8387. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0913-18.2018.
 Epub 2018 Aug 13.

Posterior Parietal Cortex Dysfunction Is Central to Working Memory Storage and 
Broad Cognitive Deficits in Schizophrenia.

Hahn B(1), Robinson BM(2), Leonard CJ(3), Luck SJ(4), Gold JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21228, bhahn@som.umaryland.edu.
(2)Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21228.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado 80204, 
and.
(4)Center for Mind and Brain, University of California-Davis, Davis, California 
95618.

PFC dysfunction is widely believed to underlie working memory (WM) deficits in 
people with schizophrenia (PSZ), but few studies have focused on measures of WM 
storage devoid of manipulation. Research in neurotypical individuals has shown 
that storage capacity is more closely related to posterior parietal cortex (PPC) 
than PFC, suggesting that reductions in WM storage capacity in schizophrenia 
that are associated with broad cognitive deficits may be related to neural 
activity in PPC. In the present human neuroimaging study, 37 PSZ and 37 matched 
healthy control subjects of either sex completed a change detection task with 
varying set sizes while undergoing fMRI. The task was designed to emphasize WM 
storage with minimal top-down control demands. Whole-brain analysis identified 
areas in which BOLD activity covaried with the number of items maintained in WM 
(K), as derived from task performance at a given set size. Across groups, K 
values independent of set size predicted BOLD activity in PPC, including 
superior and inferior parietal lobules and intraparietal sulcus, and middle 
occipital gyrus. Whole-brain interaction analysis found significantly less 
K-dependent signal modulation in PSZ than healthy control subjects in left PPC, 
a phenomenon that could not be explained by a narrower K value range. The slope 
between K and PPC activation statistically accounted for 43.4% of the 
between-group differences in broad cognitive function. These results indicate 
that PPC dysfunction is central to WM storage deficits in PSZ and may play a key 
role in the broad cognitive deficits associated with schizophrenia.SIGNIFICANCE 
STATEMENT People with schizophrenia exhibit cognitive deficits across a wide 
range of tasks. Explaining these impairments in terms of a small number of core 
deficits with clearly defined neural correlates would advance the understanding 
of the disorder and promote treatment development. We show that a substantial 
portion of broad cognitive deficits in schizophrenia can be explained by a 
failure to flexibly modulate posterior parietal cortex activity as a function of 
the amount of information currently stored in working memory. Working memory 
deficits have long been considered central to schizophrenia-related cognitive 
deficits, but the focus has been on paradigms involving some form of top-down 
control rather than pure storage of information, which may have unduly narrowed 
the focus on prefrontal dysfunction.

Copyright © 2018 the authors 0270-6474/18/388378-10$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0913-18.2018
PMCID: PMC6158696
PMID: 30104335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]