---
reference_id: "PMID:19661632"
title: Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Blennow K
- Zetterberg H
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1177
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Blennow K, Zetterberg H
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-2009-1177](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-2009-1177)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;18(2):413-7. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1177.

Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease.

Blennow K(1), Zetterberg H.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, The Sahlgrenska Academy at Göteborg 
University, Mölndal, Sweden. kaj.blennow@neuro.gu.se

Research progress has given detailed knowledge on the molecular pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), which has been translated into an ongoing development 
of disease-modifying treatments. These new drug candidates are targeted on 
inhibiting amyloid-beta (Abeta) production and aggregation or tau aggregation. 
If these drugs prove to be efficient, diagnostic tools enabling early diagnosis 
of AD will be of great value. Also in drug development, it is important to 
co-develop biomarkers to serve as tools to identify and monitor the biochemical 
effect of the drug directly in patients. Molecular aberrations in the AD brain 
are reflected in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The core candidate CSF 
biomarkers Abeta42, total tau (T-tau), and phosphorylated tau (P-tau) have been 
shown to have a high diagnostic performance to identify AD also in the early 
phase of the disease. This paper reviews recent research advances on these CSF 
biomarkers for use in clinical diagnosis and in clinical trials in AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1177
PMID: 19661632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]