---
reference_id: "PMID:23868034"
title: The Budd-Chiari syndrome.
authors:
- Hefaiedh R
- Cheikh M
- Marsaoui L
- Ennaifer R
- Romdhane H
- Ben Nejma H
- Bel Hadj N
- Arfa N
- Khalfallah MT
journal: Tunis Med
year: '2013'
keywords:
- "Budd-Chiari Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Humans
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Budd-Chiari syndrome.
**Authors:** Hefaiedh R, Cheikh M, Marsaoui L, Ennaifer R, Romdhane H, Ben Nejma H, Bel Hadj N, Arfa N, Khalfallah MT
**Journal:** Tunis Med (2013)

## Content

1. Tunis Med. 2013 Jun;91(6):376-81.

The Budd-Chiari syndrome.

Hefaiedh R, Cheikh M, Marsaoui L, Ennaifer R, Romdhane H, Ben Nejma H, Bel Hadj 
N, Arfa N, Khalfallah MT.

BACKGROUND: The Budd-Chiari syndrome is a rare disease, often fatal if not 
treated optimally. It is characterized by a blocked hepatic venous outflow 
tract. aim: This review attempted to present pathophysiology, 
aetiologies,diagnosis and therapeutic modalities of the Budd-Chiari syndrome.
METHODS: Review of literature.
RESULTS: Budd-Chiari syndrome is a complex disease with a wide spectrum of 
aetiologies and presentations. Hematologic abnormalities, particularly 
myeloproliferative disorders, are the most common causes of the Budd-Chiari 
syndrome. The clinical presentation is governed by the extent and rapidity of 
the hepatic vein occlusion. Doppler-ultrasound, computed tomography or magnetic 
resonance imaging of hepatic veins and inferior vena cava are usually successful 
in demonstrating non-invasively the obstacle or its consequences. A therapeutic 
strategy has been proposed where anticoagulation, correction of risk factors, 
diuretics and prophylaxis for portal hypertension are used first; then 
angioplasty for shortlength venous stenosis; then Transjugular Intrahepatic 
Portosystemic Shunt (TIPS); and ultimately liver transplantation. Treatment 
progression is dictated by the response to previous therapy. This strategy has 
achieved 5-year survival rates approaching 70%. Medium-term prognosis depends on 
the severity of liver disease.
CONCLUSION: The diagnosis of the Budd-Chiari syndrome must be considered in any 
patients with acute or chronic liver disease. Management of this syndrome should 
follow a step by step strategy.

PMID: 23868034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]