---
reference_id: "PMID:41333404"
title: The ontogeny of myeloid-stromal synovial tissue niches in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Elmesmari A
- Somma D
- MacDonald L
- Frew J
- Kuczynska Z
- Mario CD
- Coletto LA
- Baruah S
- Campobasso D
- Simakou T
- Philippon EML
- Tas SW
- Doohan M
- Benvenuto R
- Bruno D
- Gigante MR
- Petricca L
- Pacucci VA
- Wei K
- McSharry CP
- Windell D
- Pledger S
- Davidson S
- Coles MC
- Gessi M
- Tough D
- "D'Agostino MA"
- McInnes IB
- Dakin SG
- Buckley CD
- Alivernini S
- Kurowska-Stolarska M
journal: Res Sq
year: '2025'
doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-8079358/v1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ontogeny of myeloid-stromal synovial tissue niches in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Elmesmari A, Somma D, MacDonald L, Frew J, Kuczynska Z, Mario CD, Coletto LA, Baruah S, Campobasso D, Simakou T, Philippon EML, Tas SW, Doohan M, Benvenuto R, Bruno D, Gigante MR, Petricca L, Pacucci VA, Wei K, McSharry CP, Windell D, Pledger S, Davidson S, Coles MC, Gessi M, Tough D, D'Agostino MA, McInnes IB, Dakin SG, Buckley CD, Alivernini S, Kurowska-Stolarska M
**Journal:** Res Sq (2025)
**DOI:** [10.21203/rs.3.rs-8079358/v1](https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-8079358/v1)

## Content

1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2025 Nov 21:rs.3.rs-8079358. doi:
10.21203/rs.3.rs-8079358/v1.

The ontogeny of myeloid-stromal synovial tissue niches in rheumatoid arthritis.

Elmesmari A(1)(2), Somma D(1)(2), MacDonald L(1)(2), Frew J(1)(2), Kuczynska
Z(2), Mario CD(3), Coletto LA(1)(2), Baruah S(2), Campobasso D(3), Simakou T(2),
Philippon EML(4)(5), Tas SW(4)(5), Doohan M(2), Benvenuto R(6), Bruno D(2),
Gigante MR(7), Petricca L(7), Pacucci VA(7), Wei K(8), McSharry CP(2)(9),
Windell D(10), Pledger S(1)(10), Davidson S(1)(10), Coles MC(1)(10), Gessi M(6),
Tough D(11), D'Agostino MA(7), McInnes IB(1)(2), Dakin SG(12), Buckley
CD(1)(10), Alivernini S(1)(2)(3)(7), Kurowska-Stolarska M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research into Inflammatory Arthritis Centre Versus Arthritis (RACE), 120
University Place, Glasgow G12 8TA, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Infection & Immunity, University of Glasgow; 120 University Place,
Glasgow G12 8TA, United Kingdom.
(3)Immunology Research Core Facility, Gemelli Science and Technology Park,
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS Rome; Largo Agostino
Gemelli 1, 00168, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology, Amsterdam University
Medical Centre, Amsterdam; Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Experimental Immunology, Amsterdam University Medical Centre,
Amsterdam Institute for Immunology and Infectious diseases, Meibergdreef 9, 1105
AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Institute of Pathology, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli
IRCCS, Largo Agostino Gemelli 1, 00168, Rome, Italy.
(7)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome; Largo Agostino Gemelli 1, 00168, Rome,
Italy.
(8)Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston; MA 02115, USA.
(9)Clinical Services Division, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow G51
4TF, United Kingdom.
(10)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford; Roosevelt Drive,
Headington, Oxford, OX3 7FY, United Kingdom.
(11)Respiratory, Immunology & Inflammation Research Unit, GSK, Stevenage, SG1
2NY, UK.
(12)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal
Sciences, University of Oxford; Windmill Road, Oxford, OX3 7LD, United Kingdom.

Recent single-cell multi-omic and spatial analyses of synovial biopsies have
transformed our understanding of myeloid cell-driven mechanisms underlying human
joint pathology and tissue homeostasis in Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However,
the developmental trajectories of synovial tissue macrophage (STM) subsets in
humans remain poorly understood, due in part to the lack of models that
faithfully replicate synovial tissue niches. This hinders the exploration of the
therapeutic potential of targeting specific synovial myeloid cell clusters.
Using multi-omics analyses of synovial tissue from an allogeneic bone marrow
transplant recipient, we show that joint-specific tissue-resident STM subsets,
including both health- and disease-associated clusters, can derive from
peripheral blood monocytes. Analysis of embryonic synovial joints revealed that
macrophage localization and maturation in the joints are preceded by local
stromal niche specialisation, indicating that synovial fibroblasts (FLS) provide
tissue-specific instructive cues to STM precursors. To elucidate human STM
developmental trajectories, we established a SNP-based fate-tracking human
synovial organoid system by embedding distinct blood-derived myeloid precursors,
together with FLS clusters from RA synovial biopsies and endothelial cells, into
3D structures. These organoids reproduced key synovial tissue features,
including lining and sublining architecture and stromal-myeloid cell cluster
composition. Importantly, they supported differentiation of all resident STM
subsets: homeostatic lining TREM2pos macrophages, their pathogenic
TREM2lowSPP1pos counterparts that characterize the RA hyperplastic lining, and
both homeostatic and RA-associated perivascular LYVE1pos STM clusters, all
traced to monocytic precursors. In summary, we show that development of STM
subsets is driven by fibroblast-conditioned spatial niches. We have established
a novel, tractable ex vivo platform to dissect the niche-specific cues driving
homeostatic versus pathogenic phenotypic clusters.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-8079358/v1
PMCID: PMC12668173
PMID: 41333404

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Authors declare that they
have no competing interests.
