---
reference_id: "PMID:22864798"
title: The unique clinical characteristics of melanoma diagnosed in children.
authors:
- Han D
- Zager JS
- Han G
- Marzban SS
- Puleo CA
- Sarnaik AA
- Reed D
- Messina JL
- Sondak VK
journal: Ann Surg Oncol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2554-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The unique clinical characteristics of melanoma diagnosed in children.
**Authors:** Han D, Zager JS, Han G, Marzban SS, Puleo CA, Sarnaik AA, Reed D, Messina JL, Sondak VK
**Journal:** Ann Surg Oncol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1245/s10434-012-2554-5](https://doi.org/10.1245/s10434-012-2554-5)

## Content

1. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Nov;19(12):3888-95. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2554-5. Epub 
2012 Aug 3.

The unique clinical characteristics of melanoma diagnosed in children.

Han D(1), Zager JS, Han G, Marzban SS, Puleo CA, Sarnaik AA, Reed D, Messina JL, 
Sondak VK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cutaneous Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Studies have demonstrated a higher rate of nodal metastases in 
melanoma of childhood, but there is controversy about the overall prognosis 
relative to adults. We describe a large single-institution experience with 
pediatric melanoma and assess prognostic characteristics.
METHODS: Retrospective review identified 126 patients diagnosed with melanoma at 
<21 years of age and referred for treatment from 1986 to 2011. Atypical lesions 
were excluded. Clinicopathologic characteristics were correlated with sentinel 
lymph node (SLN) status and outcomes.
RESULTS: SLN biopsy was positive in 18 of 62 cases (29 %). Increasing Breslow 
thickness correlated with a positive SLN (p < 0.05). After a median follow-up of 
5 years, there were 27 recurrences and 20 deaths. Positive SLN patients had 
significantly worse recurrence-free survival (RFS, p < 0.05) and significantly 
worse melanoma-specific survival (MSS, p = 0.05) compared with negative SLN 
patients. The 5-year RFS and MSS for positive SLN patients were 59.5 and 77.8 %, 
compared with 93.7 and 96.8 % for negative SLN patients. Recurrences and 
melanoma-related deaths were often seen beyond 5 years. No deaths have occurred 
in patients <12 years, but 9.1 % of patients 12-17 years and 17.2 % of patients 
18-20 years died from melanoma (p = 0.291).
CONCLUSIONS: Children with melanoma have higher rates of SLN metastases (29 %) 
than adults with comparable melanomas. Despite the higher incidence of nodal 
metastases, survival is equal to or better than what is reported for adults. 
However, long-term follow-up is necessary in this population since recurrences 
and deaths are often seen beyond 5 years.

DOI: 10.1245/s10434-012-2554-5
PMCID: PMC4519977
PMID: 22864798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]