---
reference_id: "PMID:38030819"
title: "Molecular consequences of PQBP1 deficiency, involved in the X-linked Renpenning syndrome."
authors:
- Courraud J
- Engel C
- Quartier A
- Drouot N
- Houessou U
- Plassard D
- Sorlin A
- Brischoux-Boucher E
- Gouy E
- Van Maldergem L
- Rossi M
- Lesca G
- Edery P
- Putoux A
- Bilan F
- Gilbert-Dussardier B
- Atallah I
- Kalscheuer VM
- Mandel JL
- Piton A
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02323-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation/genetics
- Nonsense Mediated mRNA Decay/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Proliferation/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Male
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Cerebral Palsy
- X-Linked Intellectual Disability
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular consequences of PQBP1 deficiency, involved in the X-linked Renpenning syndrome.
**Authors:** Courraud J, Engel C, Quartier A, Drouot N, Houessou U, Plassard D, Sorlin A, Brischoux-Boucher E, Gouy E, Van Maldergem L, Rossi M, Lesca G, Edery P, Putoux A, Bilan F, Gilbert-Dussardier B, Atallah I, Kalscheuer VM, Mandel JL, Piton A
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-023-02323-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-02323-5)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2024 Feb;29(2):287-296. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02323-5. Epub 
2023 Nov 29.

Molecular consequences of PQBP1 deficiency, involved in the X-linked Renpenning 
syndrome.

Courraud J(1)(2)(3)(4), Engel C(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Quartier A(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Drouot N(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Houessou U(1)(2)(3)(4), Plassard D(1)(2)(3)(4), Sorlin 
A(5), Brischoux-Boucher E(6), Gouy E(7), Van Maldergem L(6), Rossi M(7)(8), 
Lesca G(7)(8), Edery P(7)(8), Putoux A(7)(8), Bilan F(9), Gilbert-Dussardier 
B(9), Atallah I(10), Kalscheuer VM(11), Mandel JL(1)(2)(3)(4), Piton 
A(12)(13)(14)(15)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, 
France.
(2)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7104, Illkirch, France.
(3)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U964, Illkirch, 
France.
(4)Université de Strasbourg, 67 400, Illkirch, France.
(5)National Center of Genetics, Laboratoire national de santé, Dudelange, 
Luxembourg.
(6)Centre de Génétique Humaine, CHU Besançon, Université de Franche-Comté, 
25056, Besançon, France.
(7)Genetics Department, University Hospital of Lyon, Bron, 69500, France.
(8)Equipe GENDEV, CRNL, Inserm U1028, CNRS UMR 5292, UCB Lyon1, Illkirch, 
France.
(9)Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Poitiers, 86 000, Poitiers, France.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics, Lausanne University Hospital and University 
of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(11)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, 
France. apiton@unistra.fr.
(13)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7104, Illkirch, France. 
apiton@unistra.fr.
(14)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U964, Illkirch, 
France. apiton@unistra.fr.
(15)Université de Strasbourg, 67 400, Illkirch, France. apiton@unistra.fr.
(16)Genetic diagnosis laboratory, Strasbourg University Hospital, 67 090, 
Strasbourg, France. apiton@unistra.fr.
(17)Institut Universitaire de France, Paris, France. apiton@unistra.fr.
(#)Contributed equally

Mutations in the PQBP1 gene (polyglutamine-binding protein-1) are responsible 
for a syndromic X-linked form of neurodevelopmental disorder (XL-NDD) with 
intellectual disability (ID), named Renpenning syndrome. PQBP1 encodes a protein 
involved in transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of gene 
expression. To investigate the consequences of PQBP1 loss, we used RNA 
interference to knock-down (KD) PQBP1 in human neural stem cells (hNSC). We 
observed a decrease of cell proliferation, as well as the deregulation of the 
expression of 58 genes, comprising genes encoding proteins associated with 
neurodegenerative diseases, playing a role in mRNA regulation or involved in 
innate immunity. We also observed an enrichment of genes involved in other forms 
of NDD (CELF2, APC2, etc). In particular, we identified an increase of a 
non-canonical isoform of another XL-NDD gene, UPF3B, an actor of nonsense mRNA 
mediated decay (NMD). This isoform encodes a shorter protein (UPF3B_S) deprived 
from the domains binding NMD effectors, however no notable change in NMD was 
observed after PQBP1-KD in fibroblasts containing a premature termination codon. 
We showed that short non-canonical and long canonical UPF3B isoforms have 
different interactomes, suggesting they could play distinct roles. The link 
between PQBP1 loss and increase of UPF3B_S expression was confirmed in mRNA 
obtained from patients with pathogenic variants in PQBP1, particularly 
pronounced for truncating variants and missense variants located in the 
C-terminal domain. We therefore used it as a molecular marker of Renpenning 
syndrome, to test the pathogenicity of variants of uncertain clinical 
significance identified in PQPB1 in individuals with NDD, using patient blood 
mRNA and HeLa cells expressing wild-type or mutant PQBP1 cDNA. We showed that 
these different approaches were efficient to prove a functional effect of 
variants in the C-terminal domain of the protein. In conclusion, our study 
provided information on the pathological mechanisms involved in Renpenning 
syndrome, but also allowed the identification of a biomarker of PQBP1 deficiency 
useful to test variant effect.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-023-02323-5
PMID: 38030819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]