---
reference_id: "PMID:34675934"
title: Identification of a Novel Serological Marker in Seronegative Rheumatoid Arthritis Using the Peptide Library Approach.
authors:
- Bason C
- Barbieri A
- Martinelli N
- Olivieri B
- Argentino G
- Bartoloni E
- Beri R
- Jadav G
- Puccetti A
- Tinazzi E
- Lunardi C
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.753400
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a Novel Serological Marker in Seronegative Rheumatoid Arthritis Using the Peptide Library Approach.
**Authors:** Bason C, Barbieri A, Martinelli N, Olivieri B, Argentino G, Bartoloni E, Beri R, Jadav G, Puccetti A, Tinazzi E, Lunardi C
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.753400](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.753400)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 5;12:753400. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.753400.
eCollection  2021.

Identification of a Novel Serological Marker in Seronegative Rheumatoid 
Arthritis Using the Peptide Library Approach.

Bason C(1), Barbieri A(2), Martinelli N(1), Olivieri B(1), Argentino G(1), 
Bartoloni E(3), Beri R(1), Jadav G(1), Puccetti A(4), Tinazzi E(1), Lunardi 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Perugia, 
Perugia, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Histology, University of 
Genova, Genova, Italy.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease characterized by 
chronic inflammation mainly affecting the joints leading to cartilage and bone 
destruction. The definition of seropositive or seronegative RA is based on the 
presence or absence of rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-citrullinated peptide 
antibodies (ACPAs). Other autoantibodies have been identified in the last decade 
such as antibodies directed against carbamylated antigens, peptidyl-arginine 
deiminase type 4 and v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homologue B. In order 
to identify relevant autoantigens, we screened a random peptide library (RPL) 
with pooled IgGs obtained from 50 patients with seronegative RA. Patients' sera 
were then used in an ELISA test to identify the most frequently recognized 
peptide among those obtained by screening the RPL. Sera from age- and 
sex-matched healthy subjects were used as controls. We identified a specific 
peptide (RA-peptide) recognized by RA patients' sera, but not by healthy 
subjects or by patients with other immune-mediated diseases. The majority of 
sera from seronegative and seropositive RA patients (73.8% and 63.6% 
respectively) contained IgG antibodies directed against the RA-peptide. 
Interestingly, this peptide shares homology with some self-antigens, such as 
Protein-tyrosine kinase 2 beta, B cell scaffold protein, Liprin-alfa1 and 
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte protein 4. Affinity purified anti-RA-peptide antibodies 
were able to cross react with these autoantigens. In conclusion, we identified a 
peptide that is recognized by seropositive and, most importantly, by 
seronegative RA patients' sera, but not by healthy subjects, conferring to this 
epitope a high degree of specificity. This peptide shares also homology with 
other autoantigens which can be recognized by autoantibodies present in 
seronegative RA sera. These newly identified autoantibodies, although present 
also in a percentage of seropositive RA patients, may be considered as novel 
serum biomarkers for seronegative RA, which lacks the presence of RF and/or 
ACPAs.

Copyright © 2021 Bason, Barbieri, Martinelli, Olivieri, Argentino, Bartoloni, 
Beri, Jadav, Puccetti, Tinazzi and Lunardi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.753400
PMCID: PMC8525329
PMID: 34675934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.