---
reference_id: "PMID:14970983"
title: "Fibrocartilaginous embolism--an uncommon cause of spinal cord infarction: a case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Han JJ
- Massagli TL
- Jaffe KM
journal: Arch Phys Med Rehabil
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/s0003-9993(03)00289-2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cartilage
- "Embolism/complications, etiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Infarction/etiology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Prolapse
- "Spinal Cord/blood supply, pathology"
- Spinal Cord Diseases/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibrocartilaginous embolism--an uncommon cause of spinal cord infarction: a case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Han JJ, Massagli TL, Jaffe KM
**Journal:** Arch Phys Med Rehabil (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0003-9993(03)00289-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0003-9993(03)00289-2)

## Content

1. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2004 Jan;85(1):153-7. doi:
10.1016/s0003-9993(03)00289-2.

Fibrocartilaginous embolism--an uncommon cause of spinal cord infarction: a case 
report and review of the literature.

Han JJ(1), Massagli TL, Jaffe KM.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital and Regional Medical Center and Department of 
Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, USA. 
jhan@u.washington.edu

Fibrocartilaginous embolism is a rare cause of spinal cord infarction. It is 
postulated that an acute vertical disk herniation of the nucleus pulposus 
material can lead to spinal cord infarction by a retrograde embolization to the 
central artery. An increased intradiskal pressure resulting from axial loading 
of the vertebral column with a concomitant Valsalva maneuver is thought to be 
the initiating event for the embolus. We present a previously healthy 
16-year-old boy with sudden onset of back pain and progressive paraparesis 
within 36 hours after lifting exercises in a squat position. His clinical 
presentation and neuroimaging studies were consistent with spinal cord 
infarction resulting from a central artery embolus at the T8 spinal cord level. 
Laboratory investigation showed no evidence of infectious, autoimmune, 
inflammatory, or neoplastic causes. Although no histologic confirmation was 
obtained, lack of evidence for other plausible diagnoses in the setting of his 
clinical presentation and in the magnetic resonance imaging findings made 
fibrocartilaginous embolism myelopathy the most likely diagnosis. We postulated 
that some cases of transverse myelitis might actually be fibrocartilaginous 
embolism, making it a more prevalent cause of an acute myelopathy than commonly 
recognized. Relevant literature and current theories regarding the pathogenesis 
of fibrocartilaginous embolism myelopathy are reviewed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0003-9993(03)00289-2
PMID: 14970983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]