---
reference_id: "PMID:28742979"
title: Adult attachment and drinking context as predictors of alcohol problems and relationship satisfaction in college students.
authors:
- Hocking EC
- Simons RM
- Simons JS
- Freeman H
journal: Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/00952990.2017.1344682
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult attachment and drinking context as predictors of alcohol problems and relationship satisfaction in college students.
**Authors:** Hocking EC, Simons RM, Simons JS, Freeman H
**Journal:** Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00952990.2017.1344682](https://doi.org/10.1080/00952990.2017.1344682)

## Content

1. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2018;44(3):339-347. doi:
10.1080/00952990.2017.1344682.  Epub 2017 Jul 25.

Adult attachment and drinking context as predictors of alcohol problems and 
relationship satisfaction in college students.

Hocking EC(1), Simons RM(1), Simons JS(1), Freeman H(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Psychology , University of South Dakota , Vermillion , South 
Dakota , USA.
(2)b Department of Counseling and Psychology in Education , University of South 
Dakota , Vermillion , South Dakota , USA.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that for young adults, intimate partners influence 
each other's drinking patterns. Therefore, exploration of variables related to 
intimate partner relationships (such as attachment style) could broaden the 
current understanding of risk factors for alcohol problems in this demographic.
OBJECTIVES: The current study examined the role of drinking context in the 
relationships among insecure attachment, alcohol problems, and relationship 
satisfaction. A path model was hypothesized where the relationship between 
insecure attachment and alcohol problems would be explained via two distinct 
drinking contexts (i.e., drinking with one's partner and drinking away from 
one's partner). It was also hypothesized that the relationship between insecure 
attachment and relationship satisfaction would be explained via these same two 
drinking contexts.
METHODS: Participants were 194 undergraduate students ages 18-25 who reported 
being in a monogamous intimate partner relationship for at least 90 days and had 
also consumed alcohol in the past 90 days. The sample was comprised of 76% women 
and 24% men.
RESULTS: The hypothesized direct relationship from anxious attachment to alcohol 
problems was significant; there were also significant direct paths from both 
anxious and avoidant attachment to relationship satisfaction. The hypotheses 
regarding indirect relationships were not supported.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study contribute to the existing literature, in 
that they suggest that drinking in the context of an intimate relationship may 
not directly affect relationship satisfaction in this population. However, 
relationship functioning still appears to be an important variable to consider 
in the prevention and treatment of alcohol-related problems affecting college 
students.

DOI: 10.1080/00952990.2017.1344682
PMID: 28742979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]