---
reference_id: "PMID:22572546"
title: "Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of Niemann-Pick disease type C: an update."
authors:
- Patterson MC
- Hendriksz CJ
- Walterfang M
- Sedel F
- Vanier MT
- Wijburg F
- NP-C Guidelines Working Group
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.012
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type C/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of Niemann-Pick disease type C: an update.
**Authors:** Patterson MC, Hendriksz CJ, Walterfang M, Sedel F, Vanier MT, Wijburg F, NP-C Guidelines Working Group
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.012)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2012 Jul;106(3):330-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.012.
Epub  2012 May 8.

Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of Niemann-Pick disease type C: 
an update.

Patterson MC(1), Hendriksz CJ, Walterfang M, Sedel F, Vanier MT, Wijburg F; NP-C 
Guidelines Working Group.

Collaborators: Baumgartner M, Bembi B, Bonnot C, Burlina A, Correll C, Covanis 
A, Dionisi-Vici C, Gama C, Hendriksz CJ, Klünemann H, Lachmann R, Lobo A, 
Lourenço C, Mengel E, Ory D, Patterson M, Pineda M, Sedel F, Topçu M, Vanier MT, 
Walterfang M, Wijburg F, Wraith JE.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
Patterson.Marc@mayo.edu

Niemann-Pick disease type C (NP-C) is a rare inherited neurovisceral disease 
caused by mutations in either the NPC1 (in 95% of cases) or the NPC2 gene (in 
around 5% of cases), which lead to impaired intracellular lipid trafficking and 
accumulation of cholesterol and glycosphingolipids in the brain and other 
tissues. Characteristic neurological manifestations of NP-C include saccadic eye 
movement (SEM) abnormalities or vertical supranuclear gaze palsy (VSGP), 
cerebellar signs (ataxia, dystonia/dysmetria, dysarthria and dysphagia) and 
gelastic cataplexy. Epileptic seizures are also common in affected patients. 
Typically, neurological disease onset occurs during childhood, although an 
increasing number of cases are being detected and diagnosed during adulthood 
based on late-onset neurological signs and psychiatric manifestations. 
Categorization of patients according to age at onset of neurological 
manifestations (i.e. early-infantile, late-infantile, juvenile and 
adolescent/adult-onset) can be useful for the evaluation of disease course and 
treatment responses. The first international guidelines for the clinical 
management of NP-C in children and adults were published in 2009. Since that 
time a significant amount of data regarding the epidemiology, 
detection/diagnosis, and treatment of NP-C has been published. Here, we report 
points of consensus among experts in the diagnosis and treatment of NP-C based 
on a follow-up meeting in Paris, France in September 2011. This article serves 
as an update to the original guidelines providing, among other things, further 
information on detection/diagnostic methods, potential new methods of monitoring 
disease progression, and therapy. Treatment goals and the application of 
disease-specific therapy with miglustat are also re-evaluated.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.012
PMID: 22572546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]