---
reference_id: "PMID:33603285"
title: "The heterotaxy syndrome: associated congenital heart defects and management."
authors:
- Agarwal R
- Varghese R
- Jesudian V
- Moses J
journal: Indian J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12055-020-00935-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The heterotaxy syndrome: associated congenital heart defects and management.
**Authors:** Agarwal R, Varghese R, Jesudian V, Moses J
**Journal:** Indian J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12055-020-00935-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12055-020-00935-y)

## Content

1. Indian J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021 Jan;37(Suppl 1):67-81. doi:
10.1007/s12055-020-00935-y. Epub 2020 Mar 27.

The heterotaxy syndrome: associated congenital heart defects and management.

Agarwal R(1), Varghese R(1), Jesudian V(2), Moses J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiac Surgery, The Madras Medical Mission, 4-A, Dr.
J.J. Nagar, Mogappair, Chennai, Tamil Nadu India.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, The Madras Medical Mission, 4-A, Dr. J.J.
Nagar, Mogappair, Chennai, Tamil Nadu India.

Heterotaxy syndrome (HS) constitutes a spectrum of anomalies arising from
embryological errors that result in abnormalities of lateralization involving
thoraco-abdominal viscera and culminate in loss of normal asymmetric arrangement
of these organs. Besides the unique challenges involved in planning and
execution of surgical procedures aimed at correction or palliation of these
anomalies, they have the potential to cause profound physiological and
immunological consequences in the individual patient due to their cardiac and
extra-cardiac manifestations. This article aims to review the literature on this
rare and extraordinary subset of developmental anomalies with the intention of
familiarizing the reader on the modes of presentation, manifestations, and the
variations thereof while dealing with this anomaly. In our institutional
experience with HS, 75 consecutive patients were seen between January 2011 and
September 2018. Of these, 48 (64%) were confirmed to have isomerism of right
atrial appendages (IRAA) and the rest had isomerism of left atrial appendages
(ILAA). The cardiac and extra-cardiac manifestations of these patients were
listed out. Fifty-four patients (34 with IRAA and 20 with ILAA) underwent 83
surgical procedures. While 49 patients were palliated on the univentricular
pathway, 5 underwent biventricular repair. The in-hospital mortality was 7 (13%)
in both groups combined (5 for patients with IRAA and 2 for ILAA). In
conclusion, the surgical management of HS is associated with satisfactory
outcomes in current era.

© Indian Association of Cardiovascular-Thoracic Surgeons 2020.

DOI: 10.1007/s12055-020-00935-y
PMCID: PMC7859150
PMID: 33603285

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.
