---
reference_id: "PMID:29395989"
title: "Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, part 1: diagnosis, and neuromuscular, rehabilitation, endocrine, and gastrointestinal and nutritional management."
authors:
- Birnkrant DJ
- Bushby K
- Bann CM
- Apkon SD
- Blackwell A
- Brumbaugh D
- Case LE
- Clemens PR
- Hadjiyannakis S
- Pandya S
- Street N
- Tomezsko J
- Wagner KR
- Ward LM
- Weber DR
- DMD Care Considerations Working Group
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30024-3
keywords:
- Disease Management
- Endocrine System/physiopathology
- Gastrointestinal Tract/physiopathology
- Humans
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Neuromuscular Junction/pathology, physiopathology"
- Nutrition Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, part 1: diagnosis, and neuromuscular, rehabilitation, endocrine, and gastrointestinal and nutritional management.
**Authors:** Birnkrant DJ, Bushby K, Bann CM, Apkon SD, Blackwell A, Brumbaugh D, Case LE, Clemens PR, Hadjiyannakis S, Pandya S, Street N, Tomezsko J, Wagner KR, Ward LM, Weber DR, DMD Care Considerations Working Group
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30024-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30024-3)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2018 Mar;17(3):251-267. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30024-3.
Epub  2018 Feb 3.

Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, part 1: diagnosis, and 
neuromuscular, rehabilitation, endocrine, and gastrointestinal and nutritional 
management.

Birnkrant DJ(1), Bushby K(2), Bann CM(3), Apkon SD(4), Blackwell A(3), Brumbaugh 
D(5), Case LE(6), Clemens PR(7), Hadjiyannakis S(8), Pandya S(9), Street N(10), 
Tomezsko J(11), Wagner KR(12), Ward LM(8), Weber DR(13); DMD Care Considerations 
Working Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, MetroHealth Medical Center, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH, USA. Electronic address: dbirnkrant@metrohealth.org.
(2)John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Institute of Genetic 
Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(3)RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(5)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Children's 
Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Doctor of Physical Therapy Division, Department of Orthopaedics, Duke 
University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, and 
Neurology Service, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.
(8)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of Eastern 
Ontario, and University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(9)School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 
USA.
(10)Rare Disorders and Health Outcomes Team, National Center on Birth Defects 
and Developmental Disabilities, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(11)Medical Nutrition Consulting of Media LLC, and Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(12)Center for Genetic Muscle Disorders, Kennedy Krieger Institute, and Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(13)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Golisano Children's Hospital, 
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2018 Jun;17(6):495. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30125-X.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2018 May;17(5):389-391. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30115-7.

Since the publication of the Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) care 
considerations in 2010, multidisciplinary care of this severe, progressive 
neuromuscular disease has evolved. In conjunction with improved patient 
survival, a shift to more anticipatory diagnostic and therapeutic strategies has 
occurred, with a renewed focus on patient quality of life. In 2014, a steering 
committee of experts from a wide range of disciplines was established to update 
the 2010 DMD care considerations, with the goal of improving patient care. The 
new care considerations aim to address the needs of patients with prolonged 
survival, to provide guidance on advances in assessments and interventions, and 
to consider the implications of emerging genetic and molecular therapies for 
DMD. The committee identified 11 topics to be included in the update, eight of 
which were addressed in the original care considerations. The three new topics 
are primary care and emergency management, endocrine management, and transitions 
of care across the lifespan. In part 1 of this three-part update, we present 
care considerations for diagnosis of DMD and neuromuscular, rehabilitation, 
endocrine (growth, puberty, and adrenal insufficiency), and gastrointestinal 
(including nutrition and dysphagia) management.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30024-3
PMCID: PMC5869704
PMID: 29395989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]