---
reference_id: "PMID:18552279"
title: Saccharomyces cerevisiae Afr1 protein is a protein phosphatase 1/Glc7-targeting subunit that regulates the septin cytoskeleton during mating.
authors:
- Bharucha JP
- Larson JR
- Konopka JB
- Tatchell K
journal: Eukaryot Cell
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1128/EC.00024-08
keywords:
- Cell Polarity/physiology
- "Cytoplasm/enzymology, genetics, ultrastructure"
- "Cytoskeleton/enzymology, genetics, ultrastructure"
- "Microfilament Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Phosphoprotein Phosphatases/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Binding/genetics
- Protein Phosphatase 1
- "Protein Subunits/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Reproduction/genetics
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/enzymology, genetics, ultrastructure"
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Saccharomyces cerevisiae Afr1 protein is a protein phosphatase 1/Glc7-targeting subunit that regulates the septin cytoskeleton during mating.
**Authors:** Bharucha JP, Larson JR, Konopka JB, Tatchell K
**Journal:** Eukaryot Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/EC.00024-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/EC.00024-08)

## Content

1. Eukaryot Cell. 2008 Aug;7(8):1246-55. doi: 10.1128/EC.00024-08. Epub 2008 Jun
13.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae Afr1 protein is a protein phosphatase 1/Glc7-targeting
subunit that regulates the septin cytoskeleton during mating.

Bharucha JP(1), Larson JR, Konopka JB, Tatchell K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 1501 Kings Highway, LSU
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport LA 71130, USA.

Glc7, the type1 serine/threonine phosphatase in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, is targeted by auxiliary subunits to numerous locations in the cell,
where it regulates a range of physiological pathways. We show here that the
accumulation of Glc7 at mating projections requires Afr1, a protein required for
the formation of normal projections. AFR1-null mutants fail to target Glc7 to
projections, and an Afr1 variant specifically defective in binding to Glc7
[Afr1(V546A F548A)] forms aberrant projections. The septin filaments in mating
projections of AFR1 mutants initiate normally but then rearrange asymmetrically
as the projection develops, suggesting that the Afr1-Glc7 holoenzyme may
regulate the maintenance of septin complexes during mating. These results
demonstrate a previously unknown role for Afr1 in targeting Glc7 to mating
projections and in regulating the septin architecture during mating.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00024-08
PMCID: PMC2519778
PMID: 18552279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
