---
reference_id: "PMID:14663033"
title: Subacute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.
authors:
- Oh SJ
- Kurokawa K
- de Almeida DF
- Ryan HF Jr
- Claussen GC
journal: Neurology
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000096166.28131.4c
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Biopsy
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nerve Fibers/pathology
- "Polyradiculoneuropathy/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- "Polyradiculoneuropathy, Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating/diagnosis"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subacute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.
**Authors:** Oh SJ, Kurokawa K, de Almeida DF, Ryan HF Jr, Claussen GC
**Journal:** Neurology (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1212/01.wnl.0000096166.28131.4c](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000096166.28131.4c)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2003 Dec 9;61(11):1507-12. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000096166.28131.4c.

Subacute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.

Oh SJ(1), Kurokawa K, de Almeida DF, Ryan HF Jr, Claussen GC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, and Department 
of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 35294, USA. shinjoh@uab.edu

OBJECTIVE: To report the clinical, electrophysiologic, and histologic 
characteristics of subacute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (SIDP) and 
to present the diagnostic criteria of this disease.
METHODS: For a diagnosis of "definite SIDP," there were four mandatory criteria: 
1) progressive motor and/or sensory dysfunction consistent with neuropathy in 
more than one limb with time to nadir between 4 and 8 weeks, 2) 
electrophysiologic evidence of demyelination in at least two nerves, 3) no other 
etiology of neuropathy, and 4) no relapse on adequate follow-up. Supportive 
criteria included high spinal fluid protein level (>55 mg/dL) and inflammatory 
cells in the nerve biopsy. A diagnosis of "probable SIDP" required progression 
of demyelinating neuropathy over a 4- to 8-week period.
RESULTS: Sixteen definite SIDP patients were identified among 29 probable SIDP 
patients. An antecedent infection was found in 38% of cases. The two most common 
neuropathy types were a symmetric motor-sensory neuropathy and a pure motor 
neuropathy. Cranial nerve deficits and respiratory failure were rare. Spinal 
fluid protein was high in 93% of cases. Demyelination was documented by the 
motor nerve conduction in 88% of cases and by the near-nerve needle sensory 
nerve conduction in two cases. Almost all patients were treated with prednisone 
and some with additional immunotherapies. Complete recovery was achieved in 69% 
of cases and partial recovery in others. Definite SIDP had all the 
characteristics of CIDP with three exceptions: a higher rate of antecedent 
infection, no relapse rate, and a high rate of recovery to normal.
CONCLUSION: Subacute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy is a definite 
entity bridging the gap between Guillain-Barré syndrome and chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating polyneuropathy.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000096166.28131.4c
PMID: 14663033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]