---
reference_id: "PMID:17236137"
title: ALAD porphyria is a conformational disease.
authors:
- Jaffe EK
- Stith L
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/511444
keywords:
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- "Porphobilinogen Synthase/chemistry, genetics"
- Porphyrias/genetics
- Protein Conformation
- "Recombinant Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALAD porphyria is a conformational disease.
**Authors:** Jaffe EK, Stith L
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/511444](https://doi.org/10.1086/511444)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Feb;80(2):329-37. doi: 10.1086/511444. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

ALAD porphyria is a conformational disease.

Jaffe EK(1), Stith L.

Author information:
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. Eileen.Jaffe@fccc.edu

ALAD porphyria is a rare porphyric disorder, with five documented compound
heterozygous patients, and it is caused by a profound lack of porphobilinogen
synthase (PBGS) activity. PBGS, also called "delta-aminolevulinate dehydratase,"
is encoded by the ALAD gene and catalyzes the second step in the biosynthesis of
heme. ALAD porphyria is a recessive disorder; there are two common variant ALAD
alleles, which encode K59 and N59, and eight known porphyria-associated ALAD
mutations, which encode F12L, E89K, C132R, G133R, V153M, R240W, A274T, and
V275M. Human PBGS exists as an equilibrium of functionally distinct quaternary
structure assemblies, known as "morpheeins," in which one functional
homo-oligomer can dissociate, change conformation, and reassociate into a
different oligomer. In the case of human PBGS, the two assemblies are a
high-activity octamer and a low-activity hexamer. The current study quantifies
the morpheein forms of human PBGS for the common and porphyria-associated
variants. Heterologous expression in Escherichia coli, followed by separation of
the octameric and hexameric assemblies on an ion-exchange column, showed that
the percentage of hexamer for F12L (100%), R240W (80%), G133R (48%), C132R
(36%), E89K (31%), and A274T (14%) was appreciably larger than for the wild-type
proteins K59 and N59 (0% and 3%, respectively). All eight porphyria-associated
variants, including V153M and V275M, showed an increased propensity to form the
hexamer, according to a kinetic analysis. Thus, all porphyria-associated human
PBGS variants are found to shift the morpheein equilibrium for PBGS toward the
less active hexamer. We propose that the disequilibrium of morpheein assemblies
broadens the definition of conformational diseases beyond the prion disorders
and that ALAD porphyria is the first example of a morpheein-based conformational
disease.

DOI: 10.1086/511444
PMCID: PMC1785348
PMID: 17236137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
