---
reference_id: "PMID:33131691"
title: "The NZB/W F1 mouse model for Sjögren's syndrome: A historical perspective and lessons learned."
authors:
- Bagavant H
- Michrowska A
- Deshmukh US
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102686
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The NZB/W F1 mouse model for Sjögren's syndrome: A historical perspective and lessons learned.
**Authors:** Bagavant H, Michrowska A, Deshmukh US
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102686](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102686)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2020 Dec;19(12):102686. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102686. Epub
 2020 Oct 22.

The NZB/W F1 mouse model for Sjögren's syndrome: A historical perspective and 
lessons learned.

Bagavant H(1), Michrowska A(1), Deshmukh US(2).

Author information:
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(2)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Electronic address: umesh-deshmukh@omrf.org.

Sjögren's syndrome (SS) is a chronic rheumatic autoimmune disorder affecting 
multiple organ systems. The clinical findings in SS patients show considerable 
heterogeneity and overlap with other autoimmune diseases. In addition, the 
autoimmune response in SS initiates several years before the appearance of 
clinical symptoms. Thus, understanding the pathogenic mechanisms involved in the 
disease process have been a challenge. Several animal model systems of SS-like 
disease have been developed to overcome these issues. The New Zealand Black 
(NZB) x New Zealand White (NZW) F1 (NZB/W F1) mouse represents the first 
spontaneous mouse model of SS. In this review, we provide a historical 
perspective and detailed description of this mouse model focusing on exocrine 
gland histopathology, autoantibody populations, and glandular dysfunction. 
Considering that NZB/W F1 mice also develop a systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE)-like disease, this mouse model mimics the clinical presentation of 
polyautoimmunity seen in a sizable subset of SS patients. It is plausible that 
such patients will require distinct therapeutic interventions necessary to treat 
both SLE and SS. Therefore, the NZB/W F1 mouse is a powerful tool to decipher 
pathogenic mechanisms involved in SS related polyautoimmunity and develop 
appropriate therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102686
PMCID: PMC7781068
PMID: 33131691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]