---
reference_id: "PMID:39014464"
title: "Data-independent LC-MS/MS analysis of ME/CFS plasma reveals a dysregulated coagulation system, endothelial dysfunction, downregulation of complement machinery."
authors:
- Nunes M
- Vlok M
- Proal A
- Kell DB
- Pretorius E
journal: Cardiovasc Diabetol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12933-024-02315-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Blood Coagulation
- "Chromatography, Liquid"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Down-Regulation
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/blood, physiopathology, immunology, metabolism"
- Case-Control Studies
- Proteomics
- COVID-19/blood
- Complement System Proteins/metabolism
- "Endothelium, Vascular/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Data-independent LC-MS/MS analysis of ME/CFS plasma reveals a dysregulated coagulation system, endothelial dysfunction, downregulation of complement machinery.
**Authors:** Nunes M, Vlok M, Proal A, Kell DB, Pretorius E
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Diabetol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12933-024-02315-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12933-024-02315-x)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2024 Jul 16;23(1):254. doi: 10.1186/s12933-024-02315-x.

Data-independent LC-MS/MS analysis of ME/CFS plasma reveals a dysregulated 
coagulation system, endothelial dysfunction, downregulation of complement 
machinery.

Nunes M(1), Vlok M(2), Proal A(3), Kell DB(4)(5)(6), Pretorius E(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Stellenbosch 
University, Private Bag X1 Matieland, Stellenbosch, 7602, South Africa.
(2)Central Analytical Facility: Mass Spectrometry, Stellenbosch University, 
Tygerberg Campus, Room 6054, Clinical Building, Francie Van Zijl Drive 
Tygerberg, Cape Town, 7505, South Africa.
(3)PolyBio Research Foundation, 7900 SE 28th ST, Suite 412, Mercer Island, DC, 
98040, USA.
(4)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Stellenbosch 
University, Private Bag X1 Matieland, Stellenbosch, 7602, South Africa. 
dbk@liv.ac.uk.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Systems Biology, Institute of Systems, 
Molecular and Integrative Biology, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, 
University of Liverpool, Crown St, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK. dbk@liv.ac.uk.
(6)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Building 220, Chemitorvet 200, 2800, Kongens Lyngby, 
Denmark. dbk@liv.ac.uk.
(7)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Stellenbosch 
University, Private Bag X1 Matieland, Stellenbosch, 7602, South Africa. 
resiap@sun.ac.za.
(8)Department of Biochemistry and Systems Biology, Institute of Systems, 
Molecular and Integrative Biology, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, 
University of Liverpool, Crown St, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK. resiap@sun.ac.za.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a debilitating 
chronic condition that is characterized by unresolved fatigue, post-exertion 
symptom exacerbation (PESE), cognitive dysfunction, orthostatic intolerance, and 
other symptoms. ME/CFS lacks established clinical biomarkers and requires 
further elucidation of disease mechanisms. A growing number of studies 
demonstrate signs of hematological and cardiovascular pathology in ME/CFS 
cohorts, including hyperactivated platelets, endothelial dysfunction, vascular 
dysregulation, and anomalous clotting processes. To build on these findings, and 
to identify potential biomarkers that can be related to pathophysiology, we 
measured differences in protein expression in platelet-poor plasma (PPP) samples 
from 15 ME/CFS study participants and 10 controls not previously infected with 
SARS-CoV-2, using DIA LC-MS/MS. We identified 24 proteins that are significantly 
increased in the ME/CFS group compared to the controls, and 21 proteins that are 
significantly downregulated. Proteins related to clotting processes - 
thrombospondin-1 (important in platelet activation), platelet factor 4, and 
protein S - were differentially expressed in the ME/CFS group, suggestive of a 
dysregulated coagulation system and abnormal endothelial function. Complement 
machinery was also significantly downregulated, including C9 which forms part of 
the membrane attack complex. Additionally, we identified a significant 
upregulation of lactotransferrin, protein S100-A9, and an immunoglobulin 
variant. The findings from this experiment further implicate the coagulation and 
immune system in ME/CFS, and bring to attention the pathology of or imposed on 
the endothelium. This study highlights potential systems and proteins that 
require further research with regards to their contribution to the pathogenesis 
of ME/CFS, symptom manifestation, and biomarker potential, and also gives 
insight into the hematological and cardiovascular risk for ME/CFS individuals 
affected by diabetes mellitus.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12933-024-02315-x
PMCID: PMC11253362
PMID: 39014464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.