---
reference_id: "PMID:38664536"
title: "Pouchitis: pathophysiology and management."
authors:
- Shen B
journal: Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41575-024-00920-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pouchitis: pathophysiology and management.
**Authors:** Shen B
**Journal:** Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41575-024-00920-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41575-024-00920-5)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2024 Jul;21(7):463-476. doi: 
10.1038/s41575-024-00920-5. Epub 2024 Apr 25.

Pouchitis: pathophysiology and management.

Shen B(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases and the Global Center for Integrated 
Colorectal Surgery and IBD Interventional Endoscopy, Columbia University Irving 
Medical Center/New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA. 
bs3270@columbia.edu.

Pouchitis is an acute or chronic inflammatory disease of the ileal reservoir. It 
is common after restorative proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis, 
and treatment of chronic antibiotic-refractory pouchitis has proven challenging. 
Most cases of acute pouchitis evolve into chronic pouchitis. The aetiology of 
acute pouchitis is likely to be partly related to the gut microbiota, whereas 
the pathophysiology of chronic pouchitis involves abnormal interactions between 
genetic disposition, faecal stasis, the gut microbiota, dysregulated host 
immunity, surgical techniques, ischaemia and mesentery-related factors. 
Pouchoscopy with biopsy is the most valuable modality for diagnosis, disease 
monitoring, assessment of treatment response, dysplasia surveillance and 
delivery of endoscopic therapy. Triggering or risk factors, such as 
Clostridioides difficile infection and use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs, should be modified or eradicated. In terms of treatment, acute pouchitis 
usually responds to oral antibiotics, whereas chronic antibiotic-refractory 
pouchitis often requires induction and maintenance therapy with integrin, 
interleukin or tumour necrosis factor inhibitors. Chronic pouchitis with 
ischaemic features, fistulae or abscesses can be treated with hyperbaric oxygen 
therapy.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41575-024-00920-5
PMID: 38664536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]