---
reference_id: "PMID:7980669"
title: Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis perturbations in patients with fibromyalgia.
authors:
- Crofford LJ
- Pillemer SR
- Kalogeras KT
- Cash JM
- Michelson D
- Kling MA
- Sternberg EM
- Gold PW
- Chrousos GP
- Wilder RL
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1002/art.1780371105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis perturbations in patients with fibromyalgia.
**Authors:** Crofford LJ, Pillemer SR, Kalogeras KT, Cash JM, Michelson D, Kling MA, Sternberg EM, Gold PW, Chrousos GP, Wilder RL
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.1780371105](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780371105)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 1994 Nov;37(11):1583-92. doi: 10.1002/art.1780371105.

Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis perturbations in patients with fibromyalgia.

Crofford LJ(1), Pillemer SR, Kalogeras KT, Cash JM, Michelson D, Kling MA, 
Sternberg EM, Gold PW, Chrousos GP, Wilder RL.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases 
(NIAMS), NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.

OBJECTIVE: To examine basal and stimulated hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) 
axis and related hormone levels, including adrenocorticotropin (ACTH), cortisol, 
arginine vasopressin (AVP), and neuropeptide Y (NPY), in patients with 
fibromyalgia (FM).
METHODS: Basal and ovine corticotropin-releasing hormone (oCRH)-stimulated HPA 
axis function were assessed in 12 patients with FM and in age- and sex-matched 
normal subjects. Basal plasma AVP levels and AVP release after postural change 
were assessed, and plasma NPY levels were measured in the same samples.
RESULTS: Patients with FM had low 24-hour urinary free cortisol, but normal peak 
and elevated trough plasma cortisol levels, compared with normal subjects. The 
net integrated ACTH response to oCRH in FM was not significantly different from 
that in normal subjects, but tended toward an exaggerated response. There was a 
significant decrease in net integrated cortisol response to oCRH in FM patients, 
indicating adrenal hyporesponsiveness. AVP levels were not significantly 
different between FM patients and control subjects, but variability was greater 
among the FM patients. Plasma NPY levels were significantly lower in FM patients 
than in normal subjects.
CONCLUSION: These data support the view that HPA axis function is perturbed in 
patients with FM. Further study is required to ascertain the cause of HPA axis 
perturbations and their relationship to symptoms in patients with FM.

DOI: 10.1002/art.1780371105
PMID: 7980669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]