---
reference_id: "PMID:7503570"
title: Clinicopathologic correlation in erythema multiforme and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
authors:
- Côté B
- Wechsler J
- Bastuji-Garin S
- Assier H
- Revuz J
- Roujeau JC
journal: Arch Dermatol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1001/archderm.1995.01690230046008
keywords:
- "Erythema Multiforme/complications, pathology"
- Humans
- "Inflammation/complications, pathology"
- "Necrosis/complications, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic correlation in erythema multiforme and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
**Authors:** Côté B, Wechsler J, Bastuji-Garin S, Assier H, Revuz J, Roujeau JC
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archderm.1995.01690230046008](https://doi.org/10.1001/archderm.1995.01690230046008)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol. 1995 Nov;131(11):1268-72. doi: 
10.1001/archderm.1995.01690230046008.

Clinicopathologic correlation in erythema multiforme and Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome.

Côté B(1), Wechsler J, Bastuji-Garin S, Assier H, Revuz J, Roujeau JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Université Paris XII, 
Créteil, France.

BACKGROUND AND DESIGN: To confirm the recent hypothesis that the spectrum of 
severe erythema multiforme (EM) is actually composed of two different disorders, 
we retrospectively studied 38 such cases, particularly in regard to their 
histopathologic features. Based on photographs and a recent proposal, the cases 
were classified as EM major when the eruption consisted of typical or raised 
atypical target lesions located on the extremities and/or the face or as 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome when the eruption consisted of flat atypical target 
lesions or purpuric macules that were widespread or distributed on the trunk. 
The cases were also assessed for causal agent. A biopsy specimen was obtained in 
each case. Several histologic parameters were analyzed (and scored) without 
clinical data and correlated to the clinical pattern. These parameters were 
first studied in a global assessment and then in a detailed evaluation.
RESULTS: The global assessment showed two different histological patterns: (1) a 
predominantly inflammatory pattern characterized by a lichenoid infiltrate and 
epidermal necrosis that mainly affected the basal layer; and (2) a predominantly 
necrotic pattern in which major epidermal necrosis and minimal inflammatory 
infiltration were found. The former pattern was associated with EM major, the 
latter with Stevens-Johnson syndrome (P < .001) and with drug-related cause (P < 
.001). The detailed evaluation showed also less epidermal necrosis, and more 
dermal inflammation, and more exocytosis in EM major. Conversely, there was more 
epidermal necrosis, less dermal inflammation, and less exocytosis in 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome. The difference was statistically significant for the 
inflammation and exocytosis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the two different symptomatologies in the 
spectrum of severe EM correlate with two different patterns of histopathologic 
changes. A prospective multicentered study should be conducted to definitively 
characterize these entities.

DOI: 10.1001/archderm.1995.01690230046008
PMID: 7503570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]