---
reference_id: "PMID:28437056"
title: "Psychotic and Bipolar Disorders: Schizophrenia."
authors:
- Edmunds AL
journal: FP Essent
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychotic and Bipolar Disorders: Schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Edmunds AL
**Journal:** FP Essent (2017)

## Content

1. FP Essent. 2017 Apr;455:11-17.

Psychotic and Bipolar Disorders: Schizophrenia.

Edmunds AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Baylor Family Medicine Residency at Garland, 601 Clara Barton Blvd. Suite 
340, Garland, TX 75042.

Schizophrenia is the most common psychotic illness, typically appearing between 
the late teenage years and the mid-30s. The first episode of psychosis may be 
preceded by a prodromal period. Schizophrenia symptoms fall into six common 
symptom clusters: delusions and hallucinations, disorganization of speech, 
cognitive dysfunction, negative symptoms, affective symptoms, and motor system 
abnormalities. The diagnosis is based on criteria in the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, including exclusion of 
other possible medical or psychiatric etiologies of psychosis. The main goals 
during the initial evaluation of a patient with suspected schizophrenia are to 
rule out secondary etiologies of symptoms and to assess for significant comorbid 
conditions, balancing broad screening tests with the exclusion of specific 
disorders suggested by the presentation and history. After the initial 
evaluation, antipsychotic drug treatment should be initiated and consideration 
given to psychosocial treatments in conjunction with pharmacotherapy. 
Comanagement of the patient by a mental health subspecialist and a family 
physician is important to ensure appropriate screening, diagnosis, and 
management of common associated conditions.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 28437056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]