---
reference_id: "PMID:38993725"
title: "Clinical management of diazoxide-unresponsive congenital hyperinsulinism: A single-center experience."
authors:
- Takasawa K
- Iemura R
- Orimoto R
- Yamano H
- Kirino S
- Adachi E
- Saito Y
- Yamamoto K
- Matsuda N
- Takishima S
- Shuno K
- Tajima H
- Sugie M
- Mizuno Y
- Sutani A
- Okamoto K
- Masue M
- Morio T
- Kashimada K
journal: Clin Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1297/cpe.2024-0004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical management of diazoxide-unresponsive congenital hyperinsulinism: A single-center experience.
**Authors:** Takasawa K, Iemura R, Orimoto R, Yamano H, Kirino S, Adachi E, Saito Y, Yamamoto K, Matsuda N, Takishima S, Shuno K, Tajima H, Sugie M, Mizuno Y, Sutani A, Okamoto K, Masue M, Morio T, Kashimada K
**Journal:** Clin Pediatr Endocrinol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1297/cpe.2024-0004](https://doi.org/10.1297/cpe.2024-0004)

## Content

1. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2024;33(3):187-194. doi: 10.1297/cpe.2024-0004. Epub 
2024 Jun 3.

Clinical management of diazoxide-unresponsive congenital hyperinsulinism: A 
single-center experience.

Takasawa K(1), Iemura R(1), Orimoto R(1), Yamano H(1), Kirino S(1), Adachi E(1), 
Saito Y(1)(2), Yamamoto K(3), Matsuda N(4), Takishima S(4), Shuno K(5), Tajima 
H(5), Sugie M(1), Mizuno Y(6), Sutani A(7), Okamoto K(6), Masue M(8), Morio 
T(1), Kashimada K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Human Pathology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Soka Municipal Hospital, Saitama, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Kawaguchi Municipal Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Central Japan International Medical Center, Gifu, 
Japan.

The most common cause of persistent hypoglycemia in newborns and children is 
congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI). Remarkable advancements in diagnostic tools 
and treatments, including novel imaging and genetic techniques, and continuous 
subcutaneous octreotide administration, have improved the prognosis of 
diazoxide-unresponsive CHI; however, in clinical practice, some issues remain. 
Here, we report a case series consisting of four adenosine 
triphosphate-sensitive potassium-associated CHI cases, discuss the practical use 
of new international guidelines published in 2023, and suggest clinical issues 
associated with CHI management. Based on the clinical experience of two diffuse 
and two focal CHI cases, we employed an updated treatment strategy, including 
genetic diagnosis to determine treatment plans, careful catheter management, 
switching from octreotide to long-acting somatostatin, effective utilization of 
a continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) device, measures for feeding problems, and 
individualized and systematic developmental follow-up. Particularly, our cases 
suggest a safe method of switching from octreotide to lanreotide, elucidate the 
efficacy of home-based CGM monitoring, and indicate need for personalized 
support for feeding problems. Severe CHI is a rare and challenging disorder; 
thus, further accumulation of experience according to new treatment strategies 
is essential in generating high-quality evidence for the development and 
approval of new treatment options.

2024©The Japanese Society for Pediatric Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1297/cpe.2024-0004
PMCID: PMC11234188
PMID: 38993725

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest 
associated with this research.