---
reference_id: "PMID:28342640"
title: Systematic Review Links the Prevalence of Intraductal Carcinoma of the Prostate to Prostate Cancer Risk Categories.
authors:
- Porter LH
- Lawrence MG
- Ilic D
- Clouston D
- Bolton DM
- Frydenberg M
- Murphy DG
- Pezaro C
- Risbridger GP
- Taylor RA
journal: Eur Urol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2017.03.013
keywords:
- "Carcinoma/epidemiology, pathology, therapy"
- Cell Proliferation
- Humans
- Male
- Neoplasm Grading
- Prevalence
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/epidemiology, pathology, therapy"
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic Review Links the Prevalence of Intraductal Carcinoma of the Prostate to Prostate Cancer Risk Categories.
**Authors:** Porter LH, Lawrence MG, Ilic D, Clouston D, Bolton DM, Frydenberg M, Murphy DG, Pezaro C, Risbridger GP, Taylor RA
**Journal:** Eur Urol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eururo.2017.03.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2017.03.013)

## Content

1. Eur Urol. 2017 Oct;72(4):492-495. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2017.03.013. Epub 2017
 Mar 22.

Systematic Review Links the Prevalence of Intraductal Carcinoma of the Prostate
to Prostate Cancer Risk Categories.

Porter LH(1), Lawrence MG(1), Ilic D(2), Clouston D(3), Bolton DM(4), Frydenberg
M(5), Murphy DG(6), Pezaro C(7), Risbridger GP(1), Taylor RA(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Biomedicine Discovery
Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia; Prostate Cancer Research
Program, Cancer Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne,
Australia.
(2)School of Public Health & Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia.
(3)TissuPath, Mount Waverley, Australia.
(4)Department of Urology, Austin Hospital, Melbourne, Australia; Department of
Surgery, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Biomedicine Discovery
Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia; Department of Surgery,
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Division of Cancer Surgery, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne,
Australia; Australian Prostate Cancer Research Centre, Epworth Healthcare,
Richmond, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Electronic address: declan.murphy@petermac.org.
(7)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Biomedicine Discovery
Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia; Eastern Health Clinical
School, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(8)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Biomedicine Discovery
Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia; Prostate Cancer Research
Program, Cancer Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne,
Australia; Department of Physiology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash
University, Melbourne, Australia. Electronic address: renea.taylor@monash.edu.

Comment in
    Eur Urol. 2017 Oct;72(4):496-498. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2017.04.004.
    J Urol. 2017 Dec;198(6):1208-1211. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2017.09.063.

Intraductal carcinoma of the prostate (IDC-P) is associated with poor prognosis.
While it is often regarded as a rare pathology, the prevalence of IDC-P remains
unclear, with variable reports from small and disparate patient populations. To
determine how common IDC-P is across the spectrum of prostate cancer, we
conducted a systematic review correlating IDC-P prevalence with prostate cancer
risk. Electronic searches of the OVID Medline, PubMed, and Scopus literature
databases identified 38 patient cohorts in 24 articles, which were divided
between four prostate cancer risk categories (low, moderate, high, and recurrent
or metastatic disease). This review, which included radical prostatectomy and
prostate biopsy specimens from >7000 patients, revealed an unexpectedly high
rate of IDC-P. The IDC-P prevalence increased from 2.1% in low-risk patient
cohorts to 23.1%, 36.7%, and 56.0% in moderate-risk, high-risk, and metastatic
or recurrent disease risk categories, respectively (p<0.0001). IDC-P was also
highly prevalent in tumours following androgen deprivation therapy or
chemotherapy (60%). Contrary to common perceptions, this study demonstrates a
strong association between IDC-P prevalence and aggressive prostate cancer, with
a significantly higher frequency in high-risk disease. Greater recognition and
systematic reporting of IDC-P may improve patient risk stratification.
PATIENT SUMMARY: Prostate cancer can grow within ducts of the prostate, as well
as in prostate tissue. By reviewing all reports describing prostate cancer
growing within ducts, we found that it occurs more commonly than many scientists
and clinicians appreciate, especially in aggressive prostate cancers. We
conclude that there should be more awareness of this pattern of prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2017 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eururo.2017.03.013
PMID: 28342640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
