---
reference_id: "PMID:20301699"
title: Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Stevens CA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Stevens CA

## Content

1. Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome.

Stevens CA(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Aug 30 [updated 2023 Nov 9].

Author information:
(1)Director, Medical Genetics, Professor, Pediatrics, University of Tennessee 
College of Medicine, Chattanooga, Tennessee

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is characterized by 
distinctive facial features, broad and often angulated thumbs and halluces, 
short stature, and moderate-to-severe intellectual disability. Characteristic 
craniofacial features include downslanted palpebral fissures, low-hanging 
columella, high palate, grimacing smile, and talon cusps. Prenatal growth is 
often normal, then height, weight, and head circumference percentiles rapidly 
drop in the first few months of life. Short stature is typical in adulthood. 
Obesity may develop in childhood or adolescence. Average IQ ranges between 35 
and 50; however, developmental outcome varies considerably. Some individuals 
with EP300-related RSTS have normal intellect. Additional features include 
ocular abnormalities, hearing loss, respiratory difficulties, congenital heart 
defects, renal abnormalities, cryptorchidism, feeding problems, recurrent 
infections, and severe constipation.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of RSTS is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical features. A heterozygous pathogenic variant in CREBBP or 
EP300 identified by molecular genetic testing confirms the diagnosis if clinical 
features are inconclusive.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Early intervention programs, special 
education, vocational training to address developmental disabilities, referral 
to behavioral specialists / psychologists, and support groups / resources for 
family members; standard treatment for eye abnormalities, hearing loss, sleep 
apnea, cardiac anomalies, renal anomalies, cryptorchidism, and dental anomalies; 
aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux and constipation; surgical 
repair of significantly angulated thumbs or duplicated halluces. Surveillance: 
Monitoring of growth and feeding, especially in the first year of life; annual 
eye and hearing evaluations; routine monitoring for cardiac, renal, and dental 
anomalies. Pregnancy management: Preeclampsia or placental abnormalities have 
been reported in some pregnancies with RSTS.
GENETIC COUNSELING: RSTS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most 
individuals diagnosed with RSTS have the disorder as the result of a de novo 
pathogenic variant and are the only affected member of their families. Rarely, 
an individual diagnosed with RSTS has the disorder as the result of a CREBBP or 
EP300 pathogenic variant inherited from a heterozygous or mosaic parent. Each 
child of an individual with RSTS has a 50% chance of inheriting the RSTS-related 
pathogenic variant. Once the RSTS-related pathogenic variant has been identified 
in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for 
RSTS are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301699