---
reference_id: "PMID:32677590"
title: "Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Single Pediatric Center Experience From 2014 to 2019."
authors:
- Patel R
- Gombolay GY
- Peljovich AE
- Conklin J
- Blackwell LS
- Howarth R
- Wolf DS
- Upadhyayula SR
- Verma S
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1177/0883073820939392
keywords:
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electromyography/methods
- Female
- Georgia
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Myelitis/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Nerve Transfer/methods
- Neural Conduction/physiology
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Neuropsychological Tests/statistics & numerical data"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Single Pediatric Center Experience From 2014 to 2019.
**Authors:** Patel R, Gombolay GY, Peljovich AE, Conklin J, Blackwell LS, Howarth R, Wolf DS, Upadhyayula SR, Verma S
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0883073820939392](https://doi.org/10.1177/0883073820939392)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2020 Nov;35(13):912-917. doi: 10.1177/0883073820939392. Epub
2020 Jul 17.

Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Single Pediatric Center Experience From 2014 to 2019.

Patel R(1), Gombolay GY(2), Peljovich AE(3), Conklin J(4), Blackwell LS(4),
Howarth R(4), Wolf DS(2), Upadhyayula SR(2), Verma S(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology, MercyOne, Des Moines, IA, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics and Neurology,
1371Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)The Hand and Upper Extremity Center of Georgia, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, 1367Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta Medical Center
Orthopaedic Residency Program, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Division of Neuropsychology, 1367Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta,
GA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Acute flaccid myelitis has emerged as the leading cause of acute
flaccid paralysis in children. Acute flaccid myelitis leads to significant
physical disability; hence, objective outcome measures to study disease severity
and progression are desirable. In addition, nerve transfer to improve motor
function in affected children needs further study.
METHODS: Retrospective study of acute flaccid myelitis subjects managed at
Children's Healthcare of Atlanta from August 2014 to December 2019. Clinical,
electromyography and nerve conduction study, neuropsychological functional
independence (WeeFIM), and nerve transfer data were reviewed.
RESULTS: Fifteen children (11 boys and 4 girls) mean age 5.1±3.2 years (range 14
months to 12 years) were included. All subjects (n = 15) presented with severe
asymmetric motor weakness and absent tendon reflexes. Motor nerve conduction
study of the affected limbs in 93% (n = 14) showed absent or markedly reduced
amplitude. Ten patients received comprehensive inpatient rehabilitation and
neuropsychological evaluation. Admission and discharge WeeFIM scores showed
deficits most consistent and pronounced in the domains of self-care and
mobility. Multiple nerve transfer surgery was performed on 13 limbs (9 upper and
4 lower extremities) in 6 children. Postsurgery (mean duration of 10.4 ± 5.7
months) follow-up demonstrated improvement on active movement scale (AMS) in 4
subjects.
CONCLUSION: Acute flaccid myelitis affects school-age children with asymmetric
motor weakness, absent tendon reflexes, and reduced or absent motor amplitude on
nerve conduction study. Comprehensive rehabilitation and nerve transfer led to
improvement in motor function on neuropsychology WeeFIM and AMS scores.

DOI: 10.1177/0883073820939392
PMID: 32677590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
