---
reference_id: "PMID:25843314"
title: "Novel mutations in TNFRSF7/CD27: Clinical, immunologic, and genetic characterization of human CD27 deficiency."
authors:
- Alkhairy OK
- Perez-Becker R
- Driessen GJ
- Abolhassani H
- van Montfrans J
- Borte S
- Choo S
- Wang N
- Tesselaar K
- Fang M
- Bienemann K
- Boztug K
- Daneva A
- Mechinaud F
- Wiesel T
- Becker C
- Dückers G
- Siepermann K
- van Zelm MC
- Rezaei N
- van der Burg M
- Aghamohammadi A
- Seidel MG
- Niehues T
- Hammarström L
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.02.022
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/diagnosis, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Exome
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Heterozygote
- "Hodgkin Disease/diagnosis, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- Infant
- "Lymphohistiocytosis, Hemophagocytic/diagnosis, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- "Lymphoproliferative Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Superfamily, Member 7/deficiency, genetics, immunology"
- "Uveitis/diagnosis, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel mutations in TNFRSF7/CD27: Clinical, immunologic, and genetic characterization of human CD27 deficiency.
**Authors:** Alkhairy OK, Perez-Becker R, Driessen GJ, Abolhassani H, van Montfrans J, Borte S, Choo S, Wang N, Tesselaar K, Fang M, Bienemann K, Boztug K, Daneva A, Mechinaud F, Wiesel T, Becker C, Dückers G, Siepermann K, van Zelm MC, Rezaei N, van der Burg M, Aghamohammadi A, Seidel MG, Niehues T, Hammarström L
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2015.02.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2015.02.022)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Sep;136(3):703-712.e10. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.02.022. Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Novel mutations in TNFRSF7/CD27: Clinical, immunologic, and genetic
characterization of human CD27 deficiency.

Alkhairy OK(1), Perez-Becker R(2), Driessen GJ(3), Abolhassani H(4), van
Montfrans J(5), Borte S(6), Choo S(7), Wang N(8), Tesselaar K(5), Fang M(9),
Bienemann K(10), Boztug K(11), Daneva A(3), Mechinaud F(12), Wiesel T(13),
Becker C(14), Dückers G(2), Siepermann K(2), van Zelm MC(15), Rezaei N(16), van
der Burg M(15), Aghamohammadi A(17), Seidel MG(18), Niehues T(19), Hammarström
L(20).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm,
Sweden; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, King Abdulaziz Medical
City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Centre for Child and Adolescent Health, HELIOS Clinic Krefeld, Krefeld,
Germany.
(3)Erasmus MC, Department of Pediatrics, Subdepartment of Pediatric Infectious
Disease and Immunology, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm,
Sweden; Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Pediatrics Center of Excellence,
Children's Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Departments of Pediatric Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Wilhelmina
Children's Hospital/University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm,
Sweden; Translational Centre for Regenerative Medicine (TRM), University of
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(7)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne,
Australia.
(8)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(9)BGI-Shenzhen, Beishan Industrial Zone, Yantian District, Shenzhen, China.
(10)Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Medical Faculty,
Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(11)CeMM Research Center of Molecular Medicine, Austrian Academy of Sciences,
and Division of Neonatal Medicine and Intensive Care, Department of Pediatrics
and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(12)Children's Cancer Centre, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
(13)Children's Hospital, Vestische Youth Hospital, University of
Witten/Herdecke, Datteln, Germany.
(14)Institute for Hygiene and Laboratory Medicine, HELIOS Clinic Krefeld,
Krefeld, Germany.
(15)Erasmus MC, Department of Immunology, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(16)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Pediatrics Center of Excellence,
Children's Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran;
Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, and Molecular Immunology Research
Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(17)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Pediatrics Center of Excellence,
Children's Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(18)St Anna Children's Hospital, Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University Vienna,
Vienna, Austria; Division of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Department of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
Electronic address: markus.seidel@medunigraz.at.
(19)Centre for Child and Adolescent Health, HELIOS Clinic Krefeld, Krefeld,
Germany. Electronic address: tim.niehues@helios-kliniken.de.
(20)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm,
Sweden. Electronic address: lennart.hammarstrom@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: The clinical and immunologic features of CD27 deficiency remain
obscure because only a few patients have been identified to date.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to identify novel mutations in TNFRSF7/CD27 and to provide
an overview of clinical, immunologic, and laboratory phenotypes in patients with
CD27 deficiency.
METHODS: Review of the medical records and molecular, genetic, and flow
cytometric analyses of the patients and family members were performed. Treatment
outcomes of previously described patients were followed up.
RESULTS: In addition to the previously reported homozygous mutations
c.G24A/p.W8X (n = 2) and c.G158A/p.C53Y (n = 8), 4 novel mutations were
identified: homozygous missense c.G287A/p.C96Y (n = 4), homozygous missense
c.C232T/p.R78W (n = 1), heterozygous nonsense c.C30A/p.C10X (n = 1), and
compound heterozygous c.C319T/p.R107C-c.G24A/p.W8X (n = 1). EBV-associated
lymphoproliferative disease/hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, Hodgkin
lymphoma, uveitis, and recurrent infections were the predominant clinical
features. Expression of cell-surface and soluble CD27 was significantly reduced
in patients and heterozygous family members. Immunoglobulin substitution therapy
was administered in 5 of the newly diagnosed cases.
CONCLUSION: CD27 deficiency is potentially fatal and should be excluded in all
cases of severe EBV infections to minimize diagnostic delay. Flow cytometric
immunophenotyping offers a reliable initial test for CD27 deficiency.
Determining the precise role of CD27 in immunity against EBV might provide a
framework for new therapeutic concepts.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.02.022
PMID: 25843314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
