---
reference_id: "PMID:34639431"
title: "Occupational Risk of Airborne Mycobacterium tuberculosis Exposure: A Situational Analysis in a Three-Tier Public Healthcare System in South Africa."
authors:
- Matuka DO
- Duba T
- Ngcobo Z
- Made F
- Muleba L
- Nthoke T
- Singh TS
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph181910130
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Occupational Risk of Airborne Mycobacterium tuberculosis Exposure: A Situational Analysis in a Three-Tier Public Healthcare System in South Africa.
**Authors:** Matuka DO, Duba T, Ngcobo Z, Made F, Muleba L, Nthoke T, Singh TS
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph181910130](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph181910130)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Sep 27;18(19):10130. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph181910130.

Occupational Risk of Airborne Mycobacterium tuberculosis Exposure: A Situational 
Analysis in a Three-Tier Public Healthcare System in South Africa.

Matuka DO(1), Duba T(1), Ngcobo Z(1), Made F(1), Muleba L(1), Nthoke T(1), Singh 
TS(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Occupational Health (NIOH), National Health Laboratory 
Service (NHLS), Johannesburg 2000, South Africa.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Disease, School of 
Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2000, South Africa.
(3)Department of Environmental Health, School of Health Sciences, University of 
Johannesburg, Johannesburg 2028, South Africa.

This study aimed to detect airborne Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) at nine 
public health facilities in three provinces of South Africa and determine 
possible risk factors that may contribute to airborne transmission. Personal 
samples (n = 264) and stationary samples (n = 327) were collected from perceived 
high-risk areas in district, primary health clinics (PHCs) and TB facilities. 
Quantitative real-time (RT) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used for TB 
analysis. Walkabout observations and work practices through the infection 
prevention and control (IPC) questionnaire were documented. Statistical analysis 
was carried out using Stata version 15.2 software. Airborne MTB was detected in 
2.2% of samples (13/572), and 97.8% were negative. District hospitals and 
Western Cape province had the most TB-positive samples and identified risk areas 
included medical wards, casualty, and TB wards. MTB-positive samples were not 
detected in PHCs and during the summer season. All facilities reported training 
healthcare workers (HCWs) on TB IPC. The risk factors for airborne MTB included 
province, type of facility, area or section, season, lack of UVGI, and 
ineffective ventilation. Environmental monitoring, PCR, IPC questionnaire, and 
walkabout observations can estimate the risk of TB transmission in various 
settings. These findings can be used to inform management and staff to improve 
the TB IPC programmes.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph181910130
PMCID: PMC8508202
PMID: 34639431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.