---
reference_id: "PMID:25476731"
title: In silico single cell dynamics of hepatitis B virus infection and clearance.
authors:
- Murray JM
- Goyal A
journal: J Theor Biol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.11.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In silico single cell dynamics of hepatitis B virus infection and clearance.
**Authors:** Murray JM, Goyal A
**Journal:** J Theor Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.11.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.11.020)

## Content

1. J Theor Biol. 2015 Feb 7;366:91-102. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.11.020. Epub
2014  Dec 2.

In silico single cell dynamics of hepatitis B virus infection and clearance.

Murray JM(1), Goyal A(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematics and Statistics, UNSW, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. 
Electronic address: j.murray@unsw.edu.au.
(2)School of Mathematics and Statistics, UNSW, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.

The progression of acute hepatitis B virus (HBV) to chronic infection or 
clearance is highly dependent on the host immune response composed of cytolytic 
(CTL) and non-cytolytic (non-CTL) effects. Cytolytic processes induce hepatocyte 
killing while non-CTL processes inhibit intracellular replication. Both effects 
are widely recognized and accepted. However, there are uncertainties about the 
assistance provided by either the loss of covalently circular closed DNA 
(cccDNA) during cell proliferation or the emergence of refractory cells to 
immune mediated clearance. We developed an agent-based mathematical model and 
tested the relative roles of different mechanisms of the immune system in the 
clearance of acute HBV infection. HBV viremia clearance time and hepatocyte 
turnover (HT) were used as the two major criteria in determining reasonable 
outcomes. Modelling results in 90% of cells containing between 1 and 17 cccDNA 
copies and normally distributed at the peak of infection. Variations in p36 
levels, responsible for determining export of virions or recirculation to 
amplify cccDNA numbers, have a much greater impact on mean cccDNA level/cell at 
peak viremia than virus infectivity and cccDNA half-life. A strong CTL effect 
alone failed to clear infection with HT ≈ 10. Acute infection clearance was 
possible with combined CTL and non-CTL effects along with complete loss of 
intracellular viral components during cell proliferation resulting in the 
desired range of HT (0.7-1). The emergence of cells refractory to infection can 
reduce HT by up to 90%. However their impact was less effective than complete 
loss of intracellular viral components during cell proliferation.
CONCLUSION: the existence of refractory cells is not necessary when there is 
complete loss of intracellular quantities during cell proliferation but is 
essential with only partial clearance.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.11.020
PMID: 25476731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]