---
reference_id: "PMID:19490778"
title: "TESE-ICSI in patients with non-mosaic Klinefelter syndrome: a comparative study."
authors:
- Yarali H
- Polat M
- Bozdag G
- Gunel M
- Alpas I
- Esinler I
- Dogan U
- Tiras B
journal: Reprod Biomed Online
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/s1472-6483(10)60023-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TESE-ICSI in patients with non-mosaic Klinefelter syndrome: a comparative study.
**Authors:** Yarali H, Polat M, Bozdag G, Gunel M, Alpas I, Esinler I, Dogan U, Tiras B
**Journal:** Reprod Biomed Online (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1472-6483(10)60023-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1472-6483(10)60023-5)

## Content

1. Reprod Biomed Online. 2009 Jun;18(6):756-60. doi:
10.1016/s1472-6483(10)60023-5.

TESE-ICSI in patients with non-mosaic Klinefelter syndrome: a comparative study.

Yarali H(1), Polat M, Bozdag G, Gunel M, Alpas I, Esinler I, Dogan U, Tiras B.

Author information:
(1)Hacettepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey. hyarali@hacettepe.edu.tr

There are limited data in the literature on the performance of testicular sperm 
extraction (TESE) and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) treatment in 
patients with Klinefelter syndrome. The current study compared TESE-ICSI 
treatment in patients with non-mosaic Klinefelter syndrome with controls having 
non-obstructive azoospermia and normal karyotype. Thirty-three consecutive 
patients (39 TESE-ICSI cycles) with Klinefelter syndrome (study group) and 113 
consecutive patients (130 TESE-ICSI cycles) with non-obstructive azoospermia and 
normal karyotype (control group) were recruited in a private IVF setting. In the 
two groups, the mean ages of the men at the time of TESE were 32.0 +/- 6.4 and 
34.3 +/- 5.8 years respectively (P < 0.05) and the successful sperm recovery 
rates per total TESE attempts were 56 (22/39) and 44% (57/130) respectively. 
Similarly, fertilization rates were comparable between the two groups. In the 
Klinefelter syndrome group, following biopsy and fluorescence in-situ 
hybridization, a normal karyotype was obtained in 42 of the 71 embryos (59%). 
The clinical pregnancy and implantation rates in the study and control groups 
were similar (39, 23 and 33, 26% respectively). In conclusion, patients with 
non-mosaic Klinefelter syndrome have sperm recovery and pregnancy rates 
comparable with patients having non-obstructive azoospermia and normal 
karyotype.

DOI: 10.1016/s1472-6483(10)60023-5
PMID: 19490778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]