---
reference_id: "PMID:34582342"
title: "Small cell carcinoma of the bladder: A population-based analysis of long-term outcomes after radical cystectomy and bladder conservation with chemoradiotherapy."
authors:
- Oh J
- Eigl B
- Black PC
- Pickles T
- Villamil C
- Sunderland K
- Tyldesley S
journal: Can Urol Assoc J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.5489/cuaj.7411
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small cell carcinoma of the bladder: A population-based analysis of long-term outcomes after radical cystectomy and bladder conservation with chemoradiotherapy.
**Authors:** Oh J, Eigl B, Black PC, Pickles T, Villamil C, Sunderland K, Tyldesley S
**Journal:** Can Urol Assoc J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.5489/cuaj.7411](https://doi.org/10.5489/cuaj.7411)

## Content

1. Can Urol Assoc J. 2022 Feb;16(2):55-62. doi: 10.5489/cuaj.7411.

Small cell carcinoma of the bladder: A population-based analysis of long-term 
outcomes after radical cystectomy and bladder conservation with 
chemoradiotherapy.

Oh J(1)(2), Eigl B(3), Black PC(4), Pickles T(1)(2), Villamil C(5), Sunderland 
K(6), Tyldesley S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, British Columbia Cancer - Vancouver Centre, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, British Columbia Cancer - 
Vancouver Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(6)Cancer Surveillance and Outcomes, Population Oncology, British Columbia 
Cancer.

INTRODUCTION: We aimed to describe the oncological outcomes after radical 
cystectomy and chemo-radiation for localized small cell bladder cancer (SCBC).
METHODS: This population-based analysis of localized SCBC from 1985-2018 in 
British Columbia included an analysis (analysis 1) of cancer-specific survival 
(CSS) and overall survival (OS) of patients treated with curative-intent radical 
cystectomy (RC) and radiation (RT), and an analysis (analysis 2) of CSS and OS 
in patients treated with RC and chemoRT consistent with the SCBC Canadian 
consensus guideline.
RESULTS: Seventy-seven patients who were treated with curative intent were 
identified: 33 patients had RC and 44 had RT. For analysis 1, five-year OS was 
29% and 39% for RC and RT, respectively (p=0.51), and five-year CSS was 35% and 
52% for RC and RT, respectively (p=0.29). On multivariable analysis, higher 
Charlson comorbidity index (CCI) and the lack of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) 
were associated with worse OS, while higher CCI and Eastern Cooperative Oncology 
Group (ECOG) were associated with worse CSS. For analysis 2, five-year OS was 
56% and 58% for the RC and chemoRT groups, respectively (p=0.90), and five-year 
CSS was 56% for RC and 71% for chemoRT (p=0.71). Four of 42 (9.5%) chemoRT 
patients had RC at relapse.
CONCLUSIONS: SCBC is a rare entity with a poor prognosis. RC and chemoRT offer 
similar CSS and OS for localized SCBC, even when focusing the analysis on 
patients treated according to the modern consensus guidelines. NAC should be 
considered for eligible patients. Both chemoRT and RC treatment options should 
be discussed with patients with SCBC.

DOI: 10.5489/cuaj.7411
PMCID: PMC8932431
PMID: 34582342

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors do not report 
any competing personal or financial interests related to this work.