---
reference_id: "PMID:37043208"
title: Characterizing the molecular impact of KMT2D variants on the epigenetic and transcriptional landscapes in Kabuki syndrome.
authors:
- Jung YL
- Hung C
- Choi J
- Lee EA
- Bodamer O
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad059
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Myosin Type I/genetics
- Hematologic Diseases/genetics
- Mutation
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear"
- Lysine/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/genetics"
- Vestibular Diseases/genetics
- Face/abnormalities
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterizing the molecular impact of KMT2D variants on the epigenetic and transcriptional landscapes in Kabuki syndrome.
**Authors:** Jung YL, Hung C, Choi J, Lee EA, Bodamer O
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddad059](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddad059)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Jun 19;32(13):2251-2261. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad059.

Characterizing the molecular impact of KMT2D variants on the epigenetic and 
transcriptional landscapes in Kabuki syndrome.

Jung YL(1)(2), Hung C(1)(2), Choi J(1)(2), Lee EA(1)(2), Bodamer O(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Broad Institute of Harvard University and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare, multisystem disorder with a variable clinical 
phenotype. The majority of KS is caused by dominant loss-of-function mutations 
in KMT2D (lysine methyltransferase 2D). KMT2D mediates chromatin accessibility 
by adding methyl groups to lysine residue 4 of histone 3, which plays a critical 
role in cell differentiation and homeostasis. The molecular underpinnings of KS 
remain elusive partly because of a lack of histone modification data from human 
samples. Consequently, we profiled and characterized alterations in histone 
modification and gene transcription in peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMCs) from 33 patients with KMT2D mutations and 36 unaffected healthy 
controls. Our analysis identified unique enhancer signatures in H3K4me1 and 
H3K4me2 in KS compared with controls. Reduced enhancer signals were present for 
promoter-distal sites of immune-related genes for which co-binding of 
PBMC-specific transcription factors was predicted; 31% of super-enhancers of 
normal blood cells overlapped with disrupted enhancers in KS, supporting an 
association of reduced enhancer activity of immune-related genes with immune 
deficiency phenotypes. In contrast, increased enhancer signals were observed for 
promoter-proximal regions of metabolic genes enriched with EGR1 and E2F2 motifs, 
whose transcriptional levels were significantly increased in KS. Additionally, 
we identified ~100 de novo enhancers in genes, such as in MYO1F and AGAP2. 
Together, our results underscore the effect of KMT2D haploinsufficiency on 
dysregulation of enhancer states and gene transcription and provide a framework 
for the identification of therapeutic targets and biomarkers in preparation for 
clinical trial readiness.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddad059
PMID: 37043208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]