---
reference_id: "PMID:35757712"
title: "Epidemiology of Psoriasis and Comorbid Diseases: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Bu J
- Ding R
- Zhou L
- Chen X
- Shen E
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.880201
keywords:
- Chronic Disease
- Comorbidity
- Humans
- Inflammation/epidemiology
- Psoriasis
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/epidemiology"
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of Psoriasis and Comorbid Diseases: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Bu J, Ding R, Zhou L, Chen X, Shen E
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.880201](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.880201)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jun 10;13:880201. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.880201. 
eCollection 2022.

Epidemiology of Psoriasis and Comorbid Diseases: A Narrative Review.

Bu J(1), Ding R(1), Zhou L(1), Chen X(2), Shen E(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Hospital for Skin Disease (Institute of Dermatology), Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, China.
(2)Sino-French Hoffmann Institute, School of Basic Medicine, The Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)The State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated 
Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Psoriasis is a chronic autoimmune inflammatory disease that remains active for a 
long period, even for life in most patients. The impact of psoriasis on health 
is not only limited to the skin, but also influences multiple systems of the 
body, even mental health. With the increasing of literature on the association 
between psoriasis and extracutaneous systems, a better understanding of 
psoriasis as an autoimmune disease with systemic inflammation is created. Except 
for cardiometabolic diseases, gastrointestinal diseases, chronic kidney 
diseases, malignancy, and infections that have received much attention, the 
association between psoriasis and more systemic diseases, including the skin 
system, reproductive system, and oral and ocular systems has also been revealed, 
and mental health diseases draw more attention not just because of the negative 
mental and mood influence caused by skin lesions, but a common 
immune-inflammatory mechanism identified of the two systemic diseases. This 
review summarizes the epidemiological evidence supporting the association 
between psoriasis and important and/or newly reported systemic diseases in the 
past 5 years, and may help to comprehensively recognize the comorbidity burden 
related to psoriasis, further to improve the management of people with 
psoriasis.

Copyright © 2022 Bu, Ding, Zhou, Chen and Shen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.880201
PMCID: PMC9226890
PMID: 35757712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.