---
reference_id: "PMID:37256936"
title: Gene-edited and -engineered stem cell platform drives immunotherapy for brain metastatic melanomas.
authors:
- Kanaya N
- Kitamura Y
- Lopez Vazquez M
- Franco A
- Chen KS
- van Schaik TA
- Farzani TA
- Borges P
- Ichinose T
- Seddiq W
- Kuroda S
- Boland G
- Jahan N
- Fisher D
- Wakimoto H
- Shah K
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.ade8732
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor
- Gene Editing
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf
- "Melanoma/therapy, pathology"
- Simplexvirus/genetics
- Oncolytic Virotherapy
- Oncolytic Viruses/genetics
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, therapy, pathology"
- Brain/pathology
- Immunotherapy
- Stem Cells
- Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene-edited and -engineered stem cell platform drives immunotherapy for brain metastatic melanomas.
**Authors:** Kanaya N, Kitamura Y, Lopez Vazquez M, Franco A, Chen KS, van Schaik TA, Farzani TA, Borges P, Ichinose T, Seddiq W, Kuroda S, Boland G, Jahan N, Fisher D, Wakimoto H, Shah K
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.ade8732](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.ade8732)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2023 May 31;15(698):eade8732. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.ade8732.  Epub 2023 May 31.

Gene-edited and -engineered stem cell platform drives immunotherapy for brain
metastatic melanomas.

Kanaya N(1)(2), Kitamura Y(1)(2), Lopez Vazquez M(1)(2), Franco A(1)(2), Chen
KS(1)(2), van Schaik TA(1)(2), Farzani TA(1)(2), Borges P(1)(2), Ichinose
T(1)(2), Seddiq W(1)(2), Kuroda S(3), Boland G(4), Jahan N(5), Fisher D(4),
Wakimoto H(1)(2)(5), Shah K(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Stem Cell and Translational Immunotherapy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School
of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(6)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Erratum in
    Sci Transl Med. 2024 Jul 31;16(758):eadr6879. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.adr6879.

Oncolytic virus therapy has shown activity against primary melanomas; however,
its efficacy in brain metastases remains challenging, mainly because of the
delivery and immunosuppressive nature of tumors in the brain. To address this
challenge, we first established PTEN-deficient melanoma brain metastasis mouse
models and characterized them to be more immunosuppressive compared with primary
melanoma, mimicking the clinical settings. Next, we developed an allogeneic twin
stem cell (TSC) system composed of two tumor-targeting stem cell (SC)
populations. One SC was loaded with oncolytic herpes simplex virus (oHSV), and
the other SC was CRISPR-Cas9 gene-edited to knock out nectin 1 (N1) receptor
(N1KO) to acquire resistance to oHSV and release immunomodulators, such as
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Using mouse models of
brain metastatic BRAFV600E/PTEN-/- and BRAFV600E/wt/PTEN-/- mutant melanomas, we
show that locoregional delivery of TSCs releasing oHSV and GM-CSF (TSC-G)
activated dendritic cell- and T cell-mediated immune responses. In addition, our
strategy exhibited greater therapeutic efficacy when compared with the existing
oncolytic viral therapeutic approaches. Moreover, the TSCs composed of SC-oHSV
and SCN1KO-releasing GM-CSF and single-chain variable fragment anti-PD-1
(TSC-G/P) had therapeutic efficacy in both syngeneic and patient-derived
humanized mouse models of leptomeningeal metastasis. Our findings provide a
promising allogeneic SC-based immunotherapeutic strategy against melanomas in
the CNS and a road map toward clinical translation.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.ade8732
PMCID: PMC10799631
PMID: 37256936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: K.S. owns equity in and is
a member of the Board of Directors of AMASA Therapeutics, a company developing
stem cell–based therapies for cancer. D.F. has a financial interest in Soltego.
K.S.’s and D.F.’s interests were reviewed by Brigham and Women’s Hospital and
Mass General Brigham in accordance with their conflict-of-interest policies. The
other authors declare that they have no competing interests. The patent
application entitled “Gene editing and engineering stem cell for drug delivery”
(PCT/US22/49523) has been filed.
