---
reference_id: "PMID:27838190"
title: "Safety and effectiveness of hormonal treatment versus hormonal treatment with vigabatrin for infantile spasms (ICISS): a randomised, multicentre, open-label trial."
authors:
- "O'Callaghan FJ"
- Edwards SW
- Alber FD
- Hancock E
- Johnson AL
- Kennedy CR
- Likeman M
- Lux AL
- Mackay M
- Mallick AA
- Newton RW
- Nolan M
- Pressler R
- Rating D
- Schmitt B
- Verity CM
- Osborne JP
- participating investigators
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30294-0
keywords:
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- Cosyntropin/therapeutic use
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Electroencephalography
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Hormones/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Prednisolone/therapeutic use
- "Spasms, Infantile/drug therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
- Vigabatrin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and effectiveness of hormonal treatment versus hormonal treatment with vigabatrin for infantile spasms (ICISS): a randomised, multicentre, open-label trial.
**Authors:** O'Callaghan FJ, Edwards SW, Alber FD, Hancock E, Johnson AL, Kennedy CR, Likeman M, Lux AL, Mackay M, Mallick AA, Newton RW, Nolan M, Pressler R, Rating D, Schmitt B, Verity CM, Osborne JP, participating investigators
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30294-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30294-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2017 Jan;16(1):33-42. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30294-0. Epub
2016 Nov 10.

Safety and effectiveness of hormonal treatment versus hormonal treatment with
vigabatrin for infantile spasms (ICISS): a randomised, multicentre, open-label
trial.

O'Callaghan FJ(1), Edwards SW(2), Alber FD(3), Hancock E(4), Johnson AL(5),
Kennedy CR(6), Likeman M(7), Lux AL(8), Mackay M(9), Mallick AA(8), Newton
RW(10), Nolan M(11), Pressler R(12), Rating D(13), Schmitt B(14), Verity CM(15),
Osborne JP(2); participating investigators.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK; Children's
Department, Royal United Hospitals Bath NHS Foundation Trust, Combe Park, Bath,
UK. Electronic address: f.o'callaghan@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Children's Department, Royal United Hospitals Bath NHS Foundation Trust,
Combe Park, Bath, UK; Department for Health, University of Bath, Claverton Down,
Bath, UK.
(3)Division of Neurology/Neuropsychology, University Children's Hospital,
Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Children's Department, Royal United Hospitals Bath NHS Foundation Trust,
Combe Park, Bath, UK.
(5)Medical Research Council Clinical Trials Unit at UCL, Aviation House, London,
UK.
(6)Clinical Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, UK.
(7)Department of Paediatric Radiology, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children,
Bristol, UK.
(8)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children,
Bristol, UK.
(9)Neurology Department, The Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.
(10)Department of Neurology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester,
UK.
(11)Starship Children's Health, Auckland, New Zealand.
(12)UCL Institute of Child Health, Clinical Neurosciences, London, UK.
(13)University of Heidelberg, Germany.
(14)Division of Clinical Neurophysiology/Epilepsy, University Children's
Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
(15)PIND Research, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2017 Jan;16(1):19-20. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30276-9.
    J Pediatr. 2017 May;184:235-238. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.02.051.
    Epilepsy Curr. 2017 Nov-Dec;17(6):355-357. doi: 10.5698/1535-7597.17.6.355.

BACKGROUND: Infantile spasms constitutes a severe infantile epilepsy syndrome
that is difficult to treat and has a high morbidity. Hormonal therapies or
vigabatrin are the most commonly used treatments. We aimed to assess whether
combining the treatments would be more effective than hormonal therapy alone.
METHODS: In this multicentre, open-label randomised trial, 102 hospitals
(Australia [three], Germany [11], New Zealand [two], Switzerland [three], and
the UK [83]) enrolled infants who had a clinical diagnosis of infantile spasms
and a hypsarrhythmic (or similar) EEG no more than 7 days before enrolment.
Participants were randomly assigned (1:1) by a secure website to receive
hormonal therapy with vigabatrin or hormonal therapy alone. If parents
consented, there was an additional randomisation (1:1) of type of hormonal
therapy used (prednisolone or tetracosactide depot). Block randomisation was
stratified for hormonal treatment and risk of developmental impairment. Parents
and clinicians were not masked to therapy, but investigators assessing
electro-clinical outcome were masked to treatment allocation. Minimum doses were
prednisolone 10 mg four times a day or intramuscular tetracosactide depot 0·5 mg
(40 IU) on alternate days with or without vigabatrin 100 mg/kg per day. The
primary outcome was cessation of spasms, which was defined as no witnessed
spasms on and between day 14 and day 42 from trial entry, as recorded by parents
and carers in a seizure diary. Analysis was by intention to treat. The trial is
registered with The International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial Number
(ISRCTN), number 54363174, and the European Union Drug Regulating Authorities
Clinical Trials (EUDRACT), number 2006-000788-27.
FINDINGS: Between March 7, 2007, and May 22, 2014, 766 infants were screened
and, of those, 377 were randomly assigned to hormonal therapy with vigabatrin
(186) or hormonal therapy alone (191). All 377 infants were assessed for the
primary outcome. Between days 14 and 42 inclusive no spasms were witnessed in
133 (72%) of 186 patients on hormonal therapy with vigabatrin compared with 108
(57%) of 191 patients on hormonal therapy alone (difference 15·0%, 95% CI
5·1-24·9, p=0·002). Serious adverse reactions necessitating hospitalisation
occurred in 33 infants (16 on hormonal therapy alone and 17 on hormonal therapy
with vigabatrin). The most common serious adverse reaction was infection
occurring in five infants on hormonal therapy alone and four on hormonal therapy
with vigabatrin. There were no deaths attributable to treatment.
INTERPRETATION: Hormonal therapy with vigabatrin is significantly more effective
at stopping infantile spasms than hormonal therapy alone. The 4 week period of
spasm cessation required to achieve a primary clinical response to treatment
suggests that the effect seen might be sustained, but this needs to be confirmed
at the 18 month follow-up.
FUNDING: The Castang Foundation, Bath Unit for Research in Paediatrics, National
Institute of Health Research, the Royal United Hospitals Bath NHS Foundation
Trust, the BRONNER-BENDUNG Stifung/Gernsbach, and University Children's Hospital
Zurich.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30294-0
PMID: 27838190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
