---
reference_id: "PMID:28499397"
title: "Neutral Lipid Storage Diseases: clinical/genetic features and natural history in a large cohort of Italian patients."
authors:
- Pennisi EM
- Arca M
- Bertini E
- Bruno C
- Cassandrini D
- "D'amico A"
- Garibaldi M
- Gragnani F
- Maggi L
- Massa R
- Missaglia S
- Morandi L
- Musumeci O
- Pegoraro E
- Rastelli E
- Santorelli FM
- Tasca E
- Tavian D
- Toscano A
- Angelini C
- Italian NLSD Group
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0646-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Ichthyosiform Erythroderma, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Italy
- Lipase/genetics
- Lipid Metabolism/genetics
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Muscular Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Respiration, Artificial"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
- Acyltransferases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutral Lipid Storage Diseases: clinical/genetic features and natural history in a large cohort of Italian patients.
**Authors:** Pennisi EM, Arca M, Bertini E, Bruno C, Cassandrini D, D'amico A, Garibaldi M, Gragnani F, Maggi L, Massa R, Missaglia S, Morandi L, Musumeci O, Pegoraro E, Rastelli E, Santorelli FM, Tasca E, Tavian D, Toscano A, Angelini C, Italian NLSD Group
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-017-0646-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-017-0646-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017 May 12;12(1):90. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0646-9.

Neutral Lipid Storage Diseases: clinical/genetic features and natural history in 
a large cohort of Italian patients.

Pennisi EM(1), Arca M(2), Bertini E(3), Bruno C(4), Cassandrini D(5), D'amico 
A(3), Garibaldi M(6), Gragnani F(7), Maggi L(8), Massa R(9), Missaglia S(10), 
Morandi L(8), Musumeci O(11), Pegoraro E(12), Rastelli E(9), Santorelli FM(5), 
Tasca E(13), Tavian D(10), Toscano A(11), Angelini C(13); Italian NLSD Group.

Author information:
(1)UOC of Neurology, San Filippo Neri Hospital, via Martinotti 20, 00135, Rome, 
Italy. elenapennisi@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Allied Sciences, Atherosclerosis Unit, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Bambin Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
(5)IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Calambrone, Pisa, Italy.
(6)S. Andrea Hospital, La Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(7)Sandro Pertini Hospital, Neurology, Rome, Italy.
(8)Neuroimmunology and Neuromuscular Diseases Unit, Foundation IRCCS 
Neurological Institute "Carlo Besta", Milan, Italy.
(9)Department of Systems Medicine, Centre of Neuromuscular Disorders, Tor 
Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
(10)CRIBENS, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy.
(11)Department of Neurosciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(12)Department of Neurology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(13)IRCCS Fondazione Ospedale S. Camillo, Venice, Italy.

BACKGROUND: A small number of patients affected by Neutral Lipid Storage 
Diseases (NLSDs: NLSD type M with Myopathy and NLSD type I with Ichthyosis) have 
been described in various ethnic groups worldwide. However, relatively little is 
known about the progression and phenotypic variability of the disease in large 
specific populations. The aim of our study was to assess the natural history, 
disability and genotype-phenotype correlations in Italian patients with NLSDs. 
Twenty-one patients who satisfied the criteria for NLSDs were enrolled in a 
retrospective cross-sectional study to evaluate the genetic aspects, clinical 
signs at onset, disability progression and comorbidities associated with this 
group of diseases.
RESULTS: During the clinical follow-up (range: 2-44 years, median: 17.8 years), 
two patients (9.5%, both with NLSD-I) died of hepatic failure, and a further 
five (24%) lost their ability to walk or needed help when walking after a mean 
period of 30.6 years of disease. None of the patients required mechanical 
ventilation. No patient required a heart transplant, one patient with NLSD-M was 
implanted with a cardioverter defibrillator for severe arrhythmias.
CONCLUSION: The genotype/phenotype correlation analysis in our population showed 
that the same gene mutations were associated with a varying clinical onset and 
course. This study highlights peculiar aspects of Italian NLSD patients that 
differ from those observed in Japanese patients, who were found to be affected 
by a marked hypertrophic cardiopathy. Owing to the varying phenotypic expression 
of the same mutations, it is conceivable that some additional genetic or 
epigenetic factors affect the symptoms and progression in this group of 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-017-0646-9
PMCID: PMC5427600
PMID: 28499397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]