---
reference_id: "PMID:29446669"
title: "Segmental Arterial Mediolysis: Abdominal Imaging of and Disease Course in 111 Patients."
authors:
- Naidu SG
- Menias CO
- Oklu R
- Hines RS
- Alhalabi K
- Makar G
- Shamoun FE
- Henkin S
- McBane RD
journal: AJR Am J Roentgenol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2214/AJR.17.18309
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Angiography
- Arteries
- Contrast Media
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- "Image Interpretation, Computer-Assisted"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Vascular Diseases/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Segmental Arterial Mediolysis: Abdominal Imaging of and Disease Course in 111 Patients.
**Authors:** Naidu SG, Menias CO, Oklu R, Hines RS, Alhalabi K, Makar G, Shamoun FE, Henkin S, McBane RD
**Journal:** AJR Am J Roentgenol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2214/AJR.17.18309](https://doi.org/10.2214/AJR.17.18309)

## Content

1. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2018 Apr;210(4):899-905. doi: 10.2214/AJR.17.18309. Epub 
2018 Feb 15.

Segmental Arterial Mediolysis: Abdominal Imaging of and Disease Course in 111 
Patients.

Naidu SG(1), Menias CO(1), Oklu R(1), Hines RS(2), Alhalabi K(1), Makar G(3), 
Shamoun FE(3), Henkin S(4), McBane RD(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic Hospital, 5777 E Mayo Blvd, Phoenix, 
AZ 85054.
(2)2 Baptist Health System, Birmingham, AL.
(3)3 Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ.
(4)4 Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(5)5 Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to identify the imaging characteristics 
of segmental arterial mediolysis (SAM) at presentation and establish the 
longitudinal course of disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively identified patients with SAM at a 
single institution from 2000 through 2015. Diagnosis was based on published 
guidelines with multidisciplinary consensus. Imaging studies obtained at initial 
evaluation were reviewed to evaluate imaging findings and vascular territory 
distribution. All subsequent follow-up imaging studies were reviewed to assess 
for progression, stability, or regression.
RESULTS: We identified 111 patients (79 men and 32 women; median age, 51 years) 
who met the diagnostic criteria for SAM. Abdominal pain was the most common 
presentation (74%), followed by flank pain (21%). SAM most commonly affected the 
renal arteries (47%), superior mesenteric artery (46%), celiac trunk (46%), 
hepatic artery (23%), iliac arteries (18%), and splenic artery (14%). The most 
common imaging findings were dissection (86%), aneurysm (57%), beading or webs 
(28%), occlusion (19%), and a rind or wall thickening (15%). The 247 available 
follow-up imaging studies for 97 patients (median follow-up, 12 months) showed 
progression in 19 patients (20%), with either stability or regression observed 
in the remaining patients.
CONCLUSION: SAM most commonly affects the renal arteries, superior mesenteric 
artery, and celiac artery. Dissections and aneurysms are the most common imaging 
findings. Follow-up imaging studies show stability or regression in most 
patients.

DOI: 10.2214/AJR.17.18309
PMID: 29446669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]