---
reference_id: "PMID:26904326"
title: Risk Factors and Epidemiology of Coccidioidomycosis Demonstrated by a Case of Spontaneous Pulmonary Rupture of Cavitary Coccidioidomycosis.
authors:
- Yau AA
journal: Case Rep Infect Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1155/2016/8165414
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk Factors and Epidemiology of Coccidioidomycosis Demonstrated by a Case of Spontaneous Pulmonary Rupture of Cavitary Coccidioidomycosis.
**Authors:** Yau AA
**Journal:** Case Rep Infect Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2016/8165414](https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/8165414)

## Content

1. Case Rep Infect Dis. 2016;2016:8165414. doi: 10.1155/2016/8165414. Epub 2016
Jan  24.

Risk Factors and Epidemiology of Coccidioidomycosis Demonstrated by a Case of 
Spontaneous Pulmonary Rupture of Cavitary Coccidioidomycosis.

Yau AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, William Beaumont Army Medical Center, 5005 North Piedras 
Street, El Paso, TX 79920, USA.

A 31-year-old Hispanic male with no medical history was admitted for fevers, 
pleurisy, and cough after recent oral surgery and completing demolition and 
construction work in Juarez, Mexico. Imaging showed a 4.4 cm cavitary lesion and 
bilateral tree-in-bud opacities. Initial suspicion of bacterial infection 
confirmed with clinical improvement on culture specific antibiotics, but after 
discharge he returned with progression of symptoms and new dyspnea. Radiograph 
showed a pyopneumothorax. Chest computed tomography after thoracostomy showed 
worsening infiltrates and another cavitary lesion. Symptoms persisted despite 
addition of broad spectrum antibiotics. Surgical repair for persistent air leak 
was required. Weeks after discharge, cultures and serologies returned positive 
for Coccidioidomycosis immitis. Coccidioides species cause up to 30% of 
community-acquired pneumonia and incidental cavitary lesions in endemic regions. 
Symptoms are nonspecific yet usually involve fatigue, cough, and pleurisy. Most 
hosts have spontaneous resolution; however, certain demographics such as 
Hispanics and diabetics, later diagnosed in our patient, have higher morbidity. 
As seen with our patient, cavitary rupture and bronchopleural fistulas are rare 
occurring in 2.6% of cavitary lesions. High suspicion based on symptoms and host 
demographics is important to assist in early diagnosis and treatment to avoid 
and treat this common pathogen's presentations.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/8165414
PMCID: PMC4745348
PMID: 26904326