---
reference_id: "PMID:22258501"
title: Using HIV viral load to guide treatment-for-prevention interventions.
authors:
- Novitsky V
- Essex M
journal: Curr Opin HIV AIDS
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/COH.0b013e32834fe8ff
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Using HIV viral load to guide treatment-for-prevention interventions.
**Authors:** Novitsky V, Essex M
**Journal:** Curr Opin HIV AIDS (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/COH.0b013e32834fe8ff](https://doi.org/10.1097/COH.0b013e32834fe8ff)

## Content

1. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2012 Mar;7(2):117-24. doi: 10.1097/COH.0b013e32834fe8ff.

Using HIV viral load to guide treatment-for-prevention interventions.

Novitsky V(1), Essex M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public 
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To provide evidence that HIV-1 RNA load can guide 
treatment-for-prevention interventions to mitigate the HIV epidemic.
RECENT FINDINGS: Some HIV-infected individuals maintain increased levels of 
HIV-1 RNA load after acute infection for an extended period of time, and can 
disproportionately contribute to the spread of HIV in the community. The recent 
HIV Prevention Trials Network 052 study has demonstrated 96% efficacy for 
initiation of early antiretroviral treatment (ART) in HIV-1 serodiscordant 
couples.
SUMMARY: The level of HIV-1 RNA load in plasma is the major biological predictor 
of virus transmission. HIV-infected individuals who maintain increased levels of 
HIV-1 RNA load, extended high viremics, can transmit virus at higher rates. 
Combinatorial ART decreases HIV replication, thus reducing rates of virus 
transmission. Identifying high viremics and placing them on ART seems an 
attractive strategy that has the potential to achieve both individual benefits 
by lowering risk for early onset of clinical AIDS and public health benefits by 
reducing HIV transmission. A key logistical challenge is to screen for high 
viremics among HIV-positive individuals. Efficacy of the modified 
treatment-for-prevention approach focused on high viremics is being evaluated in 
ongoing and upcoming clinical trials. If efficacious, such an approach could be 
used widely to mitigate and control the HIV epidemic.

DOI: 10.1097/COH.0b013e32834fe8ff
PMID: 22258501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]