---
reference_id: "PMID:19615493"
title: "Elevated heart rate in cardiovascular diseases: a target for treatment?"
authors:
- Palatini P
journal: Prog Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2009.05.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated heart rate in cardiovascular diseases: a target for treatment?
**Authors:** Palatini P
**Journal:** Prog Cardiovasc Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pcad.2009.05.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcad.2009.05.005)

## Content

1. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Jul-Aug;52(1):46-60. doi:
10.1016/j.pcad.2009.05.005.

Elevated heart rate in cardiovascular diseases: a target for treatment?

Palatini P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Padova, 
Padova, Italy. palatini@unipd.it

Heart rate is a major determinant of myocardial oxygen consumption and of 
cardiac work, and thus reduction of heart rate may represent an important 
strategy for the treatment of patients with a wide range of cardiac disorders. 
In addition, several experimental lines of research point to high heart rate as 
an important risk factor for atherosclerosis and, thus, pharmacologic heart rate 
reduction could prevent or retard the development of atherosclerotic plaques and 
increase survival. Today, in patients with acute or chronic coronary syndromes 
or with congestive heart failure, reducing heart rate is a generally accepted 
treatment modality. Up to now, no human study has been performed to demonstrate 
the efficacy and the risk-benefit ratio of cardiac slowing in patients without 
cardiac disorders. However, recent retrospective analyses of the INternational 
VErapamil-SR/trandolapril STudy and the Paris Prospective Study 1 provided 
promising results. Treatment of high heart rate in healthy subjects appears to 
be premature, but in clinical conditions such as hypertension or diabetes, the 
reduction of elevated heart rate appears a desirable additional goal of therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcad.2009.05.005
PMID: 19615493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]