---
reference_id: "PMID:23000146"
title: Nonsense mutations in AAGAB cause punctate palmoplantar keratoderma type Buschke-Fischer-Brauer.
authors:
- Giehl KA
- Eckstein GN
- Pasternack SM
- Praetzel-Wunder S
- Ruzicka T
- Lichtner P
- Seidl K
- Rogers M
- Graf E
- Langbein L
- Braun-Falco M
- Betz RC
- Strom TM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.08.024
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport"
- Alleles
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Exome
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Keratinocytes/metabolism
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Pedigree
- Protein Biosynthesis
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
- "Skin Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonsense mutations in AAGAB cause punctate palmoplantar keratoderma type Buschke-Fischer-Brauer.
**Authors:** Giehl KA, Eckstein GN, Pasternack SM, Praetzel-Wunder S, Ruzicka T, Lichtner P, Seidl K, Rogers M, Graf E, Langbein L, Braun-Falco M, Betz RC, Strom TM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.08.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.08.024)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Oct 5;91(4):754-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.08.024. Epub 
2012 Sep 20.

Nonsense mutations in AAGAB cause punctate palmoplantar keratoderma type 
Buschke-Fischer-Brauer.

Giehl KA(1), Eckstein GN, Pasternack SM, Praetzel-Wunder S, Ruzicka T, Lichtner 
P, Seidl K, Rogers M, Graf E, Langbein L, Braun-Falco M, Betz RC, Strom TM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Rare and Genetic Skin Diseases, Department of Dermatology, Ludwig 
Maximilians University, 80337 Munich, Germany. kathrin.giehl@med.uni-muenchen.de

Punctate palmoplantar keratodermas (PPKPs) are rare autosomal-dominant inherited 
skin diseases that are characterized by multiple hyperkeratotic plaques 
distributed on the palms and soles. To date, two different loci in chromosomal 
regions 15q22-15q24 and 8q24.13-8q24.21 have been reported. Pathogenic 
mutations, however, have yet to be identified. In order to elucidate the genetic 
cause of PPKP type Buschke-Fischer-Brauer (PPKP1), we performed exome sequencing 
in five affected individuals from three families, and we identified in 
chromosomal region 15q22.33-q23 two heterozygous nonsense mutations-c.370C>T 
(p.Arg124(∗)) and c.481C>T (p.Arg161(∗))-in AAGAB in all affected individuals. 
Using immunoblot analysis, we showed that both mutations result in premature 
termination of translation and truncated protein products. Analyses of mRNA of 
affected individuals revealed that the disease allele is either not detectable 
or only detectable at low levels. To assess the consequences of the mutations in 
skin, we performed immunofluorescence analyses. Notably, the amount of granular 
staining in the keratinocytes of affected individuals was lower in the cytoplasm 
but higher around the nucleus than it was in the keratinocytes of control 
individuals. AAGAB encodes the alpha-and gamma-adaptin-binding protein p34 and 
might play a role in membrane traffic as a chaperone. The identification of 
mutations, along with the results from additional studies, defines the genetic 
basis of PPKP1 and provides evidence that AAGAB plays an important role in skin 
integrity.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.08.024
PMCID: PMC3484507
PMID: 23000146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]