---
reference_id: "PMID:37920169"
title: Successes and challenges in modeling heterogeneous BRAF(V600E) mutated central nervous system neoplasms.
authors:
- Xing YL
- Panovska D
- Petritsch CK
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1223199
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successes and challenges in modeling heterogeneous BRAF(V600E) mutated central nervous system neoplasms.
**Authors:** Xing YL, Panovska D, Petritsch CK
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2023.1223199](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1223199)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2023 Oct 18;13:1223199. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1223199.
eCollection  2023.

Successes and challenges in modeling heterogeneous BRAF(V600E) mutated central
nervous system neoplasms.

Xing YL(1), Panovska D(1), Petritsch CK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, United States.

Central nervous system (CNS) neoplasms are difficult to treat due to their
sensitive location. Over the past two decades, the availability of patient tumor
materials facilitated large scale genomic and epigenomic profiling studies,
which have resulted in detailed insights into the molecular underpinnings of CNS
tumorigenesis. Based on results from these studies, CNS tumors have high
molecular and cellular intra-tumoral and inter-tumoral heterogeneity. CNS cancer
models have yet to reflect the broad diversity of CNS tumors and patients and
the lack of such faithful cancer models represents a major bottleneck to
urgently needed innovations in CNS cancer treatment. Pediatric cancer model
development is lagging behind adult tumor model development, which is why we
focus this review on CNS tumors mutated for BRAFV600E which are more prevalent
in the pediatric patient population. BRAFV600E-mutated CNS tumors exhibit high
inter-tumoral heterogeneity, encompassing clinically and histopathological
diverse tumor types. Moreover, BRAFV600E is the second most common alteration in
pediatric low-grade CNS tumors, and low-grade tumors are notoriously difficult
to recapitulate in vitro and in vivo. Although the mutation predominates in
low-grade CNS tumors, when combined with other mutations, most commonly CDKN2A
deletion, BRAFV600E-mutated CNS tumors are prone to develop high-grade features,
and therefore BRAFV600E-mutated CNS are a paradigm for tumor progression. Here,
we describe existing in vitro and in vivo models of BRAFV600E-mutated CNS
tumors, including patient-derived cell lines, patient-derived xenografts,
syngeneic models, and genetically engineered mouse models, along with their
advantages and shortcomings. We discuss which research gaps each model might be
best suited to answer, and identify those areas in model development that need
to be strengthened further. We highlight areas of potential research focus that
will lead to the heightened predictive capacity of preclinical studies, allow
for appropriate validation, and ultimately improve the success of "bench to
bedside" translational research.

Copyright © 2023 Xing, Panovska and Petritsch.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1223199
PMCID: PMC10619673
PMID: 37920169

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
