---
reference_id: "PMID:26688844"
title: "The Impact of Huntington Disease on Family Carers: a Literature Overview."
authors:
- Domaradzki J
journal: Psychiatr Pol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.12740/PP/34496
keywords:
- "Adaptation, Psychological"
- Caregivers/psychology
- Cost of Illness
- Female
- Home Nursing/psychology
- Humans
- Huntington Disease/psychology
- Male
- Quality of Life/psychology
- Social Support
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Impact of Huntington Disease on Family Carers: a Literature Overview.
**Authors:** Domaradzki J
**Journal:** Psychiatr Pol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.12740/PP/34496](https://doi.org/10.12740/PP/34496)

## Content

1. Psychiatr Pol. 2015;49(5):931-44. doi: 10.12740/PP/34496.

The Impact of Huntington Disease on Family Carers: a Literature Overview.

[Article in English, Polish]

Domaradzki J(1).

Author information:
(1)Katedra Nauk Społecznych UM w Poznaniu.

Caring for a person with chronic disease often rests on the patient's family. 
Nevertheless, most studies on the needs, quality of life and caregiver burden 
focus on different types of dementia, including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's 
disease, stroke, cancer or mental illnesses. Less attention has been paid to 
informal caregivers of patients with Huntington's disease (HD). Meanwhile, 
psychosocial implications of HD are much more serious and wide-ranging. Thus, 
this paper aims to review the literature on the costs of caring for a person 
with HD (pHD). The review identifies the aspects of caregiving that are the most 
burdensome to family caregivers: negative experience with health and social care 
services, dissatisfaction with caregiving role, concern over children, loss of 
meaningful relationship with pHD, family breakdown and loss of social contacts 
and decrease in health. It also describes strategies of coping with HD. While 
the analysis points to the many similarities between taking care of HD patients 
and those suffering from other neurodegenerative disorders, it also emphasizes 
the factors associated with HD that are not present in other diseases: early 
onset, severity of symptoms, prolonged trajectory, its genetic, i.e. hereditary 
character and social ignorance of HD. It concludes that while in medical setting 
the HD patient is the one who draws professional attention, it is often the 
unaffected family caregiver who needs the most attention, support and help.

DOI: 10.12740/PP/34496
PMID: 26688844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]