---
reference_id: "PMID:38795165"
title: "Genetic analyses unravel the causal association of cytokine levels on lichen simplex chronicus risk: insights from a mendelian randomization study."
authors:
- Yu H
- Ou G
journal: Arch Dermatol Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00403-024-02964-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic analyses unravel the causal association of cytokine levels on lichen simplex chronicus risk: insights from a mendelian randomization study.
**Authors:** Yu H, Ou G
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00403-024-02964-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-024-02964-8)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2024 May 25;316(6):241. doi: 10.1007/s00403-024-02964-8.

Genetic analyses unravel the causal association of cytokine levels on lichen 
simplex chronicus risk: insights from a mendelian randomization study.

Yu H(1), Ou G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Taizhou First People's Hospital, Taizhou, 
Zhejiang, 318020, P. R. China. Hyyu1029@126.com.
(2)School of Medicine, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, 
Guangdong, 518055, P. R. China.

Lichen simplex chronicus (LSC) presents a challenge in dermatology due to its 
elusive pathogenic mechanisms. While associations between circulating 
inflammatory cytokines and LSC were observed, the definitive causal dynamics 
remain to be elucidated. Our study used a two-sample Mendelian randomization 
(MR) approach to investigate causal relationships. We applied a suite of MR 
methodologies, including IVW, Weighted Median, MR-Egger, Weighted Mode, Simple 
Mode, MR-PRESSO, and the Steiger test, to ensure robust causal inference. Our 
analysis confirmed the causal impact of genetically determined cytokine levels 
on LSC risk, particularly MMP-10 (OR = 0.493, P = 0.004) and DNER (OR = 0.651, 
P = 0.043) in risk attenuation. We also found a positive causal correlation 
between GDNF levels (OR = 1.871, P = 0.007) and LSC prevalence. Notably, 
bidirectional causality was observed between DNER and LSC. Consistency across 
various MR analyses and sensitivity analyses confirmed the absence of horizontal 
pleiotropy, validating the causal estimates. This pioneering MR investigation 
unveils a novel genetically anchored causal relationship between the circulating 
levels of MMP-10, DNER, and GDNF and LSC risk. Although further validation is 
requisite, our findings augment the understanding of cytokine mediation in LSC 
and underscore prospective avenues for research.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-024-02964-8
PMID: 38795165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]