---
reference_id: "PMID:37233271"
title: "Coccidioidal Pulmonary Cavitation: A New Age."
authors:
- Kooner L
- Munoz A
- Garcia A
- Kaur A
- Sharma R
- Bustamante V
- Narang V
- Thompson GR 3rd
- Kuran R
- Berjis A
- Johnson RH
- Heidari A
journal: J Fungi (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jof9050561
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coccidioidal Pulmonary Cavitation: A New Age.
**Authors:** Kooner L, Munoz A, Garcia A, Kaur A, Sharma R, Bustamante V, Narang V, Thompson GR 3rd, Kuran R, Berjis A, Johnson RH, Heidari A
**Journal:** J Fungi (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jof9050561](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof9050561)

## Content

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2023 May 12;9(5):561. doi: 10.3390/jof9050561.

Coccidioidal Pulmonary Cavitation: A New Age.

Kooner L(1)(2), Munoz A(1)(2)(3), Garcia A(1)(2)(3), Kaur A(1)(2)(3), Sharma 
R(1)(2)(3), Bustamante V(1)(2)(3), Narang V(1)(2)(3), Thompson GR 3rd(4), Kuran 
R(1)(2)(3), Berjis A(5), Johnson RH(1)(2)(3), Heidari A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Kern Medical Center, 
Bakersfield, CA 93306, USA.
(2)Valley Fever Institute, Kern Medical Center, Bakersfield, CA 93306, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, UC-Davis 
Medical Center, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, Kern Medical Center, Bakersfield, CA 93306, USA.

Coccidioides species are thermally dimorphic fungi found in geographically 
defined areas of the Western Hemisphere. The primary portal of entry is 
respiratory, with symptomatic pneumonic diseases as the most common 
presentation. Subsequent pulmonary complications as well as extrapulmonary 
metastatic infection may occur, either of which may be the presenting disease 
manifestation. Cavitary lung disease may be found incidentally or when 
investigating symptoms such as cough or hemoptysis. This study aims to explore 
the spectrum of coccidioidal cavities and the evaluation and management in a 
cohort of patients seen at Kern Medical over the last 12 years.

DOI: 10.3390/jof9050561
PMCID: PMC10218991
PMID: 37233271

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.