---
reference_id: "PMID:39542866"
title: Insights From a Novel Splicing Variant and Recurrent Arginine Variants in the CHD3 Gene Causing Snijders Blok-Campeau Syndrome.
authors:
- Tie X
- Che F
- Liu S
- Mo L
- Zhang L
- Li B
- Yang Y
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63930
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Arginine/genetics
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- HEK293 Cells
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- RNA Splicing/genetics
- Infant
- Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex
- Hypertelorism
- Facies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights From a Novel Splicing Variant and Recurrent Arginine Variants in the CHD3 Gene Causing Snijders Blok-Campeau Syndrome.
**Authors:** Tie X, Che F, Liu S, Mo L, Zhang L, Li B, Yang Y
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63930](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63930)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2025 Mar;197(3):e63930. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63930. Epub 2024
 Nov 14.

Insights From a Novel Splicing Variant and Recurrent Arginine Variants in the
CHD3 Gene Causing Snijders Blok-Campeau Syndrome.

Tie X(1), Che F(2), Liu S(1), Mo L(2), Zhang L(2), Li B(2), Yang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of rehabilitation, Xi'an Children's Hospital, Xi'an, China.
(2)Shaanxi Institute for Pediatric Diseases, Xi'an Children's Hospital, Xi'an,
China.

Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome (SNIBCPS, OMIM#618205) is an autosomal dominant
neurodevelopmental disorder attributed to pathogenic variants in the
chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 3 (CHD3) gene. To date, more than 100
individuals have been diagnosed with SNIBCPS. The syndrome is characterized by
intellectual disability, global developmental delay, speech or language
impediments, and dysmorphic features associated with macrocephaly. Additionally,
affected individuals may exhibit behavioral issues, hypotonia, and autistic
traits. A novel splicing variant (c.5590+1G > T) in the C-terminal 2 region of
the CHD3 gene was identified in a patient predominantly exhibiting autistic
characteristics. In vitro minigene splicing experiments conducted in HEK293
cells revealed that aberrant splicing resulted in the formation of a cryptic
site 46 nucleotides downstream of the 5' splice site. This alteration was
predicted to disrupt the reading frame by eliminating the physiological stop
codon, consequently causing an extension in protein translation. Furthermore, an
additional patient presenting with hypotonia, dysmorphic features, and global
developmental delay was documented. This patient harbored a missense variant in
the helicase C-terminal domain, c.3505C > T (p. Arg1169Trp). The pathogenic
variant was anticipated to impact chromatin remodeling capacity and enzyme
activity. Given the high prevalence of arginine residue pathogenic variants in
the CHD3 protein and its notable propensity for binding and storing ATP
molecules, intriguing insights into the potential effects of arginine residue
pathogenic variants on phenotypes are provided. These findings contribute to a
more comprehensive understanding of the genetic landscape of SNIBCPS while
elucidating potential molecular mechanisms underlying the syndrome.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63930
PMID: 39542866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
