---
reference_id: "PMID:37280119"
title: Clinical considerations in early-onset cerebral amyloid angiopathy.
authors:
- Banerjee G
- Collinge J
- Fox NC
- Lashley T
- Mead S
- Schott JM
- Werring DJ
- Ryan NS
journal: Brain
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awad193
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy/genetics, complications"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/genetics
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Iatrogenic Disease
- Alzheimer Disease/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical considerations in early-onset cerebral amyloid angiopathy.
**Authors:** Banerjee G, Collinge J, Fox NC, Lashley T, Mead S, Schott JM, Werring DJ, Ryan NS
**Journal:** Brain (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awad193](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad193)

## Content

1. Brain. 2023 Oct 3;146(10):3991-4014. doi: 10.1093/brain/awad193.

Clinical considerations in early-onset cerebral amyloid angiopathy.

Banerjee G(1), Collinge J(1), Fox NC(2)(3), Lashley T(4)(5), Mead S(1), Schott 
JM(2)(3), Werring DJ(6), Ryan NS(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)MRC Prion Unit at University College London (UCL), Institute of Prion 
Diseases, UCL, London, W1W 7FF, UK.
(2)Dementia Research Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen 
Square Institute of Neurology, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(3)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.
(4)The Queen Square Brain Bank for Neurological Disorders, Department of 
Clinical and Movement Disorders, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 
London, W1 1PJ, UK.
(5)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(6)Stroke Research Centre, Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, UCL 
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is an important cerebral small vessel disease 
associated with brain haemorrhage and cognitive change. The commonest form, 
sporadic amyloid-β CAA, usually affects people in mid- to later life. However, 
early-onset forms, though uncommon, are increasingly recognized and may result 
from genetic or iatrogenic causes that warrant specific and focused 
investigation and management. In this review, we firstly describe the causes of 
early-onset CAA, including monogenic causes of amyloid-β CAA (APP missense 
mutations and copy number variants; mutations of PSEN1 and PSEN2) and 
non-amyloid-β CAA (associated with ITM2B, CST3, GSN, PRNP and TTR mutations), 
and other unusual sporadic and acquired causes including the newly-recognized 
iatrogenic subtype. We then provide a structured approach for investigating 
early-onset CAA, and highlight important management considerations. Improving 
awareness of these unusual forms of CAA amongst healthcare professionals is 
essential for facilitating their prompt diagnosis, and an understanding of their 
underlying pathophysiology may have implications for more common, late-onset, 
forms of the disease.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awad193
PMCID: PMC10545523
PMID: 37280119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.