---
reference_id: "PMID:26171070"
title: A 13-year follow-up of Finnish patients with Salla disease.
authors:
- Paavola LE
- Remes AM
- Harila MJ
- Varho TT
- Korhonen TT
- Majamaa K
journal: J Neurodev Disord
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s11689-015-9116-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A 13-year follow-up of Finnish patients with Salla disease.
**Authors:** Paavola LE, Remes AM, Harila MJ, Varho TT, Korhonen TT, Majamaa K
**Journal:** J Neurodev Disord (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s11689-015-9116-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s11689-015-9116-7)

## Content

1. J Neurodev Disord. 2015;7(1):20. doi: 10.1186/s11689-015-9116-7. Epub 2015 Jul
 13.

A 13-year follow-up of Finnish patients with Salla disease.

Paavola LE(1), Remes AM(2), Harila MJ(3), Varho TT(4), Korhonen TT(5), Majamaa
K(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Oulu University Hospital, P.O. Box 20, 90029 Oulu,
Finland ; Department of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Oulu, P.O.
Box 5000, 90014 Oulu, Finland ; Department of Clinical Neurology, University of
Oulu, P.O. Box 5000, 90014 Oulu, Finland ; Neural Ltd, Center of
Neuropsychology, Isokatu 16 B 18, 90100 Oulu, Finland.
(2)Department of Neurology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627, 70211 Kuopio, Finland ; Department of Neurology,
Kuopio University Hospital, P.O. Box 1777, 70211 Kuopio, Finland.
(3)Neural Ltd, Center of Neuropsychology, Isokatu 16 B 18, 90100 Oulu, Finland.
(4)The Neuropediatric Unit of Turku City Welfare Division, P. O. Box 670, 20101
Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Turku, Turku, 20014 Finland.
(6)Department of Neurology, Oulu University Hospital, P.O. Box 20, 90029 Oulu,
Finland ; Department of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Oulu, P.O.
Box 5000, 90014 Oulu, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Salla disease (SD) is a rare lysosomal storage disorder leading to
severe intellectual disability. SD belongs to the Finnish disease heritage, and
it is caused by mutations in the SLC17A5 gene. The aim of the study was to
investigate the course of neurocognitive features of SD patients in a long-term
follow-up.
METHODS: Neuropsychological and neurological investigations were carried out on
24 SD patients, aged 16-65 years, 13 years after a similar examination.
RESULTS: The survival analysis showed excess mortality among patients with SD
after the age of 30 years. The course of the disease was progressive, but
follow-up of SD patients revealed that motor skills improved till the age of 20
years, while mental abilities improved in most patients till 40 years of age.
Verbal comprehension skills did not diminish during the follow-up, but
productive speech deteriorated because of dyspraxia and dysarthria. Motor
deficits were marked. Ataxia was prominent in childhood, but it was replaced by
athetotic movements during the teens. Spasticity became more obvious with age
especially in severely disabled SD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Younger SD patients performed better in almost every task measuring
mental abilities that then seem to remain fairly constant till early sixties.
Thus, the results indicate better prognosis in cognitive skills than earlier
assumed. There is an apparent decline in motor skills after the age of 20 years.
The early neurocognitive development predicts the later course of motor and
cognitive development.

DOI: 10.1186/s11689-015-9116-7
PMCID: PMC4499899
PMID: 26171070
