---
reference_id: "PMID:36060742"
title: Evaluation of two different vaccine platforms for immunization against melioidosis and glanders.
authors:
- Biryukov SS
- Cote CK
- Klimko CP
- Dankmeyer JL
- Rill NO
- Shoe JL
- Hunter M
- Shamsuddin Z
- Velez I
- Hedrick ZM
- Rosario-Acevedo R
- Talyansky Y
- Schmidt LK
- Orne CE
- Fetterer DP
- Burtnick MN
- Brett PJ
- Welkos SL
- DeShazer D
journal: Front Microbiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.965518
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of two different vaccine platforms for immunization against melioidosis and glanders.
**Authors:** Biryukov SS, Cote CK, Klimko CP, Dankmeyer JL, Rill NO, Shoe JL, Hunter M, Shamsuddin Z, Velez I, Hedrick ZM, Rosario-Acevedo R, Talyansky Y, Schmidt LK, Orne CE, Fetterer DP, Burtnick MN, Brett PJ, Welkos SL, DeShazer D
**Journal:** Front Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmicb.2022.965518](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.965518)

## Content

1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Aug 17;13:965518. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.965518.
eCollection 2022.

Evaluation of two different vaccine platforms for immunization against
melioidosis and glanders.

Biryukov SS(1), Cote CK(1), Klimko CP(1), Dankmeyer JL(1), Rill NO(1), Shoe
JL(1), Hunter M(1), Shamsuddin Z(1), Velez I(1), Hedrick ZM(1), Rosario-Acevedo
R(1), Talyansky Y(1), Schmidt LK(2), Orne CE(2), Fetterer DP(3), Burtnick
MN(2)(4), Brett PJ(2)(4), Welkos SL(1), DeShazer D(1).

Author information:
(1)Bacteriology Division, United States Army Medical Research Institute of
Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), Fort Detrick, Frederick, MD, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Nevada, Reno School
of Medicine, Reno, NV, United States.
(3)Biostatistics Division, United States Army Medical Research Institute of
Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), Fort Detrick, Frederick, MD, United States.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Burkholderia pseudomallei and the closely related species, Burkholderia mallei,
produce similar multifaceted diseases which range from rapidly fatal to
protracted and chronic, and are a major cause of mortality in endemic regions.
Besides causing natural infections, both microbes are Tier 1 potential biothreat
agents. Antibiotic treatment is prolonged with variable results, hence effective
vaccines are urgently needed. The purpose of our studies was to compare
candidate vaccines that target both melioidosis and glanders to identify the
most efficacious one(s) and define residual requirements for their transition to
the non-human primate aerosol model. Studies were conducted in the C57BL/6 mouse
model to evaluate the humoral and cell-mediated immune response and protective
efficacy of three Burkholderia vaccine candidates against lethal aerosol
challenges with B. pseudomallei K96243, B. pseudomallei MSHR5855, and B. mallei
FMH. The recombinant vaccines generated significant immune responses to the
vaccine antigens, and the live attenuated vaccine generated a greater immune
response to OPS and the whole bacterial cells. Regardless of the candidate
vaccine evaluated, the protection of mice was associated with a dampened
cytokine response within the lungs after exposure to aerosolized bacteria.
Despite being delivered by two different platforms and generating distinct
immune responses, two experimental vaccines, a capsule conjugate + Hcp1 subunit
vaccine and the live B. pseudomallei 668 ΔilvI strain, provided significant
protection and were down-selected for further investigation and advanced
development.

Copyright © 2022 Biryukov, Cote, Klimko, Dankmeyer, Rill, Shoe, Hunter,
Shamsuddin, Velez, Hedrick, Rosario-Acevedo, Talyansky, Schmidt, Orne, Fetterer,
Burtnick, Brett, Welkos and DeShazer.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.965518
PMCID: PMC9428723
PMID: 36060742

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
