---
reference_id: "PMID:28330942"
title: "Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous System: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Spectrum of Parenchymal, Meningeal, and Vascular Lesions at Baseline."
authors:
- Boulouis G
- de Boysson H
- Zuber M
- Guillevin L
- Meary E
- Costalat V
- Pagnoux C
- Naggara O
- French Vasculitis Group
journal: Stroke
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.016194
keywords:
- Adult
- "Cerebral Hemorrhage/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Cerebral Infarction/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, etiology"
- Female
- France
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography/methods
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Stroke/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/complications, diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous System: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Spectrum of Parenchymal, Meningeal, and Vascular Lesions at Baseline.
**Authors:** Boulouis G, de Boysson H, Zuber M, Guillevin L, Meary E, Costalat V, Pagnoux C, Naggara O, French Vasculitis Group
**Journal:** Stroke (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.016194](https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.016194)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2017 May;48(5):1248-1255. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.016194. Epub 2017
 Mar 22.

Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous System: Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
Spectrum of Parenchymal, Meningeal, and Vascular Lesions at Baseline.

Boulouis G(1), de Boysson H(1), Zuber M(1), Guillevin L(1), Meary E(1), Costalat 
V(1), Pagnoux C(1), Naggara O(2); French Vasculitis Group.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neuroradiology, Université Paris-Descartes, INSERM UMR 
894, Centre Hospitalier Sainte-Anne, Paris, France (G.B., E.M., O.N.); 
Department of Internal Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Caen, Caen 
University, Basse Normandie, France (H.d.B.); Department of Vascular Neurology, 
Centre Hospitalier Saint Joseph, Paris, France (M.Z.); Department of Internal 
Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Cochin, Paris, France (L.G.); Department of 
Neuroradiology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Montpellier, France (V.C.); 
and Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada (C.P.).
(2)From the Department of Neuroradiology, Université Paris-Descartes, INSERM UMR 
894, Centre Hospitalier Sainte-Anne, Paris, France (G.B., E.M., O.N.); 
Department of Internal Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Caen, Caen 
University, Basse Normandie, France (H.d.B.); Department of Vascular Neurology, 
Centre Hospitalier Saint Joseph, Paris, France (M.Z.); Department of Internal 
Medicine, Centre Hospitalier Cochin, Paris, France (L.G.); Department of 
Neuroradiology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Montpellier, France (V.C.); 
and Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada (C.P.). o.naggara@ch-sainte-anne.fr.

Comment in
    Stroke. 2017 Jul;48(7):e179. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.117.017609.
    Stroke. 2017 Jul;48(7):e178. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.117.017518.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Primary angiitis of the central nervous system remains 
challenging. To report an overview and pictorial review of brain magnetic 
resonance imaging findings in adult primary angiitis of the central nervous 
system and to determine the distribution of parenchymal, meningeal, and vascular 
lesions in a large multicentric cohort.
METHODS: Adult patients from the French COVAC cohort (Cohort of Patients With 
Primary Vasculitis of the Central Nervous System), with biopsy or 
angiographically proven primary angiitis of the central nervous system and brain 
magnetic resonance imaging available at the time of diagnosis were included. A 
systematic imaging review was performed blinded to clinical data.
RESULTS: Sixty patients met inclusion criteria. Mean age was 45 years (±12.9). 
Patients initially presented focal deficit(s) (83%), headaches (53%), cognitive 
disorder (40%), and seizures (38.3%). The most common magnetic resonance imaging 
finding observed in 42% of patients was multiterritorial, bilateral, distal 
acute stroke lesions after small to medium artery distribution, with a 
predominant carotid circulation distribution. Hemorrhagic infarctions and 
parenchymal hemorrhages were also frequently found in the cohort (55%). Acute 
convexity subarachnoid hemorrhage was found in 26% of patients and 42% 
demonstrated pre-eminent leptomeningeal enhancement, which is found to be 
significantly more prevalent in biopsy-proven patients (60% versus 28%; P=0.04). 
Seven patients had tumor-like presentations. Seventy-seven percent of magnetic 
resonance angiographic studies were abnormal, revealing proximal/distal stenoses 
in 57% and 61% of patients, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Adult primary angiitis of the central nervous system is a 
heterogenous disease, with multiterritorial, distal, and bilateral acute stroke 
being the most common pattern of parenchymal lesions found on magnetic resonance 
imaging. Our findings suggest a higher than previously thought prevalence of 
hemorrhagic transformation and other hemorrhagic manifestations.

© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.016194
PMID: 28330942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]