---
reference_id: "PMID:39200375"
title: Navigating Complexity in Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome.
authors:
- Qu HQ
- Hakonarson H
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12081911
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Navigating Complexity in Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome.
**Authors:** Qu HQ, Hakonarson H
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12081911](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12081911)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 Aug 20;12(8):1911. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12081911.

Navigating Complexity in Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome.

Qu HQ(1), Hakonarson H(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 191104, USA.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland.

Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS) affects up to 1% of the US
population, predominantly women, and is characterized by a complex, elusive
etiology and heterogeneous phenotypes. This review delves into the intricate
physiology and etiology of POTS, decoding the roles of the sinoatrial node, the
autonomic nervous system, fluid dynamics, and the interplay between the immune
and endocrine systems. It further examines key contributing factors such as
dysautonomia, thoracic hypovolemia, autonomic neuropathies, sympathetic
denervation, autoimmune responses, and associations with conditions such as
small-fiber neuropathy and mast cell activation syndrome. Given the numerous
mysteries surrounding POTS, we also cautiously bring attention to sinoatrial
node and myocardial function, particularly in how the heart responds to stress
despite exhibiting a normal cardiac phenotype at rest. The potential of genomic
research in elucidating the underlying mechanisms of POTS is emphasized,
suggesting this as a valuable approach that is likely to improve our
understanding of the genetic underpinnings of POTS. The review introduces a
tentative classification system for the etiological factors in POTS, which seeks
to capture the condition's diverse aspects by categorizing various etiological
factors and acknowledging co-occurring conditions. This classification, while
aiming to enhance understanding and optimize treatment targets, is presented as
a preliminary model needing further study and refinement. This review
underscores the ongoing need for research to unravel the complexities of POTS
and to develop targeted therapies that can improve patient outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12081911
PMCID: PMC11352109
PMID: 39200375

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of
interest with respect to this research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
