---
reference_id: "PMID:34416493"
title: Emerging roles of oxidative stress in brain aging and Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Ionescu-Tucker A
- Cotman CW
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.07.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emerging roles of oxidative stress in brain aging and Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Ionescu-Tucker A, Cotman CW
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.07.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.07.014)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Aging. 2021 Nov;107:86-95. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.07.014.  Epub 2021 Jul 25.

Emerging roles of oxidative stress in brain aging and Alzheimer's disease.

Ionescu-Tucker A(1), Cotman CW(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, Department of 
Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, 
California. Electronic address: aionescu@uci.edu.
(2)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, Department of 
Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, 
California. Electronic address: cwcotman@uci.edu.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are metabolic byproducts that are necessary for 
physiological function but can be toxic at high levels. Levels of these 
oxidative stressors increase gradually throughout the lifespan, impairing 
mitochondrial function and damaging all parts of the body, particularly the 
central nervous system. Emerging evidence suggests that accumulated oxidative 
stress may be one of the key mechanisms causing cognitive aging and 
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here, we synthesize 
the current literature on the effect of neuronal oxidative stress on 
mitochondrial dysfunction, DNA damage and epigenetic changes related to 
cognitive aging and AD. We further describe how oxidative stress therapeutics 
such as antioxidants, caloric restriction and physical activity can reduce 
oxidation and prevent cognitive decline in brain aging and AD. Of the currently 
available therapeutics, we propose that long term physical activity is the most 
promising avenue for improving cognitive health by reducing ROS while promoting 
the low levels required for optimal function.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.07.014
PMID: 34416493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]