---
reference_id: "PMID:39036255"
title: "Rheumatoid Vasculitis in Modern Era: A Case Report and Comprehensive Literature Review."
authors:
- Ahmad A
- Tariq F
- Zaheer M
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.62783
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid Vasculitis in Modern Era: A Case Report and Comprehensive Literature Review.
**Authors:** Ahmad A, Tariq F, Zaheer M
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.62783](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.62783)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jun 20;16(6):e62783. doi: 10.7759/cureus.62783. eCollection 2024 
Jun.

Rheumatoid Vasculitis in Modern Era: A Case Report and Comprehensive Literature 
Review.

Ahmad A(1), Tariq F(2), Zaheer M(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, St. Luke's Hospital, Chesterfield, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Quaid-E-Azam Medical College, Chesterfield, USA.
(3)Internal Medicine, St. Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, USA.

Rheumatoid vasculitis (RV) is a rare extraarticular manifestation of severe 
seropositive rheumatoid arthritis (RA), affecting small and medium vessels and 
associated with significant morbidity and mortality. The incidence of RV has 
significantly decreased in the last three decades due to early diagnosis and 
better management of RA with biologics. Still, the mortality rate remains high 
and there are insufficient controlled studies guiding RV treatment. Here, we 
discussed a case of a 75-year-old male who presented with a non-healing ulcer on 
lateral malleolus without significant joint pain, the workup showed very high 
titer rheumatoid factor with erosive joint disease raising high clinical 
suspicion of RV. Skin biopsy was negative for histologic evidence of vasculitis. 
He had complete healing of the ulcer with prednisone and methotrexate (MTX). 
This case highlights the importance of promptly recognizing this rare entity and 
that a negative biopsy does not rule out RV, and appropriate treatment helps 
decrease morbidity and mortality.

Copyright © 2024, Ahmad et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.62783
PMCID: PMC11260207
PMID: 39036255

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.