---
reference_id: "PMID:32764620"
title: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
authors:
- Costabel U
- Miyazaki Y
- Pardo A
- Koschel D
- Bonella F
- Spagnolo P
- Guzman J
- Ryerson CJ
- Selman M
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0191-z
keywords:
- "Alveolitis, Extrinsic Allergic/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Bronchoalveolar Lavage/methods
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Incidence
- "Lung/pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Costabel U, Miyazaki Y, Pardo A, Koschel D, Bonella F, Spagnolo P, Guzman J, Ryerson CJ, Selman M
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-020-0191-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-020-0191-z)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Aug 6;6(1):65. doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0191-z.

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Costabel U(1), Miyazaki Y(2), Pardo A(3), Koschel D(4)(5), Bonella F(6), 
Spagnolo P(7), Guzman J(8), Ryerson CJ(9)(10), Selman M(11).

Author information:
(1)Center for Interstitial and Rare Lung Diseases, Pneumology Department, 
Ruhrlandklinik, University Hospital, University of Essen, Essen, Germany. 
ulrich.costabel@rlk.uk-essen.de.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, 
Mexico.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Pneumology, Fachkrankenhaus Coswig, 
Centre for Pulmonary Diseases and Thoracic Surgery, Coswig, Germany.
(5)Division of Pneumology, Medical Department I, University Hospital Carl Gustav 
Carus, Dresden, Germany.
(6)Center for Interstitial and Rare Lung Diseases, Pneumology Department, 
Ruhrlandklinik, University Hospital, University of Essen, Essen, Germany.
(7)Respiratory Disease Unit, Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences 
and Public Health, University of Padova, Padua, Italy.
(8)General and Experimental Pathology, Ruhr-University, Bochum, Germany.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(10)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, St. Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(11)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael Cosío Villegas", 
Mexico City, Mexico.

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is a complex syndrome caused by the inhalation 
of a variety of antigens in susceptible and sensitized individuals. These 
antigens are found in the environment, mostly derived from bird proteins and 
fungi. The prevalence and incidence of HP vary widely depending on the intensity 
of exposure, the geographical area and the local climate. Immunopathologically, 
HP is characterized by an exaggerated humoral and cellular immune response 
affecting the small airways and lung parenchyma. A complex interplay of genetic, 
host and environmental factors underlies the development and progression of HP. 
HP can be classified into acute, chronic non-fibrotic and chronic fibrotic 
forms. Acute HP results from intermittent, high-level exposure to the inducing 
antigen, usually within a few hours of exposure, whereas chronic HP mostly 
originates from long-term, low-level exposure (usually to birds or moulds in the 
home), is not easy to define in terms of time, and may occur within weeks, 
months or even years of exposure. Some patients with fibrotic HP may evolve to a 
progressive phenotype, even with complete exposure avoidance. Diagnosis is based 
on an accurate exposure history, clinical presentation, characteristic 
high-resolution CT findings, specific IgG antibodies to the offending antigen, 
bronchoalveolar lavage and pathological features. Complete antigen avoidance is 
the mainstay of treatment. The pharmacotherapy of chronic HP consists of 
immunosuppressive drugs such as corticosteroids, with antifibrotic therapy being 
a potential therapy for patients with progressive disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-020-0191-z
PMID: 32764620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]