---
reference_id: "PMID:31331324"
title: "Celiac disease: a comprehensive current review."
authors:
- Caio G
- Volta U
- Sapone A
- Leffler DA
- De Giorgio R
- Catassi C
- Fasano A
journal: BMC Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12916-019-1380-z
keywords:
- Biopsy
- "Celiac Disease/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, therapy"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Diet, Gluten-Free"
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/physiology"
- Phenotype
- Quality of Life
- Serologic Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Celiac disease: a comprehensive current review.
**Authors:** Caio G, Volta U, Sapone A, Leffler DA, De Giorgio R, Catassi C, Fasano A
**Journal:** BMC Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12916-019-1380-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-019-1380-z)

## Content

1. BMC Med. 2019 Jul 23;17(1):142. doi: 10.1186/s12916-019-1380-z.

Celiac disease: a comprehensive current review.

Caio G(1)(2), Volta U(3), Sapone A(4)(5), Leffler DA(5)(6), De Giorgio R(7), 
Catassi C(4)(8), Fasano A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Via Aldo Moro 8, Cona, 
44124, Ferrara, Italy. caigmp@unife.it.
(2)Center for Celiac Research and Treatment, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, 02114, USA. caigmp@unife.it.
(3)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, 40138, 
Bologna, Italy.
(4)Center for Celiac Research and Treatment, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, 02114, USA.
(5)Takeda Pharmaceuticals International Co, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, 
MA, 02115, USA.
(7)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Via Aldo Moro 8, Cona, 
44124, Ferrara, Italy.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Celiac Research, Università Politecnica 
delle Marche, 60121, Ancona, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Celiac disease remains a challenging condition because of a steady 
increase in knowledge tackling its pathophysiology, diagnosis, management, and 
possible therapeutic options.
MAIN BODY: A major milestone in the history of celiac disease was the 
identification of tissue transglutaminase as the autoantigen, thereby confirming 
the autoimmune nature of this disorder. A genetic background (HLA-DQ2/DQ8 
positivity and non-HLA genes) is a mandatory determinant of the development of 
the disease, which occurs with the contribution of environmental factors (e.g., 
viral infections and dysbiosis of gut microbiota). Its prevalence in the general 
population is of approximately 1%, with female predominance. The disease can 
occur at any age, with a variety of symptoms/manifestations. This multifaceted 
clinical presentation leads to several phenotypes, i.e., gastrointestinal, 
extraintestinal, subclinical, potential, seronegative, non-responsive, and 
refractory. Although small intestinal biopsy remains the diagnostic 'gold 
standard', highly sensitive and specific serological tests, such as tissue 
transglutaminase, endomysial and deamidated gliadin peptide antibodies, have 
become gradually more important in the diagnostic work-up of celiac disease. 
Currently, the only treatment for celiac disease is a life-long, strict 
gluten-free diet leading to improvement in quality of life, ameliorating 
symptoms, and preventing the occurrence of refractory celiac disease, ulcerative 
jejunoileitis, and small intestinal adenocarcinoma and lymphoma.
CONCLUSIONS: The present review is timely and provides a thorough appraisal of 
various aspects characterizing celiac disease. Remaining challenges include 
obtaining a better understanding of still-unclear phenotypes such as 
slow-responsive, potential (minimal lesions) and seronegative celiac disease. 
The identification of alternative or complementary treatments to the gluten-free 
diet brings hope for patients unavoidably burdened by diet restrictions.

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-019-1380-z
PMCID: PMC6647104
PMID: 31331324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.