---
reference_id: "PMID:25358657"
title: "Trends in E-Cigarette Awareness, Trial, and Use Under the Different Regulatory Environments of Australia and the United Kingdom."
authors:
- Yong HH
- Borland R
- Balmford J
- McNeill A
- Hitchman S
- Driezen P
- Thompson ME
- Fong GT
- Cummings KM
journal: Nicotine Tob Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntu231
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trends in E-Cigarette Awareness, Trial, and Use Under the Different Regulatory Environments of Australia and the United Kingdom.
**Authors:** Yong HH, Borland R, Balmford J, McNeill A, Hitchman S, Driezen P, Thompson ME, Fong GT, Cummings KM
**Journal:** Nicotine Tob Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ntr/ntu231](https://doi.org/10.1093/ntr/ntu231)

## Content

1. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015 Oct;17(10):1203-11. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntu231. Epub 2014 
Oct 30.

Trends in E-Cigarette Awareness, Trial, and Use Under the Different Regulatory 
Environments of Australia and the United Kingdom.

Yong HH(1), Borland R(2), Balmford J(2), McNeill A(3), Hitchman S(3), Driezen 
P(4), Thompson ME(5), Fong GT(6), Cummings KM(7).

Author information:
(1)VicHealth Centre for Tobacco Control, Cancer Council Victoria, Melbourne, 
Australia; Hua.yong@cancervic.org.au.
(2)VicHealth Centre for Tobacco Control, Cancer Council Victoria, Melbourne, 
Australia;
(3)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, UK;
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada;
(5)Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of Waterloo, 
Waterloo, Canada;
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada; Ontario 
Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
(7)Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC.

INTRODUCTION: E-cigarettes (ECs) have gained significant attention in recent 
years. They have been introduced in jurisdictions with divergent existing laws 
that affect their legality. This provides the opportunity for natural 
experiments to assess effects of such laws in some cases independent of any 
formulated government policy. We compare patterns of EC awareness and use over a 
3 year period in Australia where laws severely restrict EC availability, with 
awareness and use in the United Kingdom where ECs are readily available.
METHODS: Data analyzed come from Waves 8 and 9 (collected in 2010 and 2013, 
respectively) of the International Tobacco Control surveys in Australia and the 
United Kingdom (approximately 1,500 respondents per wave per country).
RESULTS: Across both waves, EC awareness, trial, and use among current and 
former smokers were significantly greater in the United Kingdom than in 
Australia, but all 3 of these measures increased significantly between 2010 and 
2013 in both countries, and the rate of increase was equivalent between 
countries. Seventy-three percent of U.K. respondents reported that their current 
brands contained nicotine as did 43% in Australia even though sale, possession 
and/or use of nicotine-containing ECs without a permit are illegal in Australia. 
EC use was greater among smokers in both countries, at least in part due to less 
uptake by ex-smokers.
CONCLUSIONS: EC awareness and use have risen rapidly between 2010 and 2013 among 
current and former smokers in both Australia and the United Kingdom despite 
different EC regulatory environments. Substantial numbers in both countries are 
using ECs that contain nicotine.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ntr/ntu231
PMCID: PMC4598793
PMID: 25358657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]