---
reference_id: "PMID:30310097"
title: Propensity-score-matched evaluation of under-recognition of acute kidney injury and short-term outcomes.
authors:
- Wu B
- Li L
- Cheng X
- Yan W
- Liu Y
- Xing C
- Mao H
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-33103-9
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/diagnosis, pathology"
- Aged
- Female
- Hospital Mortality
- Hospitalization
- Humans
- Kidney/pathology
- Length of Stay
- Logistic Models
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Propensity Score
- Retrospective Studies
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Propensity-score-matched evaluation of under-recognition of acute kidney injury and short-term outcomes.
**Authors:** Wu B, Li L, Cheng X, Yan W, Liu Y, Xing C, Mao H
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-018-33103-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-33103-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2018 Oct 11;8(1):15171. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-33103-9.

Propensity-score-matched evaluation of under-recognition of acute kidney injury 
and short-term outcomes.

Wu B(1), Li L(1), Cheng X(1)(2), Yan W(1), Liu Y(3), Xing C(1), Mao H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210029, China.
(2)Intensive Care Unit, Sichuan Cancer Hospital & Institute, Sichuan Cancer 
Center, School of Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of 
China, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(3)Department of Information, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210029, China.
(4)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210029, China. huijuanmao@126.com.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a common disease, but diagnosis is usually delayed 
or missed in hospitalized patients. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
impact of under-recognition of AKI (beyond 3 days after AKI onset) on short-time 
prognosis. Of 785 patients with under-recognition of AKI and 616 patients with 
timely-recognition of AKI were propensity matched in a 1:1 ratio. The two 
groups, with a total of 482 matched patients (241:241), were comparable in 
baseline covariates. Under-recognition of AKI was not associated with 30-day 
all-cause mortality in the logistic regression model with covariate adjustment 
(OR = 1.01, 95% CI = 0.62-1.64, p = 0.967). Sensitivity analyses and subgroup 
analyses also proved the association. There were also no significant differences 
in causes of 30-day mortality, in-hospital mortality, recovery of renal function 
at discharge, length of hospital stay, length of intensive care unit stay or 
hospitalization costs between the two groups, although timely-recognition group 
had more chance of renal consult and a little more interventions for AKI. In 
conclusion, under-recognition of AKI may not be associated with poor short-term 
outcomes of adult hospitalized patients via these propensity-score-matched 
analyses.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-33103-9
PMCID: PMC6181969
PMID: 30310097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.