---
reference_id: "PMID:11174912"
title: Cardiac arrhythmias in the athlete.
authors:
- Link MS
- Homoud MK
- Wang PJ
- Estes NA 3rd
journal: Cardiol Rev
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1097/00045415-200101000-00006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac arrhythmias in the athlete.
**Authors:** Link MS, Homoud MK, Wang PJ, Estes NA 3rd
**Journal:** Cardiol Rev (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00045415-200101000-00006](https://doi.org/10.1097/00045415-200101000-00006)

## Content

1. Cardiol Rev. 2001 Jan-Feb;9(1):21-30. doi: 10.1097/00045415-200101000-00006.

Cardiac arrhythmias in the athlete.

Link MS(1), Homoud MK, Wang PJ, Estes NA 3rd.

Author information:
(1)The Center for Cardiovascular Evaluation of Athletes, The Cardiac Arrhythmia 
Center, New England Medical Center, Box 197, 750 Washington Street, Boston, MA 
02111, USA.

Cardiac arrhythmias in the athlete are a frequent cause for concern. Some 
arrhythmias may be benign and asymptomatic, but others may be life threatening 
and a sign that serious cardiovascular disease is present. Physicians often are 
consulted with regard to arrhythmias, or symptoms consistent with arrhythmias, 
in athletes. Sinus bradyarrhythmias are common and even expected in athletes. 
These bradyarrhythmias are rarely a cause for concern. Heart block is unusual 
and merits a thorough workup. Atrial fibrillation may be more common in the 
athlete. Supraventricular tachycardias other than atrial fibrillation generally 
warrant consideration of radiofrequency ablation for cure of the 
tachyarrhythmia. Ventricular arrhythmias in the athlete generally occur in the 
setting of structural heart disease that is genetically determined (hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, anomalous coronary 
arteries) or acquired (coronary artery disease, myocarditis, idiopathic dilated 
cardiomyopathies). In these conditions, the arrhythmia generally is life 
threatening. Ventricular arrhythmias that occur in the athlete without 
structural heart disease are not thought to be life threatening. Athletes with 
structural heart disease and syncope and those with exertional syncope merit a 
complete evaluation.

DOI: 10.1097/00045415-200101000-00006
PMID: 11174912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]