---
reference_id: "PMID:34348419"
title: Aromatase deficiency in an Ontario Old Order Mennonite family.
authors:
- Kim SY
- Colaiacovo S
- Dave S
- Coughlin K
- Langdon K
- Stein R
- Saleh M
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2021-0229
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aromatase deficiency in an Ontario Old Order Mennonite family.
**Authors:** Kim SY, Colaiacovo S, Dave S, Coughlin K, Langdon K, Stein R, Saleh M
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2021-0229](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2021-0229)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2021 Aug 5;34(12):1615-1618. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2021-0229. Print 2021 Dec 20.

Aromatase deficiency in an Ontario Old Order Mennonite family.

Kim SY(1), Colaiacovo S(1)(2), Dave S(1)(3), Coughlin K(1)(4), Langdon K(1)(5), 
Stein R(1)(5), Saleh M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Schulich School of Medicine, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, London Health 
Sciences Centre, London, Canada.
(3)Division of Urology, Department of Pediatrics, London Health Sciences Centre, 
London, Canada.
(4)Division of Neonatal Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, London Health 
Sciences, London, Canada.
(5)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, London Health Sciences 
Centre, London, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Aromatase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disease that 
results in the absence of aromatase. In females it presents with ambiguous 
genitalia and lack of secondary sexual characteristics during puberty. Aromatase 
deficiency is not attributed to any specific population, but it is more commonly 
seen in consanguineous parents. Herein, we report the first Old Order Mennonite 
family with that diagnosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: Our proband is an Old Order Mennonite female born with 
ambiguous genitalia who was identified to carry novel homozygous variant in the 
CYP19A1 gene c.1304G>A (p. Arg435His). Her older brother was later confirmed 
with the same genetic diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Recognizing the cultural sensitivity, unrecognized affected cases, 
and late presentation of males affected with aromatase deficiency, this 
condition may be more prevalent than believed in that population.

© 2021 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2021-0229
PMID: 34348419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]