---
reference_id: "PMID:25125611"
title: "ECHS1 mutations in Leigh disease: a new inborn error of metabolism affecting valine metabolism."
authors:
- Peters H
- Buck N
- Wanders R
- Ruiter J
- Waterham H
- Koster J
- Yaplito-Lee J
- Ferdinandusse S
- Pitt J
journal: Brain
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awu216
keywords:
- "Enoyl-CoA Hydratase/deficiency, genetics"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Leigh Disease/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Siblings
- "Thiolester Hydrolases/deficiency, genetics"
- Valine/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# ECHS1 mutations in Leigh disease: a new inborn error of metabolism affecting valine metabolism.
**Authors:** Peters H, Buck N, Wanders R, Ruiter J, Waterham H, Koster J, Yaplito-Lee J, Ferdinandusse S, Pitt J
**Journal:** Brain (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awu216](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu216)

## Content

1. Brain. 2014 Nov;137(Pt 11):2903-8. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu216. Epub 2014 Aug
14.

ECHS1 mutations in Leigh disease: a new inborn error of metabolism affecting 
valine metabolism.

Peters H(1), Buck N(1), Wanders R(2), Ruiter J(2), Waterham H(2), Koster J(2), 
Yaplito-Lee J(1), Ferdinandusse S(2), Pitt J(3).

Author information:
(1)1 Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, 
Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Vic 3052, Australia.
(2)2 University of Amsterdam, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Departments 
of Paediatrics and Laboratory Medicine, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)1 Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, 
Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Vic 3052, Australia 3 Department of 
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic 3052, Australia 
james.pitt@vcgs.org.au.

Comment in
    Brain. 2014 Nov;137(Pt 11):2872-3. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu264.

Two siblings with fatal Leigh disease had increased excretion of 
S-(2-carboxypropyl)cysteine and several other metabolites that are features of 
3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase (HIBCH) deficiency, a rare defect in the 
valine catabolic pathway associated with Leigh-like disease. However, this 
diagnosis was excluded by HIBCH sequencing and normal enzyme activity. In 
contrast to HIBCH deficiency, the excretion of 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-carnitine was 
normal in the children, suggesting deficiency of short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase 
(ECHS1 gene). This mitochondrial enzyme is active in several metabolic pathways 
involving fatty acids and amino acids, including valine, and is immediately 
upstream of HIBCH in the valine pathway. Both children were compound 
heterozygous for a c.473C > A (p.A158D) missense mutation and a c.414+3G>C 
splicing mutation in ECHS1. ECHS1 activity was markedly decreased in cultured 
fibroblasts from both siblings, ECHS1 protein was undetectable by immunoblot 
analysis and transfection of patient cells with wild-type ECHS1 rescued ECHS1 
activity. The highly reactive metabolites methacrylyl-CoA and acryloyl-CoA 
accumulate in deficiencies of both ECHS1 and HIBCH and are probably responsible 
for the brain pathology in both disorders. Deficiency of ECHS1 or HIBCH should 
be considered in children with Leigh disease. Urine metabolite testing can 
detect and distinguish between these two disorders.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu216
PMID: 25125611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]