---
reference_id: "PMID:38668041"
title: Successful Multimodal Treatment of Intracranial Growing Teratoma Syndrome with Malignant Features.
authors:
- Satake D
- Natsumeda M
- Satomi K
- Tada M
- Sato T
- Okubo N
- Kawabe K
- Takahashi H
- Tsukamoto Y
- Okada M
- Sano M
- Iwabuchi H
- Shibata N
- Imamura M
- Imai C
- Takami H
- Ichimura K
- Nishikawa R
- Umezu H
- Kakita A
- Oishi M
journal: Curr Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/curroncol31040138
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Teratoma/therapy, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Brain Neoplasms/therapy
- Combined Modality Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful Multimodal Treatment of Intracranial Growing Teratoma Syndrome with Malignant Features.
**Authors:** Satake D, Natsumeda M, Satomi K, Tada M, Sato T, Okubo N, Kawabe K, Takahashi H, Tsukamoto Y, Okada M, Sano M, Iwabuchi H, Shibata N, Imamura M, Imai C, Takami H, Ichimura K, Nishikawa R, Umezu H, Kakita A, Oishi M
**Journal:** Curr Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/curroncol31040138](https://doi.org/10.3390/curroncol31040138)

## Content

1. Curr Oncol. 2024 Mar 29;31(4):1831-1838. doi: 10.3390/curroncol31040138.

Successful Multimodal Treatment of Intracranial Growing Teratoma Syndrome with 
Malignant Features.

Satake D(1), Natsumeda M(1)(2), Satomi K(3), Tada M(4), Sato T(1), Okubo N(1), 
Kawabe K(1), Takahashi H(1), Tsukamoto Y(1), Okada M(1), Sano M(1), Iwabuchi 
H(5), Shibata N(5), Imamura M(5), Imai C(5)(6), Takami H(7), Ichimura K(8), 
Nishikawa R(9), Umezu H(10), Kakita A(4), Oishi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, 
Niigata 951-8585, Japan.
(2)Advanced Treatment of Neurological Diseases Branch, Brain Research Institute, 
Niigata University, Niigata 951-8585, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kyorin University Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo 
181-8611, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, 
Niigata 951-8585, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Niigata University Medical and Dental Hospital, 
Niigata 951-8520, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Toyama University, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo 113-8655, 
Japan.
(8)Department of Brain Disease Translational Research, Juntendo University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.
(9)Department of Neurosurgery/Neuro-Oncology, Saitama Medical University 
International Medical Center, Saitama 350-1298, Japan.
(10)Division of Pathology, Niigata University Medical and Dental Hospital, 
Niigata University, Niigata 951-8520, Japan.

Molecular analysis of the growing teratoma syndrome has not been extensively 
studied. Here, we report a 14-year-old boy with a growing mass during treatment 
for a mixed germ cell tumor of the pineal region. Tumor markers were negative; 
thus, growing teratoma syndrome was suspected. A radical resection via the 
occipital transtentorial approach was performed, and histopathological 
examination revealed a teratoma with malignant features. Methylation classifier 
analysis confirmed the diagnosis of teratoma, and DMRT1 loss and 12p gain were 
identified by copy number variation analysis, potentially elucidating the cause 
of growth and malignant transformation of the teratoma. The patient remains in 
remission after intense chemoradiation treatment as a high-risk germ cell tumor.

DOI: 10.3390/curroncol31040138
PMCID: PMC11049495
PMID: 38668041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.