---
reference_id: "PMID:31110235"
title: Urea cycle disorders-update.
authors:
- Matsumoto S
- Häberle J
- Kido J
- Mitsubuchi H
- Endo F
- Nakamura K
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-019-0614-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urea cycle disorders-update.
**Authors:** Matsumoto S, Häberle J, Kido J, Mitsubuchi H, Endo F, Nakamura K
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-019-0614-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-019-0614-4)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2019 Sep;64(9):833-847. doi: 10.1038/s10038-019-0614-4. Epub 2019
 May 20.

Urea cycle disorders-update.

Matsumoto S(1), Häberle J(2), Kido J(3), Mitsubuchi H(3), Endo F(4), Nakamura 
K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of 
Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. 
s-pediat@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)University Children's Hospital Zurich and Children's Research Centre, Zurich, 
8032, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of 
Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(4)Kumamoto Ezuko Institution for Developmental Disabilities, Kumamoto, Japan.

The urea cycle is a metabolic pathway for the disposal of excess nitrogen, which 
arises primarily as ammonia. Nitrogen is essential for growth and 
life-maintenance, but excessive ammonia leads to life-threatening conditions. 
The urea cycle disorders (UCDs) comprise diseases presenting with hyperammonemia 
that arise in either the neonatal period (about 50% of cases) or later. 
Congenital defects of the enzymes or transporters of the urea cycle cause the 
disease. This cycle utilizes five enzymes, two of which, carbamoylphosphate 
synthetase 1 and ornithine transcarbamylase are present in the mitochondrial 
matrix, whereas the others (argininosuccinate synthetase, argininosuccinate 
lyase and arginase 1) are present in the cytoplasm. In addition, 
N-acetylglutamate synthase and at least two transporter proteins are essential 
to urea cycle function. Severity and age of onset depend on residual enzyme or 
transporter function and are related to the respective gene mutations. The 
strategy for therapy is to prevent the irreversible toxicity of high-ammonia 
exposure to the brain. The pathogenesis and natural course are poorly understood 
because of the rarity of the disease, so an international registry system and 
novel clinical trials are much needed. We review here the current concepts of 
the pathogenesis, diagnostics, including genetics and treatment of UCDs.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-019-0614-4
PMID: 31110235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]