---
reference_id: "PMID:7411317"
title: "Urine screening for aminoacidopathies: is it beneficial? Results of a long-term follow-up of cases detected bny screening one millon babies."
authors:
- Wilcken B
- Smith A
- Brown DA
journal: J Pediatr
year: '1980'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(80)80216-2
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Australia
- "Cystinuria/prevention & control"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Histidine/urine
- Humans
- Infant
- Mass Screening
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urine screening for aminoacidopathies: is it beneficial? Results of a long-term follow-up of cases detected bny screening one millon babies.
**Authors:** Wilcken B, Smith A, Brown DA
**Journal:** J Pediatr (1980)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(80)80216-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(80)80216-2)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 1980 Sep;97(3):492-7. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(80)80216-2.

Urine screening for aminoacidopathies: is it beneficial? Results of a long-term
follow-up of cases detected bny screening one millon babies.

Wilcken B, Smith A, Brown DA.

One million 6-week-old infants were screened for aminoacidurias and the
long-term follow-up analyzed to assess the benefits of the screening program.
Apart from phenylketonuria, now normally detected by blood screening at five
days, the most frequent abnormalities identified were cystinuria, histidinemia,
Hartnup disease, and iminoglycinuria. Other disorders occurred less frequently
than 1:100,000. Early diagnosis provided unequivocal clinical benefit only for
phenylketonuria. There was probable benefit to patients with cystinuria,
homocystinuria, argininosuccinic aciduria, and to some patients with Hartnup
disease. However, benefit of early diagnosis in these disorders, of which the
combined incidence was 1:10,000, was not clear-cut; for example, in 68
cystinuric children, four had already developed renal stones despite close
medical supervision and a regimen of increased fluid intake to the limits of
tolerance. No patient detected with any other condition benefited, either
because the condition appeared benign and was not treated, or because the
disorder was serious or lethal and there was a bad outcome despite early
diagnosis and treatment. Existing urine screening programs should explore the
incidence and clinical significance of further biochemical abnormalities
detectable in the newborn infant, but there is no indication at present for the
initiation of new urine screening programs designed to detect only
aminoacidurias.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(80)80216-2
PMID: 7411317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
