---
reference_id: "PMID:40709761"
title: "The Clinical Spectrum of Rare Inherited Ichthyosis in China: A Review of Thirty-five Cases."
authors:
- Xiang R
- Huang X
- Liu Y
- Sun S
- Hua D
- Mo R
- Yang Y
- Chen Z
journal: Acta Derm Venereol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2340/actadv.v105.41100
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Clinical Spectrum of Rare Inherited Ichthyosis in China: A Review of Thirty-five Cases.
**Authors:** Xiang R, Huang X, Liu Y, Sun S, Hua D, Mo R, Yang Y, Chen Z
**Journal:** Acta Derm Venereol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2340/actadv.v105.41100](https://doi.org/10.2340/actadv.v105.41100)

## Content

1. Acta Derm Venereol. 2025 Jul 25;105:adv41100. doi: 10.2340/actadv.v105.41100.

The Clinical Spectrum of Rare Inherited Ichthyosis in China: A Review of 
Thirty-five Cases.

Xiang R(1), Huang X(1), Liu Y(1), Sun S(1), Hua D(1), Mo R(1), Yang Y(1), Chen 
Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetic Skin Disease Center, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for 
Skin Diseases and STIs, Hospital for Skin Diseases, Institute of Dermatology, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, China.
(2)Genetic Skin Disease Center, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for 
Skin Diseases and STIs, Hospital for Skin Diseases, Institute of Dermatology, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, China. zmchen@pumcderm.cams.cn.

Inherited ichthyosis comprises a spectrum of genetic disorders related to over 
50 pathogenic genes. However, there are limited data summarizing the clinical 
and molecular characteristics of Chinese patients. To broaden the knowledge of 
clinical and genetic characteristics of inherited ichthyosis and to optimize 
disease diagnosis and therapies, cases diagnosed with inherited ichthyosis in 1 
tertiary centre from 2019 to 2023 were collected, excluding ichthyosis vulgaris 
and X-linked recessive ichthyosis, genomic sequencing was then performed, and 
clinical details of the patients were assessed. A total of 35 patients from 
Jiangsu and Anhui provinces of China were enrolled, 31 of whom were diagnosed 
with non-syndromic ichthyosis. Within this group, there were cases of autosomal 
recessive congenital ichthyosis (18/31), epidermolytic ichthyosis (9/31), and 
superficial epidermolytic ichthyosis (4/31). Additionally, 4 patients were 
diagnosed with syndromic ichthyosis, comprising 1 case of Chanarin-Dorfman 
syndrome and 3 cases of Netherton syndrome. The genetic analysis revealed a 
total of 47 variants across 13 genes, of which 19 were identified as novel 
variants. This study describes the clinical spectrum of rare inherited 
ichthyosis in the Jiangsu-Anhui region of China and further expands the genetic 
characteristics of the disease.

DOI: 10.2340/actadv.v105.41100
PMCID: PMC12308539
PMID: 40709761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.