---
reference_id: "PMID:37021292"
title: "Cerebellar pilocytic astrocytoma. Retrospective cohort study assessing postoperative functional outcome, cerebellar mutism and hydrocephalus."
authors:
- Ruella M
- Giovannini S
- Pirozzi Chiusa C
- Perez Zabala J
- Argañaraz R
- Mantese B
journal: World Neurosurg X
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.wnsx.2023.100180
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebellar pilocytic astrocytoma. Retrospective cohort study assessing postoperative functional outcome, cerebellar mutism and hydrocephalus.
**Authors:** Ruella M, Giovannini S, Pirozzi Chiusa C, Perez Zabala J, Argañaraz R, Mantese B
**Journal:** World Neurosurg X (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.wnsx.2023.100180](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wnsx.2023.100180)

## Content

1. World Neurosurg X. 2023 Mar 23;19:100180. doi: 10.1016/j.wnsx.2023.100180.
eCollection 2023 Jul.

Cerebellar pilocytic astrocytoma. Retrospective cohort study assessing
postoperative functional outcome, cerebellar mutism and hydrocephalus.

Ruella M(1), Giovannini S(1), Pirozzi Chiusa C(2), Perez Zabala J(2), Argañaraz
R(2), Mantese B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Fleni, Montañeses 2325, CP 1428, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Hospital de Pediatría Juan P. Garrahan, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

OBJECTIVE: Analyze a series of pediatric patients with cPAs evaluating factors
that may modify or determine the final outcome in terms of neurological status,
CMS and hydrocephalus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Single Center, retrospective cohort study of surgical
patients with cPA and at least 12 months of follow-up. Clinical, imaging and
surgical features, histopathology and adjuvancy were assessed. Clinical outcome
was categorized using the FSS and modified Bloom-Scale in the short and long
term. Recurrency, PFS and mortality were also analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 100 patients with a mean follow-up of 53.9 months, with no
gender predilection, and a mean age of 7.6 years were included. The most
frequent location was central and 24% of the tumors presented brainstem
invasion. 79 patients had hydrocephalus at diagnosis and 48% required
preoperative treatment. RT was achieved in 67% of cases. CMS was observed in 15
patients, statistically associated with location, pontine invasion, preoperative
Bloom-score, and postoperative meningitis/ventriculitis. The functional
"outcome" was correlated with complications such as meningitis/ventriculitis and
cerebellar hematoma, mutism and recurrence. Recurrence was observed in 26% of
cases and surgical reintervention was the chosen therapy.
CONCLUSION: The treatment of cPAs in pediatric patients is associated with
relatively favorable results. Recurrence, CMS and surgical complications play a
prognostic value in the outcome and therefore must be managed appropriately.
Early treatment with the intention of GTR should be considered, opting, if this
is not possible, to leave a tumor residue over neurological damage. The
treatment of hydrocephalus in the preoperative instance requires individualized
management.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wnsx.2023.100180
PMCID: PMC10068610
PMID: 37021292

Conflict of interest statement: The authors do not present conflicts of
interest.
