---
reference_id: "PMID:20301635"
title: PLOD1-Related Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Rohrbach M
- Giunta C
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PLOD1-Related Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Rohrbach M, Giunta C

## Content

1. PLOD1-Related Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.

Rohrbach M(1), Giunta C(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2025.
2000 Feb 2 [updated 2024 Jun 13].

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, University Children's Hospital Zurich, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PLOD1-related kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
(PLOD1-kEDS) is characterized by hypotonia, generalized joint hypermobility, 
early-onset kyphoscoliosis, skin fragility, and ocular abnormality. Intelligence 
is normal. Life span may be normal, but affected individuals are at risk of 
life-threatening arterial ruptures and spontaneous dissections of medium-sized 
arteries. Adults with severe kyphoscoliosis are at risk for complications from 
restrictive lung disease, recurrent pneumonia, and cardiac failure.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PLOD1-kEDS is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical features and biallelic pathogenic variants in PLOD1 
identified by molecular genetic testing. If only one pathogenic variant and/or 
variants of uncertain significance are identified, testing for a markedly 
increased ratio of deoxypyridinoline to pyridinoline cross-links in urine 
measured by high-performance liquid chromatography (a highly sensitive, 
specific, and inexpensive test) may be necessary for confirmation of the 
diagnosis.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Physical therapy to strengthen large 
muscle groups; swimming; management of kyphoscoliosis by an orthopedic surgeon, 
including surgery as needed; bracing to support unstable joints; protective pads 
and helmets during active sports; dermal wounds should be closed without 
tension, preferably in two layers; deep stitches should be applied generously; 
cutaneous stitches should be left in place twice as long as usual, and 
additional fixation of adjacent skin with adhesive tape can help prevent 
stretching of the scar; treatment of cardiovascular manifestations per a 
cardiologist; control of blood pressure to reduce the risk of arterial rupture; 
treatment with beta-blockers as needed to prevent aortic dilatation; standard 
American Heart Association guidelines for antimicrobial prophylaxis for mitral 
valve prolapse; corrective lenses for myopia and/or astigmatism; laser treatment 
of the retina for those with imminent detachment; careful stitching for hernia 
repair. Surveillance: Annual physical therapy assessment for weakness and motor 
issues and orthopedic assessment for management of kyphoscoliosis and recurrent 
dislocations; assessment for osteopenia as needed beginning at age ten to 12 
years; assessment for respiratory complications as needed; echocardiogram at 
five-year intervals beginning at age five years; consider intermittent 
surveillance of the entire aorta with CT or MRA beginning in young adulthood and 
at least annually in anyone with aortic or arterial dilatation; annual 
ophthalmology examination; annual examination for inguinal hernia. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Sports that stress the joints, such as gymnastics 
or long-distance running; high-impact sports (collision sports); heavy lifting 
and weight training with extreme lifting; arteriography should be discouraged 
and used only to identify life-threatening sources of bleeding prior to surgical 
intervention because of the risk of vascular injury. Evaluation of relatives at 
risk: Clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger 
sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would 
benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Pregnancy 
management: Affected pregnant women may be at increased risk for miscarriage, 
premature rupture of membranes, and rupture of arteries. Monitoring aortic root 
measurement during pregnancy by echocardiogram is recommended. Delivery should 
be performed in a medical center with a high-risk perinatologist in attendance.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PLOD1-kEDS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If 
both parents are known to be heterozygous for a PLOD1 pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, 
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. If both PLOD1 pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2025, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301635