---
reference_id: "PMID:24346713"
title: From FMRP function to potential therapies for fragile X syndrome.
authors:
- Sethna F
- Moon C
- Wang H
journal: Neurochem Res
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s11064-013-1229-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From FMRP function to potential therapies for fragile X syndrome.
**Authors:** Sethna F, Moon C, Wang H
**Journal:** Neurochem Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11064-013-1229-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-013-1229-3)

## Content

1. Neurochem Res. 2014 Jun;39(6):1016-31. doi: 10.1007/s11064-013-1229-3. Epub
2013  Dec 18.

From FMRP function to potential therapies for fragile X syndrome.

Sethna F(1), Moon C, Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA.

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by mutations in the fragile X mental 
retardation 1 (FMR1) gene. Most FXS cases occur due to the expansion of the CGG 
trinucleotide repeats in the 5' un-translated region of FMR1, which leads to 
hypermethylation and in turn silences the expression of FMRP (fragile X mental 
retardation protein). Numerous studies have demonstrated that FMRP interacts 
with both coding and non-coding RNAs and represses protein synthesis at 
dendritic and synaptic locations. In the absence of FMRP, the basal protein 
translation is enhanced and not responsive to neuronal stimulation. The altered 
protein translation may contribute to functional abnormalities in certain 
aspects of synaptic plasticity and intracellular signaling triggered by 
Gq-coupled receptors. This review focuses on the current understanding of FMRP 
function and potential therapeutic strategies that are mainly based on the 
manipulation of FMRP targets and knowledge gained from FXS pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-013-1229-3
PMCID: PMC4024105
PMID: 24346713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]