---
reference_id: "PMID:32934110"
title: "Disease mechanism, biomarker and therapeutics for spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA)."
authors:
- Hashizume A
- Fischbeck KH
- Pennuto M
- Fratta P
- Katsuno M
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2020-322949
keywords:
- 5-alpha Reductase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Adipose Tissue/diagnostic imaging
- Adrenergic beta-Agonists/therapeutic use
- Autophagy
- Biomarkers
- "Bulbo-Spinal Atrophy, X-Linked/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, physiopathology, therapy"
- Clenbuterol/therapeutic use
- Creatinine/metabolism
- Dutasteride/therapeutic use
- Glycolysis
- Humans
- "Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/analogs & derivatives"
- Leuprolide/therapeutic use
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Muscle Fibers, Fast-Twitch/metabolism, pathology"
- "Muscle Fibers, Slow-Twitch/metabolism, pathology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use"
- Oxidation-Reduction
- RNAi Therapeutics
- "Receptors, Androgen/genetics, metabolism"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease mechanism, biomarker and therapeutics for spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA).
**Authors:** Hashizume A, Fischbeck KH, Pennuto M, Fratta P, Katsuno M
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2020-322949](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2020-322949)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2020 Oct;91(10):1085-1091. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2020-322949.

Disease mechanism, biomarker and therapeutics for spinal and bulbar muscular 
atrophy (SBMA).

Hashizume A(1), Fischbeck KH(2), Pennuto M(3)(4), Fratta P(5)(6), Katsuno M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(2)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences (DBS), University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Veneto Institute of Molecular Medicine (VIMM), Padova, Italy.
(5)Depatment of Neuromuscular Diseases, University College London Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK.
(6)MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, University College London Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK.
(7)Department of Neurology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya, Aichi, Japan ka2no@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is a hereditary neuromuscular disorder 
caused by CAG trinucleotide expansion in the gene encoding the androgen receptor 
(AR). In the central nervous system, lower motor neurons are selectively 
affected, whereas pathology of patients and animal models also indicates 
involvement of skeletal muscle including loss of fast-twitch type 2 fibres and 
increased slow-twitch type 1 fibres, together with a glycolytic-to-oxidative 
metabolic switch. Evaluation of muscle and fat using MRI, in addition to 
biochemical indices such as serum creatinine level, are promising biomarkers to 
track the disease progression. The serum level of creatinine starts to decrease 
before the onset of muscle weakness, followed by the emergence of hand tremor, a 
prodromal sign of the disease. Androgen-dependent nuclear accumulation of the 
polyglutamine-expanded AR is an essential step in the pathogenesis, providing 
therapeutic opportunities via hormonal manipulation and gene silencing with 
antisense oligonucleotides. Animal studies also suggest that hyperactivation of 
Src, alteration of autophagy and a mitochondrial deficit underlie the 
neuromuscular degeneration in SBMA and provide alternative therapeutic targets.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2020-322949
PMID: 32934110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AH is supported by a JSPS 
KAKENHI Grant Number JP18K07523. PF has received honoraria from Nido 
Biosciences. MK is supported by a JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP17H04195, grants 
from the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (Nos. 
19ek0109221h0003, 19ek0109359h0002, 19dk0207027h0004, 19lk0201101h0001 and 
19dm0107155h0001) and a grant from the Hori Sciences and Arts Foundation. He 
received honoraria from Takeda Pharmaceutical Co Ltd, Alnylam Japan, Daiichi 
Sankyo Co Ltd, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co Ltd, Novartis Pharma Co Ltd, Biogen 
Japan and UCB Japan and grants from Zenyaku Kogyo Co Ltd, Japan Blood Products 
Organization, Mitsubishi-Tanabe Pharma, CSL Behring Co Ltd, Dainippon Sumitomo 
Pharma Co Ltd, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co Ltd and Daiichi Sankyo Co Ltd.