---
reference_id: "PMID:29217468"
title: Availability of hepatitis C diagnostics and therapeutics in European and Eurasia countries.
authors:
- Leblebicioglu H
- Arends JE
- Ozaras R
- Corti G
- Santos L
- Boesecke C
- Ustianowski A
- Duberg AS
- Ruta S
- Salkic NN
- Husa P
- Lazarevic I
- Pineda JA
- Pshenichnaya NY
- Tsertswadze T
- Matičič M
- Puca E
- Abuova G
- Gervain J
- Bayramli R
- Ahmeti S
- Koulentaki M
- Kilani B
- Vince A
- Negro F
- Sunbul M
- Salmon D
- ESGHV (part of ESCMID)
journal: Antiviral Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2017.12.001
keywords:
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Asia/epidemiology
- Elasticity Imaging Techniques
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Hepacivirus
- "Hepatitis C/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, virology"
- Humans
- "Insurance, Health, Reimbursement"
- Male
- Prevalence
- Viral Load
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Availability of hepatitis C diagnostics and therapeutics in European and Eurasia countries.
**Authors:** Leblebicioglu H, Arends JE, Ozaras R, Corti G, Santos L, Boesecke C, Ustianowski A, Duberg AS, Ruta S, Salkic NN, Husa P, Lazarevic I, Pineda JA, Pshenichnaya NY, Tsertswadze T, Matičič M, Puca E, Abuova G, Gervain J, Bayramli R, Ahmeti S, Koulentaki M, Kilani B, Vince A, Negro F, Sunbul M, Salmon D, ESGHV (part of ESCMID)
**Journal:** Antiviral Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.antiviral.2017.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2017.12.001)

## Content

1. Antiviral Res. 2018 Feb;150:9-14. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2017.12.001. Epub
2017 Dec 5.

Availability of hepatitis C diagnostics and therapeutics in European and Eurasia
countries.

Leblebicioglu H(1), Arends JE(2), Ozaras R(3), Corti G(4), Santos L(5), Boesecke
C(6), Ustianowski A(7), Duberg AS(8), Ruta S(9), Salkic NN(10), Husa P(11),
Lazarevic I(12), Pineda JA(13), Pshenichnaya NY(14), Tsertswadze T(15), Matičič
M(16), Puca E(17), Abuova G(18), Gervain J(19), Bayramli R(20), Ahmeti S(21),
Koulentaki M(22), Kilani B(23), Vince A(24), Negro F(25), Sunbul M(26), Salmon
D(27); ESGHV (part of ESCMID).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Ondokuz Mayis
University, Medical School, Samsun, Turkey. Electronic address:
hakanomu@yahoo.com.
(2)Internal Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Universitair Medisch Centrum
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Istanbul
University Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Infectious Disease Unit, University of Florence School of Medicine, Florence,
Italy.
(5)Infectious Diseases Service C Hospitalar São João, Faculty of Medicine,
Alameda Professor Hernani Monteiro, Porto, Portugal.
(6)Department of Medicine I, Bonn University, Bonn, Germany.
(7)Infectious Diseases & Tropical Medicine and Research Lead, North Western
Infectious Diseases Unit, Pennine Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, North Manchester
General Hospital, Delaunays Road, Manchester, UK.
(8)Department of Infectious Diseases, Örebro University Hospital, School of
Medical Sciences, Örebro, Sweden.
(9)Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Stefan S. Nicolau Institute
of Virology, Bucharest, Romania.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Clinical Center
Tuzla, Tuzla, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(11)Masaryk University, Infectious Diseases, Brno, Czech Republic; University
Hospital Brno, Infectious Diseases, Brno, Czech Republic.
(12)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(13)Unidad de Enfermedades Infecciosas y Microbiología, Hospital Universitario
de Valme, Avda. de Bellavista, Sevilla, Spain.
(14)Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia.
(15)Infectious Diseases, AIDS and Clinical Immunology Research Center, Tbilisi,
Georgia; Faculty of Medicine, Ivane Javakhishvili Tbilisi State University,
Tbilisi, Georgia.
(16)Clinic for Infectious Diseases and Febrile Illnesses, University Medical
Centre Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(17)Department of Infection Diseases, University Hospital Center, Tirane,
Albania.
(18)Infectious Diseases Department, South - Kazakhstan State Pharmaceutical
Academy, Shymkent, Kazakhstan.
(19)Division Hepato-Pancreatology 1st Department of Gastroenterology and
Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, "Szent György" Teaching Hospital
Székesfehérvár, Hungary.
(20)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Azerbaijan Medical University,
Educational Therapeutic Hospital, Baku, Azerbaijan.
(21)Infectious Disease Clinic, University Clinical Centre of Kosova, Faculty of
Medicine, Prishtina University, Pristina, Kosovo.
(22)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion,
Crete, Greece.
(23)Service des Maladies Infectieuses, Faculté de Médecine de Tunis, Université
Tunis EL Manar, Hôpital la Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia.
(24)University Hospital of Infectious Diseases, Zagreb School of Medicine,
Zagreb, Croatia.
(25)Divisions of Gastroenterology and Hepatology of Clinical Pathology,
University Hospital of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(26)Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Ondokuz Mayis
University, Medical School, Samsun, Turkey.
(27)Infectious Diseases, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Centre, Université Paris
Descartes, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Treatment with direct acting antiviral agents (DAAs) has provided
sustained virological response rates in >95% of patients with chronic hepatitis
C virus (HCV) infection. However treatment is costly and market access,
reimbursement and governmental restrictions differ among countries. We aimed to
analyze these differences among European and Eurasian countries.
METHODS: A survey including 20-item questionnaire was sent to experts in viral
hepatitis. Countries were evaluated according to their income categories by the
World Bank stratification.
RESULTS: Experts from 26 countries responded to the survey. As of May 2016, HCV
prevalence was reported as low (≤1%) in Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
France, Germany, Hungary, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
UK; intermediate (1-4%) in Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Italy, Kosovo,
Greece, Kazakhstan, Romania, Russia, Serbia and high in Georgia (6.7%). All
countries had national guidelines except Albania, Kosovo, Serbia, Tunisia, and
UK. Transient elastography was available in all countries, but reimbursed in
61%. HCV-RNA was reimbursed in 81%. PegIFN/RBV was reimbursed in 54% of the
countries. No DAAs were available in four countries: Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Serbia,
and Tunisia. In others, at least one DAA combination with either PegIFN/RBV or
another DAA was available. In Germany and the Netherlands all DAAs were
reimbursed without restrictions: Sofosbuvir and sofosbuvir/ledipasvir were free
of charge in Georgia.
CONCLUSION: Prevalence of HCV is relatively higher in lower-middle and
upper-middle income countries. DAAs are not available or reimbursed in many
Eurasia and European countries. Effective screening and access to care are
essential for reducing liver-related morbidity and mortality.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2017.12.001
PMID: 29217468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
