---
reference_id: "PMID:16970829"
title: Expression of P2 receptors in human B cells and Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines.
authors:
- Lee DH
- Park KS
- Kong ID
- Kim JW
- Han BG
journal: BMC Immunol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-7-22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression of P2 receptors in human B cells and Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines.
**Authors:** Lee DH, Park KS, Kong ID, Kim JW, Han BG
**Journal:** BMC Immunol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2172-7-22](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2172-7-22)

## Content

1. BMC Immunol. 2006 Sep 14;7:22. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-7-22.

Expression of P2 receptors in human B cells and Epstein-Barr virus-transformed 
lymphoblastoid cell lines.

Lee DH(1), Park KS, Kong ID, Kim JW, Han BG.

Author information:
(1)Biobank for Health Sciences, Center for Genome Sciences, National Institute 
of Health, Korea Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Seoul, South Korea. 
hepatichyeon@paran.com

BACKGROUND: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection immortalizes primary B cells in 
vitro and generates lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs), which are used for several 
purposes in immunological and genetic studies. Purinergic receptors, consisting 
of P2X and P2Y, are activated by extracellular nucleotides in most tissues and 
exert various physiological effects. In B cells, especially EBV-induced LCLs, 
their expression and function have not been well studied. We investigated the 
expression of P2 receptors on primary human B cells and LCLs using the 
quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method for 
revealing the gene expression profile of the P2 receptor subtypes and their 
changes during transformation.
RESULTS: The mRNA transcripts of most P2 receptors were detected in primary B 
cells; the expression of P2X3 and P2X7 receptors was the lowest of all the P2 
receptors. By contrast, LCLs expressed several dominant P2 receptors--P2X4, 
P2X5, and P2Y11--in amounts similar to those seen in B cells infected with EBV 
for 2 weeks. The amount of most P2 subtypes in LCLs or EBV-infected B cells was 
lower than in normal B cells. However, the amount of P2X7 receptor expressed in 
LCLs was higher. Protein expression was studied using Western blotting to 
confirm the mRNA findings for P2X1, P2X4, P2X7, P2Y1, and P2Y11 receptors. ATP 
increased the intracellular free Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i) by enhancing the 
Ca2+ influx in both B cells and LCLs in a dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSION: These findings describe P2 receptor expression profiles and the 
effects of purinergic stimuli on B cells and suggest some plasticity in the 
expression of the P2 receptor phenotype. This may help explain the nature and 
effect of P2 receptors on B cells and their role in altering the characteristics 
of LCLs.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2172-7-22
PMCID: PMC1609185
PMID: 16970829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]