---
reference_id: "PMID:35162892"
title: "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Type Arthrochalasia: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Martín-Martín M
- Cortés-Martín J
- Tovar-Gálvez MI
- Sánchez-García JC
- Díaz-Rodríguez L
- Rodríguez-Blanque R
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph19031870
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Type Arthrochalasia: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Martín-Martín M, Cortés-Martín J, Tovar-Gálvez MI, Sánchez-García JC, Díaz-Rodríguez L, Rodríguez-Blanque R
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph19031870](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19031870)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Feb 7;19(3):1870. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph19031870.

Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Type Arthrochalasia: A Systematic Review.

Martín-Martín M(1), Cortés-Martín J(2)(3), Tovar-Gálvez MI(2)(4), Sánchez-García 
JC(2)(3), Díaz-Rodríguez L(2)(3), Rodríguez-Blanque R(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Virgen de las Nieves University Hospital, 18014 Granada, Spain.
(2)Research Group CTS1068, Andalusia Research Plan, Junta de Andalucía, 18014 
Granada, Spain.
(3)Department of Nursing, School of Health Sciences, University of Granada, 
18016 Granada, Spain.
(4)Department of Nursing, School of Health Sciences, Ceuta Campus, University of 
Granada, 51001 Ceuta, Spain.
(5)San Cecilio University Hospital, 18016 Granada, Spain.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type arthrochalasia (aEDS) is a rare genetic disease 
characterized by severe generalized joint hypermobility, bilateral congenital 
hip dislocation, skin hyperextensibility, muscle hypotonia, and mild dysmorphic 
features. It is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disease causing defects 
in collagen, associated with two genes, COL1A1 or COL1A2. Only about 42 cases 
have been published worldwide. Treatment is currently symptomatic and focuses on 
increasing the quality of life of these patients, as there is no curative 
treatment. The main objective of the review was to update information on 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type arthrochalasia from scientific publications. The 
review report was carried out in accordance with the criteria of the Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and MetaAnalyses (PRISMA) review 
protocol, by searching Orphanet, OMIM, PubMed, and Scopus, as well as free 
sources. A total of 20 articles were analyzed, which, after analysis, provide an 
updated report that aims to establish a solid starting point for future lines of 
research.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph19031870
PMCID: PMC8835098
PMID: 35162892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.