---
reference_id: "PMID:34296492"
title: "Structural and functional brain alterations in anorexia nervosa:A multimodal meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies."
authors:
- Su T
- Gong J
- Tang G
- Qiu S
- Chen P
- Chen G
- Wang J
- Huang L
- Wang Y
journal: Hum Brain Mapp
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/hbm.25602
keywords:
- "Anorexia Nervosa/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Cerebral Cortex/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Neuroimaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural and functional brain alterations in anorexia nervosa:A multimodal meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies.
**Authors:** Su T, Gong J, Tang G, Qiu S, Chen P, Chen G, Wang J, Huang L, Wang Y
**Journal:** Hum Brain Mapp (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hbm.25602](https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.25602)

## Content

1. Hum Brain Mapp. 2021 Oct 15;42(15):5154-5169. doi: 10.1002/hbm.25602. Epub
2021  Jul 23.

Structural and functional brain alterations in anorexia nervosa:A multimodal
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies.

Su T(1)(2), Gong J(2)(3), Tang G(1)(2), Qiu S(1), Chen P(1)(2), Chen G(1)(2),
Wang J(4), Huang L(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Imaging Center, First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Functional Imaging, Jinan University, Guangzhou,
China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Six Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Applied Psychology, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies,
Guangzhou, China.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a complex psychiatric disorder with poorly understood
etiology. Numerous voxel-based morphometry (VBM) and resting-state functional
imaging studies have provided strong evidence of abnormal brain structure and
intrinsic and functional activities in AN, but with inconsistent conclusions.
Herein, a whole-brain meta-analysis was conducted on VBM (660 patients with AN,
and 740 controls) and resting-state functional imaging (425 patients with AN,
and 461 controls) studies that measured differences in the gray matter volume
(GMV) and intrinsic functional activity between patients with AN and healthy
controls (HCs). Overall, patients with AN displayed decreased GMV in the
bilateral median cingulate cortex (extending to the bilateral anterior and
posterior cingulate cortex), and left middle occipital gyrus (extending to the
left inferior parietal lobe). In resting-state functional imaging studies,
patients with AN displayed decreased resting-state functional activity in the
bilateral anterior cingulate cortex and bilateral median cingulate cortex, and
increased resting-state functional activity in the right parahippocampal gyrus.
This multimodal meta-analysis identified reductions of gray matter and
functional activity in the anterior and median cingulate in patients with AN,
which contributes to further understanding of the pathophysiology of AN.

© 2021 The Authors. Human Brain Mapping published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.25602
PMCID: PMC8449099
PMID: 34296492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interests.
