---
reference_id: "PMID:32554531"
title: Disruption of the nectin-afadin complex recapitulates features of the human cleft lip/palate syndrome CLPED1.
authors:
- Lough KJ
- Spitzer DC
- Bergman AJ
- Wu JJ
- Byrd KM
- Williams SE
journal: Development
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1242/dev.189241
keywords:
- Animals
- Cleft Lip/genetics
- Cleft Palate/genetics
- Epithelial Cells/metabolism
- Humans
- Integrases/metabolism
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Nectins/genetics
- Organogenesis
- Palate/embryology
- Penetrance
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of the nectin-afadin complex recapitulates features of the human cleft lip/palate syndrome CLPED1.
**Authors:** Lough KJ, Spitzer DC, Bergman AJ, Wu JJ, Byrd KM, Williams SE
**Journal:** Development (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.189241](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.189241)

## Content

1. Development. 2020 Jul 13;147(21):dev189241. doi: 10.1242/dev.189241.

Disruption of the nectin-afadin complex recapitulates features of the human 
cleft lip/palate syndrome CLPED1.

Lough KJ(1), Spitzer DC(1), Bergman AJ(1), Wu JJ(1), Byrd KM(1)(2), Williams 
SE(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine and Biology, Lineberger 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599, USA.
(2)Department of Oral & Craniofacial Health Sciences, The University of North 
Carolina School of Dentistry, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(3)Departments of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine and Biology, Lineberger 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599, USA scott_williams@med.unc.edu.

Cleft palate (CP), one of the most common congenital conditions, arises from 
failures in secondary palatogenesis during embryonic development. Several human 
genetic syndromes featuring CP and ectodermal dysplasia have been linked to 
mutations in genes regulating cell-cell adhesion, yet mouse models have largely 
failed to recapitulate these findings. Here, we use in utero lentiviral-mediated 
genetic approaches in mice to provide the first direct evidence that the 
nectin-afadin axis is essential for proper palate shelf elevation and fusion. 
Using this technique, we demonstrate that palatal epithelial conditional loss of 
afadin (Afdn) - an obligate nectin- and actin-binding protein - induces a high 
penetrance of CP, not observed when Afdn is targeted later using Krt14-Cre We 
implicate Nectin1 and Nectin4 as being crucially involved, as loss of either 
induces a low penetrance of mild palate closure defects, while loss of both 
causes severe CP with a frequency similar to Afdn loss. Finally, expression of 
the human disease mutant NECTIN1W185X causes CP with greater penetrance than 
Nectin1 loss, suggesting this alteration may drive CP via a dominant interfering 
mechanism.

© 2020. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.189241
PMCID: PMC7375477
PMID: 32554531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.