---
reference_id: "PMID:38434197"
title: "Case report: Susac syndrome-two ends of the spectrum, single center case reports and review of the literature."
authors:
- Cviková M
- Štefela J
- Všianský V
- Dufek M
- Doležalová I
- Vinklárek J
- Herzig R
- Zemanová M
- Červeňák V
- Brichta J
- Bárková V
- Kouřil D
- Aulický P
- Filip P
- Weiss V
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1339438
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Susac syndrome-two ends of the spectrum, single center case reports and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Cviková M, Štefela J, Všianský V, Dufek M, Doležalová I, Vinklárek J, Herzig R, Zemanová M, Červeňák V, Brichta J, Bárková V, Kouřil D, Aulický P, Filip P, Weiss V
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2024.1339438](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2024.1339438)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2024 Feb 16;15:1339438. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1339438. 
eCollection 2024.

Case report: Susac syndrome-two ends of the spectrum, single center case reports 
and review of the literature.

Cviková M(#)(1), Štefela J(#)(1), Všianský V(1), Dufek M(1), Doležalová I(1), 
Vinklárek J(1), Herzig R(2), Zemanová M(3), Červeňák V(4), Brichta J(1), Bárková 
V(5), Kouřil D(6), Aulický P(7), Filip P(8)(9), Weiss V(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, St. Anne's University Hospital in Brno and Faculty 
of Medicine at Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia.
(2)Department of Neurology, Comprehensive Stroke Center, Charles University 
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital, Hradec Králové, Czechia.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Optometry, St. Anne's University Hospital in 
Brno and Faculty of Medicine at Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia.
(4)Department of Medical Imaging, St. Anne's University Hospital and Faculty of 
Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, St. Anne's University Hospital, Brno, 
Czechia.
(6)Department of Neurology, Blansko Hospital, Blansko, Czechia.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology, Hospital of the Brothers of Charity Brno, Brno, 
Czechia.
(8)Department of Neurology, Charles University, First Faculty of Medicine and 
General University Hospital, Prague, Czechia.
(9)Center for Magnetic Resonance Research (CMRR), University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, United States.
(10)Department of Neurology, Charles University Faculty of Medicine, Hradec 
Králové, Czechia.
(#)Contributed equally

Susac syndrome is a rare and enigmatic complex neurological disorder primarily 
affecting small blood vessels in the brain, retina, and inner ear. Diagnosing 
Susac syndrome may be extremely challenging not only due to its rarity, but also 
due to the variability of its clinical presentation. This paper describes two 
vastly different cases-one with mild symptoms and good response to therapy, the 
other with severe, complicated course, relapses and long-term sequelae despite 
multiple therapeutic interventions. Building upon the available guidelines, we 
highlight the utility of black blood MRI in this disease and provide a 
comprehensive review of available clinical experience in clinical presentation, 
diagnosis and therapy of this disease. Despite its rarity, the awareness of 
Susac syndrome may be of uttermost importance since it ultimately is a treatable 
condition. If diagnosed in a timely manner, early intervention can substantially 
improve the outcomes of our patients.

Copyright © 2024 Cviková, Štefela, Všianský, Dufek, Doležalová, Vinklárek, 
Herzig, Zemanová, Červeňák, Brichta, Bárková, Kouřil, Aulický, Filip and Weiss.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1339438
PMCID: PMC10904644
PMID: 38434197

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.