---
reference_id: "PMID:35297669"
title: Sindbis Macrodomain Poly-ADP-Ribose Hydrolase Activity Is Important for Viral RNA Synthesis.
authors:
- Aguilar EG
- Paniccia G
- Adura C
- Singer ZS
- Ashbrook AW
- Razooky BS
- Rice CM
- MacDonald MR
journal: J Virol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.01516-21
keywords:
- Animals
- Coronavirus/genetics
- Hydrolases/metabolism
- Mammals/genetics
- Poly Adenosine Diphosphate Ribose/metabolism
- "RNA, Viral/genetics"
- "Sindbis Virus/enzymology, genetics"
- Virus Replication
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sindbis Macrodomain Poly-ADP-Ribose Hydrolase Activity Is Important for Viral RNA Synthesis.
**Authors:** Aguilar EG, Paniccia G, Adura C, Singer ZS, Ashbrook AW, Razooky BS, Rice CM, MacDonald MR
**Journal:** J Virol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.01516-21](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.01516-21)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2022 Apr 13;96(7):e0151621. doi: 10.1128/jvi.01516-21. Epub 2022 Mar
17.

Sindbis Macrodomain Poly-ADP-Ribose Hydrolase Activity Is Important for Viral
RNA Synthesis.

Aguilar EG(1), Paniccia G(1), Adura C(2), Singer ZS(1)(3), Ashbrook AW(1),
Razooky BS(1), Rice CM(1), MacDonald MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller
Universitygrid.134907.8, New York, New York, USA.
(2)High-Throughput and Spectroscopy Resource Center, The Rockefeller
Universitygrid.134907.8, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, New
York, USA.

ADP-ribosylation is a highly dynamic posttranslational modification frequently
studied in stress response pathways with recent attention given to its role in
response to viral infection. Notably, the alphaviruses encode catalytically
active macrodomains capable of ADP-ribosylhydrolase (ARH) activities, implying a
role in remodeling the cellular ADP-ribosylome. This report decouples mono- and
poly-ARH contributions to macrodomain function using a newly engineered Sindbis
virus (SINV) mutant with attenuated poly-ARH activity. Our findings indicate
that viral poly-ARH activity is uniquely required for high titer replication in
mammalian systems. Despite translating incoming genomic RNA as efficiently as WT
virus, mutant viruses have a reduced capacity to establish productive infection,
offering a more complete understanding of the kinetics and role of the
alphavirus macrodomain with important implications for broader
ADP-ribosyltransferase biology. IMPORTANCE Viral macrodomains have drawn
attention in recent years due to their high degree of conservation in several
virus families (e.g., coronaviruses and alphaviruses) and their potential
druggability. These domains erase mono- or poly-ADP-ribose, posttranslational
modifications written by host poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) proteins, from
undetermined host or viral proteins to enhance replication. Prior work
determined that efficient alphavirus replication requires catalytically active
macrodomains; however, which form of the modification requires removal and from
which protein(s) had not been determined. Here, we present evidence for the
specific requirement of poly-ARH activity to ensure efficient productive
infection and virus replication.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.01516-21
PMCID: PMC9006893
PMID: 35297669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
