---
reference_id: PMID:31126248
title: Angiopoietin-like-3 knockout protects against glomerulosclerosis in murine adriamycin-induced nephropathy by attenuating podocyte loss.
authors:
- Dai R
- Liu H
- Han X
- Liu J
- Zhai Y
- Rao J
- Shen Q
- Xu H
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-019-1383-1
keywords:
- Angiopoietin-Like Protein 3
- Angiopoietin-like Proteins/deficiency
- Animals
- "Antibiotics, Antineoplastic/toxicity"
- "Cell Survival/drug effects, physiology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Doxorubicin/toxicity
- Female
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, 129 Strain"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Podocytes/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angiopoietin-like-3 knockout protects against glomerulosclerosis in murine adriamycin-induced nephropathy by attenuating podocyte loss.
**Authors:** Dai R, Liu H, Han X, Liu J, Zhai Y, Rao J, Shen Q, Xu H
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-019-1383-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-019-1383-1)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2019 May 24;20(1):185. doi: 10.1186/s12882-019-1383-1.

Angiopoietin-like-3 knockout protects against glomerulosclerosis in murine 
adriamycin-induced nephropathy by attenuating podocyte loss.

Dai R(1)(2), Liu H(2)(3), Han X(1)(2), Liu J(2)(4), Zhai Y(1)(2), Rao J(1)(2), 
Shen Q(1)(2), Xu H(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 
201102, China.
(2)Shanghai Kidney Development & Pediatric Kidney Disease Research Center, 
Shanghai, 201102, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatism, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 
201102, China.
(4)Department of Chinese Medicine, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
Shanghai, 201102, China.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 
201102, China. hxu@shmu.edu.cn.
(6)Shanghai Kidney Development & Pediatric Kidney Disease Research Center, 
Shanghai, 201102, China. hxu@shmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Angiopoietin-like-3 (Angptl3) knockout is known for its protective 
effects on podocyte injury and proteinuria in the early stage of adriamycin 
(ADR) nephropathy. The current study re-evaluated the renoprotective effect of 
Angptl3 knockout in chronic ADR nephropathy and attempted to explore the 
mechanism underlying the effect associated with Angptl3 knockout in 
glomerulosclerosis.
METHODS: B6; 129S5 mice were injected with ADR to induce nephropathy. Kidney 
structure and serum and urine parameters were observed during long-term 
follow-up. Cultured primary mouse podocytes were exposed to ADR and analyzed for 
the expression of some relative proteins. Podocyte loss was analyzed in both in 
vivo and in vitro experiments.
RESULTS: Angptl3 knockout attenuated proteinuria and hypoproteinemia, protected 
renal structure and function, and improved the survival of mice over the whole 
process of ADR nephropathy. Furthermore, Angptl3 knockout reduced the numbers of 
the detached and apoptotic cells in the renal tissue and alleviated podocyte 
loss in mice with ADR chronic nephropathy, thereby, delaying the 
glomerulosclerosis formation. Additional results in vitro showed that Angptl3 
knockout attenuated ADR-induced primary podocyte loss, including podocyte 
detachment and apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: In addition to serving a renoprotective role in the early stage of 
ADR nephropathy, Angptl3 knockout contributed to disease amelioration throughout 
the ADR nephropathy process. Angptl3 knockout effectively delayed 
glomerulosclerosis formation by attenuating podocyte loss through rescuing 
podocytes from detachment and apoptosis. Angptl3 antagonists or inhibitors might 
have therapeutic potential in the occurrence and progression of nephropathy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-019-1383-1
PMCID: PMC6533758
PMID: 31126248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.