---
reference_id: "PMID:33788257"
title: "Comprehensive comparison between 222 CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency and 212 LRBA deficiency patients: a systematic review."
authors:
- Jamee M
- Hosseinzadeh S
- Sharifinejad N
- Zaki-Dizaji M
- Matloubi M
- Hasani M
- Baris S
- Alsabbagh M
- Lo B
- Azizi G
journal: Clin Exp Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/cei.13600
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/deficiency, immunology"
- "CTLA-4 Antigen/genetics, immunology"
- "Haploinsufficiency/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulins/immunology
- Immunosuppressive Agents/immunology
- Lymphocytes/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive comparison between 222 CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency and 212 LRBA deficiency patients: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Jamee M, Hosseinzadeh S, Sharifinejad N, Zaki-Dizaji M, Matloubi M, Hasani M, Baris S, Alsabbagh M, Lo B, Azizi G
**Journal:** Clin Exp Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cei.13600](https://doi.org/10.1111/cei.13600)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2021 Jul;205(1):28-43. doi: 10.1111/cei.13600. Epub 2021 May
 3.

Comprehensive comparison between 222 CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency and 212 LRBA
deficiency patients: a systematic review.

Jamee M(1)(2), Hosseinzadeh S(1), Sharifinejad N(1), Zaki-Dizaji M(3), Matloubi
M(4), Hasani M(5), Baris S(6), Alsabbagh M(7), Lo B(7), Azizi G(8).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Alborz University of Medical Sciences, Karaj,
Iran.
(2)Pediatric Infections Research Center, Research Institute for Children's
Health, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Legal Medicine Research Center, Legal Medicine Organization, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Medical Immunology Department, School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical
Science, Tehran, Iran.
(5)CinnaGen Medical Biotechnology Research Center, Alborz University of Medical
Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(6)Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Istanbul Jeffrey Modell Diagnostic and
Research Center for Primary Immunodeficiencies, Marmara University Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey.
(7)Division of Translational Medicine, Research Branch, Sidra Medicine, Doha,
Qatar.
(8)Non-communicable Diseases Research Center, Alborz University of Medical
Sciences, Karaj, Iran.

Cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) haploinsufficiency (CHAI) and
lipopolysaccharide-responsive beige-like anchor (LRBA) deficiency (LATAIE) are
newly identified inborn errors of immunity with shared molecular pathomechanisms
and clinical manifestations. In this review, we aimed to provide differential
comparisons regarding demographic, clinical, immunological and molecular
characteristics between these two similar conditions. A literature search was
conducted in PubMed, Web of Science and Scopus databases and included studies
were systematically evaluated. Overall, 434 (222 CHAI and 212 LATAIE) patients
were found in 101 eligible studies. The CHAI patients were mainly reported from
North America and western Europe, while LATAIE patients were predominantly from
Asian countries. In CHAI, positive familial history (P < 0·001) and in LATAIE,
consanguineous parents (P < 0·001) were more common. In CHAI patients the rates
of granulomas (P < 0·001), malignancies (P = 0·001), atopy (P = 0·001),
cutaneous disorders (P < 0·001) and neurological (P = 0·002) disorders were
higher, while LATAIE patients were more commonly complicated with
life-threatening infections (P = 0·002), pneumonia (P = 0·006), ear, nose and
throat disorders (P < 0·001), organomegaly (P = 0·023), autoimmune enteropathy
(P = 0·038) and growth failure (P < 0·001). Normal lymphocyte subsets and
immunoglobulins except low serum levels of CD9+ B cells (14·0 versus 38·4%,
P < 0·001), natural killer (NK) cells (21 versus 41·1%, P < 0·001),
immunoglobulin (Ig)G (46·9 versus 41·1%, P = 0·291) and IgA (54·5 versus 44·7%,
P = 0·076) were found in the majority of CHAI and LATAIE patients, respectively.
The most frequent biological immunosuppressive agents prescribed for CHAI and
LATAIE patients were rituximab and abatacept, respectively. Further
investigations into the best conditioning and treatment regimens pre- and
post-transplantation are required to improve the survival rate of transplanted
CHAI and LATAIE patients.

© 2021 British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.13600
PMCID: PMC8209572
PMID: 33788257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.
