---
reference_id: "PMID:10406661"
title: Small deletions in the type II collagen triple helix produce kniest dysplasia.
authors:
- Wilkin DJ
- Artz AS
- South S
- Lachman RS
- Rimoin DL
- Wilcox WR
- McKusick VA
- Stratakis CA
- Francomano CA
- Cohn DH
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1999'
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen/genetics
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Models, Genetic"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small deletions in the type II collagen triple helix produce kniest dysplasia.
**Authors:** Wilkin DJ, Artz AS, South S, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL, Wilcox WR, McKusick VA, Stratakis CA, Francomano CA, Cohn DH
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1999)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Jul 16;85(2):105-12.

Small deletions in the type II collagen triple helix produce kniest dysplasia.

Wilkin DJ(1), Artz AS, South S, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL, Wilcox WR, McKusick VA, 
Stratakis CA, Francomano CA, Cohn DH.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1267, USA.

Kniest dysplasia is a moderately severe type II collagenopathy, characterized by 
short trunk and limbs, kyphoscoliosis, midface hypoplasia, severe myopia, and 
hearing loss. Mutations in the gene that encodes type II collagen (COL2A1), the 
predominant protein of cartilage, have been identified in a number of 
individuals with Kniest dysplasia. All but two of these previously described 
mutations cause in-frame deletions in type II collagen, either by small 
deletions in the gene or splice site alterations. Furthermore, all but one of 
these mutations is located between exons 12 and 24 in the COL2A1 gene. We used 
heteroduplex analysis to identify sequence anomalies in five individuals with 
Kniest dysplasia. Sequencing of the index patients' genomic DNA identified four 
new dominant mutations in COL2A1 that result in Kniest dysplasia: a 21-bp 
deletion in exon 16, an 18-bp deletion in exon 19, and 4-bp deletions in the 
splice donor sites of introns 14 and 20. A previously described 28-bp deletion 
at the COL2A1 exon 12-intron 12 junction, deleting the splice donor site, was 
identified in the fifth case. The latter three mutations are predicted to result 
in exon skipping in the mRNA encoded from the mutant allele. These data suggest 
that Kniest dysplasia results from shorter type II collagen monomers, and 
support the hypothesis that alteration of a specific COL2A1 domain, which may 
span from exons 12 to 24, leads to the Kniest dysplasia phenotype.

PMID: 10406661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]