---
reference_id: "PMID:37072247"
title: Pilot study of gene mutations associated with Lynch syndrome in Slovak patients with breast cancer.
authors:
- Krasničanová L
- Saade R
- Priščáková P
- Gbelcová H
- Kaľavská K
- Karaba M
- Benca J
- Mego M
- Repiská V
journal: Klin Onkol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.48095/ccko2023130
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pilot study of gene mutations associated with Lynch syndrome in Slovak patients with breast cancer.
**Authors:** Krasničanová L, Saade R, Priščáková P, Gbelcová H, Kaľavská K, Karaba M, Benca J, Mego M, Repiská V
**Journal:** Klin Onkol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.48095/ccko2023130](https://doi.org/10.48095/ccko2023130)

## Content

1. Klin Onkol. 2023 Spring;36(2):130-134. doi: 10.48095/ccko2023130.

Pilot study of gene mutations associated with Lynch syndrome in Slovak patients 
with breast cancer.

[Article in English]

Krasničanová L, Saade R, Priščáková P, Gbelcová H, Kaľavská K, Karaba M, Benca 
J, Mego M, Repiská V.

BACKGROUND: Lynch syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder 
which causes an increased risk of cancer, especially colorectal and endometrial 
carcinomas. Recent studies have shown an association between LS and breast 
cancer as well. The aim of our study is to highlight the possible presence of 
mutations in genes associated with LS in patients with breast cancer and the 
need to include the examination of Lynch-associated genes in patients with a 
family history of breast cancer as well as in patients with recurrent breast 
cancer, as well as with the occurrence of other Lynch-associated cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed tumor tissue samples from 78 patients with 
primary breast cancer. Our samples were tested with a gene panel associated with 
the risk of developing breast cancer, while in our study we focused primarily on 
the occurrence of mutations in mismatch-repair genes. DNA isolated from tumor 
tissue was sequenced using next generation sequencing (NGS) and analyzed using 
the Ingenuity Variant Analysis tool. To confirm the germline mutation, we 
examined the patient's blood sample using NGS sequencing.
RESULTS: As a result of our analysis, we managed to identify a mutation in the 
PMS2 gene in one patient's breast tumor tissue. The presence of this mutation 
indicates that the resulting cancer may be a consequence of LS. As for 
pathogenicity, this was probably a pathogenic variant, as we detected deletions 
in the exon region, which led to frameshift mutation. Moreover, we also 
identified single-nucleotide pathogenic variants in the TP53 and PIK3CA genes. 
To definitively establish the diagnosis of LS in the patient, we examined a 
blood sample, where we also identified a mutation of the PMS2 gene.
CONCLUSION: LS is underdiagnosed in many Lynch-associated cancers. However, in 
the case of a familial occurrence of breast cancer and other Lynch-associated 
genes, it is important to think about a possible diagnosis of LS and, if the 
patient meets the diagnostic criteria, to carry out a genetic examination of 
Lynch-associated genes.

DOI: 10.48095/ccko2023130
PMID: 37072247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]