---
reference_id: "PMID:29032195"
title: "Global causes of blindness and distance vision impairment 1990-2020: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Flaxman SR
- Bourne RRA
- Resnikoff S
- Ackland P
- Braithwaite T
- Cicinelli MV
- Das A
- Jonas JB
- Keeffe J
- Kempen JH
- Leasher J
- Limburg H
- Naidoo K
- Pesudovs K
- Silvester A
- Stevens GA
- Tahhan N
- Wong TY
- Taylor HR
- Vision Loss Expert Group of the Global Burden of Disease Study
journal: Lancet Glob Health
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30393-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global causes of blindness and distance vision impairment 1990-2020: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Flaxman SR, Bourne RRA, Resnikoff S, Ackland P, Braithwaite T, Cicinelli MV, Das A, Jonas JB, Keeffe J, Kempen JH, Leasher J, Limburg H, Naidoo K, Pesudovs K, Silvester A, Stevens GA, Tahhan N, Wong TY, Taylor HR, Vision Loss Expert Group of the Global Burden of Disease Study
**Journal:** Lancet Glob Health (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30393-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30393-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Glob Health. 2017 Dec;5(12):e1221-e1234. doi: 
10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30393-5. Epub 2017 Oct 11.

Global causes of blindness and distance vision impairment 1990-2020: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Flaxman SR(1), Bourne RRA(2), Resnikoff S(3), Ackland P(4), Braithwaite T(5), 
Cicinelli MV(6), Das A(7), Jonas JB(8), Keeffe J(9), Kempen JH(10), Leasher 
J(11), Limburg H(12), Naidoo K(13), Pesudovs K(14), Silvester A(15), Stevens 
GA(16), Tahhan N(3), Wong TY(17), Taylor HR(18); Vision Loss Expert Group of the 
Global Burden of Disease Study.

Collaborators: Bourne R, Ackland P, Arditi A, Barkana Y, Bozkurt B, Braithwaite 
T, Bron A, Budenz D, Cai F, Casson R, Chakravarthy U, Choi J, Cicinelli MV, 
Congdon N, Dana R, Dandona R, Dandona L, Das A, Dekaris I, Del Monte M, Deva J, 
Dreer L, Ellwein L, Frazier M, Frick K, Friedman D, Furtado J, Gao H, Gazzard G, 
George R, Gichuhi S, Gonzalez V, Hammond B, Hartnett ME, He M, Hejtmancik J, 
Hirai F, Huang J, Ingram A, Javitt J, Jonas J, Joslin C, Keeffe J, Kempen J, 
Khairallah M, Khanna R, Kim J, Lambrou G, Lansingh VC, Lanzetta P, Leasher J, 
Lim J, Limburg H, Mansouri K, Mathew A, Morse A, Munoz B, Musch D, Naidoo K, 
Nangia V, Palaiou M, Parodi MB, Pena FY, Pesudovs K, Peto T, Quigley H, Raju M, 
Ramulu P, Rankin Z, Resnikoff S, Reza D, Robin A, Rossetti L, Saaddine J, Sandar 
M, Serle J, Shen T, Shetty R, Sieving P, Silva JC, Silvester A, Sitorus RS, 
Stambolian D, Stevens G, Taylor H, Tejedor J, Tielsch J, Tsilimbaris M, van 
Meurs J, Varma R, Virgili G, Wang YX, Wang NL, West S, Wiedemann P, Wong T, 
Wormald R, Zheng Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Data Science Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(2)Vision and Eye Research Unit, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK. 
Electronic address: rb@rupertbourne.co.uk.
(3)Brien Holden Vision Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia; School of Optometry 
and Vision Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)International Agency for the Prevention of Blindness, London, UK.
(5)Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(7)York Hospital, York, UK.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Universitätsmedizin, Mannheim, Germany; Medical 
Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.
(9)L V Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, India.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Discovery Eye Center, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; 
MyungSung Christian Medical Center, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(11)Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA.
(12)Health Information Services, Grootebroek, Netherlands.
(13)Brien Holden Vision Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia; African Vision 
Research Institute, University of Kwazulu-Natal, Glenwood, Durban, South Africa.
(14)National Health and Medical Research Council Centre for Clinical Eye 
Research, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(15)SpaMedica Research Institute, Bolton, UK.
(16)Department of Information, Evidence and Research, World Health Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(17)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Duke-National University of Singapore 
Graduate Medical School, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(18)Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Comment in
    Lancet Glob Health. 2017 Dec;5(12):e1164-e1165. doi: 
10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30412-6.

BACKGROUND: Contemporary data for causes of vision impairment and blindness form 
an important basis of recommendations in public health policies. Refreshment of 
the Global Vision Database with recently published data sources permitted 
modelling of cause of vision loss data from 1990 to 2015, further disaggregation 
by cause, and forecasts to 2020.
METHODS: In this systematic review and meta-analysis, we analysed published and 
unpublished population-based data for the causes of vision impairment and 
blindness from 1980 to 2014. We identified population-based studies published 
before July 8, 2014, by searching online databases with no language restrictions 
(MEDLINE from Jan 1, 1946, and Embase from Jan 1, 1974, and the WHO Library 
Database). We fitted a series of regression models to estimate the proportion of 
moderate or severe vision impairment (defined as presenting visual acuity of 
<6/18 but ≥3/60 in the better eye) and blindness (presenting visual acuity of 
<3/60 in the better eye) by cause, age, region, and year.
FINDINGS: We identified 288 studies of 3 983 541 participants contributing data 
from 98 countries. Among the global population with moderate or severe vision 
impairment in 2015 (216·6 million [80% uncertainty interval 98·5 million to 
359·1 million]), the leading causes were uncorrected refractive error (116·3 
million [49·4 million to 202·1 million]), cataract (52·6 million [18·2 million 
to 109·6 million]), age-related macular degeneration (8·4 million [0·9 million 
to 29·5 million]), glaucoma (4·0 million [0·6 million to 13·3 million]), and 
diabetic retinopathy (2·6 million [0·2 million to 9·9 million]). Among the 
global population who were blind in 2015 (36·0 million [12·9 million to 65·4 
million]), the leading causes were cataract (12·6 million [3·4 million to 28·7 
million]), uncorrected refractive error (7·4 million [2·4 million to 14·8 
million]), and glaucoma (2·9 million [0·4 million to 9·9 million]). By 2020, 
among the global population with moderate or severe vision impairment (237·1 
million [101·5 million to 399·0 million]), the number of people affected by 
uncorrected refractive error is anticipated to rise to 127·7 million (51·0 
million to 225·3 million), by cataract to 57·1 million (17·9 million to 124·1 
million), by age-related macular degeneration to 8·8 million (0·8 million to 
32·1 million), by glaucoma to 4·5 million (0·5 million to 15·4 million), and by 
diabetic retinopathy to 3·2 million (0·2 million to 12·9 million). By 2020, 
among the global population who are blind (38·5 million [13·2 million to 70·9 
million]), the number of patients blind because of cataract is anticipated to 
rise to 13·4 million (3·3 million to 31·6 million), because of uncorrected 
refractive error to 8·0 million (2·5 million to 16·3 million), and because of 
glaucoma to 3·2 million (0·4 million to 11·0 million). Cataract and uncorrected 
refractive error combined contributed to 55% of blindness and 77% of vision 
impairment in adults aged 50 years and older in 2015. World regions varied 
markedly in the causes of blindness and vision impairment in this age group, 
with a low prevalence of cataract (<22% for blindness and 14·1-15·9% for vision 
impairment) and a high prevalence of age-related macular degeneration (>14% of 
blindness) as causes in the high-income subregions. Blindness and vision 
impairment at all ages in 2015 due to diabetic retinopathy (odds ratio 2·52 
[1·48-3·73]) and cataract (1·21 [1·17-1·25]) were more common among women than 
among men, whereas blindness and vision impairment due to glaucoma (0·71 
[0·57-0·86]) and corneal opacity (0·54 [0·43-0·66]) were more common among men 
than among women, with no sex difference related to age-related macular 
degeneration (0·91 [0·70-1·14]).
INTERPRETATION: The number of people affected by the common causes of vision 
loss has increased substantially as the population increases and ages. 
Preventable vision loss due to cataract (reversible with surgery) and refractive 
error (reversible with spectacle correction) continue to cause most cases of 
blindness and moderate or severe vision impairment in adults aged 50 years and 
older. A large scale-up of eye care provision to cope with the increasing 
numbers is needed to address avoidable vision loss.
FUNDING: Brien Holden Vision Institute.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30393-5
PMID: 29032195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]