---
reference_id: "PMID:21887521"
title: Extrapyramidal syndromes in frontotemporal degeneration.
authors:
- Kertesz A
- McMonagle P
- Jesso S
journal: J Mol Neurosci
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9616-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extrapyramidal syndromes in frontotemporal degeneration.
**Authors:** Kertesz A, McMonagle P, Jesso S
**Journal:** J Mol Neurosci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12031-011-9616-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12031-011-9616-1)

## Content

1. J Mol Neurosci. 2011 Nov;45(3):336-42. doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9616-1. Epub
2011  Sep 2.

Extrapyramidal syndromes in frontotemporal degeneration.

Kertesz A(1), McMonagle P, Jesso S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. 
andrew.kertesz@sjhc.london.on.ca

Descriptions of extrapyramidal (EP) involvement in Pick's disease (renamed 
recently as FTD) appeared 80 years ago. CBD pathology was confirmed as a common 
substrate for primary progressive aphasia (PPA). We suggested that CBD and PPA 
should be included with frontal lobe dementia as Pick complex. PSP was prototype 
for "subcortical dementia", and aphasia and apraxia, considered unusual for PSP, 
are now seen as a rule. The overlap of PSP and CBD is considerable. We recently 
reviewed our cohort with EPS in FTD and identified 22 patients with the movement 
disorder as a first syndrome and another larger group of 48 patients who 
developed EPS after an initial onset with a cognitive disorder: aphasic, 
behavioral or both. All cognitive onset CBD/PSP patients and all but two with 
motor onset developed aphasia during the course of their illness. General 
cognitive and behavioral measures are similar for each presentation, but 
language scores are worse in cognitive onset cases, reflecting the frequency of 
aphasic presentations. Anomic patients become non-fluent, logopenic, agrammatic 
and mute. Using the Frontal Behavioral Inventory (FBI), a questionnaire 
specifically designed for the spectrum of apathy and disinhibition displayed by 
patients with FTD, we have documented the behavior change in CBD/PSP with motor 
and cognitive onsets. The significant personality changes consisted of apathy, 
disinhibition, perseveration and inattention, some of the core symptoms of FTD. 
In 18 autopsied cases, 15 had tau pathology. The overlap of CBD/PSP with PPA and 
bvFTD suggests a spectrum of related entities and predicts tau-positive 
pathology. Cross-sectional studies without significant follow-up may not observe 
the subsequent development language or behavior deficit, or the evolution from 
PPA and/or FTD-bv to CBD/PSP.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-011-9616-1
PMID: 21887521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]