---
reference_id: "PMID:25115486"
title: "X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy: pathogenesis and treatment."
authors:
- Engelen M
- Kemp S
- Poll-The BT
journal: Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s11910-014-0486-0
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily D, Member 1"
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Addison Disease/etiology
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/complications, etiology, genetics, therapy"
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/etiology
- Spinal Cord Diseases/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy: pathogenesis and treatment.
**Authors:** Engelen M, Kemp S, Poll-The BT
**Journal:** Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11910-014-0486-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-014-0486-0)

## Content

1. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2014 Oct;14(10):486. doi: 10.1007/s11910-014-0486-0.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy: pathogenesis and treatment.

Engelen M(1), Kemp S, Poll-The BT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology/Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1100 DD, The Netherlands,
m.engelen@amc.uva.nl.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a puzzling inborn error of metabolism
with a strikingly heterogeneous clinical spectrum. All patients have mutations
in the ABCD1 gene and accumulate very long chain fatty acids in all tissues.
Virtually all male X-ALD patients develop adrenocortical insufficiency in
childhood and progressive myelopathy and peripheral neuropathy in adulthood. A
subset of male patients, however, develops a fatal cerebral demyelinating
disease, cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy. Female patients also develop progressive
myelopathy and peripheral neuropathy, but generally at a later age than males.
They only very rarely develop adrenocortical insufficiency or cerebral
adrenoleukodystrophy. This review proposes to simplify the classification of the
clinical spectrum of X-ALD and reviews the largely unresolved pathophysiological
mechanisms and the current treatment options.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-014-0486-0
PMID: 25115486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
