---
reference_id: "PMID:31899843"
title: Evidence for bradykinin release in chronic spontaneous urticaria.
authors:
- Hofman ZLM
- van den Elzen MT
- Kuijpers J
- de Maat S
- Hack CE
- Knulst AC
- Röckmann H
- Maas C
journal: Clin Exp Allergy
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/cea.13558
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence for bradykinin release in chronic spontaneous urticaria.
**Authors:** Hofman ZLM, van den Elzen MT, Kuijpers J, de Maat S, Hack CE, Knulst AC, Röckmann H, Maas C
**Journal:** Clin Exp Allergy (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cea.13558](https://doi.org/10.1111/cea.13558)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Allergy. 2020 Mar;50(3):343-351. doi: 10.1111/cea.13558. Epub 2020
Jan  21.

Evidence for bradykinin release in chronic spontaneous urticaria.

Hofman ZLM(1)(2), van den Elzen MT(2)(3), Kuijpers J(1), de Maat S(1), Hack 
CE(2), Knulst AC(2)(3), Röckmann H(2)(3), Maas C(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Haematology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory for Translational Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Dermatology/Allergology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) is characterized by recurrent 
itchy weals and/or angioedema and is believed to be driven by mast cell 
activation. It was shown that excessive mast cell activation during anaphylaxis 
initiates contact activation, resulting in bradykinin release. Evidence for 
bradykinin release was never demonstrated in CSU.
OBJECTIVE: To study biomarkers of bradykinin release in CSU.
METHODS: Plasma samples of CSU patients were collected during routine visits at 
the outpatient clinic. Cleaved high molecular weight kininogen (cHK) was used as 
a biomarker for bradykinin release. cHK, factor XIIa-C1-inhibitor 
(FXIIa-C1-INH), kallikrein-C1-INH, plasmin-antiplasmin (PAP) complexes and 
soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR) levels were 
determined by ELISA. Clinical data and data on tryptase levels were collected 
from medical records. cHK levels were compared to previously determined levels 
in hereditary angioedema (HAE).
RESULTS: One hundred seventeen samples from 88 CSU patients and 28 samples from 
healthy controls were analysed. Median cHK level in CSU was 9.1% (range: 
1.4%-21.5%), significantly increased compared to healthy controls (median 6.0% 
range: 0%-19.9%; P = .0005) and comparable to HAE (n = 46, median 10.3%, range 
0%-44.3%, P > .9999). cHK levels normalized in patients during disease remission 
(median 6.5% range 1.5%-20.8%) but were not dependent on the presence of 
angioedema, acute angioedema attacks or response to antihistamines. 
Surprisingly, cHK levels were inversely correlated to serum tryptase (r = -0.65 
P = .0137). C1-INH complexes and suPAR levels were not elevated in patients 
compared to healthy controls. PAP-complex levels in patients were elevated 
compared to healthy controls but there was no correlation between PAP-complex 
and cHK levels.
CONCLUSIONS: cHK levels are elevated in symptomatic CSU patients compared to 
healthy controls, indicating increased bradykinin production. Increased cHK 
levels are not limited to patients with angioedema.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: If elevated bradykinin generation has clinical implications 
in the pathology of CSU is open to debate.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Allergy published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cea.13558
PMID: 31899843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]