---
reference_id: "PMID:40095977"
title: Enteroendocrine cells regulate intestinal barrier permeability.
authors:
- Nwako JG
- Patel SD
- Roach TJ
- Gupte SR
- Williams SG
- Riedman AM
- McCauley HA
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.01077.2024
keywords:
- Humans
- "Intestinal Mucosa/metabolism, drug effects"
- "Enteroendocrine Cells/metabolism, drug effects"
- "Tight Junctions/metabolism, drug effects"
- Permeability
- Organoids/metabolism
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Intestinal Barrier Function
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enteroendocrine cells regulate intestinal barrier permeability.
**Authors:** Nwako JG, Patel SD, Roach TJ, Gupte SR, Williams SG, Riedman AM, McCauley HA
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.01077.2024](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.01077.2024)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2025 May 1;328(5):C1501-C1508. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.01077.2024. Epub 2025 Mar 17.

Enteroendocrine cells regulate intestinal barrier permeability.

Nwako JG(1), Patel SD(1), Roach TJ(1), Gupte SR(1), Williams SG(1), Riedman
AM(1), McCauley HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2025 Mar 12:2025.03.07.642036. doi: 10.1101/2025.03.07.642036.

The intestinal epithelial barrier is essential for nutrient absorption and
protection against ingested pathogens and foreign substances. Barrier integrity
is maintained by tight junctions, which are sensitive to inflammatory signals,
thus creating a feed-forward loop with an increasingly permeable barrier that
further drives inflammation and is the hallmark of inflammatory bowel disease.
There are currently no therapeutic strategies to improve the intestinal
epithelial barrier. We hypothesized that enteroendocrine cells may play an
unappreciated role in maintaining barrier integrity. To test this hypothesis, we
seeded human intestinal enteroids with genetic loss of enteroendocrine cells on
Transwell filters and evaluated transepithelial electrical resistance,
paracellular permeability, and the localization and abundance of junctional
proteins. We found that enteroendocrine cells were required to maintain a
healthy barrier in crypt-like "stem" and villus-like differentiated cultures. In
addition, exogenous supplementation of enteroendocrine-deficient cultures with
the hormones peptide tyrosine-tyrosine (PYY), and the somatostatin analog
octreotide was sufficient to rescue many aspects of this barrier defect both at
baseline and in the presence of the inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor.
Surprisingly, these improvements in barrier function occurred largely
independently of changes in protein abundance of junctional proteins zona
occludens 1, occludin, and claudin-2. These findings support a novel role for
enteroendocrine cells in augmenting epithelial barrier function in the presence
of inflammatory stimuli and present an opportunity for developing therapies to
improve the intestinal barrier.NEW & NOTEWORTHY There are no therapies that
directly improve the permeability of the intestinal epithelial barrier. This
work uses a human intestinal epithelial model system to demonstrate that sensory
enteroendocrine cells are necessary for healthy barrier function and that two of
their secreted products, peptide YY and somatostatin, are sufficient to improve
barrier function at homeostasis and in the presence of inflammatory cytokines.
This could provide novel treatments for strengthening the epithelial barrier in
human gastrointestinal disease.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.01077.2024
PMCID: PMC12054964
PMID: 40095977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
