---
reference_id: "PMID:32744306"
title: "Genetic risk factors of ME/CFS: a critical review."
authors:
- Dibble JJ
- McGrath SJ
- Ponting CP
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa169
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic risk factors of ME/CFS: a critical review.
**Authors:** Dibble JJ, McGrath SJ, Ponting CP
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddaa169](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddaa169)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 Sep 30;29(R1):R117-R124. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa169.

Genetic risk factors of ME/CFS: a critical review.

Dibble JJ(1), McGrath SJ(2), Ponting CP(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 
University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.
(2)Wrekin, Prospect Road, Monmouth NP25 3SZ, UK.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a complex 
multisystem illness that lacks effective therapy and a biomedical understanding 
of its causes. Despite a prevalence of ∼0.2-0.4% and its high public health 
burden, and evidence that it has a heritable component, ME/CFS has not yet 
benefited from the advances in technology and analytical tools that have 
improved our understanding of many other complex diseases. Here we critically 
review existing evidence that genetic factors alter ME/CFS risk before 
concluding that most ME/CFS candidate gene associations are not replicated by 
the larger CFS cohort within the UK Biobank. Multiple genome-wide association 
studies of this cohort also have not yielded consistently significant 
associations. Ahead of upcoming larger genome-wide association studies, we 
discuss how these could generate new lines of enquiry into the DNA variants, 
genes and cell types that are causally involved in ME/CFS disease.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa169
PMCID: PMC7530519
PMID: 32744306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]