---
reference_id: "PMID:18830438"
title: "Narcolepsy: current treatment options and future approaches."
authors:
- Billiard M
journal: Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Narcolepsy: current treatment options and future approaches.
**Authors:** Billiard M
**Journal:** Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat (2008)

## Content

1. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2008 Jun;4(3):557-66.

Narcolepsy: current treatment options and future approaches.

Billiard M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Gui de Chauliac Hospital, 80 Avenue Augustin Fliche, 
34295, Montpellier, cedex 5, France. mbilliard@wanadoo.fr

The management of narcolepsy is presently at a turning point. Three main avenues 
are considered in this review: 1) Two tendencies characterize the conventional 
treatment of narcolepsy. Modafinil has replaced methylphenidate and amphetamine 
as the first-line treatment of excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) and sleep 
attacks, based on randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials 
of modafinil, but on no direct comparison of modafinil versus traditional 
stimulants. For cataplexy, sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic hallucinations, new 
antidepressants tend to replace tricyclic antidepressants and selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in spite of a lack of randomized, double 
blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials of these compounds; 2) The 
conventional treatment of narcolepsy is now challenged by sodium oxybate, the 
sodium salt of gammahydroxybutyrate, based on a series of randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials and a long-term open label 
study. This treatment has a fairly good efficacy and is active on all symptoms 
of narcolepsy. Careful titration up to an adequate level is essential both to 
obtain positive results and avoid adverse effects; 3) A series of new treatments 
are currently being tested, either in animal models or in humans, They include 
novel stimulant and anticataplectic drugs, endocrine therapy, and, more 
attractively, totally new approaches based on the present state of knowledge of 
the pathophysiology of narcolepsy with cataplexy, hypocretine-based therapies, 
and immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2526380
PMID: 18830438