---
reference_id: "PMID:28544185"
title: "Ketoacidosis at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes: Effect of prospective studies with newborn genetic screening and follow up of risk children."
authors:
- Hekkala AM
- Ilonen J
- Toppari J
- Knip M
- Veijola R
journal: Pediatr Diabetes
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/pedi.12541
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ketoacidosis at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes: Effect of prospective studies with newborn genetic screening and follow up of risk children.
**Authors:** Hekkala AM, Ilonen J, Toppari J, Knip M, Veijola R
**Journal:** Pediatr Diabetes (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pedi.12541](https://doi.org/10.1111/pedi.12541)

## Content

1. Pediatr Diabetes. 2018 Mar;19(2):314-319. doi: 10.1111/pedi.12541. Epub 2017
May  23.

Ketoacidosis at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes: Effect of prospective studies with 
newborn genetic screening and follow up of risk children.

Hekkala AM(1), Ilonen J(2), Toppari J(3)(4), Knip M(5)(6)(7)(8), Veijola R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, MRC Oulu, PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu 
and Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(2)Immunogenetics Laboratory, University of Turku, and Turku University 
Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, 
Turku, Finland.
(4)Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, 
Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(6)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Research Programs Unit, Diabetes and Obesity, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland.

We studied the frequency of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in children at diagnosis 
of type 1 diabetes (T1D) in a region where newborn infants have since 1995 been 
recruited for genetic screening for human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-conferred 
disease susceptibility and prospective follow up. The aim was to study whether 
participation in newborn screening and follow up affected the frequency of DKA, 
and to follow the time trends in DKA frequency. We first included children born 
in Oulu University Hospital since 1995 when the prospective studies have been 
ongoing and diagnosed with T1D <15 years by 2015 (study cohort 1, n = 517). 
Secondly, we included all children diagnosed with T1D <15 years in this center 
during 2002-2014 (study cohort 2, n = 579). Children who had an increased 
genetic risk for T1D and participated in prospective follow up had low frequency 
of DKA at diagnosis (5.0%). DKA was present in 22.7% of patients not screened 
for genetic risk, 26.7% of those who were screened but had not an increased risk 
and 23.4% of children with increased genetic risk but who were not followed up. 
In study cohort 2 the overall frequency of DKA was 18.5% (13.0% in children <5 
years, 14.0% in children 5-10 years and 28.6% in children ≥10 years at 
diagnosis; P<.001). In children <2 years the frequency of DKA was 17.1%. 
Participation in prospective follow-up studies reduces the frequency of DKA in 
children at diagnosis of T1D, but genetic screening alone does not decrease DKA 
risk.

© 2017 The Authors. Pediatric Diabetes published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pedi.12541
PMID: 28544185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]