---
reference_id: "PMID:37955240"
title: "Neurological manifestations in PMM2-congenital disorders of glycosylation (PMM2-CDG): Insights into clinico-radiological characteristics, recommendations for follow-up, and future directions."
authors:
- Muthusamy K
- Perez-Ortiz JM
- Ligezka AN
- Altassan R
- Johnsen C
- Schultz MJ
- Patterson MC
- Morava E
journal: Genet Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2023.101027
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/drug therapy, genetics"
- Acetazolamide/therapeutic use
- Follow-Up Studies
- Prospective Studies
- Cerebellar Ataxia
- Stroke
- Phosphotransferases (Phosphomutases)/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological manifestations in PMM2-congenital disorders of glycosylation (PMM2-CDG): Insights into clinico-radiological characteristics, recommendations for follow-up, and future directions.
**Authors:** Muthusamy K, Perez-Ortiz JM, Ligezka AN, Altassan R, Johnsen C, Schultz MJ, Patterson MC, Morava E
**Journal:** Genet Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2023.101027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2023.101027)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2024 Feb;26(2):101027. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2023.101027. Epub 2023
Nov  10.

Neurological manifestations in PMM2-congenital disorders of glycosylation
(PMM2-CDG): Insights into clinico-radiological characteristics, recommendations
for follow-up, and future directions.

Muthusamy K(1), Perez-Ortiz JM(2), Ligezka AN(3), Altassan R(4), Johnsen C(5),
Schultz MJ(6), Patterson MC(7), Morava E(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL. Electronic
address: muthusamy.karthik@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN;
Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(3)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(4)Department of Medical Genomics, Centre for Genomic Medicine, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; College of
Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Department of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Centre, Göttingen,
Germany.
(6)Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(7)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN;
Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Department of Clinical
Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(8)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Laboratory
Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Department of Medical
Genetics, University Medical School, Pecs, Hungary.

PURPOSE: In the absence of prospective data on neurological symptoms, disease
outcome, or guidelines for system specific management in phosphomannomutase
2-congenital disorders of glycosylation (PMM2-CDG), we aimed to collect and
review natural history data.
METHODS: Fifty-one molecularly confirmed individuals with PMM2-CDG enrolled in
the Frontiers of Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation natural history study
were reviewed. In addition, we prospectively reviewed a smaller cohort of these
individuals with PMM2-CDG on off-label acetazolamide treatment.
RESULTS: Mean age at diagnosis was 28.04 months. Developmental delay is a
constant phenotype. Neurological manifestation included ataxia (90.2%), myopathy
(82.4%), seizures (56.9%), neuropathy (52.9%), microcephaly (19.1%),
extrapyramidal symptoms (27.5%), stroke-like episodes (SLE) (15.7%), and
spasticity (13.7%). Progressive cerebellar atrophy is the characteristic
neuroimaging finding. Additionally, supratentorial white matter changes were
noted in adult age. No correlation was observed between the seizure severity and
SLE risk, although all patients with SLE have had seizures in the past.
"Off-label" acetazolamide therapy in a smaller sub-cohort resulted in
improvement in speech fluency but did not show statistically significant
improvement in objective ataxia scores.
CONCLUSION: Clinical and radiological findings suggest both neurodevelopmental
and neurodegenerative pathophysiology. Seizures may manifest at any age and are
responsive to levetiracetam monotherapy in most cases. Febrile seizure is the
most common trigger for SLEs. Acetazolamide is well tolerated.

Copyright © 2023 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2023.101027
PMID: 37955240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Mayo Clinic and Eva Morava
have a financial interest related to this research. This research has been
reviewed by the Mayo Clinic Conflict of Interest Review Board and is being
conducted in compliance with Mayo Clinic Conflict of Interest policies. This
work was funded by the grant titled Frontiers in Congenital Disorders of
Glycosylation (1U54NS115198-01) from the National Institute of Neurological
Diseases and Stroke (NINDS) and the National Center for Advancing Translational
Sciences (NCATS), and the Rare Disorders Clinical Research Network (RDCRN), at
the National Institute of Health. All other authors declare no conflicts of
interest.
