---
reference_id: "PMID:28974506"
title: Five-year results of brentuximab vedotin in patients with relapsed or refractory systemic anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Pro B
- Advani R
- Brice P
- Bartlett NL
- Rosenblatt JD
- Illidge T
- Matous J
- Ramchandren R
- Fanale M
- Connors JM
- Fenton K
- Huebner D
- Pinelli JM
- Kennedy DA
- Shustov A
journal: Blood
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-05-780049
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Brentuximab Vedotin
- Disease Progression
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunoconjugates/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Longitudinal Studies
- "Lymphoma, Large-Cell, Anaplastic/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/etiology
- Remission Induction
- Salvage Therapy/methods
- Stem Cell Transplantation
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Five-year results of brentuximab vedotin in patients with relapsed or refractory systemic anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Pro B, Advani R, Brice P, Bartlett NL, Rosenblatt JD, Illidge T, Matous J, Ramchandren R, Fanale M, Connors JM, Fenton K, Huebner D, Pinelli JM, Kennedy DA, Shustov A
**Journal:** Blood (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2017-05-780049](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2017-05-780049)

## Content

1. Blood. 2017 Dec 21;130(25):2709-2717. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-05-780049. Epub
2017 Oct 3.

Five-year results of brentuximab vedotin in patients with relapsed or refractory
systemic anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

Pro B(1), Advani R(2), Brice P(3), Bartlett NL(4), Rosenblatt JD(5), Illidge
T(6), Matous J(7), Ramchandren R(8), Fanale M(9), Connors JM(10), Fenton K(11),
Huebner D(12), Pinelli JM(11), Kennedy DA(11), Shustov A(13).

Author information:
(1)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Chicago, IL.
(2)Division of Oncology, Stanford University Medical Center, Palo Alto, CA.
(3)Hemato-oncology Department, Hospital Saint-Louis, Paris, France.
(4)Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO.
(5)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, FL.
(6)Christie Hospital National Health Service, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(7)Colorado Blood and Cancer Institute, Denver, CO.
(8)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI.
(9)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(10)British Columbia Cancer Agency Centre for Lymphoid Cancer, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.
(11)Seattle Genetics, Inc, Bothell, WA.
(12)Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Cambridge, MA, a wholly owned subsidiary of
Takeda Pharmaceuticals Limited; and.
(13)Division of Hematology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2018 Jul 26;132(4):458-459. doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-05-853192.

Comment in
    Blood. 2017 Dec 21;130(25):2691-2692. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-10-811083.

This pivotal phase 2 study evaluated the safety and efficacy of brentuximab
vedotin in patients with relapsed or refractory (R/R) systemic anaplastic large
cell lymphoma (ALCL). After a median observation period of approximately 6 years
from first treatment, we examined the durability of remission, progression-free
survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), and safety outcomes of patients treated
on this trial. Among all enrolled patients (n = 58), no progressions were
observed beyond 40 months, and median OS was not reached. Patients with a
complete response (CR), as assessed by the investigator (38 of 58, 66%),
continued to demonstrate improved outcomes with neither median OS nor PFS
reached. Of the 38 CR patients, 16 received a consolidative stem cell transplant
(SCT) with median PFS not reached. Among patients who were on-study and in
remission at study closure, 16 patients had not received any new treatment after
single-agent brentuximab vedotin other than consolidative SCT. Among this subset
of 16 patients, 8 received SCT, and the remaining 8 patients (14% of all
enrolled patients) remained in sustained remission without consolidative SCT or
any new anticancer therapy. Thirty-three patients experienced peripheral
neuropathy, among whom, the majority (30 of 33, 91%) had experienced resolution
or improvement at their last assessment. These final results, which demonstrated
a high rate of peripheral neuropathy resolution, and durable remissions in a
subset of patients with relapsed or refractory systemic ALCL, provide evidence
that single-agent brentuximab vedotin may be a potentially curative treatment
option. This trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00866047.

© 2017 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2017-05-780049
PMCID: PMC5746164
PMID: 28974506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: J.M.P., K.F.,
and D.A.K. are employees of and have equity ownership of Seattle Genetics. D.H.
is an employee of and has equity ownership of Takeda. P.B. received funding from
Seattle Genetics and Takeda. J.M.C. received funding from Seattle Genetics,
Takeda, Roche, and Bristol-Myers Squibb. B.P., M.F., T.I., J.M., J.D.R., A.S.,
and R.R. received funding from Seattle Genetics; R.A. received funding from
Kura, Celgene, Genentech, Infinity, Seattle Genetics, Agensys, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Merck, Millennium, Regeneron, Janssen, and Pharmacyclics. N.L.B.
received funding from Celgene, Seattle Genetics, Genentech, Pfizer, KITE, Merck,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Immune Design, Forty Seven, Affimed, Janssen,
Pharmacyclics, Millennium, AstraZeneca, ImaginAb, and Novartis. B.P. and T.I.
received honoraria from Takeda. P.B. received honoraria from Takeda, Roche,
Gilead, and Bristol-Myers Squibb. M.F. received honoraria from Seattle Genetics.
M.F. and R.R. has received consultant fees from Seattle Genetics. T.I. has
received consultant fees from Seattle Genetics and Takeda. J.M. has received
consultant fees from Celgene. B.P. has received consultant fees from Seattle
Genetics. N.L.B. has received consultant fees from Seattle Genetics, KITE, and
Gilead. R.A. has received consultant fees from NanoString Technologies,
Pharmacyclics, Spectrum, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Forty Seven, Sutro Biopharma,
Juno Therapeutics, and Gilead. J.M. is a member of the speakers bureau for
Seattle Genetics and Celgene. M.F., B.P., and R.R. have received travel expenses
from Seattle Genetics.
