---
reference_id: "PMID:37065413"
title: "Dieulafoy Lesion: Scope it Until You Find it."
authors:
- Kusnik A
- Mostafa MR
- Sharma RP
- Chodos A
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.36097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dieulafoy Lesion: Scope it Until You Find it.
**Authors:** Kusnik A, Mostafa MR, Sharma RP, Chodos A
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.36097](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.36097)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Mar 13;15(3):e36097. doi: 10.7759/cureus.36097. eCollection 2023 
Mar.

Dieulafoy Lesion: Scope it Until You Find it.

Kusnik A(1), Mostafa MR(1), Sharma RP(1), Chodos A(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Unity Hospital, Rochester Regional Health, Rochester, USA.

A Dieulafoy lesion is an important consideration every gastroenterologist and 
internal medicine physician has to make in cases of recurrent, unidentifiable, 
and hemodynamically compromising gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. A Dieulafoy 
lesion is an aberrant vessel that does not reduce in caliber when it extends 
from the submucosa to the mucosa. Damage to this artery can result in severe, 
intermittent arterial bleeding from tiny, difficult-to-visualize vessel stumps. 
Furthermore, these catastrophic bleeding episodes frequently result in 
hemodynamic instability and the need for transfusion of multiple blood products. 
As the patients presenting with Dieulafoy lesions often have concomitant cardiac 
and renal disease, familiarity with this condition is relevant as these patients 
are at risk of transfusion-related injuries. This case is unique as the 
Dieulafoy lesion was not visualizable in a standard location despite multiple 
esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and CT angiography, illustrating the difficulty 
of accurately managing and diagnosing this condition.

Copyright © 2023, Kusnik et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.36097
PMCID: PMC10097443
PMID: 37065413

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.