---
reference_id: "PMID:35094387"
title: "Clinicodemographic features of mixed vitiligo: a case-control study."
authors:
- Kumar S
- Vinay K
- Choudhary R
- Thakur V
- Bishnoi A
- Kumaran MS
- Parsad D
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.16090
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicodemographic features of mixed vitiligo: a case-control study.
**Authors:** Kumar S, Vinay K, Choudhary R, Thakur V, Bishnoi A, Kumaran MS, Parsad D
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.16090](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.16090)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2022 Aug;61(8):982-987. doi: 10.1111/ijd.16090. Epub 2022 Jan 
30.

Clinicodemographic features of mixed vitiligo: a case-control study.

Kumar S(1), Vinay K(1), Choudhary R(1), Thakur V(1), Bishnoi A(1), Kumaran 
MS(1), Parsad D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology, Postgraduate Institute 
of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.

BACKGROUND: Mixed vitiligo (MV) is the coexistence of segmental vitiligo (SV) 
and non-segmental vitiligo (NSV). The literature on MV is sparse.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the clinicodemographic and treatment parameters in MV and 
compare them with SV.
METHODS: Clinical data of MV and SV patients enrolled in our pigmentary clinic 
from July 2015 to December 2019 were reviewed retrospectively and compared.
RESULTS: Out of a total of 4,371 vitiligo patients, 293 (6.7%) were SV while 74 
(1.69%) were MV. As compared to SV, MV had significantly lower mean age of onset 
of segmental component (SC) (13.33 ± 9.01 vs. 15.70 ± 8.60 years, P = 0.03) and 
significantly higher proportion of patients with more than 1% body surface 
involvement by SC (66.2% vs. 51.5%, P = 0.03) and presence of leukotrichia in 
the SC (66.2% vs. 51.5%, P = 0.03). Topical agents and systemic 
immunosuppressive agents were significantly more effective in non-segmental 
component (NSC) as compared to SC of MV. Surgical modalities were the only 
effective treatment modality for SC.
LIMITATIONS: Retrospective design, heterogeneity of treatment regimens.
CONCLUSION: Early age of onset, larger (>1%) body surface area involvement, and 
leukotrichia in SV predict its progression into MV with time. Treatment response 
to different modalities varies significantly between SC and NSC of MV.

© 2022 the International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.16090
PMID: 35094387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]