---
reference_id: "PMID:21704640"
title: The correlation between infectivity and incubation period of measles, estimated from households with two cases.
authors:
- Klinkenberg D
- Nishiura H
journal: J Theor Biol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.06.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The correlation between infectivity and incubation period of measles, estimated from households with two cases.
**Authors:** Klinkenberg D, Nishiura H
**Journal:** J Theor Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.06.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.06.015)

## Content

1. J Theor Biol. 2011 Sep 7;284(1):52-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.06.015. Epub 
2011 Jun 22.

The correlation between infectivity and incubation period of measles, estimated 
from households with two cases.

Klinkenberg D(1), Nishiura H.

Author information:
(1)Theoretical Epidemiology, Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 7, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
d.klinkenberg@uu.nl

The generation time of an infectious disease is the time between infection of a 
primary case and infection of a secondary case by the primary case. Its 
distribution plays a key role in understanding the dynamics of infectious 
diseases in populations, e.g. in estimating the basic reproduction number. 
Moreover, the generation time and incubation period distributions together 
characterize the effectiveness of control by isolation and quarantine. In 
modelling studies, a relation between the two is often not made specific, but a 
correlation is biologically plausible. However, it is difficult to establish 
such correlation, because of the unobservable nature of infection events. We 
have quantified a joint distribution of generation time and incubation period by 
a novel estimation method for household data with two susceptible individuals, 
consisting of time intervals between disease onsets of two measles cases. We 
used two such datasets, and a separate incubation period dataset. Results 
indicate that the mean incubation period and the generation time of measles are 
positively correlated, and that both lie in the range of 11-12 days, suggesting 
that infectiousness of measles cases increases significantly around the time of 
symptom onset. The correlation between times from infection to secondary 
transmission and to symptom onset could critically affect the predicted 
effectiveness of isolation and quarantine.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.06.015
PMID: 21704640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]