---
reference_id: "PMID:20301330"
title: Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Evans DG
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Evans DG

## Content

1. Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome.

Evans DG(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2002 Jun 20 [updated 2024 Feb 22].

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine, Division of Evolution, Infection and Genomics, Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre;, Consultant in Medical Genetics, St Mary's
Hospital and Christie Hospital;, Professor of Medical Genetics and Cancer
Epidemiology, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is
characterized by the development of multiple jaw keratocysts, frequently
beginning in the second decade of life, and/or basal cell carcinomas (BCCs),
usually from the third decade onward. Many individuals have a recognizable
appearance with macrocephaly, frontal bossing, coarse facial features, and
facial milia. Most individuals have skeletal anomalies (e.g., bifid ribs,
wedge-shaped vertebrae). Ectopic calcification, particularly in the falx, is
present in 90% of affected individuals by age 30 years. Cardiac and ovarian
fibromas occur in approximately 2% and 20% of individuals, respectively.
Approximately 5% of all children with NBCCS develop medulloblastoma (primitive
neuroectodermal tumor), generally the desmoplastic subtype. The risk of
developing medulloblastoma is substantially higher in individuals with an SUFU
pathogenic variant (33%) than in those with a PTCH1 pathogenic variant (<2%).
Peak incidence is at age one to two years. Life expectancy in NBCCS is not
significantly different from average.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of NBCCS is established in a proband who
fulfills proposed diagnostic clinical criteria. Identification of a heterozygous
germline pathogenic variant in PTCH1 or SUFU by molecular genetic testing
establishes the diagnosis if clinical features are inconclusive.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Best provided by specialists
experienced with the condition; avoidance of direct sun exposure through the use
of complete sunblock and covering of exposed skin with long sleeves, high
collars, and hats; early treatment of BCCs to ensure complete eradication of
aggressive BCCs and to preserve normal tissue to prevent disfigurement; sonic
hedgehog inhibitors such as vismodegib to treat severe BCCs; jaw keratocysts
usually require surgical excision; treatment of medulloblastoma per
neurosurgeon/oncologist. Surveillance: Monitor head circumference throughout
childhood; ophthalmology evaluations per ophthalmologist; feeding, hearing, and
speech evaluation as needed in those with a history of cleft lip/palate;
clinical exam for scoliosis as needed; skin examination at least annually;
orthopantogram every 12-18 months beginning at age eight years to identify jaw
keratocysts; developmental assessment and physical examination every six months
until age five years due to increased risk for medulloblastoma; brain MRI in
those with SUFU-related NBCCS every three to four months until age three years,
every six months until age five years, annually until age eight years for
medulloblastoma, and then every three to five years beginning at age 30 years
for meningioma; ovarian ultrasound in women at age 18 years.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Radiotherapy if there are alternative treatments,
especially in childhood; diagnostic radiographs should be used sparingly; direct
sun exposure should be limited, as excessive sun exposure increases the
likelihood of developing BCCs. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Because of the
need for surveillance for complications of NBCCS (medulloblastoma in children;
jaw keratocysts and BCCs in adults) and the need to avoid radiographs and sun
exposure, clarification of the genetic status of at-risk relatives, including
children, is appropriate.
GENETIC COUNSELING: NBCCS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
Approximately 70%-80% of individuals with NBCCS have an affected parent and
about 20%-30% have NBCCS as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant. Each
child of an individual with NBCCS has a 50% chance of inheriting the disorder.
If the NBCCS-related pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for NBCCS are
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301330
