---
reference_id: "PMID:12841365"
title: A length polymorphism in the circadian clock gene Per3 is linked to delayed sleep phase syndrome and extreme diurnal preference.
authors:
- Archer SN
- Robilliard DL
- Skene DJ
- Smits M
- Williams A
- Arendt J
- von Schantz M
journal: Sleep
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/sleep/26.4.413
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A length polymorphism in the circadian clock gene Per3 is linked to delayed sleep phase syndrome and extreme diurnal preference.
**Authors:** Archer SN, Robilliard DL, Skene DJ, Smits M, Williams A, Arendt J, von Schantz M
**Journal:** Sleep (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/sleep/26.4.413](https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/26.4.413)

## Content

1. Sleep. 2003 Jun 15;26(4):413-5. doi: 10.1093/sleep/26.4.413.

A length polymorphism in the circadian clock gene Per3 is linked to delayed 
sleep phase syndrome and extreme diurnal preference.

Archer SN(1), Robilliard DL, Skene DJ, Smits M, Williams A, Arendt J, von 
Schantz M.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Chronobiology, School of Biomedical and Life Science, University 
of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, UK.

Comment in
    Sleep. 2003 Jun 15;26(4):411.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To investigate the link between extreme diurnal preference, 
delayed sleep phase syndrome, and a length polymorphism in Per3.
DESIGN: Subjects were genotyped using polymerase chain reaction.
PATIENTS OR PARTICIPANTS: Subjects with defined diurnal preference as determined 
by the Horne-Ostberg questionnaire and patients with delayed sleep phase 
syndrome.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: The Per3 polymorphism correlated significantly with 
extreme diurnal preference, the longer allele associating with morningness and 
the shorter allele with eveningness. The shorter allele was strongly associated 
with the delayed sleep phase syndrome patients, 75% of whom were homozygous.
CONCLUSION: The length of the Per3 repeat region identifies a potential genetic 
marker for extreme diurnal preference.

DOI: 10.1093/sleep/26.4.413
PMID: 12841365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]