---
reference_id: "PMID:32500973"
title: Activating variants in PDGFRB result in a spectrum of disorders responsive to imatinib monotherapy.
authors:
- Wenger TL
- Bly RA
- Wu N
- Albert CM
- Park J
- Shieh J
- Chenbhanich J
- Heike CL
- Adam MP
- Chang I
- Sun A
- Miller DE
- Beck AE
- Gupta D
- Boos MD
- Zackai EH
- Everman D
- Ganapathi S
- Wilson M
- Christodoulou J
- Zarate YA
- Curry C
- Li D
- Guimier A
- Amiel J
- Hakonarson H
- Webster R
- Bhoj EJ
- Perkins JA
- Dahl JP
- Dobyns WB
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61615
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aneurysm/genetics
- Child
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Imatinib Mesylate/therapeutic use
- Infant
- "Leukoencephalopathies/drug therapy, etiology, genetics"
- Male
- "Myofibromatosis/congenital, drug therapy, etiology, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activating variants in PDGFRB result in a spectrum of disorders responsive to imatinib monotherapy.
**Authors:** Wenger TL, Bly RA, Wu N, Albert CM, Park J, Shieh J, Chenbhanich J, Heike CL, Adam MP, Chang I, Sun A, Miller DE, Beck AE, Gupta D, Boos MD, Zackai EH, Everman D, Ganapathi S, Wilson M, Christodoulou J, Zarate YA, Curry C, Li D, Guimier A, Amiel J, Hakonarson H, Webster R, Bhoj EJ, Perkins JA, Dahl JP, Dobyns WB
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61615](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61615)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2020 Jul;182(7):1576-1591. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61615. Epub 
2020 Jun 5.

Activating variants in PDGFRB result in a spectrum of disorders responsive to 
imatinib monotherapy.

Wenger TL(1), Bly RA(2), Wu N(3), Albert CM(3), Park J(3), Shieh J(4), 
Chenbhanich J(4), Heike CL(5), Adam MP(1), Chang I(1), Sun A(1), Miller DE(1), 
Beck AE(1), Gupta D(6), Boos MD(6), Zackai EH(7), Everman D(8), Ganapathi S(3), 
Wilson M(9)(10), Christodoulou J(11), Zarate YA(12), Curry C(4), Li D(13), 
Guimier A(14), Amiel J(14), Hakonarson H(13), Webster R(15), Bhoj EJ(7)(13), 
Perkins JA(2), Dahl JP(2), Dobyns WB(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics, Benioff Children's Hospital and Institute for 
Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California, USA.
(5)Division of Craniofacial Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.
(6)Division of Dermatology, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(7)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(8)Greenwood Genetics Center, Greenville, South Carolina, USA.
(9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Sydney Children's Hospitals 
Network-Westmead, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(10)Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(11)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Department of Paediatrics, 
Melbourne Medical School, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(12)Section of Genetics and Metabolism, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(13)Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(14)Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance 
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(15)Department of Neurology, Sydney Children's Hospital Network, Westmead, New 
South Wales, Australia.

More than 50 individuals with activating variants in the receptor tyrosine 
kinase PDGFRB have been reported, separated based on clinical features into 
solitary myofibromas, infantile myofibromatosis, Penttinen syndrome with 
premature aging and osteopenia, Kosaki overgrowth syndrome, and fusiform 
aneurysms. Despite their descriptions as distinct clinical entities, review of 
previous reports demonstrates substantial phenotypic overlap. We present a case 
series of 12 patients with activating variants in PDGFRB and review of the 
literature. We describe five patients with PDGFRB activating variants whose 
clinical features overlap multiple diagnostic entities. Seven additional 
patients from a large family had variable expressivity and late-onset disease, 
including adult onset features and two individuals with sudden death. Three 
patients were treated with imatinib and had robust and rapid response, including 
the first two reported infants with multicentric myofibromas treated with 
imatinib monotherapy and one with a recurrent p.Val665Ala (Penttinen) variant. 
Along with previously reported individuals, our cohort suggests infants and 
young children had few abnormal features, while older individuals had multiple 
additional features, several of which appeared to worsen with advancing age. Our 
analysis supports a diagnostic entity of a spectrum disorders due to activating 
variants in PDGFRB. Differences in reported phenotypes can be dramatic and 
correlate with advancing age, genotype, and to mosaicism in some individuals.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61615
PMID: 32500973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]