---
reference_id: "PMID:39298100"
title: Fatal exulceratio simplex (dieulafoy lesion) - a case report and review.
authors:
- Tan L
- Gilbert JD
- Byard RW
journal: Forensic Sci Med Pathol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12024-024-00895-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatal exulceratio simplex (dieulafoy lesion) - a case report and review.
**Authors:** Tan L, Gilbert JD, Byard RW
**Journal:** Forensic Sci Med Pathol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12024-024-00895-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12024-024-00895-4)

## Content

1. Forensic Sci Med Pathol. 2025 Jun;21(2):1030-1035. doi: 
10.1007/s12024-024-00895-4. Epub 2024 Sep 19.

Fatal exulceratio simplex (dieulafoy lesion) - a case report and review.

Tan L(1), Gilbert JD(2), Byard RW(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Adelaide Medical School, The University of Adelaide, Frome Road, Level 2, 
Room N237, Helen Mayo North, Adelaide, SA, 5005, Australia.
(2)Forensic Science South Australia, 21 Divett Place, Adelaide, South Australia, 
5005, Australia.
(3)Adelaide Medical School, The University of Adelaide, Frome Road, Level 2, 
Room N237, Helen Mayo North, Adelaide, SA, 5005, Australia. 
roger.byard@sa.gov.au.
(4)Forensic Science South Australia, 21 Divett Place, Adelaide, South Australia, 
5005, Australia. roger.byard@sa.gov.au.

A 64-year-old man involved in a low-speed vehicle crash was found at autopsy to 
have altered blood extending from his stomach to his rectum. Within the stomach 
a small arterial vessel opened onto the mucosa of the posterior wall of the 
antrum adjacent to the pylorus with no adjacent mucosal ulceration or 
malignancy. Histologic sections showed the typical appearances of a Dieulafoy 
lesion with a tortuous small arteriole within the submucosa extending to the 
gastric lumen with an overlying cap of recently formed clot. There were no 
injuries attributable to the vehicle collision. Death was due to a bleeding 
Dieulafoy lesion of the stomach with a background of cardiomegaly. Dieulafoy 
lesion of the stomach is a rare disorder accounting for only 1-2% of cases of 
acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Although its pathogenesis is poorly 
understood it is capable of producing life-threatening bleeding, as in the 
present case. The small size of the lesion may make it difficult to identify at 
the time of autopsy.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12024-024-00895-4
PMCID: PMC12325514
PMID: 39298100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]