---
reference_id: "PMID:21670455"
title: "Biomarker analyses and final overall survival results from a phase III, randomized, open-label, first-line study of gefitinib versus carboplatin/paclitaxel in clinically selected patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer in Asia (IPASS)."
authors:
- Fukuoka M
- Wu YL
- Thongprasert S
- Sunpaweravong P
- Leong SS
- Sriuranpong V
- Chao TY
- Nakagawa K
- Chu DT
- Saijo N
- Duffield EL
- Rukazenkov Y
- Speake G
- Jiang H
- Armour AA
- To KF
- Yang JC
- Mok TS
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.33.4235
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/chemistry, drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Adenocarcinoma of Lung
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Asia
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis, genetics"
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/chemistry, drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Disease-Free Survival
- "ErbB Receptors/analysis, antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Female
- Gefitinib
- Gene Dosage
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Logistic Models
- "Lung Neoplasms/chemistry, drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Odds Ratio
- "Paclitaxel/administration & dosage"
- Patient Selection
- Precision Medicine
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Quinazolines/therapeutic use
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Survival Rate
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarker analyses and final overall survival results from a phase III, randomized, open-label, first-line study of gefitinib versus carboplatin/paclitaxel in clinically selected patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer in Asia (IPASS).
**Authors:** Fukuoka M, Wu YL, Thongprasert S, Sunpaweravong P, Leong SS, Sriuranpong V, Chao TY, Nakagawa K, Chu DT, Saijo N, Duffield EL, Rukazenkov Y, Speake G, Jiang H, Armour AA, To KF, Yang JC, Mok TS
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2010.33.4235](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2010.33.4235)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jul 20;29(21):2866-74. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.33.4235. Epub
2011 Jun 13.

Biomarker analyses and final overall survival results from a phase III,
randomized, open-label, first-line study of gefitinib versus
carboplatin/paclitaxel in clinically selected patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer in Asia (IPASS).

Fukuoka M(1), Wu YL, Thongprasert S, Sunpaweravong P, Leong SS, Sriuranpong V,
Chao TY, Nakagawa K, Chu DT, Saijo N, Duffield EL, Rukazenkov Y, Speake G, Jiang
H, Armour AA, To KF, Yang JC, Mok TS.

Author information:
(1)Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jul 20;29(21):2843-4. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.35.9208.

PURPOSE: The results of the Iressa Pan-Asia Study (IPASS), which compared
gefitinib and carboplatin/paclitaxel in previously untreated never-smokers and
light ex-smokers with advanced pulmonary adenocarcinoma were published
previously. This report presents overall survival (OS) and efficacy according to
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) biomarker status.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In all, 1,217 patients were randomly assigned. Biomarkers
analyzed were EGFR mutation (amplification mutation refractory system; 437
patients evaluable), EGFR gene copy number (fluorescent in situ hybridization;
406 patients evaluable), and EGFR protein expression (immunohistochemistry; 365
patients evaluable). OS analysis was performed at 78% maturity. A Cox
proportional hazards model was used to assess biomarker status by randomly
assigned treatment interactions for progression-free survival (PFS) and OS.
RESULTS: OS (954 deaths) was similar for gefitinib and carboplatin/paclitaxel
with no significant difference between treatments overall (hazard ratio [HR],
0.90; 95% CI, 0.79 to 1.02; P = .109) or in EGFR mutation-positive (HR, 1.00;
95% CI, 0.76 to 1.33; P = .990) or EGFR mutation-negative (HR, 1.18; 95% CI,
0.86 to 1.63; P = .309; treatment by EGFR mutation interaction P = .480)
subgroups. A high proportion (64.3%) of EGFR mutation-positive patients randomly
assigned to carboplatin/paclitaxel received subsequent EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. PFS was significantly longer with gefitinib for patients whose
tumors had both high EGFR gene copy number and EGFR mutation (HR, 0.48; 95% CI,
0.34 to 0.67) but significantly shorter when high EGFR gene copy number was not
accompanied by EGFR mutation (HR, 3.85; 95% CI, 2.09 to 7.09).
CONCLUSION: EGFR mutations are the strongest predictive biomarker for PFS and
tumor response to first-line gefitinib versus carboplatin/paclitaxel. The
predictive value of EGFR gene copy number was driven by coexisting EGFR mutation
(post hoc analysis). Treatment-related differences observed for PFS in the EGFR
mutation-positive subgroup were not apparent for OS. OS results were likely
confounded by the high proportion of patients crossing over to the alternative
treatment.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2010.33.4235
PMID: 21670455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
