---
reference_id: "PMID:15654696"
title: "Axenfeld-Rieger malformation and distinctive facial features: Clues to a recognizable 6p25 microdeletion syndrome."
authors:
- Maclean K
- Smith J
- St Heaps L
- Chia N
- Williams R
- Peters GB
- Onikul E
- McCrossin T
- Lehmann OJ
- Adès LC
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30274
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axenfeld-Rieger malformation and distinctive facial features: Clues to a recognizable 6p25 microdeletion syndrome.
**Authors:** Maclean K, Smith J, St Heaps L, Chia N, Williams R, Peters GB, Onikul E, McCrossin T, Lehmann OJ, Adès LC
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30274](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30274)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Feb 1;132A(4):381-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30274.

Axenfeld-Rieger malformation and distinctive facial features: Clues to a 
recognizable 6p25 microdeletion syndrome.

Maclean K(1), Smith J, St Heaps L, Chia N, Williams R, Peters GB, Onikul E, 
McCrossin T, Lehmann OJ, Adès LC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, 
New South Wales, Australia. k.maclean@victorchang.unsw.edu.au

Deletion of distal 6p is associated with a distinctive clinical phenotype 
including Axenfeld-Rieger malformation, hearing loss, congenital heart disease, 
dental anomalies, developmental delay, and a characteristic facial appearance. 
We report the case of a child where recognition of the specific ocular and 
facial phenotype, led to identification of a 6p microdeletion arising from a de 
novo 6:18 translocation. Detailed analysis confirmed deletion of the FOXC1 
forkhead gene cluster at 6p25. CNS anomalies included hydrocephalus and 
hypoplasia of the cerebellum, brainstem, and corpus callosum with mild to 
moderate developmental delay. Unlike previous reports, hearing was normal.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30274
PMID: 15654696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]