---
reference_id: "PMID:35956138"
title: Long-Term Neuroradiological and Clinical Evaluation of NBIA Patients Treated with a Deferiprone Based Iron-Chelation Therapy.
authors:
- Romano N
- Baiardi G
- Pinto VM
- Quintino S
- Gianesin B
- Sasso R
- Diociasi A
- Mattioli F
- Marchese R
- Abbruzzese G
- Castaldi A
- Forni GL
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jcm11154524
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Neuroradiological and Clinical Evaluation of NBIA Patients Treated with a Deferiprone Based Iron-Chelation Therapy.
**Authors:** Romano N, Baiardi G, Pinto VM, Quintino S, Gianesin B, Sasso R, Diociasi A, Mattioli F, Marchese R, Abbruzzese G, Castaldi A, Forni GL
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm11154524](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm11154524)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2022 Aug 3;11(15):4524. doi: 10.3390/jcm11154524.

Long-Term Neuroradiological and Clinical Evaluation of NBIA Patients Treated 
with a Deferiprone Based Iron-Chelation Therapy.

Romano N(1), Baiardi G(2)(3), Pinto VM(4), Quintino S(4), Gianesin B(4), Sasso 
R(1)(5), Diociasi A(5), Mattioli F(2)(3), Marchese R(6), Abbruzzese G(7), 
Castaldi A(1), Forni GL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, EO Ospedali 
Galliera, 16128 Genoa, Italy.
(2)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, EO Ospedali Galliera, 16128 Genoa, Italy.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Pharmacology & Toxicology Unit, University 
of Genoa, 16132 Genoa, Italy.
(4)Centro della Microcitemia, delle Anemie Congenite e dei Disordini del 
Metabolismo del Ferro, EO Ospedali Galliera, 16128 Genoa, Italy.
(5)Department of Health Sciences (DISSAL), Radiology Section, University of 
Genoa, 16132 Genoa, Italy.
(6)IRCCS Policlinico San Martino, 16132 Genoa, Italy.
(7)Clinical Neurophysiology, Department of Neurosciences, Ophthalmology and 
Genetics, University of Genoa, 16132 Genoa, Italy.

Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) comprises various rare 
clinical entities with brain iron overload as a common feature. Magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) allows diagnosis of this condition, and genetic 
molecular testing can confirm the diagnosis to better understand the 
intracellular damage mechanism involved. NBIA groups disorders include: 
pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN), mutations in the gene 
encoding pantothenate kinase 2 (PANK2); neuroferritinopathy, mutations in the 
calcium-independent phospholipase A2 gene (PLA2G6); aceruloplasminemia; and 
other subtypes with no specific clinical or MRI specific patterns identified. 
There is no causal therapy, and only symptom treatments are available for this 
condition. Promising strategies include the use of deferiprone (DFP), an orally 
administered bidentate iron chelator with the ability to pass through the 
blood-brain barrier. This is a prospective study analysis with a mean follow-up 
time of 5.5 ± 2.3 years (min-max: 2.4-9.6 years) to define DFP (15 mg/kg bid)'s 
efficacy and safety in the continuous treatment of 10 NBIA patients through 
clinical and neuroradiological evaluation. Our results show the progressive 
decrease in the cerebral accumulation of iron evaluated by MRI and a substantial 
stability of the overall clinical neurological picture without a significant 
correlation between clinical and radiological findings. Complete ferrochelation 
throughout the day appears to be of fundamental importance considering that 
oxidative damage is generated, above, all by non-transferrin-bound iron (NTBI); 
thus, we hypothesize that a (TID) administration regimen of DFP might better 
apply its chelating properties over 24 h with the aim to also obtain clinical 
improvement beyond the neuroradiological improvement.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11154524
PMCID: PMC9369383
PMID: 35956138

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.