---
reference_id: "PMID:30570978"
title: Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.
authors:
- Sherman S
- Menon G
- Krishnamurthy K
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.
**Authors:** Sherman S, Menon G, Krishnamurthy K

## Content

1. Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.

Sherman S(1), Menon G, Krishnamurthy K(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2025 Feb 17.

Author information:
(1)Albany Medical College, Albany, NY
(2)HCA Florida Orange Park Hospital

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by 
the development of hamartomatous polyps in the gastrointestinal tract and 
distinctive mucocutaneous pigmented spots. The primary genetic defect associated 
with PJS is a germline mutation in the STK11 gene, which encodes a tumor 
suppressor involved in regulating cell growth. PJS presents with a range of 
clinical features, including gastrointestinal polyps, often located in the small 
intestine, and dark brown or blue-gray macules on the skin and mucous membranes, 
particularly around the lips and mouth. If left untreated, individuals with PJS 
face an increased lifetime risk of developing various cancers, including those 
of the gastrointestinal tract, breast, pancreas, and reproductive organs. The 
lifetime risk of malignancy is significantly elevated, with cancers often 
developing at younger ages than the general population. Regular cancer screening 
and gastrointestinal surveillance are essential for managing PJS and reducing 
the risk of cancer-related complications. Additionally, gastrointestinal polyps 
can lead to significant complications requiring surgical intervention, such as 
obstruction and bleeding. Early diagnosis and management improve outcomes and 
quality of life for affected individuals.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30570978

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Samantha Sherman declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Gopal 
Menon declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Karthik Krishnamurthy declares no relevant financial relationships 
with ineligible companies.