---
reference_id: "PMID:23999006"
title: "Prevalence of extra-articular manifestations in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Stolwijk C
- van Tubergen A
- Castillo-Ortiz JD
- Boonen A
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203582
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of extra-articular manifestations in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Stolwijk C, van Tubergen A, Castillo-Ortiz JD, Boonen A
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203582](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203582)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Jan;74(1):65-73. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203582.
Epub  2013 Sep 2.

Prevalence of extra-articular manifestations in patients with ankylosing 
spondylitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Stolwijk C(1), van Tubergen A(1), Castillo-Ortiz JD(2), Boonen A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Maastricht University 
Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands School for Public Health and Primary 
Care (CAPHRI), University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Unidad de Investigacion em Enfermadades Cronico-Degenerativas, Hospital 
General de Zona 50, Guadalajara, Mexico.

OBJECTIVES: Uveitis, psoriasis and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are common 
extra-articular manifestations (EAM) in patients with ankylosing spondylitis 
(AS); however, summary data of reported prevalence are lacking. The aim of the 
present study was to summarise the prevalence of EAMs among patients with AS and 
to identify underlying factors to explain potential heterogeneity of prevalence.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was performed (Medline, Embase and 
Cochrane Library) to identify relevant articles. Risk of bias was assessed and 
data were extracted. Pooled prevalences were calculated. Potential sources of 
any observed clinical or methodological heterogeneity in the estimates were 
explored by subgroup and metaregression analysis.
RESULTS: In the 156 selected articles, 143 reported the prevalence of uveitis 
(44 372 patients), 56 of psoriasis (27 626 patients) and 69 of IBD (30 410 
patients). Substantial heterogeneity was observed in prevalence estimates among 
all EAMs (I(2)=84-95%). The pooled prevalence of uveitis was 25.8% (95% CI 24.1% 
to 27.6%), and was positively associated in multivariable metaregression with 
disease duration (β 0.05, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.08) and random selection of patients 
(β -0.24, 95% CI -0.43 to -0.04). The pooled prevalence of psoriasis was 9.3% 
(95% CI 8.1% to 10.6%). The pooled prevalence of IBD was 6.8% (95% CI 6.1% to 
7.7%) and was positively associated with the percentage of women in the studies 
(β 0.02, 95% CI 0.00 to 0.03). Geographical area was associated in multivariable 
metaregressions with prevalence of all EAMs.
CONCLUSIONS: EAMs are common in patients with AS. The large heterogeneity 
between studies can be partly explained by differences in clinical as well as 
methodological characteristics.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203582
PMID: 23999006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]