---
reference_id: "PMID:19844120"
title: Genetic and clinical spectrum of aromatase deficiency in infancy, childhood and adolescence.
authors:
- Belgorosky A
- Guercio G
- Pepe C
- Saraco N
- Rivarola MA
journal: Horm Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1159/000249159
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and clinical spectrum of aromatase deficiency in infancy, childhood and adolescence.
**Authors:** Belgorosky A, Guercio G, Pepe C, Saraco N, Rivarola MA
**Journal:** Horm Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000249159](https://doi.org/10.1159/000249159)

## Content

1. Horm Res. 2009;72(6):321-30. doi: 10.1159/000249159. Epub 2009 Oct 21.

Genetic and clinical spectrum of aromatase deficiency in infancy, childhood and 
adolescence.

Belgorosky A(1), Guercio G, Pepe C, Saraco N, Rivarola MA.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Service, Hospital de Pediatria Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
abelgo @ elsitio.net

INTRODUCTION: cP450aromatase deficiency provides clues for the understanding of 
the role of aromatase in prepubertal and pubertal human health and disease. 
Placental aromatization of androgens protects the female fetus against the 
virilizing action of fetal androgens. After birth, the dual effect of aromatase 
deficiency, excessive androgens, and insufficient estrogens is responsible for a 
variable clinical picture. Nineteen cases of aromatase gene (CYP19) deficiency 
have been reported.
PHENOTYPE: Phenotype is dependent on sex and age. In newborns, aromatase 
deficiency should be considered in the etiology of 46,XX DSD, after ruling out 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia. In prepubertal aromatase deficient girls, high 
levels of ovarian androgens and gonadotropins facilitate the formation of 
ovarian cysts. Bone mineralization can be affected and bone aging is delayed. In 
pubertal girls, there is poor sexual development and abnormal virilization. The 
phenotype may be variable according to enzyme activity level. Insulin 
sensitivity may be abnormal in both men and women. Finally, aromatase might also 
play a role in the regulation of testicular cell mass in the newborn testis.
CONCLUSION: Adequate interpretation of clinical data should lead to the analysis 
of the CYP19 gene for diagnostic confirmation and implementation of appropriate 
management.

DOI: 10.1159/000249159
PMID: 19844120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]