---
reference_id: "PMID:17156452"
title: Pheochromocytomas and secreting paragangliomas.
authors:
- Plouin PF
- Gimenez-Roqueplo AP
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-49
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pheochromocytomas and secreting paragangliomas.
**Authors:** Plouin PF, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-1-49](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-1-49)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2006 Dec 8;1:49. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-49.

Pheochromocytomas and secreting paragangliomas.

Plouin PF(1), Gimenez-Roqueplo AP.

Author information:
(1)Hypertension Unit, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Université René Descartes-Paris 5, France. 
pierre-francois.plouin@egp.aphp.fr

Catecholamine-producing tumors may arise in the adrenal medulla 
(pheochromocytomas) or in extraadrenal chromaffin cells (secreting 
paragangliomas). Their prevalence is about 0.1% in patients with hypertension 
and 4% in patients with a fortuitously discovered adrenal mass. An increase in 
the production of catecholamines causes symptoms (mainly headaches, palpitations 
and excess sweating) and signs (mainly hypertension, weight loss and diabetes) 
reflecting the effects of epinephrine and norepinephrine on alpha- and 
beta-adrenergic receptors. Catecholamine-producing tumors mimic paroxysmal 
conditions with hypertension and/or cardiac rhythm disorders, including panic 
attacks, in which sympathetic activation linked to anxiety reproduces the same 
signs and symptoms. These tumors may be sporadic or part of any of several 
genetic diseases: familial pheochromocytoma-paraganglioma syndromes, multiple 
endocrine neoplasia type 2, neurofibromatosis 1 and von Hippel-Lindau disease. 
Familial cases are diagnosed earlier and are more frequently bilateral and 
recurring than sporadic cases. The most specific and sensitive diagnostic test 
for the tumor is the determination of plasma or urinary metanephrines. The tumor 
can be located by computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging and 
metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy. Treatment requires resection of the tumor, 
generally by laparoscopic surgery. About 10% of tumors are malignant either at 
first operation or during follow-up, malignancy being diagnosed by the presence 
of lymph node, visceral or bone metastases. Recurrences and malignancy are more 
frequent in cases with large or extraadrenal tumors. Patients, especially those 
with familial or extraadrenal tumors, should be followed-up indefinitely.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-49
PMCID: PMC1702343
PMID: 17156452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]