---
reference_id: "PMID:18411236"
title: Evaluation of long-term treatment of children with congenital lactic acidosis with dichloroacetate.
authors:
- Stacpoole PW
- Gilbert LR
- Neiberger RE
- Carney PR
- Valenstein E
- Theriaque DW
- Shuster JJ
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2007-2062
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/complications, congenital, drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dichloroacetic Acid/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Lactic Acid/blood
- Male
- Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies/complications
- Neural Conduction
- Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of long-term treatment of children with congenital lactic acidosis with dichloroacetate.
**Authors:** Stacpoole PW, Gilbert LR, Neiberger RE, Carney PR, Valenstein E, Theriaque DW, Shuster JJ
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2007-2062](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2007-2062)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2008 May;121(5):e1223-8. doi: 10.1542/peds.2007-2062. Epub 2008
Apr  14.

Evaluation of long-term treatment of children with congenital lactic acidosis
with dichloroacetate.

Stacpoole PW(1), Gilbert LR, Neiberger RE, Carney PR, Valenstein E, Theriaque
DW, Shuster JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, General Clinical Research Center, JHMHC, Gainesville,
FL 32610-0226, USA. peter.stacpoole@medicine.ufl.edu

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this research was to report results on long-term
administration of dichloroacetate in 36 children with congenital lactic acidosis
who participated previously in a controlled trial of this drug.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a randomized control trial, followed by an
open-label study. Data were analyzed for each patient from the time they began
treatment through May 2005.
RESULTS: Subject exposure to dichloroacetate totaled 110.42 years. Median height
and weight increased over time, but the standardized values declined slightly
and remained below the first percentile. There were no significant changes in
biochemical metabolic indices, except for a 2% rise in total protein and a 22%
increase in 24-hour urinary oxalate. Both the basal and carbohydrate
meal-induced rises in lactate were blunted by dichloroacetate. The median
cerebrospinal fluid lactate also decreased over time. Conduction velocity
decreased and distal latency increased in peroneal nerves. Mean 3-year survival
for all of the subjects was 79%.
CONCLUSIONS: Oral dichloroacetate is generally well tolerated in young children
with congenital lactic acidosis. Although continued dichloroacetate exposure is
associated with evidence of peripheral neuropathy, it cannot be determined
whether this is attributable mainly to the drug or to progression of underlying
disease.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2007-2062
PMCID: PMC3777225
PMID: 18411236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
