---
reference_id: "PMID:30288772"
title: Novel and recurrent mutations in keratin 1 cause epidermolytic ichthyosis and palmoplantar keratoderma.
authors:
- Smith FJD
- Kreuser-Genis IM
- Jury CS
- Wilson NJ
- Terron-Kwiatowski A
- Zamiri M
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/ced.13800
keywords:
- Adult
- Family
- Female
- Humans
- "Hyperkeratosis, Epidermolytic/genetics"
- Keratin-1/genetics
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel and recurrent mutations in keratin 1 cause epidermolytic ichthyosis and palmoplantar keratoderma.
**Authors:** Smith FJD, Kreuser-Genis IM, Jury CS, Wilson NJ, Terron-Kwiatowski A, Zamiri M
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ced.13800](https://doi.org/10.1111/ced.13800)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2019 Jul;44(5):528-534. doi: 10.1111/ced.13800. Epub 2018
Oct  4.

Novel and recurrent mutations in keratin 1 cause epidermolytic ichthyosis and
palmoplantar keratoderma.

Smith FJD(1)(2), Kreuser-Genis IM(3), Jury CS(4), Wilson NJ(1),
Terron-Kwiatowski A(5), Zamiri M(6).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology and Genetic Medicine, Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug
Discovery, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(2)Pachyonychia Congenita Project, Holladay, UT, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Crosshouse, Kilmarnock, UK.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, UK.
(5)East of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, UK.
(6)Alan Lyell Centre for Dermatology, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital,
Glasgow, UK.

Mutations in keratin genes underlie a variety of epidermal and nonepidermal
cell-fragility disorders, and are the genetic basis of many inherited
palmoplantar keratodermas (PPKs). Epidermolytic PPK (EPPK) is an autosomal
dominant disorder that can be due to mutations in the keratin 1 gene, KRT1.
Epidermolytic ichthyosis (EI), the major keratinopathic ichthyosis, is
characterized by congenital erythroderma, blistering and erosions of the skin.
Causative mutations in KRT1 and KRT10 have been described, with PPK being
present primarily in association with the former. We report four unrelated cases
(one with sporadic EI and three with autosomal dominant PPK), due to two novel
and two recurrent KRT1 mutations. Mutations in KRT1 are not only scattered
throughout the keratin 1 protein, as opposed to being clustered, but can result
in a range of phenotypes as further confirmed by these mutations, giving a
complex genotype/phenotype pattern.

© 2018 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.13800
PMCID: PMC7116359
PMID: 30288772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None
