---
reference_id: "PMID:31483318"
title: "Drug-induced acute kidney injury: diverse mechanisms of tubular injury."
authors:
- Perazella MA
journal: Curr Opin Crit Care
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/MCC.0000000000000653
keywords:
- Acute Kidney Injury/chemically induced
- Humans
- "Kidney Tubules/drug effects, pathology"
- Vancomycin/toxicity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug-induced acute kidney injury: diverse mechanisms of tubular injury.
**Authors:** Perazella MA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Crit Care (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCC.0000000000000653](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCC.0000000000000653)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2019 Dec;25(6):550-557. doi:
10.1097/MCC.0000000000000653.

Drug-induced acute kidney injury: diverse mechanisms of tubular injury.

Perazella MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven.
(2)Section of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, West Haven, Connecticut, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Medications are a relatively common cause of acute kidney 
injury (AKI), especially in hospitalized patients who are exposed to numerous 
agents. Drug-related acute tubular/tubulointerstitial injury is the most common 
cause of AKI associated with these agents. Toxic effects of drugs and their 
renal handling often lead to various forms of AKI.
RECENT FINDINGS: The inherent nephrotoxicity of drugs and their transport and 
metabolism by the kidneys play an important role in the occurrence of acute 
tubular injury. Apical transport of the aminoglycosides by endocytosis and 
apical pinocytosis of filtered hydroxyethyl starch into cells lead to acute 
tubular dysfunction. Transport of tenofovir and cisplatin by organic anion and 
cation transporters in the basolateral surface of the proximal tubule, 
respectively, are associated with intracellular drug accumulation and injury. 
Intratubular deposition of drug crystals with associated AKI occurs with several 
drugs, in particular the anticancer agent methotrexate. A potentially new 
mechanism of drug-induced AKI was described with vancomycin - acute 
vancomycin-related cast nephropathy. Immune-mediated acute tubulointerstitial 
injury is another cause of drug-induced AKI, as seen with immune checkpoint 
inhibitors.
SUMMARY: Drugs lead to AKI through mechanisms that involve their inherent 
toxicity as well as their transport and handling by the kidneys.

DOI: 10.1097/MCC.0000000000000653
PMID: 31483318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]