---
reference_id: "PMID:25480036"
title: "MCM9 mutations are associated with ovarian failure, short stature, and chromosomal instability."
authors:
- Wood-Trageser MA
- Gurbuz F
- Yatsenko SA
- Jeffries EP
- Kotan LD
- Surti U
- Ketterer DM
- Matic J
- Chipkin J
- Jiang H
- Trakselis MA
- Topaloglu AK
- Rajkovic A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.11.002
keywords:
- Abnormal Karyotype
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amenorrhea/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- Chromosomal Instability/genetics
- Consanguinity
- "DNA Breaks, Double-Stranded"
- DNA Repair
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Homologous Recombination
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Minichromosome Maintenance Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics
- RNA Splice Sites
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MCM9 mutations are associated with ovarian failure, short stature, and chromosomal instability.
**Authors:** Wood-Trageser MA, Gurbuz F, Yatsenko SA, Jeffries EP, Kotan LD, Surti U, Ketterer DM, Matic J, Chipkin J, Jiang H, Trakselis MA, Topaloglu AK, Rajkovic A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.11.002)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Dec 4;95(6):754-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.11.002.

MCM9 mutations are associated with ovarian failure, short stature, and 
chromosomal instability.

Wood-Trageser MA(1), Gurbuz F(2), Yatsenko SA(3), Jeffries EP(4), Kotan LD(5), 
Surti U(3), Ketterer DM(1), Matic J(1), Chipkin J(1), Jiang H(1), Trakselis 
MA(4), Topaloglu AK(2), Rajkovic A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Magee-Womens 
Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine, Cukurova 
University, Adana 01330, Turkey.
(3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Magee-Womens 
Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; 
Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Sciences, Cukurova University, 
Adana 01330, Turkey.
(6)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Magee-Womens 
Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; 
Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA; 
Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. 
Electronic address: rajkovic@upmc.edu.

Comment in
    Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):15750-1. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4589.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is genetically heterogeneous and manifests as 
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism either as part of a syndrome or in isolation. We 
studied two unrelated consanguineous families with daughters exhibiting primary 
amenorrhea, short stature, and a 46,XX karyotype. A combination of SNP arrays, 
comparative genomic hybridization arrays, and whole-exome sequencing analyses 
identified homozygous pathogenic variants in MCM9, a gene implicated in 
homologous recombination and repair of double-stranded DNA breaks. In one 
family, the MCM9 c.1732+2T>C variant alters a splice donor site, resulting in 
abnormal alternative splicing and truncated forms of MCM9 that are unable to be 
recruited to sites of DNA damage. In the second family, MCM9 c.394C>T 
(p.Arg132(∗)) results in a predicted loss of functional MCM9. Repair of 
chromosome breaks was impaired in lymphocytes from affected, but not unaffected, 
females in both families, consistent with MCM9 function in homologous 
recombination. Autosomal-recessive variants in MCM9 cause a genomic-instability 
syndrome associated with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and short stature. 
Preferential sensitivity of germline meiosis to MCM9 functional deficiency and 
compromised DNA repair in the somatic component most likely account for the 
ovarian failure and short stature.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.11.002
PMCID: PMC4259971
PMID: 25480036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]