---
reference_id: "PMID:34666531"
title: Diabetes mellitus is associated with an increased incidence of aortic valve stenosis.
authors:
- Roderburg C
- Loosen SH
- Luedde T
- Kostev K
- Luedde M
journal: Diab Vasc Dis Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/14791641211033819
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetes mellitus is associated with an increased incidence of aortic valve stenosis.
**Authors:** Roderburg C, Loosen SH, Luedde T, Kostev K, Luedde M
**Journal:** Diab Vasc Dis Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/14791641211033819](https://doi.org/10.1177/14791641211033819)

## Content

1. Diab Vasc Dis Res. 2021 Sep-Oct;18(5):14791641211033819. doi: 
10.1177/14791641211033819.

Diabetes mellitus is associated with an increased incidence of aortic valve 
stenosis.

Roderburg C(1), Loosen SH(1), Luedde T(1), Kostev K(2), Luedde M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, University 
Hospital Düsseldorf, Medical Faculty of Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Epidemiology, IQVIA, Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Germany.
(4)KGP Bremerhaven, Bremerhaven, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The prognosis of patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) is 
particularly determined by vascular comorbidities. A recent theory implies that 
DM could also promote aortic valve stenosis (AS). The present study investigates 
this association in a large collective of outpatients.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study compared the incidence of AS in 
patients with an initial diagnosis of type 2 DM and a matched non-DM cohort in 
809 general and diabetologist practices in Germany between January 2005 and 
December 2018. Cox regression models were performed to study the association 
between type 2 DM and AS incidence.
RESULTS: A total of 78,805 patients with type 2 DM and 78,805 patients without 
diabetes were analysed. Diabetes patients were more frequently diagnosed with 
obesity (52% vs 21%). Four percent of patients with and three percent of without 
diabetes were diagnosed with AS (p < 0.001). Diabetes was significantly 
associated with an increased incidence of AS (HR: 1.36, p < 0.001). This 
association was higher in men (HR: 1.41) versus women (HR: 1.30). The strongest 
association was observed in young patients (18-50 years, HR: 2.35, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: In our study, diabetes patients had a higher incidence of aortic 
stenosis during their disease course.

DOI: 10.1177/14791641211033819
PMCID: PMC8532229
PMID: 34666531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.