---
reference_id: "PMID:38380453"
title: Laryngotracheoesophageal Cleft Type IV in a Preterm Neonate. A Case Report and Literature Review.
authors:
- Sokou R
- Batsiou A
- Konstantinidi A
- Kopanou-Taliaka P
- Tsaousi M
- Lampridou M
- Tavoulari EF
- Mitropoulos K
- Liakou P
- Willadara-Gamage S
- Vlastarakos PV
- Iliodromiti Z
- Boutsikou T
- Iacovidou N
journal: Prague Med Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.14712/23362936.2024.4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laryngotracheoesophageal Cleft Type IV in a Preterm Neonate. A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Sokou R, Batsiou A, Konstantinidi A, Kopanou-Taliaka P, Tsaousi M, Lampridou M, Tavoulari EF, Mitropoulos K, Liakou P, Willadara-Gamage S, Vlastarakos PV, Iliodromiti Z, Boutsikou T, Iacovidou N
**Journal:** Prague Med Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.14712/23362936.2024.4](https://doi.org/10.14712/23362936.2024.4)

## Content

1. Prague Med Rep. 2024;125(1):47-55. doi: 10.14712/23362936.2024.4.

Laryngotracheoesophageal Cleft Type IV in a Preterm Neonate. A Case Report and 
Literature Review.

Sokou R(1)(2), Batsiou A(3), Konstantinidi A(3), Kopanou-Taliaka P(3), Tsaousi 
M(4), Lampridou M(3), Tavoulari EF(3), Mitropoulos K(3), Liakou P(3), 
Willadara-Gamage S(3), Vlastarakos PV(5), Iliodromiti Z(4), Boutsikou T(4), 
Iacovidou N(4).

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Department, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Aretaieio Hospital, Athens, Greece. sokourozeta@yahoo.gr.
(2)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, "Agios Panteleimon" General Hospital of Nikea, 
Piraeus, Greece. sokourozeta@yahoo.gr.
(3)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, "Agios Panteleimon" General Hospital of Nikea, 
Piraeus, Greece.
(4)Neonatal Department, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Aretaieio Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(5)2nd ENT Department, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Attikon 
University Hospital, Athens, Greece.

We present a case of a preterm neonate with a type IV 
laryngo-tracheo-oesophageal cleft, an uncommon congenital malformation, 
resulting from the failure of separation of the trachea and the oesophagus 
during fetal development, often associated with other deformities as well. Data 
in the literature shows that the long-term morbidity from the entity has 
declined over the last decades, even though prognosis remains unfavourable for 
types III and IV. This report emphasizes the complex issues neonatologists are 
faced with, when treating neonates with this rare disorder in the first days of 
life, what will raise suspicion of this rare medical entity, and that direct 
laryngoscopy/bronchoscopy finally depicts the exact extension of the medical 
condition. At the same time extensive evaluation for coexisting congenital 
anomalies should be performed. For all the above reasons, these neonates should 
be treated in specialized tertiary pediatric centers for multidisciplinary 
prompt management, which may improve, the outcome.

DOI: 10.14712/23362936.2024.4
PMID: 38380453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]