---
reference_id: "PMID:31174229"
title: Paragangliomas in Carney-Stratakis Syndrome.
authors:
- Khurana A
- Mei L
- Faber AC
- Smith SC
- Boikos SA
journal: Horm Metab Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1055/a-0918-8340
keywords:
- Adult
- "Chondroma/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- "Leiomyosarcoma/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- "Paraganglioma/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Paraganglioma, Extra-Adrenal/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Stomach Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paragangliomas in Carney-Stratakis Syndrome.
**Authors:** Khurana A, Mei L, Faber AC, Smith SC, Boikos SA
**Journal:** Horm Metab Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-0918-8340](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-0918-8340)

## Content

1. Horm Metab Res. 2019 Jul;51(7):437-442. doi: 10.1055/a-0918-8340. Epub 2019
Jun  7.

Paragangliomas in Carney-Stratakis Syndrome.

Khurana A(1), Mei L(1), Faber AC(2), Smith SC(3), Boikos SA(1).

Author information:
(1)VCU Massey Cancer Center - Hematology Oncology, Richmond, Virginia, USA.
(2)Virginia Commonwealth University - Philips Institute for Oral Health 
Research, Richmond, Virginia, USA.
(3)Virginia Commonwealth University - Pathology, Richmond, Virginia, USA.

Carney-Stratakis Syndrome (CSS) comprises of paragangliomas (PGLs) and 
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs). Several of its features overlap with 
Carney Triad (CT) - PGLs, GISTs, and pulmonary chondromas. CSS has autosomal 
dominant inheritance, incomplete penetrance, and greater relative frequency of 
PGL over GISTs. The PGLs in CSS are multicentric and GISTs are multifocal in all 
the patients, suggesting an inherited susceptibility and associating the two 
manifestations. In this review, we highlight the clinical, pathological, and 
molecular characteristics of CSS, along with its diagnostic and therapeutic 
implications.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0918-8340
PMID: 31174229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.