---
reference_id: "PMID:14726820"
title: "Absence of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 expression in varicella zoster virus-infected keratinocytes during herpes zoster: another immune evasion strategy?"
authors:
- Nikkels AF
- Sadzot-Delvaux C
- Piérard GE
journal: Am J Dermatopathol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1097/00000372-200402000-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Absence of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 expression in varicella zoster virus-infected keratinocytes during herpes zoster: another immune evasion strategy?
**Authors:** Nikkels AF, Sadzot-Delvaux C, Piérard GE
**Journal:** Am J Dermatopathol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00000372-200402000-00005](https://doi.org/10.1097/00000372-200402000-00005)

## Content

1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2004 Feb;26(1):27-32. doi:
10.1097/00000372-200402000-00005.

Absence of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 expression in varicella zoster 
virus-infected keratinocytes during herpes zoster: another immune evasion 
strategy?

Nikkels AF(1), Sadzot-Delvaux C, Piérard GE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatopathology, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium. 
af.nikkels@chu.ulg.ac.be

Downregulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I, MHC-II, and 
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) expression in infected cell lines 
allows some viruses to escape host immunity. In skin lesions of varicella zoster 
virus (VZV), MHC-II transcripts were demonstrated in keratinocytes around 
vesicles, but not in VZV-infected cells. Whether other immunoevasive mechanisms 
are present during herpes zoster (HZ) is not yet elucidated. The aim of the 
study was to disclose the temporal immunohistochemical expression of immune 
escape mechanisms during HZ. Sequential skin biopsies were performed in 5 HZ 
patients. VZV IE63, CD1a, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD56, CD68, L1, HLA-DR, HLA-ABC, 
interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, interferon gamma (IFNgamma), tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNFalpha), and ICAM-1 expressions were assessed on frozen sections using 
immunohistochemistry. Controls consisted of normal skin, herpes simplex virus 
(HSV) skin infections, and other distinct bullous skin diseases. HLA-DR and 
ICAM-1 expressions were not observed in VZV- and HSV-infected keratinocytes, 
contrasting with their upregulation in the surrounding epidermis and inside 
nonviral blisters. However, HLA-ABC expressions were not inhibited in 
VZV-infected keratinocytes. Furthermore, the CD4/CD8 ratio remained unmodified 
during the infection evolution, and this ratio was variable among patients. 
Increased IFNgamma, TNFalpha, and IL-6 expressions were present, but IL-10 
expression only increased in later stages. In contrast to in vitro MHC-I and 
MHC-II downregulation, VZV infection is related to MHC-II but not MHC-I 
expression on infected keratinocytes. The absence of ICAM-1 expression on 
infected keratinocytes may reduce their antigen presentation capacities to LFA-1 
ligand-bearing T cells. This may represent another VZV-associated immune escape 
mechanism. Increased IFNgamma, TNFalpha, and IL-6 expressions suggest a TH1 
profile.

DOI: 10.1097/00000372-200402000-00005
PMID: 14726820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]