---
reference_id: "PMID:15514009"
title: "The platelet glycoprotein Ib-von Willebrand factor interaction activates the collagen receptor alpha2beta1 to bind collagen: activation-dependent conformational change of the alpha2-I domain."
authors:
- Cruz MA
- Chen J
- Whitelock JL
- Morales LD
- López JA
journal: Blood
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2004-04-1365
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The platelet glycoprotein Ib-von Willebrand factor interaction activates the collagen receptor alpha2beta1 to bind collagen: activation-dependent conformational change of the alpha2-I domain.
**Authors:** Cruz MA, Chen J, Whitelock JL, Morales LD, López JA
**Journal:** Blood (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2004-04-1365](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-04-1365)

## Content

1. Blood. 2005 Mar 1;105(5):1986-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2004-04-1365. Epub 2004
Oct  28.

The platelet glycoprotein Ib-von Willebrand factor interaction activates the 
collagen receptor alpha2beta1 to bind collagen: activation-dependent 
conformational change of the alpha2-I domain.

Cruz MA(1), Chen J, Whitelock JL, Morales LD, López JA.

Author information:
(1)Thrombosis Research Section, Department of Medicine, Baylor College of 
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, N1319, Houston, TX 77030, USA. miguelc@bcm.tmc.edu

Integrin alpha2beta1 (glycoprotein [GP] Ia/IIa) is a major platelet receptor for 
collagen, containing its collagen-binding site within the alpha2 I domain. 
alpha2beta1 changes conformation upon platelet activation, increasing its 
affinity for collagen. We observed that 2 antibodies known to bind within the 
alpha2I domain, 12F1 and 6F1, bound preferentially to adenosine diphosphate 
(ADP)-activated platelets. Interestingly, when whole blood was perfused over a 
surface coated with either 12F1 or 6F1, only 6F1 supported the adhesion of 
unstimulated platelets. To test whether the interaction of GP Ib with von 
Willebrand factor (VWF) directly activates alpha2beta1, we used 12F1 as a probe 
of integrin activation. We perfused blood over a surface coated with a mixture 
of VWF-A1 domain (a GP Ib ligand) and 12F1 or VWF-A1 and mouse immunoglobulin G 
(IgG). Platelets rolled and did not attach stably on the A1/IgG surface, but 
they firmly bound and covered the A1/12F1 surface. We corroborated that 12F1 
binds an active conformation of the I domain by showing that it binds with 
higher affinity to a gain-of-function mutant than to either wild-type I domain 
or a loss-of-function mutant. These results strongly suggest that the 
interaction of platelet GP Ib with VWF mediates the activation of alpha2beta1, 
increasing its affinity for collagen.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2004-04-1365
PMID: 15514009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]