---
reference_id: "PMID:36845240"
title: "Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency in girls: a diagnosis not to be missed (a case report)."
authors:
- Boussaadni YE
- Aboulfouyoul A
- Khabbache K
- Khalki H
- Oulmaati A
journal: Pan Afr Med J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.11604/pamj.2022.42.240.36270
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency in girls: a diagnosis not to be missed (a case report).
**Authors:** Boussaadni YE, Aboulfouyoul A, Khabbache K, Khalki H, Oulmaati A
**Journal:** Pan Afr Med J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.11604/pamj.2022.42.240.36270](https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2022.42.240.36270)

## Content

1. Pan Afr Med J. 2022 Jul 28;42:240. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2022.42.240.36270. 
eCollection 2022.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency in girls: a diagnosis not to 
be missed (a case report).

Boussaadni YE(1), Aboulfouyoul A(1), Khabbache K(1), Khalki H(2), Oulmaati A(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Department, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Tanger Tétouan Al 
Hoceima (CHU TTA), Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy of Tangier, Abdelmalek 
Essaadi University, Tangier, Morocco.
(2)Biochemistry Department, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Tanger Tétouan Al 
Hoceima (CHU TTA), Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy of Tangier, Abdelmalek 
Essaadi University, Tangier, Morocco.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is a polymorphic enzyme encoded by the 
X chromosome. It protects the cell against hydrogen peroxide-induced damage and 
ensures an oxidative balance profile within the cell. The disease is more 
frequent in males, and rare cases are described in girls. We report an 
observation of a 7-month-old Moroccan girl hospitalized for acute hemolysis 
after consuming fava beans. The diagnosis of a G6PD deficiency was retained 
after an assay of the enzymatic activity that returned collapsed. After initial 
conditioning, a transfusion of phenotyped retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) is 
performed. The rapid evolution is favorable, and the child is discharged after 
therapeutic education sessions for the parents on the products to be avoided. 
Through this observation, we insist on the importance of neonatal screening in 
regions with a high prevalence of hemolysis in order to avoid diagnostic delays 
and also to prioritize the evaluation to be requested in an acute hemolysis 
state, to propose an education articulated around a preventive approach in 
children with this disease.

Copyright: Yousra El Boussaadni et al.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2022.42.240.36270
PMCID: PMC9949298
PMID: 36845240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.