---
reference_id: "PMID:18310267"
title: Molecular analysis of digenic inheritance in Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness.
authors:
- Nozu K
- Inagaki T
- Fu XJ
- Nozu Y
- Kaito H
- Kanda K
- Sekine T
- Igarashi T
- Nakanishi K
- Yoshikawa N
- Iijima K
- Matsuo M
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.052944
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Bartter Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/complications, genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- RNA Splice Sites
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular analysis of digenic inheritance in Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness.
**Authors:** Nozu K, Inagaki T, Fu XJ, Nozu Y, Kaito H, Kanda K, Sekine T, Igarashi T, Nakanishi K, Yoshikawa N, Iijima K, Matsuo M
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2007.052944](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2007.052944)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2008 Mar;45(3):182-6. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.052944.

Molecular analysis of digenic inheritance in Bartter syndrome with sensorineural
deafness.

Nozu K(1), Inagaki T, Fu XJ, Nozu Y, Kaito H, Kanda K, Sekine T, Igarashi T,
Nakanishi K, Yoshikawa N, Iijima K, Matsuo M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Hyogo, Japan. nozu@med.kobe-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Bartter syndrome (BS) is a genetic disorder accompanied by
hypokalaemic metabolic alkalosis. BS with sensorineural deafness (SND,
OMIM602522) is a newly identified phenotype caused by mutations in the BSND gene
that encodes barttin, a beta-subunit for chloride channel ClC-Ka and ClC-Kb and
classified as type IV BS. Type IV BS features the most severe phenotype
entailing life-threatening neonatal volume depletion and chronic renal failure
developing during infancy. A recent report described a case of BS with SND from
a consanguineous family who showed homozygous mutations in the CLCNKA and CLCNKB
genes. This case indicated the possibility of the occurrence of digenic
inheritance in BS with SND resulting from double mutations in the CLCNKA and
CLCNKB genes.
SUBJECT AND RESULTS: The current report concerns a 2-year-old girl from a
non-consanguineous family with BS accompanied by SND. In our case, four
loss-of-function mutations, consisting of mutations in both parental alleles in
both CLCNKA and CLCNKB, were identified. The paternal allele had a nonsense
mutation (Q260X) in CLCNKA and a splicing site mutation (IVS17+1 g>a) in CLCNKB.
The maternal allele had a large deletion mutation (about 12 kbp) extending from
CLCNKA to CLCNKB. Our case provides clear evidence that loss-of-function alleles
in both alleles of both CLCNKA and CLCNKB results in a phenotype
indistinguishable from that of mutations in BSND (type IV BS).
CONCLUSIONS: Recent advances in genetics have resulted in a better understanding
of many human inherited diseases, but most of them are monogenic disorders and
more complex inheritance patterns remain unresolved. Our case provides clear
evidence of digenic inheritance outside the scope of Mendelian inheritance
disorders.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2007.052944
PMID: 18310267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
