---
reference_id: "PMID:37960733"
title: "Sintilimab-related diabetes mellitus and psoriasis: A case report and literature review."
authors:
- Huang W
- Liu Y
- Li M
- Xue Y
- Bao W
- Guo Y
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000035946
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sintilimab-related diabetes mellitus and psoriasis: A case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Huang W, Liu Y, Li M, Xue Y, Bao W, Guo Y
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000035946](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000035946)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Nov 10;102(45):e35946. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000035946.

Sintilimab-related diabetes mellitus and psoriasis: A case report and literature 
review.

Huang W(1), Liu Y(1), Li M(1), Xue Y(1), Bao W(1), Guo Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Clinical Medicine, Weifang Medical University, Affiliated Hospital 
of Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong Province, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Affiliated Hospital of 
Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong Province, China.

RATIONALE: With the popularity of ICIs in different oncology treatments, 
immune-related adverse events have raised concerns, mostly occurring in skin and 
endocrine gland injury. This disease involves different organ systems and 
presents with a variety of clinical manifestations. Most patients with immune 
checkpoint inhibitor-induced type 1 diabetes are reported to have no combination 
of autoimmune disease. We report a case of Sintilimab-related diabetes mellitus 
and psoriasis.
PATIENT CONCERNS: We report a case of a 65-year-old female with 
Sintilimab-related diabetes mellitus and psoriasis.
DIAGNOSIS: The patient treated with anti-programmed cell death protein 1 
(Sintilimab) for 4 cycles. The patient presented with inexplicable bouts of 
nausea and vomiting, accompanied by chest discomfort and a feeling of 
breathlessness, prompting their admission to the local hospital. The initial 
assessment upon admission revealed an abrupt elevation in blood glucose levels, 
alongside normal ketone levels, lactic acidosis, and hyperuricemia. A 
comprehensive regimen was provided to regulate glucose levels and address the 
symptoms, resulting in notable improvement and subsequent discharge. 
Regrettably, the patient's personal decision to discontinue medication for a 
single day led to the emergence of acute ketoacidosis, coupled with a recurrence 
of psoriasis vulgaris. Consequently, readmission became necessary. Based on the 
patient's medical history and diabetes antibody testing, the diagnosis of immune 
checkpoint inhibitor induced diabetes mellitus has been confidently established.
INTERVENTIONS: The patient ceased treatment with Sintilimab and was initiated on 
insulin therapy for glycemic control, alongside symptomatic management for 
psoriasis. Upon stabilization of the condition, long-term administration of 
exogenous insulin was implemented as a substitute treatment.
OUTCOME: Outside of the hospital, insulin therapy effectively maintained stable 
blood glucose levels, and there were no further episodes of psoriasis flare-ups.
LESSON: The clinical manifestations of immune checkpoint inhibitor induced 
diabetes mellitus are variable, and in this case the patient presented with 
unique primary symptoms. Therefore, it is crucial to accumulate relevant cases, 
understand the different clinical presentations and identify the underlying 
mechanisms of the disease. This will provide further evidence for early 
therapeutic intervention in similar patients in the future.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000035946
PMCID: PMC10637498
PMID: 37960733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.