---
reference_id: "PMID:37364617"
title: "Erythromelalgia. Part I: Pathogenesis, clinical features, evaluation, and complications."
authors:
- Caldito EG
- Kaul S
- Caldito NG
- Piette W
- Mehta S
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.071
keywords:
- Humans
- "Erythromelalgia/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Pain/diagnosis, etiology"
- Erythema
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythromelalgia. Part I: Pathogenesis, clinical features, evaluation, and complications.
**Authors:** Caldito EG, Kaul S, Caldito NG, Piette W, Mehta S
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.071](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.071)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2024 Mar;90(3):453-462. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.071. 
Epub 2023 Jun 24.

Erythromelalgia. Part I: Pathogenesis, clinical features, evaluation, and 
complications.

Caldito EG(1), Kaul S(1), Caldito NG(2), Piette W(3), Mehta S(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, John H Stroger Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(2)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Division of Dermatology, John H Stroger Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, 
Illinois; Department of Dermatology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(4)Division of Dermatology, John H Stroger Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, 
Illinois. Electronic address: shilpaderm@gmail.com.

Erythromelalgia is a rare pain disorder that is underrecognized and 
difficult-to-treat. It is characterized by episodes of extremity erythema and 
pain that can be disabling; it may be genetic, related to an underlying systemic 
disease, or idiopathic. Considering the prominent cutaneous features 
characteristic of the condition, dermatologists can play an important role in 
early recognition and limitation of morbidity. The first article in this 2-part 
continuing medical education series reviews the epidemiology, pathogenesis, 
clinical manifestations, evaluation, and complications.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.071
PMID: 37364617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None disclosed.