---
reference_id: PMID:28244303
title: "Autologous chondrocyte implantation in the knee: systematic review and economic evaluation."
authors:
- Mistry H
- Connock M
- Pink J
- Shyangdan D
- Clar C
- Royle P
- Court R
- Biant LC
- Metcalfe A
- Waugh N
journal: Health Technol Assess
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3310/hta21060
keywords:
- Cartilage Diseases/surgery
- Chondrocytes
- Cost-Benefit Analysis
- Graft Survival
- Humans
- Knee Injuries/surgery
- Knee Joint/surgery
- "Orthopedic Procedures/economics, methods"
- "Osteoarthritis, Knee/surgery"
- State Medicine
- United Kingdom
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autologous chondrocyte implantation in the knee: systematic review and economic evaluation.
**Authors:** Mistry H, Connock M, Pink J, Shyangdan D, Clar C, Royle P, Court R, Biant LC, Metcalfe A, Waugh N
**Journal:** Health Technol Assess (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3310/hta21060](https://doi.org/10.3310/hta21060)

## Content

1. Health Technol Assess. 2017 Feb;21(6):1-294. doi: 10.3310/hta21060.

Autologous chondrocyte implantation in the knee: systematic review and economic 
evaluation.

Mistry H(1), Connock M(1), Pink J(1), Shyangdan D(1), Clar C(1), Royle P(1), 
Court R(1), Biant LC(2), Metcalfe A(3), Waugh N(1).

Author information:
(1)Warwick Evidence, Division of Health Sciences, University of Warwick, 
Coventry, UK.
(2)Department of Trauma and Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(3)Warwick Clinical Trials Unit, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.

BACKGROUND: The surfaces of the bones in the knee are covered with articular 
cartilage, a rubber-like substance that is very smooth, allowing frictionless 
movement in the joint and acting as a shock absorber. The cells that form the 
cartilage are called chondrocytes. Natural cartilage is called hyaline 
cartilage. Articular cartilage has very little capacity for self-repair, so 
damage may be permanent. Various methods have been used to try to repair 
cartilage. Autologous chondrocyte implantation (ACI) involves laboratory culture 
of cartilage-producing cells from the knee and then implanting them into the 
chondral defect.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of ACI in 
chondral defects in the knee, compared with microfracture (MF).
DATA SOURCES: A broad search was done in MEDLINE, EMBASE, The Cochrane Library, 
NHS Economic Evaluation Database and Web of Science, for studies published since 
the last Health Technology Assessment review.
REVIEW METHODS: Systematic review of recent reviews, trials, long-term 
observational studies and economic evaluations of the use of ACI and MF for 
repairing symptomatic articular cartilage defects of the knee. A new economic 
model was constructed. Submissions from two manufacturers and the ACTIVE 
(Autologous Chondrocyte Transplantation/Implantation Versus Existing Treatment) 
trial group were reviewed. Survival analysis was based on long-term 
observational studies.
RESULTS: Four randomised controlled trials (RCTs) published since the last 
appraisal provided evidence on the efficacy of ACI. The SUMMIT (Superiority of 
Matrix-induced autologous chondrocyte implant versus Microfracture for Treatment 
of symptomatic articular cartilage defects) trial compared matrix-applied 
chondrocyte implantation (MACI®) against MF. The TIG/ACT/01/2000 (TIG/ACT) trial 
compared ACI with characterised chondrocytes against MF. The ACTIVE trial 
compared several forms of ACI against standard treatments, mainly MF. In the 
SUMMIT trial, improvements in knee injury and osteoarthritis outcome scores 
(KOOSs), and the proportion of responders, were greater in the MACI group than 
in the MF group. In the TIG/ACT trial there was improvement in the KOOS at 60 
months, but no difference between ACI and MF overall. Patients with onset of 
symptoms < 3 years' duration did better with ACI. Results from ACTIVE have not 
yet been published. Survival analysis suggests that long-term results are better 
with ACI than with MF. Economic modelling suggested that ACI was cost-effective 
compared with MF across a range of scenarios.
LIMITATIONS: The main limitation is the lack of RCT data beyond 5 years of 
follow-up. A second is that the techniques of ACI are evolving, so long-term 
data come from trials using forms of ACI that are now superseded. In the 
modelling, we therefore assumed that durability of cartilage repair as seen in 
studies of older forms of ACI could be applied in modelling of newer forms. A 
third is that the high list prices of chondrocytes are reduced by confidential 
discounting. The main research needs are for longer-term follow-up and for 
trials of the next generation of ACI.
CONCLUSIONS: The evidence base for ACI has improved since the last appraisal by 
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. In most analyses, the 
incremental cost-effectiveness ratios for ACI compared with MF appear to be 
within a range usually considered acceptable. Research is needed into long-term 
results of new forms of ACI.
STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as PROSPERO CRD42014013083.
FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment 
programme.

DOI: 10.3310/hta21060
PMCID: PMC5346885
PMID: 28244303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]