---
reference_id: "PMID:36458152"
title: Understanding the environmental drivers of clinical azole resistance in Aspergillus species.
authors:
- Sen P
- Vijay M
- Singh S
- Hameed S
- Vijayaraghavan P
journal: Drug Target Insights
year: '2022'
doi: 10.33393/dti.2022.2476
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding the environmental drivers of clinical azole resistance in Aspergillus species.
**Authors:** Sen P, Vijay M, Singh S, Hameed S, Vijayaraghavan P
**Journal:** Drug Target Insights (2022)
**DOI:** [10.33393/dti.2022.2476](https://doi.org/10.33393/dti.2022.2476)

## Content

1. Drug Target Insights. 2022 Nov 22;16:25-35. doi: 10.33393/dti.2022.2476. 
eCollection 2022 Jan-Dec.

Understanding the environmental drivers of clinical azole resistance in 
Aspergillus species.

Sen P(1), Vijay M(1), Singh S(2), Hameed S(2), Vijayaraghavan P(1).

Author information:
(1)Antimycotic and Drug Susceptibility Laboratory, Amity Institute of 
Biotechnology, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, Uttar Pradesh - India.
(2)Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Haryana, Gurugram 
(Manesar) - India.

Aspergilli are ubiquitous fungal pathogens associated with severe 
life-threatening infections, especially in immunocompromised patients. Azoles 
are the first line of defence in the fight against most Aspergillus-related 
infections. However, resistance to these therapeutic compounds has developed, 
which is mainly due to the existence of mutations in lanosterol 14 
alpha-demethylase (Cyp51A), a crucial enzyme in the pathway that produces 
ergosterol and is the target of azole antifungals. Azole-based antifungal 
medications are ineffective because of infections brought on by azole-resistant 
Aspergillus species, leading to a high fatality rate. However, resistant 
Aspergillus isolates have also been isolated from azole-naïve patients. Global 
agricultural practices promote the use of azole fungicides to protect crops from 
phytopathogens. Usage of azole fungicides on a large scale has been linked to 
the development of resistance among Aspergillus species prevalent in the 
environment. The infections caused by these azole-resistant Aspergillus species 
cannot be treated by the available azole drugs, in turn leading to high 
morbidity and mortality rates. Thus, knowledge of the environmental drivers and 
comprehending the genetic basis of fungal drug resistance evolution is 
pertinent, considering increasing numbers of patients with COVID-19 infections 
who are sensitive to opportunistic fungal infections. This article emphasises 
the prevalence and underlying mechanisms of azole resistance in Aspergillus 
species, with a focus on environmental triggers and resistance development. It 
also highlights the need for regular surveillance of pesticide use in 
agriculture, detection of triazole-resistant Aspergillus species in 
environmental and clinical settings and development of new antifungal drugs.

DOI: 10.33393/dti.2022.2476
PMCID: PMC9685629
PMID: 36458152

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.