---
reference_id: "PMID:30968759"
title: Type of Organ Transplanted Impacts the Risk and Presentation of Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Transplant Recipients.
authors:
- Puza CJ
- Beasley GM
- Barbas AS
- Mosca PJ
journal: Exp Clin Transplant
year: '2020'
doi: 10.6002/ect.2018.0238
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type of Organ Transplanted Impacts the Risk and Presentation of Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Transplant Recipients.
**Authors:** Puza CJ, Beasley GM, Barbas AS, Mosca PJ
**Journal:** Exp Clin Transplant (2020)
**DOI:** [10.6002/ect.2018.0238](https://doi.org/10.6002/ect.2018.0238)

## Content

1. Exp Clin Transplant. 2020 Feb;18(1):93-97. doi: 10.6002/ect.2018.0238. Epub
2019  Apr 9.

Type of Organ Transplanted Impacts the Risk and Presentation of Cutaneous 
Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Transplant Recipients.

Puza CJ(1), Beasley GM, Barbas AS, Mosca PJ.

Author information:
(1)From the Duke University School of Medicine, Duke University Health System, 
Durham, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Transplant immunosuppression increases the risk of cutaneous 
squamous cell carcinoma by 65- to 200-fold. Our objective was to investigate the 
impact of the type of organ transplanted on the risk and presentation of 
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The retrospective database of the Duke University Health 
System was queried to identify patients who underwent an organ transplant from 
1996 to 2016. Data regarding transplant outcomes, cutaneous squamous cell 
carcinoma, immunosuppressive regimens, and survival were recorded. We used 
chi-square tests, analysis of variance, and unpaired t tests to compare the 
incidence and presentation of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma among organ 
types.
RESULTS: Of 3652 renal, hepatic, and cardiothoracic transplant patients 
identified, 142 patients developed at least 1 cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. 
The incidence of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma varied by type of organ 
transplanted, with 46 of 1684 (2.7%) renal transplant patients developing 
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma, 33 of 804 (4.1%) hepatic transplant patients, 
and 63 of 1164 (5.4%) cardiothoracic transplant patients over the median 
follow-up time of 6.5 years. Incidence in the renal transplant versus the 
cardiothoracic transplant group was significantly different (P < .001). The time 
to presentation of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma varied significantly by 
group, with the renal cohort presenting at 3.8 years compared with at 2.4 years 
in the cardiothoracic group and 2.1 years in the hepatic group (P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: The type of organ transplanted confers a unique risk and 
presentation of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.

DOI: 10.6002/ect.2018.0238
PMID: 30968759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]