---
reference_id: "PMID:36828393"
title: "Central nervous system manifestations of dengue infection: data from a tertiary care Centre in South India."
authors:
- George JT
- Lenin A
- Koshy M
- Vignesh CV
- Sathyendra S
journal: Postgrad Med J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/postmj/qgad004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central nervous system manifestations of dengue infection: data from a tertiary care Centre in South India.
**Authors:** George JT, Lenin A, Koshy M, Vignesh CV, Sathyendra S
**Journal:** Postgrad Med J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/postmj/qgad004](https://doi.org/10.1093/postmj/qgad004)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med J. 2023 Mar 31;99(1168):50-55. doi: 10.1093/postmj/qgad004.

Central nervous system manifestations of dengue infection: data from a tertiary 
care Centre in South India.

George JT(1), Lenin A(1), Koshy M(1), Vignesh CV(1), Sathyendra S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Christian Medical College, Vellore, Tamilnadu, 
632004, India.

BACKGROUND: Dengue fever is the second most common mosquito-borne disease 
affecting human beings and neurological manifestations (NMs) of this arboviral 
infection are increasingly being reported.
METHODS: In this retrospective study, conducted in a tertiary care centre in 
south India, we sought to describe the spectrum of NMs of dengue fever. The 
records of all patients admitted in the Department of Internal Medicine over 8 
years, with a diagnosis of dengue-based on clinical symptoms and the detection 
of dengue IgM antibodies or detection of NS1 antigen or nucleic acid by reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); with Glasgow coma score (GCS) 
≤14, neck stiffness, focal neurological signs, seizures, or visual 
disturbances-were explored.
RESULTS: Of 1121 patients admitted with dengue fever, 341 (30%) had severe 
dengue and 23 (2%) had NMs. Encephalopathy was seen in 9 patients (39%), 
encephalitis in 6 (27%), cerebellitis in 4 (17%), acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis (ADEM) in 2 (9%), ischaemic stroke in 1 (4%) patient, and 
neuro-ophthalmological manifestations in 1 (4%) patient. The median duration of 
hospital stay was 7 days. Nine (39% of) patients required intensive care unit 
(ICU) admission and 5 (22%) had fatal outcomes. There was no association between 
thrombocytopenia, metabolic acidosis, transaminitis, hyponatremia, the type of 
dengue infection, and the various NMs described.
CONCLUSIONS: The NMs of dengue infection are varied, and a high index of 
suspicion is needed to identify them in patients who present with lethargy or 
altered sensorium on the background of an acute febrile illness suggestive of 
dengue.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Postgraduate Medical Journal. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/postmj/qgad004
PMID: 36828393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]