---
reference_id: "PMID:15668283"
title: "Amplification of HER-2 in gastric carcinoma: association with Topoisomerase IIalpha gene amplification, intestinal type, poor prognosis and sensitivity to trastuzumab."
authors:
- Tanner M
- Hollmén M
- Junttila TT
- Kapanen AI
- Tommola S
- Soini Y
- Helin H
- Salo J
- Joensuu H
- Sihvo E
- Elenius K
- Isola J
journal: Ann Oncol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdi064
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- Aged
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Breast Neoplasms/pathology
- "DNA Topoisomerases, Type II/genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Esophagogastric Junction/pathology
- Female
- Gene Amplification
- "Genes, erbB-2"
- Humans
- Isoenzymes
- Male
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- "Stomach Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amplification of HER-2 in gastric carcinoma: association with Topoisomerase IIalpha gene amplification, intestinal type, poor prognosis and sensitivity to trastuzumab.
**Authors:** Tanner M, Hollmén M, Junttila TT, Kapanen AI, Tommola S, Soini Y, Helin H, Salo J, Joensuu H, Sihvo E, Elenius K, Isola J
**Journal:** Ann Oncol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/annonc/mdi064](https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdi064)

## Content

1. Ann Oncol. 2005 Feb;16(2):273-8. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdi064.

Amplification of HER-2 in gastric carcinoma: association with Topoisomerase
IIalpha gene amplification, intestinal type, poor prognosis and sensitivity to
trastuzumab.

Tanner M(1), Hollmén M, Junttila TT, Kapanen AI, Tommola S, Soini Y, Helin H,
Salo J, Joensuu H, Sihvo E, Elenius K, Isola J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Institute of Medical Technology, University of
Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, FIN-33101 Tampere, Finland.

BACKGROUND: HER-2/neu gene amplification has predictive value in breast cancer
patients responding to trastuzumab. We wanted to investigate the frequency and
clinical significance of HER-2/neu amplification in gastric carcinoma.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The frequency of HER-2/neu and Topoisomerase IIalpha gene
amplification was studied in adenocarcinomas of the stomach (n=131) and the
gastroesophageal junction (n=100) by chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH).
Sensitivity of a gastric cancer cell line N87 with HER-2/neu amplification to
trastuzumab was studied by a cell viability assay and compared with that of a
HER-2 amplified breast cancer cell line SKBR-3. Growth inhibition of N87 cells
was also verified in vivo in N87 xenograft tumors.
RESULTS: HER-2/neu amplification was present in 16 (12.2%) of the 131 gastric
and in 24 (24.0%) of the 100 gastroesophageal adenocarcinomas. Co-amplification
of Topoisomerase IIalpha was present in the majority of gastric (63%) and
esophagogastric junction cancers (68%) with HER-2/neu amplification. HER-2/neu
amplification was more common in the intestinal histologic type of gastric
cancer (21.5%) than in the diffuse (2%) or the mixed/anaplastic type (5%,
P=0.0051), but it was not associated with gender, age at diagnosis or clinical
stage. Presence of HER-2/neu amplification was associated with poor
carcinoma-specific survival (P=0.0089). HER-2/neu targeting antibody trastuzumab
inhibited the growth of a p185(HER-2/neu) overexpressing gastric and breast
carcinoma cell lines (N87 and SKBR-3) with equal efficacy.
CONCLUSIONS: HER-2/neu amplification is common in the intestinal type of gastric
carcinoma, and it is associated with a poor outcome. HER-2 might be a useful
target in this disease, and this hypothesis deserves to be investigated in
clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdi064
PMID: 15668283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
