---
reference_id: "PMID:9806419"
title: Arsenic toxicity is enzyme specific and its affects on ligation are not caused by the direct inhibition of DNA repair enzymes.
authors:
- Hu Y
- Su L
- Snow ET
journal: Mutat Res
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0921-8777(98)00035-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic toxicity is enzyme specific and its affects on ligation are not caused by the direct inhibition of DNA repair enzymes.
**Authors:** Hu Y, Su L, Snow ET
**Journal:** Mutat Res (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0921-8777(98)00035-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0921-8777(98)00035-4)

## Content

1. Mutat Res. 1998 Sep 11;408(3):203-18. doi: 10.1016/s0921-8777(98)00035-4.

Arsenic toxicity is enzyme specific and its affects on ligation are not caused 
by the direct inhibition of DNA repair enzymes.

Hu Y(1), Su L, Snow ET.

Author information:
(1)Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, New York University Medical Center, Tuxedo 10987, USA.

The molecular mechanism of arsenic toxicity is believed to be due to the ability 
of arsenite [As(III)] to bind protein thiols. Numerous studies have shown that 
arsenic is cytotoxic at micromolar concentrations. Micromolar As can also induce 
chromosomal damage and inhibit DNA repair. The mechanism of arsenic-induced 
genotoxicity is very important because arsenic is a human carcinogen, but not a 
mutagen, and there is a need to establish recommendations for safe levels of As 
in the environment. We have measured the dose-response for arsenic inhibition of 
several purified human DNA repair enzymes, including DNA polymerase beta, DNA 
ligase I and DNA ligase III and have found that most enzymes, even those with 
critical SH groups, are very insensitive to As. Many repair enzymes are 
activated by millimolar concentrations of As(III) and/or As(V). Only pyruvate 
dehydrogenase, one of eight purified enzymes examined so far, is inhibited by 
micromolar arsenic. In contrast to the purified enzymes, treatment of human 
cells in culture with micromolar arsenic produces a significant dose-dependent 
decrease in DNA ligase activity in nuclear extracts from the treated cells. 
However, the ligase activity in extracts from untreated cells is no more 
sensitive to arsenic than the purified enzymes. Our results show that direct 
enzyme inhibition is not a common toxic effect of As and that only a few 
sensitive enzymes are responsible for arsenic-induced cellular toxicity. Thus, 
arsenic-induced co-mutagenesis and inhibition of DNA repair is probably not the 
result of direct enzyme inhibition, but may be an indirect effect caused by 
As-induced changes in cellular redox levels or alterations in signal 
transduction pathways and consequent changes in gene expression.

DOI: 10.1016/s0921-8777(98)00035-4
PMID: 9806419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]