---
reference_id: "PMID:38201440"
title: "Quantitative ctDNA Detection in Hepatoblastoma: Implications for Precision Medicine."
authors:
- Kahana-Edwin S
- Torpy J
- Cain LE
- Mullins A
- McCowage G
- Woodfield SE
- Vasudevan SA
- Shea DPT
- Minoche AE
- Espinoza AF
- Kummerfeld S
- Goldstein LD
- Karpelowsky J
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16010012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative ctDNA Detection in Hepatoblastoma: Implications for Precision Medicine.
**Authors:** Kahana-Edwin S, Torpy J, Cain LE, Mullins A, McCowage G, Woodfield SE, Vasudevan SA, Shea DPT, Minoche AE, Espinoza AF, Kummerfeld S, Goldstein LD, Karpelowsky J
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16010012](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16010012)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Dec 19;16(1):12. doi: 10.3390/cancers16010012.

Quantitative ctDNA Detection in Hepatoblastoma: Implications for Precision 
Medicine.

Kahana-Edwin S(1), Torpy J(2), Cain LE(3), Mullins A(3), McCowage G(3), 
Woodfield SE(4), Vasudevan SA(4), Shea DPT(2), Minoche AE(2), Espinoza AF(4), 
Kummerfeld S(2)(5), Goldstein LD(2)(5), Karpelowsky J(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Children's Cancer Research Unit, Kids Research, The Children's Hospital at 
Westmead, Sydney, NSW 2145, Australia.
(2)Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 
Sydney, NSW 2010, Australia.
(3)Cancer Centre for Children, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW 
2145, Australia.
(4)Divisions of Pediatric Surgery and Surgical Research, Michael E. DeBakey 
Department of Surgery, Pediatric Surgical Oncology Laboratory, Texas Children's 
Surgical Oncology Program, Texas Children's Liver Tumor Program, Dan L. Duncan 
Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)St Vincent's Clinical School, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2217, Australia.
(6)Paediatric Oncology and Thoracic Surgery, The Children's Hospital at 
Westmead, Sydney, NSW 2145, Australia.
(7)Division of Child and Adolescent Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW 2050, Australia.

Hepatoblastoma is characterized by driver mutations in CTNNB1, making it an 
attractive biomarker for a liquid biopsy approach utilizing circulating tumor 
DNA (ctDNA). This prospective observational study sought to ascertain the 
feasibility of ctDNA detection in patients with hepatoblastoma and explore its 
associations with established clinical indicators and biomarkers, including 
serum Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). We obtained 38 plasma samples and 17 tumor 
samples from 20 patients with hepatoblastoma. These samples were collected at 
various stages: 10 at initial diagnosis, 17 during neoadjuvant chemotherapy, 6 
post-operatively, and 5 at disease recurrence. Utilizing a bespoke sequencing 
assay we developed called QUENCH, we identified single nucleotide variants and 
deletions in CTNNB1 ctDNA. Our study demonstrated the capability to quantitate 
ctDNA down to a variant allele frequency of 0.3%, achieving a sensitivity of 90% 
for patients at initial diagnosis, and a specificity of 100% at the patient 
level. Notably, ctDNA positivity correlated with tumor burden, and ctDNA levels 
exhibited associations with macroscopic residual disease and treatment response. 
Our findings provide evidence for the utility of quantitative ctDNA detection in 
hepatoblastoma management. Given the distinct detection targets, ctDNA and 
AFP-based stratification and monitoring approaches could synergize to enhance 
clinical decision-making. Further research is needed to elucidate the interplay 
between ctDNA and AFP and determine the optimal clinical applications for both 
methods in risk stratification and residual disease detection.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16010012
PMCID: PMC10778269
PMID: 38201440

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.