---
reference_id: "PMID:1706358"
title: "Quantitative analysis of a vulnerable subset of pyramidal neurons in Alzheimer's disease: II. Primary and secondary visual cortex."
authors:
- Hof PR
- Morrison JH
journal: J Comp Neurol
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1002/cne.903010106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative analysis of a vulnerable subset of pyramidal neurons in Alzheimer's disease: II. Primary and secondary visual cortex.
**Authors:** Hof PR, Morrison JH
**Journal:** J Comp Neurol (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cne.903010106](https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.903010106)

## Content

1. J Comp Neurol. 1990 Nov 1;301(1):55-64. doi: 10.1002/cne.903010106.

Quantitative analysis of a vulnerable subset of pyramidal neurons in Alzheimer's 
disease: II. Primary and secondary visual cortex.

Hof PR(1), Morrison JH.

Author information:
(1)Fishberg Research Center for Neurobiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, New York 10029.

In this study we investigated the primary and secondary visual areas of normal 
and Alzheimer's disease brains by using the SMI32 antibody. It is known that in 
Alzheimer's disease primary sensory areas are usually less devastated than 
association cortices, although visual symptomatology has been documented early 
in the course of the disease. In area 17, the SMI32 antibody primarily labeled 
the perikarya and dentritic tree of the large Meynert cells and cells in layer 
IVB. Smaller neurons in layers III, V, and VI were also immunoreactive (ir). In 
area 18, very large SMI32-ir pyramidal neurons in layers III and V were 
observed. In both areas, staining intensity was correlated with cell size, the 
largest neurons being the most intensely stained. Only a few changes were 
observed in the Alzheimer's disease cases. The only statistically significant 
differences in SMI32-ir neuron counts between control and Alzheimer's disease 
brains occurred in layer IVB cells and Meynert cells in area 17, and in layer 
III cells in area 18. In contrast with association cortices, there were no 
changes in staining intensity in the visual areas. There were fewer 
neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques in these areas than in prefrontal 
and inferior temporal cortex, and a correlation between neurofibrillary tangle 
counts and SMI32-ir neuron loss was only observed in layer III of area 18. These 
observations show that in the primary and secondary visual cortex, SMI32 also 
labeled a distinct subset of pyramidal cells that are known from data obtained 
in the monkey brain to furnish long corticocortical as well as subcortical 
projections. Interestingly, although there is much less cell and/or 
neurofibrillary tangle formation in these occipital regions than in prefrontal 
and temporal association areas, there is significant loss within key subsets of 
pyramidal cells. The selective loss of this particular subpopulation of 
pyramidal neurons will disrupt association pathways linking primary visual 
cortex with areas involved in higher level visual processing. The partial 
disconnection of such pathways may be relevant to the visual symptomatology 
frequently observed in Alzheimer's disease patients. These data further support 
the hypothesis that subtypes of pyramidal neurons with specific anatomical and 
molecular profiles may display a differential vulnerability in Alzheimer's 
disease.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.903010106
PMID: 1706358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]