---
reference_id: "PMID:37750541"
title: Evaluation of Post-Intervention Outcomes in Patients with Empty Nose Syndrome.
authors:
- Kim DH
- Kim SW
- Basurrah MA
- Hwang SH
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/lary.31077
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of Post-Intervention Outcomes in Patients with Empty Nose Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kim DH, Kim SW, Basurrah MA, Hwang SH
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.31077](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.31077)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2024 May;134(5):2005-2011. doi: 10.1002/lary.31077. Epub 2023
Sep  26.

Evaluation of Post-Intervention Outcomes in Patients with Empty Nose Syndrome.

Kim DH(1), Kim SW(1), Basurrah MA(2), Hwang SH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Seoul St. Mary's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, Taif University, Taif, Saudi 
Arabia.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Bucheon St. Mary's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of published 
articles to assess the impact of inferior turbinate/meatus augmentation in 
patients diagnosed with empty nose syndrome (ENS).
DATA SOURCES: PubMed, Cochrane database, Embase, Web of Science, SCOPUS, and 
Google Scholar.
REVIEW METHODS: Six databases were searched to December 2022. We retrieved 
studies evaluating improvements in refractory ENS-related symptoms based on 
various patient-reported outcome measures after inferior turbinate/meatus 
augmentation.
RESULTS: As a result of meta-analysis, Sinonasal Outcome Test, Empty Nose 
Syndrome 6-Item Questionnaire (ENS6Q), and depression scores were measured at 
1 week; 1, 3, and 6 months; and later than 12 months after intervention for 
patients with ENS. All scores revealed significant symptom improvement. By 
reference to the minimal clinically important difference of the ENS6Q (6.25), 
inferior turbinate/meatus augmentation relieved the nasal symptoms of ENS in the 
long term. Although the improvements in anxiety scores at 1 week (0.4133 
[-0.3366; 1.1633], 0.00, I2 = NA) and 1 month (0.4525 [-0.0529; 0.9579], 
I2 = 0.0%) were not statistically significant, the scores differed significantly 
at 3 months (0.7351 [0.4143; 1.0559], I2 = 28.4%), 6 months (0.8297 [0.6256; 
1.0337], I2 = 37.2%), and longer than 12 months (0.7969 [0.4768; 1.1170], 
I2 = 0.0%).
CONCLUSION: These data and analysis suggest that performing inferior 
turbinate/meatus augmentation on ENS patients may improve not only nasal symptom 
scores but also accompanying psychological problems such as anxiety and 
depression. Laryngoscope, 134:2005-2011, 2024.

© 2023 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.31077
PMID: 37750541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]