---
reference_id: "PMID:37666272"
title: "Underdiagnosed Roifman syndrome manifested as non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy: a case report."
authors:
- Xi Q
- Plaza Enriquez LJ
- Tanni NU
- Patsias I
journal: ESC Heart Fail
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ehf2.14518
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Underdiagnosed Roifman syndrome manifested as non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy: a case report.
**Authors:** Xi Q, Plaza Enriquez LJ, Tanni NU, Patsias I
**Journal:** ESC Heart Fail (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ehf2.14518](https://doi.org/10.1002/ehf2.14518)

## Content

1. ESC Heart Fail. 2023 Oct;10(5):3195-3198. doi: 10.1002/ehf2.14518. Epub 2023
Sep  4.

Underdiagnosed Roifman syndrome manifested as non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy: a 
case report.

Xi Q(1), Plaza Enriquez LJ(1), Tanni NU(1), Patsias I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Memorial Healthcare System, Hollywood, FL, 
USA.
(2)Advanced Heart Failure and Transplant, Memorial Healthcare System, Hollywood, 
FL, USA.

Roifman syndrome is a rare congenital disorder characterized by growth 
retardation, cognitive delay, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, immunodeficiency, 
and retinal dystrophy. However, very rarely, with only one case reported to 
date, a patient with Roifman syndrome may develop cardiomyopathy in their 
lifetime. We reported a case with underdiagnosed Roifman syndrome confirmed by 
whole genome sequencing, manifested as non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy, which has 
broadened the association between non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy and the genetic 
disorder Roifman syndrome. We also underscored that cardiomyopathy might be part 
of the clinical manifestations of Roifman syndrome and the importance of whole 
genome sequencing for diagnosis, as RNU4ATAC is not targeted by many 
commercially available exome capture kits.

© 2023 The Authors. ESC Heart Failure published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ehf2.14518
PMCID: PMC10567627
PMID: 37666272

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.