---
reference_id: "PMID:38459011"
title: GRB2 stabilizes RAD51 at reversed replication forks suppressing genomic instability and innate immunity against cancer.
authors:
- Ye Z
- Xu S
- Shi Y
- Cheng X
- Zhang Y
- Roy S
- Namjoshi S
- Longo MA
- Link TM
- Schlacher K
- Peng G
- Yu D
- Wang B
- Tainer JA
- Ahmed Z
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-46283-y
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- DNA
- DNA Replication
- Genomic Instability
- "GRB2 Adaptor Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Immunity, Innate"
- MRE11 Homologue Protein/metabolism
- Neoplasms/genetics
- "Rad51 Recombinase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GRB2 stabilizes RAD51 at reversed replication forks suppressing genomic instability and innate immunity against cancer.
**Authors:** Ye Z, Xu S, Shi Y, Cheng X, Zhang Y, Roy S, Namjoshi S, Longo MA, Link TM, Schlacher K, Peng G, Yu D, Wang B, Tainer JA, Ahmed Z
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-46283-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-46283-y)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Mar 8;15(1):2132. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-46283-y.

GRB2 stabilizes RAD51 at reversed replication forks suppressing genomic
instability and innate immunity against cancer.

Ye Z(1)(2), Xu S(3), Shi Y(4)(5), Cheng X(6), Zhang Y(1), Roy S(7), Namjoshi
S(1), Longo MA(1), Link TM(1), Schlacher K(7), Peng G(6), Yu D(1), Wang B(3),
Tainer JA(8), Ahmed Z(9).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Molecular and Cellular Oncology and Cancer Biology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(2)Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou Institute of Medicine (HIM), Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310022, China.
(3)Department of Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
310058, China.
(5)Division of Pediatrics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(6)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(7)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(8)Departments of Molecular and Cellular Oncology and Cancer Biology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
JTainer@mdanderson.org.
(9)Departments of Molecular and Cellular Oncology and Cancer Biology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
ZAhmed@mdanderson.org.

Growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2) is a cytoplasmic adapter for
tyrosine kinase signaling and a nuclear adapter for homology-directed-DNA
repair. Here we find nuclear GRB2 protects DNA at stalled replication forks from
MRE11-mediated degradation in the BRCA2 replication fork protection axis.
Mechanistically, GRB2 binds and inhibits RAD51 ATPase activity to stabilize
RAD51 on stalled replication forks. In GRB2-depleted cells, PARP inhibitor
(PARPi) treatment releases DNA fragments from stalled forks into the cytoplasm
that activate the cGAS-STING pathway to trigger pro-inflammatory cytokine
production. Moreover in a syngeneic mouse metastatic ovarian cancer model, GRB2
depletion in the context of PARPi treatment reduced tumor burden and enabled
high survival consistent with immune suppression of cancer growth. Collective
findings unveil GRB2 function and mechanism for fork protection in the
BRCA2-RAD51-MRE11 axis and suggest GRB2 as a potential therapeutic target and an
enabling predictive biomarker for patient selection for PARPi and immunotherapy
combination.

© 2024. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-46283-y
PMCID: PMC10923831
PMID: 38459011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
