---
reference_id: "PMID:26120493"
title: Reduced EGFR signaling enhances cartilage destruction in a mouse osteoarthritis model.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Zhu J
- Liu F
- Li Y
- Chandra A
- Levin LS
- Beier F
- Enomoto-Iwamoto M
- Qin L
journal: Bone Res
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/boneres.2014.15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced EGFR signaling enhances cartilage destruction in a mouse osteoarthritis model.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Zhu J, Liu F, Li Y, Chandra A, Levin LS, Beier F, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Qin L
**Journal:** Bone Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/boneres.2014.15](https://doi.org/10.1038/boneres.2014.15)

## Content

1. Bone Res. 2014 Aug 5;2:14015. doi: 10.1038/boneres.2014.15. eCollection 2014.

Reduced EGFR signaling enhances cartilage destruction in a mouse osteoarthritis 
model.

Zhang X(1), Zhu J(2), Liu F(3), Li Y(4), Chandra A(2), Levin LS(2), Beier F(5), 
Enomoto-Iwamoto M(6), Qin L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, PA, USA ; Department of Physiology, School of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Wuhan University , Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, PA, USA ; Department of Plastic and Reconstructive 
Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital , Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, PA, USA ; Shanghai Municipal Hospital of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine , Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario , London, ON, Canada.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, PA, USA ; Department of Surgery, The Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia , Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease and a major cause of pain 
and disability in older adults. We have previously identified epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) signaling as an important regulator of cartilage matrix 
degradation during epiphyseal cartilage development. To study its function in OA 
progression, we performed surgical destabilization of the medial meniscus (DMM) 
to induce OA in two mouse models with reduced EGFR activity, one with genetic 
modification (Egfr(Wa5/+) mice) and the other one with pharmacological 
inhibition (gefitinib treatment). Histological analyses and scoring at 3 months 
post-surgery revealed increased cartilage destruction and accelerated OA 
progression in both mouse models. TUNEL staining demonstrated that EGFR 
signaling protects chondrocytes from OA-induced apoptosis, which was further 
confirmed in primary chondrocyte culture. Immunohistochemistry showed increased 
aggrecan degradation in these mouse models, which coincides with elevated 
amounts of ADAMTS5 and matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13), the principle 
proteinases responsible for aggrecan degradation, in the articular cartilage 
after DMM surgery. Furthermore, hypoxia-inducible factor 2α (HIF2α), a critical 
catabolic transcription factor stimulating MMP13 expression during OA, was also 
upregulated in mice with reduced EGFR signaling. Taken together, our findings 
demonstrate a primarily protective role of EGFR during OA progression by 
regulating chondrocyte survival and cartilage degradation.

DOI: 10.1038/boneres.2014.15
PMCID: PMC4472123
PMID: 26120493