---
reference_id: "PMID:9743596"
title: "Antiproliferative effect of the tripeptide pyroGlu-Phe-GlyNH2 on murine melanocytes: transitory delay of cell growth in vitro and the cell cycle specificity."
authors:
- Gembitsky DS
- Reichelt KL
- Elgjo K
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1006/excr.1998.4164
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Cycle/drug effects
- Cell Division/drug effects
- Cell Line
- Growth Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Melanocytes/drug effects
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Oligopeptides/pharmacology
- "Pyrrolidonecarboxylic Acid/analogs & derivatives"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiproliferative effect of the tripeptide pyroGlu-Phe-GlyNH2 on murine melanocytes: transitory delay of cell growth in vitro and the cell cycle specificity.
**Authors:** Gembitsky DS, Reichelt KL, Elgjo K
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1006/excr.1998.4164](https://doi.org/10.1006/excr.1998.4164)

## Content

1. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Sep 15;243(2):367-74. doi: 10.1006/excr.1998.4164.

Antiproliferative effect of the tripeptide pyroGlu-Phe-GlyNH2 on murine 
melanocytes: transitory delay of cell growth in vitro and the cell cycle 
specificity.

Gembitsky DS(1), Reichelt KL, Elgjo K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Oslo School of Medicine, Oslo, N-0027, 
Norway. gembitsk@creighton.edu

Cell growth and differentiation in melanocyte cell populations are regulated by 
a wide range of bioactive substances. Recently, the tripeptide 
pyroGlu-Phe-GlyNH2 which inhibits melanocyte growth in vitro was identified in 
both murine nontransformed melanocytes and malignant melanoma cells. The present 
study was undertaken to investigate the cell cycle specificity as well as the 
growth inhibitory profile of the tripeptide after a single or repeated 
administration to melanocyte cultures. Dose-related effects of the peptide were 
studied using three different bioassay systems: estimation of cell number, DNA 
synthesis, and cell flux into mitosis. Growth of melanocyte cultures as well as 
melanocyte mitotic activity were found to be reduced significantly by the 
tripeptide at two separate dose levels (10(-11) and 10(-14)-10(-15) M). Growth 
inhibition of melanocyte population did not last long: less than 36 h after the 
first and less than 24 h after the second peptide addition to the cultures. The 
level of DNA synthesis in melanocytes remained unchanged after a single peptide 
administration. The findings indicate that the tripeptide pyroGlu-Phe-GlyNH2 
causes transitory delay of cell growth in cultured melanocyte population 
resulting from a reversible inhibition of melanocyte transition from the 
G2-phase of the cell cycle into mitosis.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/excr.1998.4164
PMID: 9743596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]