---
reference_id: "PMID:38928264"
title: "NF2-Related Schwannomatosis (NF2): Molecular Insights and Therapeutic Avenues."
authors:
- Kim BH
- Chung YH
- Woo TG
- Kang SM
- Park S
- Kim M
- Park BJ
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25126558
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neurofibromatoses/therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Neurofibromin 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neurilemmoma/genetics, therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "Neurofibromatosis 2/genetics, therapy, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NF2-Related Schwannomatosis (NF2): Molecular Insights and Therapeutic Avenues.
**Authors:** Kim BH, Chung YH, Woo TG, Kang SM, Park S, Kim M, Park BJ
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25126558](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25126558)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jun 14;25(12):6558. doi: 10.3390/ijms25126558.

NF2-Related Schwannomatosis (NF2): Molecular Insights and Therapeutic Avenues.

Kim BH(1), Chung YH(1), Woo TG(1), Kang SM(2), Park S(2), Kim M(1), Park 
BJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Rare Disease R&D Center, PRG S&T Co., Ltd., Busan 46274, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Science, Pusan National 
University, Busan 46241, Republic of Korea.

NF2-related schwannomatosis (NF2) is a genetic syndrome characterized by the 
growth of benign tumors in the nervous system, particularly bilateral vestibular 
schwannomas, meningiomas, and ependymomas. This review consolidates the current 
knowledge on NF2 syndrome, emphasizing the molecular pathology associated with 
the mutations in the gene of the same name, the NF2 gene, and the subsequent 
dysfunction of its product, the Merlin protein. Merlin, a tumor suppressor, 
integrates multiple signaling pathways that regulate cell contact, 
proliferation, and motility, thereby influencing tumor growth. The loss of 
Merlin disrupts these pathways, leading to tumorigenesis. We discuss the roles 
of another two proteins potentially associated with NF2 deficiency as well as 
Merlin: Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP), which may promote tumor growth, and Raf 
kinase inhibitory protein (RKIP), which appears to suppress tumor development. 
Additionally, this review discusses the efficacy of various treatments, such as 
molecular therapies that target specific pathways or inhibit neomorphic 
protein-protein interaction caused by NF2 deficiency. This overview not only 
expands on the fundamental understanding of NF2 pathophysiology but also 
explores the potential of novel therapeutic targets that affect the clinical 
approach to NF2 syndrome.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25126558
PMCID: PMC11204266
PMID: 38928264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Bae-Hoon Kim, Yeon-Ho Chung, Tae-Gyun Woo, Minju 
Kim and Bum-Joon Park are employees of PRG S&T Co., Ltd.