---
reference_id: "PMID:41333963"
title: "Idiopathic Facial Aseptic Granuloma: A Case Report."
authors:
- Patrocínio J
- Garrido PM
- Turpin S
- Dias Ó
- Fernandes S
journal: Cureus
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.95862
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idiopathic Facial Aseptic Granuloma: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Patrocínio J, Garrido PM, Turpin S, Dias Ó, Fernandes S
**Journal:** Cureus (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.95862](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.95862)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2025 Oct 31;17(10):e95862. doi: 10.7759/cureus.95862. eCollection 2025
 Oct.

Idiopathic Facial Aseptic Granuloma: A Case Report.

Patrocínio J(1), Garrido PM(1), Turpin S(2), Dias Ó(3), Fernandes S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Unidade Local de Saúde de Santa Maria, Lisbon, 
PRT.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hospital SAMS, Lisbon, PRT.
(3)Otorhinolaryngology Clinic, Hospital SAMS, Lisbon, PRT.

Idiopathic facial aseptic granuloma (IFAG), an exclusive pediatric dermatosis, 
is typically characterized by one or more asymptomatic erythematous nodules on 
the face. While its etiology remains elusive, there are suggestions that it 
could be a manifestation of childhood rosacea. This case report sheds light on a 
five-year-old male with an erythematous nodule on the right nasolabial fold, 
conclusively diagnosed as IFAG through histopathological examination. A detailed 
overview of the clinical approach, treatment, and outcome is presented, 
contributing valuable insights to the sparse literature on this rare condition.

Copyright © 2025, Patrocínio et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.95862
PMCID: PMC12665618
PMID: 41333963

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Informed consent for treatment 
and open access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this 
study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure 
form, all authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have 
declared that no financial support was received from any organization for the 
submitted work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they 
have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years 
with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.