---
reference_id: "PMID:20207111"
title: Extrinsic and intrinsic types of atopic dermatitis.
authors:
- Tokura Y
journal: J Dermatol Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.02.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extrinsic and intrinsic types of atopic dermatitis.
**Authors:** Tokura Y
**Journal:** J Dermatol Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.02.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.02.008)

## Content

1. J Dermatol Sci. 2010 Apr;58(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.02.008. Epub 
2010 Feb 16.

Extrinsic and intrinsic types of atopic dermatitis.

Tokura Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, 1-1 Iseigaoka, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan. 
tokura@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    J Dermatol Sci. 2011 Oct;64(1):79-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2011.07.001.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) can be categorized into the extrinsic and intrinsic 
types. Extrinsic or allergic AD shows high total serum IgE levels and the 
presence of specific IgE for environmental and food allergens, whereas intrinsic 
or non-allergic AD exhibits normal total IgE values and the absence of specific 
IgE. While extrinsic AD is the classical type with high prevalence, the 
incidence of intrinsic AD is approximately 20% with female predominance. The 
clinical features of intrinsic AD include relative late onset, milder severity, 
and Dennie-Morgan folds, but no ichthyosis vulgris or palmar hyperlinearity. The 
skin barrier is perturbed in the extrinsic, but not intrinsic type. Filaggrin 
gene mutations are not a feature of intrinsic AD. The intrinsic type is 
immunologically characterized by the lower expression of interleukin (IL) -4, 
IL-5, and IL-13, and the higher expression of interferon-gamma. It is suggested 
that intrinsic AD patients are not sensitized with protein allergens, which 
induce Th2 responses, but with other antigens, and metals might be one of the 
candidates of such antigens.

(c) 2010 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by Elsevier 
Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.02.008
PMID: 20207111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]