---
reference_id: "PMID:40975525"
title: Executive summary of the KDIGO 2025 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Immunoglobulin A Nephropathy (IgAN) and Immunoglobulin A Vasculitis (IgAV).
authors:
- Floege J
- Barratt J
- Cook HT
- Noronha IL
- Reich HN
- Suzuki Y
- Tang SCW
- Trimarchi H
- Balk EM
- Gordon CE
- Adam GP
- Tonelli MA
- Earley A
- Rovin BH
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2025.04.003
keywords:
- Humans
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/therapy, diagnosis, immunology, drug therapy"
- Immunoglobulin A/immunology
- "IgA Vasculitis/therapy, immunology, diagnosis"
- Biopsy
- Nephrology/standards
- Proteinuria
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Executive summary of the KDIGO 2025 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Immunoglobulin A Nephropathy (IgAN) and Immunoglobulin A Vasculitis (IgAV).
**Authors:** Floege J, Barratt J, Cook HT, Noronha IL, Reich HN, Suzuki Y, Tang SCW, Trimarchi H, Balk EM, Gordon CE, Adam GP, Tonelli MA, Earley A, Rovin BH
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2025.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2025.04.003)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2025 Oct;108(4):548-554. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2025.04.003.

Executive summary of the KDIGO 2025 Clinical Practice Guideline for the 
Management of Immunoglobulin A Nephropathy (IgAN) and Immunoglobulin A 
Vasculitis (IgAV).

Floege J(1), Barratt J(2), Cook HT(3), Noronha IL(4), Reich HN(5), Suzuki Y(6), 
Tang SCW(7), Trimarchi H(8), Balk EM(9), Gordon CE(10), Adam GP(9), Tonelli 
MA(11), Earley A(12), Rovin BH(13).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, University Hospital, Rheinisch-Westfälische 
Technische Hochschule (RWTH) Aachen, Aachen, Germany. Electronic address: 
jfloege@ukaachen.de.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, 
UK.
(3)Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Imperial College London, London, 
UK.
(4)Renal Division, University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Divsion of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, School of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(8)Division of Nephrology and Renal Transplantation, Hospital Británico de 
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(9)Center for Evidence Synthesis in Health, Brown University School of Public 
Health, Providence, Rhode Island, USA.
(10)Division of Nephrology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(11)Department of Medicine, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(12)KDIGO, Brussels, Belgium.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University College of 
Medicine, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

The Immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) and Immunoglobulin A vasculitis (IgAV) 
management guideline was last updated and published as part of the Kidney 
Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) 2021 Clinical Practice Guideline for 
the Management of Glomerular Diseases. Based on new developments in IgAN 
assessment and therapy, a major update of the guideline was necessary in 2024. 
Compared with the last version, the KDIGO 2025 IgAN guideline now encourages a 
more liberal kidney biopsy policy and suggests aiming for stricter proteinuria 
control, with a goal of <0.5 g/d, ideally <0.3 g/d, and a stable estimated 
glomerular filtration rate. A major new concept in the 2025 guideline is to 
initiate treatment with (i) therapies that prevent or reduce pathogenic IgA 
production and IgA/IgA and IgA/IgG immune complex formation along with (ii) 
therapies to manage the consequences of existing IgAN-induced nephron loss. 
Approaches to achieve the first aim are currently limited to targeted-release 
budesonide (Nefecon) or reduced-dose systemic corticosteroid therapy and, in 
Chinese patients, mycophenolate mofetil. Approaches to the more generic second 
aim include healthy lifestyle education, renin-angiotensin system blockers, 
sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors, and/or dual endothelin angiotensin 
receptor blockers. Little has changed for special situations of IgA-dominant 
immune complex glomerular diseases such as nephrotic syndrome, acute kidney 
injury, rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, and pregnancy in IgAN, or 
children with IgAN or IgAV, given the lack of major clinical trials in these 
patient populations. Here, we provide an executive summary of the most important 
changes in the KDIGO 2025 IgAN and IgAV guideline as a quick reference.

Copyright © 2025 Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2025.04.003
PMID: 40975525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]