---
reference_id: "PMID:27993576"
title: "Cancer-testis antigen expression in synovial sarcoma: NY-ESO-1, PRAME, MAGEA4, and MAGEA1."
authors:
- Iura K
- Maekawa A
- Kohashi K
- Ishii T
- Bekki H
- Otsuka H
- Yamada Y
- Yamamoto H
- Harimaya K
- Iwamoto Y
- Oda Y
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2016.12.006
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/analysis, genetics"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis, genetics"
- Biopsy
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling/methods
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- "Melanoma-Specific Antigens/analysis, genetics"
- "Membrane Proteins/analysis, genetics"
- Multivariate Analysis
- Necrosis
- "Neoplasm Proteins/analysis, genetics"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Risk Factors
- "Sarcoma, Synovial/genetics, immunology, pathology, therapy"
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/genetics, immunology, pathology, therapy"
- Time Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer-testis antigen expression in synovial sarcoma: NY-ESO-1, PRAME, MAGEA4, and MAGEA1.
**Authors:** Iura K, Maekawa A, Kohashi K, Ishii T, Bekki H, Otsuka H, Yamada Y, Yamamoto H, Harimaya K, Iwamoto Y, Oda Y
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2016.12.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2016.12.006)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2017 Mar;61:130-139. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2016.12.006. Epub 2016
 Dec 16.

Cancer-testis antigen expression in synovial sarcoma: NY-ESO-1, PRAME, MAGEA4,
and MAGEA1.

Iura K(1), Maekawa A(1), Kohashi K(2), Ishii T(1), Bekki H(1), Otsuka H(1),
Yamada Y(2), Yamamoto H(2), Harimaya K(3), Iwamoto Y(3), Oda Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(4)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. Electronic address:
oda@surgpath.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

Synovial sarcoma (SS) is regarded as a relatively chemosensitive sarcoma, but
the prognosis of advanced SSs remains poor. Here we identified highly expressed
cancer-testis antigens that could be promising immunotherapy targets for SS,
using a previously conducted cDNA microarray, and we assessed the
clinicopathological or prognostic relationships of these antigens in SS. We
compared the gene expression profiles of 11 SSs with those of 3 normal adipose
tissues. Among the up-regulated cancer-testis antigens, we analyzed PRAME,
MAGEA1, and MAGEA4 and another cancer-testis antigen (NY-ESO-1) together, by
immunohistochemistry and real-time polymerase chain reaction in 108 SSs.
Immunohistochemically, NY-ESO-1, PRAME, MAGEA4, and MAGEA1 were positive in 66
(61%), 93 (86%), 89 (82%), and 16 (15%) of 108 SSs, respectively, and 104 (96%)
of 108 SSs showed the immunohistochemical expression of at least 1 of NY-ESO-1,
PRAME, and MAGEA4. Moreover, the high expression of at least 1 of these 3
antigens was observed in 83% of the SSs. High expression of NY-ESO-1 and MAGEA4
was significantly correlated with the presence of necrosis and advanced clinical
stage. The immunohistochemical expression of these cancer-testis antigens was
not correlated with prognosis, but the coexpression of NY-ESO-1, PRAME, and
MAGEA4 was significantly associated with adverse prognosis. The real-time
polymerase chain reaction results were closely related to the
immunohistochemical results: NY-ESO-1 (P = .0019), PRAME (P = .039), MAGEA4 (P =
.0149), and MAGEA1 (P = .0766). These data support the potential utility of
NY-ESO-1, PRAME, and MAGEA4 as immunotherapy targets and ancillary prognostic
parameters, suggesting the possible benefit of the combined use of these
cancer-testis antigens as an SS immunotherapy target.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2016.12.006
PMID: 27993576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]