---
reference_id: "PMID:28148584"
title: "Psoriatic arthritis: state of the art review."
authors:
- Coates LC
- Helliwell PS
journal: Clin Med (Lond)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.7861/clinmedicine.17-1-65
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psoriatic arthritis: state of the art review.
**Authors:** Coates LC, Helliwell PS
**Journal:** Clin Med (Lond) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.7861/clinmedicine.17-1-65](https://doi.org/10.7861/clinmedicine.17-1-65)

## Content

1. Clin Med (Lond). 2017 Feb;17(1):65-70. doi: 10.7861/clinmedicine.17-1-65.

Psoriatic arthritis: state of the art review.

Coates LC(1), Helliwell PS(2).

Author information:
(1)Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Medicine, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, UK and Leeds Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Leeds 
Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK.
(2)Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Medicine, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, UK and Leeds Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Leeds 
Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK p.helliwell@leeds.ac.uk.

Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) accounts for around 20% of referrals to the early 
arthritis clinic and presents a significant diagnostic and management challenge. 
Early diagnosis is important to prevent long term functional disability and to 
ensure optimal management of arthritis and key comorbidities. From the 
rheumatologist's perspective, the differential diagnosis includes rheumatoid 
arthritis, gout and other inflammatory arthritides. Once diagnosed, it is 
essential to assess the disease fully, including arthritis, enthesitis, 
dactylitis, skin/nail disease and axial involvement. Using this information, 
appropriate treatment can be planned using therapies that are effective at 
treating the relevant domains of disease. Despite poor data, traditional 
disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs are commonly used and have been effective 
in observational studies. Following tumour necrosis factor inhibitors, which 
have proven excellent efficacy in multiple domains of PsA, new biologics are 
available or in development and will improve treatment options for people with 
refractory PsA.

© Royal College of Physicians 2017. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.7861/clinmedicine.17-1-65
PMCID: PMC6297592
PMID: 28148584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]