---
reference_id: "PMID:36603064"
title: BMPR2 Mutation and Metabolic Reprogramming in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
authors:
- Cuthbertson I
- Morrell NW
- Caruso P
journal: Circ Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.321554
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptors, Type II/genetics, metabolism"
- Endothelial Cells/metabolism
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/etiology"
- Mutation
- Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension/metabolism
- Pulmonary Artery/metabolism
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BMPR2 Mutation and Metabolic Reprogramming in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
**Authors:** Cuthbertson I, Morrell NW, Caruso P
**Journal:** Circ Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.321554](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.321554)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2023 Jan 6;132(1):109-126. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.321554. Epub
2023 Jan 5.

BMPR2 Mutation and Metabolic Reprogramming in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.

Cuthbertson I(1), Morrell NW(1), Caruso P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine,
Heart and Lung Research Institute, United Kingdom.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension forms the first and most severe of the 5
categories of pulmonary hypertension. Disease pathogenesis is driven by
progressive remodeling of peripheral pulmonary arteries, caused by the excessive
proliferation of vascular wall cells, including endothelial cells, smooth muscle
cells and fibroblasts, and perivascular inflammation. Compelling evidence from
animal models suggests endothelial cell dysfunction is a key initial trigger of
pulmonary vascular remodeling, which is characterised by hyperproliferation and
early apoptosis followed by enrichment of apoptosis-resistant populations.
Dysfunctional pulmonary arterial endothelial cells lose their ability to produce
vasodilatory mediators, together leading to augmented pulmonary arterial smooth
muscle cell responses, increased pulmonary vascular pressures and right
ventricular afterload, and progressive right ventricular hypertrophy and heart
failure. It is recognized that a range of abnormal cellular molecular signatures
underpin the pathophysiology of pulmonary arterial hypertension and are enhanced
by loss-of-function mutations in the BMPR2 gene, the most common genetic cause
of pulmonary arterial hypertension and associated with worse disease prognosis.
Widespread metabolic abnormalities are observed in the heart, pulmonary
vasculature, and systemic tissues, and may underpin heterogeneity in
responsivity to treatment. Metabolic abnormalities include hyperglycolytic
reprogramming, mitochondrial dysfunction, aberrant polyamine and sphingosine
metabolism, reduced insulin sensitivity, and defective iron handling. This
review critically discusses published mechanisms linking metabolic abnormalities
with dysfunctional BMPR2 (bone morphogenetic protein receptor 2) signaling;
hypothesized mechanistic links requiring further validation; and their relevance
to pulmonary arterial hypertension pathogenesis and the development of potential
therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.321554
PMID: 36603064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
