---
reference_id: "PMID:37274199"
title: "Clinical, radiological, therapeutic and prognostic differences between MOG-seropositive and MOG-seronegative pediatric acute disseminated encephalomyelitis patients: a retrospective cohort study."
authors:
- Dong X
- Jiang Y
- Yuan P
- Fan X
- Ma J
- Wu P
- Jiang L
- Li X
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1128422
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, radiological, therapeutic and prognostic differences between MOG-seropositive and MOG-seronegative pediatric acute disseminated encephalomyelitis patients: a retrospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Dong X, Jiang Y, Yuan P, Fan X, Ma J, Wu P, Jiang L, Li X
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2023.1128422](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2023.1128422)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2023 May 19;17:1128422. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1128422. 
eCollection 2023.

Clinical, radiological, therapeutic and prognostic differences between 
MOG-seropositive and MOG-seronegative pediatric acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis patients: a retrospective cohort study.

Dong X(1)(2)(3), Jiang Y(1)(2)(3), Yuan P(1)(2)(3), Fan X(2)(3)(4), Ma 
J(1)(2)(3), Wu P(1)(2)(3), Jiang L(1)(2)(3), Li X(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Ministry of 
Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing, China.
(2)China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Child 
Development and Critical Disorders, Chongqing, China.
(3)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Chongqing, China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Ministry of 
Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to compare the clinical, radiological, therapeutic, 
and prognostic differences between pediatric patients showing acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis (ADEM) with and without myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
(MOG) antibodies.
METHODS: We retrospectively collected all available data of children diagnosed 
with ADEM and tested for serum MOG antibodies at the Children's Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University from January 2017 to May 2021.
RESULTS: A total of 62 patients were included in our cohort, of which 35 were 
MOG-seropositive and 27 were MOG-seronegative. MOG-seropositive ADEM children 
presented with significantly lower rates of seizures (P = 0.038) and cranial 
nerve (III-XII) palsy (P = 0.003). Isolated leukocytosis in the blood was more 
common in ADEM children with MOG antibodies (P < 0.001). The two groups showed 
no significant differences in the distributions and extent of the MRI lesions as 
well as the appearance of typical/atypical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
features. MOG-seropositive children were more likely to relapse (P = 0.017) 
despite having slower oral prednisolone tapering after acute treatments (P = 
0.028). In scoring performed on the basis of two neurological function scoring 
systems, MOG-seropositive children showed milder neurological disability status 
at onset (P = 0.017 and 0.025, respectively) but showed no difference during 
follow-up.
CONCLUSION: In summary, the differences in the clinical manifestations and 
auxiliary examination findings for MOG-seropositive and MOG-seronegative ADEM 
children lacked significance and specificity, making early identification 
difficult. MOG-seropositive children were more likely to relapse and showed 
slower steroid tapering. Moreover, MOG-seronegative children tended to have more 
severe neurological impairments at onset with no difference during follow-up.

Copyright © 2023 Dong, Jiang, Yuan, Fan, Ma, Wu, Jiang and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1128422
PMCID: PMC10235790
PMID: 37274199

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.