---
reference_id: "PMID:30093684"
title: Schistosomiasis.
authors:
- McManus DP
- Dunne DW
- Sacko M
- Utzinger J
- Vennervald BJ
- Zhou XN
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-018-0013-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schistosomiasis.
**Authors:** McManus DP, Dunne DW, Sacko M, Utzinger J, Vennervald BJ, Zhou XN
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-018-0013-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-018-0013-8)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018 Aug 9;4(1):13. doi: 10.1038/s41572-018-0013-8.

Schistosomiasis.

McManus DP(1), Dunne DW(2), Sacko M(3), Utzinger J(4)(5), Vennervald BJ(6), Zhou 
XN(7).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Department, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Don.McManus@qimrberghofer.edu.au.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Diagnostic and Biomedical Research, Institut National de 
Recherche en Santé Publique, Bamako, Mali.
(4)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Veterinary and Animal Science, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Shanghai, People's Republic of 
China.

Schistosomiasis (bilharzia) is a neglected tropical disease caused by parasitic 
flatworms (blood flukes) of the genus Schistosoma, with considerable morbidity 
in parts of the Middle East, South America, Southeast Asia and, particularly, in 
sub-Saharan Africa. Infective larvae grow in an intermediate host (fresh-water 
snails) before penetrating the skin of the definitive human host. Mature adult 
worms reside in the mesenteric (Schistosoma mansoni and Schistosoma japonicum) 
or pelvic (Schistosoma haematobium) veins, where female worms lay eggs, which 
are secreted in stool or urine. Eggs trapped in the surrounding tissues and 
organs, such as the liver and bladder, cause inflammatory immune responses 
(including granulomas) that result in intestinal, hepato-splenic or urogenital 
disease. Diagnosis requires the detection of eggs in excreta or worm antigens in 
the serum, and sensitive, rapid, point-of-care tests for populations living in 
endemic areas are needed. The anti-schistosomal drug praziquantel is safe and 
efficacious against adult worms of all the six Schistosoma spp. infecting 
humans; however, it does not prevent reinfection and the emergence of drug 
resistance is a concern. Schistosomiasis elimination will require a multifaceted 
approach, including: treatment; snail control; information, education and 
communication; improved water, sanitation and hygiene; accurate diagnostics; and 
surveillance-response systems that are readily tailored to social-ecological 
settings.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-018-0013-8
PMID: 30093684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]