---
reference_id: "PMID:39408658"
title: In Silico Modeling of Fabry Disease Pathophysiology for the Identification of Early Cellular Damage Biomarker Candidates.
authors:
- Gervas-Arruga J
- Barba-Romero MÁ
- Fernández-Martín JJ
- Gómez-Cerezo JF
- Segú-Vergés C
- Ronzoni G
- Cebolla JJ
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms251910329
keywords:
- "Fabry Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Biomarkers
- Computer Simulation
- Machine Learning
- "Lamin Type A/metabolism, genetics"
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In Silico Modeling of Fabry Disease Pathophysiology for the Identification of Early Cellular Damage Biomarker Candidates.
**Authors:** Gervas-Arruga J, Barba-Romero MÁ, Fernández-Martín JJ, Gómez-Cerezo JF, Segú-Vergés C, Ronzoni G, Cebolla JJ
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms251910329](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms251910329)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Sep 25;25(19):10329. doi: 10.3390/ijms251910329.

In Silico Modeling of Fabry Disease Pathophysiology for the Identification of
Early Cellular Damage Biomarker Candidates.

Gervas-Arruga J(1), Barba-Romero MÁ(2)(3), Fernández-Martín JJ(4), Gómez-Cerezo
JF(5)(6), Segú-Vergés C(7), Ronzoni G(8), Cebolla JJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Takeda Development Center Americas Inc., Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Albacete University Hospital, 02006
Albacete, Spain.
(3)Albacete Medical School, Castilla-La Mancha University, 02006 Albacete,
Spain.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Álvaro Cunqueiro, 36312
Vigo, Spain.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Infanta Sofía University Hospital, 28702
Madrid, Spain.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, European University of Madrid, 28670 Madrid, Spain.
(7)Anaxomics Biotech S.L., 08007 Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Takeda Farmacéutica España S.A., 28046 Madrid, Spain.

Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked lysosomal disease whose ultimate consequences
are the accumulation of sphingolipids and subsequent inflammatory events, mainly
at the endothelial level. The outcomes include different nervous system
manifestations as well as multiple organ damage. Despite the availability of
known biomarkers, early detection of FD remains a medical need. This study aimed
to develop an in silico model based on machine learning to identify candidate
vascular and nervous system proteins for early FD damage detection at the
cellular level. A combined systems biology and machine learning approach was
carried out considering molecular characteristics of FD to create a
computational model of vascular and nervous system disease. A data science
strategy was applied to identify risk classifiers by using 10 K-fold
cross-validation. Further biological and clinical criteria were used to
prioritize the most promising candidates, resulting in the identification of 36
biomarker candidates with classifier abilities, which are easily measurable in
body fluids. Among them, we propose four candidates, CAMK2A, ILK, LMNA, and
KHSRP, which have high classification capabilities according to our models
(cross-validated accuracy ≥ 90%) and are related to the vascular and nervous
systems. These biomarkers show promise as high-risk cellular and tissue damage
indicators that are potentially applicable in clinical settings, although in
vivo validation is still needed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms251910329
PMCID: PMC11477023
PMID: 39408658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: G.R. and J.J.C. are full-time employees of
Takeda Farmacéutica España S.A. without stock options. J.G.-A. is full-time
employee of Takeda Development Center Americas Inc. and Takeda Pharmaceuticals
Company Limited stockholder. C.S.-V. is an employee of Anaxomics Biotech, S.L.
M.Á.B.-R., J.J.F.-M. and J.F.G.-C. have no conflicts of interest related to this
publication and have not received any compensation for the collaboration. The
authors declare that this research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the
collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the
manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.
