---
reference_id: "PMID:36937980"
title: Urea cycle disorders and indications for liver transplantation.
authors:
- García Vega M
- Andrade JD
- Morais A
- Frauca E
- Muñoz Bartolo G
- Lledín MD
- Bergua A
- Hierro L
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1103757
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urea cycle disorders and indications for liver transplantation.
**Authors:** García Vega M, Andrade JD, Morais A, Frauca E, Muñoz Bartolo G, Lledín MD, Bergua A, Hierro L
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2023.1103757](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.1103757)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Mar 3;11:1103757. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1103757. 
eCollection 2023.

Urea cycle disorders and indications for liver transplantation.

García Vega M(1), Andrade JD(2), Morais A(2), Frauca E(1), Muñoz Bartolo G(1), 
Lledín MD(1), Bergua A(2), Hierro L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hepatology & Liver Transplant, Hospital Universitario 
La Paz & IdiPAZ, ERN Rare-Liver, ERN Trasplant Child, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Pediatric Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, Hospital 
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

Urea cycle disorders (UCD) are inborn errors of metabolism caused by deficiency 
of enzymes required to convert nitrogen from ammonia into urea. Current 
paradigms of treatment focus on dietary manipulations, ammonia scavenger drugs, 
and liver transplantation. The aim of this study was to describe the 
characteristics and indication of liver transplantation in UCD in a tertiary 
hospital. We performed a retrospective study of children with UCD seen in the 
period 2000-2021. Data was collected on clinical onset, hyperammonemia severity, 
evolution and liver transplantation. There were 33 patients in the study period, 
whose diagnosis were: ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC, n = 20, 10 females), 
argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS, n = 6), carbamylphosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1, 
n = 4), argininosuccinate lyase (ASL, n = 2) and N-acetylglutamate synthetase 
(NAGS, n = 1) deficiency. Thirty one were detected because of clinical symptoms 
(45% with neonatal onset). The other 2 were diagnosed being presymptomatic, by 
neonatal/family screening. Neonatal forms (n = 14) were more severe, all of them 
presented during the first week of life as severe hyperammonemia (mean peak 
1,152 µmol/L). Seven patients died (6 at debut) and all survivors received 
transplantation. There was no mortality among the late forms. Of the 27 patients 
who did not die in the neonatal period, 16 (59%) received liver 
transplantationwith 100% survival, normal protein tolerance and usual need of 
citrulline supplementation. The transplant's metabolic success was accompanied 
by neurologic sequelae in 69%, but there was no progression of brain damage. 
Decision of continuous medical treatment in 11 patients appeared to be related 
with preserved neurodevelopment and fewer metabolic crises.

© 2023 García Vega, Andrade, Morais, Frauca, Muñoz Bartolo, Lledín, Bergua and 
Hierro.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.1103757
PMCID: PMC10020209
PMID: 36937980

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.