---
reference_id: "PMID:33305974"
title: Exhalation Delivery Systems for Application of Intranasal Corticosteroids.
authors:
- Kovacs AJ
- Adappa ND
- Kuan EC
journal: Ear Nose Throat J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/0145561320980194
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exhalation Delivery Systems for Application of Intranasal Corticosteroids.
**Authors:** Kovacs AJ, Adappa ND, Kuan EC
**Journal:** Ear Nose Throat J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0145561320980194](https://doi.org/10.1177/0145561320980194)

## Content

1. Ear Nose Throat J. 2021 Jun;100(5):309-313. doi: 10.1177/0145561320980194.
Epub  2020 Dec 11.

Exhalation Delivery Systems for Application of Intranasal Corticosteroids.

Kovacs AJ(1), Adappa ND(2), Kuan EC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, 8788University of 
California, Irvine, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, 6572University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is a common sinonasal disorder which 
results in significant inflammation in the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. 
Topical nasal steroids play an important role in the treatment of CRS. 
Exhalation delivery system with fluticasone (EDS-FLU) utilizes a patient's 
forced exhalation to power the delivery of topical steroids to deeper areas of 
the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses most affected by CRS. This review focuses 
on evidence surrounding the safety and efficacy of the EDS-FLU system.
METHODS: Literature search was conducted of articles investigating the safety 
and efficacy of EDS-FLU. Relevant efficacy and safety data were examined and 
summarized from the studies.
RESULTS: The efficacy and safety of EDS-FLU in CRS, both with and without 
polyps, has been established in open-label and placebo-controlled phase 3 
trials. There was significant improvement in the cardinal symptoms of CRS and 
subjective patient-reported outcomes scores. Additionally, there was objective 
improvement in sinonasal inflammation as measured by polyp grade. Recent studies 
have also established significant improvement in health status and general 
quality of life following treatment using EDS-FLU. Emerging data have also 
examined patients who have previously had endoscopic sinus surgery and on 
appropriate medical therapy and noted improvement in polyp burden and overall 
Lund-Kennedy scores after using EDS-FLU.
CONCLUSION: Exhalation delivery system with fluticasone demonstrates significant 
results in both patient-oriented outcomes and objective measures of sinonasal 
inflammation in patients with CRS with and without polyps. Further research is 
needed to investigate the long-term outcomes of EDS-FLU and to compare the 
effects of EDS-FLU with ESS. Exhalation delivery system with fluticasone 
provides an additional effective treatment modality for patients suffering from 
CRS.

DOI: 10.1177/0145561320980194
PMID: 33305974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]