---
reference_id: "PMID:39334417"
title: "Effectiveness and safety of canakinumab in cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome: a retrospective study in China."
authors:
- Zhu X
- Fan J
- Huang Y
- Xu Y
- Yang Z
- Weng R
- Luo Y
- Yang J
- He T
journal: Pediatr Rheumatol Online J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12969-024-01023-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes/drug therapy
- Male
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Retrospective Studies
- Female
- China
- Treatment Outcome
- C-Reactive Protein/analysis
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Serum Amyloid A Protein
- Infant
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness and safety of canakinumab in cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome: a retrospective study in China.
**Authors:** Zhu X, Fan J, Huang Y, Xu Y, Yang Z, Weng R, Luo Y, Yang J, He T
**Journal:** Pediatr Rheumatol Online J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12969-024-01023-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12969-024-01023-w)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2024 Sep 27;22(1):87. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-024-01023-w.

Effectiveness and safety of canakinumab in cryopyrin-associated periodic 
syndrome: a retrospective study in China.

Zhu X(#)(1), Fan J(#)(1), Huang Y(1), Xu Y(1), Yang Z(1), Weng R(1), Luo Y(1), 
Yang J(1), He T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Shenzhen Children's Hospital, 7019 
Yitian Road, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Shenzhen Children's Hospital, 7019 
Yitian Road, Shenzhen, China. hetingyan2017@outlook.com.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS) is characterized by 
excessive IL-1β release resulting in systemic and organ inflammation. As an 
anti-IL-1 agent, canakinumab has been approved with all CAPS phenotypes in USA 
and European countries. However, the use of canakinumab in CAPS in Chinese 
patients was rarely reported. In this study, we aimed to assess the 
effectiveness and safety of canakinumab in Chinese patients with CAPS.
METHODS: Patients with CAPS treated with canakinumab were included. Clinical 
data were collected retrospectively from medical records. Treatment response was 
evaluated by CAPS disease activity score, C-reactive protein (CRP), and/or serum 
amyloid A (SAA) levels. Data was analyzed at canakinumab initiation, at months 
1, 3, 6, 9, and 12, or the last follow-up.
RESULTS: A total of 10 CAPS patients were included. 40% of patients were males, 
the median age at disease onset was 2.5 (2.5, 6) days and the median duration of 
follow-up while on canakinumab was 22.5 (8.5, 27.5) months. 80% (8/10) of CAPS 
patients presented with moderate-severe disease activity before the canakinumab 
treatment. 30% (3/10) of patients required canakinumab dose increase to control 
disease activity. After treatments, 60% (6/10) of CAPS patients achieved 
complete remission without relapse and the rest showed minimal disease activity. 
Clinical symptoms such as fever and rash were improved significantly in most 
patients (80%). Although abnormal imaging in brain MRI remained in over half of 
those patients, neurological manifestations were all relieved. 60% (6/10) of 
patients received prednisone before starting canakinumab therapy and five of 
them discontinued prednisone later. The most common adverse event was infection 
(40%). No serious adverse events occurred during the treatment of canakinumab.
CONCLUSIONS: Canakinumab may be effective and tolerable for Chinese CAPS 
patients, helping to reduce the dosage of corticosteroids. However, additional 
trials on large samples are required to further evaluate its efficacy and safety 
in China.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-024-01023-w
PMCID: PMC11428461
PMID: 39334417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Patients accessed canakinumab 
on their own expenses and without any company participation.