---
reference_id: "PMID:32404319"
title: Lipotransfer provides effective soft tissue replacement for acquired partial lipodystrophy.
authors:
- Jeon FHK
- Griffin M
- Frosdick C
- Butler PEM
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2019-232601
keywords:
- Adipose Tissue/transplantation
- Autografts
- Face/surgery
- Female
- Humans
- Lipodystrophy/surgery
- Middle Aged
- Plastic Surgery Procedures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lipotransfer provides effective soft tissue replacement for acquired partial lipodystrophy.
**Authors:** Jeon FHK, Griffin M, Frosdick C, Butler PEM
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2019-232601](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2019-232601)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2020 May 12;13(5):e232601. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2019-232601.

Lipotransfer provides effective soft tissue replacement for acquired partial 
lipodystrophy.

Jeon FHK(1), Griffin M(2)(3), Frosdick C(3), Butler PEM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgery & Interventional Science, University College London, 
London, UK h.jeon@outlook.com.
(2)Division of Surgery & Interventional Science, University College London, 
London, UK.
(3)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Royal Free London NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.

We present a 48-year-old female patient who presented with features consistent 
with acquired partial lipodystrophy (APL) also known as 'Barraquer-Simons 
syndrome'. It is a rare disease characterised by a gradual and progressive onset 
of lipoatrophy limited to the face, neck, upper limbs, thorax and abdomen and 
sparing the lower extremities. The resultant physical appearance can have 
significant psychosocial sequelae, further compounded by misdiagnosis and delay 
in recognition and management. Treatment is aimed at surgical correction of soft 
tissue destruction. Autologous fat transfer is an established plastic and 
reconstructive procedure that is safe and minimally invasive and can be used to 
reconstruct a variety of soft tissue defects and has shown to be an effective 
treatment modality in patients with APL.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2019-232601
PMCID: PMC7228454
PMID: 32404319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.