---
reference_id: "PMID:29381136"
title: COX16 promotes COX2 metallation and assembly during respiratory complex IV biogenesis.
authors:
- Aich A
- Wang C
- Chowdhury A
- Ronsör C
- Pacheu-Grau D
- Richter-Dennerlein R
- Dennerlein S
- Rehling P
journal: Elife
year: '2018'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.32572
keywords:
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- Copper/metabolism
- Cyclooxygenase 1/metabolism
- Electron Transport Complex IV/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Mitochondrial Proteins/metabolism
- Molecular Chaperones
- Protein Binding
- Protein Multimerization
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COX16 promotes COX2 metallation and assembly during respiratory complex IV biogenesis.
**Authors:** Aich A, Wang C, Chowdhury A, Ronsör C, Pacheu-Grau D, Richter-Dennerlein R, Dennerlein S, Rehling P
**Journal:** Elife (2018)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.32572](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32572)

## Content

1. Elife. 2018 Jan 30;7:e32572. doi: 10.7554/eLife.32572.

COX16 promotes COX2 metallation and assembly during respiratory complex IV 
biogenesis.

Aich A(1), Wang C(1), Chowdhury A(1), Ronsör C(1), Pacheu-Grau D(1), 
Richter-Dennerlein R(1), Dennerlein S(1), Rehling P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, University Medical Centre Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

Cytochrome c oxidase of the mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation system 
reduces molecular oxygen with redox equivalent-derived electrons. The conserved 
mitochondrial-encoded COX1- and COX2-subunits are the heme- and copper-center 
containing core subunits that catalyze water formation. COX1 and COX2 initially 
follow independent biogenesis pathways creating assembly modules with 
subunit-specific, chaperone-like assembly factors that assist in redox centers 
formation. Here, we find that COX16, a protein required for cytochrome c oxidase 
assembly, interacts specifically with newly synthesized COX2 and its copper 
center-forming metallochaperones SCO1, SCO2, and COA6. The recruitment of SCO1 
to the COX2-module is COX16- dependent and patient-mimicking mutations in SCO1 
affect interaction with COX16. These findings implicate COX16 in CuA-site 
formation. Surprisingly, COX16 is also found in COX1-containing assembly 
intermediates and COX2 recruitment to COX1. We conclude that COX16 participates 
in merging the COX1 and COX2 assembly lines.

© 2018, Aich et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.32572
PMCID: PMC5809144
PMID: 29381136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AA, CW, AC, CR, DP, RR, SD, PR No competing 
interests declared