---
reference_id: "PMID:41235131"
title: Expanding the Phenotype Spectrum of β-Mannosidosis.
authors:
- Martin Rios AM
- Gibbs LH
- Stepien KM
- Hall K
- Hall PL
- Bentz Pino G
- Wang RY
- Pillai NR
- Lund T
- Orchard PJ
- Kimonis VE
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200317
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the Phenotype Spectrum of β-Mannosidosis.
**Authors:** Martin Rios AM, Gibbs LH, Stepien KM, Hall K, Hall PL, Bentz Pino G, Wang RY, Pillai NR, Lund T, Orchard PJ, Kimonis VE
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200317](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200317)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2025 Nov 7;11(6):e200317. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200317. 
eCollection 2025 Dec.

Expanding the Phenotype Spectrum of β-Mannosidosis.

Martin Rios AM(1), Gibbs LH(2), Stepien KM(3), Hall K(1)(4), Hall PL(5), Bentz 
Pino G(5), Wang RY(6)(7), Pillai NR(8), Lund T(9), Orchard PJ(9), Kimonis 
VE(1)(4)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of California, 
Irvine, Orange, CA.
(2)Department of Radiological Sciences, School of Medicine, University of 
California, Irvine, Orange, CA.
(3)Adult Inherited Metabolic Diseases Department, Salford Royal Organization, 
Northern Care Alliance NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, United Kingdom.
(4)CHOC Children's Hospital, Orange, CA.
(5)Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Division of Laboratory Genetics and 
Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(6)Division of Metabolic Disorders CHOC Children's Hospital, Orange, CA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of California-Irvine School of Medicine, 
Irvine, CA.
(8)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(9)Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(10)Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, Orange, CA; and.
(11)Department of Pathology, University of California, Irvine, Orange, CA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: β-mannosidosis is an ultra-rare lysosomal storage 
disorder caused by a deficiency of β-mannosidase, which catalyzes the last step 
of glycoprotein degradation. Owing to the limited number of reported cases, 
information on the natural history of the disease and brain imaging is scarce. 
We report 6 new cases and review them together with all the previously reported 
cases in the literature.
METHODS: We describe the clinical features of 6 unrelated patients with 
β-mannosidosis, their variants in MANBA, enzyme activity, urine oligosaccharide 
profiles, brain MRI findings, and longitudinal MRI changes in 2 of them. We also 
review previously reported patients to broaden the spectrum of clinical features 
and identify genotype-phenotype correlations.
RESULTS: Developmental regression, dysphagia, obsessive-compulsive-like 
behavior, and erythromelalgia are newly described features associated with 
β-mannosidosis among the 6 patients from our cohort. Nystagmus in association 
with β-mannosidosis was also found in 1 patient. Half the patients have abnormal 
brain MRIs, showing delayed myelination before 2 years of age and diffuse 
hypomyelination thereafter. A new oligosaccharide was found in the urine of the 
2 most severely affected patients. Including our 6 patients, a total of 46 cases 
from 37 different families have been reported. The mean age of diagnosis is 12.8 
years, and the mean age of symptom onset is 2.4 years. Hearing loss was the 
initial symptom most frequently reported, and intellectual disability was the 
most frequent symptom overall. Across the cohort, 29 pathogenic MANBA variants 
were identified, 61.8% were private, and 38.2% have the recurrent c.2158-2A>G 
variant. Neuroimaging abnormalities were reported in 40% of published cases and 
included cortical and subcortical atrophy, basal ganglia and white matter 
calcification, hydrocephalus, periventricular and subcortical white matter 
hyperintensities, and delayed myelination.
DISCUSSION: Genotype-phenotype correlation in β-mannosidosis remains elusive, 
likely due to phenotypic variability, disease rarity, and lack of association 
between the enzyme activity and the clinical severity. Modifier genes in the 
N-glycan degradation pathway, such as CTBS, may influence disease expression. 
β-mannosidosis should be considered as a differential diagnosis in patients with 
syndromic or apparently nonsyndromic hearing loss, unexplained brain 
hypomyelination, behavioral disturbances, and intellectual disability.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200317
PMCID: PMC12608049
PMID: 41235131

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/NG for full disclosures.