---
reference_id: "PMID:37108447"
title: "Immune-Mediated Neuropathies: Pathophysiology and Management."
authors:
- Shastri A
- Al Aiyan A
- Kishore U
- Farrugia ME
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24087288
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune-Mediated Neuropathies: Pathophysiology and Management.
**Authors:** Shastri A, Al Aiyan A, Kishore U, Farrugia ME
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24087288](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24087288)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 14;24(8):7288. doi: 10.3390/ijms24087288.

Immune-Mediated Neuropathies: Pathophysiology and Management.

Shastri A(1), Al Aiyan A(2), Kishore U(2), Farrugia ME(3).

Author information:
(1)Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust, London NW1 3AX, UK.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, UAE University, Al Ain P.O. Box 15551, 
United Arab Emirates.
(3)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Southern General 
Hospital, Glasgow G51 4TF, UK.

Dysfunction of the immune system can result in damage of the peripheral nervous 
system. The immunological mechanisms, which include macrophage infiltration, 
inflammation and proliferation of Schwann cells, result in variable degrees of 
demyelination and axonal degeneration. Aetiology is diverse and, in some cases, 
may be precipitated by infection. Various animal models have contributed and 
helped to elucidate the pathophysiological mechanisms in acute and chronic 
inflammatory polyradiculoneuropathies (Guillain-Barre Syndrome and chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy, respectively). The presence 
of specific anti-glycoconjugate antibodies indicates an underlying process of 
molecular mimicry and sometimes assists in the classification of these 
disorders, which often merely supports the clinical diagnosis. Now, the 
electrophysiological presence of conduction blocks is another important factor 
in characterizing another subgroup of treatable motor neuropathies (multifocal 
motor neuropathy with conduction block), which is distinct from Lewis-Sumner 
syndrome (multifocal acquired demyelinating sensory and motor neuropathy) in its 
response to treatment modalities as well as electrophysiological features. 
Furthermore, paraneoplastic neuropathies are also immune-mediated and are the 
result of an immune reaction to tumour cells that express onconeural antigens 
and mimic molecules expressed on the surface of neurons. The detection of 
specific paraneoplastic antibodies often assists the clinician in the 
investigation of an underlying, sometimes specific, malignancy. This review aims 
to discuss the immunological and pathophysiological mechanisms that are thought 
to be crucial in the aetiology of dysimmune neuropathies as well as their 
individual electrophysiological characteristics, their laboratory features and 
existing treatment options. Here, we aim to present a balance of discussion from 
these diverse angles that may be helpful in categorizing disease and 
establishing prognosis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24087288
PMCID: PMC10139406
PMID: 37108447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.