---
reference_id: "PMID:32114588"
title: The Role of Urinary Calcium and Chitotriosidase in a Cohort of Chronic Sarcoidosis Patients.
authors:
- Cameli P
- Gonnelli S
- Bargagli E
- "d'Alessandro M"
- Bergantini L
- Favetta V
- Tomai Pitinca MD
- Lisi E
- Refini RM
- Pieroni M
- Sestini P
- Caffarelli C
journal: Respiration
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000505653
keywords:
- "Absorptiometry, Photon"
- Adult
- Aged
- Bone Density
- Calcium/metabolism
- Creatinine/metabolism
- Female
- Forced Expiratory Volume
- Hexosaminidases/blood
- Humans
- Hypercalcemia/metabolism
- Hypercalciuria/metabolism
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A/blood
- Phosphates/metabolism
- Pulmonary Diffusing Capacity
- "Radiography, Thoracic"
- Respiratory Function Tests
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sarcoidosis/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Vital Capacity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Urinary Calcium and Chitotriosidase in a Cohort of Chronic Sarcoidosis Patients.
**Authors:** Cameli P, Gonnelli S, Bargagli E, d'Alessandro M, Bergantini L, Favetta V, Tomai Pitinca MD, Lisi E, Refini RM, Pieroni M, Sestini P, Caffarelli C
**Journal:** Respiration (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000505653](https://doi.org/10.1159/000505653)

## Content

1. Respiration. 2020;99(3):207-212. doi: 10.1159/000505653. Epub 2020 Feb 28.

The Role of Urinary Calcium and Chitotriosidase in a Cohort of Chronic
Sarcoidosis Patients.

Cameli P(1), Gonnelli S(2), Bargagli E(3), d'Alessandro M(3), Bergantini L(3),
Favetta V(3), Tomai Pitinca MD(2), Lisi E(4), Refini RM(3), Pieroni M(3),
Sestini P(3), Caffarelli C(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Diseases and Lung Transplantation, Department of Medicine,
Surgery and Neurosciences, Siena University Hospital, Siena, Italy,
paolocameli88@gmail.com.
(2)Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neurosciences, Siena
University Hospital, Siena, Italy.
(3)Respiratory Diseases and Lung Transplantation, Department of Medicine,
Surgery and Neurosciences, Siena University Hospital, Siena, Italy.
(4)Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Calcium metabolism alterations are quite common in sarcoidosis and
have been correlated with disease activity.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to investigate the clinical significance of
calcium metabolism alterations in patients with chronic sarcoidosis. We paid
particular attention to associations with specific disease phenotypes and
chitotriosidase (CTO) expression.
METHODS: 212 chronic sarcoidosis patients (mean age 56.07 ± 12 years; 97 males)
were retrospectively recruited. Demographic, clinical, functional, and
radiological data, and serum-urinary calcium metabolism were entered into an
electronical database for analysis. Levels of CTO and angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) were measured and bone mineral density and lung function tests were
conducted.
RESULTS: Hypercalciuria and hypercalcemia were observed in 18.8 and 1.8% of
patients, respectively. Urinary calcium levels correlated with CTO activity (r =
0.33, p = 0.0042). Patients with worsening persistent disease showed the highest
levels of urinary calcium. Diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide
(DLCO) percentage correlated inversely with urinary calcium (r = 0.1482; p =
0.0397).
CONCLUSIONS: Calcium metabolism alteration, particularly hypercalciuria, was
observed in a significant percentage of patients of sarcoidosis. Urinary calcium
was correlated with clinical status, DLCO, and serum CTO activity, suggesting
its potential role as a biomarker of the activity and severity of sarcoidosis.

© 2020 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000505653
PMID: 32114588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
