---
reference_id: "PMID:28426424"
title: cDNA library construction of two human Demodexspecies.
authors:
- Niu D
- Wang R
- Zhao Y
- Yang R
- Hu L
- Lei Y
- Dan W
journal: Acta Parasitol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1515/ap-2017-0043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# cDNA library construction of two human Demodexspecies.
**Authors:** Niu D, Wang R, Zhao Y, Yang R, Hu L, Lei Y, Dan W
**Journal:** Acta Parasitol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1515/ap-2017-0043](https://doi.org/10.1515/ap-2017-0043)

## Content

1. Acta Parasitol. 2017 Jun 1;62(2):354-376. doi: 10.1515/ap-2017-0043.

cDNA library construction of two human Demodexspecies.

Niu D(1), Wang R(1), Zhao Y(1), Yang R(1), Hu L(1), Lei Y(1), Dan W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061.

The research of Demodex, a type of pathogen causing various dermatoses in 
animals and human beings, is lacking at RNA level. This study aims at extracting 
RNA and constructing cDNA library for Demodex. First, P. cuniculiand D. 
farinaewere mixed to establish homogenization method for RNA extraction. Second, 
D. folliculorumand D. breviswere collected and preserved in Trizol, which were 
mixed with D. farinaerespectively to extract RNA. Finally, cDNA library was 
constructed and its quality was assessed. The results indicated that for D. 
folliculorum& D. farinae, the recombination rate of cDNA library was 90.67% and 
the library titer was 7.50 × 104 pfu/ml. 17 of the 59 positive clones were 
predicted to be of D. folliculorum; For D. brevis& D. farinae, the recombination 
rate was 90.96% and the library titer was 7.85 x104 pfu/ml. 40 of the 59 
positive clones were predicted to be of D. brevis. Further detection by specific 
primers demonstrated that mtDNA cox1, cox3and ATP6 detected from cDNA libraries 
had 96.52%-99.73% identities with the corresponding sequences in GenBank. In 
conclusion, the cDNA libraries constructed for Demodexmixed with D. farinaewere 
successful and could satisfy the requirements for functional genes detection.

DOI: 10.1515/ap-2017-0043
PMID: 28426424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]