---
reference_id: "PMID:25873734"
title: Minichromosome maintenance complex component 8 (MCM8) gene mutations result in primary gonadal failure.
authors:
- Tenenbaum-Rakover Y
- Weinberg-Shukron A
- Renbaum P
- Lobel O
- Eideh H
- Gulsuner S
- Dahary D
- Abu-Rayyan A
- Kanaan M
- Levy-Lahad E
- Bercovich D
- Zangen D
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102921
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alleles
- Chromosomal Instability
- Chromosome Breakage
- Chromosome Mapping
- Consanguinity
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- Exome
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- "Gonadal Disorders/diagnosis, genetics"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Minichromosome Maintenance Complex Component 8/genetics
- Mutation
- Ovary/metabolism
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- RNA Splice Sites
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Minichromosome maintenance complex component 8 (MCM8) gene mutations result in primary gonadal failure.
**Authors:** Tenenbaum-Rakover Y, Weinberg-Shukron A, Renbaum P, Lobel O, Eideh H, Gulsuner S, Dahary D, Abu-Rayyan A, Kanaan M, Levy-Lahad E, Bercovich D, Zangen D
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102921](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102921)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2015 Jun;52(6):391-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102921. Epub
2015  Apr 14.

Minichromosome maintenance complex component 8 (MCM8) gene mutations result in 
primary gonadal failure.

Tenenbaum-Rakover Y(1), Weinberg-Shukron A(2), Renbaum P(3), Lobel O(2), Eideh 
H(4), Gulsuner S(5), Dahary D(6), Abu-Rayyan A(7), Kanaan M(7), Levy-Lahad E(2), 
Bercovich D(8), Zangen D(9).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Ha'Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel The Rappaport 
Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel 
Hebrew University Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Palestinian Medical Complex, Ramallah, USA.
(5)Departments of Medicine (Medical Genetics) and Genome Sciences, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(6)Toldot Genetics Ltd., Hod Hasharon, Israel.
(7)Hereditary Research Laboratory, Bethlehem University, Bethlehem, Palestine.
(8)Tel Hai College and GGA (Galilee Genetic Analysis lab), Tel Hai, Israel.
(9)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical 
Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Primary gonadal failure is characterised by primary amenorrhoea or 
early menopause in females, and oligospermia or azoospermia in males. Variants 
of the minichromosome maintenance complex component 8 gene (MCM8) have recently 
been shown to be significantly associated with women's menopausal age in 
genome-wide association studies. Furthermore, MCM8-knockout mice are sterile. 
The objective of this study was to elucidate the genetic aetiology of gonadal 
failure in two consanguineous families presenting as primary amenorrhoea in the 
females and as small testes and azoospermia in a male.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using whole exome sequencing, we identified two novel 
homozygous mutations in the MCM8 gene: a splice (c.1954-1G>A) and a frameshift 
(c.1469-1470insTA). In each consanguineous family the mutation segregated with 
the disease and both mutations were absent in 100 ethnically matched controls. 
The splice mutation led to lack of the wild-type transcript and three different 
aberrant transcripts predicted to result in either truncated or significantly 
shorter proteins. Quantitative analysis of the aberrantly spliced transcripts 
showed a significant decrease in total MCM8 message in affected homozygotes for 
the mutation, and an intermediate decrease in heterozygous family members. 
Chromosomal breakage following exposure to mitomcyin C was significantly 
increased in cells from homozygous individuals for c.1954-1G>A, as well as 
c.1469-1470insTA.
CONCLUSIONS: MCM8, a component of the pre-replication complex, is crucial for 
gonadal development and maintenance in humans-both males and females. These 
findings provide new insights into the genetic disorders of infertility and 
premature menopause in women.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102921
PMID: 25873734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]