---
reference_id: "PMID:27659143"
title: Immune and Pancreatic β Cell Interactions in Type 1 Diabetes.
authors:
- Boldison J
- Wong FS
journal: Trends Endocrinol Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2016.08.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune and Pancreatic β Cell Interactions in Type 1 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Boldison J, Wong FS
**Journal:** Trends Endocrinol Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tem.2016.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2016.08.007)

## Content

1. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Dec;27(12):856-867. doi: 
10.1016/j.tem.2016.08.007. Epub 2016 Sep 19.

Immune and Pancreatic β Cell Interactions in Type 1 Diabetes.

Boldison J(1), Wong FS(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University School of Medicine, 
Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.
(2)Division of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University School of Medicine, 
Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK. Electronic address: WongFS@Cardiff.ac.uk.

The autoimmune destruction of the pancreatic islet β cells is due to a targeted 
lymphocyte attack. Different T cell subsets communicate with each other and with 
the insulin-producing β cells in this process, with evidence not only of damage 
to the tissue cells but also of lymphocyte regulation. Here we explore the 
various components of the immune response as well as the cellular interactions 
that are involved in causing or reducing immune damage to the β cells. We 
consider these in the light of the possibility that understanding them may help 
us identify therapeutic targets to reduce the damage and destruction leading to 
type 1 diabetes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tem.2016.08.007
PMID: 27659143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]