---
reference_id: "PMID:21412769"
title: "Malignant mesothelioma: facts, myths, and hypotheses."
authors:
- Carbone M
- Ly BH
- Dodson RF
- Pagano I
- Morris PT
- Dogan UA
- Gazdar AF
- Pass HI
- Yang H
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/jcp.22724
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant mesothelioma: facts, myths, and hypotheses.
**Authors:** Carbone M, Ly BH, Dodson RF, Pagano I, Morris PT, Dogan UA, Gazdar AF, Pass HI, Yang H
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.22724](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.22724)

## Content

1. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jan;227(1):44-58. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22724.

Malignant mesothelioma: facts, myths, and hypotheses.

Carbone M(1), Ly BH, Dodson RF, Pagano I, Morris PT, Dogan UA, Gazdar AF, Pass 
HI, Yang H.

Author information:
(1)University of Hawaii Cancer Center, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii 
96813, USA. mcarbone@crch.hawaii.edu

Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a neoplasm arising from mesothelial cells lining 
the pleural, peritoneal, and pericardial cavities. Over 20 million people in the 
US are at risk of developing MM due to asbestos exposure. MM mortality rates are 
estimated to increase by 5-10% per year in most industrialized countries until 
about 2020. The incidence of MM in men has continued to rise during the past 50 
years, while the incidence in women appears largely unchanged. It is estimated 
that about 50-80% of pleural MM in men and 20-30% in women developed in 
individuals whose history indicates asbestos exposure(s) above that expected 
from most background settings. While rare for women, about 30% of peritoneal 
mesothelioma in men has been associated with exposure to asbestos. Erionite is a 
potent carcinogenic mineral fiber capable of causing both pleural and peritoneal 
MM. Since erionite is considerably less widespread than asbestos, the number of 
MM cases associated with erionite exposure is smaller. Asbestos induces DNA 
alterations mostly by inducing mesothelial cells and reactive macrophages to 
secrete mutagenic oxygen and nitrogen species. In addition, asbestos 
carcinogenesis is linked to the chronic inflammatory process caused by the 
deposition of a sufficient number of asbestos fibers and the consequent release 
of pro-inflammatory molecules, especially HMGB-1, the master switch that starts 
the inflammatory process, and TNF-alpha by macrophages and mesothelial cells. 
Genetic predisposition, radiation exposure and viral infection are co-factors 
that can alone or together with asbestos and erionite cause MM. J. Cell. 
Physiol. 227: 44-58, 2012. © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.22724
PMCID: PMC3143206
PMID: 21412769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]