---
reference_id: "PMID:27162746"
title: Dracunculiasis in oral and maxillofacial surgery.
authors:
- Kim SM
journal: J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg
year: '2016'
doi: 10.5125/jkaoms.2016.42.2.67
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dracunculiasis in oral and maxillofacial surgery.
**Authors:** Kim SM
**Journal:** J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg (2016)
**DOI:** [10.5125/jkaoms.2016.42.2.67](https://doi.org/10.5125/jkaoms.2016.42.2.67)

## Content

1. J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2016 Apr;42(2):67-76. doi: 
10.5125/jkaoms.2016.42.2.67. Epub 2016 Apr 27.

Dracunculiasis in oral and maxillofacial surgery.

Kim SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Microvascular Reconstruction Lab, Sunyani Regional 
Hospital, Sunyani, Brong Ahafo, Ghana.; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial 
Surgery, Dental Research Institute, School of Dentistry, Seoul National 
University, Seoul, Korea.

Dracunculiasis, otherwise known as guinea worm disease (GWD), is caused by 
infection with the nematode Dracunculus medinensis. This nematode is transmitted 
to humans exclusively via contaminated drinking water. The transmitting vectors 
are Cyclops copepods (water fleas), which are tiny free-swimming crustaceans 
usually found abundantly in freshwater ponds. Humans can acquire GWD by drinking 
water that contains vectors infected with guinea worm larvae. This disease is 
prevalent in some of the most deprived areas of the world, and no vaccine or 
medicine is currently available. International efforts to eradicate 
dracunculiasis began in the early 1980s. Most dentists and maxillofacial 
surgeons have neglected this kind of parasite infection. However, when 
performing charitable work in developing countries near the tropic lines or 
other regions where GWD is endemic, it is important to consider GWD in cases of 
swelling or tumors of unknown origin. This paper reviews the pathogenesis, 
epidemiology, clinical criteria, diagnostic criteria, treatment, and prevention 
of dracunculiasis. It also summarizes important factors for maxillofacial 
surgeons to consider.

DOI: 10.5125/jkaoms.2016.42.2.67
PMCID: PMC4860382
PMID: 27162746

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.