---
reference_id: "PMID:37238646"
title: "Mice Mutated in the Third Fibronectin Domain of L1 Show Enhanced Hippocampal Neuronal Cell Death, Astrogliosis and Alterations in Behavior."
authors:
- Congiu L
- Granato V
- Jakovcevski I
- Kleene R
- Fernandes L
- Freitag S
- Kneussel M
- Schachner M
- Loers G
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biom13050776
keywords:
- Animals
- Female
- Male
- Mice
- "Fibronectins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gliosis/metabolism
- Hippocampus/metabolism
- "Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule L1/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mice Mutated in the Third Fibronectin Domain of L1 Show Enhanced Hippocampal Neuronal Cell Death, Astrogliosis and Alterations in Behavior.
**Authors:** Congiu L, Granato V, Jakovcevski I, Kleene R, Fernandes L, Freitag S, Kneussel M, Schachner M, Loers G
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom13050776](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13050776)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2023 Apr 29;13(5):776. doi: 10.3390/biom13050776.

Mice Mutated in the Third Fibronectin Domain of L1 Show Enhanced Hippocampal 
Neuronal Cell Death, Astrogliosis and Alterations in Behavior.

Congiu L(1), Granato V(1), Jakovcevski I(2), Kleene R(1), Fernandes L(1), 
Freitag S(1), Kneussel M(1), Schachner M(3), Loers G(1).

Author information:
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Falkenried 94, 20251 Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Institut für Anatomie und Klinische Morphologie, Universität Witten/Herdecke, 
58455 Witten, Germany.
(3)Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience, Department of Cell Biology and 
Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08554, USA.

Adhesion molecules play major roles in cell proliferation, migration, survival, 
neurite outgrowth and synapse formation during nervous system development and in 
adulthood. The neural cell adhesion molecule L1 contributes to these functions 
during development and in synapse formation and synaptic plasticity after trauma 
in adulthood. Mutations of L1 in humans result in L1 syndrome, which is 
associated with mild-to-severe brain malformations and mental disabilities. 
Furthermore, mutations in the extracellular domain were shown to cause a severe 
phenotype more often than mutations in the intracellular domain. To explore the 
outcome of a mutation in the extracellular domain, we generated mice with 
disruption of the dibasic sequences RK and KR that localize to position 
858RKHSKR863 in the third fibronectin type III domain of murine L1. These mice 
exhibit alterations in exploratory behavior and enhanced marble burying 
activity. Mutant mice display higher numbers of caspase 3-positive neurons, a 
reduced number of principle neurons in the hippocampus, and an enhanced number 
of glial cells. Experiments suggest that disruption of the dibasic sequence in 
L1 results in subtle impairments in brain structure and functions leading to 
obsessive-like behavior in males and reduced anxiety in females.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13050776
PMCID: PMC10216033
PMID: 37238646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.