---
reference_id: "PMID:21836034"
title: Epstein-Barr virus and multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Lucas RM
- Hughes AM
- Lay ML
- Ponsonby AL
- Dwyer DE
- Taylor BV
- Pender MP
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2011-300174
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epstein-Barr virus and multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Lucas RM, Hughes AM, Lay ML, Ponsonby AL, Dwyer DE, Taylor BV, Pender MP
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2011-300174](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2011-300174)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011 Oct;82(10):1142-8. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2011-300174. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Epstein-Barr virus and multiple sclerosis.

Lucas RM(1), Hughes AM, Lay ML, Ponsonby AL, Dwyer DE, Taylor BV, Pender MP.

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, The Australian 
National University, Canberra, Australia. robyn.lucas@anu.edu.au

This review of the considerable evidence linking Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) 
infection to risk and disease progression in multiple sclerosis (MS) builds on 
the background to the virus and its interactions with the human host available 
in the online supplement (see supplement, available online only). The evidence 
for a similarity in the geographic patterns of occurrence of MS and EBV 
infection (with infectious mononucleosis or EBV specific serology used as 
surrogate markers), when reviewed critically, is very limited. There is strong 
evidence however that people with MS are more likely to report a past history of 
infectious mononucleosis (thought to represent initial EBV infection at an older 
age), and higher titres of EBV specific antibodies are associated with an 
increased risk of developing MS. Elevated levels of the latter are apparent many 
years before MS onset (compared with non-MS controls) and there is a 
dose-response relationship between MS risk and antibody titre, with antibodies 
to the EBV nuclear antigen-1 particularly important. The evidence in relation to 
EBV DNA load in blood or CSF is conflicting, as is that in relation to T cell 
responses to EBV. Several hypotheses that have been proposed to explain the 
links between EBV and MS risk are reviewed and gaps requiring further research 
are identified.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2011-300174
PMID: 21836034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]