---
reference_id: "PMID:34715835"
title: "Clinical spectrum and predictors of severity of dengue among children in 2019 outbreak: a multicenter hospital-based study in Bangladesh."
authors:
- Khan MAS
- Al Mosabbir A
- Raheem E
- Ahmed A
- Rouf RR
- Hasan M
- Alam FB
- Hannan N
- Yesmin S
- Amin R
- Ahsan N
- Anwar S
- Afroza S
- Hossain MS
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-021-02947-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical spectrum and predictors of severity of dengue among children in 2019 outbreak: a multicenter hospital-based study in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Khan MAS, Al Mosabbir A, Raheem E, Ahmed A, Rouf RR, Hasan M, Alam FB, Hannan N, Yesmin S, Amin R, Ahsan N, Anwar S, Afroza S, Hossain MS
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-021-02947-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-021-02947-y)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2021 Oct 29;21(1):478. doi: 10.1186/s12887-021-02947-y.

Clinical spectrum and predictors of severity of dengue among children in 2019 
outbreak: a multicenter hospital-based study in Bangladesh.

Khan MAS(1), Al Mosabbir A(1), Raheem E(1), Ahmed A(1), Rouf RR(1), Hasan M(1), 
Alam FB(2), Hannan N(1), Yesmin S(3), Amin R(4), Ahsan N(5), Anwar S(6), Afroza 
S(7), Hossain MS(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emerging and Neglected Diseases, Biomedical Research 
Foundation, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Sir Salimullah Medical College and Mitford Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(3)Medicine Unit 1, BIRDEM, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Medicine, Dhaka Medical College & Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(5)Department of Medicine, Shaheed Suhrawardy Medical College & Hospital, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Dhaka Medical College & Hospital, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, MH Samorita Hospital and Medical College, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.
(8)Department of Emerging and Neglected Diseases, Biomedical Research 
Foundation, Dhaka, Bangladesh. sorowar.hossain@brfbd.org.
(9)School of Environment and Life Sciences, Independent University, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh. sorowar.hossain@brfbd.org.

BACKGROUND: The mosquito-borne arboviral disease dengue has become a global 
public health concern. However, very few studies have reported atypical clinical 
features of dengue among children. Because an understanding of various spectrums 
of presentation of dengue is necessary for timely diagnosis and management, we 
aimed to document the typical and atypical clinical features along with 
predictors of severity among children with dengue during the largest outbreak in 
Bangladesh in 2019.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study between August 15 and September 
30, 2019. in eight tertiary level hospitals in Dhaka city. Children (aged 
< 15 years) with serologically confirmed dengue were conveniently selected for 
data collection through a structured questionnaire. Descriptive, inferential 
statistics, and multivariable logistic regression were used to analyze data.
RESULTS: Among the 190 children (mean age 8.8 years, and male-female ratio 
1.22:1) included in the analysis, respectively 71.1 and 28.9% children had 
non-severe and severe dengue. All children had fever with an average temperature 
of 103.3 ± 1.2 F (SD). Gastrointestinal symptoms were the most common associated 
feature, including mostly vomiting (80.4%), decreased appetite (79.5%), 
constipation (72.7%), and abdominal pain (64.9%). Mouth sore, a less reported 
feature besides constipation, was present in 28.3% of children. Atypical 
clinical features were mostly neurological, with confusion (21.3%) being the 
predominant symptom. Frequent laboratory abnormalities were thrombocytopenia 
(87.2%), leucopenia (40.4%), and increased hematocrit (13.4%). Age (AOR 0.86, 
95%CI 0.75-0.98, p = 0.023), mouth sore (AOR 2.69, 95%CI 1.06-6.96, p = 0.038) 
and a decreased platelet count (< 50,000/mm3) with increased hematocrit (> 20%) 
(AOR 4.94, 95%CI 1.48-17.31, p = 0.01) were significant predictors of severity.
CONCLUSIONS: Dengue in children was characterized by a high severity, 
predominance of gastrointestinal symptoms, and atypical neurological 
presentations. Younger age, mouth sores, and a decreased platelet with increased 
hematocrit were significant predictors of severity. Our findings would 
contribute to the clinical management of dengue in children.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-021-02947-y
PMCID: PMC8555185
PMID: 34715835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.