---
reference_id: "PMID:32361678"
title: Kinase inhibitors in the treatment of obstructive pulmonary diseases.
authors:
- Defnet AE
- Hasday JD
- Shapiro P
journal: Curr Opin Pharmacol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2020.03.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kinase inhibitors in the treatment of obstructive pulmonary diseases.
**Authors:** Defnet AE, Hasday JD, Shapiro P
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pharmacol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coph.2020.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coph.2020.03.005)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2020 Apr;51:11-18. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2020.03.005. Epub 
2020 Apr 30.

Kinase inhibitors in the treatment of obstructive pulmonary diseases.

Defnet AE(1), Hasday JD(2), Shapiro P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland School of 
Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD, 21201, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland School of 
Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD, 21201, United States. Electronic address: 
pshapiro@rx.umaryland.edu.

Chronic pulmonary diseases, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) and asthma, are major causes of death and reduced quality of life. 
Characteristic of chronic pulmonary disease is excessive lung inflammation that 
occurs in response to exposure to inhaled irritants, chemicals, and allergens. 
Chronic inflammation leads to remodeling of the airways that includes excess 
mucus secretion, proliferation of smooth muscle cells, increased deposition of 
extracellular matrix proteins and fibrosis. Protein kinases have been implicated 
in mediating inflammatory signals and airway remodeling associated with reduced 
lung function in chronic pulmonary disease. This review will highlight the role 
of protein kinases in the lung during chronic inflammation and examine 
opportunities to use protein kinase inhibitors for the treatment of chronic 
pulmonary diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coph.2020.03.005
PMCID: PMC8504404
PMID: 32361678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest statement Nothing 
declared.