---
reference_id: "PMID:38733954"
title: Prognostic factors of 87 ovarian yolk sac tumor (OYST) patients and molecular characteristics of persistent and recurrent OYST.
authors:
- Liang S
- Ge H
- Zhou S
- Tang J
- Gu Y
- Wu X
- Li J
journal: Gynecol Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.05.001
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Adult
- Retrospective Studies
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/genetics, pathology"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, blood"
- Middle Aged
- "Endodermal Sinus Tumor/genetics, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- Exome Sequencing
- Mutation
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic factors of 87 ovarian yolk sac tumor (OYST) patients and molecular characteristics of persistent and recurrent OYST.
**Authors:** Liang S, Ge H, Zhou S, Tang J, Gu Y, Wu X, Li J
**Journal:** Gynecol Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.05.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.05.001)

## Content

1. Gynecol Oncol. 2024 Aug;187:64-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.05.001. Epub 2024
 May 10.

Prognostic factors of 87 ovarian yolk sac tumor (OYST) patients and molecular 
characteristics of persistent and recurrent OYST.

Liang S(1), Ge H(2), Zhou S(2), Tang J(1), Gu Y(2), Wu X(3), Li J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecological Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer 
Center, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China; Department of Oncology, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 
200032, China; Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 
Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(3)Department of Gynecological Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer 
Center, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China; Department of Oncology, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. Electronic 
address: docwuxh@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Gynecological Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer 
Center, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China; Department of Oncology, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. Electronic 
address: dr.jinli@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to explore the characteristics of OYST, particularly for 
persistent and recurrent OYST, in order to explore potential treatment options 
and thereby improve patient outcomes.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the clinical records of all patients with 
OYST at Fudan university Shanghai Cancer Center from December 3, 2005 to 
November 27, 2020. Furthermore, and performed whole-exome sequencing on 17 
paired OYST (including 8 paired persistent and recurrent OYST) tumor and blood 
samples to elucidate the aberrant molecular features.
RESULTS: Totally, 87 OYST patients were included between 2007/03/13 and 
2020/11/17. With a median follow-up of 73 [3-189] months, 22 patients relapsed 
or disease persisted. Overall, 17 patients died with a median overall survival 
of 21 [3-54] months. Univariate and multivariate analysis revealed tumor 
histology and residual lesions were independently associated with event free 
survival and overall survival, cycles to AFP normalization were another 
independent risk factor for overall survival. For the 8 persistent and recurrent 
OYST: cancer driver genes including ANKRD36, ANKRD62, DNAH8, MUC5B, NUP205, 
RYR2, STARD9, MUC16, TTN, ARID1A and PIK3CA were frequently mutated; cell cycle, 
ABC transporters, HR, NHEJ and AMPK signal pathway demonstrated as the most 
significantly enriched pathways; TMB, DNA MMR gene mutation and MSI were 
significantly higher. Mutation signature 11, 19 and 30 were the dominant 
contributors in persistent and recurrent OYST mutation.
CONCLUSION: Persistent and recurrent OYST associated with poor prognosis, and 
probably susceptible to immune checkpoint blockade therapy. Molecular 
characteristics contributed to predict the persistence and recurrence of OYST.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.05.001
PMID: 38733954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
report no conflict of interest.