---
reference_id: "PMID:10339581"
title: "Mutations in HYAL1, a member of a tandemly distributed multigene family encoding disparate hyaluronidase activities, cause a newly described lysosomal disorder, mucopolysaccharidosis IX."
authors:
- Triggs-Raine B
- Salo TJ
- Zhang H
- Wicklow BA
- Natowicz MR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.11.6296
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Binding Sites
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3"
- DNA Transposable Elements
- Female
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- Humans
- "Hyaluronoglucosaminidase/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- Leukocytes/enzymology
- Lysosomes/enzymology
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mucopolysaccharidoses/blood, enzymology, genetics"
- Multigene Family
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Sequence Alignment
- Sequence Deletion
- "Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid"
- Spermatozoa/enzymology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in HYAL1, a member of a tandemly distributed multigene family encoding disparate hyaluronidase activities, cause a newly described lysosomal disorder, mucopolysaccharidosis IX.
**Authors:** Triggs-Raine B, Salo TJ, Zhang H, Wicklow BA, Natowicz MR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.11.6296](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.11.6296)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 May 25;96(11):6296-300. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.96.11.6296.

Mutations in HYAL1, a member of a tandemly distributed multigene family encoding 
disparate hyaluronidase activities, cause a newly described lysosomal disorder, 
mucopolysaccharidosis IX.

Triggs-Raine B(1), Salo TJ, Zhang H, Wicklow BA, Natowicz MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, MB R3E OW3, Canada. traine@ms.umanitoba.ca

Hyaluronan (HA), a large glycosaminoglycan abundant in the extracellular matrix, 
is important in cell migration during embryonic development, cellular 
proliferation, and differentiation and has a structural role in connective 
tissues. The turnover of HA requires endoglycosidic breakdown by lysosomal 
hyaluronidase, and a congenital deficiency of hyaluronidase has been thought to 
be incompatible with life. However, a patient with a deficiency of serum 
hyaluronidase, now designated as mucopolysaccharidosis IX, was recently 
described. This patient had a surprisingly mild clinical phenotype, including 
notable periarticular soft tissue masses, mild short stature, an absence of 
neurological or visceral involvement, and histological and ultrastructural 
evidence of a lysosomal storage disease. To determine the molecular basis of 
mucopolysaccharidosis IX, we analyzed two candidate genes tandemly distributed 
on human chromosome 3p21.3 and encoding proteins with homology to a sperm 
protein with hyaluronidase activity. These genes, HYAL1 and HYAL2, encode two 
distinct lysosomal hyaluronidases with different substrate specificities. We 
identified two mutations in the HYAL1 alleles of the patient, a 1412G --> A 
mutation that introduces a nonconservative amino acid substitution (Glu268Lys) 
in a putative active site residue and a complex intragenic rearrangement, 
1361del37ins14, that results in a premature termination codon. We further show 
that these two hyaluronidase genes, as well as a third recently discovered 
adjacent hyaluronidase gene, HYAL3, have markedly different tissue expression 
patterns, consistent with differing roles in HA metabolism. These data provide 
an explanation for the unexpectedly mild phenotype in mucopolysaccharidosis IX 
and predict the existence of other hyaluronidase deficiency disorders.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.11.6296
PMCID: PMC26875
PMID: 10339581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]