---
reference_id: "PMID:14977076"
title: "Horizontal vestibulo-ocular reflex dynamics in acute vestibular neuritis and viral labyrinthitis: evidence of otolith-canal interaction."
authors:
- Maire R
- Van Melle G
journal: Acta Otolaryngol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1080/00016480310015272
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Horizontal vestibulo-ocular reflex dynamics in acute vestibular neuritis and viral labyrinthitis: evidence of otolith-canal interaction.
**Authors:** Maire R, Van Melle G
**Journal:** Acta Otolaryngol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00016480310015272](https://doi.org/10.1080/00016480310015272)

## Content

1. Acta Otolaryngol. 2004 Jan;124(1):36-40. doi: 10.1080/00016480310015272.

Horizontal vestibulo-ocular reflex dynamics in acute vestibular neuritis and 
viral labyrinthitis: evidence of otolith-canal interaction.

Maire R(1), Van Melle G.

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Neurotology Unit, University 
Hospital Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Raphael.Maire@chuv.hospvd.ch

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the dynamic properties of the horizontal vestibulo-ocular 
reflex (h-VOR) in the acute stage of two common labyrinthine diseases that 
provoke severe attacks of vertigo with spontaneous nystagmus: vestibular 
neuritis (vestibular loss alone) and viral labyrinthitis (cochleovestibular 
loss).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Sixty-three patients were investigated: 42 were diagnosed 
with vestibular neuritis and 21 with viral labyrinthitis. The h-VOR function was 
evaluated by conventional caloric and impulsive testing. A simplified model of 
vestibular function was used to analyze the vestibulo-ocular response to 
rotational stimulation.
RESULTS: The results showed a significant difference in h-VOR characteristics 
between the two pathologies. Patients with vestibular neuritis exhibited a 
strong horizontal semicircular canal deficit, but no h-VOR asymmetry between the 
two rotational directions. In contrast, patients with viral labyrinthitis 
demonstrated moderate canal paresis and a marked h-VOR deficit in rotation 
toward the affected ear.
CONCLUSION: These findings support the hypothesis that the h-VOR dynamic 
asymmetry that occurs after an acute unilateral inner ear lesion is not due to 
canal dysfunction alone, but involves complex adaptive changes in the central 
VOR that may implicate the otolith system. Based on histopathologic and clinical 
differences in the two pathologies reported in the literature, we postulate that 
this otolith-canal interaction is mainly linked to the loss of saccular 
function.

DOI: 10.1080/00016480310015272
PMID: 14977076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]