---
reference_id: PMID:40059635
title: Radiotherapy results in decreased time to second cancer in children with Li Fraumeni syndrome.
authors:
- Woodward ER
- Kilday JP
- Ng S
- Kelsey A
- Evans DGR
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/djaf057
keywords:
- Humans
- "Li-Fraumeni Syndrome/radiotherapy, complications, genetics"
- Child
- Female
- "Neoplasms, Second Primary/epidemiology, etiology, prevention & control, mortality"
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiotherapy results in decreased time to second cancer in children with Li Fraumeni syndrome.
**Authors:** Woodward ER, Kilday JP, Ng S, Kelsey A, Evans DGR
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/djaf057](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djaf057)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2025 Oct 1;117(10):2120-2123. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djaf057.

Radiotherapy results in decreased time to second cancer in children with Li 
Fraumeni syndrome.

Woodward ER(1)(2)(3), Kilday JP(4), Ng S(2), Kelsey A(4), Evans DGR(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Evolution, Infection and Genomic Sciences, Faculty of Biology, 
Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(3)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Li Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) arising from germline TP53 mutation results in 
defective DNA repair and increased risk of multiple primary cancers beginning in 
childhood. Curative intent radiotherapy is often used to treat childhood cancer, 
but its impact on children with LFS has not been reviewed. We undertook a 
retrospective case-series review of 47 children with a solid cancer diagnosed 
age less than 16 years to assess time and survival after second cancer 
diagnosis. After radiotherapy for the first cancer diagnosis, median time to 
second primary cancer diagnosis was 13.3 years and median survival 9.7 years. 
Where no radiotherapy was received, median time to second primary cancer 
diagnosis was 25.1 years (χ2 = 14.8, P < .0001; Hazard Ratio = 7.9 [95% CI = 2.8 
to 22.6]), and median survival of 29.2 years (χ2 = 12.5, P = .004, Hazard 
Ratio = 3.2 [95% CI = 1.5 to 6.6]). Radiotherapy for first cancer in children 
with LFS is associated with adverse outcomes and ought to be considered only in 
the absence of other potentially curative options. Where unavoidable, second 
cancer risks must be minimized.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djaf057
PMCID: PMC12505129
PMID: 40059635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.