---
reference_id: "PMID:35791863"
title: Biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs to treat multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
authors:
- Cron RQ
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000889
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs to treat multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
**Authors:** Cron RQ
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000889](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000889)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2022 Sep 1;34(5):274-279. doi: 
10.1097/BOR.0000000000000889. Epub 2022 Jul 5.

Biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs to treat multisystem inflammatory 
syndrome in children.

Cron RQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Rheumatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham 
Heersink School of Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a 
postinfectious complication of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) infection primarily affecting children. MIS-C shares features with 
Kawasaki disease (KD) and cytokine storm syndrome (CSS) frequently requiring 
intensive care support. Although intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) and 
glucocorticoids (GCs) are effective therapeutics for most, refractory MIS-C is 
treated with various biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (bDMARDs). 
Understanding the clinical features, inflammatory cytokines, and genetic 
associations provides rationale for bDMARD in treating severe MIS-C.
RECENT FINDINGS: Children with MIS-C have clinical KD features and often present 
in hypovolemic and cardiogenic shock requiring volume repletion 
(gastrointestinaI losses) and cardiac pressor support (epinephrine). 
Investigation of MIS-C serum reveals elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines 
[interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-18, interferon gamma (IFNγ), tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)], but to a lesser extent than other established CSS. Gene sequencing of 
MIS-C children identifies heterozygous mutations in CSS associated genes. 
Treatment of refractory (IVIg and GC) MIS-C with bDMARDs to IL-1, IL-6, and TNF 
is efficacious for survival as well as resolving cardiac and coronary artery 
inflammation.
SUMMARY: MIS-C is a postinfectious complication of SARS-CoV-2 resembling KD and 
CSS, both genetically and by pro-inflammatory cytokines. MIS-C that is 
refractory to IVIg and GC is routinely responsive to bDMARDs targeting IL-1, 
IL-6, and TNF.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000889
PMID: 35791863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]