---
reference_id: "PMID:34776077"
title: The Heart Muscle and Valve Involvement in Marfan Syndrome, Loeys-Dietz Syndromes, and Collagenopathies.
authors:
- Fusco A
- Mauriello A
- Lioncino M
- Palmiero G
- Fratta F
- Granato C
- Cirillo A
- Caiazza M
- Monda E
- Credendino A
- Signore G
- Natale F
- Chiosi F
- Scarano G
- Della Corte A
- Nistri S
- Russo MG
- Limongelli G
- Pepe G
journal: Heart Fail Clin
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2021.07.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Heart Muscle and Valve Involvement in Marfan Syndrome, Loeys-Dietz Syndromes, and Collagenopathies.
**Authors:** Fusco A, Mauriello A, Lioncino M, Palmiero G, Fratta F, Granato C, Cirillo A, Caiazza M, Monda E, Credendino A, Signore G, Natale F, Chiosi F, Scarano G, Della Corte A, Nistri S, Russo MG, Limongelli G, Pepe G
**Journal:** Heart Fail Clin (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hfc.2021.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hfc.2021.07.007)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Clin. 2022 Jan;18(1):165-175. doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2021.07.007. Epub 
2021 Oct 25.

The Heart Muscle and Valve Involvement in Marfan Syndrome, Loeys-Dietz 
Syndromes, and Collagenopathies.

Fusco A(1), Mauriello A(1), Lioncino M(1), Palmiero G(1), Fratta F(1), Granato 
C(2), Cirillo A(1), Caiazza M(1), Monda E(1), Credendino A(3), Signore G(1), 
Natale F(1), Chiosi F(4), Scarano G(1), Della Corte A(1), Nistri S(5), Russo 
MG(1), Limongelli G(1), Pepe G(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi 
Vanvitelli", Naples 80131, Italy.
(2)Grupo de Enfermedades Cardiovasculares, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca 
(VHIR), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Orthopaedics, AORN dei Colli, Monaldi Hospital.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Azienda Ospedaliera dei Colli AORN Monaldi, 
Naples 80100, Italy.
(5)Cardiology Service, CMSR Veneto Medica, Altavilla Vicentina, Italy.
(6)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, CRR 
Tuscany Marfan Center, Florence, Italy. Electronic address: 
guglielmina.pepe@unifi.it.

The inherited connective tissue disorders (Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome 
[LDS], and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome [EDS]) involve connective tissue of various 
organ systems. These pathologies share many common features, nonetheless 
compared to Marfan syndrome, LDS' cardiovascular manifestations tend to be more 
severe. In contrast, no association is reported between LDS and the presence of 
ectopia lentis. The EDS are currently classified into thirteen subtypes. There 
is substantial symptoms overlap between the EDS subtypes, and they are 
associated with an increased incidence of cardiovascular abnormalities, such as 
mitral valve prolapse and aortic dissection.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hfc.2021.07.007
PMID: 34776077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have nothing to disclose.