---
reference_id: "PMID:34531539"
title: Identifying transcriptional programs underlying cancer drug response with TraCe-seq.
authors:
- Chang MT
- Shanahan F
- Nguyen TTT
- Staben ST
- Gazzard L
- Yamazoe S
- Wertz IE
- Piskol R
- Yang YA
- Modrusan Z
- Haley B
- Evangelista M
- Malek S
- Foster SA
- Ye X
journal: Nat Biotechnol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41587-021-01005-3
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "ErbB Receptors/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Single-Cell Analysis/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identifying transcriptional programs underlying cancer drug response with TraCe-seq.
**Authors:** Chang MT, Shanahan F, Nguyen TTT, Staben ST, Gazzard L, Yamazoe S, Wertz IE, Piskol R, Yang YA, Modrusan Z, Haley B, Evangelista M, Malek S, Foster SA, Ye X
**Journal:** Nat Biotechnol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41587-021-01005-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-021-01005-3)

## Content

1. Nat Biotechnol. 2022 Jan;40(1):86-93. doi: 10.1038/s41587-021-01005-3. Epub
2021  Sep 16.

Identifying transcriptional programs underlying cancer drug response with
TraCe-seq.

Chang MT(1)(2), Shanahan F(2), Nguyen TTT(1), Staben ST(3), Gazzard L(3),
Yamazoe S(3)(4), Wertz IE(2)(5), Piskol R(1), Yang YA(6), Modrusan Z(6), Haley
B(7), Evangelista M(2), Malek S(2), Foster SA(8), Ye X(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Genentech Inc., South
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Discovery Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA,
USA.
(3)Department of Discovery Chemistry, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA,
USA.
(4)Discovery Biotherapeutics, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Redwood City, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Early Discovery Biochemistry, Genentech Inc., South San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Microchemistry, Proteomics and Lipidomics, Genentech Inc.,
South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA,
USA.
(8)Department of Discovery Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA,
USA. foster.scott@gene.com.
(9)Department of Discovery Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA,
USA. ye.xin@gene.com.

Genetic and non-genetic heterogeneity within cancer cell populations represent
major challenges to anticancer therapies. We currently lack robust methods to
determine how preexisting and adaptive features affect cellular responses to
therapies. Here, by conducting clonal fitness mapping and transcriptional
characterization using expressed barcodes and single-cell RNA sequencing
(scRNA-seq), we have developed tracking differential clonal response by
scRNA-seq (TraCe-seq). TraCe-seq is a method that captures at clonal resolution
the origin, fate and differential early adaptive transcriptional programs of
cells in a complex population in response to distinct treatments. We used
TraCe-seq to benchmark how next-generation dual epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) inhibitor-degraders compare to standard EGFR kinase inhibitors in
EGFR-mutant lung cancer cells. We identified a loss of antigrowth activity
associated with targeted degradation of EGFR protein and an essential role of
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) protein processing pathway in anti-EGFR
therapeutic efficacy. Our results suggest that targeted degradation is not
always superior to enzymatic inhibition and establish TraCe-seq as an approach
to study how preexisting transcriptional programs affect treatment responses.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41587-021-01005-3
PMID: 34531539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
