---
reference_id: "PMID:33602010"
title: Neuropathology of primary lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Mackenzie IRA
journal: Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/21678421.2020.1837173
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathology of primary lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Mackenzie IRA
**Journal:** Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21678421.2020.1837173](https://doi.org/10.1080/21678421.2020.1837173)

## Content

1. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2020 Nov;21(sup1):47-51. doi: 
10.1080/21678421.2020.1837173.

Neuropathology of primary lateral sclerosis.

Mackenzie IRA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Published descriptions of the neuropathology of clinically defined primary 
lateral sclerosis (PLS) are reviewed in order to clarify the pathogenesis and 
the relationship between PLS and classical amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). 
Degeneration of the primary motor cortex and corticospinal tracts with 
preservation of lower motor neurons (LMN) has been reported in most cases. 
Studies that employed immunohistochemistry found ubiquitin and/or 
TDP-43-positive neuronal inclusions in the motor cortex and often in the 
extramotor neocortex. Ubiquitin/TDP-43-immunoreactive inclusions in LMN have 
been reported in just over half of cases; however, these have never been 
numerous. The finding of TDP-43 pathology in most cases indicates that PLS and 
ALS are closely related conditions; however, the fact that cases of PLS 
consistently show minimal involvement of LMN suggests that PLS represents a 
distinct entity, rather than an early stage of ALS.

DOI: 10.1080/21678421.2020.1837173
PMID: 33602010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]