---
reference_id: "PMID:37471493"
title: "The collective burden of childhood dementia: a scoping review."
authors:
- Elvidge KL
- Christodoulou J
- Farrar MA
- Tilden D
- Maack M
- Valeri M
- Ellis M
- Smith NJC
- Childhood Dementia Working Group
journal: Brain
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awad242
keywords:
- Child
- Adolescent
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
- Cost of Illness
- Prevalence
- Dementia/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The collective burden of childhood dementia: a scoping review.
**Authors:** Elvidge KL, Christodoulou J, Farrar MA, Tilden D, Maack M, Valeri M, Ellis M, Smith NJC, Childhood Dementia Working Group
**Journal:** Brain (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awad242](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad242)

## Content

1. Brain. 2023 Nov 2;146(11):4446-4455. doi: 10.1093/brain/awad242.

The collective burden of childhood dementia: a scoping review.

Elvidge KL(1), Christodoulou J(2)(3), Farrar MA(4)(5), Tilden D(6), Maack M(1), 
Valeri M(6), Ellis M(6), Smith NJC(7)(8); Childhood Dementia Working Group.

Collaborators: Thorburn DR, Hilton G, Van Velsen E, Cini D, Davis B, Webster R, 
Ellaway CJ, Inwood A.

Author information:
(1)Childhood Dementia Initiative, Brookvale, NSW 2100, Australia.
(2)Brain and Mitochondrial Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research 
Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Neurology, Sydney Children's Hospital Network, Randwick, NSW 
2031, Australia.
(5)Discipline of Paediatrics, School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW Medicine and 
Health, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.
(6)THEMA Consulting Pty Ltd, Pyrmont, NSW 2009, Australia.
(7)Discipline of Paediatrics, University of Adelaide, Women's and Children's 
Hospital, North Adelaide, South Australia 5006, Australia.
(8)Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, Women's and Children's 
Health Network, North Adelaide, South Australia 5006, Australia.

Childhood dementia is a devastating and under-recognized group of disorders with 
a high level of unmet need. Typically monogenic in origin, this collective of 
individual neurodegenerative conditions are defined by a progressive impairment 
of neurocognitive function, presenting in childhood and adolescence. This 
scoping review aims to clarify definitions and conceptual boundaries of 
childhood dementia and quantify the collective disease burden. A literature 
review identified conditions that met the case definition. An expert clinical 
working group reviewed and ratified inclusion. Epidemiological data were 
extracted from published literature and collective burden modelled. One hundred 
and seventy genetic childhood dementia disorders were identified. Of these, 25 
were analysed separately as treatable conditions. Collectively, currently 
untreatable childhood dementia was estimated to have an incidence of 34.5 per 
100 000 (1 in 2900 births), median life expectancy of 9 years and prevalence of 
5.3 per 100 000 persons. The estimated number of premature deaths per year is 
similar to childhood cancer (0-14 years) and approximately 70% of those deaths 
will be prior to adulthood. An additional 49.8 per 100 000 births are 
attributable to treatable conditions that would cause childhood dementia if not 
diagnosed early and stringently treated. A relational database of the childhood 
dementia disorders has been created and will be continually updated as new 
disorders are identified (https://knowledgebase.childhooddementia.org/). We 
present the first comprehensive overview of monogenic childhood dementia 
conditions and their collective epidemiology. Unifying these conditions, with 
consistent language and definitions, reinforces motivation to advance 
therapeutic development and health service supports for this significantly 
disadvantaged group of children and their families.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awad242
PMCID: PMC10629766
PMID: 37471493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K.L.E., M.M. and G.H. are current employees of 
Childhood Dementia Initiative. N.J.C.S., M.A.F. and J.C. are non-pecuniary 
members of the Scientific and Medical Advisory Committee for the Childhood 
Dementia Initiative.