---
reference_id: "PMID:11069504"
title: The prevalence and clinical characteristics of pruritus among patients with extensive psoriasis.
authors:
- Yosipovitch G
- Goon A
- Wee J
- Chan YH
- Goh CL
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2133.2000.03829.x
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Antipruritics/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pruritus/drug therapy, etiology"
- Psoriasis/complications
- Quality of Life
- Risk Factors
- Sensation
- Severity of Illness Index
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Treatment Failure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prevalence and clinical characteristics of pruritus among patients with extensive psoriasis.
**Authors:** Yosipovitch G, Goon A, Wee J, Chan YH, Goh CL
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2133.2000.03829.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2133.2000.03829.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2000 Nov;143(5):969-73. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2133.2000.03829.x.

The prevalence and clinical characteristics of pruritus among patients with
extensive psoriasis.

Yosipovitch G(1), Goon A, Wee J, Chan YH, Goh CL.

Author information:
(1)National Skin Centre, 1 Mandalay Road, Singapore 308205Clinical Trials and
Epidemiology Research Unit, National Medical Research Council, Ministry of
Health, Singapore. gil@nsc.gov.sg

BACKGROUND: Many patients with psoriasis are known to suffer from itch. However,
the data available regarding itch and its characteristics in psoriasis are
sparse.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the prevalence of pruritus and various related clinical
characteristics in 101 patients with extensive psoriasis.
METHODS: A structured questionnaire was used.
RESULTS: Generalized pruritus was a feature of psoriasis in 84% of the patients.
In 77% of these it appeared on a daily basis. It involved all areas of the body,
had prolonged duration and appeared mainly in the evening and at night. The
pruritus significantly affected quality of life. Important daily factors that
were found to exacerbate the itch were ambient heat (81%), skin dryness (80%),
sweating (65%) and stress (55%). Important factors that were found to ameliorate
itch were sleep (57%) and cold showers (55%). The pruritus was found to be
unresponsive to most available antipruritics, including phototherapy. Itch
intensity as reflected by a visual analogue scale did not correlate with
Psoriasis Area and Severity Index scores; however, a highly significant
correlation was obtained between the affective descriptors and itch intensity in
the worst itch states (r = 0.6, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Pruritus is a common feature of psoriasis and affects quality of
life.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2133.2000.03829.x
PMID: 11069504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
