---
reference_id: "PMID:21441262"
title: "The core FOXG1 syndrome phenotype consists of postnatal microcephaly, severe mental retardation, absent language, dyskinesia, and corpus callosum hypogenesis."
authors:
- Kortüm F
- Das S
- Flindt M
- Morris-Rosendahl DJ
- Stefanova I
- Goldstein A
- Horn D
- Klopocki E
- Kluger G
- Martin P
- Rauch A
- Roumer A
- Saitta S
- Walsh LE
- Wieczorek D
- Uyanik G
- Kutsche K
- Dobyns WB
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.087528
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14/chemistry"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Corpus Callosum/pathology
- Dyskinesias/genetics
- Female
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Molecular Typing
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Rett Syndrome/classification, genetics"
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The core FOXG1 syndrome phenotype consists of postnatal microcephaly, severe mental retardation, absent language, dyskinesia, and corpus callosum hypogenesis.
**Authors:** Kortüm F, Das S, Flindt M, Morris-Rosendahl DJ, Stefanova I, Goldstein A, Horn D, Klopocki E, Kluger G, Martin P, Rauch A, Roumer A, Saitta S, Walsh LE, Wieczorek D, Uyanik G, Kutsche K, Dobyns WB
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2010.087528](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2010.087528)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2011 Jun;48(6):396-406. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.087528. Epub 2011
Mar  25.

The core FOXG1 syndrome phenotype consists of postnatal microcephaly, severe
mental retardation, absent language, dyskinesia, and corpus callosum
hypogenesis.

Kortüm F(1), Das S, Flindt M, Morris-Rosendahl DJ, Stefanova I, Goldstein A,
Horn D, Klopocki E, Kluger G, Martin P, Rauch A, Roumer A, Saitta S, Walsh LE,
Wieczorek D, Uyanik G, Kutsche K, Dobyns WB.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Campus
Forschung, Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Submicroscopic deletions in 14q12 spanning FOXG1 or intragenic
mutations have been reported in patients with a developmental disorder described
as a congenital variant of Rett syndrome. This study aimed to further
characterise and delineate the phenotype of FOXG1 mutation positive patients.
METHOD: The study mapped the breakpoints of a 2;14 translocation by fluorescence
in situ hybridisation and analysed three chromosome rearrangements in 14q12 by
cytogenetic analysis and/or array comparative genomic hybridisation. The FOXG1
gene was sequenced in 210 patients, including 129 patients with unexplained
developmental disorders and 81 MECP2 mutation negative individuals.
RESULTS: One known mutation, seen in two patients, and nine novel mutations of
FOXG1 including two deletions, two chromosome rearrangements disrupting or
displacing putative cis-regulatory elements from FOXG1, and seven sequence
changes, are reported. Analysis of 11 patients in this study, and a further 15
patients reported in the literature, demonstrates a complex constellation of
features including mild postnatal growth deficiency, severe postnatal
microcephaly, severe mental retardation with absent language development,
deficient social reciprocity resembling autism, combined stereotypies and frank
dyskinesias, epilepsy, poor sleep patterns, irritability in infancy, unexplained
episodes of crying, recurrent aspiration, and gastro-oesophageal reflux. Brain
imaging studies reveal simplified gyral pattern and reduced white matter volume
in the frontal lobes, corpus callosum hypogenesis, and variable mild frontal
pachgyria.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings have significantly expanded the number of FOXG1
mutations and identified two affecting possible cis-regulatory elements. While
the phenotype of the patients overlaps both classic and congenital Rett
syndrome, extensive clinical evaluation demonstrates a distinctive and
clinically recognisable phenotype which the authors suggest designating as the
FOXG1 syndrome.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2010.087528
PMCID: PMC5522617
PMID: 21441262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest None.
