---
reference_id: "PMID:37557168"
title: "Lymph node sharing between pancreas, gut, and liver leads to immune crosstalk and regulation of pancreatic autoimmunity."
authors:
- Brown H
- Komnick MR
- Brigleb PH
- Dermody TS
- Esterházy D
journal: Immunity
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.07.008
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Autoimmunity
- Pancreas/pathology
- Liver
- T-Lymphocytes
- Lymph Nodes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lymph node sharing between pancreas, gut, and liver leads to immune crosstalk and regulation of pancreatic autoimmunity.
**Authors:** Brown H, Komnick MR, Brigleb PH, Dermody TS, Esterházy D
**Journal:** Immunity (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.immuni.2023.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2023.07.008)

## Content

1. Immunity. 2023 Sep 12;56(9):2070-2085.e11. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.07.008.
Epub 2023 Aug 8.

Lymph node sharing between pancreas, gut, and liver leads to immune crosstalk
and regulation of pancreatic autoimmunity.

Brown H(1), Komnick MR(1), Brigleb PH(2), Dermody TS(3), Esterházy D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Institute of Infection, Inflammation,
and Immunity, UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Institute of Infection, Inflammation,
and Immunity, UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic
address: desterhazy@bsd.uchicago.edu.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2023 Sep 12;56(9):1980-1982. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.08.016.

Lymph nodes (LNs) are critical sites for shaping tissue-specific adaptive
immunity. However, the impact of LN sharing between multiple organs on such
tailoring is less understood. Here, we describe the drainage hierarchy of the
pancreas, liver, and the upper small intestine (duodenum) into three murine LNs.
Migratory dendritic cells (migDCs), key in instructing adaptive immune outcome,
exhibited stronger pro-inflammatory signatures when originating from the
pancreas or liver than from the duodenum. Qualitatively different migDC mixing
in each shared LN influenced pancreatic β-cell-reactive T cells to acquire
gut-homing and tolerogenic phenotypes proportional to duodenal co-drainage.
However, duodenal viral infections rendered non-intestinal migDCs and
β-cell-reactive T cells more pro-inflammatory in all shared LNs, resulting in
elevated pancreatic islet lymphocyte infiltration. Our study uncovers immune
crosstalk through LN co-drainage as a powerful force regulating pancreatic
autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.07.008
PMCID: PMC11040372
PMID: 37557168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
