---
reference_id: "PMID:28350873"
title: On-treatment HBV DNA dynamics predict virological breakthrough in entecavir-treated HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B.
authors:
- Huang YJ
- Chang CS
- Peng YC
- Yeh HZ
- Yang SS
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# On-treatment HBV DNA dynamics predict virological breakthrough in entecavir-treated HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B.
**Authors:** Huang YJ, Chang CS, Peng YC, Yeh HZ, Yang SS
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0174046](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0174046)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 28;12(3):e0174046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174046. 
eCollection 2017.

On-treatment HBV DNA dynamics predict virological breakthrough in 
entecavir-treated HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B.

Huang YJ(1), Chang CS(1)(2), Peng YC(1)(3), Yeh HZ(1)(3), Yang SS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Taichung 
Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Virological breakthrough (VBT) could be a manifestation of 
chronic hepatitis B (CHB) in patients treated with long-term nucleot(s)ide 
analogues. We aimed to determine the association of on-treatment serum hepatitis 
B virus (HBV) DNA with VBT in HBeAg-positive CHB patients receiving entecavir 
(ETV) treatment.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study, including 162 consecutive patients (95 
men and 67 women; mean age, 43.1±13.4 years) with HBeAg-positive CHB treated 
with ETV for at least 48 weeks between August 2008 and May 2015, was conducted. 
Univariate and multivariate cox regression analysis were used to identify 
associations with VBT and clinical factors, including HBV DNA and HBeAg serum 
status.
RESULTS: Among the 162 ETV-treated HBeAg-positive CHB patients, eighteen 
patients (11.1%) experienced VBT (VBT group), whereas the other 144 patients 
were without VBT (non-VBT group). The cumulative rate of HBV DNA < 100 IU/mL in 
the VBT group and the non-VBT group at week 48 were 44.44% and 70.14%, and at 
week 96 were 58.33% and 92.56%, respectively (p = 0.015). The cumulative rate of 
HBeAg seroclearance in the VBT group and non-VBT group at week 48 and week 96 
were statistically significant (p = 0.014). Multivariate analysis disclosed that 
failure to achieve HBeAg seroclearance were the factors significantly associated 
with VBT.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that on-treatment HBV DNA could probably 
predict VBT in ETV-treated HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B patients. Failure 
to achieve HBeAg seroclearance was associated with VBT in ETV-treated 
HBeAg-positive CHB patients. HBV DNA >100IU/mL at 48 weeks is potentially a 
predictor for VBT.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174046
PMCID: PMC5369759
PMID: 28350873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.