---
reference_id: "PMID:31895846"
title: "Apert Syndrome Management: Changing Treatment Algorithm."
authors:
- Raposo-Amaral CE
- Denadai R
- Oliveira YM
- Ghizoni E
- Raposo-Amaral CA
journal: J Craniofac Surg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000006105
keywords:
- Acrocephalosyndactylia/surgery
- Adolescent
- Algorithms
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Length of Stay
- Male
- "Osteogenesis, Distraction/methods"
- Plastic Surgery Procedures
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Apert Syndrome Management: Changing Treatment Algorithm.
**Authors:** Raposo-Amaral CE, Denadai R, Oliveira YM, Ghizoni E, Raposo-Amaral CA
**Journal:** J Craniofac Surg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SCS.0000000000006105](https://doi.org/10.1097/SCS.0000000000006105)

## Content

1. J Craniofac Surg. 2020 May/Jun;31(3):648-652. doi:
10.1097/SCS.0000000000006105.

Apert Syndrome Management: Changing Treatment Algorithm.

Raposo-Amaral CE(1), Denadai R(1), Oliveira YM(1), Ghizoni E(1)(2), 
Raposo-Amaral CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plastic and Craniofacial Surgery, SOBRAPAR Hospital, Campinas.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study is to review 10 years of surgical 
experience in the management of Apert syndrome, focusing on an updated algorithm 
which includes hand reconstruction and posterior vault distraction osteogenesis 
(PVDO). Additionally, the authors compare PVDO, which is currently used, with 
fronto-orbital advancement (FOA), which was utilized in a previous algorithm.
METHODS: An observational retrospective study was performed on consecutive 
patients with Apert syndrome who underwent upper and lower limb reconstruction 
and craniofacial surgery between 2007 and 2017. A modified Clavien-Dindo 
surgical complication scale was used to stratify complications between PVDO and 
FOA. Demographic, surgical, and outcome data was also recorded. The blood 
transfusion rate between PVDO and FOA was also assessed and compared utilizing 
the Student t test.
RESULTS: The present study included 69 patients with Apert syndrome (34 males 
and 35 females). Craniofacial surgeries were performed on a total of 38 
patients. A total of 210 operations were performed on the respective upper and 
lower limbs of patients included in this study. A total of 18 patients underwent 
PVDO (n = 9) and FOA (n = 9). Posterior vault distraction osteogenesis required 
significantly less transfused blood volume than FOA (P < 0.05). Complication 
rate and length of hospital stay were similar for each procedure.
CONCLUSION: An updated algorithm to treat Apert patients was implemented. 
Posterior vault distraction osteogenesis incorporated into an updated algorithm 
results in a lower blood transfusion rate.

DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000006105
PMID: 31895846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]