---
reference_id: "PMID:15950133"
title: Dyspnea and leg effort during exercise.
authors:
- Stendardi L
- Grazzini M
- Gigliotti F
- Lotti P
- Scano G
journal: Respir Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2005.02.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dyspnea and leg effort during exercise.
**Authors:** Stendardi L, Grazzini M, Gigliotti F, Lotti P, Scano G
**Journal:** Respir Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2005.02.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2005.02.005)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2005 Aug;99(8):933-42. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2005.02.005. Epub 2005 
Mar 23.

Dyspnea and leg effort during exercise.

Stendardi L(1), Grazzini M, Gigliotti F, Lotti P, Scano G.

Author information:
(1)Fondazione Don C. Gnocchi, IRCCS, Pozzolatico, Florence, Italy.

Dyspnea and leg effort are the major symptoms limiting exercise in healthy 
subjects and in patients with a variety of respiratory disorders. Quantitative 
measurement of both symptoms may be obtained by category scales such as VAS and 
Borg, with the latter being widely used. Furthermore, descriptor clusters of 
dyspnea help to assess some of the reasons for stopping exercise. The intensity 
of dyspnea and leg effort are similar in different disease states; this symmetry 
suggests that the limiting discomfort is a function of the intensity of 
increased motor drive to peripheral and respiratory muscles. An alternative 
explanation for the factors which limit exercise is that the subjects stop 
exercise volitionally when the discomfort associated with continuing exercise 
exceeds that which they are willing to tolerate. Muscle strength contributes to 
the intensity of dyspnea and leg effort at a given power output: the greater the 
muscle force, the lower the symptom. Symptoms also correlate with intensity and 
duration of a task by a power function in such a way that when minimizing the 
intensity of a given muscular task by prolonging the duration of activity, the 
symptom is drastically reduced. Skeletal muscle fatigue may be a factor limiting 
exercise tolerance both in healthy subjects and in patients with 
cardiorespiratory disorders. In conclusion, symptom measurement complements 
physiological measurements, both being essential to a comprehensive 
understanding of exercise tolerance.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2005.02.005
PMID: 15950133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]