---
reference_id: "PMID:29710228"
title: Immune Profiling of Premalignant Lesions in Patients With Lynch Syndrome.
authors:
- Chang K
- Taggart MW
- Reyes-Uribe L
- Borras E
- Riquelme E
- Barnett RM
- Leoni G
- San Lucas FA
- Catanese MT
- Mori F
- Diodoro MG
- You YN
- Hawk ET
- Roszik J
- Scheet P
- Kopetz S
- Nicosia A
- Scarselli E
- Lynch PM
- McAllister F
- Vilar E
journal: JAMA Oncol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.1482
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune Profiling of Premalignant Lesions in Patients With Lynch Syndrome.
**Authors:** Chang K, Taggart MW, Reyes-Uribe L, Borras E, Riquelme E, Barnett RM, Leoni G, San Lucas FA, Catanese MT, Mori F, Diodoro MG, You YN, Hawk ET, Roszik J, Scheet P, Kopetz S, Nicosia A, Scarselli E, Lynch PM, McAllister F, Vilar E
**Journal:** JAMA Oncol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.1482](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.1482)

## Content

1. JAMA Oncol. 2018 Aug 1;4(8):1085-1092. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.1482.

Immune Profiling of Premalignant Lesions in Patients With Lynch Syndrome.

Chang K(1)(2), Taggart MW(3), Reyes-Uribe L(1), Borras E(1), Riquelme E(1), 
Barnett RM(1), Leoni G(4), San Lucas FA(5), Catanese MT(4), Mori F(6), Diodoro 
MG(7), You YN(8)(9), Hawk ET(1), Roszik J(10)(11), Scheet P(2)(5), Kopetz S(12), 
Nicosia A(4)(13)(14), Scarselli E(4), Lynch PM(9)(15), McAllister 
F(1)(2)(9)(12), Vilar E(1)(2)(9)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston.
(2)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston.
(4)Nouscom SRL, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston.
(6)ReiThera SRL, Rome, Italy.
(7)Department of Pathology, "Regina Elena" National Cancer Institute, Rome, 
Italy.
(8)Department of Surgical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston.
(9)Clinical Cancer Genetics Program, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston.
(10)Department of Melanoma Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston.
(11)Department of Genomic Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston.
(12)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston.
(13)CEINGE, Naples, Italy.
(14)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of 
Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(15)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston.

IMPORTANCE: Colorectal carcinomas in patients with Lynch syndrome (LS) arise in 
a background of mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency, display a unique immune 
profile with upregulation of immune checkpoints, and response to immunotherapy. 
However, there is still a gap in understanding the pathogenesis of MMR-deficient 
colorectal premalignant lesions, which is essential for the development of novel 
preventive strategies for LS.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the immune profile of premalignant lesions from a 
cohort of patients with LS.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Whole-genome transcriptomic analysis using 
next-generation sequencing was performed in colorectal polyps and carcinomas of 
patients with LS. As comparator and model of MMR-proficient colorectal 
carcinogenesis, we used samples from patients with familial adenomatous 
polyposis (FAP). In addition, a total of 47 colorectal carcinomas (6 
hypermutants and 41 nonhypermutants) were obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas 
(TCGA) for comparisons. Samples were obtained from the University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center and "Regina Elena" National Cancer Institute, Rome, 
Italy. All diagnoses were confirmed by genetic testing. Polyps were collected at 
the time of endoscopic surveillance and tumors were collected at the time of 
surgical resection. The data were analyzed from October 2016 to November 2017.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Assessment of the immune profile, mutational 
signature, mutational and neoantigen rate, and pathway enrichment analysis of 
neoantigens in LS premalignant lesions and their comparison with FAP 
premalignant lesions, LS carcinoma, and sporadic colorectal cancers from TCGA.
RESULTS: The analysis was performed in a total of 28 polyps (26 tubular adenomas 
and 2 hyperplastic polyps) and 3 early-stage LS colorectal tumors from 24 
patients (15 [62%] female; mean [SD] age, 48.12 [15.38] years) diagnosed with 
FAP (n = 10) and LS (n = 14). Overall, LS polyps presented with low mutational 
and neoantigen rates but displayed a striking immune activation profile 
characterized by CD4 T cells, proinflammatory (tumor necrosis factor, 
interleukin 12) and checkpoint molecules (LAG3 [lymphocyte activation gene 3] 
and PD-L1 [programmed cell death 1 ligand 1]). This immune profile was 
independent of mutational rate, neoantigen formation, and MMR status. In 
addition, we identified a small subset of LS polyps with high mutational and 
neoantigen rates that were comparable to hypermutant tumors and displayed 
additional checkpoint (CTLA4 [cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4]) and 
neoantigens involved in DNA damage response (ATM and BRCA1 signaling).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These findings challenge the canonical model, based 
on the observations made in carcinomas, that emphasizes a dependency of immune 
activation on the acquisition of high levels of mutations and neoantigens, thus 
opening the door to the implementation of immune checkpoint inhibitors and 
vaccines for cancer prevention in LS.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.1482
PMCID: PMC6087485
PMID: 29710228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Taggart has 
received honoraria from PeerView Institute for Medical Education. Dr Hawk has a 
consulting or advisory role with Cancer Prevention Pharmaceuticals, PLx Pharma, 
and POZEN. Dr Kopetz has a consulting or advisory role with Amgen, Array, Bayer, 
Genentch, and Taiho, and has equity interest in MolecularMatch. Drs Leoni and 
Catanese and Ms Mori are employees of Nouscom, SRL. Drs Leoni, Nicosia, and 
Scarselli are authors of a patent application on microsatellite-instable cancer 
vaccines. Drs Scarselli and Nicosia are founders of Nouscom, SRL. Dr Vilar has a 
consulting or advisory role with Janssen Research and Development. No other 
disclosures are reported.