---
reference_id: "PMID:39152755"
title: Improved biochemical and neurodevelopmental profiles with high-dose hydroxocobalamin therapy in cobalamin C defect.
authors:
- Olivieri G
- Greco B
- Cairoli S
- Catesini G
- Lepri FR
- Orazi L
- Mallardi M
- Martinelli D
- Ricci D
- Simeoli R
- Dionisi-Vici C
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12787
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hydroxocobalamin/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Male
- Female
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Homocystinuria/drug therapy
- Neonatal Screening
- Infant
- Methylmalonic Acid
- "Vitamin B 12/administration & dosage"
- Child
- "Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/drug therapy, congenital"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/drug therapy"
- Homocysteine/blood
- Methionine
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Improved biochemical and neurodevelopmental profiles with high-dose hydroxocobalamin therapy in cobalamin C defect.
**Authors:** Olivieri G, Greco B, Cairoli S, Catesini G, Lepri FR, Orazi L, Mallardi M, Martinelli D, Ricci D, Simeoli R, Dionisi-Vici C
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12787](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12787)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2025 Jan;48(1):e12787. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12787. Epub 2024
 Aug 17.

Improved biochemical and neurodevelopmental profiles with high-dose
hydroxocobalamin therapy in cobalamin C defect.

Olivieri G(1), Greco B(1), Cairoli S(1), Catesini G(1), Lepri FR(2), Orazi
L(3)(4), Mallardi M(5), Martinelli D(1), Ricci D(3)(6), Simeoli R(1),
Dionisi-Vici C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolic Diseases and Hepatology, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Translational Cytogenomics Research Unity,
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)National Centre of Services and Research for the Prevention of Blindness and
Rehabilitation of Visually Impaired, IAPB Italia Onlus, Rome, Italy.
(4)Ophthalmology Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, IRCCS,
Rome, Italy.
(5)Clinical Psychology Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli,
IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli,
IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Cobalamin C (Cbl-C) defect causes methylmalonic acidemia, homocystinuria,
intellectual disability and visual impairment, despite treatment adherence.
While international guidelines recommend parenteral hydroxocobalamin (OH-Cbl) as
effective treatment, dose adjustments remain unclear. We assessed OH-Cbl therapy
impact on biochemical, neurocognitive and visual outcomes in early-onset Cbl-C
patients treated with different OH-Cbl doses over 3 years. Group A (n = 5),
diagnosed via newborn screening (NBS), received high-dose OH-Cbl (median
0.55 mg/kg/day); Group B1 (n = 3), NBS-diagnosed, received low-dose OH-Cbl
(median 0.09 mg/kg/day); Group B2 (n = 12), diagnosed on clinical bases,
received low-dose OH-Cbl (median 0.06 mg/kg/day). Biochemical analyses revealed
better values of homocysteine, methionine and methylmalonic acid in Group A
compared to Group B1 (p < 0.01, p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively) and B2
(p < 0.001, p < 0.01 and p < 0.001, respectively). Neurodevelopmental assessment
showed better outcome in Group A compared to low-dose treated Groups B1 and B2,
especially in Developmental Quotient, Hearing and Speech and Performance
subscales without significant differences between Group B2 and Group B1.
Maculopathy was detected in 100%, 66% and 83% of patients in the three groups,
respectively. This study showed that "high-dose" OH-Cbl treatment in
NBS-diagnosed children with severe early-onset Cbl-C defect led to a significant
improvement in the metabolic profile and in neurocognitive outcome, compared to
age-matched patients treated with a "low-dose" regimen. Effects on maculopathy
seem unaffected by OH-Cbl dosage. Our findings, although observed in a limited
number of patients, may contribute to improve the long-term outcome of Cbl-C
patients.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12787
PMCID: PMC11670441
PMID: 39152755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest for this manuscript.
