---
reference_id: PMID:29365305
title: Acute Myocardial Infarction after Laboratory-Confirmed Influenza Infection.
authors:
- Kwong JC
- Schwartz KL
- Campitelli MA
- Chung H
- Crowcroft NS
- Karnauchow T
- Katz K
- Ko DT
- McGeer AJ
- McNally D
- Richardson DC
- Rosella LC
- Simor A
- Smieja M
- Zahariadis G
- Gubbay JB
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1702090
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Influenza A virus/isolation & purification"
- "Influenza B virus/isolation & purification"
- "Influenza, Human/complications, diagnosis"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Myocardial Infarction/epidemiology, etiology"
- Ontario/epidemiology
- Risk
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Myocardial Infarction after Laboratory-Confirmed Influenza Infection.
**Authors:** Kwong JC, Schwartz KL, Campitelli MA, Chung H, Crowcroft NS, Karnauchow T, Katz K, Ko DT, McGeer AJ, McNally D, Richardson DC, Rosella LC, Simor A, Smieja M, Zahariadis G, Gubbay JB
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1702090](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1702090)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2018 Jan 25;378(4):345-353. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1702090.

Acute Myocardial Infarction after Laboratory-Confirmed Influenza Infection.

Kwong JC(1), Schwartz KL(1), Campitelli MA(1), Chung H(1), Crowcroft NS(1), 
Karnauchow T(1), Katz K(1), Ko DT(1), McGeer AJ(1), McNally D(1), Richardson 
DC(1), Rosella LC(1), Simor A(1), Smieja M(1), Zahariadis G(1), Gubbay JB(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences (J.C.K., K.L.S., M.A.C., 
H.C., D.T.K., L.C.R.), Public Health Ontario (J.C.K., K.L.S., N.S.C., L.C.R., 
J.B.G.), Dalla Lana School of Public Health (J.C.K., K.L.S., N.S.C., A.J.M., 
L.C.R.), and the Departments of Family and Community Medicine (J.C.K.) and 
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology (N.S.C., K.K., A.J.M., A.S., J.B.G.), 
University of Toronto, University Health Network (J.C.K.), North York General 
Hospital (K.K.), Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre (D.T.K., A.S.), Sinai Health 
System (A.J.M.), and the Hospital for Sick Children (J.B.G.), Toronto, 
Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario (T.K., D.M.) and the Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Ottawa (T.K.), Ottawa, William 
Osler Health System, Brampton, ON (D.C.R.), McMaster University, Hamilton, ON 
(M.S.), London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON (G.Z.), and the Newfoundland 
and Labrador Public Health Laboratory, St. John's (G.Z.) - all in Canada.

Comment in
    MMW Fortschr Med. 2018 Feb;160(3):33. doi: 10.1007/s15006-018-0190-0.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Jun 28;378(26):2538-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1805679.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Jun 28;378(26):2539. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1805679.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Jun 28;378(26):2539. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1805679.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Jun 28;378(26):2539-40. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1805679.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Jun 28;378(26):2540. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1805679.

BACKGROUND: Acute myocardial infarction can be triggered by acute respiratory 
infections. Previous studies have suggested an association between influenza and 
acute myocardial infarction, but those studies used nonspecific measures of 
influenza infection or study designs that were susceptible to bias. We evaluated 
the association between laboratory-confirmed influenza infection and acute 
myocardial infarction.
METHODS: We used the self-controlled case-series design to evaluate the 
association between laboratory-confirmed influenza infection and hospitalization 
for acute myocardial infarction. We used various high-specificity laboratory 
methods to confirm influenza infection in respiratory specimens, and we 
ascertained hospitalization for acute myocardial infarction from administrative 
data. We defined the "risk interval" as the first 7 days after respiratory 
specimen collection and the "control interval" as 1 year before and 1 year after 
the risk interval.
RESULTS: We identified 364 hospitalizations for acute myocardial infarction that 
occurred within 1 year before and 1 year after a positive test result for 
influenza. Of these, 20 (20.0 admissions per week) occurred during the risk 
interval and 344 (3.3 admissions per week) occurred during the control interval. 
The incidence ratio of an admission for acute myocardial infarction during the 
risk interval as compared with the control interval was 6.05 (95% confidence 
interval [CI], 3.86 to 9.50). No increased incidence was observed after day 7. 
Incidence ratios for acute myocardial infarction within 7 days after detection 
of influenza B, influenza A, respiratory syncytial virus, and other viruses were 
10.11 (95% CI, 4.37 to 23.38), 5.17 (95% CI, 3.02 to 8.84), 3.51 (95% CI, 1.11 
to 11.12), and 2.77 (95% CI, 1.23 to 6.24), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: We found a significant association between respiratory infections, 
especially influenza, and acute myocardial infarction. (Funded by the Canadian 
Institutes of Health Research and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1702090
PMID: 29365305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]