---
reference_id: "PMID:39231392"
title: "New Benchmark for Targeted Therapies in Lung Cancer: Median Progression-Free Survival for Lorlatinib in Advanced ALK+ Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Surpasses 5 years."
authors:
- Lovly CM
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.24.01147
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Lactams/therapeutic use
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- Aminopyridines/therapeutic use
- Progression-Free Survival
- "Lactams, Macrocyclic/therapeutic use"
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Male
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Benchmark for Targeted Therapies in Lung Cancer: Median Progression-Free Survival for Lorlatinib in Advanced ALK+ Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Surpasses 5 years.
**Authors:** Lovly CM
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.24.01147](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.24.01147)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2024 Oct 10;42(29):3383-3386. doi: 10.1200/JCO.24.01147. Epub
2024  Sep 4.

New Benchmark for Targeted Therapies in Lung Cancer: Median Progression-Free
Survival for Lorlatinib in Advanced ALK+ Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Surpasses 5
years.

Lovly CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center and Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2024 Oct 10;42(29):3400-3409. doi: 10.1200/JCO.24.00581.

In the article that accompanies this editorial, Dr. Solomon and colleagues
present a post-hoc analysis of investigator-assessed efficacy outcomes, safety,
and biomarker analyses encompassing approximately 5 years’ worth of data from
the CROWN trial (NCT03052608) of lorlatinib compared with crizotinib in patients
with treatment naïve advanced / metastatic ALK+ NSCLC demonstrating a PFS
benefit for lorlatinib which exceeds 5 years and a 96% probability of preventing
brain metastases within this time frame. These updated data are unprecedented
for the treatment of ALK+ NSCLC, and for NSCLC treated with targeted therapies
in general, making a compelling argument for lorlatinib as the preferred first
line ALK TKI.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.24.01147
PMCID: PMC11521153
PMID: 39231392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
