---
reference_id: "PMID:41357598"
title: "Managing lorlatinib-induced weight gain through a structured exercise intervention in an ALK+ NSCLC patient: a case report."
authors:
- Ciurnelli C
- Mariangela Scaglione I
- Eccher S
- Borsati A
- Toniolo L
- Adamoli G
- Tregnago D
- Longo L
- Sposito M
- Insolda J
- Milella M
- Schena F
- Quist M
- Belluomini L
- Pilotto S
- Avancini A
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2025.1672319
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Managing lorlatinib-induced weight gain through a structured exercise intervention in an ALK+ NSCLC patient: a case report.
**Authors:** Ciurnelli C, Mariangela Scaglione I, Eccher S, Borsati A, Toniolo L, Adamoli G, Tregnago D, Longo L, Sposito M, Insolda J, Milella M, Schena F, Quist M, Belluomini L, Pilotto S, Avancini A
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2025.1672319](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2025.1672319)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2025 Nov 20;15:1672319. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2025.1672319.
eCollection  2025.

Managing lorlatinib-induced weight gain through a structured exercise
intervention in an ALK+ NSCLC patient: a case report.

Ciurnelli C(1), Mariangela Scaglione I(2), Eccher S(2), Borsati A(1)(3), Toniolo
L(1), Adamoli G(2), Tregnago D(2), Longo L(2), Sposito M(2), Insolda J(2),
Milella M(1), Schena F(1), Quist M(4), Belluomini L(2), Pilotto S(2), Avancini
A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Section of Oncology, Department of Engineering for Innovation Medicine,
University of Verona School of Medicine and Verona University Hospital Trust,
Verona, Italy.
(3)Biomedical, Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Department of Medicine,
University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(4)Rigshospitalet, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), ALK tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) have been associated with significant weight gain,
predominantly in fat tissues. To date, only one case report has evaluated the
impact of pharmacologic intervention on managing this drug-related side effect,
with concerns about potential interactions with oncological treatments. No
information is available regarding non-pharmacological intervention.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 43-year-old man affected by metastatic ALK-rearranged NSCLC
developed Grade 1 weight gain 1.5 months after starting Lorlatinib. The patient
participated in a structured exercise program to manage this side effect. The
program lasted 6 months and consisted of aerobic activities, including
continuous and interval training, as well as resistance exercises using body
weight/isotonic machines, performed at moderate to somewhat vigorous intensity,
twice a week. Assessments were performed at three and six months, and included
physical fitness and patient-reported outcomes parameters. Although the weight
remained stable, body composition analysis, via bioimpedance and CT scan,
revealed a decrease in fat tissue and an increase in muscle mass. Moreover, the
patient reported improvements in physical fitness, especially in
cardiorespiratory fitness, muscle strength, endurance, and flexibility. Among
the patient-reported outcomes, different domains of quality of life improved.
CONCLUSION: This case may represent the backbone for further interventional
studies aimed at determining the real efficacy of exercise intervention in
preventing or controlling weight gain in this population.

Copyright © 2025 Ciurnelli, Mariangela Scaglione, Eccher, Borsati, Toniolo,
Adamoli, Tregnago, Longo, Sposito, Insolda, Milella, Schena, Quist, Belluomini,
Pilotto and Avancini.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2025.1672319
PMCID: PMC12675186
PMID: 41357598

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer RB declared a
past co-authorship with the authors MM, LB, SP to the handling editor. The
author(s) declared that they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the
time of submission. This had no impact on the peer review process and the final
decision.
