---
reference_id: "PMID:1543672"
title: "Terbinafine: mode of action and properties of the squalene epoxidase inhibition."
authors:
- Ryder NS
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.1992.tb00001.x
keywords:
- Antifungal Agents/pharmacology
- Ergosterol/biosynthesis
- "Fungi/drug effects, metabolism"
- Naphthalenes/pharmacology
- "Oxygenases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Squalene Monooxygenase
- Terbinafine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Terbinafine: mode of action and properties of the squalene epoxidase inhibition.
**Authors:** Ryder NS
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.1992.tb00001.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.1992.tb00001.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 1992 Feb;126 Suppl 39:2-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2133.1992.tb00001.x.

Terbinafine: mode of action and properties of the squalene epoxidase inhibition.

Ryder NS(1).

Author information:
(1)Sandoz Research Institute, Vienna, Austria.

Terbinafine (Lamisil) has primarily fungicidal action against many fungi as a 
result of its specific mechanism of squalene epoxidase inhibition. Treated fungi 
accumulate squalene while becoming deficient in ergosterol, an essential 
component of fungal cell membranes. The cidal action is closely associated with 
the development of high intracellular squalene concentrations, which are 
believed to interfere with fungal membrane function and cell wall synthesis. In 
the case of Candida albicans, growth inhibition with terbinafine appears to 
result from the ergosterol deficiency. The filamentous form of this fungus is 
more susceptible than the yeast form. Measurement of ergosterol biosynthesis by 
incorporation of radiolabelled precursors indicates a correlation between 
inhibition of growth and ergosterol biosynthesis in a range of pathogenic fungi. 
Terbinafine is a potent non-competitive inhibitor of squalene epoxidase from 
Candida (Ki = 30 nM). In contrast, inhibition of rat liver squalene epoxidase 
only occurs at higher drug concentrations (Ki = 77 microM), and is competitive 
with squalene. Thus, terbinafine has no effect on cholesterol biosynthesis in 
vivo. Squalene epoxidase is not an enzyme of the cytochrome P-450 type, thereby 
avoiding potential inhibition of this class of enzymes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.1992.tb00001.x
PMID: 1543672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]