---
reference_id: "PMID:39080280"
title: Harnessing DNA replication stress to target RBM10 deficiency in lung adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Machour FE
- R Abu-Zhayia E
- Kamar J
- Barisaac AS
- Simon I
- Ayoub N
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-50882-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Harnessing DNA replication stress to target RBM10 deficiency in lung adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Machour FE, R Abu-Zhayia E, Kamar J, Barisaac AS, Simon I, Ayoub N
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-50882-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-50882-0)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Jul 30;15(1):6417. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-50882-0.

Harnessing DNA replication stress to target RBM10 deficiency in lung 
adenocarcinoma.

Machour FE(1), R Abu-Zhayia E(1), Kamar J(2), Barisaac AS(1), Simon I(2), Ayoub 
N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Medical 
Research Israel-Canada, Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(3)Department of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 
Israel. ayoubn@technion.ac.il.

The splicing factor RNA-binding motif protein 10 (RBM10) is frequently mutated 
in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) (9-25%). Most RBM10 cancer mutations are 
loss-of-function, correlating with increased tumorigenesis and limiting the 
efficacy of current LUAD targeted therapies. Remarkably, therapeutic strategies 
leveraging RBM10 deficiency remain unexplored. Here, we conduct a CRISPR-Cas9 
synthetic lethality (SL) screen and identify ~60 RBM10 SL genes, including WEE1 
kinase. WEE1 inhibition sensitizes RBM10-deficient LUAD cells in-vitro and 
in-vivo. Mechanistically, we identify a splicing-independent role of RBM10 in 
regulating DNA replication fork progression and replication stress response, 
which underpins RBM10-WEE1 SL. Additionally, RBM10 interacts with active DNA 
replication forks, relying on DNA Primase Subunit 1 (PRIM1) that synthesizes 
Okazaki RNA primers. Functionally, we demonstrate that RBM10 serves as an anchor 
for recruiting Histone Deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to facilitate H4K16 deacetylation 
and R-loop homeostasis to maintain replication fork stability. Collectively, our 
data reveal a role of RBM10 in fine-tuning DNA replication and provide 
therapeutic arsenal for targeting RBM10-deficient tumors.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-50882-0
PMCID: PMC11289143
PMID: 39080280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.