---
reference_id: "PMID:10892490"
title: Food as a vehicle of transmission of cholera.
authors:
- Rabbani GH
- Greenough WB 3rd
journal: J Diarrhoeal Dis Res
year: '1999'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Food as a vehicle of transmission of cholera.
**Authors:** Rabbani GH, Greenough WB 3rd
**Journal:** J Diarrhoeal Dis Res (1999)

## Content

1. J Diarrhoeal Dis Res. 1999 Mar;17(1):1-9.

Food as a vehicle of transmission of cholera.

Rabbani GH(1), Greenough WB 3rd.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Sciences Division, ICDDR,B: Centre for Health and Population 
Research, Mohakhali, Dhaka, Bangladesh. rabbani@icddrb.org

Cholera has been recognized as a killer disease since earliest time. Since 1817, 
six pandemics have swept over the world, and the seventh one is in progress. The 
disease is caused by infection of the small intestine by Vibrio cholerae O1 and 
O139 and is characterized by massive acute diarrhoea, vomiting, and dehydration: 
death occurs in severe, untreated cases. Cholera is a highly contagious disease, 
and is transmitted primarily by ingestion of faecally-contaminated water by 
susceptible persons. Besides water, foods have also been recognized as an 
important vehicle for transmission of cholera. Foods are likely to be faecally 
contaminated during preparation, particularly by infected food handlers in an 
unhygienic environment. The physicochemical characteristics of foods that 
support survival and growth of V. cholerae O1 and O139 include high-moisture 
content, neutral or an alkaline pH, low temperature, high-organic content, and 
absence of other competing bacteria. Seafoods, including fish, shellfish, crabs, 
oysters and clams, have all been incriminated in cholera outbreaks in many 
countries, including the United States and Australia. Contaminated rice, millet 
gruel, and vegetables have also been implicated in several outbreaks. Other 
foods, including fruits (except sour fruits), poultry, meat, and dairy products, 
have the potential of transmitting cholera. To reduce the risk of food-borne 
transmission of cholera, it is recommended that foods should be prepared, 
served, and eaten in an hygienic environment, free from faecal contamination. 
Proper cooking, storing, and re-heating of foods before eating, and hand-washing 
with safe water before eating and after defaecation are important safety 
measures for preventing food-borne transmission of cholera.

PMID: 10892490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]