---
reference_id: "PMID:11363911"
title: Candidiasis.
authors:
- Powderly WG
journal: J Int Assoc Physicians AIDS Care
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Candidiasis.
**Authors:** Powderly WG
**Journal:** J Int Assoc Physicians AIDS Care (1996)

## Content

1. J Int Assoc Physicians AIDS Care. 1996 Oct;2(10):36-9.

Candidiasis.

Powderly WG(1).

Author information:
(1)Washington University, School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO.

AIDS: Oropharyngeal candidiasis has been one of the main features of HIV 
infection since AIDS has been known as a disease, but attention to it has been 
downplayed since many other opportunistic infections are more life-threatening. 
Candidiasis greatly impacts patients' quality of life and more treatments need 
to be developed to overcome recurrent cases. Diagnosis of the most common forms 
of candidiasis, i.e., oral and vaginal, is not difficult, and may be treated 
locally initially, then systemically. Antifungal agents for oral or esophageal 
candidiasis may include nystatin, clotrimazole, ketoconazole, fluconazole, 
itraconazole, or amphotericin B; vulvovaginal disease is treated with 
clotrimazole, miconazole, or butoconazole in cream or suppository form. Since 
relapses are a concern, patients with CD4 counts less than 200 may be treated 
with fluconazole, although this drug may interact with treatment for other 
opportunistic infections. In cases of fluconazole-resistant candidiasis, 
treatment with the other previously-listed antifungal agents may be tried.

PMID: 11363911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]