---
reference_id: PMID:21074091
title: "Chronic traumatic encephalopathy: a potential late effect of sport-related concussive and subconcussive head trauma."
authors:
- Gavett BE
- Stern RA
- McKee AC
journal: Clin Sports Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.csm.2010.09.007
keywords:
- Amyloid beta-Peptides
- Athletic Injuries/complications
- Brain Concussion/complications
- "Brain Injury, Chronic/diagnosis, etiology"
- Chronic Disease
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Humans
- Risk Factors
- Sports
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic traumatic encephalopathy: a potential late effect of sport-related concussive and subconcussive head trauma.
**Authors:** Gavett BE, Stern RA, McKee AC
**Journal:** Clin Sports Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.csm.2010.09.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csm.2010.09.007)

## Content

1. Clin Sports Med. 2011 Jan;30(1):179-88, xi. doi: 10.1016/j.csm.2010.09.007.

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy: a potential late effect of sport-related 
concussive and subconcussive head trauma.

Gavett BE(1), Stern RA, McKee AC.

Author information:
(1)Center for the Study of Traumatic Encephalopathy and Alzheimer's Disease 
Center, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 East Concord Street, B-7800, 
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is a form of neurodegeneration believed 
to result from repeated head injuries. Originally termed dementia pugilistica 
because of its association with boxing, the neuropathology of CTE was first 
described by Corsellis in 1973 in a case series of 15 retired boxers. CTE has 
recently been found to occur after other causes of repeated head trauma, 
suggesting that any repeated blows to the head, such as those that occur in 
American football, hockey, soccer, professional wrestling, and physical abuse, 
can also lead to neurodegenerative changes. These changes often include cerebral 
atrophy, cavum septi pellucidi with fenestrations, shrinkage of the mammillary 
bodies, dense tau immunoreactive inclusions (neurofibrillary tangles, glial 
tangles, and neuropil neurites), and, in some cases, a TDP-43 proteinopathy. In 
association with these pathologic changes, disordered memory and executive 
functioning, behavioral and personality disturbances (eg, apathy, depression, 
irritability, impulsiveness, suicidality), parkinsonism, and, occasionally, 
motor neuron disease are seen in affected individuals. No formal clinical or 
pathologic diagnostic criteria for CTE currently exist, but the distinctive 
neuropathologic profile of the disorder lends promise for future research into 
its prevention, diagnosis, and treatment.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csm.2010.09.007
PMCID: PMC2995699
PMID: 21074091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]