---
reference_id: "PMID:30027543"
title: Lynch syndrome - cancer pathways, heterogeneity and immune escape.
authors:
- Seth S
- Ager A
- Arends MJ
- Frayling IM
journal: J Pathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/path.5139
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lynch syndrome - cancer pathways, heterogeneity and immune escape.
**Authors:** Seth S, Ager A, Arends MJ, Frayling IM
**Journal:** J Pathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/path.5139](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.5139)

## Content

1. J Pathol. 2018 Oct;246(2):129-133. doi: 10.1002/path.5139. Epub 2018 Aug 27.

Lynch syndrome - cancer pathways, heterogeneity and immune escape.

Seth S(1), Ager A(2), Arends MJ(3), Frayling IM(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Edinburgh Medical School, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Division of Infection and Immunity, School of Medicine, and Systems Immunity 
Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(3)Division of Pathology, Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre, Institute of 
Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, UK.
(5)Institute of Cancer and Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.

Recent work has provided evidence for genetic and molecular heterogeneity in 
colorectal cancers (CRCs) arising in patients with Lynch syndrome (LS), dividing 
these into two groups: G1 and G2. In terms of mutation and gene expression 
profile, G1 CRCs bear resemblance to sporadic CRCs with microsatellite 
instability (MSI), whereas G2 CRCs are more similar to microsatellite-stable 
CRCs. Here we review the current state of knowledge on pathways of precursor 
progression to CRC in LS and how these might tie in with the new findings. 
Immunotherapies are an active field of research for MSI cancers and their 
potential use for cancer therapy for both sporadic and LS MSI cancers is 
discussed. Copyright © 2018 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2018 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.5139
PMID: 30027543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]