---
reference_id: PMID:16237067
title: Promiscuous thymic expression of an autoantigen gene does not result in negative selection of pathogenic T cells.
authors:
- Allen S
- Read S
- DiPaolo R
- McHugh RS
- Shevach EM
- Gleeson PA
- van Driel IR
journal: J Immunol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.9.5759
keywords:
- Animals
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Autoimmune Diseases/etiology
- CD4 Antigens/genetics
- Gastritis/etiology
- "H(+)-K(+)-Exchanging ATPase/analysis, genetics"
- Immune Tolerance
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- Protein Subunits
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/genetics"
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Thymus Gland/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Promiscuous thymic expression of an autoantigen gene does not result in negative selection of pathogenic T cells.
**Authors:** Allen S, Read S, DiPaolo R, McHugh RS, Shevach EM, Gleeson PA, van Driel IR
**Journal:** J Immunol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.175.9.5759](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.175.9.5759)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5759-64. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.9.5759.

Promiscuous thymic expression of an autoantigen gene does not result in negative 
selection of pathogenic T cells.

Allen S(1), Read S, DiPaolo R, McHugh RS, Shevach EM, Gleeson PA, van Driel IR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Bio21 Molecular Science 
and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

"Promiscuous" thymic expression of peripheral autoantigens can contribute to 
immunological tolerance in some cases. However, in this study we show that 
thymic mRNA expression alone cannot predict a contribution to thymic tolerance. 
Autoimmune gastritis is caused by CD4+ T cells directed to the alpha (H/Kalpha) 
and beta (H/Kbeta) subunits of the gastric membrane protein the H+/K+ ATPase. 
H/Kalpha mRNA is expressed in the thymus, but H/Kbeta expression is barely 
detectable. In this study, we demonstrate that thymic H/Kalpha in wild-type mice 
or mice that overexpressed H/Kalpha did not result in negative selection of 
pathogenic anti-H/Kalpha T cells. However, negative selection of anti-H/Kalpha T 
cells did occur if H/Kbeta was artificially overexpressed in the thymus. Given 
that H/Kalpha cannot be exported from the endoplasmic reticulum and is rapidly 
degraded in the absence of H/Kbeta, we conclude that H/Kalpha epitopes are 
unable to access MHC class II loading compartments in cells of the normal 
thymus. This work, taken together with our previous studies, highlights that 
thymic autoantigen expression does not necessarily result in the induction of 
tolerance.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.9.5759
PMID: 16237067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]