---
reference_id: "PMID:32286103"
title: Persistence of Parvovirus B19 in liver from transplanted patients with acute liver failure.
authors:
- Alves AD
- Melgaço JG
- Cássia Nc Garcia R
- Raposo JV
- de Paula VS
- Araújo CC
- Pinto MA
- Amado LA
journal: Future Microbiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2217/fmb-2019-0224
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Persistence of Parvovirus B19 in liver from transplanted patients with acute liver failure.
**Authors:** Alves AD, Melgaço JG, Cássia Nc Garcia R, Raposo JV, de Paula VS, Araújo CC, Pinto MA, Amado LA
**Journal:** Future Microbiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fmb-2019-0224](https://doi.org/10.2217/fmb-2019-0224)

## Content

1. Future Microbiol. 2020 Mar;15:307-317. doi: 10.2217/fmb-2019-0224.

Persistence of Parvovirus B19 in liver from transplanted patients with acute 
liver failure.

Alves AD(1), Melgaço JG(1), Cássia Nc Garcia R(2), Raposo JV(3), de Paula VS(3), 
Araújo CC(4), Pinto MA(1), Amado LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Desenvolvimento Tecnológico em Virologia, Instituto Oswaldo 
Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.
(2)Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia, Instituto Biomédico, 
Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niterói, RJ, Brasil.
(3)Laboratório de Virologia Molecular, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo 
Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.
(4)Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.

Aim: In this study, we investigated the presence of B19V in liver tissues from 
patients with acute liver failure (ALF) and evaluated the viral activity in 
infected liver. Methods: Serum and liver samples from 30 patients who underwent 
liver transplantation for ALF were investigated for B19V infection by real-time 
PCR, serological tests and examination of B19V mRNA (transcript) expression in 
the liver. Results: The serum and liver samples from seven patients were B19V 
DNA positive (103-105 copies/ml). Most of them presented detectable anti-B19V 
IgG, indicating persistent infection. B19V mRNA was detected in all patients, 
demonstrating intra-hepatic replication. Conclusion: B19V infection of the liver 
during the course of non-A-E ALF suggested a role of B19V, which produced the 
worst outcome in co-infected patients and in patients with cryptogenic ALF, in 
liver damage.

DOI: 10.2217/fmb-2019-0224
PMID: 32286103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]