---
reference_id: "PMID:34693619"
title: Modelling of primary ciliary dyskinesia using patient-derived airway organoids.
authors:
- van der Vaart J
- Böttinger L
- Geurts MH
- van de Wetering WJ
- Knoops K
- Sachs N
- Begthel H
- Korving J
- Lopez-Iglesias C
- Peters PJ
- Eitan K
- Gileles-Hillel A
- Clevers H
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.15252/embr.202052058
keywords:
- Cilia
- Ciliary Motility Disorders/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Organoids
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modelling of primary ciliary dyskinesia using patient-derived airway organoids.
**Authors:** van der Vaart J, Böttinger L, Geurts MH, van de Wetering WJ, Knoops K, Sachs N, Begthel H, Korving J, Lopez-Iglesias C, Peters PJ, Eitan K, Gileles-Hillel A, Clevers H
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.202052058](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.202052058)

## Content

1. EMBO Rep. 2021 Dec 6;22(12):e52058. doi: 10.15252/embr.202052058. Epub 2021
Oct  25.

Modelling of primary ciliary dyskinesia using patient-derived airway organoids.

van der Vaart J(1)(2), Böttinger L(1), Geurts MH(1)(2), van de Wetering WJ(3),
Knoops K(3), Sachs N(1), Begthel H(1)(2), Korving J(1)(2), Lopez-Iglesias C(3),
Peters PJ(3), Eitan K(4), Gileles-Hillel A(4)(5), Clevers H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW),
University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Oncode Institute, Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)The Maastricht Multimodal Molecular Imaging Institute, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Division of Cell Biology, Immunology and Cancer Research, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Paediatric Pulmonology and Sleep, Hadassah Hebrew
University Medical Centre, Jerusalem, Israel.

Patient-derived human organoids can be used to model a variety of diseases.
Recently, we described conditions for long-term expansion of human airway
organoids (AOs) directly from healthy individuals and patients. Here, we first
optimize differentiation of AOs towards ciliated cells. After differentiation of
the AOs towards ciliated cells, these can be studied for weeks. When returned to
expansion conditions, the organoids readily resume their growth. We apply this
condition to AOs established from nasal inferior turbinate brush samples of
patients suffering from primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), a pulmonary disease
caused by dysfunction of the motile cilia in the airways. Patient-specific
differences in ciliary beating are observed and are in agreement with the
patients' genetic mutations. More detailed organoid ciliary phenotypes can thus
be documented in addition to the standard diagnostic procedure. Additionally,
using genetic editing tools, we show that a patient-specific mutation can be
repaired. This study demonstrates the utility of organoid technology for
investigating hereditary airway diseases such as PCD.

© 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.202052058
PMCID: PMC8647008
PMID: 34693619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.C. is inventor on several patents related to
organoid technology together with N.S.; his full disclosure is given at
https://www.uu.nl/staff/JCClevers/.
