---
reference_id: "PMID:7478577"
title: Activation of the EGF receptor by insertional mutations in its juxtamembrane regions.
authors:
- Sorokin A
journal: Oncogene
year: '1995'
keywords:
- 3T3 Cells
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cell Division
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Enzyme Activation
- Epidermal Growth Factor/metabolism
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutagenesis, Insertional"
- Oligodeoxyribonucleotides/chemistry
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Binding
- Signal Transduction
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation of the EGF receptor by insertional mutations in its juxtamembrane regions.
**Authors:** Sorokin A
**Journal:** Oncogene (1995)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 1995 Oct 19;11(8):1531-40.

Activation of the EGF receptor by insertional mutations in its juxtamembrane
regions.

Sorokin A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University Medical Center, NY 10016,
USA.

Ligand dependent activation of receptor tyrosine kinases is mediated by an
allosteric dimerization process that is responsible for the stimulation of
protein tyrosine kinase activity and receptor autophosphorylation. In order to
gain further insight into the processes which control this process, we have
generated EGF receptor mutants that contain inserts of 20-40 amino acids in
their juxtamembrane regions, on each side of the receptor's single transmembrane
domain. An EGF receptor mutant with an insertion on the cytoplasmic side of the
transmembrane domain exhibited typical EGF binding characteristics,
ligand-dependent tyrosine autophosphorylation, as well as ligand-induced DNA
synthesis. However, an EGF receptor mutant with an insertion on both sides of
the transmembrane domain was found to be constitutively activated. This mutant
also exhibited dramatically reduced EGF binding, but dimerized and had enhanced
tyrosine kinase activity even in the absence of ligand. Moreover, NIH3T3 cells
expressing this mutant receptor formed colonies in soft agar in the absence of
EGF. This represents a novel example of a constitutively activated receptor, and
provides further support for receptor dimerization as a mechanism for activation
of EGFR and other receptor tyrosine kinases.

PMID: 7478577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
