---
reference_id: "PMID:28286921"
title: Treatment Strategies for Metastatic Neuroendocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract.
authors:
- Cives M
- Strosberg J
journal: Curr Treat Options Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s11864-017-0461-5
keywords:
- Algorithms
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Clinical Decision-Making
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Intestinal Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Stomach Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment Strategies for Metastatic Neuroendocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract.
**Authors:** Cives M, Strosberg J
**Journal:** Curr Treat Options Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11864-017-0461-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11864-017-0461-5)

## Content

1. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2017 Mar;18(3):14. doi: 10.1007/s11864-017-0461-5.

Treatment Strategies for Metastatic Neuroendocrine Tumors of the 
Gastrointestinal Tract.

Cives M(1), Strosberg J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and 
Research Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA.
(2)Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and 
Research Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA. 
jonathan.strosberg@moffitt.org.

The therapeutic landscape of gastroenteropancreatic-neuroendocrine tumors 
(GEP-NETs) has evolved significantly in recent years. Current and emerging 
treatment options include somatostatin analogs, radiolabeled somatostatin 
analogs, the mTOR inhibitor everolimus, and the tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
sunitinib. Although high-quality data from phase III trials are lacking, 
cytotoxic agents are commonly used for the treatment of poorly differentiated 
neuroendocrine carcinomas and well-differentiated NETs originating in the 
pancreas. Hepatic-directed therapies are recommended for patients with 
slow-growing, liver-predominant disease but have never been compared to systemic 
agents. Telotristat ethyl, a novel serotonin synthesis inhibitor, has recently 
demonstrated efficacy in palliating diarrhea in patients with poorly controlled 
carcinoid syndrome. In the absence of definite predictive biomarkers, 
therapeutic decisions in most cases rely on clinical and pathological criteria. 
However, navigating the current therapeutic algorithm may be challenging, and 
future trials need to address several important questions: what is the best 
sequence of treatment? Is there a role for combination therapies in GEP-NETs? 
Are neoadjuvant, adjuvant, or maintenance strategies safe and effective? Do all 
NET patients require active treatment? What new molecular targets can be 
clinically exploited? A tight integration between basic and clinical research is 
needed to further advance the field of NETs.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-017-0461-5
PMID: 28286921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]