---
reference_id: "PMID:25546339"
title: Is dengue a disease of poverty? A systematic review.
authors:
- Mulligan K
- Dixon J
- Sinn CL
- Elliott SJ
journal: Pathog Glob Health
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1179/2047773214Y.0000000168
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is dengue a disease of poverty? A systematic review.
**Authors:** Mulligan K, Dixon J, Sinn CL, Elliott SJ
**Journal:** Pathog Glob Health (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1179/2047773214Y.0000000168](https://doi.org/10.1179/2047773214Y.0000000168)

## Content

1. Pathog Glob Health. 2015 Feb;109(1):10-8. doi: 10.1179/2047773214Y.0000000168.
 Epub 2014 Dec 29.

Is dengue a disease of poverty? A systematic review.

Mulligan K, Dixon J, Sinn CL, Elliott SJ.

Policy prescriptions for combating dengue fever tend to focus on addressing 
environmental and social conditions of poverty. However, while poverty has long 
been considered a determinant of dengue, the research evidence for such a 
relationship is not well established. Results of a systematic review of the 
research literature designed to identify and assess the current state of the 
empirical evidence for the dengue-poverty link reveal a mixed story. Of 260 
peer-reviewed articles referencing dengue-poverty relationships, only 12 
English-language studies empirically assessed these relationships. Our analysis 
covering various social and economic conditions of poverty showed no clear 
associations with dengue rates. While nine of the 12 studies demonstrated some 
positive associations between measures of dengue and poverty (measured 
inconsistently through income, education, structural housing condition, 
overcrowding, and socioeconomic status), nine also presented null results and 
five with negative results. Of the five studies relating to access to water and 
sanitation, four reported null associations. Income and physical housing 
conditions were more consistently correlated with dengue outcomes than other 
poverty indicators. The small size of this sample, and the heterogeneity of 
measures and scales used to capture conditions of poverty, make it difficult to 
assess the strength and consistency of associations between various poverty 
indicators and dengue outcomes. At present, the global body of eligible 
English-language peer-reviewed literature investigating dengue-poverty 
relationships is too small to support a definitive relationship. We conclude 
that more research, particularly using standardized measures of both outcomes 
and indicators, is needed to support evidence-informed policies and approaches.

DOI: 10.1179/2047773214Y.0000000168
PMCID: PMC4445289
PMID: 25546339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]