---
reference_id: "PMID:36265857"
title: "Clinical Manifestations of Varicella: Disease Is Largely Forgotten, but It's Not Gone."
authors:
- Dooling K
- Marin M
- Gershon AA
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiac390
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Manifestations of Varicella: Disease Is Largely Forgotten, but It's Not Gone.
**Authors:** Dooling K, Marin M, Gershon AA
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiac390](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiac390)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2022 Oct 21;226(Suppl 4):S380-S384. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiac390.

Clinical Manifestations of Varicella: Disease Is Largely Forgotten, but It's Not 
Gone.

Dooling K(1), Marin M(1), Gershon AA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory 
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, 
USA.

After 25 years of varicella vaccination in the United States, classic varicella 
and its complications have become an uncommon occurrence. The clinical 
manifestation of varicella among vaccinated persons is usually modified, with 
fewer skin lesions, mostly maculopapular, and milder presentation. However, the 
potential for severe manifestations from varicella still exists among both 
vaccinated and unvaccinated persons, and thus healthcare providers should keep 
varicella in the differential diagnosis of a maculopapular or vesicular rash. 
The prompt recognition and diagnosis of varicella is important because when 
confirmed, clinical and public health measures need to be taken swiftly.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Infectious Diseases Society of 
America 2022.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiac390
PMCID: PMC10205892
PMID: 36265857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. A. A. G. 
receives National Institutes of Health funding (grant number R01DK093094); and 
has a contractual relationship with Merck through the Varicella Zoster Virus 
Identification Program. All other authors: No reported conflicts. All authors 
have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.