---
reference_id: "PMID:23436330"
title: "Atrial fibrillation and sinus node dysfunction in human ankyrin-B syndrome: a computational analysis."
authors:
- Wolf RM
- Glynn P
- Hashemi S
- Zarei K
- Mitchell CC
- Anderson ME
- Mohler PJ
- Hund TJ
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00734.2012
keywords:
- Action Potentials
- Animals
- Ankyrins/metabolism
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/physiopathology"
- Atrial Fibrillation/physiopathology
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/metabolism"
- Computer Simulation
- Fibrosis/physiopathology
- Heart Atria/pathology
- Humans
- Mice
- "Models, Cardiovascular"
- "Sinoatrial Node/pathology, physiopathology"
- Sodium-Calcium Exchanger/metabolism
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atrial fibrillation and sinus node dysfunction in human ankyrin-B syndrome: a computational analysis.
**Authors:** Wolf RM, Glynn P, Hashemi S, Zarei K, Mitchell CC, Anderson ME, Mohler PJ, Hund TJ
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00734.2012](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00734.2012)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2013 May;304(9):H1253-66. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00734.2012. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

Atrial fibrillation and sinus node dysfunction in human ankyrin-B syndrome: a
computational analysis.

Wolf RM(1), Glynn P, Hashemi S, Zarei K, Mitchell CC, Anderson ME, Mohler PJ,
Hund TJ.

Author information:
(1)The Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Ankyrin-B is a multifunctional adapter protein responsible for localization and
stabilization of select ion channels, transporters, and signaling molecules in
excitable cells including cardiomyocytes. Ankyrin-B dysfunction has been linked
with highly penetrant sinoatrial node (SAN) dysfunction and increased
susceptibility to atrial fibrillation. While previous studies have identified a
role for abnormal ion homeostasis in ventricular arrhythmias, the molecular
mechanisms responsible for atrial arrhythmias and SAN dysfunction in human
patients with ankyrin-B syndrome are unclear. Here, we develop a computational
model of ankyrin-B dysfunction in atrial and SAN cells and tissue to determine
the mechanism for increased susceptibility to atrial fibrillation and SAN
dysfunction in human patients with ankyrin-B syndrome. Our simulations predict
that defective membrane targeting of the voltage-gated L-type Ca(2+) channel
Cav1.3 leads to action potential shortening that reduces the critical atrial
tissue mass needed to sustain reentrant activation. In parallel, increased
fibrosis results in conduction slowing that further increases the susceptibility
to sustained reentry in the setting of ankyrin-B dysfunction. In SAN cells, loss
of Cav1.3 slows spontaneous pacemaking activity, whereas defects in Na(+)/Ca(2+)
exchanger and Na(+)/K(+) ATPase increase variability in SAN cell firing.
Finally, simulations of the intact SAN reveal a shift in primary pacemaker site,
SAN exit block, and even SAN failure in ankyrin-B-deficient tissue. These
studies identify the mechanism for increased susceptibility to atrial
fibrillation and SAN dysfunction in human disease. Importantly, ankyrin-B
dysfunction involves changes at both the cell and tissue levels that favor the
common manifestation of atrial arrhythmias and SAN dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00734.2012
PMCID: PMC3652094
PMID: 23436330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
