---
reference_id: "PMID:37960342"
title: Heptanoate Improves Compensatory Mechanism of Glucose Homeostasis in Mitochondrial Long-Chain Fatty Acid Oxidation Defect.
authors:
- Nurjanah S
- Gerding A
- Vieira-Lara MA
- Evers B
- Langelaar-Makkinje M
- Spiekerkoetter U
- Bakker BM
- Tucci S
journal: Nutrients
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/nu15214689
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heptanoate Improves Compensatory Mechanism of Glucose Homeostasis in Mitochondrial Long-Chain Fatty Acid Oxidation Defect.
**Authors:** Nurjanah S, Gerding A, Vieira-Lara MA, Evers B, Langelaar-Makkinje M, Spiekerkoetter U, Bakker BM, Tucci S
**Journal:** Nutrients (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu15214689](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15214689)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2023 Nov 5;15(21):4689. doi: 10.3390/nu15214689.

Heptanoate Improves Compensatory Mechanism of Glucose Homeostasis in 
Mitochondrial Long-Chain Fatty Acid Oxidation Defect.

Nurjanah S(1)(2), Gerding A(3)(4), Vieira-Lara MA(3), Evers B(3), 
Langelaar-Makkinje M(3), Spiekerkoetter U(1), Bakker BM(3), Tucci S(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Medical Centre, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, 
Germany.
(2)Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Pediatrics, Systems Medicine of Metabolism and Signaling, 
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Pharmacy, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(6)G.E.R.N. Research Center for Tissue Replacement, Regeneration & Neogenesis, 
Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Defects in mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation (FAO) impair metabolic 
flexibility, which is an essential process for energy homeostasis. 
Very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCADD; OMIM 609575) deficiency is the 
most common long-chain mitochondrial FAO disorder presenting with hypoglycemia 
as a common clinical manifestation. To prevent hypoglycemia, triheptanoin-a 
triglyceride composed of three heptanoates (C7) esterified with a glycerol 
backbone-can be used as a dietary treatment, since it is metabolized into 
precursors for gluconeogenesis. However, studies investigating the effect of 
triheptanoin on glucose homeostasis are limited. To understand the role of 
gluconeogenesis in the pathophysiology of long-chain mitochondrial FAO defects, 
we injected VLCAD-deficient (VLCAD-/-) mice with 13C3-glycerol in the presence 
and absence of heptanoate (C7). The incorporation of 13C3-glycerol into blood 
glucose was higher in VLCAD-/- mice than in WT mice, whereas the difference 
disappeared in the presence of C7. The result correlates with 13C enrichment of 
liver metabolites in VLCAD-/- mice. In contrast, the C7 bolus significantly 
decreased the 13C enrichment. These data suggest that the increased contribution 
of gluconeogenesis to the overall glucose production in VLCAD-/- mice increases 
the need for gluconeogenesis substrate, thereby avoiding hypoglycemia. 
Heptanoate is a suitable substrate to induce glucose production in mitochondrial 
FAO defect.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15214689
PMCID: PMC10649308
PMID: 37960342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.