---
reference_id: "PMID:30268123"
title: "New insights into the phenotypic spectrum of 14q22q23 deletions: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Pichiecchio A
- Vitale G
- Caporali C
- Parazzini C
- Milani D
- Recalcati MP
- "D'Amico L"
- Signorini S
- Balottin U
- Bastianello S
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-018-0405-3
keywords:
- "Anophthalmos/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Blepharophimosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14"
- Echocardiography
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Microphthalmos/diagnosis, genetics"
- Otx Transcription Factors/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into the phenotypic spectrum of 14q22q23 deletions: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Pichiecchio A, Vitale G, Caporali C, Parazzini C, Milani D, Recalcati MP, D'Amico L, Signorini S, Balottin U, Bastianello S
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-018-0405-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-018-0405-3)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2018 Sep 29;11(1):87. doi: 10.1186/s12920-018-0405-3.

New insights into the phenotypic spectrum of 14q22q23 deletions: a case report 
and literature review.

Pichiecchio A(1)(2), Vitale G(3), Caporali C(2), Parazzini C(4), Milani D(5), 
Recalcati MP(6), D'Amico L(2), Signorini S(7), Balottin U(2)(7), Bastianello 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroradiology, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, via Mondino 2, 27100, 
Pavia, Italy.
(2)University of Pavia, Corso Strada Nuova 65, 27100, Pavia, Italy.
(3)University of Pavia, Corso Strada Nuova 65, 27100, Pavia, Italy. 
giovitale01@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Pediatric Radiology and Neuroradiology, Children's Hospital "V. 
Buzzi", via Lodovico Castelvetro 32, 20154, Milan, Italy.
(5)Medical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, via Francesco Sforza 35, 20122, Milan, Italy.
(6)Medical Cytogenetics Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, 
Italy.
(7)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, via Mondino 2, 27100, 
Pavia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mutations occurring in the orthodenticle homeobox 2 gene (OTX2) are 
responsible for a rare genetic syndrome, characterized mainly by 
microphthalmia/anophthalmia associated with extra-ocular defects such as brain 
malformations, pituitary abnormalities, short stature and intellectual 
disability. To date, the spectrum of radiological features observed in patients 
with OTX2 mutations has never been summarized.
CASE PRESENTATION: In this report, we describe a case of large microdeletion 
encompassing OTX2 but not BMP4 presenting with a syndromic anophthalmia with 
corpus callosum hypoplasia, pituitary gland hypoplasia and vermian hypoplasia.
CONCLUSION: Our case report provides an illustration of the neuroradiological 
spectrum in a case of OTX2-related syndrome and the first radiological evidence 
of 14q22.2q23.1 deletion associated posterior cranial fossa anomalies.

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-018-0405-3
PMCID: PMC6162925
PMID: 30268123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent was obtained from 
the patient’s parents for publication of patient’s medical data and images. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.