---
reference_id: "PMID:23471635"
title: "Secondary infection as a risk factor for dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome: an historical perspective and role of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection."
authors:
- Guzman MG
- Alvarez M
- Halstead SB
journal: Arch Virol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00705-013-1645-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secondary infection as a risk factor for dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome: an historical perspective and role of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection.
**Authors:** Guzman MG, Alvarez M, Halstead SB
**Journal:** Arch Virol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00705-013-1645-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00705-013-1645-3)

## Content

1. Arch Virol. 2013 Jul;158(7):1445-59. doi: 10.1007/s00705-013-1645-3. Epub 2013
 Mar 8.

Secondary infection as a risk factor for dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock 
syndrome: an historical perspective and role of antibody-dependent enhancement 
of infection.

Guzman MG(1), Alvarez M, Halstead SB.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine Pedro Kouri, Havana, Cuba. lupe@ipk.sld.cu

Today, dengue viruses are the most prevalent arthropod-borne viruses in the 
world. Since the 1960s, numerous reports have identified a second heterologous 
dengue virus (DENV) infection as a principal risk factor for severe dengue 
disease (dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, DHF/DSS). Modifiers of 
dengue disease response include the specific sequence of two DENV infections, 
the interval between infections, and contributions from the human host, such as 
age, ethnicity, chronic illnesses and genetic background. Antibody-dependent 
enhancement (ADE) of dengue virus infection has been proposed as the early 
mechanism underlying DHF/DSS. Dengue cross-reactive antibodies raised following 
a first dengue infection combine with a second infecting virus to form 
infectious immune complexes that enter Fc-receptor-bearing cells. This results 
in an increased number of infected cells and increased viral output per cell. At 
the late illness stage, high levels of cytokines, possibly the result of T cell 
elimination of infected cells, result in vascular permeability, leading to shock 
and death. This review is focused on the etiological role of secondary 
infections (SI) and mechanisms of ADE.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-013-1645-3
PMID: 23471635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]