---
reference_id: "PMID:15647702"
title: Sexual transmission of hepatitis B.
authors:
- Atkins M
- Nolan M
journal: Curr Opin Infect Dis
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/00001432-200502000-00011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sexual transmission of hepatitis B.
**Authors:** Atkins M, Nolan M
**Journal:** Curr Opin Infect Dis (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00001432-200502000-00011](https://doi.org/10.1097/00001432-200502000-00011)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2005 Feb;18(1):67-72. doi: 
10.1097/00001432-200502000-00011.

Sexual transmission of hepatitis B.

Atkins M(1), Nolan M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, Fulham Road, 
London, UK. m.atkins@imperial.ac.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Hepatitis B virus infection is prevalent worldwide and is a 
significant cause of morbidity and mortality particularly in Asia. Adults 
chronically infected with hepatitis B virus remain a significant potential 
source of sexually transmitted hepatitis B. The purpose of this article is to 
review the recent literature relating to hepatitis B virus transmission with 
particular emphasis on sexual transmission and efforts to prevent spread.
RECENT FINDINGS: The introduction of hepatitis B virus vaccine and the 
implementation of universal childhood vaccination for hepatitis B in some 
countries have led to a dramatic reduction in the number of children with 
chronic hepatitis B. However, recent reports suggest that we are not as 
successful in preventing infection by sexual transmission. It is clear that 
sexual transmission of hepatitis B virus is still widespread and is a major 
problem in certain high-risk groups such as men who have sex with men, 
intravenous drug users, prisoners and sex workers. Significant problems remain 
with respect to education and vaccination within these groups.
SUMMARY: Hepatitis B virus remains a major health burden but it is preventable 
by education and vaccination. Greater resources are required to expand 
vaccination to the at-risk, sexually active adult populations if the World 
Health Organization ideal of hepatitis B virus eradication is to be realized and 
the burden of hepatitis B virus-related morbidity and mortality contained.

DOI: 10.1097/00001432-200502000-00011
PMID: 15647702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]