---
reference_id: "PMID:39320041"
title: "An inherited TBX3 alteration in a prenatal case of ulnar-mammary syndrome: Clinical assessment and functional characterization in Drosophila melanogaster."
authors:
- Bottillo I
- "D'Alessandro A"
- Ciccone MP
- Cestra G
- Di Giacomo G
- Silvestri E
- Castori M
- Brancati F
- Lenzi A
- Paiardini A
- Majore S
- Cenci G
- Grammatico P
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/jcp.31440
keywords:
- Animals
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- Drosophila melanogaster/genetics
- Humans
- Female
- Ulna/abnormalities
- "Upper Extremity Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Phenotype
- Drosophila Proteins/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Male
- Pregnancy
- Mutation/genetics
- Breast Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An inherited TBX3 alteration in a prenatal case of ulnar-mammary syndrome: Clinical assessment and functional characterization in Drosophila melanogaster.
**Authors:** Bottillo I, D'Alessandro A, Ciccone MP, Cestra G, Di Giacomo G, Silvestri E, Castori M, Brancati F, Lenzi A, Paiardini A, Majore S, Cenci G, Grammatico P
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.31440](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.31440)

## Content

1. J Cell Physiol. 2024 Dec;239(12):e31440. doi: 10.1002/jcp.31440. Epub 2024 Sep
 25.

An inherited TBX3 alteration in a prenatal case of ulnar-mammary syndrome: 
Clinical assessment and functional characterization in Drosophila melanogaster.

Bottillo I(1), D'Alessandro A(2)(3), Ciccone MP(1), Cestra G(2)(4)(5), Di 
Giacomo G(1), Silvestri E(6), Castori M(7), Brancati F(8)(9), Lenzi A(10), 
Paiardini A(11), Majore S(1), Cenci G(2)(3), Grammatico P(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Experimental Medicine, San 
Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Biology and Biotechnologies "C. Darwin", Sapienza University of 
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)Istituto Pasteur Italia-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Rome, Italy.
(4)Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology (IBPM), National Research 
Council (CNR), Rome, Italy.
(5)Fondazione Santa Lucia IRCCS, c/o CERC, Rome, Italy.
(6)Unit of Fetal and Neonatal Pathology, Division of Pathology, San 
Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(7)Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(8)Human Genetics Laboratory, Department of Life, Health and Environmental 
Sciences, University of L'Aquila, Italy.
(9)San Raffaele Roma IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(10)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy.
(11)Department of Biochemical Sciences "A. Rossi Fanelli", Sapienza University 
of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Ulnar mammary syndrome (UMS) results from heterozygous variants in the TBX3 gene 
and impacts limb, tooth, hair, apocrine gland, and genitalia development. The 
expressivity of UMS is highly variable with no established genotype-phenotype 
correlations. TBX3 belongs to the Tbx gene family, which encodes transcription 
factors characterized by the presence of a T-box DNA-binding domain. We describe 
a fetus exhibiting severe upper limb defects and harboring the novel 
TBX3:c.400 C > T (p.P134S) variant inherited from the mother who remained 
clinically misdiagnosed until prenatal diagnosis. Literature revision was 
conducted to uncover the TBX3 clinical and mutational spectrum. Moreover, we 
generated a Drosophila humanized model for TBX3 to study the developmental 
consequences of the p.P134S as well as of other variants targeting different 
regions of the protein. Phenotypic analysis in flies, coupled with in silico 
modeling on the TBX3 variants, suggested that the c.400 C > T is UMS-causing and 
impacts TBX3 localization. Comparative analyses of the fly phenotypes caused by 
the expression of all variants, demonstrated that missense changes in the T-box 
domain affect more significantly TBX3 activity than variants outside this 
domain. To improve the clinicians' recognition of UMS, we estimated the 
frequency of the main clinical features of the disease. Core features often 
present pre-pubertally include defects of the ulna and/or of ulnar ray, 
hypoplastic nipples and/or areolas and, less frequently, genitalia anomalies in 
young males. These results enhance our understanding of the molecular basis and 
the clinical spectrum of UMS, shedding light on the functional consequences of 
TBX3 variants in a developmental context.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Cellular Physiology published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.31440
PMCID: PMC11649972
PMID: 39320041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest have been disclosed by any 
of the authors.