---
reference_id: "PMID:38977461"
title: "Spinal movement disorders in NMOSD, MOGAD, and idiopathic transverse myelitis: a prospective observational study."
authors:
- Abboud H
- Sun R
- Modak N
- Elkasaby M
- Wang A
- Levy M
journal: J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12527-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Female
- "Myelitis, Transverse/epidemiology"
- Adult
- Male
- Aged
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Neuromyelitis Optica/epidemiology
- Prospective Studies
- Movement Disorders/epidemiology
- Aquaporin 4/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal movement disorders in NMOSD, MOGAD, and idiopathic transverse myelitis: a prospective observational study.
**Authors:** Abboud H, Sun R, Modak N, Elkasaby M, Wang A, Levy M
**Journal:** J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-024-12527-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-024-12527-6)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2024 Sep;271(9):5875-5885. doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12527-6. Epub
2024  Jul 8.

Spinal movement disorders in NMOSD, MOGAD, and idiopathic transverse myelitis: a 
prospective observational study.

Abboud H(1)(2)(3), Sun R(4), Modak N(4), Elkasaby M(5), Wang A(5), Levy M(6).

Author information:
(1)Multiple Sclerosis and Neuroimmunology Program, University Hospitals 
Cleveland Medical Center, Bolwell, 5th Floor, 11100 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, 
OH, 44106, USA. Hesham.abboud@uhhospitals.org.
(2)Parkinson's and Movement Disorders Center, University Hospitals Cleveland 
Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA. Hesham.abboud@uhhospitals.org.
(3)Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA. 
Hesham.abboud@uhhospitals.org.
(4)Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Parkinson's and Movement Disorders Center, University Hospitals Cleveland 
Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(6)Division of Neuroimmunology and Neuroinfectious Diseases, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Retrospective studies suggest that spinal movement disorders, 
especially tonic spasms, are prevalent in NMOSD. However, there have been no 
prospective studies evaluating spinal movement disorders in NMOSD, MOGAD, and 
idiopathic transverse myelitis (ITM).
METHODS: Patients referred to a tertiary neuroimmunology clinic for spinal cord 
demyelination (excluding MS) were evaluated. All patients answered a movement 
disorders survey and underwent a movement disorder-focused exam. Movement 
disorders were compared among patients with NMOSD with and without AQP4-IgG, 
MOGAD, and ITM. Patients with and without involuntary movements were also 
compared to identify predictors of spinal movement disorders.
RESULTS: Sixty-three patients were evaluated from 2017 to 2021 (71% females, 
median age 49 years, range 18-72 years, median disease duration 12 months, range 
1-408). Of the total, 49% had ITM, 21% had NMOSD without AQP4-IgG, 19% had NMOSD 
with AQP4-IgG, and 11% had MOGAD. Movement disorders were present in 73% of the 
total patients and were most frequent in NMOSD with AQP4-IgG (92%) and least 
frequent in MOGAD (57%). The most frequent spinal movement disorders were tonic 
spasms (57%), focal dystonia (25%), spinal tremor (16%), spontaneous clonus 
(9.5%), secondary restless limb syndrome (9.5%), and spinal myoclonus (8%). 
Multivariate analysis showed that longitudinally extensive myelitis and AQP4-IgG 
are independent risk factors for the development of spinal movement disorders, 
while MOG-IgG and African American race were associated with a lower risk of 
developing these movement disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: Spinal movement disorders are highly prevalent in non-MS 
demyelinating disorders of the spinal cord. Prevalence rates exceed those 
reported in MS and retrospective NMOSD studies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-024-12527-6
PMCID: PMC11377660
PMID: 38977461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Abboud is a consultant and speaker for 
Biogen, Genentech, BMS, Horizon, and Alexion. He has served as a consultant 
and/or advisory board member for Cycle pharma and Alpine Pharma. He received 
honoraria from Neurology Live. He receives research support from Genentech, BMS, 
Novartis, Sanofi, UCB, and the Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation. He serves as 
an Assistant Editor for the Neurology Journal. He receives royalties from 
UpToDate. Dr Levy received personal compensation from Alexion, Horizon, 
Genentech, UCB Pharma, Quest Diagnostics, and Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma 
Corporation, and research grants from Alexion, Horizon, and Genentech. He serves 
as a co-editor of the Multiple Sclerosis and related Disorders Journal and the 
editor-in-chief of Neuroimmunology Reports. All other authors report no 
disclosures. The authors declare no conflict of interest related to this 
research. Full financial disclosures for the past year are included at the end 
of the manuscript.