---
reference_id: "PMID:30578502"
title: Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy.
authors:
- Tsang SH
- Sharma T
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-95046-4_29
keywords:
- "Bestrophins/deficiency, genetics"
- Electroretinography
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy.
**Authors:** Tsang SH, Sharma T
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-319-95046-4_29](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-95046-4_29)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2018;1085:157-158. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-95046-4_29.

Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy.

Tsang SH(1)(2), Sharma T(3).

Author information:
(1)Jonas Children's Vision Care, Bernard & Shirlee Brown Glaucoma Laboratory,
Columbia Stem Cell Initiative-Departments of Ophthalmology, Biomedical
Engineering, Pathology & Cell Biology, Institute of Human Nutrition, Vagelos
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University, Edward S. Harkness Eye
Institute, NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Jonas Children's Vision Care, Bernard & Shirlee Brown Glaucoma Laboratory,
Columbia Stem Cell Initiative-Departments of Ophthalmology, Biomedical
Engineering, Pathology & Cell Biology, Institute of Human Nutrition, Vagelos
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
ts3118@cumc.columbia.edu.

Autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB) results from a total absence of
functional bestrophin-1 protein owing to two BEST1 mutations, one on each of the
chromosomes. If present at an early age, the presenting feature could be
decreased vision due to amblyopia. Refractive error is hyperopia, predisposing
these eyes for acute angle-closure glaucoma. The yellowish lesions are larger
and more extensive-extending beyond the arcades-than in the typical autosomal
dominant Best disease. Some of the eyes also show numerous yellowish subretinal
dots. Lesions are multifocal (Fig. 29.1). Subretinal fibrosis in the macular
area is a common feature. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) may show cystoid
changes in the neurosensory retina. Fundus autofluorescence (FAF): Increased AF
reflects lipofuscin accumulation in the RPE; decreased AF reflects RPE atrophy.
Electroretinography (ERG): As panretinal photoreceptor dysfunction progresses
with advancing age, full-field (FF) ERG shows delayed rod and cone responses.
Electrooculography (EOG): Abnormal Arden ratio.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-95046-4_29
PMID: 30578502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
