---
reference_id: "PMID:19755199"
title: Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) is useful in the diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis.
authors:
- Bolat S
- Berding G
- Dengler R
- Stangel M
- Trebst C
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.060
keywords:
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- Azathioprine/therapeutic use
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Encephalitis/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- Fluorodeoxyglucose F18
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Lymph Nodes/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Myelitis, Transverse/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- Positron-Emission Tomography/methods
- Predictive Value of Tests
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- "Spinal Cord/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- Steroids/therapeutic use
- "Temporal Lobe/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) is useful in the diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Bolat S, Berding G, Dengler R, Stangel M, Trebst C
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.060](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.060)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2009 Dec 15;287(1-2):257-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.060. Epub
 2009 Sep 15.

Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) is useful in the
diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis.

Bolat S(1), Berding G, Dengler R, Stangel M, Trebst C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
bolat.seza@mh-hannover.de

A 45-year-old man presented with a progressive transverse spinal cord syndrome.
MRI scanning revealed bitemporal and multiple spinal lesions with significant
enhancement after gadolinium administration mimicking an acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis. CSF analyses showed a lymphocytic pleocytosis. After
treatment with high dose steroids clinical improvement was observed with a
secondary decline shortly thereafter. MRI rescanning showed no remarkable
alterations of the lesions. Further diagnostic work-up included a
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) of the whole body to
search for occult inflammation or neoplasia. The FDG-PET showed hypermetabolic
foci corresponding to the lesions on MRI and additionally increased uptake in
mediastinal and pulmonary hilar lymph nodes. A mediastinal lymph node was
biopsied. Pathology was consistent with the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. The usual
diagnostical tools to evaluate a sarcoidosis, such as serum angiotensin
converting enzyme (ACE) and computed tomography of the chest were performed
initially and revealed no pathological results. Therefore, in this case FDG-PET
was crucial for the diagnostic work-up leading to an accessible inflammatory
lesion outside the CNS for biopsy and the final diagnosis of sarcoidosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.060
PMID: 19755199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
