---
reference_id: "PMID:39465408"
title: "A 16-year evaluation of opportunistic lung cancer screening with low-dose CT in China: comparative findings between non-smokers and smokers."
authors:
- Tang Y
- Zhao S
- Zhou L
- Huang Y
- Wang J
- Liang M
- Wang F
- Zhu H
- Qi L
- Zhang L
- Liu L
- Hou D
- Xu Z
- Zhang K
- Tang W
- Wu N
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13056-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, pathology, diagnosis, mortality"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- China/epidemiology
- Early Detection of Cancer/methods
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
- "Smokers/statistics & numerical data"
- Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Non-Smokers/statistics & numerical data"
- "Smoking/adverse effects, epidemiology"
- Prospective Studies
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A 16-year evaluation of opportunistic lung cancer screening with low-dose CT in China: comparative findings between non-smokers and smokers.
**Authors:** Tang Y, Zhao S, Zhou L, Huang Y, Wang J, Liang M, Wang F, Zhu H, Qi L, Zhang L, Liu L, Hou D, Xu Z, Zhang K, Tang W, Wu N
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-024-13056-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-024-13056-1)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2024 Oct 28;24(1):1322. doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13056-1.

A 16-year evaluation of opportunistic lung cancer screening with low-dose CT in
China: comparative findings between non-smokers and smokers.

Tang Y(1), Zhao S(1), Zhou L(1), Huang Y(1), Wang J(1), Liang M(2), Wang F(3),
Zhu H(4), Qi L(1), Zhang L(1), Liu L(1), Hou D(1), Xu Z(5), Zhang K(5), Tang
W(6), Wu N(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, National Clinical Research Center for
Cancer/Cancer Hospital, National Cancer Center, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, 100020, China.
(3)Office of Cancer Screening, National Clinical Research Center for
Cancer/Cancer Hospital, National Cancer Center, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Clinical Study on
Anticancer Molecular Targeted Drugs, National Clinical Research Center for
Cancer/Cancer Hospital, National Cancer Center, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
(5)Department of Cancer Prevention, National Clinical Research Center for
Cancer/Cancer Hospital, National Cancer Center, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
(6)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, National Clinical Research Center for
Cancer/Cancer Hospital, National Cancer Center, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
tang.wei@vip.163.com.
(7)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, National Clinical Research Center for
Cancer/Cancer Hospital, National Cancer Center, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
cjr.wuning@vip.163.com.
(8)Department of Nuclear Medicine (PET-CT Center), National Clinical Research
Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, National Cancer Center, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
cjr.wuning@vip.163.com.

BACKGROUND: Although low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) screening effectively
reduces LC mortality in high-risk individuals with a history of smoking in
China, the feasibility and efficacy of lung cancer screening (LCS) in
individuals who never smoked versus individuals who smoked remains unclear.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis of prospective cohort studies at
the National Cancer Center (NCC) in China from January 2006 to December 2022. A
comprehensive LCS initiative was undertaken, involving 30,468 participants
(54.5% male). Participants underwent LCS using LDCT. Potential malignancies were
managed through joint consensus between patients and their physicians.
Epidemiology, screening eligibility criteria, and LC detection rates and
survival outcomes were compared between individuals who smoked and individuals
who never smoked.
RESULTS: Among 30,468 participants, 339 LCs were pathologically confirmed in 289
patients. The LC detection rate was 0.9% (289/30,468) overall, 0.8% in
individuals who smoked (71/9,042), and 1.0% in individuals who never smoked
(218/21,426). In individuals who smoked, LC detection rates were 0.5% (21/4516)
and 1.1% (50/4526) in the < 20 and ≥ 20 pack-year subgroups, respectively
(P = 0.001). Early-stage LC (stage 0 or I) was detected in 73.8% of the
individuals who smoked and in 78.8% of individuals who never smoked, while
advanced LC (stage III-IV) was found 8.8% of individuals who smoked and 4.2% of
individuals who never smoked, respectively. Significant differences in
histologic types were found between individuals who smoked and individuals who
never smoked (P = 0.01), although adenocarcinoma was the most prevalent in both
groups, at 83.0% and 78.8%, respectively. The median nodule size was 9.9 mm
(IQR, 8.0-13.8) in individuals who smoked and 9.2 mm (IQR, 6.8-13.6) in
individuals who never smoked (P = 0.228). Individuals who never smoked tended to
favour surgical treatment alone (88.0%) more than individuals who smoked
(81.3%). The 10-year survival rate was higher in individuals who never smoked
(92.6%) than in individuals who smoked (88.8%). Only 15.6% (45/289) of patients
with LC met the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) criteria
for LDCT eligibility, while 29.0% (84/289) met the China guideline for the
screening and early detection of lung cancer (CGSL) criteria. Median follow-up
for those followed was 25.4 (IQR, 13.7-43.3) months.
CONCLUSIONS: LDCT screening improves early LC detection and treatment outcomes
for both individuals who smoked and individuals who never smoked. Significant
differences exist in epidemiology, histologic type, and survival between these
groups. The USPSTF and CGSL criteria miss a significant number of LC cases,
particularly among individuals who never smoked. Integrating individuals who
never smoked into LCS programs is essential, yet it comes with its own
challenges, such as managing radiation risks, allocating resources effectively,
and considering financial aspects. Consequently, there is an urgent need for LCS
programs in China to better identify the "high-risk" non-smoker population
susceptible to LC and to ensure that potential risks associated with screening
are reduced.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-024-13056-1
PMCID: PMC11514951
PMID: 39465408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
