---
reference_id: "PMID:31332380"
title: "Noncoding CGG repeat expansions in neuronal intranuclear inclusion disease, oculopharyngodistal myopathy and an overlapping disease."
authors:
- Ishiura H
- Shibata S
- Yoshimura J
- Suzuki Y
- Qu W
- Doi K
- Almansour MA
- Kikuchi JK
- Taira M
- Mitsui J
- Takahashi Y
- Ichikawa Y
- Mano T
- Iwata A
- Harigaya Y
- Matsukawa MK
- Matsukawa T
- Tanaka M
- Shirota Y
- Ohtomo R
- Kowa H
- Date H
- Mitsue A
- Hatsuta H
- Morimoto S
- Murayama S
- Shiio Y
- Saito Y
- Mitsutake A
- Kawai M
- Sasaki T
- Sugiyama Y
- Hamada M
- Ohtomo G
- Terao Y
- Nakazato Y
- Takeda A
- Sakiyama Y
- Umeda-Kameyama Y
- Shinmi J
- Ogata K
- Kohno Y
- Lim SY
- Tan AH
- Shimizu J
- Goto J
- Nishino I
- Toda T
- Morishita S
- Tsuji S
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41588-019-0458-z
keywords:
- Adult
- "Ataxia/genetics, pathology"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1/genetics
- "Fragile X Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Genetic Markers
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
- Humans
- "Intranuclear Inclusion Bodies/genetics, pathology"
- Linkage Disequilibrium
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-1/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscular Dystrophies/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Neuroimaging/methods
- Pedigree
- "Tremor/genetics, pathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noncoding CGG repeat expansions in neuronal intranuclear inclusion disease, oculopharyngodistal myopathy and an overlapping disease.
**Authors:** Ishiura H, Shibata S, Yoshimura J, Suzuki Y, Qu W, Doi K, Almansour MA, Kikuchi JK, Taira M, Mitsui J, Takahashi Y, Ichikawa Y, Mano T, Iwata A, Harigaya Y, Matsukawa MK, Matsukawa T, Tanaka M, Shirota Y, Ohtomo R, Kowa H, Date H, Mitsue A, Hatsuta H, Morimoto S, Murayama S, Shiio Y, Saito Y, Mitsutake A, Kawai M, Sasaki T, Sugiyama Y, Hamada M, Ohtomo G, Terao Y, Nakazato Y, Takeda A, Sakiyama Y, Umeda-Kameyama Y, Shinmi J, Ogata K, Kohno Y, Lim SY, Tan AH, Shimizu J, Goto J, Nishino I, Toda T, Morishita S, Tsuji S
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41588-019-0458-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-019-0458-z)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2019 Aug;51(8):1222-1232. doi: 10.1038/s41588-019-0458-z. Epub 2019
 Jul 22.

Noncoding CGG repeat expansions in neuronal intranuclear inclusion disease, 
oculopharyngodistal myopathy and an overlapping disease.

Ishiura H(1), Shibata S(1), Yoshimura J(2), Suzuki Y(2), Qu W(2), Doi K(2)(3), 
Almansour MA(1), Kikuchi JK(1), Taira M(1)(4), Mitsui J(1)(5), Takahashi 
Y(1)(6), Ichikawa Y(1)(7), Mano T(1), Iwata A(1), Harigaya Y(8), Matsukawa 
MK(1), Matsukawa T(1)(5), Tanaka M(1)(9), Shirota Y(1), Ohtomo R(1), Kowa 
H(1)(10), Date H(1)(6), Mitsue A(1), Hatsuta H(11)(12), Morimoto S(11), Murayama 
S(11), Shiio Y(13), Saito Y(14), Mitsutake A(1), Kawai M(1), Sasaki T(1), 
Sugiyama Y(1), Hamada M(1), Ohtomo G(1), Terao Y(1)(15), Nakazato Y(16), Takeda 
A(12), Sakiyama Y(17), Umeda-Kameyama Y(18), Shinmi J(1), Ogata K(19), Kohno 
Y(20), Lim SY(21), Tan AH(21), Shimizu J(1), Goto J(1)(22), Nishino I(23), Toda 
T(1), Morishita S(2), Tsuji S(24)(25)(26).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of 
Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan.
(3)School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo University of Technology, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Integrative Genomics, Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization, 
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Neurology, Kyorin University, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Neurology, Maebashi Red Cross Hospital, Maebashi, Japan.
(9)Institute of Medical Genomics, International University of Health and 
Welfare, Chiba, Japan.
(10)Department of Rehabilitation Science, Kobe University Graduate School of 
Health Sciences, Kobe, Japan.
(11)Department of Neurology and Neuropathology (the Brain Bank for Aging 
Research), Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Department of Neurology, Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan.
(13)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Teishin Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(14)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, National Center Hospital, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(15)Department of Cell Physiology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(16)Department of Neurology, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan.
(17)Department of Neurology, Jichi Medical University, Saitama Medical Center, 
Saitama, Japan.
(18)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(19)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Higashisaitama 
Hospital, Saitama, Japan.
(20)Department of Neurology, Ibaraki Prefectural University of Health Sciences, 
Ami, Japan.
(21)Division of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(22)Department of Neurology, International University of Health and Welfare Mita 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(23)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(24)Department of Neurology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. 
tsuji@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
(25)Department of Molecular Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. tsuji@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
(26)Institute of Medical Genomics, International University of Health and 
Welfare, Chiba, Japan. tsuji@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Noncoding repeat expansions cause various neuromuscular diseases, including 
myotonic dystrophies, fragile X tremor/ataxia syndrome, some spinocerebellar 
ataxias, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and benign adult familial myoclonic 
epilepsies. Inspired by the striking similarities in the clinical and 
neuroimaging findings between neuronal intranuclear inclusion disease (NIID) and 
fragile X tremor/ataxia syndrome caused by noncoding CGG repeat expansions in 
FMR1, we directly searched for repeat expansion mutations and identified 
noncoding CGG repeat expansions in NBPF19 (NOTCH2NLC) as the causative mutations 
for NIID. Further prompted by the similarities in the clinical and neuroimaging 
findings with NIID, we identified similar noncoding CGG repeat expansions in two 
other diseases: oculopharyngeal myopathy with leukoencephalopathy and 
oculopharyngodistal myopathy, in LOC642361/NUTM2B-AS1 and LRP12, respectively. 
These findings expand our knowledge of the clinical spectra of diseases caused 
by expansions of the same repeat motif, and further highlight how directly 
searching for expanded repeats can help identify mutations underlying diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-019-0458-z
PMID: 31332380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]