---
reference_id: "PMID:22893778"
title: "Sodium oxybate for narcolepsy with cataplexy: systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Alshaikh MK
- Tricco AC
- Tashkandi M
- Mamdani M
- Straus SE
- BaHammam AS
journal: J Clin Sleep Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.5664/jcsm.2048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sodium oxybate for narcolepsy with cataplexy: systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Alshaikh MK, Tricco AC, Tashkandi M, Mamdani M, Straus SE, BaHammam AS
**Journal:** J Clin Sleep Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.5664/jcsm.2048](https://doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.2048)

## Content

1. J Clin Sleep Med. 2012 Aug 15;8(4):451-8. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.2048.

Sodium oxybate for narcolepsy with cataplexy: systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Alshaikh MK(1), Tricco AC, Tashkandi M, Mamdani M, Straus SE, BaHammam AS.

Author information:
(1)University Sleep Disorders Center, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of sodium oxybate (SXB) in 
narcolepsy-cataplexy patients.
DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
PATIENTS: Adults with narcolepsy-cataplexy.
INTERVENTIONS: SXB.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Electronic databases (e.g., MEDLINE) and references of 
included studies were searched to identify randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 
assessing the efficacy and safety of SXB for patients with narcolepsy-cataplexy. 
Risk of bias was appraised using the Cochrane risk of bias tool. Meta-analysis 
was conducted in Review Manager Version 5. Six RCTs and 5 companion reports were 
included after screening 14 full-text articles and 483 citations. All were 
private-industry funded. SXB (usually 9 g/night) was superior to placebo for 
reducing mean weekly cataplexy attacks (n = 2 RCTs, mean difference [MD]: -8.5, 
95% CI: -15.3, -1.6), increasing maintenance wakefulness test (MWT) (n = 2, MD: 
5.18, 95% CI: 2.59-7.78), reducing sleep attacks (n = 2, MD: -9.65, 95% CI: 
-17.72, -1.59), and increasing Clinical Global Impression scores (n = 3, 
relative risk, RR: 2.42, 95% CI: 1.77-3.32). SXB did not significantly increase 
REM sleep versus placebo (n = 2, MD: -0.49, 95% CI: -3.90, 2.92). Patients 
receiving SXB had statistically more adverse events versus placebo, including 
nausea (n = 3, relative risk [RR]: 7.74, 95% CI: 3.2, 19.2), vomiting (n = 2, 
RR: 11.8, 95% CI: 1.6, 89.4), and dizziness (n = 3, RR: 4.3, 95% CI: 1.1, 16.4). 
Enuresis was not significantly different from placebo (n = 2, RR: 2.6, 95% CI: 
0.8, 9.8). All meta-analyses had minimal statistical heterogeneity (p-value > 
0.1).
CONCLUSION: Narcolepsy patients on SXB have significant reductions in cataplexy 
and daytime sleepiness. SXB is well tolerated in patients with narcolepsy, and 
most adverse events were mild to moderate in severity.

DOI: 10.5664/jcsm.2048
PMCID: PMC3407266
PMID: 22893778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]