---
reference_id: PMID:37903214
title: Ellis-van Creveld Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Da Silva JD
- Tkachenko N
- Soares AR
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ellis-van Creveld Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Da Silva JD, Tkachenko N, Soares AR

## Content

1. Ellis-van Creveld Syndrome.

Da Silva JD(1), Tkachenko N(1), Soares AR(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2023 Oct 26.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Department, Santo Antonio University Hospital Center, Porto, 
Portugal

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Ellis-van Creveld (EVC) syndrome is characterized by 
postaxial polydactyly of the hands, disproportionate short stature with short 
limbs, dystrophic and/or hypoplastic nails, dental and oral manifestations, 
congenital heart disease, and radiologic abnormalities (narrow chest, short 
ribs, short tubular bones, bulbous ends of the proximal ulnae and distal radii, 
carpal and metacarpal fusions, cone-shaped epiphyses of phalanges, small iliac 
crests, acetabular spur projections [trident ilia], and lateral slanting of the 
tibial plateau). Other less common and more variable features include postaxial 
polydactyly of the feet, upper lip defect, and developmental delay.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of EVC syndrome is established in a proband 
with characteristic clinical and radiographic findings and biallelic pathogenic 
variants in DYNC2H1, DYNC2LI1, EVC, EVC2, GLI, SMO, or WDR35 or a heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in PRKACA or PRKACB identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgical amputation for polydactyly if 
desired; surgical correction of genu valgum as needed; physical therapy as 
needed; mechanical ventilation may be required in the neonatal period in those 
with severe restrictive lung disease; orthodontic and/or surgical treatment of 
dental anomalies; standard treatment for congenital heart disease; developmental 
services as needed; surgical correction of genital urinary malformations as 
needed; standard treatment for hearing loss. Surveillance: Monitor growth at 
least annually throughout childhood; orthopedic evaluation with radiographic 
assessment as needed; physical and rehabilitation medicine evaluation as needed; 
assessment for manifestations of respiratory failure and/or restrictive lung 
disease as needed; monitor for dental eruption, overcrowding, and dental 
morphology annually throughout childhood; echocardiogram as needed; monitor 
developmental progress and educational needs at each visit until adulthood; 
hearing evaluation as needed if hearing loss is present. Pregnancy management: 
Cesarean delivery is recommended in pregnant women with EVC syndrome who have 
pelvic/hip abnormalities.
GENETIC COUNSELING: EVC syndrome caused by pathogenic variants in DYNC2H1, 
DYNC2LI1, EVC, EVC2, GLI, SMO, or WDR35 is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. EVC syndrome caused by pathogenic variants in PRKACA or PRKACB 
(accounting for 2% of affected individuals) is inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. Autosomal recessive inheritance: If both parents are known to 
be heterozygous for an EVC syndrome-related pathogenic variant, each sib of an 
affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% 
chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the 
familial pathogenic variants. Once the EVC syndrome-related pathogenic variants 
have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 37903214