---
reference_id: "PMID:39123476"
title: "Observation and Management of Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia and Noonan Syndrome-Associated Myeloproliferative Disorder: A Real-World Experience."
authors:
- Lucas BJ
- Connors JS
- Wang H
- Conneely S
- Cuglievan B
- Garcia MB
- Rau RE
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16152749
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Observation and Management of Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia and Noonan Syndrome-Associated Myeloproliferative Disorder: A Real-World Experience.
**Authors:** Lucas BJ, Connors JS, Wang H, Conneely S, Cuglievan B, Garcia MB, Rau RE
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16152749](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16152749)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Aug 2;16(15):2749. doi: 10.3390/cancers16152749.

Observation and Management of Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia and Noonan
Syndrome-Associated Myeloproliferative Disorder: A Real-World Experience.

Lucas BJ(1), Connors JS(2), Wang H(3), Conneely S(1), Cuglievan B(2)(4), Garcia
MB(2)(4), Rau RE(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's Cancer
and Hematology Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Children's Memorial Hermann Hospital,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Ben Towne Center for Childhood Cancer Research,
Seattle Children's Hospital, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.

Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia (JMML) is a rare and clonal hematopoietic
disorder of infancy and early childhood with myeloproliferative/myelodysplastic
features resulting from germline or somatic mutations in the RAS pathway.
Treatment is not uniform, with management varying from observation to stem cell
transplant. The aim of our retrospective review is to describe the treatment and
outcomes of a cohort of patients with JMML or Noonan Syndrome-associated
Myeloproliferative Disorder (NS-MPD) to provide management guidance for this
rare and heterogeneous disease. We report on 22 patients with JMML or NS-MPD
managed at three institutions in the Texas Medical Center. Of patients with
known genetic mutations and cytogenetics, 6 harbored germline mutations, 12 had
somatic mutations, and 9 showed cytogenetic abnormalities. Overall, 14/22
patients are alive. Spontaneous clinical remission occurred in one patient with
somatic NRAS mutation, as well as two with germline PTPN11 mutations with
NS-MPD, and two others with germline PTPN11 mutations and NS-MPD remain under
surveillance. Patients with NS-MPD were excluded from treatment analysis as none
required chemotherapeutic intervention. All patients (5/5) treated with
5-azacitidine alone and one of the four treated with 6-mercaptopurine
monotherapy had a reduction in mutant variant allele frequency. Transformation
to acute myeloid leukemia was seen in two patients who both died. Among patients
who received transplants, 7/13 are alive, and relapse post-transplant occurred
in 3/13 with a median time to relapse of 3.55 months. This report provides
insight into therapy responses and long-term outcomes across different genetic
subsets of JMML and lends insight into the expected time to spontaneous
resolution in patients with NS-MPD with germline PTPN11 mutations.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16152749
PMCID: PMC11311611
PMID: 39123476

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
