---
reference_id: "PMID:37651202"
title: Effects of AFQ056 on language learning in fragile X syndrome.
authors:
- Berry-Kravis E
- Abbeduto L
- Hagerman R
- Coffey CS
- Cudkowicz M
- Erickson CA
- McDuffie A
- Hessl D
- Ethridge L
- Tassone F
- Kaufmann WE
- Friedmann K
- Bullard L
- Hoffmann A
- Veenstra-VanderWeele J
- Staley K
- Klements D
- Moshinsky M
- Harkey B
- Long J
- Fedler J
- Klingner E
- Ecklund D
- Costigan M
- Huff T
- Pearson B
- NeuroNEXT FXLEARN Investigators
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/JCI171723
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- Child
- Humans
- Fragile X Syndrome/drug therapy
- Single-Blind Method
- Learning
- Language
- Cleft Palate
- Indoles
- Malignant Hyperthermia
- Myotonia Congenita
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of AFQ056 on language learning in fragile X syndrome.
**Authors:** Berry-Kravis E, Abbeduto L, Hagerman R, Coffey CS, Cudkowicz M, Erickson CA, McDuffie A, Hessl D, Ethridge L, Tassone F, Kaufmann WE, Friedmann K, Bullard L, Hoffmann A, Veenstra-VanderWeele J, Staley K, Klements D, Moshinsky M, Harkey B, Long J, Fedler J, Klingner E, Ecklund D, Costigan M, Huff T, Pearson B, NeuroNEXT FXLEARN Investigators
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI171723](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI171723)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2023 Aug 31;134(5):e171723. doi: 10.1172/JCI171723.

Effects of AFQ056 on language learning in fragile X syndrome.

Berry-Kravis E(1), Abbeduto L(2), Hagerman R(3), Coffey CS(4), Cudkowicz M(5),
Erickson CA(6), McDuffie A(2), Hessl D(2), Ethridge L(7), Tassone F(8), Kaufmann
WE(9), Friedmann K(10), Bullard L(2), Hoffmann A(11), Veenstra-VanderWeele
J(12), Staley K(5), Klements D(5), Moshinsky M(5), Harkey B(5), Long J(4),
Fedler J(4), Klingner E(4), Ecklund D(4), Costigan M(4), Huff T(4), Pearson
B(4); NeuroNEXT FXLEARN Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Neurological Sciences, and Anatomy & Cell Biology,
Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)MIND Institute and Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and.
(3)MIND Institute and Department of Pediatrics, UCD, Sacramento, California,
USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(7)Department of Psychology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, and
Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.
(8)MIND Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, UCD,
Sacramento, California, USA.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.
(10)College of Nursing and.
(11)Departments of Pediatrics and Communication Disorders and Sciences, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, and New York State
Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Challenges in developing therapies in Fragile X syndrome: how the FXLEARN
trial can guide research.

BACKGROUNDFXLEARN, the first-ever large multisite trial of effects of
disease-targeted pharmacotherapy on learning, was designed to explore a paradigm
for measuring effects of mechanism-targeted treatment in fragile X syndrome
(FXS). In FXLEARN, the effects of metabotropic glutamate receptor type 5
(mGluR5) negative allosteric modulator (NAM) AFQ056 on language learning were
evaluated in 3- to 6-year-old children with FXS, expected to have more learning
plasticity than adults, for whom prior trials of mGluR5 NAMs have
failed.METHODSAfter a 4-month single-blind placebo lead-in, participants were
randomized 1:1 to AFQ056 or placebo, with 2 months of dose optimization to the
maximum tolerated dose, then 6 months of treatment during which a
language-learning intervention was implemented for both groups. The primary
outcome was a centrally scored videotaped communication measure, the Weighted
Communication Scale (WCS). Secondary outcomes were objective performance-based
and parent-reported cognitive and language measures.RESULTSFXLEARN enrolled 110
participants, randomized 99, and had 91 who completed the placebo-controlled
period. Although both groups made language progress and there were no safety
issues, the change in WCS score during the placebo-controlled period was not
significantly different between the AFQ056 and placebo-treated groups, nor were
there any significant between-group differences in change in any secondary
measures.CONCLUSIONDespite the large body of evidence supporting use of mGluR5
NAMs in animal models of FXS, this study suggests that this mechanism of action
does not translate into benefit for the human FXS population and that better
strategies are needed to determine which mechanisms will translate from
preclinical models to humans in genetic neurodevelopmental disorders.TRIAL
REGISTRATIONClincalTrials.gov NCT02920892.FUNDING SOURCESNeuroNEXT network NIH
grants U01NS096767, U24NS107200, U24NS107209, U01NS077323, U24NS107183,
U24NS107168, U24NS107128, U24NS107199, U24NS107198, U24NS107166, U10NS077368,
U01NS077366, U24NS107205, U01NS077179, and U01NS077352; NIH grant P50HD103526;
and Novartis IIT grant AFQ056X2201T for provision of AFQ056.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI171723
PMCID: PMC10904045
PMID: 37651202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: EBK has received funding
from Acadia, Biogen, BioMarin, Erydel, GeneTx/Ultragenyx, Ionis, Jaguar, Kisbee,
Neuren, Neurogene, Orphazyme/Kempharm/Zevra, PTC Therapeutics, Roche, Taysha,
Tetra/Shionogi, Yamo, Zynerba, and Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals for consulting
or for clinical trials in genetic neurological disorders. LA has received
funding from F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd., Roche TCRC Inc., and Neuren
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. for consulting or work on NDDs. RH has received funding
from Zynerba Pharmaceuticals and the Azrieli Foundation for clinical trials in
FXS. CAE is a current consultant to Forge, Stalicla, Impel, and Scioto
Bioscience. DH has received funding from Autifony, Ovid, Tetra, Healx, Roche,
Novartis, and Zynerba to consult on FXS trial design. WEK is chief scientific
officer of Anavex Life Sciences Corp. and serves on the Data and Safety
Monitoring Board for a phase 3 trial of BPN14770 in FXS for the Tetra
Therapeutics/Shionogi Group. LE has consulted for Healx, Autifony, Tetra
Therapeutics, Ultragenyx, and Ovid about ERP and EEG in NDDs. JVV has served on
advisory boards for Roche, Novartis, SynapDx, the Simons Foundation, Autism
Speaks, and the Brain Behavior Research Foundation. JVV has received research
funding from Roche, Novartis, SynapDx, Janssen, Forest, Acadia, Yamo, Seaside
Therapeutics, and MapLight. He has received stipends for editorial work from
Wiley and Springer.
