---
reference_id: "PMID:38355973"
title: Long-term and real-world safety and efficacy of retroviral gene therapy for adenosine deaminase deficiency.
authors:
- Migliavacca M
- Barzaghi F
- Fossati C
- Rancoita PMV
- Gabaldo M
- Dionisio F
- Giannelli S
- Salerio FA
- Ferrua F
- Tucci F
- Calbi V
- Gallo V
- Recupero S
- Consiglieri G
- Pajno R
- Sambuco M
- Priolo A
- Ferri C
- Garella V
- Monti I
- Silvani P
- Darin S
- Casiraghi M
- Corti A
- Zancan S
- Levi M
- Cesana D
- Carlucci F
- Pituch-Noworolska A
- AbdElaziz D
- Baumann U
- Finocchi A
- Cancrini C
- Ladogana S
- Meinhardt A
- Meyts I
- Montin D
- Notarangelo LD
- Porta F
- Pasquet M
- Speckmann C
- Stepensky P
- Tommasini A
- Rabusin M
- Karakas Z
- Galicchio M
- Leonardi L
- Duse M
- Guner SN
- Di Serio C
- Ciceri F
- Bernardo ME
- Aiuti A
- Cicalese MP
journal: Nat Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02789-4
keywords:
- Humans
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/genetics, therapy"
- "Adenosine Deaminase/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Busulfan/adverse effects
- Genetic Therapy
- Retroviridae/genetics
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Agammaglobulinemia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term and real-world safety and efficacy of retroviral gene therapy for adenosine deaminase deficiency.
**Authors:** Migliavacca M, Barzaghi F, Fossati C, Rancoita PMV, Gabaldo M, Dionisio F, Giannelli S, Salerio FA, Ferrua F, Tucci F, Calbi V, Gallo V, Recupero S, Consiglieri G, Pajno R, Sambuco M, Priolo A, Ferri C, Garella V, Monti I, Silvani P, Darin S, Casiraghi M, Corti A, Zancan S, Levi M, Cesana D, Carlucci F, Pituch-Noworolska A, AbdElaziz D, Baumann U, Finocchi A, Cancrini C, Ladogana S, Meinhardt A, Meyts I, Montin D, Notarangelo LD, Porta F, Pasquet M, Speckmann C, Stepensky P, Tommasini A, Rabusin M, Karakas Z, Galicchio M, Leonardi L, Duse M, Guner SN, Di Serio C, Ciceri F, Bernardo ME, Aiuti A, Cicalese MP
**Journal:** Nat Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-023-02789-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-023-02789-4)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2024 Feb;30(2):488-497. doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02789-4. Epub 2024
Feb  14.

Long-term and real-world safety and efficacy of retroviral gene therapy for 
adenosine deaminase deficiency.

Migliavacca M(1)(2), Barzaghi F(1)(2), Fossati C(1), Rancoita PMV(3), Gabaldo 
M(4), Dionisio F(1), Giannelli S(1), Salerio FA(1), Ferrua F(1)(2), Tucci 
F(1)(2), Calbi V(1)(2), Gallo V(1)(2), Recupero S(1)(2), Consiglieri G(1)(2), 
Pajno R(1)(2), Sambuco M(1)(2), Priolo A(1)(2), Ferri C(5), Garella V(5), Monti 
I(1), Silvani P(6), Darin S(1), Casiraghi M(1), Corti A(1), Zancan S(4), Levi 
M(4), Cesana D(1), Carlucci F(7), Pituch-Noworolska A(8), AbdElaziz D(9), 
Baumann U(10), Finocchi A(11)(12), Cancrini C(11)(12), Ladogana S(13), Meinhardt 
A(14), Meyts I(15), Montin D(16)(17), Notarangelo LD(18), Porta F(19), Pasquet 
M(20), Speckmann C(21)(22), Stepensky P(23), Tommasini A(24), Rabusin M(24), 
Karakas Z(25), Galicchio M(26), Leonardi L(27), Duse M(27), Guner SN(28), Di 
Serio C(3)(29), Ciceri F(1)(5)(30), Bernardo ME(1)(2)(5), Aiuti A(31)(32)(33), 
Cicalese MP(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Immunohematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(3)University Centre for Statistics in the Biomedical Sciences (CUSSB), 
Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(4)Fondazione Telethon, Milan, Italy.
(5)Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Milan, Italy.
(7)Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(8)Department of Immunology, University Children's Hospital of Cracow, Cracow, 
Poland.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, 
Egypt.
(10)Department of Paediatric Pulmonology, Allergy and Neonatology, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(11)Research Unit of Primary Immunodeficiencies, Academic Department of 
Pediatrics, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Scientific Institute for Research 
and Healthcare (IRCCS), Rome, Italy.
(12)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(13)Paediatric Onco-haematology Unit, 'Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza' Hospital, 
IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(14)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Medical Center, University 
Hospital Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(15)Laboratory of Inborn Errors of Immunity, Department of Microbiology, 
Immunology and Transplantation, KU Leuven, Childhood Immunology, Department of 
Pediatrics, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(16)Department of Pediatric and Public Health Sciences, University of Torino, 
Turin, Italy.
(17)Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, AOU Città della Salute e della 
Scienza di Torino, Turin, Italy.
(18)Medical Direction, Children's Hospital, ASST-Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(19)Pediatric Oncology-Hematology and BMT Unit, Spedali Civili di Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy.
(20)Pediatric Hematology and Immunology, Children's Hospital, Toulouse, France.
(21)Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency (CCI), 
Faculty of Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(22)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatric and 
Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center Freiburg, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(23)Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cancer Immunotherapy and 
Faculty of Medicine, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(24)Department of Pediatrics, Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS 
Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.
(25)Department of Pediatrics, Hematology/Oncology Unit, Istanbul School of 
Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(26)Allergy and Immnunology Service, Hospital de Niños VJ Vilela, Rosario, 
Argentina.
(27)Department of Maternal, Infantile and Urological Sciences, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(28)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Necmettin 
Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey.
(29)Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Università della Svizzera Italiana, Lugano, 
Switzerland.
(30)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(31)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. aiuti.alessandro@hsr.it.
(32)Pediatric Immunohematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. aiuti.alessandro@hsr.it.
(33)Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milan, Italy. aiuti.alessandro@hsr.it.

Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency leads to severe combined immunodeficiency 
(SCID). Previous clinical trials showed that autologous CD34+ cell gene therapy 
(GT) following busulfan reduced-intensity conditioning is a promising 
therapeutic approach for ADA-SCID, but long-term data are warranted. Here we 
report an analysis on long-term safety and efficacy data of 43 patients with 
ADA-SCID who received retroviral ex vivo bone marrow-derived hematopoietic stem 
cell GT. Twenty-two individuals (median follow-up 15.4 years) were treated in 
the context of clinical development or named patient program. Nineteen patients 
were treated post-marketing authorization (median follow-up 3.2 years), and two 
additional patients received mobilized peripheral blood CD34+ cell GT. At data 
cutoff, all 43 patients were alive, with a median follow-up of 5.0 years 
(interquartile range 2.4-15.4) and 2 years intervention-free survival (no need 
for long-term enzyme replacement therapy or allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation) of 88% (95% confidence interval 78.7-98.4%). Most adverse 
events/reactions were related to disease background, busulfan conditioning or 
immune reconstitution; the safety profile of the real world experience was in 
line with premarketing cohort. One patient from the named patient program 
developed a T cell leukemia related to treatment 4.7 years after GT and is 
currently in remission. Long-term persistence of multilineage gene-corrected 
cells, metabolic detoxification, immune reconstitution and decreased infection 
rates were observed. Estimated mixed-effects models showed that higher dose of 
CD34+ cells infused and younger age at GT affected positively the plateau of 
CD3+ transduced cells, lymphocytes and CD4+ CD45RA+ naive T cells, whereas the 
cell dose positively influenced the final plateau of CD15+ transduced cells. 
These long-term data suggest that the risk-benefit of GT in ADA remains 
favorable and warrant for continuing long-term safety monitoring. Clinical trial 
registration: NCT00598481 , NCT03478670 .

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-023-02789-4
PMCID: PMC7615698
PMID: 38355973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests statement: The San Raffaele 
Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget) is a joint venture between the 
Telethon Foundation and Ospedale San Raffaele (OSR). Gene therapy for ADA-SCID 
was developed at SR-Tiget and licensed to GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) in 2010. The 
treatments under NPP and Hospital Exemption were provided free of charge by GSK. 
Strimvelis Marketing Authorization in Europe occurred in 2016 (under GSK 
holding) and then transferred to Orchard Therapeutics (Netherlands) B.V. in 
2018, which divested the program and transfer the authorization to Fondazione 
Telethon that became the holder in July 2023. The product, apart EU, is also 
currently approved in Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein, and UK. The funders had no 
role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or 
preparation of the manuscript. The authors received no specific funding for this 
work. A. Aiuti receives funding from Fondazione Telethon for other research 
projects. A. Aiuti was the PI of pilot and pivotal and long-term F-U study. 
SR-Tiget clinical trial of gene therapy for ADA SCID. M.P. Cicalese and M. 
Migliavacca are PI and deputy PI, respectively of the Strimvelis Registry, RIS 
and RMMs studies. All authors declare no other competing interests.