---
reference_id: "PMID:20301661"
title: PTEN Hamartoma Tumor Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Yehia L
- Eng C
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PTEN Hamartoma Tumor Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Yehia L, Eng C

## Content

1. PTEN Hamartoma Tumor Syndrome.

Yehia L(1), Eng C(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Nov 29 [updated 2025 Aug 7].

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio
(2)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic;, Department of Genetics & 
Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, 
Ohio

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) includes 
Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), PTEN-related 
Proteus syndrome (PS), and PTEN-related Proteus-like syndrome. CS is a multiple 
hamartoma syndrome with a high risk for benign and malignant tumors of the 
thyroid, breast, kidney, and endometrium. Affected individuals usually have 
macrocephaly, trichilemmomas, and papillomatous papules, and present by the late 
20s. The lifetime risk of developing breast cancer is 85%, with an average age 
of diagnosis between 38 and 46 years. The lifetime risk for thyroid cancer 
(usually follicular, rarely papillary, but never medullary thyroid cancer) is 
approximately 35%. The lifetime risk for renal cell cancer (predominantly of 
papillary histology) is 34%. The risk for endometrial cancer may approach 28%. 
BRRS is a congenital disorder characterized by macrocephaly, intestinal 
hamartomatous polyposis, lipomas, and pigmented macules of the glans penis. PS 
is a complex, highly variable disorder involving congenital malformations and 
hamartomatous overgrowth of multiple tissues, as well as connective tissue nevi, 
epidermal nevi, and hyperostoses. Proteus-like syndrome is undefined but refers 
to individuals with significant clinical features of PS who do not meet the 
diagnostic criteria for PS.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PHTS is established in a proband by 
identification of a heterozygous germline PTEN pathogenic variant on molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment for the benign and malignant 
manifestations of PHTS is the same as for their sporadic counterparts. Topical 
agents (e.g., 5-fluorouracil), curettage, cryosurgery, or laser ablation may 
alleviate the mucocutaneous manifestations of CS but are rarely utilized; 
cutaneous lesions should be excised only if malignancy is suspected or symptoms 
(e.g., pain, deformity, increased scarring) are significant. Surveillance: To 
detect tumors at the earliest, most treatable stages: Children (age <18 years). 
Yearly thyroid ultrasound from the time of diagnosis (earliest reported at age 7 
years) and skin check with physical examination. Adults. Yearly thyroid 
ultrasound and dermatologic evaluation. Women beginning at age 30 years. Monthly 
breast self-examination; annual breast screening (at minimum mammogram; MRI may 
also be incorporated). Starting by age 35 years, consider transvaginal 
ultrasound or endometrial biopsy. Men and women. Colonoscopy beginning at age 35 
years with frequency dependent on degree of polyposis identified or family 
history of early-onset colon cancer (before age 40); biennial (every 2 years) 
renal imaging (CT or MRI preferred) beginning at age 40 years. Those with a 
family history of a particular cancer type at an early age. Consider initiating 
screening 5 to 10 years prior to the youngest age of diagnosis in the family. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: When a PTEN pathogenic variant has been 
identified in a proband, molecular genetic testing of asymptomatic at-risk 
relatives can identify those who have the family-specific pathogenic variant and 
warrant ongoing surveillance.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PHTS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Because 
CS is likely underdiagnosed, the actual proportion of simplex cases (defined as 
individuals with no obvious family history) and familial cases (defined as ≥2 
related affected individuals) cannot be determined. The majority of CS cases are 
simplex. Perhaps 10%-50% of individuals with CS have an affected parent. Each 
child of an affected individual has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic 
variant and developing PHTS. Once a PTEN pathogenic variant has been identified 
in an affected family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk 
is possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301661