---
reference_id: "PMID:27738317"
title: "The prevalence of EGFR mutation in patients with non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhang YL
- Yuan JQ
- Wang KF
- Fu XH
- Han XR
- Threapleton D
- Yang ZY
- Mao C
- Tang JL
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2016'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12587
keywords:
- Asian People/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics"
- China
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Europe
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Mutation Rate
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- Smoking/genetics
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prevalence of EGFR mutation in patients with non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhang YL, Yuan JQ, Wang KF, Fu XH, Han XR, Threapleton D, Yang ZY, Mao C, Tang JL
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2016)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.12587](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.12587)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2016 Nov 29;7(48):78985-78993. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12587.

The prevalence of EGFR mutation in patients with non-small cell lung cancer: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zhang YL(1)(2), Yuan JQ(1)(2), Wang KF(3), Fu XH(1)(2), Han XR(1)(2),
Threapleton D(1), Yang ZY(1)(2), Mao C(1)(2), Tang JL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, The Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary
Care, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Shenzhen Municipal Key Laboratory for Health Risk Analysis, Shenzhen Research
Institute of The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province,
China.
(3)Division of Epidemiology, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.

OBJECTIVES: Estimate the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation
prevalence in all non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and patient
subgroups.
RESULTS: A total of 456 studies were included, reporting 30,466 patients with
EGFR mutation among 115,815 NSCLC patients. The overall pooled prevalence for
EGFR mutations was 32.3% (95% CI 30.9% to 33.7%), ranging from 38.4% (95% CI:
36.5% to 40.3%) in China to 14.1% (95% CI: 12.7% to 15.5%) in Europe. The pooled
prevalence of EGFR mutation was higher in females (females vs. males: 43.7% vs.
24.0%; OR: 2.7, 95% CI: 2.5 to 2.9), non-smokers (non-smokers vs. past or
current smokers: 49.3% vs. 21.5%; OR: 3.7, 95% CI: 3.4 to 4.0), and patients
with adenocarcinoma (adenocarcinoma vs. non-adenocarcinoma: 38.0% vs. 11.7%; OR:
4.1, 95% CI: 3.6 to 4.8).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: PubMed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library were searched to
June 2013. Eligible studies reported EGFR mutation prevalence and the
association with at least one of the following factors: gender, smoking status
and histology. Random-effects models were used to pool EGFR mutation prevalence
data.
CONCLUSION: This study provides the exact prevalence of EGFR mutations in
different countries and NSCLC patient subgroups.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12587
PMCID: PMC5346692
PMID: 27738317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST All authors declare that
there are no conflicts of interest.
