---
reference_id: "PMID:22286061"
title: Driver mutations in histone H3.3 and chromatin remodelling genes in paediatric glioblastoma.
authors:
- Schwartzentruber J
- Korshunov A
- Liu XY
- Jones DT
- Pfaff E
- Jacob K
- Sturm D
- Fontebasso AM
- Quang DA
- Tönjes M
- Hovestadt V
- Albrecht S
- Kool M
- Nantel A
- Konermann C
- Lindroth A
- Jäger N
- Rausch T
- Ryzhova M
- Korbel JO
- Hielscher T
- Hauser P
- Garami M
- Klekner A
- Bognar L
- Ebinger M
- Schuhmann MU
- Scheurlen W
- Pekrun A
- Frühwald MC
- Roggendorf W
- Kramm C
- Dürken M
- Atkinson J
- Lepage P
- Montpetit A
- Zakrzewska M
- Zakrzewski K
- Liberski PP
- Dong Z
- Siegel P
- Kulozik AE
- Zapatka M
- Guha A
- Malkin D
- Felsberg J
- Reifenberger G
- von Deimling A
- Ichimura K
- Collins VP
- Witt H
- Milde T
- Witt O
- Zhang C
- Castelo-Branco P
- Lichter P
- Faury D
- Tabori U
- Plass C
- Majewski J
- Pfister SM
- Jabado N
journal: Nature
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/nature10833
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Chromatin/genetics, metabolism"
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly/genetics
- Co-Repressor Proteins
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exome/genetics
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Glioblastoma/genetics
- "Histones/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Molecular Chaperones
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Telomere/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- X-linked Nuclear Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Driver mutations in histone H3.3 and chromatin remodelling genes in paediatric glioblastoma.
**Authors:** Schwartzentruber J, Korshunov A, Liu XY, Jones DT, Pfaff E, Jacob K, Sturm D, Fontebasso AM, Quang DA, Tönjes M, Hovestadt V, Albrecht S, Kool M, Nantel A, Konermann C, Lindroth A, Jäger N, Rausch T, Ryzhova M, Korbel JO, Hielscher T, Hauser P, Garami M, Klekner A, Bognar L, Ebinger M, Schuhmann MU, Scheurlen W, Pekrun A, Frühwald MC, Roggendorf W, Kramm C, Dürken M, Atkinson J, Lepage P, Montpetit A, Zakrzewska M, Zakrzewski K, Liberski PP, Dong Z, Siegel P, Kulozik AE, Zapatka M, Guha A, Malkin D, Felsberg J, Reifenberger G, von Deimling A, Ichimura K, Collins VP, Witt H, Milde T, Witt O, Zhang C, Castelo-Branco P, Lichter P, Faury D, Tabori U, Plass C, Majewski J, Pfister SM, Jabado N
**Journal:** Nature (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature10833](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10833)

## Content

1. Nature. 2012 Jan 29;482(7384):226-31. doi: 10.1038/nature10833.

Driver mutations in histone H3.3 and chromatin remodelling genes in paediatric 
glioblastoma.

Schwartzentruber J(1), Korshunov A, Liu XY, Jones DT, Pfaff E, Jacob K, Sturm D, 
Fontebasso AM, Quang DA, Tönjes M, Hovestadt V, Albrecht S, Kool M, Nantel A, 
Konermann C, Lindroth A, Jäger N, Rausch T, Ryzhova M, Korbel JO, Hielscher T, 
Hauser P, Garami M, Klekner A, Bognar L, Ebinger M, Schuhmann MU, Scheurlen W, 
Pekrun A, Frühwald MC, Roggendorf W, Kramm C, Dürken M, Atkinson J, Lepage P, 
Montpetit A, Zakrzewska M, Zakrzewski K, Liberski PP, Dong Z, Siegel P, Kulozik 
AE, Zapatka M, Guha A, Malkin D, Felsberg J, Reifenberger G, von Deimling A, 
Ichimura K, Collins VP, Witt H, Milde T, Witt O, Zhang C, Castelo-Branco P, 
Lichter P, Faury D, Tabori U, Plass C, Majewski J, Pfister SM, Jabado N.

Author information:
(1)McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, Quebec H3A 
1A4, Canada.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2012 Apr 5;484(7392):130.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 Feb 14;13(3):148-9. doi: 10.1038/nrg3181.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Feb 24;12(3):156. doi: 10.1038/nrc3233.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a lethal brain tumour in adults and children. 
However, DNA copy number and gene expression signatures indicate differences 
between adult and paediatric cases. To explore the genetic events underlying 
this distinction, we sequenced the exomes of 48 paediatric GBM samples. Somatic 
mutations in the H3.3-ATRX-DAXX chromatin remodelling pathway were identified in 
44% of tumours (21/48). Recurrent mutations in H3F3A, which encodes the 
replication-independent histone 3 variant H3.3, were observed in 31% of tumours, 
and led to amino acid substitutions at two critical positions within the histone 
tail (K27M, G34R/G34V) involved in key regulatory post-translational 
modifications. Mutations in ATRX (α-thalassaemia/mental retardation syndrome 
X-linked) and DAXX (death-domain associated protein), encoding two subunits of a 
chromatin remodelling complex required for H3.3 incorporation at pericentric 
heterochromatin and telomeres, were identified in 31% of samples overall, and in 
100% of tumours harbouring a G34R or G34V H3.3 mutation. Somatic TP53 mutations 
were identified in 54% of all cases, and in 86% of samples with H3F3A and/or 
ATRX mutations. Screening of a large cohort of gliomas of various grades and 
histologies (n = 784) showed H3F3A mutations to be specific to GBM and highly 
prevalent in children and young adults. Furthermore, the presence of 
H3F3A/ATRX-DAXX/TP53 mutations was strongly associated with alternative 
lengthening of telomeres and specific gene expression profiles. This is, to our 
knowledge, the first report to highlight recurrent mutations in a regulatory 
histone in humans, and our data suggest that defects of the chromatin 
architecture underlie paediatric and young adult GBM pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10833
PMID: 22286061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]