---
reference_id: "PMID:39241780"
title: "Gut-induced alpha-Synuclein and Tau propagation initiate Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease co-pathology and behavior impairments."
authors:
- Xiang J
- Tang J
- Kang F
- Ye J
- Cui Y
- Zhang Z
- Wang J
- Wu S
- Ye K
journal: Neuron
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.08.003
keywords:
- Animals
- "alpha-Synuclein/metabolism, genetics"
- tau Proteins/metabolism
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mice
- "Parkinson Disease/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- "Alzheimer Disease/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Behavior, Animal"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gut-induced alpha-Synuclein and Tau propagation initiate Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease co-pathology and behavior impairments.
**Authors:** Xiang J, Tang J, Kang F, Ye J, Cui Y, Zhang Z, Wang J, Wu S, Ye K
**Journal:** Neuron (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2024.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2024.08.003)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2024 Nov 6;112(21):3585-3601.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.08.003.
Epub  2024 Sep 5.

Gut-induced alpha-Synuclein and Tau propagation initiate Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's disease co-pathology and behavior impairments.

Xiang J(1), Tang J(2), Kang F(3), Ye J(3), Cui Y(2), Zhang Z(4), Wang J(3), Wu
S(5), Ye K(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032,
China. Electronic address: xj890119@fmmu.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032,
China.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710032, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
China.
(5)Department of Neurobiology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032,
China. Electronic address: shengxi@fmmu.edu.cn.
(6)Faculty of Life and Health Sciences, Shenzhen University of Advanced
Technology (SUAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055,
China. Electronic address: kq.ye@siat.ac.cn.

Erratum in
    Neuron. 2025 Oct 1;113(19):3300-3302. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2025.09.015.

Tau interacts with α-Synuclein (α-Syn) and co-localizes with it in the Lewy
bodies, influencing α-Syn pathology in Parkinson's disease (PD). However,
whether these biochemical events regulate α-Syn pathology spreading from the gut
into the brain remains incompletely understood. Here, we show that α-Syn and Tau
co-pathology is spread into the brain in gut-inducible SYN103+/- and/or
TAU368+/- transgenic mouse models, eliciting behavioral defects. Gut pathology
was initially observed, and α-Syn or Tau pathology was subsequently propagated
into the DMV or NTS and then to other brain regions. Remarkably, more extensive
spreading and widespread neuronal loss were found in double transgenic mice
(Both) than in single transgenic mice. Truncal vagotomy and α-Syn deficiency
significantly inhibited synucleinopathy or tauopathy spreading. The α-Syn PET
tracer [18F]-F0502B detected α-Syn aggregates in the gut and brain. Thus, α-Syn
and Tau co-pathology can propagate from the gut to the brain, triggering
behavioral disorders.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.08.003
PMID: 39241780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests K.Y. is a co-founder of
Shanghai Braegen Pharmaceuticals, Inc., which licensed the PET tracer patent
from Emory University. No data are sponsored by the company.
