---
reference_id: "PMID:36852942"
title: T-cell dysregulation and inflammatory process in Gcn2 (Eif2ak4(-/-))-deficient rats in basal and stress conditions.
authors:
- Bignard J
- Atassi F
- Claude O
- Ghigna MR
- Mougenot N
- Abdoulkarim BS
- Deknuydt F
- Gestin A
- Monceau V
- Montani D
- Nadaud S
- Soubrier F
- Perros F
journal: Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00460.2021
keywords:
- Animals
- Rats
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary"
- Lung/metabolism
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Pulmonary Veno-Occlusive Disease/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger"
- Protein Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# T-cell dysregulation and inflammatory process in Gcn2 (Eif2ak4(-/-))-deficient rats in basal and stress conditions.
**Authors:** Bignard J, Atassi F, Claude O, Ghigna MR, Mougenot N, Abdoulkarim BS, Deknuydt F, Gestin A, Monceau V, Montani D, Nadaud S, Soubrier F, Perros F
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajplung.00460.2021](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplung.00460.2021)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2023 May 1;324(5):L609-L624. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00460.2021. Epub 2023 Feb 28.

T-cell dysregulation and inflammatory process in Gcn2 (Eif2ak4(-/-))-deficient 
rats in basal and stress conditions.

Bignard J(1), Atassi F(1), Claude O(1), Ghigna MR(2)(3), Mougenot N(4), 
Abdoulkarim BS(3), Deknuydt F(5), Gestin A(5), Monceau V(1), Montani D(3)(6), 
Nadaud S(1), Soubrier F(1), Perros F(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)UMR_S 1166, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Pathology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(3)UMR_S999, Université Paris-Saclay, INSERM, Hôpital Marie Lannelongue, Le 
Plessis Robinson, France.
(4)UMS28, Sorbonne Université, Plateforme d'Expérimentation Cœur, Muscles, 
Vaisseaux (PECMV), Paris, France.
(5)Flow Cytometry Core Cyto-ICAN, Institute of Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, 
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(6)Service de Pneumologie et Soins Intensifs Respiratoires, Hôpital de Bicêtre, 
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de paris, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(7)Laboratoire CarMeN, UMR INSERM U1060/INRA U1397, Université Claude Bernard 
Lyon1, Pierre-Bénite and Bron, France.

Hereditary pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (hPVOD) is a severe form of 
autosomal recessive pulmonary hypertension and is due to biallelic loss of 
function of the EIF2AK4 gene (alias GCN2) coding for GCN2. GCN2 is a stress 
kinase that belongs to the integrated stress response pathway (ISR). Three rat 
lines carrying biallelic Gcn2 mutation were generated and found phenotypically 
normal and did not spontaneously develop a PVOD-related disease. We submitted 
these rats to amino acid deprivation to document the molecular and cellular 
response of the lungs and to identify phenotypic changes that could be involved 
in PVOD pathophysiology. Gcn2-/- rat lungs were analyzed under basal conditions 
and 3 days after a single administration of PEG-asparaginase (ASNase). Lung 
mRNAs were analyzed by RNAseq and single-cell RNAseq (scRNA-seq), flow 
cytometry, tissue imaging, and Western blots. The ISR was not activated after 
ASNase treatment in Gcn2-/- rat lungs, and apoptosis was increased. Several 
proinflammatory and innate immunity genes were overexpressed, and inflammatory 
cells infiltration was also observed in the perivascular area. Under basal 
conditions, scRNA-seq analysis of Gcn2-/- rat lungs revealed increases in two 
T-cell populations, a LAG3+ T-cell population and a proliferative T-cell 
population. Following ASNase administration, we observed an increase in 
calprotectin expression involved in TLR pathway activation and neutrophil 
infiltration. In conclusion, under basal and asparagine and glutamine 
deprivation induced by asparaginase administration, Gcn2-/- rats display 
molecular and cellular signatures in the lungs that may indicate a role for Gcn2 
in immune homeostasis and provide further clues to the mechanisms of hPVOD 
development.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00460.2021
PMID: 36852942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]