---
reference_id: "PMID:20197625"
title: Loss of the BMP antagonist USAG-1 ameliorates disease in a mouse model of the progressive hereditary kidney disease Alport syndrome.
authors:
- Tanaka M
- Asada M
- Higashi AY
- Nakamura J
- Oguchi A
- Tomita M
- Yamada S
- Asada N
- Takase M
- Okuda T
- Kawachi H
- Economides AN
- Robertson E
- Takahashi S
- Sakurai T
- Goldschmeding R
- Muso E
- Fukatsu A
- Kita T
- Yanagita M
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1172/JCI39569
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Animals
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein 7/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Collagen Type IV/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Glomerular Basement Membrane/metabolism, pathology"
- "Glomerular Mesangium/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Kidney Tubules/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of the BMP antagonist USAG-1 ameliorates disease in a mouse model of the progressive hereditary kidney disease Alport syndrome.
**Authors:** Tanaka M, Asada M, Higashi AY, Nakamura J, Oguchi A, Tomita M, Yamada S, Asada N, Takase M, Okuda T, Kawachi H, Economides AN, Robertson E, Takahashi S, Sakurai T, Goldschmeding R, Muso E, Fukatsu A, Kita T, Yanagita M
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI39569](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI39569)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2010 Mar;120(3):768-77. doi: 10.1172/JCI39569. Epub 2010 Feb 8.

Loss of the BMP antagonist USAG-1 ameliorates disease in a mouse model of the
progressive hereditary kidney disease Alport syndrome.

Tanaka M(1), Asada M, Higashi AY, Nakamura J, Oguchi A, Tomita M, Yamada S,
Asada N, Takase M, Okuda T, Kawachi H, Economides AN, Robertson E, Takahashi S,
Sakurai T, Goldschmeding R, Muso E, Fukatsu A, Kita T, Yanagita M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

The glomerular basement membrane (GBM) is a key component of the filtering unit
in the kidney. Mutations involving any of the collagen IV genes (COL4A3, COL4A4,
and COL4A5) affect GBM assembly and cause Alport syndrome, a progressive
hereditary kidney disease with no definitive therapy. Previously, we have
demonstrated that the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) antagonist uterine
sensitization-associated gene-1 (USAG-1) negatively regulates the renoprotective
action of BMP-7 in a mouse model of tubular injury during acute renal failure.
Here, we investigated the role of USAG-1 in renal function in Col4a3-/- mice,
which model Alport syndrome. Ablation of Usag1 in Col4a3-/- mice led to
substantial attenuation of disease progression, normalization of GBM
ultrastructure, preservation of renal function, and extension of life span.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that USAG-1 and BMP-7 colocalized in the
macula densa in the distal tubules, lying in direct contact with glomerular
mesangial cells. Furthermore, in cultured mesangial cells, BMP-7 attenuated and
USAG-1 enhanced the expression of MMP-12, a protease that may contribute to GBM
degradation. These data suggest that the pathogenetic role of USAG-1 in
Col4a3-/- mice might involve crosstalk between kidney tubules and the glomerulus
and that inhibition of USAG-1 may be a promising therapeutic approach for the
treatment of Alport syndrome.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI39569
PMCID: PMC2827946
PMID: 20197625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
