---
reference_id: "PMID:36642429"
title: The Role of Complement in Autoimmune Disease-Associated Thrombotic Microangiopathy and the Potential for Therapeutics.
authors:
- Java A
- Kim AHJ
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.220752
keywords:
- Humans
- Endothelial Cells/pathology
- Thrombotic Microangiopathies/complications
- Complement System Proteins
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications"
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/complications, pathology"
- Complement C5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Complement in Autoimmune Disease-Associated Thrombotic Microangiopathy and the Potential for Therapeutics.
**Authors:** Java A, Kim AHJ
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3899/jrheum.220752](https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.220752)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2023 Jun;50(6):730-740. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.220752. Epub 2023 Jan
 15.

The Role of Complement in Autoimmune Disease-Associated Thrombotic
Microangiopathy and the Potential for Therapeutics.

Java A(1), Kim AHJ(2).

Author information:
(1)A. Java, MD, Division of Nephrology, Washington University School of
Medicine; ajava@wustl.edu.
(2)A.H.J. Kim, MD, PhD, Division of Rheumatology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

The complement system is a tightly regulated, cascading protein network
representing a key component linking the innate and humoral immune systems.
However, if misdirected or dysregulated, it can be similarly damaging to
host-tissue. The role of complement dysregulation on vascular endothelial cells
has been well established in atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS), a
thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) characterized by microangiopathic hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and target organ injury. Yet, a great deal of
complexity exists around the role of complement in TMA associated with other
diseases. A further complicating factor is the cross-talk between complement,
neutrophils, and coagulation pathways in the pathophysiology of TMA.
Advancements in the understanding of the etiopathogenesis of aHUS paved the way
for the successful development of anticomplement therapies (complement C5
inhibitors), which have revolutionized the treatment of aHUS. Therefore, a
clearer understanding of the role of the complement system in TMA associated
with other conditions will help to identify patients who would benefit from
these therapies. This review aims to provide an assessment of the nature and
extent of complement involvement in TMA associated with autoimmune diseases such
as systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid syndrome, and scleroderma
renal crisis. Defining the role of complement in TMA in these conditions will
help to guide timely diagnosis and management.

Copyright © 2023 by the Journal of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.220752
PMID: 36642429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
