---
reference_id: "PMID:14644246"
title: A case of Kniest dysplasia with retinal detachment and the mutation analysis.
authors:
- Yokoyama T
- Nakatani S
- Murakami A
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(03)00713-x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Collagen Type II/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Humans
- Male
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- Point Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Retinal Detachment/genetics, surgery"
- Silicone Oils/therapeutic use
- Visual Acuity
- Vitrectomy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of Kniest dysplasia with retinal detachment and the mutation analysis.
**Authors:** Yokoyama T, Nakatani S, Murakami A
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0002-9394(03)00713-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9394(03)00713-x)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2003 Dec;136(6):1186-8. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(03)00713-x.

A case of Kniest dysplasia with retinal detachment and the mutation analysis.

Yokoyama T(1), Nakatani S, Murakami A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Juntendo University, School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan. yokoyama@med.juntendo.ac.jp

PURPOSE: To report a case of Kniest dysplasia with retinal detachment associated 
with a novel type II collagen gene (COL2A1) mutation.
DESIGN: Interventional case report.
METHODS: DNA was isolated from peripheral lymphocytes, and mutational analysis 
was carried out using polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing.
RESULTS: A 14-year-old Japanese boy was diagnosed with Kniest dysplasia, and 
ophthalmic examination revealed a retinal detachment in the right eye. He was 
successfully treated by vitrectomy and silicon oil injection, and his visual 
acuity improved from 0.01 to 0.22. DNA analysis of COL2A1 revealed a single 
base-pair substitution at position +5 of intron 20.
CONCLUSION: Vitrectomy and silicon oil injection were effective in reattaching 
the retinal detachment in a Kniest dysplasia patient. The genetic alteration 
found in this patient suggested that this prevented the normal splicing of 
COL2A1, resulting in an abnormal type II collagen product.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9394(03)00713-x
PMID: 14644246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]