---
reference_id: "PMID:38817480"
title: "Seborrheic Pemphigus: A Misunderstood Variant of Pemphigus Foliaceus."
authors:
- Gallegos Espadas D
- Ramirez Cibrian AG
- Martínez-Ortega JI
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.59389
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seborrheic Pemphigus: A Misunderstood Variant of Pemphigus Foliaceus.
**Authors:** Gallegos Espadas D, Ramirez Cibrian AG, Martínez-Ortega JI
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.59389](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.59389)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Apr 30;16(4):e59389. doi: 10.7759/cureus.59389. eCollection 2024 
Apr.

Seborrheic Pemphigus: A Misunderstood Variant of Pemphigus Foliaceus.

Gallegos Espadas D(1), Ramirez Cibrian AG(2), Martínez-Ortega JI(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Hospital Regional Elvia Carrillo Puerto, Mérida, MEX.
(2)Medical Benefits, Mexican Institute of Social Security, Campeche, MEX.
(3)Dermatología, Instituto Dermatológico de Jalisco, Zapopan, MEX.

Seborrheic pemphigus (SP) represents a localized and superficial form of 
pemphigus foliaceus (PF) often mistaken for other dermatological conditions such 
as seborrheic dermatitis (SD) due to clinical similarities. Additionally, SP may 
be conceptually confused with pemphigus erythematosus (PE) due to historical 
terminology and overlapping clinical features. We present a case study of a 
38-year-old female initially diagnosed with SD but later identified as SP 
through detailed clinical and histopathological analysis. We discuss the 
challenges in accurately diagnosing SP, emphasizing the importance of 
distinguishing it from PE and other acantholytic dermatoses. Furthermore, we 
highlight the effectiveness of topical treatment in managing SP, contrary to the 
systemic therapy often required for PE. Our findings underscore the necessity 
for further research to optimize management strategies for SP and emphasize the 
significance of precise terminology in clinical practice and research.

Copyright © 2024, Gallegos Espadas et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.59389
PMCID: PMC11139437
PMID: 38817480

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.