---
reference_id: "PMID:37493159"
title: "Group A β-hemolytic Streptococcal Pharyngitis: An Updated Review."
authors:
- Leung AKC
- Lam JM
- Barankin B
- Leong KF
- Hon KL
journal: Curr Pediatr Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2174/1573396320666230726145436
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pharyngitis/drug therapy, diagnosis, microbiology"
- "Streptococcal Infections/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Streptococcus pyogenes
- Child
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Group A β-hemolytic Streptococcal Pharyngitis: An Updated Review.
**Authors:** Leung AKC, Lam JM, Barankin B, Leong KF, Hon KL
**Journal:** Curr Pediatr Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573396320666230726145436](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573396320666230726145436)

## Content

1. Curr Pediatr Rev. 2024;21(1):2-17. doi: 10.2174/1573396320666230726145436.

Group A β-hemolytic Streptococcal Pharyngitis: An Updated Review.

Leung AKC(1), Lam JM(2), Barankin B(3), Leong KF(4), Hon KL(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Calgary, Alberta Children's 
Hospital, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Department of Dermatology and Skin Sciences, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Toronto Dermatology Centre, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(4)Pediatric Institute, Kuala Lumpur General Hospital, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China.
(6)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Hong Kong Children's 
Hospital, Hong Kong, China.

BACKGROUND: Group A ß-hemolytic Streptococcus (GABHS) is the leading bacterial 
cause of acute pharyngitis in children and adolescents worldwide.
OBJECTIVE: This article aims to familiarize clinicians with the clinical 
manifestations, evaluation, diagnosis, and management of GABHS pharyngitis.
METHODS: A search was conducted in December 2022 in PubMed Clinical Queries 
using the key term "group A β-hemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis". This review 
covers mainly literature published in the previous ten years.
RESULTS: Children with GABHS pharyngitis typically present with an abrupt onset 
of fever, intense pain in the throat, pain on swallowing, an inflamed pharynx, 
enlarged and erythematous tonsils, a red and swollen uvula, enlarged tender 
anterior cervical lymph nodes. As clinical manifestations may not be specific, 
even experienced clinicians may have difficulties diagnosing GABHS pharyngitis 
solely based on epidemiologic or clinical grounds alone. Patients suspected of 
having GABHS pharyngitis should be confirmed by microbiologic testing (e.g., 
culture, rapid antigen detection test, molecular point-of-care test) of a throat 
swab specimen prior to the initiation of antimicrobial therapy. Microbiologic 
testing is generally unnecessary in patients with pharyngitis whose clinical and 
epidemiologic findings do not suggest GABHS. Clinical score systems such as the 
Centor score and McIssac score have been developed to help clinicians decide 
which patients should undergo diagnostic testing and reduce the unnecessary use 
of antimicrobials. Antimicrobial therapy should be initiated without delay once 
the diagnosis is confirmed. Oral penicillin V and amoxicillin remain the drugs 
of choice. For patients who have a non-anaphylactic allergy to penicillin, oral 
cephalosporin is an acceptable alternative. For patients with a history of 
immediate, anaphylactic-type hypersensitivity to penicillin, oral clindamycin, 
clarithromycin, and azithromycin are acceptable alternatives.
CONCLUSION: Early diagnosis and antimicrobial treatment are recommended to 
prevent suppurative complications (e.g., cervical lymphadenitis, peritonsillar 
abscess) and non-suppurative complications (particularly rheumatic fever) as 
well as to reduce the severity of symptoms, to shorten the duration of the 
illness and to reduce disease transmission.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573396320666230726145436
PMID: 37493159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]