---
reference_id: "PMID:35948402"
title: "Klinefelter syndrome: going beyond the diagnosis."
authors:
- Butler G
- Srirangalingam U
- Faithfull J
- Sangster P
- Senniappan S
- Mitchell R
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2020-320831
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Klinefelter syndrome: going beyond the diagnosis.
**Authors:** Butler G, Srirangalingam U, Faithfull J, Sangster P, Senniappan S, Mitchell R
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2020-320831](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2020-320831)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2023 Mar;108(3):166-171. doi:
10.1136/archdischild-2020-320831.  Epub 2022 Aug 10.

Klinefelter syndrome: going beyond the diagnosis.

Butler G(1)(2), Srirangalingam U(3), Faithfull J(3), Sangster P(4), Senniappan 
S(5), Mitchell R(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Paediatric and Adolescent Endocrinology, University College London Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK gary.butler@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(3)Endocrinology, University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(4)Urology and Andrology, University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, UK.
(5)Endocrinology, Alder Hey Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK.
(6)MRC Centre for Reproductive Health, University of Edinburgh Division of 
Reproductive and Developmental Sciences, Edinburgh, UK.
(7)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, 
Edinburgh, UK.

Although Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is common, it is rarely recognised in 
childhood, sometimes being identified with speech or developmental delay or 
incidental antenatal diagnosis. The only regular feature is testicular 
dysfunction. Postnatal gonadotropin surge (mini-puberty) may be lower, but 
treatment with testosterone needs prospective studies. The onset of puberty is 
at the normal age and biochemical hypogonadism does not typically occur until 
late puberty. Testosterone supplementation can be considered then or earlier for 
clinical hypogonadism. The size at birth is normal, but growth acceleration is 
more rapid in early and mid-childhood, with adult height greater than 
mid-parental height. Extreme tall stature is unusual. The incidence of 
adolescent gynaecomastia (35.6%) is not increased compared with typically 
developing boys and can be reduced or resolved by testosterone supplementation, 
potentially preventing the need for surgery. Around two-thirds require speech 
and language therapy or developmental support and early institution of therapy 
is important. Provision of psychological support may be helpful in ameliorating 
these experiences and provide opportunities to develop strategies to recognise, 
process and express feelings and thoughts. Boys with KS are at increased risk of 
impairment in social cognition and less accurate perceptions of social emotional 
cues. The concept of likely fertility problems needs introduction alongside 
regular reviews of puberty and sexual function in adolescents. Although there is 
now greater success in harvesting sperm through techniques such as testicular 
sperm extraction, it is more successful in later than in early adolescence. In 
vitro maturation of germ cells is still experimental.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2020-320831
PMCID: PMC7614197
PMID: 35948402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.