---
reference_id: "PMID:38467155"
title: "Recent Advances in Molecular Pathways and Therapeutic Implications for Peptic Ulcer Management: A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Joshi DC
- Joshi N
- Kumar A
- Maheshwari S
journal: Horm Metab Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/a-2256-6592
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent Advances in Molecular Pathways and Therapeutic Implications for Peptic Ulcer Management: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Joshi DC, Joshi N, Kumar A, Maheshwari S
**Journal:** Horm Metab Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2256-6592](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2256-6592)

## Content

1. Horm Metab Res. 2024 Sep;56(9):615-624. doi: 10.1055/a-2256-6592. Epub 2024
Mar  11.

Recent Advances in Molecular Pathways and Therapeutic Implications for Peptic 
Ulcer Management: A Comprehensive Review.

Joshi DC(1), Joshi N(2), Kumar A(3), Maheshwari S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, School of Chemical Sciences and Pharmacy, Central 
University of Rajasthan, Ajmer, India.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Amrapali Institute of Pharmacy and Sciences, 
Haldwani, India.
(3)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Rama University, Kanpur, India.

Peptic ulcers, recognized for their erosive impact on the gastrointestinal 
mucosa, present a considerable challenge in gastroenterology. Epidemiological 
insights underscore the global prevalence of peptic ulcers, affecting 5-10+% of 
individuals, with a yearly incidence of 0.3 to 1.9 cases per thousand. Recent 
decades have witnessed a decline in complications, attributed to improved 
diagnostics and therapeutic advancements. The review deepens into H. 
pylori-associated and NSAID-induced ulcers, emphasizing their distinct 
prevalence in developing and industrialized nations, respectively. Despite 
advancements, managing peptic ulcers remains challenging, notably in H. 
pylori-infected individuals facing recurrence and the rise of antibiotic 
resistance. The pathophysiology unravels the delicate balance between protective 
and destructive factors, including the intricate molecular mechanisms involving 
inflammatory mediators such as TNF-α, ILs, and prostaglandins. Genetic and 
ethnic factors, rare contributors, and recent molecular insights further enhance 
our understanding of peptic ulcer development. Diagnostic approaches are 
pivotal, with upper gastrointestinal endoscopy standing as the gold standard. 
Current treatment strategies focus on H. pylori eradication, NSAID 
discontinuation, and proton pump inhibitors. Surgical options become imperative 
for refractory cases, emphasizing a comprehensive approach. Advances include 
tailored H. pylori regimens, the emergence of vonoprazan, and ongoing vaccine 
development. Challenges persist, primarily in antibiotic resistance, side 
effects of acid suppressants, and translating natural compounds into 
standardized therapies. Promising avenues include the potential H. pylori 
vaccine and the exploration of natural compounds, with monoterpenes showing 
therapeutic promise. This review serves as a compass, guiding healthcare 
professionals, researchers, and policymakers through the intricate landscape of 
peptic ulcer management.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2256-6592
PMID: 38467155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.