---
reference_id: "PMID:39961465"
title: "BRAF V600E in cancer: Exploring structural complexities, mutation profiles, and pathway dysregulation."
authors:
- Bharti J
- Gogu P
- Pandey SK
- Verma A
- Yadav JP
- Singh AK
- Kumar P
- Dwivedi AR
- Pathak P
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2025.114440
keywords:
- Humans
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, metabolism, chemistry"
- "Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Animals
- Carcinogenesis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF V600E in cancer: Exploring structural complexities, mutation profiles, and pathway dysregulation.
**Authors:** Bharti J, Gogu P, Pandey SK, Verma A, Yadav JP, Singh AK, Kumar P, Dwivedi AR, Pathak P
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2025.114440](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2025.114440)

## Content

1. Exp Cell Res. 2025 Mar 1;446(1):114440. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2025.114440. Epub
 2025 Feb 15.

BRAF V600E in cancer: Exploring structural complexities, mutation profiles, and
pathway dysregulation.

Bharti J(1), Gogu P(1), Pandey SK(2), Verma A(3), Yadav JP(4), Singh AK(5),
Kumar P(6), Dwivedi AR(7), Pathak P(8).

Author information:
(1)Drug Discovery Laboratory, School of Pharmacy, GITAM (Deemed to be)
University, Hyderabad Campus, 502329, India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, DDU Gorakhpur University, Gorakhpur, 273009, India.
(3)Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry Research Laboratory, Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture, Technology
and Sciences, Prayagraj, 211007, India; School of Pharmacy, Graphic Era Hill
University, Dehradun-248002, India.
(4)Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry Research Laboratory, Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture, Technology
and Sciences, Prayagraj, 211007, India.
(5)Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry Research Laboratory, Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture, Technology
and Sciences, Prayagraj, 211007, India; Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences
and Natural Products, Central University of Punjab, Ghudda, Bathinda, India.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Natural Products, Central
University of Punjab, Ghudda, Bathinda, India.
(7)Drug Discovery Laboratory, School of Pharmacy, GITAM (Deemed to be)
University, Hyderabad Campus, 502329, India. Electronic address:
ashishrdwdy@gmail.com.
(8)Drug Discovery Laboratory, School of Pharmacy, GITAM (Deemed to be)
University, Hyderabad Campus, 502329, India. Electronic address:
prateekpharm05@gmail.com.

BRAF, a fundamental component of cellular signaling pathways regulating growth
and survival, is frequently mutated in cancer development. Among entire BRAF
mutations, the V600E substitution stands out as a dominant alteration in various
malignancies, including melanoma, colorectal cancer, and thyroid cancer.
Understanding the structural differences between wild-type BRAF and BRAFV600E is
crucial for elucidating the molecular mechanisms underpinnings tumorigenesis and
identifying dysregulation associated with the same. V600E mutation results in a
constitutively active kinase domain, leading to dysregulated downstream
signaling independent of extracellular stimuli. This sustained activation
promotes cell proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, and hallmark features of
the cancer cells. The study describes three distinct classes of BRAF mutations
where Class 1 mutations predominantly involve point mutations within the BRAF
gene, while Class 2 encompasses in-frame insertions and deletions, and Class 3
comprises gene fusions with large-scale chromosomal rearrangements. Further, we
have discussed dysregulated pathways associated with mutation of BRAFV600E,
which includes MAPK/ERK, PI3K/AKT/mTOR, TP53, DNA damage response, and
WNT/β-Catenin from schematic representation. In the current review, we have
shown how these dysregulated pathways play pivotal roles in tumorigenesis, tumor
progression in BRAF-mutant cancers and highlighted the critical role of BRAF
dysregulation in cancer development followed by its therapeutic implications of
targeting dysregulated pathways in BRAF-driven malignancies.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2025.114440
PMID: 39961465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest No potential
conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
