---
reference_id: "PMID:29451301"
title: "INTU-related oral-facial-digital syndrome type VI: A confirmatory report."
authors:
- Bruel AL
- Levy J
- Elenga N
- Defo A
- Favre A
- Lucron H
- Capri Y
- Perrin L
- Passemard S
- Vial Y
- Tabet AC
- Faivre L
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Verloes A
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13238
keywords:
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Orofaciodigital Syndromes/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# INTU-related oral-facial-digital syndrome type VI: A confirmatory report.
**Authors:** Bruel AL, Levy J, Elenga N, Defo A, Favre A, Lucron H, Capri Y, Perrin L, Passemard S, Vial Y, Tabet AC, Faivre L, Thauvin-Robinet C, Verloes A
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13238](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13238)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2018 Jun;93(6):1205-1209. doi: 10.1111/cge.13238. Epub 2018 Apr 6.

INTU-related oral-facial-digital syndrome type VI: A confirmatory report.

Bruel AL(1)(2), Levy J(3), Elenga N(4)(5), Defo A(4), Favre A(6), Lucron H(7), 
Capri Y(3), Perrin L(3), Passemard S(3)(8), Vial Y(3), Tabet AC(3), Faivre 
L(1)(2)(9), Thauvin-Robinet C(1)(2)(9), Verloes A(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)UMR 1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Université de 
Bourgogne- et Franche-Comté, Dijon, France.
(2)FHU TRANSLAD, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Bourgogne et Franche Comté, 
Dijon, France.
(3)Department of Genetics, APHP-Robert Debré University Hospital, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Pediatrics Andrée Rosémon Regional Hospital, Cayenne, French 
Guiana, France.
(5)Antilles-Guyane University, Cayenne, French Guiana, France.
(6)Neonatal intensive care Unit, Andrée Rosémon Regional Hospital, Cayenne, 
French Guiana, France.
(7)Antilles-Guyane M3C Pediatric Cardiology Center, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Martinique, Fort-de-France, France.
(8)Denis Diderot Medical School, Sorbonne-Paris-Cité University and INSERM 
U1141, Paris, France.
(9)Centre de Génétique, Centre de référence Labellisé Maladies rares Anomalies 
du Développement et syndromes malformatifs de l'est, Hôpital d'Enfants, CHU 
Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France.

Oral-facial-digital (OFD) syndromes are a subgroup of ciliopathies distinguished 
by the co-occurrence of hamartomas and/or multiple frenula of the oral region 
and digital anomalies. Several clinical forms of OFD syndromes are distinguished 
by their associated anomalies and/or inheritance patterns, and at least 20 
genetic types of OFD syndromes have been delineated. We describe here a child 
with preaxial and postaxial polydactyly, lingual hamartoma, a congenital heart 
defect, delayed development and cerebellar peduncles displaying the molar tooth 
sign. Whole-exome sequencing and SNP array identified compound heterozygous 
variants in the INTU gene, which encodes a protein involved in the positioning 
of the ciliary basal body. INTU is a subunit of the CPLANE multiprotein complex 
essential for the assembly of IFT-A particles and intraflagellar transport. This 
report of a second patient with INTU-related OFD syndrome and the further 
delineation of its neuroimaging and skeletal phenotype now allow INTU-related 
OFD syndromes to be classified within the OFD syndrome type VI group. Patients 
display a phenotype similar to that of mice with a hypomorphic mutation of Intu, 
but with the addition of a heart defect.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13238
PMID: 29451301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]