---
reference_id: "PMID:38146057"
title: The discovery of NLRP3 and its function in cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes and innate immunity.
authors:
- Putnam CD
- Broderick L
- Hoffman HM
journal: Immunol Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/imr.13292
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- "NLR Family, Pyrin Domain-Containing 3 Protein"
- "Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes/drug therapy, pathology"
- Inflammasomes/metabolism
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Inflammation
- Interleukin-1beta/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The discovery of NLRP3 and its function in cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes and innate immunity.
**Authors:** Putnam CD, Broderick L, Hoffman HM
**Journal:** Immunol Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imr.13292](https://doi.org/10.1111/imr.13292)

## Content

1. Immunol Rev. 2024 Mar;322(1):259-282. doi: 10.1111/imr.13292. Epub 2023 Dec
25.

The discovery of NLRP3 and its function in cryopyrin-associated periodic 
syndromes and innate immunity.

Putnam CD(1), Broderick L(2)(3), Hoffman HM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(2)Division of Allergy, Immunology & Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(3)Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, California, USA.

From studies of individual families to global collaborative efforts, the NLRP3 
inflammasome is now recognized to be a key regulator of innate immunity. 
Activated by a panoply of pathogen-associated and endogenous triggers, NLRP3 
serves as an intracellular sensor that drives carefully coordinated assembly of 
the inflammasome, and downstream inflammation mediated by IL-1 and IL-18. 
Initially discovered as the cause of the autoinflammatory spectrum of 
cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS), NLRP3 is now also known to play a 
role in more common diseases including cardiovascular disease, gout, and liver 
disease. We have seen cohesion in results from clinical studies in CAPS 
patients, ex vivo studies of human cells and murine cells, and in vivo murine 
models leading to our understanding of the downstream pathways, cytokine 
secretion, and cell death pathways that has solidified the role of 
autoinflammation in the pathogenesis of human disease. Recent advances in our 
understanding of the structure of the inflammasome have provided ways for us to 
visualize normal and mutant protein function and pharmacologic inhibition. The 
subsequent development of targeted therapies successfully used in the treatment 
of patients with CAPS completes the bench to bedside translational loop which 
has defined the study of this unique protein.

© 2023 The Authors. Immunological Reviews published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.13292
PMCID: PMC10950545
PMID: 38146057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT LB is a site PI 
for Novartis, Inc. HMH is a speaker and consultant for Novartis, Inc., and has 
research collaborations with Regeneron, Inc., Jecure, Inc., and Zomagen, Inc.