---
reference_id: "PMID:36882007"
title: "Bartter Syndrome-Related Variants Distribution: Brazilian Data and Its Comparison with Worldwide Cohorts."
authors:
- Vaisbich MH
- Messa ACHL
- Rangel-Santos AC
- Ferreira JCOA
- Nunes FAMDF
- Watanabe A
journal: Nephron
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000528557
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Female
- Humans
- Bartter Syndrome/genetics
- Brazil
- Phenotype
- Mutation
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 1/genetics"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bartter Syndrome-Related Variants Distribution: Brazilian Data and Its Comparison with Worldwide Cohorts.
**Authors:** Vaisbich MH, Messa ACHL, Rangel-Santos AC, Ferreira JCOA, Nunes FAMDF, Watanabe A
**Journal:** Nephron (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000528557](https://doi.org/10.1159/000528557)

## Content

1. Nephron. 2023;147(8):478-495. doi: 10.1159/000528557. Epub 2023 Mar 7.

Bartter Syndrome-Related Variants Distribution: Brazilian Data and Its
Comparison with Worldwide Cohorts.

Vaisbich MH(1), Messa ACHL(1), Rangel-Santos AC(1), Ferreira JCOA(1), Nunes
FAMDF(1), Watanabe A(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto da Criança do Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da
USP, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Genetic testing is recommended for accurate diagnosis of Bartter
syndrome (BS) and serves as a basis for implementing specific target therapies.
However, populations other than Europeans and North Americans are
underrepresented in most databases and there are uncertainties in the
genotype-phenotype correlation. We studied Brazilian BS patients, an admixed
population with diverse ancestry.
METHODS: We evaluated the clinical and mutational profile of this cohort and
performed a systematic review of BS mutations from worldwide cohorts.
RESULTS: Twenty-two patients were included; Gitelman syndrome was diagnosed in 2
siblings with antenatal BS and congenital chloride diarrhea in 1 girl. BS was
confirmed in 19 patients: BS type 1 in 1 boy (antenatal BS); BS type 4a in 1
girl and BS type 4b in 1 girl, both of them with antenatal BS and neurosensorial
deafness; BS type 3 (CLCNKB mutations): 16 cases. The deletion of the entire
CLCNKB (1-20 del) was the most frequent variant. Patients carrying the 1-20 del
presented earlier manifestations than those with other CLCNKB-mutations and the
presence of homozygous 1-20 del was correlated with progressive chronic kidney
disease. The prevalence of the 1-20 del in this BS Brazilian cohort was similar
to that of Chinese cohorts and individuals of African and Middle Eastern descent
from other cohorts.
CONCLUSION: This study expands the genetic spectrum of BS patients with
different ethnics, reveals some genotype/phenotype correlations, compares the
findings with other cohorts, and provides a systematic review of the literature
on the distribution of BS-related variants worldwide.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000528557
PMID: 36882007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
