---
reference_id: "PMID:39390411"
title: "Late-onset renal TMA and tubular injury in cobalamin C disease: a report of three cases and literature review."
authors:
- Bao D
- Yang H
- Yin Y
- Wang S
- Li Y
- Zhang X
- Su T
- Xu R
- Li C
- Zhou F
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-024-03774-w
keywords:
- Male
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, diagnosis"
- Betaine/therapeutic use
- "Carnitine/therapeutic use, deficiency"
- Adolescent
- Hydroxocobalamin/therapeutic use
- "Thrombotic Microangiopathies/etiology, complications"
- Vitamin B 12
- "Homocystinuria/complications, diagnosis"
- Oxidoreductases
- Kidney Tubules/pathology
- Humans
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-onset renal TMA and tubular injury in cobalamin C disease: a report of three cases and literature review.
**Authors:** Bao D, Yang H, Yin Y, Wang S, Li Y, Zhang X, Su T, Xu R, Li C, Zhou F
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-024-03774-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-024-03774-w)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2024 Oct 10;25(1):340. doi: 10.1186/s12882-024-03774-w.

Late-onset renal TMA and tubular injury in cobalamin C disease: a report of
three cases and literature review.

Bao D(#)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Yang H(#)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Yin
Y(#)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Wang S(8), Li Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Zhang
X(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Su T(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Xu R(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Li C(1),
Zhou F(9)(10)(11)(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, No.
8 Xishiku St., Xicheng District, Beijing, 100034, China.
(2)Institute of Nephrology, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(3)Renal Pathology Center, Institute of Nephrology, Peking University, Beijing,
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Renal Disease, Ministry of Health of China, Beijing, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Chronic Kidney Disease Prevention and Treatment, Ministry
of Education of China, Beijing, China.
(6)Research Units of Diagnosis and Treatment of Immune-Mediated Kidney Diseases,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.
(8)Laboratory of Electron Microscopy, Pathological Center, Peking University
First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(9)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, No.
8 Xishiku St., Xicheng District, Beijing, 100034, China.
zhoufude1801@vip.sina.com.
(10)Institute of Nephrology, Peking University, Beijing, China.
zhoufude1801@vip.sina.com.
(11)Renal Pathology Center, Institute of Nephrology, Peking University, Beijing,
China. zhoufude1801@vip.sina.com.
(12)Key Laboratory of Renal Disease, Ministry of Health of China, Beijing,
China. zhoufude1801@vip.sina.com.
(13)Key Laboratory of Chronic Kidney Disease Prevention and Treatment, Ministry
of Education of China, Beijing, China. zhoufude1801@vip.sina.com.
(14)Research Units of Diagnosis and Treatment of Immune-Mediated Kidney
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
zhoufude1801@vip.sina.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Mutation of MMACHC gene causes cobalamin C disease (cblC), an
inherited metabolic disorder, which presents as combined methylmalonic aciduria
(MMA-uria) and hyperhomocysteinaemia in clinical. Renal complications may also
be present in patients with this inborn deficiency. The most common histological
change is thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA). However, to our acknowledge, renal
tubular injury in the late-onset presentation of cblC is rarely been reported.
This study provides a detailed description of the characteristics of kidney
disease in cblC deficiency, aiming to improve the early recognition of this
treatable disease for clinical nephrologists.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here we described three teenage patients who presented with
hematuria, proteinuria, and hypertension in clinical presentation. They were
diagnosed with renal involvement due to cblC deficiency after laboratory tests
revealing elevated serum and urine homocysteine, renal biopsy showing TMA and
tubular injury, along with genetic testing showing heterogeneous compound
mutations in MMACHC. Hydroxocobalamin, betaine, and L-carnitine were
administered to these patients. All of them got improved, with decreased
homocysteine, controlled blood pressure, and kidney outcomes recovered.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical diagnosis of cblC disease associated with kidney
injury should be considered in patients with unclear TMA accompanied by a high
concentration of serum homocysteine, even in teenagers or adults. Early
diagnosis and timely intervention are vital to improving the prognosis of
cobalamin C disease.
CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-024-03774-w
PMCID: PMC11465495
PMID: 39390411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
