---
reference_id: "PMID:30558655"
title: "Galloway-Mowat syndrome in Taiwan: OSGEP mutation and unique clinical phenotype."
authors:
- Lin PY
- Tseng MH
- Zenker M
- Rao J
- Hildebrandt F
- Lin SH
- Lin CC
- Chang JH
- Hsu CH
- Lee MD
- Lin SP
- Tsai JD
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-018-0961-9
keywords:
- Arachnodactyly/genetics
- Female
- "Hernia, Hiatal/genetics"
- Humans
- Lissencephaly/genetics
- Male
- Metalloendopeptidases/genetics
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Nephrosis/genetics
- Nephrotic Syndrome/genetics
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Taiwan
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Galloway-Mowat syndrome in Taiwan: OSGEP mutation and unique clinical phenotype.
**Authors:** Lin PY, Tseng MH, Zenker M, Rao J, Hildebrandt F, Lin SH, Lin CC, Chang JH, Hsu CH, Lee MD, Lin SP, Tsai JD
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-018-0961-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-018-0961-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2018 Dec 17;13(1):226. doi: 10.1186/s13023-018-0961-9.

Galloway-Mowat syndrome in Taiwan: OSGEP mutation and unique clinical phenotype.

Lin PY(1)(2)(3), Tseng MH(4), Zenker M(5), Rao J(6), Hildebrandt F(6), Lin
SH(7), Lin CC(1)(8)(9), Chang JH(1), Hsu CH(1), Lee MD(10), Lin SP(11)(12)(13),
Tsai JD(14)(15)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, MacKay Children's Hospital, No. 92, Sec. 2,
Chung-Shan North Road, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, New
Taipei City, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Informatics, College of Medicine Science and
Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg,
Germany.
(6)Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(9)MacKay Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Hsinchu MacKay Memorial Hospital, Hsinchu City,
Taiwan.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, MacKay Children's Hospital, No. 92, Sec. 2,
Chung-Shan North Road, Taipei, Taiwan. 4535lin@gmail.com.
(12)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
4535lin@gmail.com.
(13)Department of Pediatric Genetics, MacKay Children's Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. 4535lin@gmail.com.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, MacKay Children's Hospital, No. 92, Sec. 2,
Chung-Shan North Road, Taipei, Taiwan. tsaijd@yahoo.com.tw.
(15)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
tsaijd@yahoo.com.tw.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. tsaijd@yahoo.com.tw.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. tsaijd@yahoo.com.tw.

BACKGROUND: Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GAMOS) is a rare autosomal recessive
disease characterized by the combination of glomerulopathy with early-onset
nephrotic syndrome and microcephaly with central nervous system anomalies. Given
its clinical heterogeneity, GAMOS is believed to be a genetically heterogenous
group of disorders. Recently, it has been reported that mutations in
KEOPS-encoding genes, including the OSGEP gene, were responsible for GAMOS.
RESULTS: Overall, 6 patients from 5 different Taiwanese families were included
in our study; the patients had an identical OSGEP gene mutation (c.740G > A
transition) and all exhibited a uniform clinical phenotype with early-onset
nephrotic syndrome, craniofacial and skeletal dysmorphism, primary microcephaly
with pachygyria, and death before 2 years of age. We reviewed their clinical
manifestations, the prenatal and postnatal presentations and ultrasound
findings, results of imaging studies, associated anomalies, and outcome on
follow-up. All individuals were found to have an "aged face" comprising peculiar
facial dysmorphisms. Arachnodactyly or camptodactyly were noted in all patients.
Neurological findings consisted of microcephaly, hypotonia, developmental delay,
and seizures. Brain imaging studies all showed pachygyria and hypomyelination.
All patients developed early-onset nephrotic syndrome. The proteinuria was
steroid-resistant and eventually resulted in renal function impairment. Prenatal
ultrasound findings included microcephaly, intrauterine growth restriction, and
oligohydramnios. Fetal MRI in 2 patients confirmed the gyral and myelin
abnormalities.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that a careful review of the facial features can
provide useful clues for an early and accurate diagnosis. Prenatal ultrasound
findings, fetal MRI, genetic counseling, and mutation analysis may be useful for
an early prenatal diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-018-0961-9
PMCID: PMC6296068
PMID: 30558655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The
study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Mackay Memorial
Hospital. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Consent for publication was provided by the
parents. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
