---
reference_id: "PMID:40289159"
title: "Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome: a prospective monocentric study of 26 patients and literature review."
authors:
- Bessis D
- Vidaud D
- Meyer P
- Pacot L
- G V
- Bonnard AA
- Capri Y
- Coubes C
- Herman F
- Lacombe D
- Molinari N
- Poujade L
- Roubertie A
- Van Gils J
- Verloes A
- Geneviève D
- Cavé H
- Willems M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03706-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome: a prospective monocentric study of 26 patients and literature review.
**Authors:** Bessis D, Vidaud D, Meyer P, Pacot L, G V, Bonnard AA, Capri Y, Coubes C, Herman F, Lacombe D, Molinari N, Poujade L, Roubertie A, Van Gils J, Verloes A, Geneviève D, Cavé H, Willems M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03706-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03706-3)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Apr 27;20(1):201. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03706-3.

Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome: a prospective monocentric study of 26 
patients and literature review.

Bessis D(1), Vidaud D(2)(3), Meyer P(4), Pacot L(2)(3), G V(5), Bonnard AA(6), 
Capri Y(7), Coubes C(8), Herman F(9), Lacombe D(10), Molinari N(9), Poujade 
L(11), Roubertie A(4), Van Gils J(10), Verloes A(7)(12), Geneviève D(8), Cavé 
H(6), Willems M(8)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Reference Center for Rare Skin Diseases, 
Filière Maladies Rares Dermatologiques (FIMARAD), MAGEC-Sud Montpellier, 
Saint-Eloi Hospital and Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France. 
didierbessis@gmail.com.
(2)Fédération de Génétique et Médecine Génomique, Hôpital Cochin, DMU BioPhyGen, 
AP-HP, Centre-Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(3)Institut Cochin, Inserm U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Université Paris Cité, CARPEM, 
Paris, France.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Gui de Chauliac Hospital and Univ 
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(5)Department of Pediatric and Congenital Cardiology, M3C Regional Reference 
Center, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(6)Department of Genetic Biochemistry, Robert-Debré Hospital, AP-HP and 
University of Paris-Diderot, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics and Reference Center, Reference Center for 
Developmental Anomalies and Malformative Syndromes- Île de France, Robert-Debré 
Hospital, AP-HP and University of Paris-Diderot, Paris, France.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, and Univ 
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(9)Department of Medical Information, Epidemiological and Clinical Research 
Unit, La Colombière Hospital, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, Pellegrin University Hospital of Bordeaux, 
AP-HP, Paris, France.
(11)Department of Dermatology and Reference Center for Rare Skin Diseases, 
Filière Maladies Rares Dermatologiques (FIMARAD), MAGEC-Sud Montpellier, 
Saint-Eloi Hospital and Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(12)ERN ITHACA Coordinating Center, Paris, France.
(13)Institute for Neurosciences of Montpellier, Univ Montpellier, INSERM, 
Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND: Data on clinical manifestations of neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome 
(NF-NS) remain heterogeneous, with limited validated descriptions.
METHODS: This study aims to better define the clinical and molecular features of 
NF-NS and compare them with existing literature. Secondary objectives include 
evaluating inter-rater diagnostic agreement among experienced clinicians and 
assessing the utility of deep-learning algorithms (Face2Gene® [F2G]). 
Additionally, we assess the prevalence of congenital heart malformations (CHM) 
in NF-NS compared to 'classic' neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). A 9-year, 
prospective, monocentric study was conducted, involving patients with NF1 
pathogenic variants (PVs) and Noonan syndrome-like facial phenotype (NSLFP).
RESULTS: Twenty-six patients were enrolled. NSLFP was categorized as 
'suggestive' in 69% of cases and 'typical' in 31%. The presence of at least two 
facial abnormalities (e.g., low-set ears, downslanted palpebral fissures, 
hypertelorism, and ptosis) was consistently observed in 'typical' cases. 
Inter-rater concordance was substantial (0.65 [95% CI = 0.56; 0.74]), while 
concordance between clinicians and F2G was almost perfect at (0.821 [CI 95% = 
0.625; 1.000]). Missense NF1 PVs were observed in 38.5% of cases. Apart from 
NSLP and a high frequency of pectus excavatum (62.5%), no significant 
differences in anthropometric, dermatological, neurological, skeletal, or ocular 
clinical features were observed between NF-NS and 'classic' NF1. CHM were found 
in 19.2% of NF-NS patients, with pulmonic stenosis present in 7.7%.
CONCLUSION: NF-NS is a distinct phenotypic variant of NF1, marked by NSLP with 
consistent facial features -, and frequent pectus excavatum. F2G demonstrated 
high diagnostic concordance, reinforcing its clinical utility. Given the 
elevated risk of CHM, especially pulmonic stenosis, proactive cardiovascular 
assessment similar to other RASopathies is recommended for NS-NF patients, 
regardless of NF1 PV type.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03706-3
PMCID: PMC12036184
PMID: 40289159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The patients in this manuscript have given written informed consent 
for publication of their case details. This. work was approved by the clinical 
research department of the university hospital of the principal investigator. 
(D.B), the Consultative Committee for the Processing of Health Research Data 
(CCTIRS; 12.750) and the National. Commission on Informatics and Liberty (CNIL; 
913041). Consent for publication: The patients in this manuscript have given 
written informed consent for publication of their case details. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no conflict of interest regarding this 
manuscript. This work was approved by the clinical research department of the 
university hospital of the principal investigator (D.B), the Consultative 
Committee for the Processing of Health Research Data (CCTIRS; 12.750) and the 
National Commission on Informatics and Liberty (CNIL; 913041).