---
reference_id: "PMID:34806523"
title: Relationship between Hepatitis B virus infection and platelet production and dysfunction.
authors:
- Jiang H
- Li Y
- Sheng Q
- Dou X
journal: Platelets
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/09537104.2021.2002836
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between Hepatitis B virus infection and platelet production and dysfunction.
**Authors:** Jiang H, Li Y, Sheng Q, Dou X
**Journal:** Platelets (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09537104.2021.2002836](https://doi.org/10.1080/09537104.2021.2002836)

## Content

1. Platelets. 2022 Feb 17;33(2):212-218. doi: 10.1080/09537104.2021.2002836. Epub
 2021 Nov 21.

Relationship between Hepatitis B virus infection and platelet production and 
dysfunction.

Jiang H(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Sheng Q(1)(2), Dou X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, China Medical University of Shengjing 
Hospital, Shenyang, China.
(2)Liaoning Key Laboratory of Viral Hepatitis, China Medical University of 
Shengjing Hospital, Shenyang, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a kind of hepatotropic DNA virus. The main target 
organ is liver, except for liver, HBV has been found in a variety of 
extrahepatic tissues, such as kidney, thyroid, pancreas, bone marrow, etc. HBV 
can cause severe complications by invading these tissues. Among them, 
pancytopenia is one of the common complications, especially thrombocytopenia 
that causes life-threatening bleeding. However, the mechanism of 
thrombocytopenia is unclear and the treatment is extremely difficult. It has 
been confirmed that HBV has a close relationship with platelets. HBV can 
directly infect bone marrow, inhibit platelet production, and accelerate 
platelet destruction by activating monocyte-macrophage system and immune system. 
While platelets act as a double-edged sword to HBV. On one hand, the activated 
platelets can degranulate and release inflammatory mediators to help clear the 
viruses. Furthermore, platelets can provide anti-fibrotic molecules to improve 
liver functions and reduce hepatic fibrosis. On the other hand, platelets can 
also cause negative effects. The infected platelets collect HBV-specific CD8+ T 
cells and nonspecific inflammatory cells into liver parenchyma, inducing chronic 
inflammation, liver fibrosis and hepatic carcinoma. This article explores the 
interaction between HBV infection and platelets, providing a theoretical basis 
for clinical treatment of thrombocytopenia and severe hemorrhage caused by HBV 
infection.

DOI: 10.1080/09537104.2021.2002836
PMID: 34806523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]