---
reference_id: "PMID:34612606"
title: "Hypotonia-cystinuria 2p21 deletion syndrome: Intrafamilial variability of clinical expression."
authors:
- Towheed A
- Hietanen CL
- Kamath VG
- Singh LN
- Ho A
- Engelstad K
- Cornett K
- Montes J
- De Vivo D
journal: Ann Clin Transl Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/acn3.51464
keywords:
- Adult
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 21/genetics"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Cystinuria/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Muscle Hypotonia/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Siblings
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypotonia-cystinuria 2p21 deletion syndrome: Intrafamilial variability of clinical expression.
**Authors:** Towheed A, Hietanen CL, Kamath VG, Singh LN, Ho A, Engelstad K, Cornett K, Montes J, De Vivo D
**Journal:** Ann Clin Transl Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acn3.51464](https://doi.org/10.1002/acn3.51464)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2021 Nov;8(11):2199-2204. doi: 10.1002/acn3.51464.
Epub  2021 Oct 6.

Hypotonia-cystinuria 2p21 deletion syndrome: Intrafamilial variability of 
clinical expression.

Towheed A(1), Hietanen CL(1), Kamath VG(1), Singh LN(2), Ho A(1), Engelstad 
K(3), Cornett K(3), Montes J(4), De Vivo D(5).

Author information:
(1)Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine, Middletown, NY, 10940.
(2)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, Philadelphia, PA, 
19104.
(3)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, 
NY, 10032.
(4)Department of Rehabilitation and Regenerative Medicine (Physical Therapy), 
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032.
(5)Department of Neurology and Pediatrics, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, 10032.

Two siblings presented similarly with congenital hypotonia, lactic acidosis, and 
failure to thrive. Later in childhood, the brother developed cystinuria and 
nephrolithiasis whereas the older sister suffered from cystinuria and chronic 
neurobehavioral disturbances. Biopsied muscle studies demonstrated deficient 
cytochrome c oxidase activities consistent with a mitochondrial disease. Whole 
exome sequencing (WES), however, revealed a homozygous 2p21 deletion involving 
two contiquous genes, SLC3A1 (deletion of exons 2-10) and PREPL (deletion of 
exons 2-14). The molecular findings were consistent with the 
hypotonia-cystinuria 2p21 deletion syndrome, presenting similarly in infancy 
with mitochondrial dysfunction but diverging later in childhood and displaying 
intrafamilial phenotypic variability.

© 2021 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.51464
PMCID: PMC8607452
PMID: 34612606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors are not aware of any conflict of 
interest involved in this report.