---
reference_id: "PMID:36326739"
title: American Thyroid Association Guidelines and National Trends in Management of Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma.
authors:
- Gordon AJ
- Dublin JC
- Patel E
- Papazian M
- Chow MS
- Persky MJ
- Jacobson AS
- Patel KN
- Suh I
- Morris LGT
- Givi B
journal: JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jamaoto.2022.3360
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Male
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/therapy"
- Cohort Studies
- Iodine Radioisotopes/therapeutic use
- Thyroid Neoplasms/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# American Thyroid Association Guidelines and National Trends in Management of Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Gordon AJ, Dublin JC, Patel E, Papazian M, Chow MS, Persky MJ, Jacobson AS, Patel KN, Suh I, Morris LGT, Givi B
**Journal:** JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaoto.2022.3360](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoto.2022.3360)

## Content

1. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2022 Dec 1;148(12):1156-1163. doi:
10.1001/jamaoto.2022.3360.

American Thyroid Association Guidelines and National Trends in Management of
Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma.

Gordon AJ(1), Dublin JC(1), Patel E(2), Papazian M(1), Chow MS(1), Persky MJ(1),
Jacobson AS(1), Patel KN(3), Suh I(3), Morris LGT(4), Givi B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, NYU Langone Health, New
York, New York.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of California,
San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, California.
(3)Division of Endocrine Surgery, Department of Surgery, NYU Langone Health, New
York, New York.
(4)Head and Neck Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York.

IMPORTANCE: Over time, the American Thyroid Association (ATA) guidelines have
increasingly promoted more limited treatments for well-differentiated thyroid
cancers.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the 2009 and 2015 ATA guidelines were associated
with changes in the management of low-risk papillary thyroid carcinomas on a
national scale.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This historical cohort study used the
National Cancer Database. All papillary thyroid carcinomas diagnosed from 2004
to 2019 in the National Cancer Database were selected. Patients with tumors of
greater than 4 cm, metastases, or clinical evidence of nodal disease were
excluded. Data were analyzed from August 1, 2021, to September 1, 2022.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary aim was to tabulate changes in the rates
of thyroid lobectomy (TL), total thyroidectomy (TT), and TT plus radioactive
iodine (RAI) therapy after the 2009 and 2015 ATA guidelines. The secondary aim
was to determine in which settings (eg, academic vs community) the practice
patterns changed the most.
RESULTS: A total of 194 254 patients (155 796 [80.2%] female patients; median
[range] age at diagnosis, 51 [18-90] years) who underwent treatment during the
study period were identified. Among patients who underwent surgery, rates of TL
decreased from 15.1% to 13.7% after the 2009 guidelines but subsequently
increased to 22.9% after the 2015 changes. Among patients undergoing TT, rates
of adjuvant RAI decreased from 48.7% to 37.1% after 2009 and to 19.3% after the
2015 guidelines. Trends were similar for subgroups based on sex and race and
ethnicity. However, academic institutions saw larger increases in TL rates
(14.9% to 25.7%) than community hospitals (16.3% to 19.5%). Additionally,
greater increases in TL rates were observed for tumors 1 to 2 cm (6.8% to 18.9%)
and 2 to 4 cm (6.6% to 16.0%) than tumors less than 1 cm (22.8% to 29.2%).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this cohort study among patients with papillary
thyroid carcinomas up to 4 cm, ATA guideline changes corresponded with increased
TL and reduced adjuvant RAI. These changes were primarily seen in academic
institutions, suggesting an opportunity to expand guideline-based care in the
community setting.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoto.2022.3360
PMCID: PMC9634599
PMID: 36326739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Suh
reported personal fees from iota Biosciences, Medtronic, Prescient Surgical, and
GLG outside the submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.
