---
reference_id: "PMID:22695777"
title: "[Perioperative Addisonian crisis]."
authors:
- Martin C
- Steinke T
- Bucher M
- Raspé C
journal: Anaesthesist
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s00101-012-2033-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Perioperative Addisonian crisis].
**Authors:** Martin C, Steinke T, Bucher M, Raspé C
**Journal:** Anaesthesist (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00101-012-2033-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00101-012-2033-1)

## Content

1. Anaesthesist. 2012 Jun;61(6):503-11. doi: 10.1007/s00101-012-2033-1. Epub 2012
 Jun 15.

[Perioperative Addisonian crisis].

[Article in German]

Martin C(1), Steinke T, Bucher M, Raspé C.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Anästhesiologie und Operative Intensivmedizin, 
Universitätsklinikum Halle (Saale), Ernst-Grube-Str. 40, 06120, Halle, 
Deutschland. christoph.martin@uk-halle.de

An Addisonian crisis marks an acute adrenocortical failure which can be caused 
by decompensation of a chronic insufficiency due to stress, an infarct or 
bleeding of the adrenal cortex and also abrupt termination of a long-term 
glucocorticoid medication. This article reports the case of a 25-year-old 
patient with Crohn's disease who suffered an Addisonian crisis with hypotension, 
hyponatriemia and hypoglycemia during an emergency laparotomy after he had 
terminated prednisolone medication on his own authority. This necessitated an 
aggressive volume therapy in addition to an initial therapy with 100 mg 
hydrocortisone, 8 g glucose and a continuous administration of catecholamines. 
Under this treatment regimen hemodynamic stabilization was achieved. Reduction 
of the administration of hydrocortisone after 3 days resulted in cardiovascular 
insufficiency which required an escalation of the hydrocortisone substitution.

DOI: 10.1007/s00101-012-2033-1
PMID: 22695777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]