---
reference_id: "PMID:30846001"
title: "Temple syndrome in a patient with variably methylated CpGs at the primary MEG3/DLK1:IG-DMR and severely hypomethylated CpGs at the secondary MEG3:TSS-DMR."
authors:
- Kagami M
- Yanagisawa A
- Ota M
- Matsuoka K
- Nakamura A
- Matsubara K
- Nakabayashi K
- Takada S
- Fukami M
- Ogata T
journal: Clin Epigenetics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13148-019-0640-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temple syndrome in a patient with variably methylated CpGs at the primary MEG3/DLK1:IG-DMR and severely hypomethylated CpGs at the secondary MEG3:TSS-DMR.
**Authors:** Kagami M, Yanagisawa A, Ota M, Matsuoka K, Nakamura A, Matsubara K, Nakabayashi K, Takada S, Fukami M, Ogata T
**Journal:** Clin Epigenetics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13148-019-0640-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13148-019-0640-2)

## Content

1. Clin Epigenetics. 2019 Mar 7;11(1):42. doi: 10.1186/s13148-019-0640-2.

Temple syndrome in a patient with variably methylated CpGs at the primary 
MEG3/DLK1:IG-DMR and severely hypomethylated CpGs at the secondary MEG3:TSS-DMR.

Kagami M(1), Yanagisawa A(2)(3), Ota M(2), Matsuoka K(4), Nakamura A(5)(6), 
Matsubara K(5), Nakabayashi K(7), Takada S(8), Fukami M(5), Ogata T(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan. 
kagami-ms@ncchd.go.jp.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Yaizu City Hospital, 1000 Doubara, Yaizu, Shizuoka, 
425-8505, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, JR Tokyo General Hospital, 2-1-3 Yoyogi, 
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo, 151-8528, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Dokkyo Medical University, Saitama Medical Center, 
2-1-50 Minami-Koshigaya, Koshigaya, Saitama, 343-8555, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-8638, Japan.
(7)Department of Maternal-Fetal Biology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan.
(8)Department of Systems BioMedicine, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan.
(9)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan. 
tomogata@hama-med.ac.jp.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 
Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan. 
tomogata@hama-med.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The human chromosome 14q32.2 imprinted region harbors the primary 
MEG3/DLK1:IG-differentially methylated region (DMR) and secondary MEG3:TSS-DMR. 
The MEG3:TSS-DMR can remain unmethylated only in the presence of unmethylated 
MEG3/DLK1:IG-DMR in somatic tissues, but not in the placenta, because of a 
hierarchical regulation of the methylation pattern between the two DMRs.
METHODS: We performed molecular studies in a 4-year-old Japanese girl with 
Temple syndrome (TS14).
RESULTS: Pyrosequencing analysis showed extremely low methylation levels of five 
CpGs at the MEG3:TSS-DMR and grossly normal methylation levels of four CpGs at 
the MEG3/DLK1:IG-DMR in leukocytes. HumanMethylation450 BeadChip confirmed 
marked hypomethylation of the MEG3:TSS-DMR and revealed multilocus imprinting 
disturbance (MLID) including mild hypomethylation of the H19/IGF2:IG-DMR and 
mild hypermethylation of the GNAS A/B:TSS-DMR in leukocytes. Bisulfite 
sequencing showed markedly hypomethylated CpGs at the MEG3:TSS-DMR and 
irregularly and non-differentially methylated CpGs at the MEG3/DLK1:IG-DMR in 
leukocytes and apparently normal methylation patterns of the two DMRs in the 
placenta. Maternal uniparental disomy 14 and a deletion involving this imprinted 
region were excluded.
CONCLUSIONS: Such a methylation pattern of the MEG3/DLK1:IG-DMR has not been 
reported in patients with TS14. It may be possible that a certain degree of 
irregular hypomethylation at the MEG3/DLK1:IG-DMR has prevented methylation of 
the MEG3:TSS-DMR in somatic tissues and that a hypermethylation type MLID has 
occurred at the MEG3/DLK1:IG-DMR to yield the apparently normal methylation 
pattern in the placenta.

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-019-0640-2
PMCID: PMC6407230
PMID: 30846001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Approval to conduct this study was obtained from the Ethical Committee of the 
Institutional Review Board Committee at the National Center for Child Health and 
Development (518). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: We obtained written informed consent 
from the patient or the patient’s parents to publish patient’s clinical and 
molecular information as well as facial photographs. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.