---
reference_id: "PMID:32961074"
title: "Cytokine storm and COVID-19: a chronicle of pro-inflammatory cytokines."
authors:
- Fara A
- Mitrev Z
- Rosalia RA
- Assas BM
journal: Open Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1098/rsob.200160
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytokine storm and COVID-19: a chronicle of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
**Authors:** Fara A, Mitrev Z, Rosalia RA, Assas BM
**Journal:** Open Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rsob.200160](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsob.200160)

## Content

1. Open Biol. 2020 Sep;10(9):200160. doi: 10.1098/rsob.200160. Epub 2020 Sep 23.

Cytokine storm and COVID-19: a chronicle of pro-inflammatory cytokines.

Fara A(1), Mitrev Z(2), Rosalia RA(2), Assas BM(3).

Author information:
(1)Independent researcher, unaffiliated.
(2)Department of Clinical Research, Zan Mitrev Clinic, St. Bledski Dogovor 8, 
1000 Skopje, The Republic of North Macedonia.
(3)Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Laboratory 
Technology, Immunology group, King Abdul Aziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has swept the world, unlike any other 
pandemic in the last 50 years. Our understanding of the disease has evolved 
rapidly since the outbreak; disease prognosis is influenced mainly by 
multi-organ involvement. Acute respiratory distress syndrome, heart failure, 
renal failure, liver damage, shock and multi-organ failure are strongly 
associated with morbidity and mortality. The COVID-19 disease pathology is 
plausibly linked to the hyperinflammatory response of the body characterized by 
pathological cytokine levels. The term 'cytokine storm syndrome' is perhaps one 
of the critical hallmarks of COVID-19 disease severity. In this review, we 
highlight prominent cytokine families and their potential role in COVID-19, the 
type I and II interferons, tumour necrosis factor and members of the Interleukin 
family. We address various changes in cellular components of the immune response 
corroborating with changes in cytokine levels while discussing cytokine sources 
and biological functions. Finally, we discuss in brief potential therapies 
attempting to modulate the cytokine storm.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.200160
PMCID: PMC7536084
PMID: 32961074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.