---
reference_id: "PMID:9398839"
title: Positional cloning of the APECED gene.
authors:
- Nagamine K
- Peterson P
- Scott HS
- Kudoh J
- Minoshima S
- Heino M
- Krohn KJ
- Lalioti MD
- Mullis PE
- Antonarakis SE
- Kawasaki K
- Asakawa S
- Ito F
- Shimizu N
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1038/ng1297-393
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 21"
- "Cloning, Molecular/methods"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Organ Specificity/genetics
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/genetics"
- "RNA, Messenger/biosynthesis"
- "Transcription Factors/biosynthesis, chemistry, genetics"
- Zinc Fingers/genetics
- AIRE Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Positional cloning of the APECED gene.
**Authors:** Nagamine K, Peterson P, Scott HS, Kudoh J, Minoshima S, Heino M, Krohn KJ, Lalioti MD, Mullis PE, Antonarakis SE, Kawasaki K, Asakawa S, Ito F, Shimizu N
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1297-393](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1297-393)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1997 Dec;17(4):393-8. doi: 10.1038/ng1297-393.

Positional cloning of the APECED gene.

Nagamine K(1), Peterson P, Scott HS, Kudoh J, Minoshima S, Heino M, Krohn KJ, 
Lalioti MD, Mullis PE, Antonarakis SE, Kawasaki K, Asakawa S, Ito F, Shimizu N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I (APS 1, also called APECED) is an 
autosomal-recessive disorder that maps to human chromosome 21q22.3 between 
markers D21S49 and D21S171 by linkage studies. We have isolated a novel gene 
from this region, AIRE (autoimmune regulator), which encodes a protein 
containing motifs suggestive of a transcription factor including two zinc-finger 
(PHD-finger) motifs, a proline-rich region and three LXXLL motifs. Two 
mutations, a C-->T substitution that changes the Arg 257 (CGA) to a stop codon 
(TGA) and an A-->G substitution that changes the Lys 83 (AAG) to a Glu codon 
(GAG), were found in this novel gene in Swiss and Finnish APECED patients. The 
Arg257stop (R257X) is the predominant mutation in Finnish APECED patients, 
accounting for 10/12 alleles studied. These results indicate that this gene is 
responsible for the pathogenesis of APECED. The identification of the gene 
defective in APECED should facilitate the genetic diagnosis and potential 
treatment of the disease and further enhance our general understanding of the 
mechanisms underlying autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1297-393
PMID: 9398839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]