---
reference_id: "PMID:29864465"
title: "Folliculitis decalvans: Effectiveness of therapies and prognostic factors in a multicenter series of 60 patients with long-term follow-up."
authors:
- Miguel-Gómez L
- Rodrigues-Barata AR
- Molina-Ruiz A
- Martorell-Calatayud A
- Fernández-Crehuet P
- Grimalt R
- Barco D
- Arias-Santiago S
- Serrano-Falcón C
- Camacho FM
- Saceda-Corralo D
- Jaén-Olasolo P
- Vañó-Galván S
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.05.1240
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Folliculitis decalvans: Effectiveness of therapies and prognostic factors in a multicenter series of 60 patients with long-term follow-up.
**Authors:** Miguel-Gómez L, Rodrigues-Barata AR, Molina-Ruiz A, Martorell-Calatayud A, Fernández-Crehuet P, Grimalt R, Barco D, Arias-Santiago S, Serrano-Falcón C, Camacho FM, Saceda-Corralo D, Jaén-Olasolo P, Vañó-Galván S
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2018.05.1240](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2018.05.1240)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018 Nov;79(5):878-883. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.05.1240. 
Epub 2018 Jun 2.

Folliculitis decalvans: Effectiveness of therapies and prognostic factors in a 
multicenter series of 60 patients with long-term follow-up.

Miguel-Gómez L(1), Rodrigues-Barata AR(2), Molina-Ruiz A(3), Martorell-Calatayud 
A(4), Fernández-Crehuet P(5), Grimalt R(6), Barco D(7), Arias-Santiago S(8), 
Serrano-Falcón C(9), Camacho FM(10), Saceda-Corralo D(2), Jaén-Olasolo P(2), 
Vañó-Galván S(2).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Department, Ramon y Cajal University Hospital, Madrid, Spain. 
Electronic address: lmg_0007@hotmail.com.
(2)Dermatology Department, Ramon y Cajal University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Dermatology Department, Fundación Jiménez Diaz Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Dermatology Department, Manises Hospital Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(5)Dermatology Department, Reina Sofía Hospital, Cordoba, Spain.
(6)Dermatology Department, Universitat Internacional de Catalunya, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(7)Dermatology Department, DermAndTek Clinic, Andorra.
(8)Dermatology Department, Complejo Universitario Hospital, Granada, Spain.
(9)Dermatology Department, La Inmaculada Hospital, Granada, Spain.
(10)Dermatology Department, Virgen Macarena Hospital, Sevilla, Spain.

Erratum in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019 Mar;80(3):834. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.12.004.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019 Apr;80(4):e85. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.11.050.
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019 Apr;80(4):e83. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.10.078.

BACKGROUND: Folliculitis decalvans (FD) is a rare neutrophilic cicatricial 
alopecia that poses a therapeutic challenge.
OBJECTIVES: To describe the therapeutic response in a large number of cases of 
FD with long-term follow-up and analyze potential prognostic factors associated 
with severity of form and with a better therapeutic response.
METHODS: This multicenter prospective study included patients with FD who had a 
minimum of 5 years of follow-up. Severity was assessed by the maximum diameter 
of the cicatricial area. Therapeutic response was evaluated according to 
stabilization of the size of the cicatricial areas and the improvement in 
clinical symptoms.
RESULTS: A total of 60 patients (37 men [61.7%] and 23 women [38.3%]) with a 
mean age of 40 years were included. Earlier age of onset (P = .01) was 
statistically associated with severity of form. Treatment with rifampicin and 
clindamycin, tetracyclines, and intralesional steroids was the most effective. 
No statistically significant prognostic factors predicting a better therapeutic 
response were found.
LIMITATIONS: Because FD is a rare disease, the main limitation was the sample 
size.
CONCLUSIONS: An earlier age of onset was associated with the severe form of the 
disease. The proposed specific therapeutic protocol can be a very useful tool in 
clinical dermatologic practice.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.05.1240
PMID: 29864465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]