---
reference_id: "PMID:36969110"
title: "Combined saposin deficiency: A rare occurrence."
authors:
- Bhat V
- Thergaonkar RW
- Thakur M
- Rajkamal T
journal: Med J Armed Forces India
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.mjafi.2021.01.024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Combined saposin deficiency: A rare occurrence.
**Authors:** Bhat V, Thergaonkar RW, Thakur M, Rajkamal T
**Journal:** Med J Armed Forces India (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mjafi.2021.01.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mjafi.2021.01.024)

## Content

1. Med J Armed Forces India. 2023 Mar-Apr;79(2):238-240. doi: 
10.1016/j.mjafi.2021.01.024. Epub 2021 May 12.

Combined saposin deficiency: A rare occurrence.

Bhat V(1), Thergaonkar RW(2), Thakur M(3), Rajkamal T(4).

Author information:
(1)Senior Advisor (Pediatrics) & Neonatologist, INHS Kalyani, Visakhapatnam, 
India.
(2)Senior Advisor (Pediatrics) & Pediatric Nephrologist, INHS Asvini, Mumbai, 
India.
(3)Ex-Classified Specialist (Pediatrics), INHS Kalyani, Visakhapatnam, India.
(4)Classified Specialist (Dermatology), INHS Kalyani, Visakhapatnam, India.

Combined saposin deficiency (OMIM #611721), an exceedingly rare lysosomal 
storage disorder, is caused by a mutation in the gene PSAP. This gene encodes a 
protein, prosaposin, that cleaves into four constituent proteins, each of which 
has a role as a cofactor for the enzymes whose deficiency results in Krabbe 
disease, metachromatic leukodystrophy, Gaucher disease, and Farber disease, 
respectively. Intact prosaposin itself is essential for neuronal survival. The 
typical manifestation of combined saposin deficiency is of severe neurological 
features in the neonatal period, hepatosplenomegaly, thrombocytopenia, and early 
death. We report, to the best of our knowledge, the first Indian case with these 
clinical manifestations and confirmation by genetic and enzymatic testing.

© 2021 Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services. Published by Elsevier, a 
division of RELX India Pvt. Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mjafi.2021.01.024
PMCID: PMC10037043
PMID: 36969110

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have none to declare.