---
reference_id: "PMID:17570934"
title: Alport syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy.
authors:
- Thorner PS
journal: Nephron Clin Pract
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1159/000101802
keywords:
- Glomerular Basement Membrane/physiopathology
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alport syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy.
**Authors:** Thorner PS
**Journal:** Nephron Clin Pract (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000101802](https://doi.org/10.1159/000101802)

## Content

1. Nephron Clin Pract. 2007;106(2):c82-8. doi: 10.1159/000101802. Epub 2007 Jun
6.

Alport syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy.

Thorner PS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pathology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
paul.thorner@sickkids.ca

Both Alport syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy (TBMN) can be
considered as genetic diseases of the GBM involving the alpha3/alpha4/alpha5
network of type IV collagen. Mutations in any of the COL4A3, COL4A4 or COL4A5
genes can lead to total or partial loss of this network. Males with mutations in
the X-linked COL4A5 gene develop Alport syndrome with progressive renal disease
and sometimes extra-renal disease. Females who are heterozygous for a COL4A5
mutation are considered to be carriers for X-linked Alport syndrome. Although
their clinical course and GBM ultrastructural changes can sometimes mimic TBMN,
more often it tends to be more progressive than usually seen in TBMN. Males or
females who are heterozygous for COL4A3 or COL4A4 mutations usually manifest as
TBMN, with nonprogressive hematuria, while those who are homozygous or combined
heterozygotes develop autosomal-recessive Alport syndrome. Thus, individuals
with TBMN can be considered to be carriers for autosomal-recessive Alport
syndrome, but there remain some exceptions in which patients heterozygous for
COL4A3 or COL4A4 mutations develop autosomal-dominant Alport syndrome.
Distinguishing between all these groups of patients requires a combination of
family history and a renal biopsy for electron microscopic examination of the
GBM and immunohistochemical staining of the GBM for the alpha3, alpha4 and
alpha5 chains of type IV collagen. Mutational analysis of the COL4A3, COL4A4,
and COL4A5 genes, whenever it becomes available, will be a valuable adjunct to
the diagnostic workup in these patients. Novel therapeutic approaches may one
day provide a treatment or cure for these patients, avoiding the need for
transplantation and dialysis.

Copyright 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000101802
PMID: 17570934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
