---
reference_id: "PMID:24657929"
title: Bacterial itaconate degradation promotes pathogenicity.
authors:
- Sasikaran J
- Ziemski M
- Zadora PK
- Fleig A
- Berg IA
journal: Nat Chem Biol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1482
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial itaconate degradation promotes pathogenicity.
**Authors:** Sasikaran J, Ziemski M, Zadora PK, Fleig A, Berg IA
**Journal:** Nat Chem Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nchembio.1482](https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.1482)

## Content

1. Nat Chem Biol. 2014 May;10(5):371-7. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1482. Epub 2014 Mar
 23.

Bacterial itaconate degradation promotes pathogenicity.

Sasikaran J(1), Ziemski M(2), Zadora PK(2), Fleig A(1), Berg IA(2).

Author information:
(1)Mikrobiologie, Fakult채t Biologie, Universit채t Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)1] Mikrobiologie, Fakult채t Biologie, Universit채t Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. 
[2].

Itaconate (methylenesuccinate) was recently identified as a mammalian metabolite 
whose production is substantially induced during macrophage activation. This 
compound is a potent inhibitor of isocitrate lyase, a key enzyme of the 
glyoxylate cycle, which is a pathway required for the survival of many pathogens 
inside the eukaryotic host. Here we show that numerous bacteria, notably many 
pathogens such as Yersinia pestis and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, have three genes 
for itaconate degradation. They encode itaconate coenzyme A (CoA) transferase, 
itaconyl-CoA hydratase and (S)-citramalyl-CoA lyase, formerly referred to as 
CitE-like protein. These genes are known to be crucial for survival of some 
pathogens in macrophages. The corresponding enzymes convert itaconate into the 
cellular building blocks pyruvate and acetyl-CoA, thus enabling the bacteria to 
metabolize itaconate and survive in macrophages. The itaconate degradation and 
detoxification pathways of Yersinia and Pseudomonas are the result of convergent 
evolution. This work revealed a common persistence factor operating in many 
pathogenic bacteria.

DOI: 10.1038/nchembio.1482
PMID: 24657929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]