---
reference_id: "PMID:3799723"
title: "A distinct lethal neonatal chondrodysplasia with snail-like pelvis: Schneckenbecken dysplasia."
authors:
- Borochowitz Z
- Jones KL
- Silbey R
- Adomian G
- Lachman R
- Rimoin DL
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320250107
keywords:
- "Dwarfism/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Genes, Lethal"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- "Pelvis/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A distinct lethal neonatal chondrodysplasia with snail-like pelvis: Schneckenbecken dysplasia.
**Authors:** Borochowitz Z, Jones KL, Silbey R, Adomian G, Lachman R, Rimoin DL
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320250107](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320250107)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1986 Sep;25(1):47-59. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320250107.

A distinct lethal neonatal chondrodysplasia with snail-like pelvis: 
Schneckenbecken dysplasia.

Borochowitz Z, Jones KL, Silbey R, Adomian G, Lachman R, Rimoin DL.

We describe the clinical, radiographic, histopathologic, and ultrastructural 
features of a distinct neonatal lethal chondrodysplasia inherited as an 
autosomal recessive trait. The characteristic radiographic findings consist of 
flattened, hypoplastic vertebral bodies; short ribs; hypoplastic iliac bones 
with "a snail-like" configuration; short, broad long-bones with dumbbell-like 
appearance; short and wide fibula; and precocious ossification of the tarsus. 
Chondro-osseous histology is characteristic with hypervascularity, increased 
cellular density, and normal size chondrocytes with a centrally located round 
nucleus and absence of lacunar space. Because of the snail-like radiographic 
appearance of the pelvis in this disorder, we propose the name "Schneckenbecken 
dysplasia" (ie, German for snail pelvis).

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320250107
PMID: 3799723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]