---
reference_id: "PMID:36894677"
title: Disease characteristics of idiopathic transverse myelitis with serum neuronal and astroglial damage biomarkers.
authors:
- Kim KW
- Lee EJ
- Kim SY
- Jung HJ
- Kim HJ
- Kim S
- Kim H
- Seo D
- So J
- Kim J
- Kim H
- Kim KK
- Lim YM
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-30755-0
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myelitis, Transverse/metabolism"
- Biomarkers
- Neurons
- Neurofilament Proteins
- Intermediate Filaments/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease characteristics of idiopathic transverse myelitis with serum neuronal and astroglial damage biomarkers.
**Authors:** Kim KW, Lee EJ, Kim SY, Jung HJ, Kim HJ, Kim S, Kim H, Seo D, So J, Kim J, Kim H, Kim KK, Lim YM
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-30755-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-30755-0)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Mar 9;13(1):3988. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-30755-0.

Disease characteristics of idiopathic transverse myelitis with serum neuronal 
and astroglial damage biomarkers.

Kim KW(1), Lee EJ(#)(2)(3), Kim SY(4), Jung HJ(1), Kim HJ(1), Kim S(5), Kim 
H(5), Seo D(1), So J(1), Kim J(1), Kim H(1), Kim KK(1), Lim YM(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, 88 Olympic-Ro 43-Gil, Songpa-Gu, Seoul, 05505, South Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, 88 Olympic-Ro 43-Gil, Songpa-Gu, Seoul, 05505, South Korea. 
eunjae.lee@amc.seoul.kr.
(3)Asan Medical Institute of Convergence Science and Technology, Asan Medical 
Center, Seoul, South Korea. eunjae.lee@amc.seoul.kr.
(4)Department of Convergence Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(5)Asan Medical Institute of Convergence Science and Technology, Asan Medical 
Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, 88 Olympic-Ro 43-Gil, Songpa-Gu, Seoul, 05505, South Korea. 
limy@amc.seoul.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

Despite its close association with CNS inflammatory demyelinating disorders 
(CIDDs), pathogenic characteristics of idiopathic transverse myelitis (ITM) 
remain largely unknown. Here, we investigated serum levels of neurofilament 
light chain (sNfL) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (sGFAP) in patients with 
ITM to unravel the disease characteristics of ITM. We prospectively recruited 70 
patients with ITM, 62 with AQP4 + NMOSD and 85 with RRMS-including 31 patients 
with acute TM attacks-along with 30 HCs. We measured sNfL and sGFAP levels using 
single-molecular arrays and compared these levels per lesion volume between the 
disease groups during attacks. Compared to HCs, ITM patients showed higher sNfL 
and sGFAP during acute attacks (sNfL: p < 0.001, sGFAP: p = 0.024), while those 
in remission (sNfL: p = 0.944, sGFAP: p > 0.999) did not, regardless of lesion 
extents and presence of multiple attacks. ITM patients demonstrated lower 
sGFAP/volume (p = 0.011) during acute attacks and lower sGFAP (p < 0.001) in 
remission compared to AQP4 + NMOSD patients. These findings suggest that both 
neuronal and astroglial damages occur in patients with acute ITM attacks at a 
similar level to those with RRMS, distinct from AQP4 + NMOSD. However, active 
neuroinflammatory process was not remarkable during remission in this cohort.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-30755-0
PMCID: PMC9998854
PMID: 36894677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.