---
reference_id: "PMID:30846703"
title: Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.
authors:
- Trapnell BC
- Nakata K
- Bonella F
- Campo I
- Griese M
- Hamilton J
- Wang T
- Morgan C
- Cottin V
- McCarthy C
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0066-3
keywords:
- Bronchoalveolar Lavage/methods
- Bronchoscopy/methods
- Humans
- "Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Pulmonary Fibrosis/etiology
- Pulmonary Surfactants/metabolism
- Quality of Life/psychology
- Risk Factors
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.
**Authors:** Trapnell BC, Nakata K, Bonella F, Campo I, Griese M, Hamilton J, Wang T, Morgan C, Cottin V, McCarthy C
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-019-0066-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-019-0066-3)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2019 Mar 7;5(1):16. doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0066-3.

Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.

Trapnell BC(1), Nakata K(2), Bonella F(3), Campo I(4), Griese M(5), Hamilton
J(6), Wang T(7), Morgan C(8), Cottin V(9), McCarthy C(10).

Author information:
(1)Translational Pulmonary Science Center, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. Bruce.Trapnell@cchmc.org.
(2)Bioscience Medical Research Center, Niigata University, Niigata, Japan.
(3)Interstitial and Rare Lung Disease Unit, Pneumology Department,
Ruhrlandklinik University Hospital, University of Essen, Essen, Germany.
(4)Pneumology Unit, IRCCS San Matteo Hospital Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Pneumology, University of Munich, German Center for Lung Research
(DZL), Munich, Germany.
(6)University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Critical Care and Anaesthesia, Royal Brompton Hospital, London,
UK.
(9)National Reference Center for Rare Pulmonary Diseases, University of Lyon,
Lyon, France.
(10)Department of Medicine, St. Vincent's University Hospital and University
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a syndrome characterized by the
accumulation of alveolar surfactant and dysfunction of alveolar macrophages. PAP
results in progressive dyspnoea of insidious onset, hypoxaemic respiratory
failure, secondary infections and pulmonary fibrosis. PAP can be classified into
different types on the basis of the pathogenetic mechanism: primary PAP is
characterized by the disruption of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) signalling and can be autoimmune (caused by elevated levels of
GM-CSF autoantibodies) or hereditary (due to mutations in CSF2RA or CSF2RB,
encoding GM-CSF receptor subunits); secondary PAP results from various
underlying conditions; and congenital PAP is caused by mutations in genes
involved in surfactant production. In most patients, pathogenesis is driven by
reduced GM-CSF-dependent cholesterol clearance in alveolar macrophages, which
impairs alveolar surfactant clearance. PAP has a prevalence of at least 7 cases
per million individuals in large population studies and affects men, women and
children of all ages, ethnicities and geographical locations irrespective of
socioeconomic status, although it is more-prevalent in smokers. Autoimmune PAP
accounts for >90% of all cases. Management aims at improving symptoms and
quality of life; whole-lung lavage effectively removes excessive surfactant.
Novel pathogenesis-based therapies are in development, targeting GM-CSF
signalling, immune modulation and cholesterol homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-019-0066-3
PMID: 30846703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
