---
reference_id: "PMID:40504975"
title: INPPL1-Related Opsismodysplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Huang S
- Earl D
- White K
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# INPPL1-Related Opsismodysplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Huang S, Earl D, White K

## Content

1. INPPL1-Related Opsismodysplasia.

Huang S(1), Earl D(2), White K(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2025 Jun 12.

Author information:
(1)Marshfield Clinic, Marshfield, Wisconsin
(2)Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington
(3)Children's Hospital of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: INPPL1-related opsismodysplasia is characterized by 
prenatal-onset short stature, short, bowed limbs, characteristic facial features 
(relative macrocephaly, prominent forehead, midface retrusion, depressed nasal 
bridge, short nose, anteverted nares, relatively long philtrum), narrow thorax, 
small hands and feet, delayed epiphyseal mineralization, metaphyseal cupping, 
and platyspondyly. Complications include increased risk of fractures, cervical 
spine abnormalities, scoliosis, bone pain, respiratory issues, and delayed gross 
motor skills. Some individuals have cardiac or kidney manifestations. Prognosis 
is variable with perinatal demise in some infants.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of INPPL1-related opsismodysplasia is 
established in a proband with characteristic clinical and radiographic features 
and biallelic pathogenic variants in INPPL1 identified by molecular genetic 
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Intravenous bisphosphonate therapy has improved 
bone mineral density and gross motor function in two individuals with 
INPPL1-related opsismodysplasia. Supportive care: Cervical spine complications 
should be managed by specialists familiar with skeletal dysplasias involving the 
spine including an orthopedist and neurosurgeon; surgical stabilization should 
be performed to prevent progressive myelopathy; management of scoliosis per 
orthopedist with surgery when indicated; management of hypophosphatemia, renal 
phosphate wasting, and bone demineralization per endocrinologist; treatment of 
respiratory insufficiency per pulmonologist; vaccines to prevent respiratory 
illnesses; CPAP and surgical management as needed for sleep apnea; feeding 
therapy with modification of fluid or food texture as needed for swallowing 
difficulties; aerodigestive evaluation for endoscopy and surgery as needed; 
management of cardiac manifestations per cardiologist; management of renal 
manifestations per nephrologist and/or urologist; amplification/hearing device 
and/or surgery when indicated for hearing impairment; social work and family 
support. Surveillance: Flexion/extension cervical spine MRI every three months 
until cervical instability can be excluded in those with instability, risk of 
cervical cord compression, or limited radiograph interpretation; then MRI every 
two to three years, preoperatively, and when indicated. Clinical examination for 
scoliosis every six to 12 months with radiographs when indicated; endocrinology 
evaluation for hypophosphatemia and renal phosphate wasting every six to 12 
months and when indicated; DXA scan when indicated; pulmonary function studies, 
chest radiographs, swallowing evaluation, and sleep study every six to 12 months 
and when indicated per pulmonologist; swallowing evaluation as indicated to 
evaluate for aspiration; developmental assessment to assess gross motor skills 
annually or as needed; rehabilitation medicine, physical therapy, and 
occupational therapy consultations when indicated to evaluate function and need 
for adaptive devices and to support activities of daily living and mobility; 
clinical cardiac examination with frequency per cardiologist; audiology 
evaluation annually or as needed; ENT and orthodontic evaluations as needed; 
assess family and social work needs at each visit. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Individuals with cervical spine instability or who are at risk for 
cervical spine instability should avoid extreme neck flexion and extension, 
contact sports, and other at-risk activities. Individuals with bone 
demineralization should avoid contact sports and other activities associated 
with an increased risk for fractures. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is 
appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic at-risk 
sibs of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those 
who would benefit from prompt initiation of targeted therapy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: INPPL1-related opsismodysplasia is inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an INPPL1 
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% 
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the INPPL1 pathogenic 
variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for 
at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 40504975