---
reference_id: "PMID:23107375"
title: "The Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere and Fazio Londe syndrome revisited: natural history, genetics, treatment and future perspectives."
authors:
- Bosch AM
- Stroek K
- Abeling NG
- Waterham HR
- Ijlst L
- Wanders RJ
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-83
keywords:
- "Bulbar Palsy, Progressive/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Riboflavin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere and Fazio Londe syndrome revisited: natural history, genetics, treatment and future perspectives.
**Authors:** Bosch AM, Stroek K, Abeling NG, Waterham HR, Ijlst L, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-7-83](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-7-83)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Oct 29;7:83. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-83.

The Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere and Fazio Londe syndrome revisited: natural 
history, genetics, treatment and future perspectives.

Bosch AM(1), Stroek K, Abeling NG, Waterham HR, Ijlst L, Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. a.m.bosch@amc.uva.nl

The Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome is a rare neurological disorder which may 
present at all ages with sensorineural deafness, bulbar palsy and respiratory 
compromise. Fazio-Londe syndrome is considered to be the same disease entity. 
Recently it was demonstrated that in some patients the disease is caused by 
mutations in the SLC52A3 gene which encodes the intestinal (hRFT2) riboflavin 
transporter. In these patients riboflavin deficiency is the cause of the BVVL/FL 
syndrome and supplementation of riboflavin proved a life saving treatment. 
Mutations in the SLC52A2 gene and the SLC52A1 (GPR172B) gene, coding for human 
riboflavin transporters hRFT3 and hRFT1 have been associated with the BVVL 
syndrome as well. We performed a review of the literature, with emphasis on the 
natural history and the effects of treatment in these patients. A total of 35 
publications were traced reporting on the clinical presentation of 74 patients 
who presented before age 18. The most prevalent symptoms were bulbar palsy, 
hearing loss, facial weakness and respiratory compromise. Death was reported in 
28 of the 61 untreated patients, with a very low survival in patients presenting 
before age 4. All 13 patients who were treated with riboflavin survived, with a 
strong clinical improvement after days to months of treatment in eight patients. 
Three patients demonstrated a stable clinical course and treatment was stopped 
early in two patients. Abnormalities in plasma flavin levels and/or plasma 
acylcarnitine profiles were observed in some but not in all patients, and also 
patients with normal plasma flavin levels and acylcarnitine profiles 
demonstrated a striking clinical improvement on riboflavin supplementation. It 
is now clear that proper diagnosis requires mutation analysis of all three 
transporter genes and treatment should be started immediately without first 
awaiting results of molecular analysis. Clinical improvement may be rapid or 
gradual over a period of more than 12 months.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-83
PMCID: PMC3517535
PMID: 23107375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]