---
reference_id: "PMID:34735420"
title: "Progress Toward Global Eradication of Dracunculiasis, January 2020-June 2021."
authors:
- Hopkins DR
- Weiss AJ
- Roy SL
- Yerian S
- Cama VA
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7044a1
keywords:
- Disease Eradication
- "Dracunculiasis/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- "Global Health/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progress Toward Global Eradication of Dracunculiasis, January 2020-June 2021.
**Authors:** Hopkins DR, Weiss AJ, Roy SL, Yerian S, Cama VA
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.mm7044a1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7044a1)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2021 Nov 5;70(44):1527-1533. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7044a1.

Progress Toward Global Eradication of Dracunculiasis, January 2020-June 2021.

Hopkins DR, Weiss AJ, Roy SL, Yerian S, Cama VA.

Dracunculiasis (Guinea worm disease), caused by the parasite Dracunculus
medinensis, is traditionally acquired by drinking water containing copepods
(water fleas) infected with D. medinensis larvae, but in recent years also
appears increasingly to be transmitted by eating fish or other aquatic animals.
The worm typically emerges through the skin on a lower limb of the host 1 year
after infection, causing pain and disability (1). There is no vaccine or
medicine to prevent or medicine to treat dracunculiasis; eradication relies on
case containment* to prevent water contamination and other interventions to
prevent infection: health education, water filtration, treatment of unsafe water
with temephos (an organophosphate larvicide), and provision of safe drinking
water (1,2). The eradication campaign began in 1980 at CDC (1). In 1986, with an
estimated 3.5 million cases† occurring annually in 20 African and Asian
countries§ (3), the World Health Assembly called for dracunculiasis elimination
(4). The Guinea Worm Eradication Program (GWEP), led by The Carter Center and
supported by the World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, CDC, and other
partners, began assisting ministries of health in countries with endemic
disease. With 27 cases in humans reported in 2020, five during January-June
2021, and only six countries currently affected by dracunculiasis (Angola, Chad,
Ethiopia, Mali, South Sudan, and importations into Cameroon), achievement of
eradication appears to be close. However, dracunculiasis eradication is
challenged by civil unrest, insecurity, and epidemiologic and zoologic concerns.
Guinea worm infections in dogs were first reported in Chad in 2012. Animal
infections have now overtaken human cases, with 1,601 reported animal infections
in 2020 and 443 during January-June 2021. Currently, all national GWEPs remain
fully operational, with precautions taken to ensure safety of program staff and
community members in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Because of COVID-19, The
Carter Center convened the 2020 and 2021 annual GWEP Program Managers meetings
virtually, and WHO's International Commission for the Certification of
Dracunculiasis Eradication met virtually in October 2020. Since 1986, WHO has
certified 199 countries, areas, and territories dracunculiasis-free. Six
countries are still affected: five with endemic disease and importations into
Cameroon. Seven countries (five with endemic dracunculiasis, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and Sudan) still lack certification (4). The existence of infected
dogs, especially in Chad, and impeded access because of civil unrest and
insecurity in Mali and South Sudan are now the greatest challenges to
interrupting transmission. This report describes progress during January
2020-June 2021 and updates previous reports (2,4,5).

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7044a1
PMCID: PMC8568094
PMID: 34735420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest. All authors report support from The Carter
Center for laboratory diagnostics for the Guinea Worm Eradication Program. No
other potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.
