---
reference_id: "PMID:21282186"
title: Functional analysis of BBS3 A89V that results in non-syndromic retinal degeneration.
authors:
- Pretorius PR
- Aldahmesh MA
- Alkuraya FS
- Sheffield VC
- Slusarski DC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr039
keywords:
- "ADP-Ribosylation Factors/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics
- Gene Silencing
- Melanosomes/metabolism
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Recombinant Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Reflex, Startle"
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Sequence Alignment
- "Zebrafish/embryology, genetics"
- "Zebrafish Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional analysis of BBS3 A89V that results in non-syndromic retinal degeneration.
**Authors:** Pretorius PR, Aldahmesh MA, Alkuraya FS, Sheffield VC, Slusarski DC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddr039](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddr039)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Apr 15;20(8):1625-32. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr039. Epub 2011
Jan  31.

Functional analysis of BBS3 A89V that results in non-syndromic retinal 
degeneration.

Pretorius PR(1), Aldahmesh MA, Alkuraya FS, Sheffield VC, Slusarski DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a syndromic form of retinal degeneration. 
Recently, homozygosity mapping with a consanguineous family with isolated 
retinitis pigmentosa identified a missense mutation in BBS3, a known BBS gene. 
The mutation in BBS3 encodes a single amino acid change at position 89 from 
alanine to valine. Since this amino acid is conserved in a wide range of 
vertebrates, we utilized the zebrafish model system to functionally characterize 
the BBS3 A89V mutation. Knockdown of bbs3 in zebrafish alters intracellular 
transport, a phenotype observed with knockdown of all BBS genes in the 
zebrafish, as well as visual impairment. Here, we find that BBS3 A89V is 
sufficient to rescue the transport delays induced by the loss of bbs3, 
indicating that this mutation does not affect the function of BBS3 as it relates 
to syndromic disease. BBS3L A89V, however, was unable to rescue vision 
impairment, highlighting a role for a specific amino acid within BBS3 that is 
necessary for visual function, but dispensable in other cell types. These data 
aid in our understanding of why patients with the BBS3 A89V missense mutation 
only present with isolated retinitis pigmentosa.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr039
PMCID: PMC3063988
PMID: 21282186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]