---
reference_id: "PMID:22098550"
title: "Liver disease in Viet Nam: screening, surveillance, management and education: a 5-year plan and call to action."
authors:
- Gish RG
- Bui TD
- Nguyen CT
- Nguyen DT
- Tran HV
- Tran DM
- Trinh HN
- International Group for Liver Health in Viet Nam
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2011.06974.x
keywords:
- Asian People
- "Delivery of Health Care, Integrated"
- Early Diagnosis
- Female
- "Health Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice"
- Health Services Accessibility
- "Hepatitis B, Chronic/diagnosis, ethnology, prevention & control, therapy"
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/diagnosis, ethnology, prevention & control, therapy"
- Humans
- "Liver Diseases/diagnosis, ethnology, prevention & control, therapy"
- "Liver Diseases, Alcoholic/diagnosis, ethnology, prevention & control, therapy"
- "Liver Neoplasms/diagnosis, ethnology, prevention & control, therapy"
- Male
- Mass Screening/methods
- National Health Programs
- Patient Education as Topic
- "Practice Patterns, Physicians'"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Program Development
- Time Factors
- Vietnam/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver disease in Viet Nam: screening, surveillance, management and education: a 5-year plan and call to action.
**Authors:** Gish RG, Bui TD, Nguyen CT, Nguyen DT, Tran HV, Tran DM, Trinh HN, International Group for Liver Health in Viet Nam
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1440-1746.2011.06974.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1746.2011.06974.x)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012 Feb;27(2):238-47. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2011.06974.x.

Liver disease in Viet Nam: screening, surveillance, management and education: a 
5-year plan and call to action.

Gish RG(1), Bui TD, Nguyen CT, Nguyen DT, Tran HV, Tran DM, Trinh HN; 
International Group for Liver Health in Viet Nam.

Author information:
(1)Division of GI Hepatology, University of California, San Diego, California 
92103-8413, USA. rgish@ucsd.edu

Despite a high prevalence of liver disease in Viet Nam, there has been no 
nationwide approach to the disease and no systematic screening of at-risk 
individuals. Risk factors include chronic hepatitis B (estimated prevalence of 
12%), chronic hepatitis C (at least 2% prevalence), and heavy consumption of 
alcohol among men. This combination of factors has resulted in liver cancer 
being the most common cause of cancer death in Viet Nam. There is a general lack 
of understanding by both the general public and health-care providers about the 
major risk to health that liver disease represents. We report here the initial 
steps taken as part of a comprehensive approach to liver disease that will 
ultimately include nationwide education for health-care providers, health 
educators, and the public; expansion of nationwide screening for hepatitis B and 
C followed by hepatitis B virus vaccination or treatment of chronic hepatitis B 
and/or hepatitis C; education about alcoholic liver disease; long-term 
surveillance for liver cancer; reduction of infection transmission related to 
medical, commercial, and personal re-use of contaminated needles, syringes, 
sharp instruments, razors, and inadequately sterilized medical equipment; and 
ongoing collection and analysis of data about the prevalence of all forms of 
liver disease and the results of the expanded screening, vaccination, and 
treatment programs. We report the beginning results of our pilot hepatitis B 
screening program. We believe that this comprehensive nationwide approach could 
substantially reduce the morbidity and mortality from liver disease and greatly 
lessen the burden in terms of both lives lost and health-care costs.

© 2011 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Blackwell 
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2011.06974.x
PMID: 22098550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]