---
reference_id: "PMID:21825032"
title: Calcitonin gene-related peptide restores disrupted excitation-contraction coupling in myotubes expressing central core disease mutations in RyR1.
authors:
- Vega AV
- Ramos-Mondragón R
- Calderón-Rivera A
- Zarain-Herzberg A
- Avila G
journal: J Physiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.210765
keywords:
- Animals
- "Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide/genetics, metabolism"
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/metabolism"
- Calcium-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Line
- Excitation Contraction Coupling/genetics
- "Membrane Potentials/genetics, physiology"
- Mice
- "Muscle Contraction/genetics, physiology"
- Muscle Development
- "Muscle Fibers, Skeletal/metabolism, physiology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, physiology"
- Mutation
- "Myoblasts/metabolism, physiology"
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics, metabolism"
- Phosphorylation
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sarcoplasmic Reticulum/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- "Sarcoplasmic Reticulum Calcium-Transporting ATPases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Signal Transduction/genetics, physiology"
- Phospholamban
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calcitonin gene-related peptide restores disrupted excitation-contraction coupling in myotubes expressing central core disease mutations in RyR1.
**Authors:** Vega AV, Ramos-Mondragón R, Calderón-Rivera A, Zarain-Herzberg A, Avila G
**Journal:** J Physiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1113/jphysiol.2011.210765](https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2011.210765)

## Content

1. J Physiol. 2011 Oct 1;589(Pt 19):4649-69. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.210765. 
Epub 2011 Aug 8.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide restores disrupted excitation-contraction 
coupling in myotubes expressing central core disease mutations in RyR1.

Vega AV(1), Ramos-Mondragón R, Calderón-Rivera A, Zarain-Herzberg A, Avila G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cinvestav-IPN, México City, DF, México.

Central core disease (CCD) is a congenital human myopathy associated with 
mutations in the gene encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RyR1), 
resulting in skeletal muscle weakness and lower limb deformities. The muscle 
weakness can be at least partially explained by a reduced magnitude of 
voltage-gated Ca(2+) release (VGCR). To date, only a few studies have focused on 
identifying potential therapeutic agents for CCD. Therefore, in this work we 
investigated the potential use of the calcitonin gene related peptide (CGRP) to 
restore VGCR in myotubes expressing CCD RyR1 mutants. We also examined the 
influence of CCD mutants on Ca(2+)-dependent processes involved in myogenesis 
(myoblast fusion and sarcoendoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase isoform 2 (SERCA2) 
gene expression). C2C12 cells were transfected with cDNAs encoding either 
wild-type RyR1 or CCD mutants, and then exposed to CGRP (100 nm, 1-4 h). 
Expression of the I4897T mutant significantly inhibited SERCA2 gene expression 
and myoblast fusion, whereas the Y523S mutant exerted the opposite effect. 
Interestingly, both mutants clearly inhibited VGCR (50%), due to a reduction in 
SR Ca(2+) content. However, no major changes due to CGRP or CCD mutants were 
observed in I(CaL). Our data suggest that the Y523S mutant results in store 
depletion via decompensated SR Ca(2+) leak, while the I4897T mutant inhibits 
SERCA2 gene expression. Remarkably, in both cases CGRP restored VGCR, likely to 
have been by enhancing phospholamban (PLB) phosphorylation, SERCA activity and 
SR Ca(2+) content. Taken together, our data show that in the C2C12 model system, 
changes in excitation-contraction coupling induced by the expression of RyR1 
channels bearing CCD mutations Y523S or I4897T can be reversed by CGRP.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.210765
PMCID: PMC3213414
PMID: 21825032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]