---
reference_id: "PMID:32830085"
title: Mechanistic insights into the role of pyroptosis in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Chadha S
- Behl T
- Bungau S
- Kumar A
- Arora R
- Gupta A
- Uddin MS
- Zengin G
- Aleya L
- Setia D
- Arora S
journal: Curr Res Transl Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.retram.2020.07.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanistic insights into the role of pyroptosis in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Chadha S, Behl T, Bungau S, Kumar A, Arora R, Gupta A, Uddin MS, Zengin G, Aleya L, Setia D, Arora S
**Journal:** Curr Res Transl Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.retram.2020.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retram.2020.07.003)

## Content

1. Curr Res Transl Med. 2020 Nov;68(4):151-158. doi:
10.1016/j.retram.2020.07.003.  Epub 2020 Aug 20.

Mechanistic insights into the role of pyroptosis in rheumatoid arthritis.

Chadha S(1), Behl T(2), Bungau S(3), Kumar A(1), Arora R(1), Gupta A(1), Uddin 
MS(4), Zengin G(5), Aleya L(6), Setia D(1), Arora S(1).

Author information:
(1)Chitkara College of Pharmacy, Chitkara University, Punjab, India.
(2)Chitkara College of Pharmacy, Chitkara University, Punjab, India. Electronic 
address: tapanbehl31@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of 
Oradea, Oradea, Romania.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Southeast University, Dhaka, Bangladesh; Pharmakon 
Neuroscience Research Network, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(5)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Selcuk Uniersity Campus, Konya, 
Turkey.
(6)Chrono-Environment Laboratory, UMR CNRS 6249, Bourgogne Franche-Comté 
University, France.

Cell death is ascribed as an essential biological process that is fundamental 
for the development of an organism along with its survival. The procedure 
comprises of apoptosis and pyroptosis. Pyroptosis is a programmed procedure for 
cell death which is inflammatory in nature and this pathway gets activated via 
human caspase-4, human caspase-11 and human caspase-5. The activation of this 
process leads to release of pro-inflammatory mediators including cytokines, 
alarmins, IL-18 and IL-1β. The pro-inflammatory mediators released via 
interaction of intracellular kinases direct the development of Rheumatoid 
arthritis. Rheumatoid arthritis is characterized as disorder/disease that is 
auto-immune and chronic in nature. It involves erosions in marginal bone along 
with articular cartilage which is responsible for joint destruction. The 
cytokine along with its complex network is responsible for inflammation. The 
process of pyroptosis is linked with the destruction of plasma membrane, that 
releases these mediators and excessive release of these mediators is linked with 
rheumatoid arthritis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.retram.2020.07.003
PMID: 32830085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]