---
reference_id: "PMID:37895219"
title: Osteogenic Differentiation Potential of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Using Single Cell Multiomic Analysis.
authors:
- Chen D
- Liu S
- Chu X
- Reiter J
- Gao H
- McGuire P
- Yu X
- Xuei X
- Liu Y
- Wan J
- Fang F
- Liu Y
- Wang Y
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14101871
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenic Differentiation Potential of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Using Single Cell Multiomic Analysis.
**Authors:** Chen D, Liu S, Chu X, Reiter J, Gao H, McGuire P, Yu X, Xuei X, Liu Y, Wan J, Fang F, Liu Y, Wang Y
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14101871](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14101871)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Sep 26;14(10):1871. doi: 10.3390/genes14101871.

Osteogenic Differentiation Potential of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Using Single Cell 
Multiomic Analysis.

Chen D(1), Liu S(1), Chu X(1), Reiter J(1), Gao H(1), McGuire P(1), Yu X(1), 
Xuei X(1), Liu Y(1), Wan J(1), Fang F(1), Liu Y(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are multipotent stem cells that can differentiate 
into multiple cell types, including osteoblasts, chondrocytes, and adipocytes. 
Osteoblast differentiation is reduced during osteoporosis development, resulting 
in reduced bone formation. Further, MSC isolated from different donors possess 
distinct osteogenic capacity. In this study, we used single-cell multiomic 
analysis to profile the transcriptome and epigenome of MSC from four healthy 
donors. Data were obtained from ~1300 to 1600 cells for each donor. These cells 
were clustered into four groups, indicating that MSC from different donors have 
distinct chromatin accessible regulatory elements for regulating gene 
expression. To investigate the mechanism by which MSC undergo osteogenic 
differentiation, we used the chromatin accessibility data from the single-cell 
multiome data to identify individual-specific enhancer-promoter pairs and 
evaluated the expression levels and activities of the transcriptional 
regulators. The MSC from four donors showed distinct differentiation potential 
into osteoblasts. MSC of donor 1 showed the largest average motif activities, 
indicating that MSC from donor 1 was most likely to differentiate into 
osteoblasts. The results of our validation experiments were consistent with the 
bioinformatics prediction. We also tested the enrichment of genome-wide 
association study (GWAS) signals of several musculoskeletal disease traits in 
the patient-specific chromatin accessible regions identified in the single-cell 
multiome data, including osteoporosis, osteopenia, and osteoarthritis. We found 
that osteoarthritis-associated variants were only enriched in the regions 
identified from donor 4. In contrast, osteoporosis and osteopenia variants were 
enriched in regions from donor 1 and least enriched in donor 4. Since 
osteoporosis and osteopenia are related to the density of bone cells, the 
enrichment of variants from these traits should be correlated with the 
osteogenic potential of MSC. In summary, this study provides large-scale data to 
link regulatory elements with their target genes to study the regulatory 
relationships during the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells and provide a 
deeper insight into the gene regulatory mechanism.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14101871
PMCID: PMC10606235
PMID: 37895219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.