---
reference_id: "PMID:8140958"
title: "Human immunodeficiency virus and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: an update."
authors:
- Schnittman SM
- Fauci AS
journal: Adv Intern Med
year: '1994'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human immunodeficiency virus and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: an update.
**Authors:** Schnittman SM, Fauci AS
**Journal:** Adv Intern Med (1994)

## Content

1. Adv Intern Med. 1994;39:305-55.

Human immunodeficiency virus and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: an update.

Schnittman SM(1), Fauci AS.

Author information:
(1)Division of AIDS, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

Research progress in the understanding of HIV and its effects on the human 
immune system continues at a rapid pace. Such research is yielding new ideas for 
chemotherapeutic agents, immunologic stimulators and modifiers, and potential 
vaccines. Clinical trials to test these approaches are under way. Despite the 
accomplishments, the epidemic progresses unchecked, resulting in continued 
suffering and death and enormous demands on the health care system of many 
nations. Clinicians have had to deal with new and difficult opportunistic 
infections. Yet advances in the treatment and prevention of these illnesses have 
benefited many AIDS victims. In the United States, the AIDS epidemic is now 
concentrating in the inner cities, involving injection drug users, minorities, 
heterosexuals, women and their offspring. In the developing world, AIDS 
continues to be predominantly a heterosexually transmitted disease, where more 
than one third of prostitutes in central African cities are infected. The major 
burden of the AIDS epidemic in the remainder of this and the next century will 
be in India and Southeast Asia, again predominantly via heterosexual spread. A 
great deal is now understood concerning the life cycle of HIV. More light has 
been shed on the interaction of HIV and CD4+ T cells, the cellular and viral 
factors involved in viral expression vs. latency, the function of the viral 
regulatory and structural proteins and the role of cytokines in regulation of 
HIV expression. Our understanding of the precise mechanisms whereby HIV causes a 
loss of CD4+ T cells remains incomplete. The direct infection and cell killing 
of CD4+ T cells is important and is supported by recent evidence demonstrating a 
high viral burden in these cells in the lymphoid tissue of patients. Over the 
last 1 to 2 years, there has been new evidence for indirect mechanisms of CD4+ 
T-cell depletion and/or dysfunction including: autoimmune reactions, 
perturbations of specific V beta T-cell receptor populations, infection of 
T-cell precursors in bone marrow and thymus, immunosuppression and dysregulation 
by viral proteins, possible super-antigen effects, and antigen-induced apoptosis 
or programmed cell death. New information has come forth in our understanding of 
B-cell abnormalities in HIV pathogenesis, including the putative role of IL-6 in 
B-cell activation and the identification of EBV in B-cell lymphomas in the CNS 
of patients with AIDS. It is expected that these and future discoveries 
concerning immunopathogenesis of HIV infection will help steer the therapeutic 
effort. Major strides continue to be made in the therapeutic arena for HIV 
infection and its complications.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 8140958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]