---
reference_id: "PMID:36969049"
title: Therapeutic advances in leiomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Lacuna K
- Bose S
- Ingham M
- Schwartz G
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1149106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic advances in leiomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Lacuna K, Bose S, Ingham M, Schwartz G
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2023.1149106](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1149106)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2023 Mar 8;13:1149106. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1149106.
eCollection  2023.

Therapeutic advances in leiomyosarcoma.

Lacuna K(1), Bose S(1), Ingham M(1), Schwartz G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Columbia
University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United States.

Leiomyosarcoma is an aggressive mesenchymal malignancy and represents one of the
most common subtypes of soft tissue sarcomas. It is characterized by significant
disease heterogeneity with variable sites of origin and diverse genomic
profiles. As a result, the treatment of advanced leiomyosarcoma is challenging.
First-line therapy for metastatic and/or unresectable leiomyosarcoma includes
anthracycline or gemcitabine based regimens, which provide a median
progression-free survival time of about 5 months and overall survival time
between 14-16 months. Effective later-line therapies are limited. Molecular
profiling has enhanced our knowledge of the pathophysiology driving
leiomyosarcoma, providing potential targets for treatment. In this review, we
explore recent advances in our understanding of leiomyosarcoma tumor biology and
implications for novel therapeutics. We describe the development of clinical
trials based on such findings and discuss available published results. To date,
the most promising approaches for advanced leiomyosarcoma include targeting DNA
damage repair pathways and aberrant metabolism associated with oncogenesis, as
well as novel chemotherapy combinations. This review highlights the recent
progress made in the treatment of advanced leiomyosarcoma. Ongoing progress is
contingent upon further development of clinical trials based on molecular
findings, with careful consideration for clinical trial design, strong academic
collaborations, and prospective correlative analyses.

Copyright © 2023 Lacuna, Bose, Ingham and Schwartz.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1149106
PMCID: PMC10031121
PMID: 36969049

Conflict of interest statement: MI served as study chair for NCI 10250 phase 2
olaparib and temozolomide. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
