---
reference_id: "PMID:18239408"
title: Drug safety in Crohn's disease therapy.
authors:
- Juillerat P
- Pittet V
- Felley C
- Mottet C
- Froehlich F
- Vader JP
- Gonvers JJ
- Michetti P
journal: Digestion
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1159/000111031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug safety in Crohn's disease therapy.
**Authors:** Juillerat P, Pittet V, Felley C, Mottet C, Froehlich F, Vader JP, Gonvers JJ, Michetti P
**Journal:** Digestion (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000111031](https://doi.org/10.1159/000111031)

## Content

1. Digestion. 2007;76(2):161-8. doi: 10.1159/000111031. Epub 2008 Feb 7.

Drug safety in Crohn's disease therapy.

Juillerat P(1), Pittet V, Felley C, Mottet C, Froehlich F, Vader JP, Gonvers JJ, 
Michetti P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. 
pascal.juillerat@chuv.ch

The management of Crohn's disease usually consists of a succession of short-term 
acute phase treatments followed by a long-term maintenance therapy. Above all 
the most frequent adverse events and the data on the long-term safety of the 
therapeutic arsenal available to the physician will be taken into consideration. 
The drugs described in this article include 5-ASA compounds, antibiotics 
(metronidazole, ciprofloxacin and rifaximin), corticosteroids (budesonide, 
prednisone and equivalents), thiopurines (azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine), 
methotrexate, anti-tumor necrosis factor inhibitors (infliximab, adalimumab, 
certolizumab), natalizumab, anticalcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus) and mycophenolate mofetil.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000111031
PMID: 18239408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]