---
reference_id: "PMID:30570999"
title: Phenylketonuria (PKU).
authors:
- Stone WL
- Los E
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenylketonuria (PKU).
**Authors:** Stone WL, Los E

## Content

1. Phenylketonuria (PKU).

Stone WL(1), Los E(1).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2023 Aug 8.

Author information:
(1)East Tennessee State University

Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inborn error of metabolism (IEM) most often caused 
by missense mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) which 
catalyzes (see Figure 1) the hydroxylation of phenylalanine (Phe) generating 
tyrosine (Tyr). PKU belongs to a class of amino acid aminoacidopathies termed 
“toxic accumulation-IEMs” where the circulating toxin is an amino acid or its 
metabolites. Mutations in an enzyme, such as PAH, are recessive since one 
functioning enzyme with the wild-type allele is sufficient.  Tetrahydrobiopterin 
(BH4) binds to the catalytic domain of PAH and is a cofactor for this reaction. 
See figure. PAH is primarily a hepatic enzyme. Elevated blood Phe levels and 
decreased Tyr levels characterize PKU. Newborns with PKU can appear normal at 
birth with the first signs appearing after several months. These signs can 
include musty odor from skin and urine, fair skin, eczema, seizures, tremors, 
and hyperactivity.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30570999

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: William Stone declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Evan Los declares 
no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.