---
reference_id: "PMID:7343943"
title: "[Primary pulmonary hypertension in childhood: familial aspects]."
authors:
- Squarcia U
- Carano N
- Agnetti A
- Haitink O
- Giovannelli G
journal: Pediatr Med Chir
year: '1981'
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/drug therapy, etiology, genetics"
- Infant
- Male
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Primary pulmonary hypertension in childhood: familial aspects].
**Authors:** Squarcia U, Carano N, Agnetti A, Haitink O, Giovannelli G
**Journal:** Pediatr Med Chir (1981)

## Content

1. Pediatr Med Chir. 1981 Nov-Dec;3(6):467-72.

[Primary pulmonary hypertension in childhood: familial aspects].

[Article in Italian]

Squarcia U, Carano N, Agnetti A, Haitink O, Giovannelli G.

Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH) is a rare, progressive and usually fatal 
disease. Its pathogenesis remains obscure. Probably multiple genetic and 
environmental factors play a role in the occurrence of PPH. PPH sometimes runs 
in families. We have studied two families in which some members were affected: 
in family A two sibs, their father and probably their paternal grandmother, in 
family B two sibs. When PPH is present in more than one generation (family A), 
an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance would be likely, whereas, when the 
disease is present in only one generation (family B), an autosomal recessive 
mode of inheritance is more probable. Treatment of PPH is based on pulmonary 
vasodilator drugs, because one of the most important mechanisms is thought to be 
an inappropriate vasoconstriction. Some drugs like oxygen, tolazoline, 
acetylcholine, isoproterenol seem to get poor results, while phentolamine, 
nifedipine, hydralazine and diazoxide show promise. Diazoxide appears to have 
some advantages because it reduces not only pulmonary arteriolar resistance, but 
also pulmonary artery pressure, without producing tachycardia.

PMID: 7343943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]