---
reference_id: "PMID:24070496"
title: "The ectodysplasin pathway: from diseases to adaptations."
authors:
- Sadier A
- Viriot L
- Pantalacci S
- Laudet V
journal: Trends Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2013.08.006
keywords:
- "Adaptation, Physiological/genetics"
- Animals
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/genetics"
- "Ectodysplasins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Edar Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Edar-Associated Death Domain Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- "NF-kappa B/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Vertebrates/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ectodysplasin pathway: from diseases to adaptations.
**Authors:** Sadier A, Viriot L, Pantalacci S, Laudet V
**Journal:** Trends Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tig.2013.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2013.08.006)

## Content

1. Trends Genet. 2014 Jan;30(1):24-31. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2013.08.006. Epub 2013 
Sep 23.

The ectodysplasin pathway: from diseases to adaptations.

Sadier A(1), Viriot L(1), Pantalacci S(1), Laudet V(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Université de Lyon, Université 
Lyon 1, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Ecole Normale 
Supérieure de Lyon, 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon CEDEX 07, France.
(2)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Université de Lyon, Université 
Lyon 1, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Ecole Normale 
Supérieure de Lyon, 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon CEDEX 07, France. Electronic 
address: Vincent.Laudet@ens-lyon.fr.

The ectodysplasin (EDA) pathway, which is active during the development of 
ectodermal organs, including teeth, hairs, feathers, and mammary glands, and 
which is crucial for fine-tuning the developmental network controlling the 
number, size, and density of these structures, was discovered by studying human 
patients affected by anhidrotic/hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia. It comprises 
three main gene products: EDA, a ligand that belongs to the tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF)-α family, EDAR, a receptor related to the TNFα receptors, and 
EDARADD, a specific adaptor. This core pathway relies on downstream NF-κB 
pathway activation to regulate target genes. The pathway has recently been found 
to be associated with specific adaptations in natural populations: the magnitude 
of armor plates in sticklebacks and the hair structure in Asian human 
populations. Thus, despite its role in human disease, the EDA pathway is a 
'hopeful pathway' that could allow adaptive changes in ectodermal appendages 
which, as specialized interfaces with the environment, are considered hot-spots 
of morphological evolution.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tig.2013.08.006
PMID: 24070496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]