---
reference_id: "PMID:29127258"
title: Homozygous mutation in CEP19, a gene mutated in morbid obesity, in Bardet-Biedl syndrome with predominant postaxial polydactyly.
authors:
- Yıldız Bölükbaşı E
- Mumtaz S
- Afzal M
- Woehlbier U
- Malik S
- Tolun A
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104758
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous mutation in CEP19, a gene mutated in morbid obesity, in Bardet-Biedl syndrome with predominant postaxial polydactyly.
**Authors:** Yıldız Bölükbaşı E, Mumtaz S, Afzal M, Woehlbier U, Malik S, Tolun A
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104758](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104758)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2018 Mar;55(3):189-197. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104758. Epub 
2017 Nov 10.

Homozygous mutation in CEP19, a gene mutated in morbid obesity, in Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome with predominant postaxial polydactyly.

Yıldız Bölükbaşı E(1), Mumtaz S(2), Afzal M(2), Woehlbier U(3), Malik S(2), 
Tolun A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(2)Human Genetics Program, Department of Animal Sciences, Faculty of Biological 
Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Center for Integrative Biology, Faculty of Science, Universidad Mayor, 
Santiago, Chile.

BACKGROUND: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a ciliopathy with extensive 
phenotypic variability and genetic heterogeneity. We aimed to discover the gene 
mutated in a consanguineous kindred with multiple cases of a BBS phenotype.
METHODS: SNP genotype data were used for linkage analysis and exome sequencing 
to identify mutations. Modelling and in silico analysis were performed to 
predict mutation severity.
RESULTS: Patients had postaxial polydactyly plus variable other clinical 
features including rod-cone dystrophy, obesity, intellectual disability, renal 
malformation, developmental delay, dental anomalies, speech disorder and 
enlarged fatty liver. The 4.57 Mb disease locus harboured homozygous, truncating 
CEP19 c.194_195insA (p.Tyr65*) mutation. We also found glioma-associated 
oncogene homolog 1(GLI1) c.820G>C (p.Gly274Arg) in the homozygous state in most 
patients. In silico modelling strongly suggests that it is damaging. Also, 
different combinations of four possible modifier alleles in BBS-related genes 
were detected. Two are known modifier alleles for BBS, splicing variant CCDC28B 
c.330C>T and missense MKKS/BBS6 p.Ile339Val, and the others are C8ORF37/BBS21 
p.Ala178Val and TMEM67/BBS14 modifier p.Asp799Asp. Some patients carry all those 
five known/possible modifier alleles. Such variants are highly significantly 
more abundant in our patients than in a control group.
CONCLUSION: CEP19 encodes a centrosomal and ciliary protein, as all BBS genes 
do. Another truncating mutation p.Arg82* has been reported as responsible for 
morbid obesity in a family; however, in the family we present, not all 
homozygotes are obese, although some are severely obese. The variant in GLI1, 
encoding a transcription factor that localises to the primary cilium and nucleus 
and is a mediator of the sonic hedgehog pathway, possibly exacerbates disease 
severity when in the homozygous state.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104758
PMID: 29127258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.