---
reference_id: "PMID:16569736"
title: PRKAR1A Mutations and protein kinase A interactions with other signaling pathways in the adrenal cortex.
authors:
- Robinson-White A
- Meoli E
- Stergiopoulos S
- Horvath A
- Boikos S
- Bossis I
- Stratakis CA
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2006-0188
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex/metabolism
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cyclic AMP/physiology
- Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinase RIalpha Subunit
- "Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinases/analysis, genetics, physiology"
- Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phosphorylation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/physiology
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PRKAR1A Mutations and protein kinase A interactions with other signaling pathways in the adrenal cortex.
**Authors:** Robinson-White A, Meoli E, Stergiopoulos S, Horvath A, Boikos S, Bossis I, Stratakis CA
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2006-0188](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2006-0188)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jun;91(6):2380-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2006-0188.
Epub  2006 Mar 28.

PRKAR1A Mutations and protein kinase A interactions with other signaling 
pathways in the adrenal cortex.

Robinson-White A(1), Meoli E, Stergiopoulos S, Horvath A, Boikos S, Bossis I, 
Stratakis CA.

Author information:
(1)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, and Pediatric Endocrinology Training 
Program, Developmental Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, 
USA.

CONTEXT: Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease, associated with 
Carney complex, is caused by mutations in PRKAR1A (mt-PRKAR1A), a gene that 
codes for the regulatory subunit type 1alpha (RIalpha) of cAMP-dependent protein 
kinase (PKA). PRKAR1A inactivation is associated with dysregulated PKA activity 
that is thought to result in tumorigenesis. mt-PRKAR1A-bearing lymphocytes from 
Carney complex patients exhibit enhanced cell proliferation associated with 
increased expression of the MAPK ERK1/2 pathway.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to determine how PKA and its subunits 
and ERK1/2 and their molecular partners change in the presence of PRKAR1A 
mutations in adrenocortical tissue.
DESIGN: PKA activity and subunit expression, ERK1/2, other immunoassays, and 
immunohistochemistry on adrenocortical samples from patients with germline 
normal or mt-PRKAR1A were analyzed.
RESULTS: Increased cAMP-stimulated total kinase activity was associated with 
mt-PRKAR1A. PKA subunit expression analysis in mt-PRKAR1A tissues, by 
quantitative mRNA assay and immunoblotting, showed a 2.4-fold (P = 0.02) and 
1.8-fold (P = 0.09) decrease in RIalpha's message and protein, respectively, and 
increases in other PKA subunits. Immunoassays showed 2-fold (P = 0.03) and 
6-fold (P = 0.03) decreases in baseline ERK1/2, with corresponding increases in 
phosphorylated (p) ERK1/2 in mt-PRKAR1A samples. B-raf kinase, p-MEK1/2, and 
p-c-Myc, but not p-Akt/protein kinase B, were significantly increased. 
Immunohistochemistry studies supported these data.
CONCLUSIONS: mt-PRKAR1A causes increased total cAMP-stimulated kinase activity, 
likely the result of up-regulation of other PKA subunits caused by 
down-regulation of RIalpha, as seen in human lymphocytes and mouse animal 
models. These changes, associated with enhanced MAPK activity, may be, in part, 
responsible for the proliferative signals that result in primary pigmented 
nodular adrenocortical disease.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2006-0188
PMID: 16569736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]