---
reference_id: "PMID:26099010"
title: "Nuclear Brachyury Expression Is Consistent in Chordoma, Common in Germ Cell Tumors and Small Cell Carcinomas, and Rare in Other Carcinomas and Sarcomas: An Immunohistochemical Study of 5229 Cases."
authors:
- Miettinen M
- Wang Z
- Lasota J
- Heery C
- Schlom J
- Palena C
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000462
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- "Carcinoma, Small Cell/chemistry, pathology"
- "Cell Nucleus/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Chordoma/chemistry, pathology"
- Female
- Fetal Proteins/analysis
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/chemistry, pathology"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- "Sarcoma/chemistry, pathology"
- T-Box Domain Proteins/analysis
- Brachyury Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nuclear Brachyury Expression Is Consistent in Chordoma, Common in Germ Cell Tumors and Small Cell Carcinomas, and Rare in Other Carcinomas and Sarcomas: An Immunohistochemical Study of 5229 Cases.
**Authors:** Miettinen M, Wang Z, Lasota J, Heery C, Schlom J, Palena C
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0000000000000462](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0000000000000462)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Oct;39(10):1305-12. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000462.

Nuclear Brachyury Expression Is Consistent in Chordoma, Common in Germ Cell 
Tumors and Small Cell Carcinomas, and Rare in Other Carcinomas and Sarcomas: An 
Immunohistochemical Study of 5229 Cases.

Miettinen M(1), Wang Z, Lasota J, Heery C, Schlom J, Palena C.

Author information:
(1)*Laboratory of Pathology †Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, 
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD.

Brachyury is a transcription factor of the T-box family typically expressed in 
notochord and chordoma. Some studies report brachyury as highly specific for 
chordoma, whereas others have concluded that brachyury is expressed in many 
types of common carcinomas by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
and immunohistochemistry and could be involved in the epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition and metastatic process. In this study, we immunohistochemically 
evaluated 5229 different tumors for nuclear brachyury expression using a new 
rabbit monoclonal antibody and automated immunostaining (Leica Bond Max). Only 
nuclear labeling was scored, and antibody dilution of 1:2000 was used. In normal 
tissues, only rare cells in seminiferous tubules were labeled; all other organs 
were negative. All chordomas (75/76), except a sarcomatous one, were positive, 
whereas chondrosarcomas were negative. Among epithelial tumors, positivity was 
often detected in embryonal carcinoma (74%) and seminoma (45%). Pulmonary small 
cell carcinoma was often positive (41%), whereas pulmonary and pancreatic 
adenocarcinomas only rarely showed nuclear brachyury positivity (3% to 4%). 
Common carcinomas such as ductal carcinomas of the breast or adenocarcinomas of 
the prostate only exceptionally showed nuclear positivity (<1%). No colorectal, 
hepatocellular, renal cell, squamous cell, thyroid or urothelial carcinoma, or 
mesothelioma showed nuclear brachyury positivity. Among mesenchymal and 
neuroectodermal tumors, only isolated cases of melanoma, malignant peripheral 
nerve sheath tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma, and follicular lymphoma 
showed nuclear expression. However, as shown previously with lung carcinoma, 
experiments with lower antibody dilutions (1:200 to 1:500) showed weak 
cytoplasmic and nuclear labeling in breast cancers. In addition to chordoma, we 
show here for the first time that nuclear brachyury expression is prevalent in 
embryonal carcinoma, seminoma, and small cell carcinoma of the lung but very 
rare in common carcinomas, sarcomas, and melanoma. With these reservations, we 
have demonstrated the presence of nuclear brachyury immunoreactivity to be a 
sensitive and fairly specific marker for chordoma.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000462
PMCID: PMC4567944
PMID: 26099010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The remaining authors declare no conflict of 
interest.