---
reference_id: "PMID:29087262"
title: "Systemic lupus erythematosus with and without a family history: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Chen LY
- Shi ZR
- Tan GZ
- Han YF
- Tang ZQ
- Wang L
journal: Lupus
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1177/0961203317739133
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic lupus erythematosus with and without a family history: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Chen LY, Shi ZR, Tan GZ, Han YF, Tang ZQ, Wang L
**Journal:** Lupus (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0961203317739133](https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203317739133)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2018 Apr;27(5):716-721. doi: 10.1177/0961203317739133. Epub 2017 Oct
31.

Systemic lupus erythematosus with and without a family history: a meta-analysis.

Chen LY(1), Shi ZR(1), Tan GZ(1), Han YF(1), Tang ZQ(1), Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, 56713 Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University , Guangzhou, China.

Objective The objective of this paper is to investigate the association of 
clinical manifestations and laboratory parameters between familial systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and sporadic SLE. Methods All relevant literature was 
retrieved from the PubMed, EMBASE, Web of Science and China National Knowledge 
Infrastructure (CNKI) databases. The qualities of these studies were evaluated 
using a modified version of the Newcastle-Ottawa scale. The characteristics and 
clinical manifestations of involved individuals were extracted from each study. 
Pooled odds ratio (OR) was calculated using the random effects-method, and the 
heterogeneity between studies was quantified using the I2 statistic. Results Of 
330 studies identified by the search strategy, six were included in this review. 
In total, 733 cases were familial SLE and 1405 were sporadic SLE. Analysis 
revealed that photosensitivity, nephritis and thrombocytopenia were negatively 
associated with familial SLE, with OR (95% CI) values of 0.73 (0.60-0.89), 0.72 
(0.59-0.88) and 0.75 (0.57-0.98), respectively. Conclusions Photosensitivity, 
thrombocytopenia and renal involvement could be more common in non-familial SLE, 
which should be further confirmed by well-designed studies with large 
populations.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203317739133
PMID: 29087262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]