---
reference_id: "PMID:15100164"
title: Role of serotonin in the pathophysiology of the irritable bowel syndrome.
authors:
- Crowell MD
journal: Br J Pharmacol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0705762
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of serotonin in the pathophysiology of the irritable bowel syndrome.
**Authors:** Crowell MD
**Journal:** Br J Pharmacol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.bjp.0705762](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjp.0705762)

## Content

1. Br J Pharmacol. 2004 Apr;141(8):1285-93. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0705762.

Role of serotonin in the pathophysiology of the irritable bowel syndrome.

Crowell MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Mayo 
Foundation, 13400 E. Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, AZ 85259, U.S.A. 
crowell.michael@mayo.edu

The irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a complex disorder that is associated with 
altered gastrointestinal motility, secretion, and sensation. Serotonin (5-HT) is 
an important neurotransmitter and paracrine signalling molecule in the 
gastrointestinal tract. 5-HT release from enterochromaffin (EC) cells initiates 
peristaltic, secretory, vasodilatory, vagal and nociceptive reflexes. The 
enteric nervous system (ENS) comprises a semiautonomous effector system that is 
connected to the central autonomic network. Parasympathetic and sympathetic 
nerves modulate the ENS via afferent and efferent communications. Ongoing, 
bidirectional brain-gut interactions involving 5-HT pathways occur that 
significantly influence the effector systems. Altered 5-HT signalling may lead 
to both intestinal and extraintestinal symptoms in IBS. 5-HT directly and 
indirectly affects intestinal motor and secretory function and abnormalities may 
lead to either constipation or diarrhea. 5-HT modulates sensation and perception 
of visceral stimulation at peripheral and central sites. Therapeutic agents 
targeting altered 5-HT signalling may provide new, effective treatments for 
patients with IBS.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0705762
PMCID: PMC1574906
PMID: 15100164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]