---
reference_id: "PMID:33439067"
title: "Aspartylglucosaminuria: Clinical Presentation and Potential Therapies."
authors:
- Goodspeed K
- Feng C
- Laine M
- Lund TC
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/0883073820980904
keywords:
- "Aspartylglucosaminuria/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspartylglucosaminuria: Clinical Presentation and Potential Therapies.
**Authors:** Goodspeed K, Feng C, Laine M, Lund TC
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0883073820980904](https://doi.org/10.1177/0883073820980904)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2021 Apr;36(5):403-414. doi: 10.1177/0883073820980904. Epub
2021  Jan 13.

Aspartylglucosaminuria: Clinical Presentation and Potential Therapies.

Goodspeed K(1), Feng C(2), Laine M(3), Lund TC(4).

Author information:
(1)7067University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Department of
Pediatrics, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)478892Neurogene Inc, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Division of Child Neurology, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)5635University of Minnesota, Department of Pediatrics, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU) is a recessively inherited neurodegenerative
lysosomal storage disease characterized by progressive intellectual disability,
skeletal abnormalities, connective tissue overgrowth, gait disturbance, and
seizures followed by premature death. AGU is caused by pathogenic variants in
the aspartylglucosaminidase (AGA) gene, leading to glycoasparagine accumulation
and cellular dysfunction. Although more prevalent in the Finnish population,
more than 30 AGA variants have been identified worldwide. Owing to its rarity,
AGU may be largely underdiagnosed. Recognition of the following early clinical
features may aid in AGU diagnosis: developmental delays, hyperactivity, early
growth spurt, inguinal and abdominal hernias, clumsiness, characteristic facial
features, recurring upper respiratory and ear infections, tonsillectomy,
multiple sets of tympanostomy tube placement, and sleep problems. Although no
curative therapies currently exist, early diagnosis may provide benefit through
the provision of anticipatory guidance, management of expectations, early
interventions, and prophylaxis; it will also be crucial for increased clinical
benefits of future AGU disease-modifying therapies.

DOI: 10.1177/0883073820980904
PMID: 33439067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
