---
reference_id: "PMID:21622483"
title: Effects of low-level arsenic exposure on urinary N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase activity.
authors:
- Eom SY
- Lee YC
- Yim DH
- Lee CH
- Kim YD
- Choi BS
- Park CH
- Yu SD
- Kim DS
- Park JD
- Kim H
journal: Hum Exp Toxicol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1177/0960327111402239
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of low-level arsenic exposure on urinary N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase activity.
**Authors:** Eom SY, Lee YC, Yim DH, Lee CH, Kim YD, Choi BS, Park CH, Yu SD, Kim DS, Park JD, Kim H
**Journal:** Hum Exp Toxicol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0960327111402239](https://doi.org/10.1177/0960327111402239)

## Content

1. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2011 Dec;30(12):1885-91. doi: 10.1177/0960327111402239. Epub 
2011 May 26.

Effects of low-level arsenic exposure on urinary N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase 
activity.

Eom SY(1), Lee YC, Yim DH, Lee CH, Kim YD, Choi BS, Park CH, Yu SD, Kim DS, Park 
JD, Kim H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Medical Research Institute, College of 
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.

This study was aimed to evaluate whether renal tubular function is impaired by 
exposure to relatively low concentrations of arsenic. Mean urinary arsenic 
concentrations and N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) activities were compared 
among 365 and 502 Korean men and women, respectively, in relation to gender, 
smoking, alcohol consumption, and recent seafood consumption. The study subjects 
were divided into 4 groups according to urinary NAG activity and seafood 
consumption prior to urine sampling, and the correlation between arsenic 
concentration and urinary NAG activity was tested for each group. The mean 
urinary arsenic level was higher in women, non-smokers, and non-drinkers in 
comparison to men, smokers, and drinkers, respectively. Individuals who consumed 
seafood within 3 days prior to urine sampling showed a higher mean urinary 
arsenic level than those who did not. The correlation between urinary arsenic 
concentration and NAG activity in urine was significant only in subjects who did 
not consume seafood within 3 days prior to urine sampling and whose urinary NAG 
activity was 7.44 U/g creatinine (75th percentile) or higher. The urinary 
arsenic concentration was a significant determinant of urinary NAG activity in 
subjects with NAG activity higher than 7.44 U/g creatinine and especially in 
those who had not consumed seafood recently. These facts suggest that a 
relatively low-level exposure to inorganic arsenic produces renal tubular damage 
in humans.

DOI: 10.1177/0960327111402239
PMID: 21622483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]