---
reference_id: "PMID:21683323"
title: "Expansion of intronic GGCCTG hexanucleotide repeat in NOP56 causes SCA36, a type of spinocerebellar ataxia accompanied by motor neuron involvement."
authors:
- Kobayashi H
- Abe K
- Matsuura T
- Ikeda Y
- Hitomi T
- Akechi Y
- Habu T
- Liu W
- Okuda H
- Koizumi A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.015
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Alzheimer Disease/genetics
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- "Enkephalins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Introns/genetics
- Lod Score
- Male
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- Motor Neurons/pathology
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- "Protein Precursors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/classification, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expansion of intronic GGCCTG hexanucleotide repeat in NOP56 causes SCA36, a type of spinocerebellar ataxia accompanied by motor neuron involvement.
**Authors:** Kobayashi H, Abe K, Matsuura T, Ikeda Y, Hitomi T, Akechi Y, Habu T, Liu W, Okuda H, Koizumi A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.015)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jul 15;89(1):121-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.015.
Epub  2011 Jun 16.

Expansion of intronic GGCCTG hexanucleotide repeat in NOP56 causes SCA36, a type 
of spinocerebellar ataxia accompanied by motor neuron involvement.

Kobayashi H(1), Abe K, Matsuura T, Ikeda Y, Hitomi T, Akechi Y, Habu T, Liu W, 
Okuda H, Koizumi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Environmental Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Japan.

Autosomal-dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a heterogeneous group of 
neurodegenerative disorders. In this study, we performed genetic analysis of a 
unique form of SCA (SCA36) that is accompanied by motor neuron involvement. 
Genome-wide linkage analysis and subsequent fine mapping for three unrelated 
Japanese families in a cohort of SCA cases, in whom molecular diagnosis had 
never been performed, mapped the disease locus to the region of a 1.8 Mb stretch 
(LOD score of 4.60) on 20p13 (D20S906-D20S193) harboring 37 genes with 
definitive open reading frames. We sequenced 33 of these and observed a large 
expansion of an intronic GGCCTG hexanucleotide repeat in NOP56 and an 
unregistered missense variant (Phe265Leu) in C20orf194, but we found no 
mutations in PDYN and TGM6. The expansion showed complete segregation with the 
SCA phenotype in family studies, whereas Phe265Leu in C20orf194 did not. 
Screening of the expansions in the SCA cohort cases revealed four additional 
occurrences, but none were revealed in the cohort of 27 Alzheimer disease cases, 
154 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases, or 300 controls. In total, nine 
unrelated cases were found in 251 cohort SCA patients (3.6%). A founder 
haplotype was confirmed in these cases. RNA foci formation was detected in 
lymphoblastoid cells from affected subjects by fluorescence in situ 
hybridization. Double staining and gel-shift assay showed that (GGCCUG)n binds 
the RNA-binding protein SRSF2 but that (CUG)(6) does not. In addition, 
transcription of MIR1292, a neighboring miRNA, was significantly decreased in 
lymphoblastoid cells of SCA patients. Our finding suggests that SCA36 is caused 
by hexanucleotide repeat expansions through RNA gain of function.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.015
PMCID: PMC3135815
PMID: 21683323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]