---
reference_id: "PMID:27491402"
title: EGFR and EML4-ALK Updated Therapies in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- De Mello RA
- Liu DJ
- Aguiar PN
- Tadokoro H
journal: Recent Pat Anticancer Drug Discov
year: '2016'
doi: 10.2174/1574892811666160803090944
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EGFR and EML4-ALK Updated Therapies in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** De Mello RA, Liu DJ, Aguiar PN, Tadokoro H
**Journal:** Recent Pat Anticancer Drug Discov (2016)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1574892811666160803090944](https://doi.org/10.2174/1574892811666160803090944)

## Content

1. Recent Pat Anticancer Drug Discov. 2016;11(4):393-400. doi: 
10.2174/1574892811666160803090944.

EGFR and EML4-ALK Updated Therapies in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

De Mello RA(1), Liu DJ, Aguiar PN, Tadokoro H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve, Campus 
de Gambelas, Ala nascente, Edifício 7, 3º Andar, 8005-139, Faro, Portugal. 
ramondemello@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer is the leading cancer-related cause of 
death.
OBJECTIVE: We review the latest therapies for NSCLC with EGFR and ELM4-ALK 
mutations as well as the most relevant studies and promising patents.
METHOD: A literature search of PubMed database was carried out to identify 
recent Clinical Trials using EGFR therapies and novel patents involving 
diagnosis and therapies on NSCLC. We conducted a search to find new therapy 
strategies, new biomarkers, and selected five patents we find relevant.
RESULTS: Over the last few years, identification of cancer harboring epidermal 
growth factor receptor mutations (EGFR) or chromosomal rearrangements of 
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) led to new ways in classifying and treating 
NSCLC. On the other hand, acquired resistance are a constantly challenge in the 
management of patients with these mutations and new drugs options are in 
development to improve and amplify treatment strategies.
CONCLUSIONS: Currently, EGFR TKIs (e.g.: erlotinib, gefitinib, osimertinib) and 
ALK inhibitors (crizotinib, ceritinib, alectinib) provided a new face for 
advanced NSCLC outcomes. To understand the disease molecular profile is 
mandatory to define the best approach for each patient.

DOI: 10.2174/1574892811666160803090944
PMID: 27491402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]