---
reference_id: "PMID:36440975"
title: ANKRD11 pathogenic variants and 16q24.3 microdeletions share an altered DNA methylation signature in patients with KBG syndrome.
authors:
- Awamleh Z
- Choufani S
- Cytrynbaum C
- Alkuraya FS
- Scherer S
- Fernandes S
- Rosas C
- Louro P
- Dias P
- Neves MT
- Sousa SB
- Weksberg R
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac289
keywords:
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Chromosome Deletion
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/genetics"
- Facies
- "Intellectual Disability/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Machine Learning
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- "Tooth Abnormalities/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ANKRD11 pathogenic variants and 16q24.3 microdeletions share an altered DNA methylation signature in patients with KBG syndrome.
**Authors:** Awamleh Z, Choufani S, Cytrynbaum C, Alkuraya FS, Scherer S, Fernandes S, Rosas C, Louro P, Dias P, Neves MT, Sousa SB, Weksberg R
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddac289](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddac289)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Apr 20;32(9):1429-1438. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac289.

ANKRD11 pathogenic variants and 16q24.3 microdeletions share an altered DNA 
methylation signature in patients with KBG syndrome.

Awamleh Z(1), Choufani S(1), Cytrynbaum C(2), Alkuraya FS(3), Scherer 
S(1)(4)(5), Fernandes S(6)(7), Rosas C(6), Louro P(6), Dias P(8), Neves MT(8), 
Sousa SB(6), Weksberg R(1)(2)(4)(5)(9).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(2)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(3)Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomic Medicine, King 
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, 
Canada.
(5)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, 
Canada.
(6)Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário 
de Coimbra, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal.
(7)Familial Risk Clinic, Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco 
Gentil, Lisbon, Portugal.
(8)Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Centro Hospitalar 
Lisboa Norte, Hospital de Santa Maria, EPE, Lisbon, Portugal.
(9)Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, 
Canada.

Pathogenic variants in ANKRD11 or microdeletions at 16q24.3 are the cause of KBG 
syndrome (KBGS), a neurodevelopmental syndrome characterized by intellectual 
disability, dental and skeletal anomalies, and characteristic facies. The 
ANKRD11 gene encodes the ankyrin repeat-containing protein 11A transcriptional 
regulator, which is expressed in the brain and implicated in neural development. 
Syndromic conditions caused by pathogenic variants in epigenetic regulatory 
genes show unique patterns of DNA methylation (DNAm) in peripheral blood, termed 
DNAm signatures. Given ANKRD11's role in chromatin modification, we tested 
whether pathogenic ANKRD11 variants underlying KBGS are associated with a DNAm 
signature. We profiled whole-blood DNAm in 21 individuals with ANKRD11 variants, 
2 individuals with microdeletions at 16q24.3 and 28 typically developing 
individuals, using Illumina's Infinium EPIC array. We identified 95 
differentially methylated CpG sites that distinguished individuals with KBGS and 
pathogenic variants in ANKRD11 (n = 14) from typically developing controls 
(n = 28). This DNAm signature was then validated in an independent cohort of 
seven individuals with KBGS and pathogenic ANKRD11 variants. We generated a 
machine learning model from the KBGS DNAm signature and classified the DNAm 
profiles of four individuals with variants of uncertain significance (VUS) in 
ANKRD11. We identified an intermediate classification score for an inherited 
missense variant transmitted from a clinically unaffected mother to her affected 
child. In conclusion, we show that the DNAm profiles of two individuals with 
16q24.3 microdeletions were indistinguishable from the DNAm profiles of 
individuals with pathogenic variants in ANKRD11, and we demonstrate the 
diagnostic utility of the new KBGS signature by classifying the DNAm profiles of 
individuals with VUS in ANKRD11.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac289
PMCID: PMC10117159
PMID: 36440975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]