---
reference_id: "PMID:33774068"
title: Therapeutic targets in lung tissue remodelling and fibrosis.
authors:
- Liu G
- Philp AM
- Corte T
- Travis MA
- Schilter H
- Hansbro NG
- Burns CJ
- Eapen MS
- Sohal SS
- Burgess JK
- Hansbro PM
journal: Pharmacol Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107839
keywords:
- Airway Remodeling/physiology
- "Asthma/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Calcium-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- Fibroblasts
- Fibrosis/physiopathology
- Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Humans
- "Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Lung Diseases/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Matrix Metalloproteinases/metabolism
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic targets in lung tissue remodelling and fibrosis.
**Authors:** Liu G, Philp AM, Corte T, Travis MA, Schilter H, Hansbro NG, Burns CJ, Eapen MS, Sohal SS, Burgess JK, Hansbro PM
**Journal:** Pharmacol Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107839](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107839)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Ther. 2021 Sep;225:107839. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107839.
Epub  2021 Mar 25.

Therapeutic targets in lung tissue remodelling and fibrosis.

Liu G(1), Philp AM(2), Corte T(3), Travis MA(4), Schilter H(5), Hansbro NG(1), 
Burns CJ(6), Eapen MS(7), Sohal SS(7), Burgess JK(8), Hansbro PM(9).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Inflammation, Centenary Institute and University of Technology 
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Centre for Inflammation, Centenary Institute and University of Technology 
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; St Vincent's Medical School, UNSW Medicine, 
UNSW, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, NSW, Australia; Sydney Medical 
School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)The Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, Faculty of 
Biology, Medicine and Health, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre and 
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, United Kingdom.
(5)Pharmaxis Ltd, 20 Rodborough Road, Frenchs Forest, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(6)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Department of Medical 
Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia.
(7)Respiratory Translational Research Group, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
School of Health Sciences, University of Tasmania, Launceston, TAS, Australia.
(8)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen 
Research Institute for Asthma and COPD (GRIAC), Department of Pathology and 
Medical Biology, Groningen, The Netherlands; Woolcock Institute of Medical 
Research, Discipline of Pharmacology, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(9)Centre for Inflammation, Centenary Institute and University of Technology 
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic address: Philip.Hansbro@uts.edu.au.

Structural changes involving tissue remodelling and fibrosis are major features 
of many pulmonary diseases, including asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Abnormal deposition of 
extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins is a key factor in the development of tissue 
remodelling that results in symptoms and impaired lung function in these 
diseases. Tissue remodelling in the lungs is complex and differs between 
compartments. Some pathways are common but tissue remodelling around the airways 
and in the parenchyma have different morphologies. Hence it is critical to 
evaluate both common fibrotic pathways and those that are specific to different 
compartments; thereby expanding the understanding of the pathogenesis of 
fibrosis and remodelling in the airways and parenchyma in asthma, COPD and IPF 
with a view to developing therapeutic strategies for each. Here we review the 
current understanding of remodelling features and underlying mechanisms in these 
major respiratory diseases. The differences and similarities of remodelling are 
used to highlight potential common therapeutic targets and strategies. One 
central pathway in remodelling processes involves transforming growth factor 
(TGF)-β induced fibroblast activation and myofibroblast differentiation that 
increases ECM production. The current treatments and clinical trials targeting 
remodelling are described, as well as potential future directions. These 
endeavours are indicative of the renewed effort and optimism for drug discovery 
targeting tissue remodelling and fibrosis.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107839
PMID: 33774068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest T.C. reports 
grants and/or personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Roche, Gilead, Bayer, 
Intermune, AstraZeneca, BMS, Promedior, Ad Alta. C.J.B is a director and 
shareholder of Amplia Therapeutics, developing anti-fibrotic drugs for the 
treatment of IPF. P.M.H. has received funding from Pharmaxis for the study of 
LOX2 inhibitors, and is on the Scientific Advisory Board of Amplia Therapeutics. 
J.K.B has received research funding from Boehringer Ingelheim. Other authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.