---
reference_id: "PMID:21975159"
title: Diagnosis and treatment of fistulising Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Hvas CL
- Dahlerup JF
- Jacobsen BA
- Ljungmann K
- Qvist N
- Staun M
- Tøttrup A
journal: Dan Med Bull
year: '2011'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and treatment of fistulising Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Hvas CL, Dahlerup JF, Jacobsen BA, Ljungmann K, Qvist N, Staun M, Tøttrup A
**Journal:** Dan Med Bull (2011)

## Content

1. Dan Med Bull. 2011 Oct;58(10):C4338.

Diagnosis and treatment of fistulising Crohn's disease.

Hvas CL(1), Dahlerup JF, Jacobsen BA, Ljungmann K, Qvist N, Staun M, Tøttrup A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Gastroenterology, Aalborg Hospital, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.

A fistula is defined as a pathological connection between the intestine and an 
inner (bladder or other intestine) or outer (vagina or skin) epithelial surface. 
Fistulas are discovered in up to 25% of all Crohn's disease patients during 
long-term follow-up examinations. Most are perianal fistulas, and these may be 
classified as simple or complex. The initial investigation of perianal fistulas 
includes imaging (MRI of the pelvis and rectum), examination under anaesthesia 
(EUA) with digital imaging, endoscopy, probing and anal ultrasound. Non-perianal 
fistulas require contrast imaging and/or CT/MRI for complete anatomical 
definition. Any abscess should be drained, and the disease extent throughout the 
entire gastrointestinal tract should be evaluated. Treatment goals for perianal 
fistulas include reduced fistula secretion or none, evaluated by clinical 
examination; the absence of abscesses; and patient satisfaction. MR imaging is 
required to demonstrate definitive fistula closure. Fistulotomy is considered 
for simple perianal fistulas. In complex perianal fistulas, antibiotics and 
azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine, which are often combined with a loose seton, 
constitute the first-line medical therapy. In cases with persistent secretion, 
infliximab at 5 mg/kg is given at weeks 0, 2, and 6 and subsequently every 8 
weeks. Adalimumab may improve fistula response in both infliximab-naïve patients 
and following infliximab treatment failure. Local therapy with fibrin glue or 
fistula plugs is rarely effective. Definitive surgical closure of perianal 
fistulas using an advancement flap may be attempted, but this procedure is 
associated with a high risk of relapse. Colostomy and proctectomy are the 
ultimate surgical treatment options for fistulas. Intestinal resection is almost 
always needed for the closure of symptomatic non-perianal fistulas.

PMID: 21975159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]