---
reference_id: "PMID:25495845"
title: "Néstor-Guillermo Progeria Syndrome: a biochemical insight into Barrier-to-Autointegration Factor 1, alanine 12 threonine mutation."
authors:
- Paquet N
- Box JK
- Ashton NW
- Suraweera A
- Croft LV
- Urquhart AJ
- Bolderson E
- Zhang SD
- "O'Byrne KJ"
- Richard DJ
journal: BMC Mol Biol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/s12867-014-0027-z
keywords:
- Aging
- Alanine/genetics
- Cell Line
- DNA/metabolism
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/analysis, genetics, metabolism"
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Nuclear Proteins/analysis, genetics, metabolism"
- Point Mutation
- "Progeria/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Stability
- Threonine/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Néstor-Guillermo Progeria Syndrome: a biochemical insight into Barrier-to-Autointegration Factor 1, alanine 12 threonine mutation.
**Authors:** Paquet N, Box JK, Ashton NW, Suraweera A, Croft LV, Urquhart AJ, Bolderson E, Zhang SD, O'Byrne KJ, Richard DJ
**Journal:** BMC Mol Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12867-014-0027-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12867-014-0027-z)

## Content

1. BMC Mol Biol. 2014 Dec 12;15:27. doi: 10.1186/s12867-014-0027-z.

Néstor-Guillermo Progeria Syndrome: a biochemical insight into 
Barrier-to-Autointegration Factor 1, alanine 12 threonine mutation.

Paquet N, Box JK, Ashton NW, Suraweera A, Croft LV, Urquhart AJ, Bolderson E, 
Zhang SD, O'Byrne KJ, Richard DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Science, Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation 
at the Translational Research Institute, Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia. derek.richard@qut.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Premature aging syndromes recapitulate many aspects of natural aging 
and provide an insight into this phenomenon at a molecular and cellular level. 
The progeria syndromes appear to cause rapid aging through disruption of normal 
nuclear structure. Recently, a coding mutation (c.34G > A [p.A12T]) in the 
Barrier to Autointegration Factor 1 (BANF1) gene was identified as the genetic 
basis of Néstor-Guillermo Progeria syndrome (NGPS). This mutation was described 
to cause instability in the BANF1 protein, causing a disruption of the nuclear 
envelope structure.
RESULTS: Here we demonstrate that the BANF1 A12T protein is indeed correctly 
folded, stable and that the observed phenotype, is likely due to the disruption 
of the DNA binding surface of the A12T mutant. We demonstrate, using biochemical 
assays, that the BANF1 A12T protein is impaired in its ability to bind DNA while 
its interaction with nuclear envelope proteins is unperturbed. Consistent with 
this, we demonstrate that ectopic expression of the mutant protein induces the 
NGPS cellular phenotype, while the protein localizes normally to the nuclear 
envelope.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study clarifies the role of the A12T mutation in NGPS patients, 
which will be of importance for understanding the development of the disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12867-014-0027-z
PMCID: PMC4266902
PMID: 25495845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]