---
reference_id: "PMID:21209035"
title: Patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome have hyperleptinemia suggestive of leptin resistance.
authors:
- Feuillan PP
- Ng D
- Han JC
- Sapp JC
- Wetsch K
- Spaulding E
- Zheng YC
- Caruso RC
- Brooks BP
- Johnston JJ
- Yanovski JA
- Biesecker LG
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-2290
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome have hyperleptinemia suggestive of leptin resistance.
**Authors:** Feuillan PP, Ng D, Han JC, Sapp JC, Wetsch K, Spaulding E, Zheng YC, Caruso RC, Brooks BP, Johnston JJ, Yanovski JA, Biesecker LG
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2010-2290](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2010-2290)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Mar;96(3):E528-35. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-2290.
Epub  2011 Jan 5.

Patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome have hyperleptinemia suggestive of leptin 
resistance.

Feuillan PP(1), Ng D, Han JC, Sapp JC, Wetsch K, Spaulding E, Zheng YC, Caruso 
RC, Brooks BP, Johnston JJ, Yanovski JA, Biesecker LG.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4472, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder 
of the primary cilium associated with obesity. In BBS mouse models, ciliary 
dysfunction leads to impaired leptin signaling and hyperleptinemia before 
obesity onset. To study the pathophysiology of obesity in BBS, we compared 
patients with BBS and body mass index Z-score (BMI-Z)-matched controls.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Fifty patients with BBS were matched 2:1 by age, sex, race, 
and BMI-Z with 100 controls. Patients with BBS and controls were compared for 
differences in body composition (dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry, abdominal 
magnetic resonance imaging), blood pressure Z-score (BP-Z; standardized for age, 
sex, and height), and fasting concentrations of leptin, lipids, insulin, and 
glucose. Patients with BBS were also compared by genotype.
RESULTS: Leptin, triglycerides, intraabdominal fat mass, and diastolic BP-Z were 
significantly greater in patients with BBS than in the controls. BBS1 (27%) and 
BBS10 (30%) mutations were the most prevalent. Patients with BBS10 mutations had 
significantly higher BMI-Z, greater visceral adiposity, and greater insulin 
resistance than those with BBS1 mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with BBS had higher leptin than expected for their degree 
of adiposity, consistent with the notion that ciliopathy-induced leptin 
signaling dysfunction is associated with leptin resistance. The preferential 
deposition of fat intraabdominally in patients with BBS may indicate a 
predisposition for metabolic complications, including hypertension and 
hypertriglyceridemia. The observation of disparate results in the BBS10 vs. BBS1 
mutation groups is the first demonstration of physiological differences among 
patients with BBS caused by mutations in distinct genes. These results suggest 
that the obesity of BBS is distinct from nonsyndromic obesity.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2010-2290
PMCID: PMC3047221
PMID: 21209035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]