---
reference_id: "PMID:11704758"
title: Subunits of the translation initiation factor eIF2B are mutant in leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter.
authors:
- Leegwater PA
- Vermeulen G
- Könst AA
- Naidu S
- Mulders J
- Visser A
- Kersbergen P
- Mobach D
- Fonds D
- van Berkel CG
- Lemmers RJ
- Frants RR
- Oudejans CB
- Schutgens RB
- Pronk JC
- van der Knaap MS
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/ng764
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Brain Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3"
- "Eukaryotic Initiation Factor-2B/genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Protein Biosynthesis/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subunits of the translation initiation factor eIF2B are mutant in leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter.
**Authors:** Leegwater PA, Vermeulen G, Könst AA, Naidu S, Mulders J, Visser A, Kersbergen P, Mobach D, Fonds D, van Berkel CG, Lemmers RJ, Frants RR, Oudejans CB, Schutgens RB, Pronk JC, van der Knaap MS
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng764](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng764)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Dec;29(4):383-8. doi: 10.1038/ng764.

Subunits of the translation initiation factor eIF2B are mutant in 
leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter.

Leegwater PA(1), Vermeulen G, Könst AA, Naidu S, Mulders J, Visser A, Kersbergen 
P, Mobach D, Fonds D, van Berkel CG, Lemmers RJ, Frants RR, Oudejans CB, 
Schutgens RB, Pronk JC, van der Knaap MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Neurology, Free University Medical Center, Van der 
Boechorststraat 7, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2001 Dec;29(4):358-9. doi: 10.1038/ng1201-358.

Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter (VWM) is an inherited brain 
disease that occurs mainly in children. The course is chronic-progressive with 
additional episodes of rapid deterioration following febrile infection or minor 
head trauma. We have identified mutations in EIF2B5 and EIF2B2, encoding the 
epsilon- and beta-subunits of the translation initiation factor eIF2B and 
located on chromosomes 3q27 and 14q24, respectively, as causing VWM. We found 16 
different mutations in EIF2B5 in 29 patients from 23 families. We also found two 
distantly related individuals who were homozygous with respect to a missense 
mutation in EIF2B2, affecting a conserved amino acid. Three other patients also 
had mutations in EIF2B2. As eIF2B has an essential role in the regulation of 
translation under different conditions, including stress, this may explain the 
rapid deterioration of people with VWM under stress. Mutant translation 
initiation factors have not previously been implicated in disease.

DOI: 10.1038/ng764
PMID: 11704758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]