---
reference_id: "PMID:29796327"
title: Effective Immunotherapy in Bone Marrow Metastatic Melanoma Presenting with Disseminated Intravascular Coagulopathy.
authors:
- Gbadamosi B
- Ezekwudo D
- Nayak B
- Yu Z
- Gjorgova-Gjeorgjievski S
- Xie M
- Robert C
- Jaiyesimi I
- Huben M
journal: Case Reports Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1155/2018/4520294
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effective Immunotherapy in Bone Marrow Metastatic Melanoma Presenting with Disseminated Intravascular Coagulopathy.
**Authors:** Gbadamosi B, Ezekwudo D, Nayak B, Yu Z, Gjorgova-Gjeorgjievski S, Xie M, Robert C, Jaiyesimi I, Huben M
**Journal:** Case Reports Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2018/4520294](https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/4520294)

## Content

1. Case Reports Immunol. 2018 Feb 12;2018:4520294. doi: 10.1155/2018/4520294. 
eCollection 2018.

Effective Immunotherapy in Bone Marrow Metastatic Melanoma Presenting with 
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulopathy.

Gbadamosi B(1), Ezekwudo D(1), Nayak B(1), Yu Z(1), Gjorgova-Gjeorgjievski S(2), 
Xie M(2), Robert C(3), Jaiyesimi I(1), Huben M(1).

Author information:
(1)Beaumont Hospital, Oakland University School of Medicine, Department of 
Hematology and Oncology, Royal Oak, MI, USA.
(2)Beaumont Hospital, Oakland University School of Medicine, Department of 
Anatomic and Hematopathology, Royal Oak, MI, USA.
(3)Beaumont Hospital, Oakland University School of Medicine, Department of 
Diagnostic Radiology and Molecular Imaging, Royal Oak, MI, USA.

Malignant melanoma is responsible for the majority of skin cancer deaths and is 
increasing in prevalence. Bone marrow (BM) involvement by melanoma is rare in 
the absence of widespread visceral disease. Here, we report the case of a 
30-year-old female who presented to the hospital with back pain, low-grade 
fever, and easy bruising. She was found to be bicytopenic and in disseminated 
intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). Surprisingly, BM biopsy showed extensive 
involvement by metastatic malignant melanoma in the absence of visceral or brain 
metastasis. The unique presentation of this case and the challenge of management 
of a potentially treatable cancer in a critically ill patient are discussed, 
alongside a review of published cases of metastatic melanoma in the BM and an 
exploration of currently available treatment options. The excellent response of 
our patient to combined immune checkpoint inhibitors has yet to be paralleled in 
the available literature.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/4520294
PMCID: PMC5896417
PMID: 29796327