---
reference_id: "PMID:19149798"
title: The risk of cardiac events and genotype-based management of LQTS patients.
authors:
- Markiewicz-Łoskot G
- Moric-Janiszewska E
- Mazurek U
journal: Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1542-474X.2008.00278.x
keywords:
- Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/therapeutic use
- "Cardiac Pacing, Artificial"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Defibrillators, Implantable"
- Female
- Ganglionectomy/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Male
- Prognosis
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Risk Assessment
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The risk of cardiac events and genotype-based management of LQTS patients.
**Authors:** Markiewicz-Łoskot G, Moric-Janiszewska E, Mazurek U
**Journal:** Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1542-474X.2008.00278.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1542-474X.2008.00278.x)

## Content

1. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2009 Jan;14(1):86-92. doi:
10.1111/j.1542-474X.2008.00278.x.

The risk of cardiac events and genotype-based management of LQTS patients.

Markiewicz-Łoskot G(1), Moric-Janiszewska E, Mazurek U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice,
Poland.

This review discusses the risk of cardiac events and genotype-based management
of LQTS. We describe here the genetic background of long QT syndrome and the
eleven different genes for ion-channels and a structural anchoring protein
associated with that disorder. Clinical Background section discusses the risk of
cardiac events associated with different LQTS types. Management and Prevention
section describes in turn gene-specific therapy, which was based on the
identification of the gene defect and the dysfunction of the associated
transmembrane ion channel. In patients affected by LQTS, genetic analysis is
useful for risk stratification and for making therapeutic decisions. A recent
study reported a quite novel pathogenic mechanism for LQTS and suggested that
treatments aimed at scaffolding proteins rather than specific ion channels may
be an alternative to antiarrhythmic strategy in the future.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1542-474X.2008.00278.x
PMCID: PMC6932313
PMID: 19149798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
