---
reference_id: "PMID:25726049"
title: Diagnostic evaluation and staging of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- McIntyre CA
- Winter JM
journal: Semin Oncol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2014.12.003
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Pancreatic Ductal/diagnosis, secondary, surgery"
- Humans
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic evaluation and staging of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** McIntyre CA, Winter JM
**Journal:** Semin Oncol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.seminoncol.2014.12.003](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.seminoncol.2014.12.003)

## Content

1. Semin Oncol. 2015 Feb;42(1):19-27. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2014.12.003. Epub
 2014 Dec 9.

Diagnostic evaluation and staging of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

McIntyre CA(1), Winter JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Jefferson Pancreas, Biliary and Related Cancer Center, Department of Surgery, 
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Jefferson Pancreas, Biliary and Related Cancer Center, Department of Surgery, 
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA. Electronic address: 
Jordan.winter@jefferson.edu.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) frequently presents at an advanced and 
incurable stage of the disease. Common signs and symptoms of PDA include 
abdominal or back pain, jaundice, weight loss, pruritus, and nausea/vomiting. 
Diagnostic workup includes serum chemistries and CA19-9, primarily to monitor 
disease status and response to treatment. Imaging studies are performed to 
assess resectability and stage disease, and pancreatic protocol computed 
tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are the preferred 
imaging studies for this purpose. Conventional staging is based on the American 
Joint Cancer Committee (AJCC) Staging System, 7th Edition and informs prognosis, 
while surgical staging systems focus specifically on assessing the likelihood of 
a complete (negative margins) resection with operative management. Herein, we 
review the presenting signs and symptoms, the diagnostic evaluation, and staging 
of PDA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2014.12.003
PMID: 25726049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]