---
reference_id: "PMID:38662954"
title: "Osteopontin-driven partial epithelial-mesenchymal transition governs the development of middle ear cholesteatoma."
journal: Cell Cycle
year: "2024"
doi: 10.1080/15384101.2024.2345481
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteopontin-driven partial epithelial-mesenchymal transition governs the development of middle ear cholesteatoma.

## Content

Cholesteatoma is a common disease of the middle ear. Currently, surgical removal
is the only treatment option and patients face a high risk of relapse. The
molecular basis of cholesteatoma remains largely unknown. Here, we show that
Osteopontin (OPN), a predominantly secreted protein, plays a crucial role in the
development of middle ear cholesteatoma. Global transcriptome analysis revealed
the loss of epithelial features and an enhanced immune response in human
cholesteatoma tissues. Quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemical staining of
middle ear cholesteatoma validated the reduced expression of epithelial markers,
as well as the elevated expression of mesenchymal markers including Vimentin and
Fibronectin, but not N-Cadherin, α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) or ferroptosis
suppressor protein 1 (FSP1), indicating a partial epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) state. Besides, the expression of OPN was significantly elevated
in human cholesteatoma tissues. Treatment with OPN promoted cell proliferation,
survival and migration and led to a partial EMT in immortalized human
keratinocyte cells. Importantly, blockade of OPN signaling could remarkably
improve the cholesteatoma-like symptoms in SD rats. Our mechanistic study
demonstrated that the AKT-zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 2 (ZEB2) axis
mediated the effects of OPN. Overall, these findings suggest that targeting the
OPN signaling represents a promising strategy for the treatment of middle ear
cholesteatoma.
