---
reference_id: "PMID:32834009"
title: Long-term multimodal imaging in acute posterior multifocal placoid pigment epitheliopathy and association with coxsackievirus exposure.
authors:
- Li AL
- Palejwala NV
- Shantha JG
- "O'Keefe G"
- Lee CS
- Albini T
- Yeh S
journal: PLoS One
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238080
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Angiography
- Enterovirus/physiology
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Multifocal Choroiditis/diagnostic imaging, virology"
- Multimodal Imaging
- Optical Imaging
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnostic imaging, virology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term multimodal imaging in acute posterior multifocal placoid pigment epitheliopathy and association with coxsackievirus exposure.
**Authors:** Li AL, Palejwala NV, Shantha JG, O'Keefe G, Lee CS, Albini T, Yeh S
**Journal:** PLoS One (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0238080](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0238080)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2020 Aug 24;15(8):e0238080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238080.
eCollection 2020.

Long-term multimodal imaging in acute posterior multifocal placoid pigment
epitheliopathy and association with coxsackievirus exposure.

Li AL(1), Palejwala NV(1), Shantha JG(1), O'Keefe G(1), Lee CS(2), Albini T(3),
Yeh S(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Vitreoretinal Disease and Surgery, Department of Ophthalmology,
Emory Eye Center, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States of America.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer Eye institute, University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States of America.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate potential insights into the
pathogenesis of acute posterior multifocal placoid pigment epitheliopathy
(APMPPE) using multimodal diagnostic imaging and laboratory evaluation in
long-term follow-up. A retrospective, single-center case series was conducted on
seven consecutive patients (14 eyes) who were given a diagnosis of APMPPE from
March 1, 2011, through June 30, 2019 with at least three months of follow-up.
Clinical characteristics (age, symptoms, visual acuity [VA]), laboratory testing
including coxsackievirus titers, and multimodal imaging from fundus photography,
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), fundus autofluorescence
(FAF), fluorescein angiography (FA), and indocyanine green angiography (ICG)
were analyzed for each patient. The initial median VA was 20/71 and final median
VA was 20/22. Coxsackievirus B (CVB) titers were elevated (≥ 1:80) in six of
seven patients, with a four-fold increase in convalescent titers seen in two
patients suggestive of recent infection. All patients were treated with oral
corticosteroids, and five patients underwent corticosteroid-sparing
immunomodulatory therapy. Initially, multifocal deep choroidal lesions were
observed in the posterior pole corresponding to patches of hypocyanescence on
ICG. Overlying retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) disease was observed on FAF,
although this finding was not universally observed, suggesting that RPE disease
may occur as a sequelae to unchecked choroidal inflammation. SD-OCT
architectural changes confirmed outer retina and ellipsoid zone disruption. FA
of active lesions showed early hypofluorescence and late hyperfluorescence with
surrounding leakage while inactive disease showed areas of staining. Long-term
follow-up of multimodal diagnostic imaging in APMPPE revealed that choroidal
inflammation likely precedes RPE change and photoreceptor damage. Elevation of
coxsackievirus titers with seroconversion may be associated with an infectious
trigger in concert with immune-mediated disease in this posterior uveitis
syndrome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238080
PMCID: PMC7446910
PMID: 32834009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
