---
reference_id: "PMID:28092363"
title: "Mouse models of UV-induced melanoma: genetics, pathology, and clinical relevance."
authors:
- Day CP
- Marchalik R
- Merlino G
- Michael H
journal: Lab Invest
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2016.155
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mouse models of UV-induced melanoma: genetics, pathology, and clinical relevance.
**Authors:** Day CP, Marchalik R, Merlino G, Michael H
**Journal:** Lab Invest (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/labinvest.2016.155](https://doi.org/10.1038/labinvest.2016.155)

## Content

1. Lab Invest. 2017 Jun;97(6):698-705. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2016.155. Epub 2017
 Jan 16.

Mouse models of UV-induced melanoma: genetics, pathology, and clinical 
relevance.

Day CP(1), Marchalik R(1), Merlino G(1), Michael H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 
USA.

Melanocytes, a neural crest cell derivative, produce pigment to protect 
keratinocytes from ultraviolet radiation (UVR). Although melanocytic lesions 
such as nevi and cutaneous malignant melanomas are known to be associated with 
sun exposure, the role of UVR in oncogenesis is complex and has yet to be 
clearly elucidated. UVR appears to have a direct mutational role in inducing or 
promoting melanoma formation as well as an indirect role through 
microenvironmental changes. Recent advances in the modeling of human melanoma in 
animals have built platforms upon which prospective studies can begin to 
investigate these questions. This review will focus exclusively on genetically 
engineered mouse models of UVR-induced melanoma. The role that UVR has in mouse 
models depends on multiple factors, including the waveband, timing, and dose of 
UVR, as well as the nature of the oncogenic agent(s) driving melanomagenesis in 
the model. Work in the field has examined the role of neonatal and adult UVR, 
interactions between UVR and common melanoma oncogenes, the role of sunscreen in 
preventing melanoma, and the effect of UVR on immune function within the skin. 
Here we describe relevant mouse models and discuss how these models can best be 
translated to the study of human skin and cutaneous melanoma.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.2016.155
PMCID: PMC5514606
PMID: 28092363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure/Conflict of Interest: The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.