---
reference_id: "PMID:18694837"
title: Multitracer PET imaging of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Shin J
- Lee SY
- Kim SH
- Kim YB
- Cho SJ
journal: Neuroimage
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multitracer PET imaging of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Shin J, Lee SY, Kim SH, Kim YB, Cho SJ
**Journal:** Neuroimage (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.022)

## Content

1. Neuroimage. 2008 Nov 1;43(2):236-44. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.022.
Epub  2008 Jul 23.

Multitracer PET imaging of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Shin J(1), Lee SY, Kim SH, Kim YB, Cho SJ.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, Gachon University of Medicine and Science, 
Namdong-Gu, Incheon, Republic of Korea. jhshin@gachon.ac.kr

Recently developed positron emission tomography (PET) tracers, such as PIB and 
FDDNP, help to visualize amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in living 
subjects. FDDNP binds to both amyloid plaques and tangles, whereas PIB 
selectively labels amyloid plaques. Therefore, it will be interesting to see a 
direct comparison of the regional binding of the two radiotracers for plaques 
(PIB) and plaques and tangles (FDDNP) using multitracer PET imaging for both PIB 
and FDDNP in the same subjects with and without Alzheimer's disease. Here we 
report that multitracer PET images of PIB and FDDNP in the same Alzheimer 
subjects show negligible PIB but strong FDDNP binding in the medial temporal 
cortex (hippocampus, amygdala, and parahippocampal gyrus), whereas there are 
significant quantities of both PIB and FDDNP binding in neocortical areas. These 
results suggest that tangles rather than amyloid plaques are the dominant 
pathology in the medial temporal cortex of living Alzheimer patients. In 
nondemented elderly normal subjects, PIB binding shows a significant increase in 
the posterior cingulate cortex compared with other brain regions, whereas in the 
same normal subjects we found significant FDDNP binding in the medial temporal 
cortex. Interestingly, the medial temporal FDDNP uptake values in normal elderly 
subjects were inversely correlated with long delay recall scores in the 
California Verbal Learning Test, a measure of episodic memory performance. We 
conclude that multitracer PET imaging of amyloid plaques and tangles using FDDNP 
and PIB in both nondemented and demented subjects provides important insight 
into these complicated pathological processes in living subjects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.022
PMID: 18694837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]