---
reference_id: "PMID:37920959"
title: "Trajectories and risk factors of persistent cough after pulmonary resection: A prospective two-center study."
authors:
- Sun X
- Lan Z
- Li S
- Huang S
- Zeng C
- Wu J
- Chen Q
- Chen Y
- Chen Z
- Tang Y
- Qiao G
journal: Thorac Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.15147
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trajectories and risk factors of persistent cough after pulmonary resection: A prospective two-center study.
**Authors:** Sun X, Lan Z, Li S, Huang S, Zeng C, Wu J, Chen Q, Chen Y, Chen Z, Tang Y, Qiao G
**Journal:** Thorac Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1759-7714.15147](https://doi.org/10.1111/1759-7714.15147)

## Content

1. Thorac Cancer. 2023 Dec;14(36):3503-3510. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.15147. Epub 
2023 Nov 3.

Trajectories and risk factors of persistent cough after pulmonary resection: A 
prospective two-center study.

Sun X(1)(2)(3), Lan Z(2)(4), Li S(1)(2)(5), Huang S(2)(4), Zeng C(1)(2), Wu 
J(2)(4), Chen Q(2)(6), Chen Y(1)(2), Chen Z(1)(2), Tang Y(2), Qiao G(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Second School of Clinical Medicine, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital 
(Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shenzhen People's Hospital (The Second 
Clinical Medical College, Jinan University; The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Southern University of Science and Technology), Shenzhen, China.
(4)Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, China.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Longgang Central Hospital of Shenzhen, 
Shenzhen, China.
(6)Guangdong Cardiovascular Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Persistent cough is one of the most frequent complications following 
lung cancer surgery. To promote optimal recovery, we conducted a study to 
investigate the trajectories of coughing symptoms and their impact on quality of 
life (QOL), as well as to identify potential risk factors of persistent cough 
after pulmonary resection (CAP).
METHODS: This prospective observational study assessed patients who underwent 
pulmonary resection for lung tumor at two medical centers in China. Persistent 
CAP was evaluated before surgery, at discharge, and 1, 3, and 6 months following 
surgery using visual analog scale (VAS), cough symptom score (CSS), and 
Leicester Cough Questionnaire in Mandarin Chinese (LCQ-MC). Univariate and 
multivariate logistic regression analyses were conducted to explore independent 
risk factors for persistent CAP.
RESULTS: Of the 506 enrolled patients, 130 patients were diagnosed with 
persistent CAP with an incidence of 25.69%. Compared to the noncough group, 
patients with persistent CAP reported significantly higher VAS (p < 0.001) and 
CSS scores (p < 0.001) and experienced worse QOL (p < 0.001) for up to 6 months, 
particularly at 1 month following surgery. Multivariable regression analysis 
revealed that a duration of anesthesia exceeding 156 min (odds ratio [OR]: 
1.847, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.156-2.951, p = 0.010) and 
gastroesophageal acid reflux (GER) (OR: 3.870, 95% CI: 2.376-6.304, p < 0.001) 
were independent risk factors of persistent CAP.
CONCLUSION: Patients who suffer from persistent CAP face a substantial burden 
and diminished QOL for an extended period compared to noncough patients. 
Moreover, prolonged duration of anesthesia and postoperative GER are potential 
risk factors of persistent CAP.

© 2023 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and 
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.15147
PMCID: PMC10733154
PMID: 37920959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare. Parts of the graphical abstract were drawn by using Figdraw 
(www.figdraw.com) and Servier Medical Art. Servier Medical Art by Servier is 
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 unported license 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).