---
reference_id: "PMID:36980965"
title: Hereditary Tyrosinemia Type 1 Mice under Continuous Nitisinone Treatment Display Remnants of an Uncorrected Liver Disease Phenotype.
authors:
- Neuckermans J
- Lequeue S
- Claes P
- Heymans A
- Hughes JH
- Colemonts-Vroninks H
- Marcélis L
- Casimir G
- Goyens P
- Martens GA
- Gallagher JA
- Vanhaecke T
- Bou-Gharios G
- De Kock J
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14030693
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Tyrosinemia Type 1 Mice under Continuous Nitisinone Treatment Display Remnants of an Uncorrected Liver Disease Phenotype.
**Authors:** Neuckermans J, Lequeue S, Claes P, Heymans A, Hughes JH, Colemonts-Vroninks H, Marcélis L, Casimir G, Goyens P, Martens GA, Gallagher JA, Vanhaecke T, Bou-Gharios G, De Kock J
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14030693](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14030693)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Mar 11;14(3):693. doi: 10.3390/genes14030693.

Hereditary Tyrosinemia Type 1 Mice under Continuous Nitisinone Treatment Display 
Remnants of an Uncorrected Liver Disease Phenotype.

Neuckermans J(1), Lequeue S(1), Claes P(2), Heymans A(2), Hughes JH(3)(4), 
Colemonts-Vroninks H(1), Marcélis L(5), Casimir G(5), Goyens P(5), Martens 
GA(6)(7), Gallagher JA(4), Vanhaecke T(2), Bou-Gharios G(4), De Kock J(1).

Author information:
(1)Liver Therapy & Evolution Team, In Vitro Toxicology and Dermato-Cosmetology 
(IVTD) Research Group, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit 
Brussel, 1090 Brussels, Belgium.
(2)In Vitro Liver Disease Modelling Team, In Vitro Toxicology and 
Dermato-Cosmetology (IVTD) Research Group, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 1090 Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Faculty Health, Social Care and Medicine, Edge Hill University, St. Helens 
Road, Omskirk L39 4QP, UK.
(4)Department of Musculoskeletal & Ageing Science, Institute of Life Course & 
Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L7 8TX, UK.
(5)Laboratoire de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola 
(HUDERF), Université Libre de Bruxelles, Avenue Jean Joseph Crocq 1-3, 1020 
Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, AZ Delta General Hospital, 8800 Roeselare, 
Belgium.
(7)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, 9000 Gent, Belgium.

Hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 (HT1) is a genetic disorder of the tyrosine 
degradation pathway (TIMD) with unmet therapeutic needs. HT1 patients are unable 
to fully break down the amino acid tyrosine due to a deficient 
fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH) enzyme and, therefore, accumulate toxic 
tyrosine intermediates. If left untreated, they experience hepatic failure with 
comorbidities involving the renal and neurological system and the development of 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Nitisinone (NTBC), a potent inhibitor of the 
4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (HPD) enzyme, rescues HT1 patients from 
severe illness and death. However, despite its demonstrated benefits, HT1 
patients under continuous NTBC therapy are at risk to develop HCC and adverse 
reactions in the eye, blood and lymphatic system, the mechanism of which is 
poorly understood. Moreover, NTBC does not restore the enzymatic defects 
inflicted by the disease nor does it cure HT1. Here, the changes in molecular 
pathways associated to the development and progression of HT1-driven liver 
disease that remains uncorrected under NTBC therapy were investigated using 
whole transcriptome analyses on the livers of Fah- and Hgd-deficient mice under 
continuous NTBC therapy and after seven days of NTBC therapy discontinuation. 
Alkaptonuria (AKU) was used as a tyrosine-inherited metabolic disorder reference 
disease with non-hepatic manifestations. The differentially expressed genes were 
enriched in toxicological gene classes related to liver disease, liver damage, 
liver regeneration and liver cancer, in particular HCC. Most importantly, a set 
of 25 genes related to liver disease and HCC development was identified that was 
differentially regulated in HT1 vs. AKU mouse livers under NTBC therapy. Some of 
those were further modulated upon NTBC therapy discontinuation in HT1 but not in 
AKU livers. Altogether, our data indicate that NTBC therapy does not completely 
resolves HT1-driven liver disease and supports the sustained risk to develop HCC 
over time as different HCC markers, including Moxd1, Saa, Mt, Dbp and Cxcl1, 
were significantly increased under NTBC.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14030693
PMCID: PMC10047938
PMID: 36980965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.