---
reference_id: "PMID:17008115"
title: "Tyrosinemia type I treated by NTBC: how does AFP predict liver cancer?"
authors:
- Koelink CJ
- van Hasselt P
- van der Ploeg A
- van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM
- Wijburg FA
- Bijleveld CM
- van Spronsen FJ
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.009
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cyclohexanones/therapeutic use
- Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Liver Neoplasms/etiology
- Male
- Nitrobenzoates/therapeutic use
- Prognosis
- "Tyrosinemias/complications, drug therapy"
- alpha-Fetoproteins/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tyrosinemia type I treated by NTBC: how does AFP predict liver cancer?
**Authors:** Koelink CJ, van Hasselt P, van der Ploeg A, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Wijburg FA, Bijleveld CM, van Spronsen FJ
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.009)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2006 Dec;89(4):310-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.009. Epub
2006 Sep 27.

Tyrosinemia type I treated by NTBC: how does AFP predict liver cancer?

Koelink CJ(1), van Hasselt P, van der Ploeg A, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM,
Wijburg FA, Bijleveld CM, van Spronsen FJ.

Author information:
(1)Section of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Tyrosinemia type I is associated with an increased risk of liver
cancer development. The formation of the pathogenic fumarylacetoacetate is
prevented by 2-(2-nitro-4-3 trifluoro-methylbenzoyl)-1,3-cyclohexanedione
(NTBC). Still, some patients with NTBC treatment develop liver cancer. A rise of
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is an indicator of liver cancer.
AIM: To study the predictive value of AFP in tyrosinemia type I patients for the
discrimination between patients at high and low risk of liver cancer
development.
METHODS: We examined the course of AFP values of 11 Dutch patients with
tyrosinemia type I treated by NTBC, of whom four were diagnosed with liver
cancer.
RESULTS: The four patients with liver cancer had a course of AFP different from
the other patients in either velocity of the decrease of AFP, achieving normal
AFP and/or having a rise of AFP concentrations.
CONCLUSION: Apart from a rise of AFP, a slow AFP decrease, and never normalizing
levels of AFP are important predictors of liver cancer development in further
life.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.009
PMID: 17008115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
