---
reference_id: "PMID:34757187"
title: An inherited sudden cardiac arrest syndrome may be based on primary myocardial and autonomic nervous system abnormalities.
authors:
- Verberne HJ
- Blom MT
- Bardai A
- Karemaker JM
- Tan HL
journal: Heart Rhythm
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2021.10.026
keywords:
- 3-Iodobenzylguanidine
- Adult
- Autonomic Nervous System/abnormalities
- Baroreflex
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Haplotypes
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- Heart Rate
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nervous System Malformations/complications
- Radionuclide Imaging
- Syndrome
- Ventricular Fibrillation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An inherited sudden cardiac arrest syndrome may be based on primary myocardial and autonomic nervous system abnormalities.
**Authors:** Verberne HJ, Blom MT, Bardai A, Karemaker JM, Tan HL
**Journal:** Heart Rhythm (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hrthm.2021.10.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2021.10.026)

## Content

1. Heart Rhythm. 2022 Feb;19(2):244-251. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2021.10.026. Epub 
2021 Oct 29.

An inherited sudden cardiac arrest syndrome may be based on primary myocardial 
and autonomic nervous system abnormalities.

Verberne HJ(1), Blom MT(2), Bardai A(2), Karemaker JM(3), Tan HL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Heart Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Biology, Section Systems Physiology, Amsterdam UMC, 
Location AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Heart Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands; Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: h.l.tan@amsterdamumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: A recently discovered sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) syndrome is linked 
to a risk haplotype that harbors the dipeptidyl-peptidase 6 (DPP6) gene as a 
plausible culprit.
OBJECTIVE: Because DPP6 impacts both cardiomyocyte and neuronal function, we 
hypothesized that ventricular fibrillation (VF) in risk haplotype carriers 
arises from functional changes in both the heart and autonomic nervous system.
METHODS: We studied 6 risk haplotype carriers with previous VF (symptomatic), 8 
carriers without VF (asymptomatic), and 7 noncarriers (controls). We analyzed 
supine and standing heart rate variability, baroreflex sensitivity, pre-VF heart 
rate changes, and myocardial 123I-meta-iodobenzylguanide (123I-mIBG) 
scintigraphy.
RESULTS: Carriers had longer interbeat intervals than controls (1.03 ± 0.11 
seconds vs 0.81 ± 0.07 seconds; P <.001), lower low-frequency (LF) and higher 
high-frequency (HF) activity, and lower LF/HF ratio (0.68 ± 0.50 vs 2.11 ± 1.10; 
P = .013) in the supine position. Upon standing up, carriers had significantly 
larger decrease in interbeat interval and increase in LF than controls 
(standing-to-supine ratio: 0.78 ± 0.07 vs 0.90 ± 0.07; P = .002; and 1.94 ± 1.03 
vs 1.17 ± 0.34; P = .022, respectively), and nonsignificantly larger decrease in 
HF (0.62 ± 0.36 vs 0.97 ± 0.42; P = .065) and increase in LF/HF ratio (5.55 ± 
6.79 vs 1.62 ± 1.24; P = .054). Sixteen of 17 VF episodes occurred at rest. 
Heart rate immediately before VF was 110 ± 25 bpm. Symptomatic carriers had less 
heterogeneous 123I-mIBG distribution in the left ventricle than asymptomatic 
carriers (single-photon emission computed tomography score ≥3 in 7 asymptomatic 
and 1 symptomatic carrier; P = .008).
CONCLUSION: It can be speculated that these data are consistent with more labile 
autonomic tone in carriers, suggesting that the primary abnormalities may reside 
in both the heart and the autonomic nervous system.

Copyright © 2021 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2021.10.026
PMID: 34757187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]