---
reference_id: "PMID:25206109"
title: "Cleidocranial dysplasia: case report of three siblings."
authors:
- Mathur R
- Bhat M
- V S
- Parvez M
journal: Int J Clin Pediatr Dent
year: '2009'
doi: 10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1027
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Cleidocranial dysplasia: case report of three siblings.
**Authors:** Mathur R, Bhat M, V S, Parvez M
**Journal:** Int J Clin Pediatr Dent (2009)
**DOI:** [10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1027](https://doi.org/10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1027)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Pediatr Dent. 2009 May;2(2):32-9. doi: 
10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1027. Epub 2009 Aug 26.

Cleidocranial dysplasia: case report of three siblings.

Mathur R(1), Bhat M(2), V S(3), Parvez M(4).

Author information:
(1)Final Year Postgraduate Student, Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, Jaipur 
Dental College, A-87, Manu Path, Shyam Nagar, Jaipur-302019, Rajasthan, India.
(2)Professor and Head, Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, 
Jaipur Dental College, Dhand Tehsil Amer, Jaipur- 302101, Rajasthan, India.
(3)Reader, Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, Jaipur Dental 
College, Dhand Tehsil Amer, Jaipur-302101 Rajasthan, India.
(4)Lecturer, Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, Jaipur Dental 
College, Dhand Tehsil Amer, Jaipur-302101 Rajasthan, India.

BACKGROUND: A family case report of cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) with varied 
manifestations from father to three siblings is presented. CCD ( MIM # 119600) 
is a rare autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia caused by CBAF1 gene ( OMIM 
600211) with a wide range of variability. In all the cases generalized dysplasia 
in bone, prolonged retention of primary teeth and delayed eruption of permanent 
teeth were evident. Interestingly, there were no supernumerary teeth present. 
There was mandibular prognathism which was intercepted by occipital chin cup 
therapy.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVE: To present the clinical manifestations, diagnostic imaging 
and treatment modalities along with dermatoglyphics in CCD patients.
CONCLUSION: Cleidocranial dysplasia is an uncommon disorder however its clinical 
and radiological features are characteristic. In addition the CCD patients may 
be distinguished by specific dermatoglyphic markers. It carries with it several 
implications in terms of complications like skeletal malocclusion, dental 
caries, etc. Medical treatment is mainly directed at orthopedic and dental 
correction. A team approach to the management of dental abnormalities on a 
long-term basis with the overall goal to provide an esthetic facial appearance 
and functioning occlusion by late adolescence or early adulthood should be 
focused.

DOI: 10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1027
PMCID: PMC4086567
PMID: 25206109

Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is an autosomal dominant
highly polymorphic skeletal disorder with a wide variety of
expressivities, primarily affecting bones undergoing
intramembranous ossification. It is characterized by retarded
cranial ossification, patent sutures and fontanelles,
supernumerary teeth, short stature and a variety of other
skeletal abnormalities.12


CCD is a rare disorder with a prevalence of less than 1
per million.3 The disease gene, which has been mapped to
chromosome 6p21 within a region containing core binding
factor activity 1 (CBFA1), a member of the Runt family of
transcription factors controls differentiation of precursor
cells into osteoblasts and is essential for both membranous
and endochondral bone formation.45



The different clinical manifestations reflect the basic
mechanisms of skeletal development, patterning, bone and
cartilage formation, growth and homeostasis.6 The oral
manifestations of CCD include an underdeveloped maxilla
with a high, narrow arched palate, prolonged retention of
deciduous teeth, failure of the secondary dentition to erupt,
delayed maturation among the permanent teeth and multiple
impacted supernumerary teeth.17-9


The term dermatoglyphics, is used in describing the
scientific fields of study of the palmer and plantar ridges of
the hands and feet. Dermal palmer and plantar ridges are
highly useful in biological studies. Their notably variable characteristics are not duplicated in other people, even in
monozygotic twins or even in the same person, from location
to location. The details of these ridges are permanent. Yet
while the individual characteristics are variable, that
diversity falls within pattern limits that permit systematic
classification.10


The aims and objectives of this article are to present the
dental, radiological and dermatoglyphic findings along with
treatment modalities in a family with CCD.



An 8 years old boy reported to the Department of Pediatric
and Preventive Dentistry, Jaipur Dental College with the
chief complaint of decayed right lower back tooth. On
general examination height and weight was normal to his
age. Further examination revealed brachycephaly, frontal
bossing and sloping of shoulders. The facial symmetry was
normal with oval form, straight profile and competent lips.
Intraoral examination revealed the presence of following
teeth:



16, 55, 54, 53, 52, 51, 21, 62, 63, 64, 65, 26



46 84, 83, 82, 81, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 36


Root Stumps in relation to 64, 84; deep proximal caries
in relation to 54, 74 and moderate proximal caries in relation
to 55 were observed. The palate was narrow with high vault.
On the left side angle’s class III molar relationship was
evident whereas on the right side posterior crossbite was
observed. In addition the patient exhibited anterior crossbite
(Fig. 1). Radiological investigations were planned for the
patient. Intraoral periapical radiograph in relation to 54, 74
revealed involvement of pulp. Chest radiograph displayed
total absence of clavicles and a bell shaped thorax with low
placed scapulas (Fig. 2). A-P view of the skull demonstrated
widening of sutures and a few wormian bones (Fig. 3). OPG
depicted a large number of retained deciduous teeth
coinciding with delayed eruption of the permanent teeth. In
addition , the second premolars were missing in both the
arches (Fig. 4). The lateral cephalometric analysis confided
a wide sella, increased growth axis (Y-axis) as well as
increased FMA (Fig. 12). Pulp therapy with stainless steel
crowns were luted in relation to 54, 74. Glass ionomer
cement restoration was done in 55. The abnormal increased
vertical growth pattern of the mandible was intercepted using
occipital chin cups (Fig. 13). The dermatoglyphic analysis
was also performed. Bilateral arch pattern depicted CWWLL
(composite, whorl, loop) sequence type in the left fingers
and LCWLL (loop, composite, whorl) pattern in the right
fingers. The total ridge count was 71 (Table 1 and Fig. 14).
The patient was diagnosed of cleidocranial dysplasia
evidenced by clinical and radiographic findings.


Anterior crossbite

 Aplasia of clavicles, bell shaped thorax

A 14 years old male, the brother of case1 was investigated
in order to detect the genetic predisposition of cleidocranial
dysplasia. The patient was short statured, with normal weight
and gait. On physical examination the patient had abnormal
movement of the right shoulder and the right clavicle
demonstrated hypermobility (Fig. 5). Patient showed a
straight profile with prominent chin. On intraoral inspection
the following teeth were present:

16, 55, 54, 53, 52, 51, 21, 62, 63, 64, 65, 26
46, 85, 84, 83, 82, 81, 31, 72, 73, 74, 75, 36


Occlusal examination pictured angle’s class III
malocclusion with bilateral posterior crossbite. High palatal
vault with narrow maxillary arch were also apparent. Chest
radiograph presented a bell shaped thorax with hypoplastic
clavicles (Fig. 6). On A-P view of the skull wide open sutures
with open fontanelles and few wormian bones were evident.
Lateral cephalometric analysis revealed reduced height of
the lower third of the face and a skeletal class III tendency.
This could be due to under development of the maxilla and
an upward and forward rotation of mandible. This was
substantiated by an increased Y-axis and FMA (Fig. 12).
On Panoramic radiograph both the arches had over-retained
deciduous teeth with unresorbed roots (Fig. 7). The abnormal
upward and forward mandibular rotation was intercepted
by occipital chin cup therapy (Fig. 13). Dermatoglyphic
findings for bilateral arch pattern revealed a specific LLLLL
(loop) sequence type on both the hands and a total ridge
count of 78 (Table 1 and Fig. 14).


 Widening of sutures with few wormian bones

 Panoramic view revealing a large number of retained
deciduous teeth and missing second premolars

Table 1: Dermatoglyphic findings in a family with cleidocranial dysplasia

 Brachycephaly, frontal bossing, sloping of shoulders
and approximation of shoulders towards each other

 Hypoplastic clavicles and bell shaped thorax

Another sibling, 11 years old female was also investigated
to assess the genetic relationship of cleidocranial dysplasia.
She was of average height and weight with a normal gait.
examination revealed retained primary
teeth and delayed eruption of permanent successors which
is one of the characteristic feature. The teeth present were:



16, 55, 54, 53, 52, 51, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 26


46, 85, 84, 83, 82, 81, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 36



Anterior and a unilateral right posterior crossbites were
present. The radiographic view of the chest revealed aplasia
of clavicles and low placed scapulas with a funnel shaped
thorax (Fig. 9). The A-P view of skull concluded wide open
sutures and fontanelles along with multiple wormian bones
(Fig. 10). The hypoplastic appearance of maxilla was clearly
evidenced on the lateral cephalogram. The malrelationship
between maxilla and mandible could arise through
discrepancies in the effective horizontal lengths of both the
arches or due to an abnormal contribution by the projected
length of the cranial base element. The projected lengths
were measured and mandibular length which exceeded the
standard indicated mandibular prognathism. Vertical
parameters pointed the increased Y-axis along with an
elevated FMA (Fig. 12). These findings ascertained a relative
mandibular prognathism. The oral pentamogram findings
were partial anodontia with the absence of 14, 15, and 25
(Fig. 11). This relative mandibular prognathism was
intercepted by occipital chin cup therapy (Fig. 13).The
dermatoglyphic findings were LWLLL (loop, whorl) and
LLLLL (loop) sequence patterns in left and right hands
respectively. The total ridge count was 65 (Table 1 and
Fig. 14).

 Panoramic view revealing prolonged retention of primary
dentition and delayed eruption of the permanent dentition

Depressed nasal bridge, frontal bossing,
brachycephaly and hypertelorism

Aplasia of clavicles and funnel shaped chest

Wide open sutures and fontanelles, multiple
wormian bones

Panoramic views revealing partial anodontia

(A) FMA – frankfort mandibular plane angle;
FH – frankfort horizontal plane; MP – mandibular plane
(B) Y-axis (Growth axis) FH – frankfort horizontal plane;
S – sella, Gn – gnathion


CCD is an autosomal dominant disorder of bone caused by
a defect in CBFA 1 gene and represents a generalized
dysplasia of skeletal structure. Being genetic in nature the
disease may pass generation to generation as any other asset.
Cleidocranial dysplasia is characterized by abnormalities
of the skull, teeth, jaws and shoulder girdle as well as by
stunting of the long bones. The defect of the shoulder girdle
from which the condition drives its name ranges from
complete absence of clavicles in about 10% to partial
absence or even simple thining of one or both clavicles.
Patients with cleidocranial dysplasia characteristically
exhibit a high, narrow arched palate. The maxilla is usually
underdeveloped and smaller in relation to mandible. One
of the outstanding oral findings is prolonged retention of
deciduous teeth and susequent delay in the eruption of
succedaneous teeth.11


Occipital chin cup therapy in case 1,2 and 3


A rare family case of CCD reported in our department
that was not previously diagnosed, though the patients had
a history of prolonged retention of primary teeth and a history
of extractions as a result of dental caries .The relatives of
the cases resided in another state due to which there was
paucity of investigations for those relatives. The mutational
analysis of RUNX2 was not carried out as proposed by
Yoshida et al.12 It is possible that the Run domain was
affected since the patients showed short stature.
Supernumerary teeth are considered to be a diagnostic
feature of CCD. However complete absence of
supernumerary teeth and hypodontia is reported in all the
three cases presented. Yoshida12 pointed out that there is a
significant correlation between the supernumerary teeth and
short stature with the gene dosage RUNX2 effect in the
RUNX2 activity. In the present clinical cases, the number and the severity of alterations were different in each patient.
RUNX2 controls the maturation of both osteoblasts and
odontoblast. Therefore a delay in tooth maturation is
expected in RUNX2 deficient tissues. This is reflected in
the clinical situations, where the dental maturation of CCD
subjects is retarded by as much as 4 years.71314



The findings of CCD, although present at birth, could
be easily missed due to its low frequency and variety of
clinical manifestations which were evident in our cases too.
The clinical and radiological studies revealed slow growth
and moderately short stature. The dysplasias may include
various combinations of absence, lack of fusion, or
incomplete modeling of any of the 3 ossification centers in
each clavicle or in the right one alone. This is evidenced by
the aplasia of clavicles in cases 1 and 3 along with hypoplasia
of the right clavicle in case 2. Other clinical findings included
low placed scapulas and deformities of the thorax. The
intraoral inspection showed unresorbed roots and prolonged
retention of primary teeth. In addition to this, there was
absence of some permanent teeth, high palatal vault and
anterior cross bite. The primary teeth erupted on time
however; the subsequent permanent teeth exhibited a
delayed eruption, presumably as a result of defective
eruption pathway. The first permanent molars erupted
spontaneously in all the patients which could be ascribed to
firstly, a very thin layer of bone to pass through for these
molars and secondly, their eruption is not dependant on root
resorption of deciduous teeth.15 In the canine and premolar
regions the persistence of primary teeth and delayed root
resorption hindered the eruption of successors. The teeth
were shaped regularly with no structural anomalies.



The radiologic features of this disorder are very
characteristic. With respect to the skull it is the membranous
portion and not the base that is affected. As such, delayed
ossification leads to delayed closure of sutures (sagittal and
coronal) and fontanelles (metopic).16 The cephalometric
features of the cases displayed increased Y axis and marked
increase in the FMA. These irregular changes resulted in
mandibular rotation (Y axis-FH), ramus inclination –FH and
the mandibular plane (FH) being forwarded with a clockwise
rotation, causing a mandiblular protrusion.17
18 The large
number of unerupted teeth in the premaxilla and mandibular
symphysis regions makes identification of points A and B,
commonly used to represent the anterior limits of the dental
bases, difficult. The results by the cephalometric analysis
confirmed the clinical reports of mandibular prognathism
in all the cases. This could be attributed to a large anteroposterior
mandibular length together with a shortened cranial
base.18 The interventional occipital chin cup therapy was
given to all the cases as they were indicative of increased Y
axis and FMA. The cases are under regular follow-up. This
interception would prevent the further worsening of the
Class III malocclusion.



Dermatoglyphic ridge patterns have been widely studied
in major malformation syndromes. In the present case report,
total ridge count (TRC) and bilateral arch patterns were
examined in the father and 3 siblings. The dermatoglyphic
findings of these CCD patients with respect to the TRC
was found to be lower than the normal study population in
the region.19 The cases exhibited varied arch patterns and
different sequence types. There was a predominance of Loop
pattern in all the cases (Fig. 14A). Interestingly, the eldest
son, case 1, demonstrated Loop pattern in all the fingers.
The other arch patterns were Composite (Fig. 14B) and
Target whorl concentric circles (Fig. 14C). Specifically no
composite pattern was found in the case 3. This hints that
the formation of ridges and TRC as a marker are influenced
by genetic differences. It also indicates some genetic
association between CCD patients and fingerprint patterns.
CCD may be genetically associated with loop, whorl and
composite patterns which can be further investigated by
detailed molecular studies. Thus, although the present study
is based on a very small number of individuals, it does
indicate that the CCD patients may also be distinguished
on the basis of dermatoglyphic markers.


 Dermatoglyphic findings. (A) Loop, (B)
Composite, (C) Target whorl concentric circles


What this paper adds?

Early diagnosis and intervention in CCD patients may
prevent a number of problems and create good esthetic
and functional results.
The dental problems if intervened before adulthood can
prevent skeletal malocclusions like short lower facial
height and mandibular prognathism. Dermatoglyphic findings may be an auxiliary tool in
distinguishing the CCD patients.


Early diagnosis and intervention in CCD patients may
prevent a number of problems and create good esthetic
and functional results.


The dental problems if intervened before adulthood can
prevent skeletal malocclusions like short lower facial
height and mandibular prognathism.

 Dermatoglyphic findings may be an auxiliary tool in
distinguishing the CCD patients.

Why this paper is important for pediatric dentist?
The treatment plan is largely dependant on both the
chronological and dental age of the patients.
The timing of diagnosis in CCD is not only important in
choosing an appropriate treatment plan but also in
attaining a successful result. Multidisciplinary approach should be planned by dental,
pediatrics, orthopedics and genetic counseling team.


The treatment plan is largely dependant on both the
chronological and dental age of the patients.


The timing of diagnosis in CCD is not only important in
choosing an appropriate treatment plan but also in
attaining a successful result.

 Multidisciplinary approach should be planned by dental,
pediatrics, orthopedics and genetic counseling team.