---
reference_id: "PMID:22247246"
title: "Oesophageal atresia: prevalence, prenatal diagnosis and associated anomalies in 23 European regions."
authors:
- Pedersen RN
- Calzolari E
- Husby S
- Garne E
- EUROCAT Working group
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2011-300597
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Abortion, Induced/statistics & numerical data"
- "Esophageal Atresia/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Fetal Death
- Fetal Diseases/diagnosis
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- International Cooperation
- Male
- Pregnancy
- "Prenatal Diagnosis/statistics & numerical data"
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Registries
- Sex Distribution
- Tracheoesophageal Fistula/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oesophageal atresia: prevalence, prenatal diagnosis and associated anomalies in 23 European regions.
**Authors:** Pedersen RN, Calzolari E, Husby S, Garne E, EUROCAT Working group
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2011-300597](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2011-300597)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2012 Mar;97(3):227-32. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2011-300597.
Epub 2012 Jan 13.

Oesophageal atresia: prevalence, prenatal diagnosis and associated anomalies in
23 European regions.

Pedersen RN(1), Calzolari E, Husby S, Garne E; EUROCAT Working group.

Collaborators: Haeusler M, Nelen V, Barisic I, Randrianaivo-Ranjatoelina H,
Doray B, Wiesel A, Rissmann A, O'Mahony M, McDonnell B, Mullaney C, Neville A,
Bianchi F, Gatt M, Bakker M, Salvador J, Addor MC, Associée M, Wertelecki W,
Draper E, Boyd P, Rankin J, Tucker D, Wellesley D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
rnp@dadlnet.dk

OBJECTIVE: To describe prevalence, prenatal diagnosis and epidemiological data
on oesophageal atresia from 23 well-defined European regions and compare the
prevalence between these regions.
DESIGN: Population-based study using data from a large European database for
surveillance of congenital anomalies (EUROCAT) for two decades (1987-2006).
SETTINGS: Twenty-three participating registries based on multiple sources of
information including information about live births, fetal deaths with
gestational age ≥20 weeks and terminations of pregnancy.
PATIENTS: 1222 cases of oesophageal atresia in a population of 5 019 804 births.
RESULTS: The overall prevalence was 2.43 cases per 10 000 births (95% CI 2.30 to
2.57). There were regional differences in prevalence ranging from 1.27 to 4.55.
Prenatal detection rates varied by registry from >50% of cases to <10% of cases.
A total of 546 cases (44.7%) had an isolated oesophageal anomaly, 386 (31.6%)
were multiple malformed and 290 (23.7%) had an association or a syndrome. There
were 1084 live born cases (88.7%), 43 cases were fetal deaths and 95 cases were
terminations of pregnancy. One-week survival for live births was 86.9% and 99.2%
if the gestational age was ≥38 weeks and isolated oesophageal atresia was
present. Males accounted for 57.3% of all cases and 38.5% of live born cases
were born with gestational age <37 weeks.
CONCLUSION: There were regional differences in prevalence of oesophageal atresia
in Europe. Half of all cases had associated anomalies. Prenatal detection rate
increased from 26% to 36.5% over the two decades. Survival in infants with
isolated oesophageal atresia born at term is high.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2011-300597
PMID: 22247246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
