---
reference_id: "PMID:38927973"
title: Imaging in Vulval Cancer.
authors:
- Ha M
- Eva L
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16122269
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging in Vulval Cancer.
**Authors:** Ha M, Eva L
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16122269](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16122269)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Jun 19;16(12):2269. doi: 10.3390/cancers16122269.

Imaging in Vulval Cancer.

Ha M(1), Eva L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynaecological Oncology, Te Toka Tumai Auckland City Hospital, 
Auckland 1023, New Zealand.

Vulval cancer is a rare gynaecological cancer, accounting for 3% of all 
gynaecological malignancies, with 47,000 cases in 2022 globally. Various imaging 
modalities are widely used in conjunction with clinical assessment in the 
diagnosis and staging of vulval cancers; however, there is significant 
heterogeneity in which modalities are recommended in international guidelines, 
reflecting the paucity of evidence in this area. We reviewed the current 
evidence for the role of imaging in vulval cancer. A systematic search of the 
literature was performed on the PubMed database using the MeSH terms 'vulval 
neoplasm' and 'diagnostic imaging'. We found that there is insufficient evidence 
to support the routine use of imaging for primary vulval tumours. For nodal 
assessment, there is no ideal imaging modality with sensitivity or specificity 
that is superior to other modalities. For distant metastases, CT CAP and 
FDG-PET/CT have the most evidence to support their use. In conclusion, the 
evidence for role of imaging in vulval cancer is limited by the heterogeneity of 
the study design and diagnostic criteria used in each study and the small sample 
size and retrospective nature of most studies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16122269
PMCID: PMC11201686
PMID: 38927973

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.