---
reference_id: "PMID:38585546"
title: "A Rare Treatable Cause of Cardiomyopathy: Primary Carnitine Deficiency."
authors:
- Basan H
- Azak E
- Çetin İİ
- Kiliç E
- Bilginer Gürbüz B
- Özbey SZ
- Kasapkara ÇS
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000534932
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Rare Treatable Cause of Cardiomyopathy: Primary Carnitine Deficiency.
**Authors:** Basan H, Azak E, Çetin İİ, Kiliç E, Bilginer Gürbüz B, Özbey SZ, Kasapkara ÇS
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000534932](https://doi.org/10.1159/000534932)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2024 Mar;15(2):156-160. doi: 10.1159/000534932. Epub 2023 Nov
27.

A Rare Treatable Cause of Cardiomyopathy: Primary Carnitine Deficiency.

Basan H(1), Azak E(2), Çetin İİ(2), Kiliç E(3), Bilginer Gürbüz B(1), Özbey 
SZ(1), Kasapkara ÇS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Ankara 
City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Ankara City 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) is a rare autosomal recessive 
disorder caused by loss of function mutations in the solute carrier family 22 
member 5 (SLC22A5) gene that encodes a high-affinity sodium-ion-dependent 
organic cation transporter protein (OCTN2). Carnitine deficiency can result in 
acute metabolic decompensation or, in a more insidious presentation, 
cardiomyopathy. Cardiomyopathy associated with PCD often presents with 
life-threatening heart failure. This presentation also usually includes skeletal 
muscle myopathy. Early recognition of this disorder and treatment with carnitine 
can avoid life-threatening complications related to cardiomyopathy.
CASE PRESENTATION: Herein, we present a 10-month-old male patient with PCD, 
which was diagnosed while investigating the etiology of dilated cardiomyopathy 
and confirmed by molecular genetic analysis.
CONCLUSION: Homozygous c.254_265 insGGCTCGCCACC (p.I89Gfs) pathogenic variant of 
the SLC22A5 gene was detected. With oral L-carnitine supplementation, the free 
carnitine level increased up to 14 μmol/L and the symptoms disappeared. LVEF 
increased by 45-70%. We would like to emphasize that this problem is a 
combination of the metabolic decompensation and the cardiac phenotypes, which 
are usually separated to either phenotype.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000534932
PMCID: PMC10996344
PMID: 38585546

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.