---
reference_id: PMID:34166620
title: "Hospital-treated infectious diseases and the risk of dementia: a large, multicohort, observational study with a replication cohort."
authors:
- Sipilä PN
- Heikkilä N
- Lindbohm JV
- Hakulinen C
- Vahtera J
- Elovainio M
- Suominen S
- Väänänen A
- Koskinen A
- Nyberg ST
- Pentti J
- Strandberg TE
- Kivimäki M
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00144-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cohort Studies
- "Communicable Diseases/complications, therapy"
- Dementia/etiology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Risk Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hospital-treated infectious diseases and the risk of dementia: a large, multicohort, observational study with a replication cohort.
**Authors:** Sipilä PN, Heikkilä N, Lindbohm JV, Hakulinen C, Vahtera J, Elovainio M, Suominen S, Väänänen A, Koskinen A, Nyberg ST, Pentti J, Strandberg TE, Kivimäki M
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00144-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00144-4)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2021 Nov;21(11):1557-1567. doi: 
10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00144-4. Epub 2021 Jun 21.

Hospital-treated infectious diseases and the risk of dementia: a large, 
multicohort, observational study with a replication cohort.

Sipilä PN(1), Heikkilä N(2), Lindbohm JV(3), Hakulinen C(4), Vahtera J(5), 
Elovainio M(6), Suominen S(7), Väänänen A(8), Koskinen A(8), Nyberg ST(9), 
Pentti J(10), Strandberg TE(11), Kivimäki M(12).

Author information:
(1)Clinicum, Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland; Helsinki Institute of Life Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland; Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland. Electronic 
address: pyry.sipila@helsinki.fi.
(2)Medicum, Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland; Translational Immunology Research Program, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Clinicum, Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland; Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College 
London, London, UK.
(4)Department of Psychology and Logopedics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland; Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Department of Public Health, University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Centre for 
Population Health Research, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, 
Turku, Finland.
(6)Research Programs Unit, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Finnish 
Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Department of Public Health, University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Research 
Services, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland; School of Health Sciences, 
University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.
(8)Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland.
(9)Clinicum, Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland; Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland.
(10)Clinicum, Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland; Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland; Department 
of Public Health, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(11)Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; 
Center for Life Course Health Research, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(12)Clinicum, Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland; Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland; Department 
of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2021 Nov;21(11):1477-1478. doi: 
10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00258-9.

BACKGROUND: Infections have been hypothesised to increase the risk of dementia. 
Existing studies have included a narrow range of infectious diseases, relied on 
short follow-up periods, and provided little evidence for whether the increased 
risk is limited to specific dementia subtypes or attributable to specific 
microbes rather than infection burden. We aimed to compare the risk of 
Alzheimer's disease and other dementias across a wide range of hospital-treated 
bacterial and viral infections in two large cohorts with long follow-up periods.
METHODS: In this large, multicohort, observational study, the analysis was based 
on a primary cohort consisting of pooled individual-level data from three 
prospective cohort studies in Finland (the Finnish Public Sector study, the 
Health and Social Support study, and the Still Working study) and an independent 
replication cohort from the UK Biobank. Community-dwelling adults (≥18 years) 
with no dementia at study entry were included. Follow-up was until Dec 31, 2012, 
in the Health and Social Support study, Dec 31, 2016, in the public sector study 
and the Still Working study, and Feb 7, 2018, in the replication cohort. Through 
record linkage to national hospital inpatient registers, we ascertained exposure 
to 925 infectious diseases (using the International Classification of Diseases 
10th Revision codes) before dementia onset, and identified incident dementia 
from hospital records, medication reimbursement entitlements, and death 
certificates. Hazard ratios (HRs) for the associations of each infectious 
disease or disease group (index infection) with incident dementia were assessed 
by use of Cox proportional hazards models. We then repeated the analysis after 
excluding incident dementia cases that occurred during the first 10 years after 
initial hospitalisation due to the index infection.
FINDINGS: From March 1, 1986, to Jan 1, 2005, 260 490 people were included in 
the primary cohort, and from Dec 19, 2006, to Oct 1, 2010, 485 708 people were 
included in the replication cohort. In the primary cohort analysis based on 
3 947 046 person-years at risk (median follow-up 15·4 years [IQR 9·8-21·0]), 
77 108 participants had at least one hospital-treated infection before dementia 
onset and 2768 developed dementia. Hospitalisation for any infectious disease 
was associated with increased dementia risk in the primary cohort (adjusted HR 
[aHR] 1·48 [95% CI 1·37-1·60]) and replication cohort (2·60 [2·38-2·83]). The 
association remained when analyses were restricted to new dementia cases that 
occurred more than 10 years after infection (aHR 1·22 [95% CI 1·09-1·36] in the 
primary cohort, the replication cohort had insufficient follow-up data for this 
analysis), and when comorbidities and other dementia risk factors were 
considered. There was evidence of a dose-response association between the number 
of episodes of hospital-treated infections and dementia risk in both cohorts 
(ptrend=0·0007). Although the greatest dementia risk was seen for central 
nervous system (CNS) infections versus no infection (aHR 3·01 [95% CI 
2·07-4·37]), excess risk was also evident for extra-CNS infections (1·47 
[1·36-1·59]). Although we found little difference in the infection-dementia 
association by type of infection, associations were stronger for vascular 
dementia than for Alzheimer's disease (aHR 2·09 [95% CI 1·59-2·75] versus aHR 
1·20 [1·08-1·33] in the primary cohort and aHR 3·28 [2·65-4·04] versus aHR 1·80 
[1·53-2·13] in the replication cohort).
INTERPRETATION: Severe infections requiring hospital treatment are associated 
with long-term increased risk of dementia, including vascular dementia and 
Alzheimer's disease. This association is not limited to CNS infections, 
suggesting that systemic effects are sufficient to affect the brain. The absence 
of infection specificity combined with evidence of dose-response relationships 
between infectious disease burden and dementia risk support the hypothesis that 
increased dementia risk is driven by general inflammation rather than specific 
microbes.
FUNDING: UK Medical Research Council, US National Institute on Aging, Wellcome 
Trust, NordForsk, Academy of Finland, and Helsinki Institute of Life Science.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00144-4
PMCID: PMC8592915
PMID: 34166620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests PNS reports funding 
from the Helsinki Institute of Life Science, NordForsk, and the Academy of 
Finland during the conduct of the study, and from the Finnish Foundation for 
Alcohol Studies outside of the submitted work. JVL reports funding from the 
Academy of Finland during the conduct of the study. STN reports funding from 
NordForsk during the conduct of the study. TES reports funding from the Academy 
of Finland; consultation fees from Servier, Orion, and Novartis outside the 
submitted work; and is a member of the European Geriatric Medicine Society 
special interest group on Cardiovascular Medicine in Older People and Diabetes 
in older people. MK reports funding from the Helsinki Institute of Life Science, 
the Academy of Finland, NordForsk, UK Medical Research Council, the US National 
Institute on Aging, and the Wellcome Trust during the conduct of the study. CH, 
JV, and ME report funding from the Academy of Finland. All other authors declare 
no competing interests.