---
reference_id: "PMID:41560679"
title: Coexpression of MYCN and ALK Induces Neuroblastoma-Like Tumors From Human iPS Cell-Derived Cranial Neural Crest Cells.
authors:
- Shi T
- Mukae K
- Shindo M
- Onuki R
- Nakazawa A
- Takenobu H
- Ohira M
- Kamijo T
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1111/gtc.70083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coexpression of MYCN and ALK Induces Neuroblastoma-Like Tumors From Human iPS Cell-Derived Cranial Neural Crest Cells.
**Authors:** Shi T, Mukae K, Shindo M, Onuki R, Nakazawa A, Takenobu H, Ohira M, Kamijo T
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1111/gtc.70083](https://doi.org/10.1111/gtc.70083)

## Content

1. Genes Cells. 2026 Jan;31(1):e70083. doi: 10.1111/gtc.70083.

Coexpression of MYCN and ALK Induces Neuroblastoma-Like Tumors From Human iPS 
Cell-Derived Cranial Neural Crest Cells.

Shi T(1)(2), Mukae K(1), Shindo M(1)(2), Onuki R(1), Nakazawa A(3), Takenobu 
H(1), Ohira M(1), Kamijo T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Clinical Oncology, Saitama Cancer Center, Saitama, 
Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology, Department of Graduate School of 
Science and Engineering, Saitama University, Saitama, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Research, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Saitama, 
Japan.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is a pediatric solid tumor originating from neural crest 
cells (NCCs), which are precursors of the sympathetic nervous system. MYCN 
amplification is a key factor contributing to the poor prognosis of NB. 
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) alterations, including mutations and 
amplification, activate oncogenic signaling pathways that, together with MYCN 
amplification, further enhance tumor malignancy. NCCs are mainly classified into 
cranial NCCs (cNCCs) and trunk NCCs (tNCCs). Recent studies have reported NB 
development from tNCCs. However, the potential for NB development from cNCCs 
remains unexplored. In this study, we sought to mimic the tumorigenic process of 
NB by overexpressing MYCN and ALK in cNCCs derived from human induced 
pluripotent stem cells. These modified cells, when subcutaneously transplanted 
into immunodeficient mice, induced NB-like tumors and could thus be used as an 
in vitro model to study this tumor. Through extensive gene expression profiling 
and whole-exome sequencing of MYCN/ALK-induced clones, we identified key 
features of NB, including loss of NF1 and gain of 17q chromosome, which are 
critical for the development of malignant tumor. This model provides a valuable 
platform for studying the biological mechanisms driving ALK and MYCN 
amplification in NB derived from cNCCs.

© 2026 Molecular Biology Society of Japan and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/gtc.70083
PMID: 41560679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]