---
reference_id: "PMID:39789203"
title: "Bone marrow transplantation reverses metabolic alterations in multiple sulfatase deficiency: a case series."
authors:
- Pillai NR
- Liu N
- Li X
- Li X
- Ahrens-Nicklas R
- Adang L
- Eisengart JB
- Bronken G
- Gupta A
- Lund TC
- Whitley CB
- Elsea SH
- Orchard PJ
journal: Commun Med (Lond)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s43856-024-00703-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone marrow transplantation reverses metabolic alterations in multiple sulfatase deficiency: a case series.
**Authors:** Pillai NR, Liu N, Li X, Li X, Ahrens-Nicklas R, Adang L, Eisengart JB, Bronken G, Gupta A, Lund TC, Whitley CB, Elsea SH, Orchard PJ
**Journal:** Commun Med (Lond) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s43856-024-00703-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00703-8)

## Content

1. Commun Med (Lond). 2025 Jan 9;5(1):12. doi: 10.1038/s43856-024-00703-8.

Bone marrow transplantation reverses metabolic alterations in multiple sulfatase
deficiency: a case series.

Pillai NR(1), Liu N(2)(3), Li X(2)(3), Li X(2), Ahrens-Nicklas R(4), Adang L(5),
Eisengart JB(6), Bronken G(7), Gupta A(8), Lund TC(8), Whitley CB(9), Elsea
SH(2)(3), Orchard PJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. Pilla125@umn.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Baylor Genetics Laboratories, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics at Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neurology at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Behavioral Neuroscience,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(7)M Health, Fairview, Minneapolis, Minnesota, MN, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Multiple sulfatase deficiency (MSD) is an exceptionally rare
neurodegenerative disorder due to the absence or deficiency of 17 known cellular
sulfatases. The activation of all these cellular sulfatases is dependent on the
presence of the formylglycine-generating enzyme, which is encoded by the SUMF1
gene. Disease-causing homozygous or compound heterozygous variants in SUMF1
result in MSD. Other than symptomatic treatment, no curative therapy exists as
of yet for MSD. Eight out of these 17 sulfatases are primarily localized in the
lysosome.
METHODS: Two siblings with attenuated MSD underwent hematopoietic cell
transplantation (HCT), evaluating the possibility of lysosomal enzymatic
cross-correction from the donor cells.
RESULTS: There is evidence of correction of currently available biomarkers
within 3 months post-HCT. Untargeted metabolomics also shows continued
correction of multiple biochemical abnormalities in the post-HCT period.
Furthermore, this article also presents the neuropsychological outcomes of these
children as well as the results of untargeted metabolomics analysis in this
condition.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest biochemical benefits post-transplant along with
slowing of disease progression. Long-term follow-up is necessary to fully
evaluate the therapeutic benefit of HCT in MSD.

Plain Language Summary: Multiple sulfatase deficiency (MSD) is a genetic
disorder in which body is unable to produce certain enzymes which are a type of
protein. MSD affects multiple body systems, primarily the brain. The current
treatments available are catered toward easing the symptoms and cannot cure the
disease. In this study, two siblings with a mild form of MSD received bone
marrow transplantation (HCT) that replaced their bone marrow with stem cells
containing the healthy version of the gene responsible for MSD. The children
were monitored for two years, during which time the siblings continued to
produce the enzymes that are normally absent in MSD and did not have mental or
behavioral deterioration. This study suggests that HCT might help slow the
progress of MSD and be an improved treatment. However, further and longer-term
studies are required to investigate this further.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s43856-024-00703-8
PMCID: PMC11718225
PMID: 39789203

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Informed consent was obtained from
the parents, and written consent from the mother was obtained to publish this
case series and any accompanying images. Competing interests: The authors
declare no competing interests.
