---
reference_id: "PMID:31898843"
title: "Mutation update: Variants of the CYB5R3 gene in recessive congenital methemoglobinemia."
authors:
- Gupta V
- Kulkarni A
- Warang P
- Devendra R
- Chiddarwar A
- Kedar P
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23973
keywords:
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Cytochrome-B(5) Reductase/chemistry, genetics"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Association Studies/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Methemoglobinemia/congenital, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Protein Conformation
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation update: Variants of the CYB5R3 gene in recessive congenital methemoglobinemia.
**Authors:** Gupta V, Kulkarni A, Warang P, Devendra R, Chiddarwar A, Kedar P
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23973](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23973)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2020 Apr;41(4):737-748. doi: 10.1002/humu.23973. Epub 2020 Jan 30.

Mutation update: Variants of the CYB5R3 gene in recessive congenital
methemoglobinemia.

Gupta V(1), Kulkarni A(1), Warang P(1), Devendra R(1), Chiddarwar A(1), Kedar
P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematogenetics, ICMR-National Institute of Immunohaematology,
King Edward Memorial Hospital Campus, Mumbai, India.

NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase 3 deficiency is an important genetic cause of
recessive congenital methemoglobinemia (RCM) and occurs worldwide in autosomal
recessive inheritance. In this Mutation Update, we provide a comprehensive
review of all the pathogenic mutations and their molecular pathology in RCM
along with the molecular basis of RCM in 21 new patients from the Indian
population, including four novel variants: c.103A>C (p.Thr35Pro), c.190C>G
(p.Leu64Val), c.310G>T (p.Gly104Cys), and c.352C>T (p.His118Tyr). In this
update, over 78 different variants have been described for RCM globally.
Molecular modeling of all the variants reported in CYB5R3 justifies association
with the varying severity of the disease. The majority of the mutations
associated with the severe form with a neurological disorder (RCM Type 2) were
associated with the FAD-binding domain of the protein while the rest were
located in another domain of the protein (RCM Type 1).

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23973
PMID: 31898843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
