---
reference_id: "PMID:34897365"
title: "Prevalence of taurodontism: meta-analysis in recent humans and evolutionary perspectives."
authors:
- Decaup PH
- Couture C
- Colin M
- Garot E
journal: Homo
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1127/homo/2021/1447
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of taurodontism: meta-analysis in recent humans and evolutionary perspectives.
**Authors:** Decaup PH, Couture C, Colin M, Garot E
**Journal:** Homo (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1127/homo/2021/1447](https://doi.org/10.1127/homo/2021/1447)

## Content

1. Homo. 2022 Nov 9;73(1):1-11. doi: 10.1127/homo/2021/1447.

Prevalence of taurodontism: meta-analysis in recent humans and evolutionary 
perspectives.

Decaup PH(1)(2), Couture C(3), Colin M(2), Garot E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Université de Bordeaux, UFR des Sciences Odontologiques, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 
33082 Bordeaux, France.
(2)Université de Bordeaux, PACEA, UMR 5199, Pessac, France.
(3)Université de Bordeaux, UFR des Sciences Odontologiques, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 
33082 Bordeaux, France Université de Bordeaux, PACEA, UMR 5199, Pessac, France 
Université de Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, IMB, UMR 5251, F-33400, Talence, 
France.

Taurodontism is a continuous anatomical variation of permanent and primary 
posterior teeth represented by an enlargement of the pulp cavity. A high 
prevalence of the trait is reported in Homo neanderthalensis remains. Exploring 
and refining epidemiology of taurodontism in actual populations could strengthen 
the hypothesis of a selective advantage for a high attrition diet (as heavy 
tooth wear in Homo sapiens evolution changed little until recently) or favour 
pleiotropic or genetic drift effects to explain the high frequency of the trait 
in Neandertal remains. Prevalence ranges between 0.1% and 48% in the literature. 
The aim of the present study is to assess the prevalence of taurodontism in 
recent populations by means of meta-analysis, that is, is the prevalence of 
taurodontism lower or higher in modern human living populations, where the 
selective advantages of high attrition diet are still expected? From 90 
potentially eligible studies, 15 were included in the meta-analysis. Only 
cross-sectional studies were reported, and 14,771 participants were included. 
The meta-analyses were performed with a random model, calculating a 
weighted-mean prevalence of 11.8%. Gender was found to be unrelated to the 
prevalence of taurodontism (OR = 0.84 (95% CI 0.67-1.05), p > 0.05). 
Taurodontism occurs in approximately 11.8% of the living population. This result 
questions the status of taurodontism as a "typical trait" in Homo 
neanderthalensis and allows a possible common evolutionary mechanism in Homo 
sapiens and Homo neanderthalensis for the trait. Further studies should include 
more accurate and standardized methods to assess the condition.

DOI: 10.1127/homo/2021/1447
PMID: 34897365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]