---
reference_id: "PMID:30888062"
title: "Two novel variants in the ATM gene causing ataxia-telangiectasia, including a duplication of 90 kb: Utility of targeted next-generation sequencing in detection of copy number variation."
authors:
- Martin-Rodriguez S
- Calvo-Ferrer A
- Ortega-Unanue N
- Samaniego-Jimenez L
- Sanz-Izquierdo MP
- Bernardo-Gonzalez I
journal: Ann Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/ahg.12312
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- Biomarkers
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Female
- Gene Duplication
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel variants in the ATM gene causing ataxia-telangiectasia, including a duplication of 90 kb: Utility of targeted next-generation sequencing in detection of copy number variation.
**Authors:** Martin-Rodriguez S, Calvo-Ferrer A, Ortega-Unanue N, Samaniego-Jimenez L, Sanz-Izquierdo MP, Bernardo-Gonzalez I
**Journal:** Ann Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ahg.12312](https://doi.org/10.1111/ahg.12312)

## Content

1. Ann Hum Genet. 2019 Jul;83(4):266-273. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12312. Epub 2019 Mar
19.

Two novel variants in the ATM gene causing ataxia-telangiectasia, including a
duplication of 90 kb: Utility of targeted next-generation sequencing in
detection of copy number variation.

Martin-Rodriguez S(1), Calvo-Ferrer A(1), Ortega-Unanue N(1), Samaniego-Jimenez
L(1), Sanz-Izquierdo MP(1), Bernardo-Gonzalez I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Diagnostics, Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, Spain.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative
disorder characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, ocular apraxia,
immunodeficiency, telangiectasia, elevated serum α-fetoprotein concentration,
radiosensitivity and cancer predisposition. Classical A-T is caused by biallelic
variants on ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) gene, leading to a loss of
function of the protein kinase ATM, involved in DNA damage repair. Atypical
presentations can be found in A-T-like disease or in Nijmegen breakage syndrome,
caused by deficiency of mre11 or nibrin proteins, respectively. In this report,
we present the genetic characterization of a 4-year-old female with clinical
diagnosis of A-T. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) revealed two novel
heterozygous mutations in the ATM gene: a single-nucleotide variant (SNV) at
exon 47 (NM_000051.3:c.6899G > C; p.Trp2300Ser) and ∼90 kb genomic duplication
spanning exons 17-61, NG_009830.1:g.(41245_49339)_(137044_147250)dup. These
findings were validated by Sanger sequencing and MLPA (multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification) analysis respectively. Familial
segregation study confirmed that the two variants are inherited, and the infant
is a compound heterozygote. Thus, our study expands the spectrum of ATM
pathogenic variants and demonstrates the utility of targeted NGS in the
detection of copy number variation.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd/University College London.

DOI: 10.1111/ahg.12312
PMID: 30888062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
