---
reference_id: "PMID:32884126"
title: New insights into the role of antinuclear antibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Pisetsky DS
- Lipsky PE
journal: Nat Rev Rheumatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41584-020-0480-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into the role of antinuclear antibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Pisetsky DS, Lipsky PE
**Journal:** Nat Rev Rheumatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41584-020-0480-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-020-0480-7)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2020 Oct;16(10):565-579. doi: 10.1038/s41584-020-0480-7.
Epub  2020 Sep 3.

New insights into the role of antinuclear antibodies in systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Pisetsky DS(1), Lipsky PE(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Immunology, Duke University Medical Center and 
Medical Research Service, Veterans Administration Medical Center, Durham, NC, 
USA. david.pisetsky@duke.edu.
(2)RILITE Research Institute, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2021 Apr;17(4):244. doi: 10.1038/s41584-021-00573-7.
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2021 Apr;17(4):245. doi: 10.1038/s41584-021-00574-6.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a prototypic autoimmune disease 
characterized by antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) that form immune complexes that 
mediate pathogenesis by tissue deposition or cytokine induction. Some ANAs bind 
DNA or associated nucleosome proteins, whereas other ANAs bind protein 
components of complexes of RNA and RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Levels of 
anti-DNA antibodies can fluctuate widely, unlike those of anti-RBP antibodies, 
which tend to be stable. Because anti-DNA antibody levels can reflect disease 
activity, repeat testing is common; by contrast, a single anti-RBP antibody 
determination is thought to suffice for clinical purposes. Experience from 
clinical trials of novel therapies has provided a new perspective on ANA 
expression during disease, as many patients with SLE are ANA negative at 
screening despite previously testing positive. Because trial results suggest 
that patients who are ANA negative might not respond to certain agents, 
screening strategies now involve ANA and anti-DNA antibody testing to identify 
patients with so-called 'active, autoantibody-positive SLE'. Evidence suggests 
that ANA responses can decrease over time because of the natural history of 
disease or the effects of therapy. Together, these findings suggest that, during 
established disease, more regular serological testing could illuminate changes 
relevant to pathogenesis and disease status.

DOI: 10.1038/s41584-020-0480-7
PMCID: PMC8456518
PMID: 32884126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.