---
reference_id: "PMID:32139505"
title: Increased dystrophin production with golodirsen in patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Frank DE
- Schnell FJ
- Akana C
- El-Husayni SH
- Desjardins CA
- Morgan J
- Charleston JS
- Sardone V
- Domingos J
- Dickson G
- Straub V
- Guglieri M
- Mercuri E
- Servais L
- Muntoni F
- SKIP-NMD Study Group
journal: Neurology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000009233
keywords:
- "Administration, Intravenous"
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Double-Blind Method
- "Dystrophin/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Humans
- Male
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne/blood, drug therapy, genetics"
- Oligonucleotides/therapeutic use
- Sequence Deletion/drug effects
- Morpholinos
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased dystrophin production with golodirsen in patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Frank DE, Schnell FJ, Akana C, El-Husayni SH, Desjardins CA, Morgan J, Charleston JS, Sardone V, Domingos J, Dickson G, Straub V, Guglieri M, Mercuri E, Servais L, Muntoni F, SKIP-NMD Study Group
**Journal:** Neurology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000009233](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000009233)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2020 May 26;94(21):e2270-e2282. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000009233. 
Epub 2020 Mar 5.

Increased dystrophin production with golodirsen in patients with Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy.

Frank DE(1), Schnell FJ(1), Akana C(1), El-Husayni SH(1), Desjardins CA(1), 
Morgan J(1), Charleston JS(1), Sardone V(1), Domingos J(1), Dickson G(1), Straub 
V(1), Guglieri M(1), Mercuri E(1), Servais L(1), Muntoni F(2); SKIP-NMD Study 
Group.

Collaborators: Clark C, Phadke R, Voit T, Carlier PG, Gidaro T, Seferian AM, 
Gargaun E, Popplewell L, Jones A, Feng L, Sewry C, Leone D, Carmela Pera M, 
Monforte M, Pane M, Tang S.

Author information:
(1)From Sarepta Therapeutics (D.E.F., F.J.S., C.A., S.H.E.-H., C.A.D., J.S.C.), 
Cambridge, MA; University College London (J.M., V.S., J.D., F.M.); Centre of 
Gene and Cell Therapy and Centre for Biomedical Sciences (G.D.), Royal Holloway, 
University of London, Egham, Surrey; Newcastle University John Walton Muscular 
Dystrophy Research Centre and the Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust 
(V.S., M.G.), Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Paediatric Neurology and Centro Clinico 
Nemo (E.M.), Catholic University and Policlinico Gemelli, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCSS, Rome, Italy; Institute I-Motion (L.S.), 
Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France; Neuromuscular Reference Center (L.S.), 
CHU Liège, Belgium; Great Ormond Street Hospital (F.M.); and NIHR Great Ormond 
Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre (F.M.), London, UK.
(2)From Sarepta Therapeutics (D.E.F., F.J.S., C.A., S.H.E.-H., C.A.D., J.S.C.), 
Cambridge, MA; University College London (J.M., V.S., J.D., F.M.); Centre of 
Gene and Cell Therapy and Centre for Biomedical Sciences (G.D.), Royal Holloway, 
University of London, Egham, Surrey; Newcastle University John Walton Muscular 
Dystrophy Research Centre and the Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust 
(V.S., M.G.), Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Paediatric Neurology and Centro Clinico 
Nemo (E.M.), Catholic University and Policlinico Gemelli, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCSS, Rome, Italy; Institute I-Motion (L.S.), 
Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France; Neuromuscular Reference Center (L.S.), 
CHU Liège, Belgium; Great Ormond Street Hospital (F.M.); and NIHR Great Ormond 
Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre (F.M.), London, UK. 
f.muntoni@ucl.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Neurology. 2023 May 9;100(19):936. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000012406.

OBJECTIVE: To report safety, pharmacokinetics, exon 53 skipping, and dystrophin 
expression in golodirsen-treated patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) 
amenable to exon 53 skipping.
METHODS: Part 1 was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 12-week dose 
titration of once-weekly golodirsen; part 2 is an ongoing, open-label 
evaluation. Safety and pharmacokinetics were primary and secondary objectives of 
part 1. Primary biological outcome measures of part 2 were blinded exon skipping 
and dystrophin protein production on muscle biopsies (baseline, week 48) 
evaluated, respectively, using reverse transcription PCR and Western blot and 
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Twelve patients were randomized to receive golodirsen (n = 8) or 
placebo (n = 4) in part 1. All from part 1 plus 13 additional patients received 
30 mg/kg golodirsen in part 2. Safety findings were consistent with those 
previously observed in pediatric patients with DMD. Most of the study drug was 
excreted within 4 hours following administration. A significant increase in exon 
53 skipping was associated with ∼16-fold increase over baseline in dystrophin 
protein expression at week 48, with a mean percent normal dystrophin protein 
standard of 1.019% (range, 0.09%-4.30%). Sarcolemmal localization of dystrophin 
was demonstrated by significantly increased dystrophin-positive fibers (week 48, 
p < 0.001) and a positive correlation (Spearman r = 0.663; p < 0.001) with 
dystrophin protein change from baseline, measured by Western blot and 
immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSION: Golodirsen was well-tolerated; muscle biopsies from 
golodirsen-treated patients showed increased exon 53 skipping, dystrophin 
production, and correct dystrophin sarcolemmal localization.
CLINICALTRIALSGOV IDENTIFIER: NCT02310906.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class I evidence that golodirsen 
is safe and Class IV evidence that it induces exon skipping and novel dystrophin 
as confirmed by 3 different assays.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000009233
PMCID: PMC7357297
PMID: 32139505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]