---
reference_id: "PMID:29222591"
title: "Dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease-dementia: current concepts and controversies."
authors:
- Jellinger KA
journal: J Neural Transm (Vienna)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00702-017-1821-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease-dementia: current concepts and controversies.
**Authors:** Jellinger KA
**Journal:** J Neural Transm (Vienna) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00702-017-1821-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-017-1821-9)

## Content

1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2018 Apr;125(4):615-650. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-017-1821-9. Epub 2017 Dec 8.

Dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease-dementia: current concepts and 
controversies.

Jellinger KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Alberichgasse 5/13, 1150, Vienna, 
Austria. kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson's disease-dementia (PDD), although 
sharing many clinical, neurochemical and morphological features, according to 
DSM-5, are two entities of major neurocognitive disorders with Lewy bodies of 
unknown etiology. Despite considerable clinical overlap, their diagnosis is 
based on an arbitrary distinction between the time of onset of motor and 
cognitive symptoms: dementia often preceding parkinsonism in DLB and onset of 
cognitive impairment after onset of motor symptoms in PDD. Both are 
characterized morphologically by widespread cortical and subcortical 
α-synuclein/Lewy body plus β-amyloid and tau pathologies. Based on recent 
publications, including the fourth consensus report of the DLB Consortium, a 
critical overview is given. The clinical features of DLB and PDD include 
cognitive impairment, parkinsonism, visual hallucinations, and fluctuating 
attention. Intravitam PET and post-mortem studies revealed more pronounced 
cortical atrophy, elevated cortical and limbic Lewy pathologies (with APOE ε4), 
apart from higher prevalence of Alzheimer pathology in DLB than PDD. These 
changes may account for earlier onset and greater severity of cognitive defects 
in DLB, while multitracer PET studies showed no differences in cholinergic and 
dopaminergic deficits. DLB and PDD sharing genetic, neurochemical, and 
morphologic factors are likely to represent two subtypes of an 
α-synuclein-associated disease spectrum (Lewy body diseases), beginning with 
incidental Lewy body disease-PD-nondemented-PDD-DLB (no parkinsonism)-DLB with 
Alzheimer's disease (DLB-AD) at the most severe end, although DLB does not begin 
with PD/PDD and does not always progress to DLB-AD, while others consider them 
as the same disease. Both DLB and PDD show heterogeneous pathology and 
neurochemistry, suggesting that they share important common underlying molecular 
pathogenesis with AD and other proteinopathies. Cognitive impairment is not only 
induced by α-synuclein-caused neurodegeneration but by multiple regional 
pathological scores. Recent animal models and human post-mortem studies have 
provided important insights into the pathophysiology of DLB/PDD showing some 
differences, e.g., different spreading patterns of α-synuclein pathology, but 
the basic pathogenic mechanisms leading to the heterogeneity between both 
disorders deserve further elucidation. In view of the controversies about the 
nosology and pathogenesis of both syndromes, there remains a pressing need to 
differentiate them more clearly and to understand the processes leading these 
synucleinopathies to cause one disorder or the other. Clinical management of 
both disorders includes cholinesterase inhibitors, other pharmacologic and 
nonpharmacologic strategies, but these have only a mild symptomatic effect. 
Currently, no disease-modifying therapies are available.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-017-1821-9
PMID: 29222591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]