---
reference_id: "PMID:29203161"
title: Echocardiography and cardiac arrhythmias.
authors:
- Papadopoulos CH
- Oikonomidis D
- Lazaris E
- Nihoyannopoulos P
journal: Hellenic J Cardiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.hjc.2017.11.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Echocardiography and cardiac arrhythmias.
**Authors:** Papadopoulos CH, Oikonomidis D, Lazaris E, Nihoyannopoulos P
**Journal:** Hellenic J Cardiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hjc.2017.11.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hjc.2017.11.017)

## Content

1. Hellenic J Cardiol. 2018 May-Jun;59(3):140-149. doi:
10.1016/j.hjc.2017.11.017.  Epub 2017 Dec 5.

Echocardiography and cardiac arrhythmias.

Papadopoulos CH(1), Oikonomidis D(2), Lazaris E(2), Nihoyannopoulos P(3).

Author information:
(1)2nd Cardiology Department, Korgialenio-Benakio Red Cross Hospital, Athens, 
Greece. Electronic address: papcost@gmail.com.
(2)2nd Cardiology Department, Korgialenio-Benakio Red Cross Hospital, Athens, 
Greece.
(3)1st Cardiology Department, Hippokratio University Hostpital, Athens, Greece.

Cardiac arrhythmias refer to any abnormality or disturbance in the normal 
activation sequence of the myocardium and may be indicative of structural heart 
disease and the cause of significant cardiovascular complications and sudden 
cardiac death. The following review summarizes the current state-of-the-art 
knowledge on the role of echocardiography in the management of cardiac 
arrhythmias and focuses on atrial fibrillation and ventricular arrhythmias where 
echocardiography presents a particular diagnostic and prognostic interest. 
Moreover, a brief reference is made to the effect of cardiac arrhythmias and 
conduction abnormalities on echocardiographic examination.

Copyright © 2017 Hellenic Society of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hjc.2017.11.017
PMID: 29203161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]