---
reference_id: "PMID:30430892"
title: A case of fatal invasive aspergillosis in a patient with neurosarcoidosis treated with infliximab.
authors:
- Van Sanford C
- Obeidat AZ
- Hagen M
- Zabeti A
journal: Int J Neurosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/00207454.2018.1544130
keywords:
- "Antirheumatic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Aspergillosis/complications
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/complications, drug therapy"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Humans
- "Infliximab/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Middle Aged
- "Sarcoidosis/complications, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of fatal invasive aspergillosis in a patient with neurosarcoidosis treated with infliximab.
**Authors:** Van Sanford C, Obeidat AZ, Hagen M, Zabeti A
**Journal:** Int J Neurosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00207454.2018.1544130](https://doi.org/10.1080/00207454.2018.1544130)

## Content

1. Int J Neurosci. 2019 Jun;129(6):619-622. doi: 10.1080/00207454.2018.1544130.
Epub 2018 Nov 28.

A case of fatal invasive aspergillosis in a patient with neurosarcoidosis
treated with infliximab.

Van Sanford C(1), Obeidat AZ(2), Hagen M(3), Zabeti A(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine , University of
Cincinnati , Cincinnati , OH , USA.
(2)b Department of Neurology , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI ,
USA.
(3)c Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , University of Cincinnati
, Cincinnati , OH , USA.

INTRODUCTION: CNS involvement in sarcoidosis is seen in 5-10% of cases. Long
term treatment involves steroids and other immunomodulatory agents, including
infliximab. Chronic immunosuppression can result in increased patient
susceptibility to opportunistic infections. We present a case of fatal
aspergillosis in a patient with neurosarcoidosis treated with infliximab.
CASE REPORT: A 55-year-old woman with neurosarcoidosis on infliximab (started
4 months prior) and dexamethasone, presented with progressive cognitive decline.
Exam revealed impaired attention and disorientation with preserved language.
Brain MRI showed multiple, bilateral cortical and subcortical ring-enhancing
lesions. We held immunosuppression due to suspicion of infection; empiric
Amphotericin B was given early in the hospital course. The patient rapidly
deteriorated from a neurological and respiratory standpoint, requiring
intubation. CSF analysis showed elevated protein of 511 and normal glucose of
104 (67% serum), with lymphocytic pleocytosis (25 cells, 96% lymphocytes).
Systemic and CNS microbiological studies were negative. On hospital day 13,
bronchial fluid grew Aspergillus fumigatus, prompting a switch to voriconazole.
Despite early empiric antifungal treatment, she died from respiratory failure;
autopsy revealed systemic and CNS aspergillosis with multiple brain abscesses.
DISCUSSION: This case represents an example of a fatal complication of
infliximab therapy, which was recently shown to be effective in neurosarcoidosis
in one study. It also serves to highlight the challenges faced in diagnosing
ring-enhancing lesions, especially in patients with pre-existing brain
disorders. Finally, it highlights the difficulty in treating invasive
aspergillosis. Further studies are needed to identify risks associated with
infliximab therapy and potential early interventions to improve outcomes.

DOI: 10.1080/00207454.2018.1544130
PMID: 30430892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
