---
reference_id: "PMID:26634258"
title: Evaluation of Chest X-ray and Thoracic Computed Tomography in Patients with Suspected Tuberculosis.
authors:
- Durmus MS
- Yildiz I
- Sutcu M
- Bulut M
- Varkal MA
- Ertem FU
- Kilic A
- Oguz F
- Unuvar E
- Yekeler E
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s12098-015-1949-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of Chest X-ray and Thoracic Computed Tomography in Patients with Suspected Tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Durmus MS, Yildiz I, Sutcu M, Bulut M, Varkal MA, Ertem FU, Kilic A, Oguz F, Unuvar E, Yekeler E
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12098-015-1949-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-015-1949-2)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2016 May;83(5):397-400. doi: 10.1007/s12098-015-1949-2. Epub
 2015 Dec 3.

Evaluation of Chest X-ray and Thoracic Computed Tomography in Patients with 
Suspected Tuberculosis.

Durmus MS(1)(2), Yildiz I(3), Sutcu M(3), Bulut M(3), Varkal MA(3), Ertem FU(3), 
Kilic A(3), Oguz F(3), Unuvar E(3), Yekeler E(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey. msaitdurmus@gmail.com.
(2)Merkez mah. Silahtaraga cad, No:73 Eyüp, Istanbul, Turkey. 
msaitdurmus@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Radiology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.

Comment in
    Indian J Pediatr. 2017 Mar;84(3):254-255. doi: 10.1007/s12098-016-2255-3.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate if there is any correlation between positive findings 
detected by posterior-anterior (PA) chest radiograph and thoracic computerized 
tomography (CT) in cases with suspected lung tuberculosis (TB) due to positive 
tuberculin skin test (TST) results.
METHODS: This is a retrospective evaluation of the medical files of patients who 
visited the Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of 
Medicine from 2006, through 2011 as outpatients and had positive TST (>15 mm) 
results.
RESULTS: A total of 326 patients were included in the study; 45.7 % (n = 149) 
were girls, and the mean age was 9.0 ± 4.1 y (range: 1-17 y). In total, 14.4 % 
(n = 47) had TB findings, all of which were in the form of hilar 
lymphadenopathy. Among the 47 cases with TB findings in PA chest X-ray, 45 
(95.7 %) also had findings in thoracic CT. Only 2 (4.3 %) patients had normal 
thoracic CT results although their PA chest X-ray results were positive.
CONCLUSIONS: Evaluation for pulmonary TB in children with positive isolated TSTs 
should be made primarily with PA chest X-ray. A routine thoracic CT scan is not 
necessary for asymptomatic patients with only hilar lymphadenopathy findings in 
PA chest radiographs.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-015-1949-2
PMID: 26634258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]