---
reference_id: "PMID:20301411"
title: MELAS.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- El-Hattab AW
- Almannai M
- Scaglia F
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MELAS.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, El-Hattab AW, Almannai M, Scaglia F

## Content

1. MELAS.

El-Hattab AW(1), Almannai M(2), Scaglia F(3)(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Feb 27 [updated 2018 Nov 29].

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor, Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Medicine, 
University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
(2)Medical Genetics and Metabolic Consultant, Section of Medical Genetics, King 
Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas
(4)Joint BCM-CUHK Center of Medical Genetics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sha Tin, 
New Territories, Hong Kong

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: MELAS (mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic 
acidosis, and stroke-like episodes) is a multisystem disorder with protean 
manifestations. The vast majority of affected individuals develop signs and 
symptoms of MELAS between ages two and 40 years. Common clinical manifestations 
include stroke-like episodes, encephalopathy with seizures and/or dementia, 
muscle weakness and exercise intolerance, normal early psychomotor development, 
recurrent headaches, recurrent vomiting, hearing impairment, peripheral 
neuropathy, learning disability, and short stature. During the stroke-like 
episodes neuroimaging shows increased T2-weighted signal areas that do not 
correspond to the classic vascular distribution (hence the term "stroke-like"). 
Lactic acidemia is very common and muscle biopsies typically show ragged red 
fibers.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MELAS is based on meeting clinical 
diagnostic criteria and identifying a pathogenic variant in one of the genes 
associated with MELAS. The m.3243A>G pathogenic variant in the mitochondrial 
gene MT-TL1 is present in approximately 80% of individuals with MELAS. 
Pathogenic variants in MT-TL1 or other mtDNA genes, particularly MT-ND5, can 
also cause this disorder.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment for MELAS is generally 
supportive. During the acute stroke-like episode, a bolus of intravenous 
arginine (500 mg/kg for children or 10 g/m2 body surface area for adults) within 
three hours of symptom onset is recommended followed by the administration of a 
similar dosage of intravenous arginine as a continuous infusion over 24 hours 
for the next three to five days. Coenzyme Q10, L-carnitine, and creatine have 
been beneficial in some individuals. Sensorineural hearing loss has been treated 
with cochlear implantation; seizures respond to traditional anticonvulsant 
therapy (although valproic acid should be avoided). Ptosis, cardiomyopathy, 
cardiac conduction defects, nephropathy, and migraine headache are treated in 
the standard manner. Diabetes mellitus is managed by dietary modification, oral 
hypoglycemic agents, or insulin therapy. Exercise intolerance and weakness may 
respond to aerobic exercise. Prevention of primary manifestations: Once an 
individual with MELAS has the first stroke-like episode, arginine should be 
administered prophylactically to reduce the risk of recurrent stroke-like 
episodes. A daily dose of 150 to 300 mg/kg/day oral arginine in three divided 
doses is recommended. Prevention of secondary complications: Because febrile 
illnesses may trigger acute exacerbations, individuals with MELAS should receive 
standard childhood vaccinations, flu vaccine, and pneumococcal vaccine. 
Surveillance: Affected individuals and their at-risk relatives should be 
followed at regular intervals to monitor progression and the appearance of new 
symptoms. Annual ophthalmologic, audiology, and cardiologic (electrocardiogram 
and echocardiogram) evaluations are recommended. Annual urinalysis and fasting 
blood glucose level are also recommended. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Mitochondrial toxins, including aminoglycoside antibiotics, linezolid, 
cigarettes, and alcohol; valproic acid for seizure treatment; metformin because 
of its propensity to cause lactic acidosis; dichloroacetate (DCA) because of 
increased risk for peripheral neuropathy. Pregnancy management: Affected or 
at-risk pregnant women should be monitored for diabetes mellitus and respiratory 
insufficiency, which may require therapeutic interventions
GENETIC COUNSELING: MELAS is caused by pathogenic variants in mtDNA and is 
transmitted by maternal inheritance. The father of a proband is not at risk of 
having the mtDNA pathogenic variant. The mother of a proband usually has the 
mtDNA pathogenic variant and may or may not have symptoms. A man with a mtDNA 
pathogenic variant cannot transmit the variant to any of his offspring. A woman 
with a mtDNA pathogenic variant (whether symptomatic or asymptomatic) transmits 
the variant to all of her offspring. Prenatal testing and preimplantation 
genetic testing for MELAS is possible if a mtDNA pathogenic variant has been 
detected in the mother. However, because the mutational load in embryonic and 
fetal tissues sampled (i.e., amniocytes and chorionic villi) may not correspond 
to that of all fetal tissues, and because the mutational load in tissues sampled 
prenatally may shift in utero or after birth as a result of random mitotic 
segregation, prediction of the phenotype from prenatal studies cannot be made 
with certainty.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301411