---
reference_id: "PMID:30335347"
title: Pulmonary Sequestration.
authors:
- Chakraborty RK
- Modi P
- Sharma S
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary Sequestration.
**Authors:** Chakraborty RK, Modi P, Sharma S

## Content

1. Pulmonary Sequestration.

Chakraborty RK(1), Modi P(2), Sharma S(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2023 Jul 24.

Author information:
(1)Steward Medical\Good Samaritan Medical
(2)North Mississippi Medical Center, Tupelo, MS
(3)Mery Fitzgerald Hospital

Pulmonary sequestration is a condition in which a segment or lobe of dysplastic 
lung tissue exists with no communication with the rest of the tracheobronchial 
tree and receives an anomalous systemic vascular supply, separate from the rest 
of the lung. It is, therefore, a nonfunctional tissue. The condition was first 
described by Pryce as early as 1946. Although Rokitansky and Rektorik described 
a similar clinical finding way back in 1861. Anatomy Pryce originally divided 
pulmonary sequestration into: Intralobar and extralobar. They further subdivided 
Intralobar into 3 types. Intralobar Sequestration Intralobar sequestration is 
characterized by its presence within the visceral pleura of the functioning 
lung. Venous drainage is into the pulmonary vein.  It is more common in the left 
lower lobe. Approximately two-thirds of intralobar sequestrations are found in 
the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe. It is more common and has a 
reported incidence of 75% to 86% among all cases of sequestration. An exception 
to the left-sided preponderance is pulmonary sequestrations associated with 
Scimitar syndrome (partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection), where 
right-sided lesions are more common. Extralobar Sequestration Extralobar 
sequestration has a separate visceral pleura and venous drainage. Venous 
drainage is into the systemic veins, frequently the lower lobe vein, azygos 
vein, or hemiazygos vein. There have been reported cases of drainage into the 
subclavian or portal vein as well. Arterial supply is from systemic vessels–most 
commonly descending thoracic aorta (73%)  as reported by Savic et al., the 
cranial portion of the abdominal aorta, celiac trunk, splenic artery (21%), as 
well as intercostal arteries. Rare cases of arterial supply 
from pericardiophrenic, right coronary artery, subclavian, and internal thoracic 
arteries have been reported. They are often found between the diaphragm and the 
lower lobes and rarely infra- diaphragmatically. In spite of the overall male 
prevalence of pulmonary sequestration, intraabdominal sequestration is most 
often found in women (75%), usually as a left retroperitoneal mass.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30335347

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Rebanta Chakraborty declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Pranav 
Modi declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Sandeep Sharma declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.