---
reference_id: "PMID:39615111"
title: The role of lncRNA and miRNA on the effects of occurrence and development of osteosarcoma.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Gao X
- Xu J
- Zhang Z
- Lin T
- Zhang X
- Kang X
journal: Int Immunopharmacol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2024.113726
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of lncRNA and miRNA on the effects of occurrence and development of osteosarcoma.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Gao X, Xu J, Zhang Z, Lin T, Zhang X, Kang X
**Journal:** Int Immunopharmacol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.intimp.2024.113726](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2024.113726)

## Content

1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2025 Jan 10;144:113726. doi:
10.1016/j.intimp.2024.113726.  Epub 2024 Nov 29.

The role of lncRNA and miRNA on the effects of occurrence and development of 
osteosarcoma.

Zhang X(1), Gao X(1), Xu J(2), Zhang Z(3), Lin T(2), Zhang X(4), Kang X(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, Honghui Hospital, Xi'an Jiao Tong University, 
710054 Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.
(2)The Second Clinical Medical College of Lanzhou University, 730000 Lanzhou, 
Gansu, China.
(3)The First Clinical Medical College of Lanzhou University, 730000 Lanzhou, 
Gansu, China.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Lanzhou University, 730000 Lanzhou, Gansu, China.
(5)Department of Sports Medicine, Honghui Hospital, Xi'an Jiao Tong University, 
710054 Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China. Electronic address: 
honghuikangxin@163.com.

Osteosarcoma is a common primary malignant bone tumor with a high incidence in 
children and adolescents, with high invasiveness and lung metastases. Even after 
traditional surgical excision, chemoradiotherapy, and comprehensive treatment, 
the survival rate of patients is still low, and the prognosis is not ideal. As 
an important part of non-coding RNA family, lncRNA and miRNA have significant 
regulatory effects on the growth, proliferation, metastasis and apoptosis of 
osteosarcoma cells. Therefore, exploring the roles of lncRNAs and miRNAs in the 
occurrence and development of osteosarcoma is of great help for the subsequent 
diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of osteosarcoma. This paper mainly reviews 
the current research progress on the effects and mechanisms of lncRNAs and 
miRNAs on osteosarcoma cells, in order to provide new ideas for future research 
on the development process, treatment methods, and prognosis of osteosarcoma.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2024.113726
PMID: 39615111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]