---
reference_id: "PMID:33746161"
title: Interval between the First Cancer and the Genetic Diagnosis in Lynch Syndrome Probands.
authors:
- Yamashita K
- Fukushima H
- Teramoto M
- Okita K
- Ishikawa A
- Sakurai A
- Akagi K
- Nakase H
journal: Intern Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.6603-20
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interval between the First Cancer and the Genetic Diagnosis in Lynch Syndrome Probands.
**Authors:** Yamashita K, Fukushima H, Teramoto M, Okita K, Ishikawa A, Sakurai A, Akagi K, Nakase H
**Journal:** Intern Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.6603-20](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.6603-20)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 2021 Sep 1;60(17):2719-2724. doi:
10.2169/internalmedicine.6603-20.  Epub 2021 Mar 22.

Interval between the First Cancer and the Genetic Diagnosis in Lynch Syndrome 
Probands.

Yamashita K(1), Fukushima H(2), Teramoto M(3), Okita K(4), Ishikawa A(2), 
Sakurai A(2), Akagi K(5), Nakase H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Sapporo Medical University, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Sapporo Medical University, Japan.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sapporo Medical University, Japan.
(4)Department of Surgery, Surgical Oncology and Science, Sapporo Medical 
University, Japan.
(5)Division of Molecular Diagnosis and Cancer Prevention, Saitama Cancer Center, 
Japan.

Objective Little is known about the time from developing a first cancer to 
confirming the presence of a mismatch repair (MMR) gene mutation for Lynch 
syndrome (LS) probands. Methods This was a retrospective single center study. LS 
probands, who have an MMR gene mutation that was confirmed first in a pedigree 
and thereafter developed at least one cancer, were included in this study. 
Results There were 21 LS probands who had developed at least one cancer; 6 with 
MLH1 mutations, 9 with MSH2 mutations, 4 with MSH6 mutations, and 2 with EPCAM 
deletions. The median ages at the first cancer and the genetic diagnosis were 47 
(34-71) and 62 (38-84) years old, respectively. The mean interval between the 
first cancer and the genetic diagnosis was 11.0 (0-25) years, and 20 years or 
longer interval was required for the 5 probands. Six (28.6%) probands were older 
than 70 years, and 3 (14.3%) were in their 80s when they were diagnosed to have 
LS. The genetic diagnosis was confirmed at the first, second, third, and fourth 
cancer or later in 5, 5, 6, and 5 probands, respectively. Of the 16 cancers 
examined, 2 (12.5%) were microsatellite stable (MSS), both of whom had germline 
MSH6 mutations. All 17 LS probands who developed colorectal cancer met the 
revised Bethesda guidelines at the genetic diagnosis, but only 7 of 11 (63.6%) 
met them at the first cancer. Twelve out of 21 (57.1%) met the revised Amsterdam 
criteria. Conclusion It took 11 years for the LS probands from the first cancer 
to the diagnostic confirmation by genetic tests. A quarter of the probands were 
in their 70s or 80s at genetic diagnosis.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.6603-20
PMCID: PMC8479221
PMID: 33746161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state that they have no Conflict of 
Interest (COI).