---
reference_id: "PMID:35915344"
title: Giant splenic artery aneurysm rupture into the stomach that was successfully managed with emergency distal pancreatectomy.
authors:
- Yoshikawa C
- Yamato I
- Nakata Y
- Nakagawa T
- Inoue T
- Nakatani M
- Nezu D
- Doi S
- Kuroda Y
- Fujii K
- Kishida S
- Kamikubo M
- Ko S
journal: Surg Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s40792-022-01498-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giant splenic artery aneurysm rupture into the stomach that was successfully managed with emergency distal pancreatectomy.
**Authors:** Yoshikawa C, Yamato I, Nakata Y, Nakagawa T, Inoue T, Nakatani M, Nezu D, Doi S, Kuroda Y, Fujii K, Kishida S, Kamikubo M, Ko S
**Journal:** Surg Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40792-022-01498-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40792-022-01498-3)

## Content

1. Surg Case Rep. 2022 Aug 2;8(1):148. doi: 10.1186/s40792-022-01498-3.

Giant splenic artery aneurysm rupture into the stomach that was successfully 
managed with emergency distal pancreatectomy.

Yoshikawa C(1), Yamato I(2), Nakata Y(2), Nakagawa T(2), Inoue T(2), Nakatani 
M(2), Nezu D(2), Doi S(2), Kuroda Y(2), Fujii K(2), Kishida S(2), Kamikubo M(2), 
Ko S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Nara Prefecture General Medical Center, 2-897-5 
Shichijo-Nishimachi, Nara, 630-8581, Japan. pc.y.chi.476.hiro2180@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Surgery, Nara Prefecture General Medical Center, 2-897-5 
Shichijo-Nishimachi, Nara, 630-8581, Japan.

Erratum in
    Surg Case Rep. 2022 Dec 8;8(1):216. doi: 10.1186/s40792-022-01577-5.

BACKGROUND: Splenic artery aneurysms usually rupture into the free peritoneal 
space and rarely into the gastrointestinal tract. We report the case of a 
patient with a giant splenic artery aneurysm that ruptured in to the stomach 
with hemorrhagic shock and was successfully treated with emergency surgery.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 59-year-old man presented to the emergency department with 
chest pain and syncope. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed splenic 
artery aneurysm with active contrast extravasation. He developed upper 
gastrointestinal (UGI) bleeding and hypovolemic shock. We diagnosed a splenic 
artery aneurysm ruptured in to the stomach, performed emergency distal 
splenopancreatectomy including the aneurysm and partial gastric resection, and 
could prevent patient death.
CONCLUSIONS: This report shows that splenic artery aneurysm can cause UGI 
bleeding. Thus, clinicians should be alert about this condition when managing 
patients with UGI bleeding and/or splenic artery aneurysm.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40792-022-01498-3
PMCID: PMC9343537
PMID: 35915344

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.