---
reference_id: "PMID:23971750"
title: Nutrigenetics, nutrigenomics and inflammatory bowel diseases.
authors:
- Ferguson LR
journal: Expert Rev Clin Immunol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1586/1744666X.2013.824245
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nutrigenetics, nutrigenomics and inflammatory bowel diseases.
**Authors:** Ferguson LR
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1586/1744666X.2013.824245](https://doi.org/10.1586/1744666X.2013.824245)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2013 Aug;9(8):717-26. doi: 
10.1586/1744666X.2013.824245.

Nutrigenetics, nutrigenomics and inflammatory bowel diseases.

Ferguson LR(1).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Nutrition, Faculty of Medical & Health Sciences, The University 
of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand and Nutrigenomics New 
Zealand, Auckland, New Zealand. l.ferguson@auckland.ac.nz

Inflammatory bowel disease includes ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, 
which are both inflammatory disorders of the gastrointestinal tract. Both types 
of inflammatory bowel disease have a complex etiology, resulting from a 
genetically determined susceptibility interacting with environmental factors, 
including the diet and gut microbiota. Genome Wide Association Studies have 
implicated more than 160 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in disease 
susceptibility. Consideration of the different pathways suggested to be involved 
implies that specific dietary interventions are likely to be appropriate, 
dependent upon the nature of the genes involved. Epigenetics and the gut 
microbiota are also responsive to dietary interventions. Nutrigenetics may lead 
to personalized nutrition for disease prevention and treatment, while 
nutrigenomics may help to understand the nature of the disease and individual 
response to nutrients.

DOI: 10.1586/1744666X.2013.824245
PMID: 23971750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]