---
reference_id: "PMID:39092677"
title: "Multiple Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency Is Associated with Sertraline Use - Is There an Acquired Form?"
authors:
- Sunebo S
- Appelqvist H
- Häggqvist B
- Danielsson O
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ana.27030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency Is Associated with Sertraline Use - Is There an Acquired Form?
**Authors:** Sunebo S, Appelqvist H, Häggqvist B, Danielsson O
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.27030](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.27030)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2024 Oct;96(4):802-811. doi: 10.1002/ana.27030. Epub 2024 Aug 2.

Multiple Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency Is Associated with Sertraline 
Use - Is There an Acquired Form?

Sunebo S(1), Appelqvist H(1), Häggqvist B(1), Danielsson O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology in Linköping, and Department of Biomedical and 
Clinical Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Multiple acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD) is a 
disorder of fatty acid oxidation and considered an inborn error of metabolism. 
In recent years, we have diagnosed an increasing number of patients where, 
despite extensive investigation, no disease-causing mutations have been found. 
We therefore investigated a cohort of consecutive patients, with the objective 
to detect possible non-genetic causes.
METHODS: We searched the patient records and the registry of muscle biopsies, 
for patients with MADD, diagnosed within the past 10 years. The patient records 
were reviewed regarding symptoms, clinical findings, comorbidities, drugs, 
diagnostic investigations, and response to treatment. In addition, complementary 
investigations of muscle tissue were performed.
RESULTS: We identified 9 patients diagnosed with late-onset MADD. All presented 
with muscle weakness and elevated levels of creatine kinase. A lipid storage 
myopathy was evident in the muscle biopsies, as was elevated acylcarnitines in 
blood. Despite thorough genetic investigations, a probable genetic cause was 
found in only 2 patients. Remarkably, all 7 patients without disease-causing 
mutations were treated with sertraline. In some cases, a deterioration of 
symptoms closely followed dose increase, and discontinuation resulted in an 
improved acylcarnitine profile. All 9 patients responded to riboflavin treatment 
with normalization of creatine kinase and muscle biopsy findings, and in 8 
patients the clinical symptoms clearly improved.
INTERPRETATION: Our findings strongly suggest that sertraline may induce an 
acquired form of MADD in some patients. Importantly, riboflavin treatment seems 
to be similarly effective as in genetic MADD, but discontinuation of sertraline 
is reasonably warranted. ANN NEUROL 2024;96:802-811.

© 2024 The Author(s). Annals of Neurology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.27030
PMID: 39092677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]