---
reference_id: "PMID:35510170"
title: "Clinical and immunological study of Tofacitinib and Baricitinib in refractory Blau syndrome: case report and literature review."
authors:
- Álvarez-Reguera C
- Prieto-Peña D
- Herrero-Morant A
- Sánchez-Bilbao L
- Martín-Varillas JL
- González-López E
- Gutiérrez-Larrañaga M
- San Segundo D
- Demetrio-Pablo R
- Ocejo-Vinyals G
- González-Gay MA
- Blanco R
journal: Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/1759720X221093211
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and immunological study of Tofacitinib and Baricitinib in refractory Blau syndrome: case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Álvarez-Reguera C, Prieto-Peña D, Herrero-Morant A, Sánchez-Bilbao L, Martín-Varillas JL, González-López E, Gutiérrez-Larrañaga M, San Segundo D, Demetrio-Pablo R, Ocejo-Vinyals G, González-Gay MA, Blanco R
**Journal:** Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1759720X221093211](https://doi.org/10.1177/1759720X221093211)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis. 2022 Apr 29;14:1759720X221093211. doi:
10.1177/1759720X221093211. eCollection 2022.

Clinical and immunological study of Tofacitinib and Baricitinib in refractory
Blau syndrome: case report and literature review.

Álvarez-Reguera C(1), Prieto-Peña D(1), Herrero-Morant A(1), Sánchez-Bilbao
L(1), Martín-Varillas JL(1), González-López E(2), Gutiérrez-Larrañaga M(2), San
Segundo D(2), Demetrio-Pablo R(3), Ocejo-Vinyals G(2), González-Gay MA(4),
Blanco R(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla,
IDIVAL, Santander, Spain.
(2)Department of Immunology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla,
Santander, Spain.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla,
Santander, Spain.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla,
IDIVAL, Avda. Valdecilla s/n., Santander ES-39008, Spain.

Blau syndrome (BS) is an autoinflammatory disorder characterized by
non-caseating granulomatous dermatitis, arthritis, and uveitis. We present a
case of refractory and severe BS that was treated with the Janus kinase
inhibitors (JAKINIBS), Tofacitinib (TOFA) and then Baricitinib (BARI). Our aim
was to describe the clinical and immunological outcomes after treatment with
JAKINIBS. Blood tests and serum samples were obtained during follow-up with TOFA
and BARI. We assessed their effects on clinical outcomes, acute phase reactants,
absolute lymphocyte counts (ALCs), lymphocyte subset counts, immunoglobulins,
and cytokine levels. A review of the literature on the use of JAKINIBS for the
treatment of uveitis and sarcoidosis was also conducted. TOFA led to a rapid and
maintained disease control and a steroid-sparing effect. A decrease from
baseline was observed in ALC, CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, and natural killer (NK) cell
counts. B-cells were stable. Serum levels of interleukin (IL)-4 and tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) increased, whereas IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-17
maintained stable. TOFA was discontinued after 19 months due to significant
lymphopenia. The initiation of BARI allowed maintaining adequate control of
disease activity with an adequate safety profile. The literature review showed
seven patients with uveitis and five with sarcoidosis treated with JAKINIBS. No
cases of BS treated with JAKINIBS were found. We report the successful use of
JAKINIBS in a patient with refractory and severe BS.

© The Author(s), 2022.

DOI: 10.1177/1759720X221093211
PMCID: PMC9058350
PMID: 35510170

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors
declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Professor Miguel A.
González-Gay has received grants/research supports from Abbvie, MSD, Jansen, and
Roche, and had consultation fees/participation in company sponsored speaker’s
bureau from Abbvie, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi, and MSD. Dr Ricardo Blanco received
grants/research supports from Abbvie, MSD, and Roche, and had consultation
fees/participation in company sponsored speaker’s bureau from Abbvie, Pfizer,
Roche, Bristol-Myers, Janssen, Lilly, and MSD. Dr Carmen Álvarez-Reguera, Diana
Prieto-Peña, Alba Herrero-Morant, Lara Sánchez-Bilbao, José Luis
Martín-Varillas, Elena González-López, María Gutiérrez-Larrañaga, David San
Segundo, Rosalía Demetrio-Pablo, and Gonzalo Ocejo-Vinyals have not declared
financial disclosures.
