---
reference_id: "PMID:21873497"
title: Impaired cardiac reserve and severely diminished skeletal muscle O₂ utilization mediate exercise intolerance in Barth syndrome.
authors:
- Spencer CT
- Byrne BJ
- Bryant RM
- Margossian R
- Maisenbacher M
- Breitenger P
- Benni PB
- Redfearn S
- Marcus E
- Cade WT
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00479.2010
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Analysis of Variance
- "Barth Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Blood Pressure
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Echocardiography
- Electrocardiography
- Exercise Test
- Exercise Tolerance
- Heart Rate
- Hemoglobins/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- Muscle Contraction
- "Oxygen/blood, metabolism"
- Oxygen Consumption
- "Quadriceps Muscle/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Respiratory Mechanics
- "Spectroscopy, Near-Infrared"
- "Ventricular Function, Left"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired cardiac reserve and severely diminished skeletal muscle O₂ utilization mediate exercise intolerance in Barth syndrome.
**Authors:** Spencer CT, Byrne BJ, Bryant RM, Margossian R, Maisenbacher M, Breitenger P, Benni PB, Redfearn S, Marcus E, Cade WT
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00479.2010](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00479.2010)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011 Nov;301(5):H2122-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00479.2010. Epub 2011 Aug 26.

Impaired cardiac reserve and severely diminished skeletal muscle O₂ utilization
mediate exercise intolerance in Barth syndrome.

Spencer CT(1), Byrne BJ, Bryant RM, Margossian R, Maisenbacher M, Breitenger P,
Benni PB, Redfearn S, Marcus E, Cade WT.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, East Carolina University,
Greenville, North Carolina, USA.

Barth syndrome (BTHS) is a mitochondrial myopathy characterized by reports of
exercise intolerance. We sought to determine if 1) BTHS leads to abnormalities
of skeletal muscle O(2) extraction/utilization and 2) exercise intolerance in
BTHS is related to impaired O(2) extraction/utilization, impaired cardiac
function, or both. Participants with BTHS (age: 17 ± 5 yr, n = 15) and control
participants (age: 13 ± 4 yr, n = 9) underwent graded exercise testing on a
cycle ergometer with continuous ECG and metabolic measurements. Echocardiography
was performed at rest and at peak exercise. Near-infrared spectroscopy of the
vastus lateralis muscle was continuously recorded for measurements of skeletal
muscle O(2) extraction. Adjusting for age, peak O(2) consumption (16.5 ± 4.0 vs.
39.5 ± 12.3 ml·kg(-1)·min(-1), P < 0.001) and peak work rate (58 ± 19 vs. 166 ±
60 W, P < 0.001) were significantly lower in BTHS than control participants. The
percent increase from rest to peak exercise in ejection fraction (BTHS: 3 ± 10
vs. control: 19 ± 4%, P < 0.01) was blunted in BTHS compared with control
participants. The muscle tissue O(2) saturation change from rest to peak
exercise was paradoxically opposite (BTHS: 8 ± 16 vs. control: -5 ± 9, P <
0.01), and the deoxyhemoglobin change was blunted (BTHS: 0 ± 12 vs. control: 10
± 8, P < 0.09) in BTHS compared with control participants, indicating impaired
skeletal muscle extraction in BTHS. In conclusion, severe exercise intolerance
in BTHS is due to both cardiac and skeletal muscle impairments that are
consistent with cardiac and skeletal mitochondrial myopathy. These findings
provide further insight to the pathophysiology of BTHS.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00479.2010
PMID: 21873497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
