---
reference_id: "PMID:35621327"
title: Cognitive Stimulation in Moderate Alzheimer's Disease.
authors:
- Gonzalez-Moreno J
- Satorres E
- Soria-Urios G
- Meléndez JC
journal: J Appl Gerontol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/07334648221089283
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive Stimulation in Moderate Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Gonzalez-Moreno J, Satorres E, Soria-Urios G, Meléndez JC
**Journal:** J Appl Gerontol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/07334648221089283](https://doi.org/10.1177/07334648221089283)

## Content

1. J Appl Gerontol. 2022 Aug;41(8):1934-1941. doi: 10.1177/07334648221089283.
Epub  2022 May 27.

Cognitive Stimulation in Moderate Alzheimer's Disease.

Gonzalez-Moreno J(1), Satorres E(2), Soria-Urios G(1)(2), Meléndez JC(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty Health Sciences, Universidad Internacional de Valencia, Valencia, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Developmental Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, University of 
Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

Cognitive stimulation is one of the non-pharmacological therapies recommended 
for dementia intervention. The present study evaluated the efficacy of an 
intervention based on cognitive stimulation in people with moderate Alzheimer's 
disease. Fifty-nine subjects with moderate dementia were randomly assigned to 
the stimulation group (N = 36) and the control group (N = 35). The treatment 
group received 16 intervention sessions cognitive tasks. All participants were 
evaluated with a battery of neuropsychological tests at three time points (pre, 
post, and follow-up). The treatment group showed significant increases in the 
three domains studied (memory, attention, and executive functions), although 
some of these effects were not maintained at follow-up. The control group 
progressively worsened. Cognitive stimulation was found to be an effective 
intervention for people with moderate Alzheimer's disease because it helped to 
maintain memory function, executive functions, and attention. However, the 
effects were minimized at the 3-month follow-up.

DOI: 10.1177/07334648221089283
PMID: 35621327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]