---
reference_id: "PMID:30383547"
title: Development and Long-Term Evaluation of Ocular Surface Conditions Using Ovariectomized Cynomolgus Monkey.
authors:
- Li C
- Zhang X
- Wang Y
- Li M
journal: Eye Contact Lens
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/ICL.0000000000000563
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development and Long-Term Evaluation of Ocular Surface Conditions Using Ovariectomized Cynomolgus Monkey.
**Authors:** Li C, Zhang X, Wang Y, Li M
**Journal:** Eye Contact Lens (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICL.0000000000000563](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICL.0000000000000563)

## Content

1. Eye Contact Lens. 2019 Jul;45(4):246-253. doi: 10.1097/ICL.0000000000000563.

Development and Long-Term Evaluation of Ocular Surface Conditions Using 
Ovariectomized Cynomolgus Monkey.

Li C(1), Zhang X, Wang Y, Li M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou, China.

OBJECTIVES: We aim to use the ovariectomized cynomolgus monkey to observe the 
effect of long-term changes of sex hormone levels on ocular surface.
METHODS: Six healthy adolescent cynomolgus monkeys were randomly assigned to 
control and experimental groups (n=3/group). Bilateral ovariectomy was performed 
in experimental group, and sham operation was performed on control animals with 
their ovaries reserved. The concentrations of serum estradiol and testosterone 
in cynomolgus monkeys' lower-limb venous were detected by radioimmunoassay 
before surgery, and at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months after the surgery. Phenol red 
cotton thread test, tear osmolarity, corneal fluorescein staining, and 
conjunctival impression cytology were performed to evaluate the ocular surface 
conditions before surgery, and at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months after the surgery. 
The histological examinations of the bulbar conjunctiva and labial glands 
tissues were performed at 12 and 24 months after the surgery.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in the serum level of estradiol 
and testosterone between the experimental and control groups before surgery, at 
6, and 12 months after surgery (P>0.05). Serum level of estradiol and 
testosterone were significantly less in experimental versus control group at 18 
and 24 months after surgery (P<0.05). There was no significant differences in 
phenol red cotton between the experimental and control groups before surgery, at 
6, 12, 18, and 24 months after surgery (P>0.05). Tear osmolarity had no 
significant differences between experimental and control group before surgery 
(P>0.05), and it was significantly higher in experimental versus control group 
at all four time-points after surgery (P<0.05). The number of conjunctival 
goblet cells had no significant differences between experimental and control 
group before surgery, at 6 months after surgery (P>0.05), and it was 
significantly lower in experimental versus control group at 12, 18, and 24 
months after surgery (P<0.05). There were no significant differences in the 
corneal fluorescein staining score between the experimental and control groups 
before surgery, at 6, 12, and 18 months after surgery (P>0.05), and it was 
higher in experimental than control group at 24 months after surgery (P<0.05). 
In addition, inflammatory cell infiltration in bulbar conjunctiva and labial 
glands tissues was observed in experimental group and was unobserved in control 
group at 24 months after surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Ovariectomy led to decreased sex hormone levels in cynomolgus 
monkey. In turn, tear osmolarity was increased, the number of conjunctival 
goblet cells were decreased, the corneal fluorescence staining was increased, 
and the pathological examination of the bulbar conjunctiva and labial glands 
tissues were abnormal, phenol red cotton thread test did not change 
significantly.

DOI: 10.1097/ICL.0000000000000563
PMID: 30383547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]