---
reference_id: "PMID:39317733"
title: Extragustatory bitter taste receptors in head and neck health and disease.
authors:
- Harris JC
- Lee RJ
- Carey RM
journal: J Mol Med (Berl)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00109-024-02490-0
keywords:
- Humans
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/metabolism, genetics"
- Taste/physiology
- Animals
- "Head and Neck Neoplasms/metabolism, genetics"
- Head
- Taste Buds/metabolism
- "Taste Receptors, Type 2"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extragustatory bitter taste receptors in head and neck health and disease.
**Authors:** Harris JC, Lee RJ, Carey RM
**Journal:** J Mol Med (Berl) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00109-024-02490-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-024-02490-0)

## Content

1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2024 Dec;102(12):1413-1424. doi: 10.1007/s00109-024-02490-0.
 Epub 2024 Sep 25.

Extragustatory bitter taste receptors in head and neck health and disease.

Harris JC(1), Lee RJ(1)(2), Carey RM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. Ryan.Carey@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Taste receptors, first described for their gustatory functions within the oral
cavity and oropharynx, are now known to be expressed in many organ systems. Even
intraoral taste receptors regulate non-sensory pathways, and recent literature
has connected bitter taste receptors to various states of health and disease.
These extragustatory pathways involve previously unexplored, clinically relevant
roles for taste signaling in areas including susceptibility to infection,
antibiotic efficacy, and cancer outcomes. Among other physicians,
otolaryngologists who manage head and neck diseases should be aware of this
growing body of evidence and its relevance to their fields. In this review, we
describe the role of extragustatory taste receptors in head and neck health and
disease, highlighting recent advances, clinical implications, and directions for
future investigation. Additionally, this review will discuss known TAS2R
polymorphisms and the associated implications for clinical prognosis.

© 2024. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-024-02490-0
PMCID: PMC11579162
PMID: 39317733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: Not applicable. Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests.
