---
reference_id: "PMID:35652398"
title: "Fabry Disease: Current and Novel Therapeutic Strategies. A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Palaiodimou L
- Kokotis P
- Zompola C
- Papagiannopoulou G
- Bakola E
- Papadopoulou M
- Zouvelou V
- Petras D
- Vlachopoulos C
- Tsivgoulis G
journal: Curr Neuropharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2174/1570159X20666220601124117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fabry Disease: Current and Novel Therapeutic Strategies. A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Palaiodimou L, Kokotis P, Zompola C, Papagiannopoulou G, Bakola E, Papadopoulou M, Zouvelou V, Petras D, Vlachopoulos C, Tsivgoulis G
**Journal:** Curr Neuropharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1570159X20666220601124117](https://doi.org/10.2174/1570159X20666220601124117)

## Content

1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2023;21(3):440-456. doi:
10.2174/1570159X20666220601124117.

Fabry Disease: Current and Novel Therapeutic Strategies. A Narrative Review.

Palaiodimou L(1), Kokotis P(2), Zompola C(1), Papagiannopoulou G(1), Bakola 
E(1), Papadopoulou M(1), Zouvelou V(2), Petras D(3), Vlachopoulos C(4), 
Tsivgoulis G(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Neurology, "Attikon" University Hospital, School of 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(2)First Department of Neurology, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, School of Medicine, Eginition Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(3)Nephrology Department, Hippokration General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(4)First Department of Cardiology, Hippokration Hospital, University of Athens, 
Athens, Greece.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Fabry disease (FD) is an inherited lysosomal storage disorder, 
leading to multisystemic manifestations and causing significant morbidity and 
mortality.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this narrative review is to present the current and novel 
therapeutic strategies in FD, including symptomatic and specific treatment 
options.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was conducted to identify relevant 
studies, including completed and ongoing randomized-controlled clinical trials 
(RCTs), prospective or retrospective cohort studies, case series and case 
reports that provided clinical data regarding FD treatment.
RESULTS: A multidisciplinary symptomatic treatment is recommended for FD 
patients, personalized according to disease manifestations and their severity. 
During the last two decades, FD-specific treatments, including two 
enzyme-replacement-therapies (agalsidase alfa and agalsidase beta) and chaperone 
treatment with migalastat have been approved for use and allowed for symptoms' 
stabilization or even disease burden reduction. More therapeutic agents are 
currently under investigation. Substrate reduction therapies, including 
lucerastat and venglustat, have shown promising results in RCTs and may be used 
either as monotherapy or as complementary therapy to established 
enzymereplacement- therapies. More stable enzyme-replacement-therapy molecules 
that are associated with less adverse events and lower likelihood of 
neutralizing antibodies formation have also been developed. Ex-vivo and in-vivo 
gene therapy is being tested in animal models and pilot human clinical trials, 
with preliminary results showing a favorable safety and efficacy profile.
CONCLUSION: The therapeutic landscape in FD appears to be actively expanding 
with more treatment options expected to become available in the near future, 
allowing for a more personalized approach in FD patients.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1570159X20666220601124117
PMCID: PMC10207921
PMID: 35652398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest, 
financial or otherwise.