---
reference_id: "PMID:27941306"
title: Peroxisome biogenesis and human peroxisome-deficiency disorders.
authors:
- Fujiki Y
journal: Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.2183/pjab.92.463
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisome biogenesis and human peroxisome-deficiency disorders.
**Authors:** Fujiki Y
**Journal:** Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.2183/pjab.92.463](https://doi.org/10.2183/pjab.92.463)

## Content

1. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci. 2016;92(10):463-477. doi: 
10.2183/pjab.92.463.

Peroxisome biogenesis and human peroxisome-deficiency disorders.

Fujiki Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University.

Peroxisome is a single-membrane-bounded ubiquitous organelle containing a 
hundred different enzymes that catalyze various metabolic pathways such as 
β-oxidation of very long-chain fatty acids and synthesis of plasmalogens. To 
investigate peroxisome biogenesis and human peroxisome biogenesis disorders 
(PBDs) including Zellweger syndrome, more than a dozen different complementation 
groups of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell mutants impaired in peroxisome 
biogenesis are isolated as a model experimental system. By taking advantage of 
rapid functional complementation assay of the CHO cell mutants, successful 
cloning of PEX genes encoding peroxins required for peroxisome assembly 
invaluably contributed to the accomplishment of cloning of pathogenic genes 
responsible for PBDs. Peroxins are divided into three groups: 1) peroxins 
including Pex3p, Pex16p and Pex19p, are responsible for peroxisome membrane 
biogenesis via Pex19p- and Pex3p-dependent class I and Pex19p- and 
Pex16p-dependent class II pathways; 2) peroxins that function in matrix protein 
import; 3) those such as Pex11pβ are involved in peroxisome division where DLP1, 
Mff, and Fis1 coordinately function.

DOI: 10.2183/pjab.92.463
PMCID: PMC5328784
PMID: 27941306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]