---
reference_id: "PMID:29636449"
title: Distinct molecular pathways mediate Mycn and Myc-regulated miR-17-92 microRNA action in Feingold syndrome mouse models.
authors:
- Mirzamohammadi F
- Kozlova A
- Papaioannou G
- Paltrinieri E
- Ayturk UM
- Kobayashi T
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-03788-7
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Eyelids/abnormalities, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- "Microcephaly/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "N-Myc Proto-Oncogene Protein/deficiency, genetics"
- "PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics, metabolism"
- "STAT3 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Tracheoesophageal Fistula/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Transforming Growth Factor beta1/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct molecular pathways mediate Mycn and Myc-regulated miR-17-92 microRNA action in Feingold syndrome mouse models.
**Authors:** Mirzamohammadi F, Kozlova A, Papaioannou G, Paltrinieri E, Ayturk UM, Kobayashi T
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-018-03788-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03788-7)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2018 Apr 10;9(1):1352. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-03788-7.

Distinct molecular pathways mediate Mycn and Myc-regulated miR-17-92 microRNA 
action in Feingold syndrome mouse models.

Mirzamohammadi F(1), Kozlova A(1), Papaioannou G(1), Paltrinieri E(1), Ayturk 
UM(2), Kobayashi T(3).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, 02114, MA, USA.
(2)Musculoskeletal Integrity Program, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, 
10021, NY, USA.
(3)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, 02114, MA, USA. tkobayashi1@mgh.harvard.edu.

Feingold syndrome is a skeletal dysplasia caused by loss-of-function mutations 
of either MYCN (type 1) or MIR17HG that encodes miR-17-92 microRNAs (type 2). 
Since miR-17-92 expression is transcriptionally regulated by MYC transcription 
factors, it has been postulated that Feingold syndrome type 1 and 2 may be 
caused by a common molecular mechanism. Here we show that Mir17-92 deficiency 
upregulates TGF-β signaling, whereas Mycn-deficiency downregulates PI3K 
signaling in limb mesenchymal cells. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of 
TGF-β signaling efficiently rescues the skeletal defects caused by Mir17-92 
deficiency, suggesting that upregulation of TGF-β signaling is responsible for 
the skeletal defect of Feingold syndrome type 2. By contrast, the skeletal 
phenotype of Mycn-deficiency is partially rescued by Pten heterozygosity, but 
not by TGF-β inhibition. These results strongly suggest that despite the 
phenotypical similarity, distinct molecular mechanisms underlie the 
pathoetiology for Feingold syndrome type 1 and 2.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03788-7
PMCID: PMC5893605
PMID: 29636449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.