---
reference_id: "PMID:24587110"
title: "Effectiveness of treatment approaches for children and adolescents with reading disabilities: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials."
authors:
- Galuschka K
- Ise E
- Krick K
- Schulte-Körne G
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089900
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Dyslexia/rehabilitation
- Exercise/physiology
- Eyeglasses
- Helianthus/chemistry
- Humans
- Plant Extracts/therapeutic use
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Reading
- Remedial Teaching/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness of treatment approaches for children and adolescents with reading disabilities: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
**Authors:** Galuschka K, Ise E, Krick K, Schulte-Körne G
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0089900](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0089900)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 26;9(2):e89900. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089900. 
eCollection 2014.

Effectiveness of treatment approaches for children and adolescents with reading 
disabilities: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Galuschka K(1), Ise E(2), Krick K(1), Schulte-Körne G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(8):e105843.

Children and adolescents with reading disabilities experience a significant 
impairment in the acquisition of reading and spelling skills. Given the 
emotional and academic consequences for children with persistent reading 
disorders, evidence-based interventions are critically needed. The present 
meta-analysis extracts the results of all available randomized controlled 
trials. The aims were to determine the effectiveness of different treatment 
approaches and the impact of various factors on the efficacy of interventions. 
The literature search for published randomized-controlled trials comprised an 
electronic search in the databases ERIC, PsycINFO, PubMed, and Cochrane, and an 
examination of bibliographical references. To check for unpublished trials, we 
searched the websites clinicaltrials.com and ProQuest, and contacted experts in 
the field. Twenty-two randomized controlled trials with a total of 49 
comparisons of experimental and control groups could be included. The 
comparisons evaluated five reading fluency trainings, three phonemic awareness 
instructions, three reading comprehension trainings, 29 phonics instructions, 
three auditory trainings, two medical treatments, and four interventions with 
coloured overlays or lenses. One trial evaluated the effectiveness of sunflower 
therapy and another investigated the effectiveness of motor exercises. The 
results revealed that phonics instruction is not only the most frequently 
investigated treatment approach, but also the only approach whose efficacy on 
reading and spelling performance in children and adolescents with reading 
disabilities is statistically confirmed. The mean effect sizes of the remaining 
treatment approaches did not reach statistical significance. The present 
meta-analysis demonstrates that severe reading and spelling difficulties can be 
ameliorated with appropriate treatment. In order to be better able to provide 
evidence-based interventions to children and adolescent with reading 
disabilities, research should intensify the application of blinded randomized 
controlled trials.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089900
PMCID: PMC3935956
PMID: 24587110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.