---
reference_id: "PMID:12776281"
title: Biological dynamics of hepatitis B virus load in dialysis population.
authors:
- Fabrizi F
- Lunghi G
- Alongi G
- Bisegna S
- Campolo G
- Mangano S
- Limido A
- Pagliari B
- Tettamanzi F
- Ponticelli C
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0272-6386(03)00360-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biological dynamics of hepatitis B virus load in dialysis population.
**Authors:** Fabrizi F, Lunghi G, Alongi G, Bisegna S, Campolo G, Mangano S, Limido A, Pagliari B, Tettamanzi F, Ponticelli C
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0272-6386(03)00360-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0272-6386(03)00360-3)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003 Jun;41(6):1278-85. doi: 10.1016/s0272-6386(03)00360-3.

Biological dynamics of hepatitis B virus load in dialysis population.

Fabrizi F(1), Lunghi G, Alongi G, Bisegna S, Campolo G, Mangano S, Limido A, 
Pagliari B, Tettamanzi F, Ponticelli C.

Author information:
(1)Nephrology and Dialysis Division, Institute of Hygiene and Preventive 
Medicine, Maggiore Hospital, IRCCS, Milano, Italy. fabrizi@policlinico.mi.it

BACKGROUND: Control of the spread of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection in 
dialysis units has been one of major advances in the management of end-stage 
renal disease. However, the natural history of HBV in dialysis patients remains 
unclear. The aim of this study is to measure monthly HBV viral load (HBV DNA) in 
a large cohort (n = 29) of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive chronic 
dialysis patients during 12 months.
METHODS: HBV DNA was measured using the Amplicor HBV Monitor Test (Roche 
Diagnostics, Branchburg, NJ), an in vitro assay using polymerase chain reaction 
nucleic acid amplification and DNA hybridization for the quantitative 
measurement of HBV DNA in serum.
RESULTS: We observed three HBV DNA patterns: (1) patients persistently positive 
by Amplicor HBV Monitor Test (persistent HBV DNA; 7 of 29 patients; 24.1%), (2) 
individuals with alternatively positive and negative results (intermittent HBV 
DNA; 18 of 29 patients; 62.1%), and (3) patients persistently negative by 
Amplicor HBV Monitor Test (4 of 29 patients; 13.8%). HBV viral load was greater 
in patients with persistent compared with intermittent HBV DNA (persistently HBV 
DNA positive; 2.686 x 10(4) copies/mL; 95% confidence interval [CI], 5.2499 x 
10(4) to 1.8158 x 10(4)copies/mL) versus intermittently HBV DNA positive (1.071 
x 10(3) copies/mL; 95% CI, 8.524 x 10(3) to 4.09 x 10(2) copies/mL; P = 0.0001). 
In the entire group, HBV load at study entry was low and did not change versus 
the end of follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Three patterns of HBV viremia in dialysis patients over time were 
assessed; HBV load was not high and was relatively stable. HBsAg-positive 
patients who were intermittently HBV DNA positive had less HBV viral load than 
persistently HBV DNA-positive patients. Periodic testing for HBV DNA to assess 
the virological status of HBsAg-positive dialysis patients is recommended.

DOI: 10.1016/s0272-6386(03)00360-3
PMID: 12776281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]