---
reference_id: "PMID:11424971"
title: Immune restoration and CD4+ T-cell function with antiretroviral therapies.
authors:
- Lederman MM
journal: AIDS
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1097/00002030-200102002-00003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune restoration and CD4+ T-cell function with antiretroviral therapies.
**Authors:** Lederman MM
**Journal:** AIDS (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00002030-200102002-00003](https://doi.org/10.1097/00002030-200102002-00003)

## Content

1. AIDS. 2001 Feb;15 Suppl 2:S11-5. doi: 10.1097/00002030-200102002-00003.

Immune restoration and CD4+ T-cell function with antiretroviral therapies.

Lederman MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Center for AIDS Research, University Hospitals of Cleveland, Ohio 
44106-5083, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To review the current understanding of the details and mechanisms of 
immune restoration that follows administration of suppressive antiretroviral 
therapies to persons with chronic HIV-1 infection.
SUMMARY: A first-phase cellular increase often includes increases in multiple 
circulating lymphocyte populations and is largely attributable to rapid 
redistribution of cells from lymphoid tissue. A second slower phase is largely 
comprised of naïve cell increases that may reflect cells newly produced in the 
thymus. Improvement in CD4+ cell function is demonstrable but functional 
restoration is incomplete. Immunization can enhance the restoration of CD4+ 
cell-dependent responses, and the magnitude of restoration is related in part to 
the degree to which HIV-1 replication and immune activation are controlled. 
Despite the incomplete nature of immune restoration seen after suppression of 
HIV-1 replication in chronic infection, clinical benefits of these responses are 
reflected in decreased HIV-1-related opportunistic infections and mortality. The 
effects of these therapies on the occurrence of non-Hodgkins lymphoma are less 
apparent.
CONCLUSIONS: Suppression of HIV-1 replication results in both laboratory and 
clinical evidence of immune restoration. Although incomplete, this immune 
restoration provides 'breathing room' to develop better-tolerated antiviral 
therapies and therapies designed to enhance immune function.

DOI: 10.1097/00002030-200102002-00003
PMID: 11424971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]