---
reference_id: "PMID:10906174"
title: Origin of hepatitis delta virus mRNA.
authors:
- Gudima S
- Wu SY
- Chiang CM
- Moraleda G
- Taylor J
journal: J Virol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.74.16.7204-7210.2000
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Origin of hepatitis delta virus mRNA.
**Authors:** Gudima S, Wu SY, Chiang CM, Moraleda G, Taylor J
**Journal:** J Virol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.74.16.7204-7210.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.74.16.7204-7210.2000)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2000 Aug;74(16):7204-10. doi: 10.1128/jvi.74.16.7204-7210.2000.

Origin of hepatitis delta virus mRNA.

Gudima S(1), Wu SY, Chiang CM, Moraleda G, Taylor J.

Author information:
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111-2497, USA.

Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is unique relative to all known animal viruses, 
especially in terms of its ability to redirect host RNA polymerase(s) to 
transcribe its 1,679-nucleotide (nt) circular RNA genome. During replication 
there accumulates not only more molecules of the genome but also its exact 
complement, the antigenome. In addition, there are relatively smaller amounts of 
an 800-nt RNA of antigenomic polarity that is polyadenylated and considered to 
act as mRNA for translation of the single and essential HDV protein, the delta 
antigen. Characterization of this mRNA could provide insights into the in vivo 
mechanism of HDV RNA-directed RNA transcription and processing. Previously, we 
showed that the 5' end of this RNA was located in the majority of species, at nt 
1630. The present studies show that (i) at least some of this RNA, as extracted 
from the liver of an HDV-infected woodchuck, behaved as if it contained a 5'-cap 
structure; (ii) in the infected liver there were additional polyadenylated 
antigenomic HDV RNA species with 5' ends located at least 202 nt and even 335 nt 
beyond the nt 1630 site, (iii) the 5' end at nt 1630 was not detected in 
transfected cells, following DNA-directed HDV RNA transcription, in the absence 
of genome replication, and (iv) nevertheless, using in vitro transcription with 
purified human RNA polymerase II holoenzyme and genomic RNA template, we did not 
detect initiation of template-dependent RNA synthesis; we observed only low 
levels of 3'-end addition to the template. These new findings support the 
interpretation that the 5' end detected at nt 1630 during HDV replication 
represents a specific site for the initiation of an RNA-directed RNA synthesis, 
which is then modified by capping.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.16.7204-7210.2000
PMCID: PMC112241
PMID: 10906174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]