---
reference_id: "PMID:38740600"
title: Role and molecular mechanism of NOD2 in chronic non-communicable diseases.
authors:
- Kong L
- Cao Y
- He Y
- Zhang Y
journal: J Mol Med (Berl)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00109-024-02451-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Nod2 Signaling Adaptor Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Noncommunicable Diseases
- Chronic Disease
- Mutation
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Immunity, Innate"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role and molecular mechanism of NOD2 in chronic non-communicable diseases.
**Authors:** Kong L, Cao Y, He Y, Zhang Y
**Journal:** J Mol Med (Berl) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00109-024-02451-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-024-02451-7)

## Content

1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2024 Jun;102(6):787-799. doi: 10.1007/s00109-024-02451-7.
Epub  2024 May 14.

Role and molecular mechanism of NOD2 in chronic non-communicable diseases.

Kong L(1), Cao Y(1), He Y(2), Zhang Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
First Medical University, No. 324, Jingwu Weiqi Road, Huaiyin District, Jinan, 
Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(2)Gamma Knife Center, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First 
Medical University, Jinan, Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
First Medical University, No. 324, Jingwu Weiqi Road, Huaiyin District, Jinan, 
Shandong, People's Republic of China. zhangyahui@sdfmu.edu.cn.

Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing 2 (NOD2), located in the 
cell cytoplasm, is a pattern recognition receptor belonging to the innate immune 
receptor family. It mediates the innate immune response by identifying conserved 
sequences in bacterial peptide glycans and plays an essential role in 
maintaining immune system homeostasis. Gene mutations of NOD2 lead to the 
development of autoimmune diseases such as Crohn's disease and Blau syndrome. 
Recently, NOD2 has been shown to be associated with the pathogenesis of 
diabetes, cardiac-cerebral diseases, and cancers. However, the function of NOD2 
in these non-communicable diseases (CNCDs) is not well summarized in reviews. 
Our report mainly discusses the primary function and molecular mechanism of NOD2 
as well as its potential clinical significance in CNCDs.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-024-02451-7
PMID: 38740600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]