---
reference_id: "PMID:35710915"
title: Cluster analysis categorizes five phenotypes of pulmonary tuberculosis.
authors:
- Koo HK
- Min J
- Kim HW
- Ko Y
- Oh JY
- Jeong YJ
- Kang HH
- Kang JY
- Lee SS
- Seo M
- Silverman EK
- Kim JS
- Park JS
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-13526-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cluster analysis categorizes five phenotypes of pulmonary tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Koo HK, Min J, Kim HW, Ko Y, Oh JY, Jeong YJ, Kang HH, Kang JY, Lee SS, Seo M, Silverman EK, Kim JS, Park JS
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-022-13526-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-13526-1)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2022 Jun 16;12(1):10084. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-13526-1.

Cluster analysis categorizes five phenotypes of pulmonary tuberculosis.

Koo HK(#)(1), Min J(#)(2), Kim HW(3), Ko Y(4), Oh JY(5), Jeong YJ(6), Kang 
HH(7), Kang JY(8), Lee SS(1), Seo M(9), Silverman EK(10)(11), Kim JS(12)(13), 
Park JS(14).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Ilsan Paik Hospital, Inje University College of Medicine, Goyang, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Daejeon St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Incheon St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, Dongguk University College of 
Medicine, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
(7)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Ulsan University Hospital, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
(8)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, College of Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(9)Department of Computer Convergence Software, Korea University, Sejong, 
Republic of Korea.
(10)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(11)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Incheon St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea. kimjusang@catholic.ac.kr.
(13)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Incheon St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, 56 Dongsu-ro, Bupyeong-gu, Incheon, 21431, Republic of 
Korea. kimjusang@catholic.ac.kr.
(14)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Dankook 
University College of Medicine, 119 Dandae-ro, Dongnam-gu, Cheonan, 31116, 
Republic of Korea. jspark@dankook.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2023 Jan 25;13(1):1411. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-28621-0.

Tuberculosis (TB) has a heterogeneous phenotype, which makes it challenging to 
diagnose. Our study aimed to identify TB phenotypes through cluster analysis and 
compare their initial symptomatic, microbiological and radiographic 
characteristics. We systemically collected data of notified TB patients notified 
in Korea and constructed a prospective, observational cohort database. Cluster 
analysis was performed using K-means clustering, and the variables to be 
included were determined by correlation network. A total of 4,370 subjects with 
pulmonary TB were enrolled in the study. Based on the correlation network, age 
and body mass index (BMI) were selected for the cluster analysis. Five clusters 
were identified and characterised as follows: (1) middle-aged overweight male 
dominance, (2) young-aged relatively female dominance without comorbidities, (3) 
middle-aged underweight male dominance, (4) overweight elderly with 
comorbidities and (5) underweight elderly with comorbidities. All clusters had 
distinct demographic and symptomatic characteristics. Initial microbiologic 
burdens and radiographic features also varied, including the presence of 
cavities and bilateral infiltration, which reflect TB-related severity. Cluster 
analysis of age and BMI identified five phenotypes of pulmonary TB with 
significant differences at initial clinical presentations. Further studies are 
necessary to validate our results and to assess their clinical implications.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-13526-1
PMCID: PMC9203754
PMID: 35710915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.