---
reference_id: "PMID:30129909"
title: "Report of Non-Lyme, Erythema Migrans Rashes from New Jersey with a Review of Possible Role of Tick Salivary Toxins."
authors:
- Kannangara DW
- Patel P
journal: Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1089/vbz.2018.2278
keywords:
- Animals
- "Erythema Chronicum Migrans/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- New Jersey/epidemiology
- Saliva/chemistry
- Tick Bites/pathology
- "Toxins, Biological/toxicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Report of Non-Lyme, Erythema Migrans Rashes from New Jersey with a Review of Possible Role of Tick Salivary Toxins.
**Authors:** Kannangara DW, Patel P
**Journal:** Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1089/vbz.2018.2278](https://doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2018.2278)

## Content

1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2018 Dec;18(12):641-652. doi:
10.1089/vbz.2018.2278.  Epub 2018 Aug 21.

Report of Non-Lyme, Erythema Migrans Rashes from New Jersey with a Review of 
Possible Role of Tick Salivary Toxins.

Kannangara DW(1), Patel P(1).

Author information:
(1)St Luke's Health NetWork , Warren Campus, Phillipsburg, New Jersey.

Erythema migrans (EM) rashes once considered pathognomonic of Lyme disease (LD) 
have been reported following bites of arthropods that do not transmit LD and in 
areas with no LD. Also, EM rashes have been reported in association with 
organisms other than members of Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato complex. 
Arthropod saliva has chemicals that have effects on the host and pathogen 
transmission. Tick saliva has protein families similar to spiders and scorpions 
and even substances homologous to those found in snakes and other venomous 
animals. Ticks "invertebrate pharmacologists" have a sophisticated arsenal of 
chemicals that assist in blood feeding, pathogen transmission, and suppressing 
host defenses. No organisms have been isolated from many EM rashes. We propose 
that tick salivary toxins may play a role in the causation of rashes and 
laboratory abnormalities in tick-borne diseases. The role of tick salivary 
toxins needs further exploration. Cases of Lyme-like EM rashes referred to as 
STARI (Southern Tick-Associated Rash Illness) following bites of the lone star 
tick, Amblyomma americanum, in the United States have been reported 
predominantly in Southeastern Missouri and a few in South Carolina, North 
Carolina, Georgia, and one case each in Mississippi and Long Island, New York. 
Although there is one report of Borrelia lonestari in a patient with a rash, 
biopsies of 31 cases of STARI, with cultures and PCR, failed to show a 
relationship. Distribution of A. americanum, whose bites are associated with 
STARI, now extends along the East Coast of the United States, including New 
Jersey, up to the Canadian border. As far as we are aware, there have been no 
prior reports of Lyme-like rashes in New Jersey. In this study, we present case 
examples of 2 Lyme-like rashes, variations of EM rashes, and a brief review of 
studies that suggest a role of tick salivary toxins in tick-borne diseases.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2018.2278
PMID: 30129909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]