---
reference_id: "PMID:36028773"
title: Genetics of circadian rhythms and sleep in human health and disease.
authors:
- Lane JM
- Qian J
- Mignot E
- Redline S
- Scheer FAJL
- Saxena R
journal: Nat Rev Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41576-022-00519-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of circadian rhythms and sleep in human health and disease.
**Authors:** Lane JM, Qian J, Mignot E, Redline S, Scheer FAJL, Saxena R
**Journal:** Nat Rev Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41576-022-00519-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-022-00519-z)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Genet. 2023 Jan;24(1):4-20. doi: 10.1038/s41576-022-00519-z. Epub 2022
 Aug 26.

Genetics of circadian rhythms and sleep in human health and disease.

Lane JM(1)(2)(3), Qian J(2), Mignot E(4), Redline S(2), Scheer FAJL(5), Saxena 
R(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of Anaesthesia, Critical Care and 
Pain Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Brigham and Women's Hospital; and 
Division of Sleep Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(4)Center for Narcolepsy, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, USA.
(5)Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Brigham and Women's Hospital; and 
Division of Sleep Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
fscheer@bwh.harvard.edu.
(6)Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of Anaesthesia, Critical Care and 
Pain Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA. rsaxena@mgh.harvard.edu.
(7)Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Brigham and Women's Hospital; and 
Division of Sleep Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
rsaxena@mgh.harvard.edu.
(8)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, 
USA. rsaxena@mgh.harvard.edu.

Circadian rhythms and sleep are fundamental biological processes integral to 
human health. Their disruption is associated with detrimental physiological 
consequences, including cognitive, metabolic, cardiovascular and immunological 
dysfunctions. Yet many of the molecular underpinnings of sleep regulation in 
health and disease have remained elusive. Given the moderate heritability of 
circadian and sleep traits, genetics offers an opportunity that complements 
insights from model organism studies to advance our fundamental molecular 
understanding of human circadian and sleep physiology and linked chronic disease 
biology. Here, we review recent discoveries of the genetics of circadian and 
sleep physiology and disorders with a focus on those that reveal causal 
contributions to complex diseases.

© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41576-022-00519-z
PMCID: PMC10947799
PMID: 36028773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The other authors report no 
competing interests.