---
reference_id: "PMID:26753951"
title: "Fetal exposure to maternal stress and risk for schizophrenia spectrum disorders among offspring: Differential influences of fetal sex."
authors:
- Fineberg AM
- Ellman LM
- Schaefer CA
- Maxwell SD
- Shen L
- Chaudhury NH
- Cook AL
- Bresnahan MA
- Susser ES
- Brown AS
journal: Psychiatry Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.12.026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fetal exposure to maternal stress and risk for schizophrenia spectrum disorders among offspring: Differential influences of fetal sex.
**Authors:** Fineberg AM, Ellman LM, Schaefer CA, Maxwell SD, Shen L, Chaudhury NH, Cook AL, Bresnahan MA, Susser ES, Brown AS
**Journal:** Psychiatry Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psychres.2015.12.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2015.12.026)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Res. 2016 Feb 28;236:91-97. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.12.026.
Epub  2015 Dec 18.

Fetal exposure to maternal stress and risk for schizophrenia spectrum disorders 
among offspring: Differential influences of fetal sex.

Fineberg AM(1), Ellman LM(2), Schaefer CA(3), Maxwell SD(1), Shen L(3), 
Chaudhury NH(4), Cook AL(5), Bresnahan MA(6), Susser ES(6), Brown AS(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
Electronic address: ellman@temple.edu.
(3)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, CA, USA.
(4)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University Mailman School of Public 
Health, New York, NY, USA; New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY, 
USA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA; Department 
of Epidemiology, Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, 
NY, USA; New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY, USA.

Exposure to adverse life events during pregnancy has been linked to increased 
risk of schizophrenia spectrum disorders (SSD) in offspring. Nevertheless, much 
of the previous work inferred maternal stress from severe life events rather 
than directly assessing maternal reports of stress. The present study aimed to 
examine maternal reports of stress during pregnancy and risk for offspring SSD. 
Participants were 95 SSD cases and 206 controls who were offspring from a large 
birth cohort study that followed pregnant women from 1959 to 1966. During 
pregnancy interviews, women were asked if anything worrisome had occurred 
recently. Interviews were qualitatively coded for stress-related themes, 
including reports of daily life stress, by two independent raters. None of the 
maternal psychosocial stress themes were significantly associated with increased 
odds of offspring SSD in analyses of the full sample. However, results indicated 
a significant daily life stress by infant sex interaction. Maternal daily life 
stress during pregnancy was associated with significantly increased odds of SSD 
among male offspring. Findings suggest sex-specific fetal sensitivity to 
maternal reported daily life stress during pregnancy on risk for SSD, with males 
appearing to be more vulnerable to the influences of maternal stress during 
pregnancy.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.12.026
PMCID: PMC4767153
PMID: 26753951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest All authors have declared 
that they have no conflicts of interest and/or financial disclosures to report.