---
reference_id: "PMID:37842880"
title: "Electroclinical features and phenotypic differences in adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: Long-term follow-up of seven patients from four families and appraisal of the literature."
authors:
- Cutillo G
- Masnada S
- Lesca G
- Ville D
- Accorsi P
- Giordano L
- Pichiecchio A
- Valente M
- Borrelli P
- Ferraro OE
- Veggiotti P
journal: Epilepsia Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/epi4.12837
keywords:
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/genetics, chemistry, deficiency"
- Epilepsy
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Autistic Disorder/genetics
- Humans
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Atrophy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Electroclinical features and phenotypic differences in adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: Long-term follow-up of seven patients from four families and appraisal of the literature.
**Authors:** Cutillo G, Masnada S, Lesca G, Ville D, Accorsi P, Giordano L, Pichiecchio A, Valente M, Borrelli P, Ferraro OE, Veggiotti P
**Journal:** Epilepsia Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/epi4.12837](https://doi.org/10.1002/epi4.12837)

## Content

1. Epilepsia Open. 2024 Feb;9(1):106-121. doi: 10.1002/epi4.12837. Epub 2023 Nov
27.

Electroclinical features and phenotypic differences in adenylosuccinate lyase
deficiency: Long-term follow-up of seven patients from four families and
appraisal of the literature.

Cutillo G(1), Masnada S(1), Lesca G(2), Ville D(3), Accorsi P(4), Giordano L(4),
Pichiecchio A(5), Valente M(6), Borrelli P(7), Ferraro OE(8), Veggiotti P(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Pediatric Neurology Unit, Buzzi Children's
Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Genetics, Lyon University Hospitals, Lyon, France.
(3)Derpartment of Pediatric Neurology, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France.
(4)Child Neuropsychiatric Division, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(5)Neuroradiology Department, IRCCS C.Mondino National Neurological Institute,
Pavia, Italy.
(6)Clinical Pathology Unit, Medical Genetics Section, SS. Annunziata Hospital,
Taranto, Italy.
(7)Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, Laboratory of
Biostatistics, University "G. D'Annunzio", Pescara, Italy.
(8)Department of Public Health, Experimental and Forensic Medicine, Unit of
Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(9)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) deficiency is a rare inherited
metabolic disorder with a wide phenotypic presentation, classically grouped into
three types (neonatal, type I, and type II). We aim to better delineate the
pathological spectrum, focusing on the electroclinical characteristics and
phenotypic differences of patients with ADSL deficiency.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Seven patients, from four different families, underwent
serial electroencephalogram (EEG), clinical assessment, and neuroimaging. We
also performed a systematic review of the cases published in the literature,
summarizing the available clinical, neurophysiological, and genetic data.
RESULTS: We report seven previously unreported ADSL deficiency patients with
long-term follow-up (10-34 years). From the literature review, we collected 81
previously reported cases. Of the included patient population, 58 % (51/88) were
classified as having ADSL deficiency type I, 28% (25/88) as having type II, and
14% (12/88) as having neonatal. The most frequently reported pathogenic variants
are p.R426H homozygous (19 patients), p.Y114H in compound heterozygosity (13
patients), and p.D430N homozygous (6 patients). In the majority (89.2%), disease
onset was within the first year of life. Epilepsy is present in 81.8% of the
patients, with polymorphic and often intractable seizures. EEG features seem to
display common patterns and developmental trajectories: (i) poor general
background organization with theta-delta activity; (ii) hypsarrhythmia with
spasms, usually adrenocorticotropic hormone-responsive; (iii) generalized
epileptic discharges with frontal or frontal temporal predominance; and (iv)
epileptic discharge activation in sleep with an altered sleep structure. Imaging
features present consistent findings of cerebral atrophy with frontal
predominance, cerebellar atrophy, and white matter abnormalities among the three
types.
SIGNIFICANCE: ADSL deficiency presents variable phenotypic expression, whose
severity could be partially attributed to residual activity of the mutant
protein. Although a precise phenotype-genotype correlation was not yet feasible,
we delineated a common pattern of clinical, neuroradiological, and
neurophysiological features.

© 2023 The Authors. Epilepsia Open published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf
of International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1002/epi4.12837
PMCID: PMC10839293
PMID: 37842880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no disclosures related to the
present work.
