---
reference_id: "PMID:30941742"
title: "Consensus recommendations for diagnosis, management and treatment of Fabry disease in paediatric patients."
authors:
- Germain DP
- Fouilhoux A
- Decramer S
- Tardieu M
- Pillet P
- Fila M
- Rivera S
- Deschênes G
- Lacombe D
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13546
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consensus recommendations for diagnosis, management and treatment of Fabry disease in paediatric patients.
**Authors:** Germain DP, Fouilhoux A, Decramer S, Tardieu M, Pillet P, Fila M, Rivera S, Deschênes G, Lacombe D
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13546](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13546)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2019 Aug;96(2):107-117. doi: 10.1111/cge.13546. Epub 2019 Jun 6.

Consensus recommendations for diagnosis, management and treatment of Fabry 
disease in paediatric patients.

Germain DP(1), Fouilhoux A(2), Decramer S(3), Tardieu M(4), Pillet P(5), Fila 
M(6), Rivera S(7), Deschênes G(8), Lacombe D(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Versailles, Montigny, France.
(2)Metabolic Diseases Unit, HFME University Hospital Lyon, Lyon, France.
(3)Paediatric Department, Inserm U1048, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, 
France.
(4)Paediatric Department, Tours University Hospital, Toulouse, France.
(5)Paediatric Department, Bordeaux University Hospital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, 
France.
(6)Department of Paediatric Nephrology-Montpellier University, Arnaud de 
Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, France.
(7)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Bayonne Hospital, Bayonne, France.
(8)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Paris University Hospital Robert Debré, 
Paris, France.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, CHU Bordeaux INSERM U1211, Université de 
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

Fabry disease (FD), a rare X-linked disease, can be treated with bi-monthly 
infusion of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) to replace deficient 
α-galactosidase A (AGAL-A). ERT reduces symptoms, improves quality of life 
(QoL), and improves clinical signs and biochemical markers. ERT initiation in 
childhood could slow or stop progressive organ damage. Preventative treatment of 
FD from childhood is thought to avoid organ damage in later life, prompting a 
French expert working group to collaborate and produce recommendations for 
treating and monitoring children with FD. Organ involvement should be assessed 
by age 5 for asymptomatic boys (age 12-15 for asymptomatic girls), and 
immediately for children diagnosed via symptoms. The renal, cardiac, nervous and 
gastrointestinal systems should be assessed, as well as bone, skin, eyes, 
hearing, and QoL. The plasma biomarker globotriaosylsphingosine is also useful. 
ERT should be considered for symptomatic boys and girls with neuropathic pain, 
pathological albuminuria (≥3 mg/mmol creatinine), severe GI involvement and 
abdominal pain or cardiac involvement. ERT should be considered for asymptomatic 
boys from the age of 7. Organ involvement should be treated as needed. Early 
diagnosis and management of FD represents a promising strategy to reduce organ 
damage, morbidity and premature mortality in adulthood.

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons A/S. 
Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13546
PMCID: PMC6852597
PMID: 30941742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.P.G. is a consultant for Amicus, 
Sanofi‐Genzyme and Shire. He has received speaker's honoraria from Amicus, 
Sanofi‐Genzyme and Shire. A.F. has received speaker's and consultation honoraria 
from Amicus Therapeutics, Biomarin and Sanofi‐Genzyme. S.D. has received 
speaker's honoraria from Sanofi‐Genzyme, Shire and Amicus. M.T. received travel 
grants and speaker's honoraria from Sanofi‐Genzyme. P.P. received consultant 
honoraria from Sanofi‐Genzyme. M.F. received travel grants from Genzyme, Shire 
and Alexion. S.R. reports no conflict of interest. G.D. has received travel 
grants and inscription fees from Sanofi‐Genzyme and Alexion Pharma France. D.L. 
is a consultant for Sanofi‐Genzyme and has received travel grants and speaker's 
honoraria from Amicus, Biomarin, Shire and Sanofi‐Genzyme.