---
reference_id: "PMID:25361846"
title: "Cutaneous vasculitis in patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: report of a case and brief review of the literature."
authors:
- Improda N
- Capalbo D
- Cirillo E
- Cerbone M
- Esposito A
- Pignata C
- Salerno M
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-14-272
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/complications, diagnosis"
- "Skin Diseases, Vascular/complications"
- Vasculitis/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous vasculitis in patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: report of a case and brief review of the literature.
**Authors:** Improda N, Capalbo D, Cirillo E, Cerbone M, Esposito A, Pignata C, Salerno M
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2431-14-272](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2431-14-272)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2014 Nov 1;14:272. doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-14-272.

Cutaneous vasculitis in patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: 
report of a case and brief review of the literature.

Improda N, Capalbo D, Cirillo E, Cerbone M, Esposito A, Pignata C, Salerno M(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Traslational Medical Sciences, 
"Federico II" University of Naples, Naples, Italy. salerno@unina.it.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1, also known as autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal-dystrophy, is a rare autosomal 
recessive disease due to pathogenic variants in the AIRE gene. Classic features 
of the syndrome are mucocutaneous candidiasis, chronic idiopathic 
hypoparathyroidism and Addison disease. However, other endocrine and 
non-endocrine components, may occur with a different prevalence. In addition to 
ectodermal features, which are quite common features of the disease, APS 1 
patients may experience other types of skin alterations, such as vasculitic skin 
rash. An early diagnosis of APS 1 can be very challenging, due to the high 
clinical heterogeneity, and a considerable delay may occur between the 
appearance of symptoms and the diagnosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report on a girl affected by APS 1 who presented with 
cutaneous vasculitis when she was seven-months old, some years before the onset 
of the common components of the disease.
CONCLUSION: Clinical picture of APS 1 may be characterized by isolated rare or 
atypical autoimmune or immune-mediated manifestations, even years before the 
onset of the classic components of the disease. Among these uncommon features, 
skin rashes of variable form and duration may occur, most of them being 
associated with histopathological features of vasculitis. Our case suggests that 
cutaneous vasculitis may represent a first sign of APS 1. The clinical 
significance of cutaneous vasculitis in the context of APS 1 is still debated. 
It may represent a rare, unusual, early component of the disease or a clinical 
manifestation secondarily related to the typical APS 1 components (i.e. 
autoimmune thyroid disease), which are frequently associated with 
rheumatologic-like signs and symptoms. Alternatively, it may be the expression 
of an independent disease co-occuring with APS 1. In conclusion, our case 
suggests that children presenting with unexplained vasculitic skin rash should 
be followed-up in order to early identify APS 1.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2431-14-272
PMCID: PMC4286916
PMID: 25361846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]