---
reference_id: "PMID:11263545"
title: Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency human genome epidemiology review.
authors:
- Wang SS
- Fernhoff PM
- Hannon WH
- Khoury MJ
journal: Genet Med
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1097/00125817-199911000-00004
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Death, Sudden"
- Genetic Testing
- Genome
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Molecular Epidemiology
- Population Surveillance
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency human genome epidemiology review.
**Authors:** Wang SS, Fernhoff PM, Hannon WH, Khoury MJ
**Journal:** Genet Med (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00125817-199911000-00004](https://doi.org/10.1097/00125817-199911000-00004)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 1999 Nov-Dec;1(7):332-9. doi: 10.1097/00125817-199911000-00004.

Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency human genome epidemiology review.

Wang SS(1), Fernhoff PM, Hannon WH, Khoury MJ.

Author information:
(1)Epidemic Intelligence Service, Division of Applied Public Health Training,
Epidemiology Program Office, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) is a tetrameric flavoprotein
essential for the beta-oxidation of medium chain fatty acids. MCAD deficiency
(MCADD) is an inherited error of fatty acid metabolism. The gene for MCAD is
located on chromosome one (1p31). One variant of the MCAD gene, G985A, a point
mutation causing a change from lysine to glutamate at position 304 (K304E) in
the mature MCAD protein, has been found in 90% of the alleles in MCADD patients
identified retrospectively. There is a high frequency of MCADD among people of
Northern European descent, which is believed to be due to a founder effect.
MCADD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Of patients clinically
diagnosed with MCADD, 81% who have been identified retrospectively are
homozygous for K304E, and 18% are compound heterozygotes for K304E. Clinical
data on the probability of clinical disease indicates that MCADD patients are at
risk for the following outcomes: hypoglycemia, vomiting, lethargy,
encephalopathy, respiratory arrest, hepatomegaly, seizures, apnea, cardiac
arrest, coma, and sudden and unexpected death. Long-term outcomes include
developmental and behavioral disability, chronic muscle weakness, failure to
thrive, cerebral palsy, and attention deficit disorder (ADD). Differences in
clinical disease specific to allelic variants have not been documented. Factors
that may increase risk for disease onset or modify disease severity are age when
the first episode occurred, fasting, and presence of infection. Acute attacks
must be treated immediately with appropriate intravenous doses of glucose. For
those diagnosed, long-term management of the disease includes preventing stress
caused by fasting and maintaining a high-carbohydrate, reduced-fat diet, and
carnitine supplementation. Hospitalization costs attributable to morbidity and
mortality from MCADD are unknown; MCADD is not a diagnosis in the International
Classification of Disease, 10th Revision (ICD-10) codebook. Furthermore, the
penetrance of the MCAD genotypes is unknown; there appears to be a substantial
number of asymptomatic MCADD individuals and some uncertainty regarding which
individuals will manifest symptoms and which individuals will remain
asymptomatic. Several technologies are available to detect MCADD. Diagnostic
technologies include DNA-based tests for K304E mutations using the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), and the detection of abnormal metabolites in urine.
Screening technologies include tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), which detects
abnormal metabolites mostly in blood. State programs are beginning to offer
screening in newborns for MCADD using MS/MS. In addition, a private company
currently offers voluntary supplemental newborn screening for MCADD to birthing
centers.

DOI: 10.1097/00125817-199911000-00004
PMID: 11263545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
