---
reference_id: "PMID:37859440"
title: Clinical Advances in Treatment Strategies for Obsessive-compulsive Disorder in Adults.
authors:
- Roh D
- Jang KW
- Kim CH
journal: Clin Psychopharmacol Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.9758/cpn.23.1075
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Advances in Treatment Strategies for Obsessive-compulsive Disorder in Adults.
**Authors:** Roh D, Jang KW, Kim CH
**Journal:** Clin Psychopharmacol Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.9758/cpn.23.1075](https://doi.org/10.9758/cpn.23.1075)

## Content

1. Clin Psychopharmacol Neurosci. 2023 Nov 30;21(4):676-685. doi: 
10.9758/cpn.23.1075. Epub 2023 Jul 17.

Clinical Advances in Treatment Strategies for Obsessive-compulsive Disorder in 
Adults.

Roh D(1)(2), Jang KW(2), Kim CH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Hallym University College of Medicine, Chuncheon, 
Korea.
(2)Mind-Neuromodulation Laboratory, Hallym University College of Medicine, 
Chuncheon, Korea.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Institute of Behavioural Science in Medicine, 
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

In the present article, we provide a comprehensive review of the treatment 
strategies for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a common, chronic, and often 
debilitating disorder, characterized by overwhelming obsessions and compulsions. 
OCD typically starts in childhood or adolescence and persists throughout life, 
causing functional impairment across multiple domains. The article begins by 
describing the historical concepts of OCD from religious and guilt-based 
explanations to psychoanalytic perspectives, and then explores the changing 
understanding of OCD as a treatable condition. Recent advances include the 
development of evidence-based psychological treatments, such as exposure and 
response prevention, and pharmacological treatments, such as selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors. The latest version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, and the International Classification of Diseases, has 
removed OCD from the anxiety disorder grouping and regrouped it into 
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. We conclude by highlighting the 
current state of knowledge and development in the clinical management of OCD, 
including recommendations for first- and second-line treatments, alternative, or 
augmentative strategies for and novel agents under investigation for OCD. In 
future, the latest advances in neuroimaging, electrophysiology, digital 
technology, and data-driven analysis will help elucidate the pathophysiology of 
OCD and develop personalized intervention strategies.

DOI: 10.9758/cpn.23.1075
PMCID: PMC10591165
PMID: 37859440

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.