---
reference_id: "PMID:34698275"
title: "Mediterranean Spotted Fever: Current Knowledge and Recent Advances."
authors:
- Spernovasilis N
- Markaki I
- Papadakis M
- Mazonakis N
- Ierodiakonou D
journal: Trop Med Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/tropicalmed6040172
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mediterranean Spotted Fever: Current Knowledge and Recent Advances.
**Authors:** Spernovasilis N, Markaki I, Papadakis M, Mazonakis N, Ierodiakonou D
**Journal:** Trop Med Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/tropicalmed6040172](https://doi.org/10.3390/tropicalmed6040172)

## Content

1. Trop Med Infect Dis. 2021 Sep 24;6(4):172. doi: 10.3390/tropicalmed6040172.

Mediterranean Spotted Fever: Current Knowledge and Recent Advances.

Spernovasilis N(1), Markaki I(2), Papadakis M(1), Mazonakis N(1), Ierodiakonou
D(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of Crete, 71003 Heraklion, Greece.
(2)"Trifyllio" General Hospital of Kythira, 80200 Kythira, Greece.
(3)Department of Social Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Crete, 71003
Heraklion, Greece.
(4)Department of Primary Care and Population Health, University of Nicosia
Medical School, Nicosia 2417, Cyprus.

Mediterranean spotted fever (MSF) is an emerging tick-borne rickettsiosis of the
spotted fever group (SFG), endemic in the Mediterranean basin. By virtue of
technological innovations in molecular genetics, it has been determined that the
causative agent of MSF is Rickettsia conorii subspecies conorii. The arthropod
vector of this bacterium is the brown dog tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus. The
true nature of the reservoir of R. conorii conorii has not been completely
deciphered yet, although many authors theorize that the canine population, other
mammals, and the ticks themselves could potentially contribute as reservoirs.
Typical symptoms of MSF include fever, maculopapular rash, and a characteristic
eschar ("tache noire"). Atypical clinical features and severe multi-organ
complications may also be present. All of these manifestations arise from the
disseminated infection of the endothelium by R. conorii conorii. Several methods
exist for the diagnosis of MSF. Serological tests are widely used and molecular
techniques have become increasingly available. Doxycycline remains the treatment
of choice, while preventive measures are focused on modification of human
behavior and vector control strategies. The purpose of this review is to
summarize the current knowledge on the epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical
features, diagnosis, and treatment of MSF.

DOI: 10.3390/tropicalmed6040172
PMCID: PMC8544691
PMID: 34698275

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
