---
reference_id: "PMID:38709228"
title: Gene Editing for CEP290-Associated Retinal Degeneration.
authors:
- Pierce EA
- Aleman TS
- Jayasundera KT
- Ashimatey BS
- Kim K
- Rashid A
- Jaskolka MC
- Myers RL
- Lam BL
- Bailey ST
- Comander JI
- Lauer AK
- Maguire AM
- Pennesi ME
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2309915
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics
- Gene Editing
- Genetic Therapy/adverse effects
- "Injections, Intraocular"
- Quality of Life
- Retina
- "Retinal Degeneration/therapy, genetics"
- Visual Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene Editing for CEP290-Associated Retinal Degeneration.
**Authors:** Pierce EA, Aleman TS, Jayasundera KT, Ashimatey BS, Kim K, Rashid A, Jaskolka MC, Myers RL, Lam BL, Bailey ST, Comander JI, Lauer AK, Maguire AM, Pennesi ME
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2309915](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2309915)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2024 Jun 6;390(21):1972-1984. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2309915. Epub 
2024 May 6.

Gene Editing for CEP290-Associated Retinal Degeneration.

Pierce EA(1), Aleman TS(1), Jayasundera KT(1), Ashimatey BS(1), Kim K(1), Rashid 
A(1), Jaskolka MC(1), Myers RL(1), Lam BL(1), Bailey ST(1), Comander JI(1), 
Lauer AK(1), Maguire AM(1), Pennesi ME(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Ocular Genomics Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Mass Eye and 
Ear and Harvard Medical School, Boston (E.A.P., J.I.C.), and Editas Medicine, 
Cambridge (B.S.A., K.K., A.R., M.C.J., R.L.M.) - both in Massachusetts; the 
Scheie Eye Institute and the Division of Ophthalmology of the Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Ophthalmology, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (T.S.A., A.M.M.); the 
University of Michigan Kellogg Eye Center, Ann Arbor (K.T.J.); the Bascom Palmer 
Eye Institute, University of Miami, Miami (B.L.L.); and the Casey Eye Institute, 
Oregon Health and Science University, Portland (S.T.B., A.K.L., M.E.P.).

BACKGROUND: CEP290-associated inherited retinal degeneration causes severe 
early-onset vision loss due to pathogenic variants in CEP290. EDIT-101 is a 
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
(CRISPR)-CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) gene-editing complex designed to 
treat inherited retinal degeneration caused by a specific damaging variant in 
intron 26 of CEP290 (IVS26 variant).
METHODS: We performed a phase 1-2, open-label, single-ascending-dose study in 
which persons 3 years of age or older with CEP290-associated inherited retinal 
degeneration caused by a homozygous or compound heterozygous IVS26 variant 
received a subretinal injection of EDIT-101 in the worse (study) eye. The 
primary outcome was safety, which included adverse events and dose-limiting 
toxic effects. Key secondary efficacy outcomes were the change from baseline in 
the best corrected visual acuity, the retinal sensitivity detected with the use 
of full-field stimulus testing (FST), the score on the Ora-Visual Navigation 
Challenge mobility test, and the vision-related quality-of-life score on the 
National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire-25 (in adults) or the 
Children's Visual Function Questionnaire (in children).
RESULTS: EDIT-101 was injected in 12 adults 17 to 63 years of age (median, 37 
years) at a low dose (in 2 participants), an intermediate dose (in 5), or a high 
dose (in 5) and in 2 children 9 and 14 years of age at the intermediate dose. At 
baseline, the median best corrected visual acuity in the study eye was 2.4 log10 
of the minimum angle of resolution (range, 3.9 to 0.6). No serious adverse 
events related to the treatment or procedure and no dose-limiting toxic effects 
were recorded. Six participants had a meaningful improvement from baseline in 
cone-mediated vision as assessed with the use of FST, of whom 5 had improvement 
in at least one other key secondary outcome. Nine participants (64%) had a 
meaningful improvement from baseline in the best corrected visual acuity, the 
sensitivity to red light as measured with FST, or the score on the mobility 
test. Six participants had a meaningful improvement from baseline in the 
vision-related quality-of-life score.
CONCLUSIONS: The safety profile and improvements in photoreceptor function after 
EDIT-101 treatment in this small phase 1-2 study support further research of in 
vivo CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing to treat inherited retinal degenerations due to 
the IVS26 variant of CEP290 and other genetic causes. (Funded by Editas Medicine 
and others; BRILLIANCE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03872479.).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2309915
PMCID: PMC11389875
PMID: 38709228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]