---
reference_id: "PMID:11549879"
title: Immunopathogenesis of dengue virus infection.
authors:
- Lei HY
- Yeh TM
- Liu HS
- Lin YS
- Chen SH
- Liu CC
journal: J Biomed Sci
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1007/BF02255946
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunopathogenesis of dengue virus infection.
**Authors:** Lei HY, Yeh TM, Liu HS, Lin YS, Chen SH, Liu CC
**Journal:** J Biomed Sci (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02255946](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02255946)

## Content

1. J Biomed Sci. 2001 Sep;8(5):377-88. doi: 10.1007/BF02255946.

Immunopathogenesis of dengue virus infection.

Lei HY(1), Yeh TM, Liu HS, Lin YS, Chen SH, Liu CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National 
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, ROC. hylei@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Dengue virus infection causes dengue fever (DF), dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF), 
and dengue shock syndrome (DSS), whose pathogeneses are not clearly understood. 
Current hypotheses of antibody-dependent enhancement, virus virulence, and 
IFN-gamma/TNFalpha-mediated immunopathogenesis are insufficient to explain 
clinical manifestations of DHF/DSS such as thrombocytopenia and 
hemoconcentration. Dengue virus infection induces transient immune aberrant 
activation of CD4/CD8 ratio inversion and cytokine overproduction, and infection 
of endothelial cells and hepatocytes causes apoptosis and dysfunction of these 
cells. The coagulation and fibrinolysis systems are also activated after dengue 
virus infection. We propose a new hypothesis for the immunopathogenesis for 
dengue virus infection. The aberrant immune responses not only impair the immune 
response to clear the virus, but also result in overproduction of cytokines that 
affect monocytes, endothelial cells, and hepatocytes. Platelets are destroyed by 
crossreactive anti-platelet autoantibodies. Dengue-virus-induced vasculopathy 
and coagulopathy must be involved in the pathogenesis of hemorrhage, and the 
unbalance between coagulation and fibrinolysis activation increases the 
likelihood of severe hemorrhage in DHF/DSS. Hemostasis is maintained unless the 
dysregulation of coagulation and fibrinolysis persists. The overproduced IL-6 
might play a crucial role in the enhanced production of anti-platelet or 
anti-endothelial cell autoantibodies, elevated levels of tPA, as well as a 
deficiency in coagulation. Capillary leakage is triggered by the dengue virus 
itself or by antibodies to its antigens. This immunopathogenesis of DHF/DSS can 
account for specific characteristics of clinical, pathologic, and 
epidemiological observations in dengue virus infection.

Copyright 2001 National Science Council, ROC and S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1007/BF02255946
PMID: 11549879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]