---
reference_id: "PMID:18974556"
title: Myotonic disorders.
authors:
- Mankodi A
journal: Neurol India
year: '2008'
doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.43448
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myotonic disorders.
**Authors:** Mankodi A
**Journal:** Neurol India (2008)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0028-3886.43448](https://doi.org/10.4103/0028-3886.43448)

## Content

1. Neurol India. 2008 Jul-Sep;56(3):298-304. doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.43448.

Myotonic disorders.

Mankodi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. 
amankod1@jhmi.edu

Myotonia reflects a state of muscle fiber hyperexcitability. Impaired 
transmembrane conductance of either chloride or sodium ions results in myotonia. 
Myotonic disorders include the myotonic dystrophies and nondystrophic myotonias. 
Mutations in the genes encoding chloride (ClC-1) or sodium (SCN4A) channels 
expressed exclusively in skeletal muscle cause nondystrophic myotonias. Genetic 
defects in the myotonic dystrophies do not involve ion channel or its regulator 
proteins. Recent research supports a novel RNA-mediated disease mechanism of 
myotonia in the myotonic dystrophies. Myotonic dystrophy Type 1 is caused by CTG 
repeat expansion in the 3' untranslated region in the Dystrophia Myotonica 
Protein Kinase (DMPK) gene. Myotonic dystrophy Type 2 is caused by CCTG repeat 
expansion in the first intron in Zinc Finger Protein 9 (ZNF9) gene. The expanded 
repeat is transcribed in RNA and forms discrete inclusions in nucleus in both 
types of myotonic dystrophies. Mutant RNA sequesters MBNL1, a splice regulator 
protein and depletes MBNL1 from the nucleoplasm. Loss of MBNL1 results in 
altered splicing of ClC-1 mRNA. Altered splice products do not encode functional 
ClC-1 protein. Subsequent loss of chloride conductance in muscle membrane causes 
myotonia in the myotonic dystrophies. The purpose of this review is to discuss 
the clinical presentation, recent advances in understanding the disease 
mechanism with particular emphasis on myotonic dystrophies and potential therapy 
options in myotonic disorders.

DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.43448
PMID: 18974556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]