---
reference_id: "PMID:40790123"
title: Immunologic profiling of the infant immune response to whole-cell and acellular pertussis vaccines.
authors:
- Creech CB
- Leguia M
- Goll JB
- Howard LM
- Vila-Sanjurjo A
- Yoder S
- Juarez D
- Garcia-Glaessner A
- Gelber CE
- Jimenez-Truque N
- Cherikh S
- Gil AI
- Crowe JE
- Cotos RC
- Edwards KM
- Lanata CF
journal: NPJ Vaccines
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41541-025-01170-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunologic profiling of the infant immune response to whole-cell and acellular pertussis vaccines.
**Authors:** Creech CB, Leguia M, Goll JB, Howard LM, Vila-Sanjurjo A, Yoder S, Juarez D, Garcia-Glaessner A, Gelber CE, Jimenez-Truque N, Cherikh S, Gil AI, Crowe JE, Cotos RC, Edwards KM, Lanata CF
**Journal:** NPJ Vaccines (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41541-025-01170-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-025-01170-5)

## Content

1. NPJ Vaccines. 2025 Aug 11;10(1):189. doi: 10.1038/s41541-025-01170-5.

Immunologic profiling of the infant immune response to whole-cell and acellular 
pertussis vaccines.

Creech CB(1), Leguia M(2), Goll JB(3), Howard LM(4), Vila-Sanjurjo A(5), Yoder 
S(4), Juarez D(2), Garcia-Glaessner A(2), Gelber CE(3), Jimenez-Truque N(3), 
Cherikh S(3), Gil AI(6), Crowe JE(7), Cotos RC(6), Edwards KM(4), Lanata CF(6).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Vaccine Research Program, Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. buddy.creech@vumc.org.
(2)Genomics Laboratory, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú (PUCP), Lima, 
Peru.
(3)Department of Biomedical Data Science and Bioinformatics, The Emmes Company, 
LLC, Rockville, MD, USA.
(4)Vanderbilt Vaccine Research Program, Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(5)CICA - Centro Interdisciplinar de Química e Bioloxía, Departamento de 
Bioloxía, Facultade de Ciencias, Universidade da Coruña, A Coruña, Spain.
(6)Instituto de Investigación Nutricional, Lima, Peru.
(7)Vanderbilt Center for Antibody Therapeutics, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

Despite robust antibody responses, immunity induced by acellular pertussis 
vaccine (DTaP) wanes over time and risk of pertussis seems to be lower in 
children who receive whole-cell vaccine (DTP) as their first dose. To 
interrogate the early immunologic response to pertussis vaccine, we enrolled 56 
healthy infants who received either DTP or DTaP at 2-, 4-, 6-, and 18-months of 
age. RNA-sequencing and ribosome profiling of PBMC were performed prior to 
vaccination (Day 1) and on either Day 2 or Day 8. Pathway enrichment analysis on 
Days 2 and 8 showed enrichment of TLR-signaling and FcϒR-mediated phagocytosis 
among DTP recipients. DTP also led to increases in IRAK-4 and IL-1ß. After 
booster vaccination, a higher frequency of PT-specific B-cells was observed in 
DTP- vs. DTaP recipients. These data provide insights into the early immunologic 
responses to pertussis vaccine and may guide next-generation pertussis vaccine 
development.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41541-025-01170-5
PMCID: PMC12340008
PMID: 40790123

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors (except C.B.C., 
J.E.C., C.F.L. and K.M.E.) declare no financial or non-financial competing 
interests and no conflicts of interest related to the published work. C.B.C. 
received funding from Moderna, NIH, and CDC and is a consultant to TDCowen, 
Guidepoint Global, GSK, Sanofi, Merck, and Delbiopharm. He also serves as a 
member of Data and Safety Monitoring Boards for GSK and Bavarian Nordic and 
receives royalties from UpToDate. J.E.C. is a former member of the Scientific 
Advisory Boards of Gigagen (Grifols) and BTG International, has consulted for 
Moderna, is founder of IDBiologics and receives royalties from UpToDate. The 
laboratory of J.E.C. received unrelated sponsored research agreements from 
IDBiologics during the conduct of the study. Vanderbilt University has applied 
for a patent from unrelated work covering human monoclonal antibodies for 
pertussis. C.F.L. has funding from and is a consultant to HilleVax. He is also a 
member of a Data and Safety Monitoring Board of Merck. K.M.E. has funding from 
NIH and CDC and is a consultant for Bionet, Dynavax and IBM. She is also a 
member of the Data and Safety Monitoring Boards of Sanofi, X-4 Pharma, Seqirus, 
Moderna, Pfizer, Merck, Roche, Novavax, and Brighton Collaboration.