---
reference_id: "PMID:11961443"
title: "Surgical treatment of scoliosis in Marfan syndrome: guidelines for a successful outcome."
authors:
- Lipton GE
- Guille JT
- Kumar SJ
journal: J Pediatr Orthop
year: '2002'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical treatment of scoliosis in Marfan syndrome: guidelines for a successful outcome.
**Authors:** Lipton GE, Guille JT, Kumar SJ
**Journal:** J Pediatr Orthop (2002)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Orthop. 2002 May-Jun;22(3):302-7.

Surgical treatment of scoliosis in Marfan syndrome: guidelines for a successful 
outcome.

Lipton GE(1), Guille JT, Kumar SJ.

Author information:
(1)Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware 19899, USA.

Twenty-three patients with Marfan syndrome who had a posterior spinal 
arthrodesis, with or without instrumentation, autogenous iliac crest bone graft, 
and postoperative immobilization were retrospectively reviewed to formulate 
guidelines for the treatment of scoliosis. Patients in group 1 (7 patients) had 
both the primary and secondary curves arthrodesed, whereas patients in group 2 
(16 patients) underwent selective arthrodesis of the entire primary and a 
partial arthrodesis of the secondary curves. Thirteen patients had triple 
curves, nine had double curves, and one patient had a single curve. At the time 
of follow-up all patients in group 1 had minimal or no progression of their 
curves, whereas 5 patients in group 2 had minimal or no progression and 11 had 
marked progression of at least one curve. There were no pseudarthroses or 
hardware failures. The authors recommend arthrodesing both the primary and 
secondary curves in all patients with Marfan syndrome.

PMID: 11961443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]