---
reference_id: "PMID:29682912"
title: "Diabetic macular oedema: under-represented in the genetic analysis of diabetic retinopathy."
authors:
- Broadgate S
- Kiire C
- Halford S
- Chong V
journal: Acta Ophthalmol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/aos.13678
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetic macular oedema: under-represented in the genetic analysis of diabetic retinopathy.
**Authors:** Broadgate S, Kiire C, Halford S, Chong V
**Journal:** Acta Ophthalmol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aos.13678](https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.13678)

## Content

1. Acta Ophthalmol. 2018 Apr;96 Suppl A111:1-51. doi: 10.1111/aos.13678.

Diabetic macular oedema: under-represented in the genetic analysis of diabetic 
retinopathy.

Broadgate S(1), Kiire C(1)(2), Halford S(1), Chong V(1).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Oxford Eye Hospital, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University NHS 
Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK.

Diabetic retinopathy, a complication of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, is a 
complex disease and is one of the leading causes of blindness in adults 
worldwide. It can be divided into distinct subclasses, one of which is diabetic 
macular oedema. Diabetic macular oedema can occur at any time in diabetic 
retinopathy and is the most common cause of vision loss in patients with type 2 
diabetes. The purpose of this review is to summarize the large number of genetic 
association studies that have been performed in cohorts of patients with type 2 
diabetes and published in English-language journals up to February 2017. Many of 
these studies have produced positive associations with gene polymorphisms and 
diabetic retinopathy. However, this review highlights that within this large 
body of work, studies specifically addressing a genetic association with 
diabetic macular oedema, although present, are vastly under-represented. We also 
highlight that many of the studies have small patient numbers and that 
meta-analyses often inappropriately combine patient data sets. We conclude that 
there will continue to be conflicting results and no meaningful findings will be 
achieved if the historical approach of combining all diabetic retinopathy 
disease states within patient cohorts continues in future studies. This review 
also identifies several genes that would be interesting to analyse in large, 
well-defined cohorts of patients with diabetic macular oedema in future 
candidate gene association studies.

© 2018 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation. Published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/aos.13678
PMID: 29682912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]