---
reference_id: "PMID:19026465"
title: "Epidermolysis bullosa and the risk of life-threatening cancers: the National EB Registry experience, 1986-2006."
authors:
- Fine JD
- Johnson LB
- Weiner M
- Li KP
- Suchindran C
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2008.09.035
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- Basal Cell Carcinoma/mortality
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/mortality"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Epidermolysis Bullosa/mortality
- Humans
- Melanoma/mortality
- Middle Aged
- "Registries/statistics & numerical data"
- Risk Factors
- Skin Neoplasms/mortality
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidermolysis bullosa and the risk of life-threatening cancers: the National EB Registry experience, 1986-2006.
**Authors:** Fine JD, Johnson LB, Weiner M, Li KP, Suchindran C
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2008.09.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2008.09.035)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009 Feb;60(2):203-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2008.09.035.
Epub  2008 Nov 20.

Epidermolysis bullosa and the risk of life-threatening cancers: the National EB 
Registry experience, 1986-2006.

Fine JD(1), Johnson LB, Weiner M, Li KP, Suchindran C.

Author information:
(1)National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. 
Jo-David.Fine@vanderbilt.edu

BACKGROUND: Case series have demonstrated that potentially lethal cutaneous 
squamous cell carcinomas arise in patients with recessive dystrophic 
epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), although the magnitude of this risk is undefined.
METHODS: Systematic case finding and data collection were performed throughout 
the continental United States (1986-2002) by the National EB Registry on 3280 EB 
patients to determine cumulative and conditional risks for squamous cell 
carcinoma (SCC), basal cell carcinoma (BCC), and malignant melanoma (MM) within 
each major EB subtype, as well as the cumulative risk of death from each tumor. 
Study design was cross-sectional, with a nested randomly sampled longitudinal 
subcohort (N = 450).
RESULTS: SCCs arose primarily in RDEB, especially the Hallopeau-Siemens subtype 
(RDEB-HS), first beginning in adolescence. Less frequently, SCCs occurred in 
junctional EB (JEB). Cumulative risks rose steeply in RDEB-HS, from 7.5% by age 
20 to 67.8%, 80.2%, and 90.1% by ages 35, 45, and 55, respectively. In Herlitz 
JEB, the risk was 18.2% by age 25. SCC deaths occurred only in RDEB, with 
cumulative risks in RDEB-HS of 38.7%, 70.0%, and 78.7% by ages 35, 45, and 55, 
respectively. MM arose in RDEB-HS, with a cumulative risk of 2.5% by age 12. 
BCCs arose almost exclusively in the most severe EB simplex subtype 
(Dowling-Meara) (cumulative risk = 43.6% by age 55).
LIMITATIONS: Mutational analyses were performed on only a minority of enrollees 
in the National EB Registry, preventing evaluation of the possible influence of 
specific genotypes on the risk of developing or dying from cutaneous SCCs.
CONCLUSIONS: SCC is the most serious complication of EB within adults, 
especially those with RDEB-HS. By mid-adulthood, nearly all will have had at 
least one SCC, and nearly 80% will have died of metastatic SCC despite 
aggressive surgical resection. When compared with SCCs arising within the normal 
population, the remarkably high risk of occurrence of and then death from SCCs 
among RDEB patients suggests likely differences in pathogenesis. Additional 
studies of EB-derived tumors and SCC cell lines may not only provide new 
insights into the mechanisms of carcinogenesis but also means whereby these 
particular tumors may be prevented or more effectively treated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2008.09.035
PMID: 19026465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]