---
reference_id: "PMID:36111785"
title: 7-Dehydrocholesterol-derived oxysterols cause neurogenic defects in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.
authors:
- Tomita H
- Hines KM
- Herron JM
- Li A
- Baggett DW
- Xu L
journal: Elife
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.67141
keywords:
- Animals
- Antioxidants
- Cholesterol
- Dehydrocholesterols
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mice
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases
- Neurogenesis
- Oxidoreductases
- Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors/genetics
- Oxysterols/therapeutic use
- "Receptors, Glucocorticoid"
- "Receptors, Nerve Growth Factor"
- "Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 7-Dehydrocholesterol-derived oxysterols cause neurogenic defects in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.
**Authors:** Tomita H, Hines KM, Herron JM, Li A, Baggett DW, Xu L
**Journal:** Elife (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.67141](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.67141)

## Content

1. Elife. 2022 Sep 16;11:e67141. doi: 10.7554/eLife.67141.

7-Dehydrocholesterol-derived oxysterols cause neurogenic defects in
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.

Tomita H(1), Hines KM(1), Herron JM(1), Li A(1), Baggett DW(1), Xu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, United
States.

Defective 3β-hydroxysterol-Δ7 -reductase (DHCR7) in the developmental disorder,
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS), results in a deficiency in cholesterol and
accumulation of its precursor, 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC). Here, we show that
loss of DHCR7 causes accumulation of 7-DHC-derived oxysterol metabolites,
premature neurogenesis from murine or human cortical neural precursors, and
depletion of the cortical precursor pool, both in vitro and in vivo. We found
that a major oxysterol, 3β,5α-dihydroxycholest-7-en-6-one (DHCEO), mediates
these effects by initiating crosstalk between glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and
neurotrophin receptor kinase TrkB. Either loss of DHCR7 or direct exposure to
DHCEO causes hyperactivation of GR and TrkB and their downstream MEK-ERK-C/EBP
signaling pathway in cortical neural precursors. Moreover, direct inhibition of
GR activation with an antagonist or inhibition of DHCEO accumulation with
antioxidants rescues the premature neurogenesis phenotype caused by the loss of
DHCR7. These results suggest that GR could be a new therapeutic target against
the neurological defects observed in SLOS.

© 2022, Tomita et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.67141
PMCID: PMC9519149
PMID: 36111785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HT, KH, JH, AL, DB, LX No competing interests
declared
