---
reference_id: "PMID:36580136"
title: "International Consensus Classification of myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms: myeloproliferative neoplasms."
authors:
- Gianelli U
- Thiele J
- Orazi A
- Gangat N
- Vannucchi AM
- Tefferi A
- Kvasnicka HM
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-022-03480-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myeloproliferative Disorders/diagnosis, genetics"
- Lymphoma
- Hematologic Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# International Consensus Classification of myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms: myeloproliferative neoplasms.
**Authors:** Gianelli U, Thiele J, Orazi A, Gangat N, Vannucchi AM, Tefferi A, Kvasnicka HM
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-022-03480-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-022-03480-8)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2023 Jan;482(1):53-68. doi: 10.1007/s00428-022-03480-8. Epub
2022  Dec 29.

International Consensus Classification of myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms: 
myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Gianelli U(1), Thiele J(2), Orazi A(3), Gangat N(4), Vannucchi AM(5), Tefferi 
A(4), Kvasnicka HM(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Milan, Department of Health Sciences and S.C. Anatomia 
Patologica, ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, Milan, Italy.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Pathology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El 
Paso, TX, USA.
(4)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)CRIMM-Centro Ricerca e Innovazione delle Malattie Mieloproliferative, Azienda 
Ospedaliera-Universitaria Careggi, Department of Experimental and Clinical 
Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(6)University Clinic Wuppertal, University of Witten/Herdecke, Wuppertal, 
Germany. hm.kvasnicka@patho-uwh.de.

The recently published International Consensus Classification (ICC) of myeloid 
neoplasms summarized the results of an in-depth effort by pathologists, 
oncologists, and geneticists aimed to update the 2017 World Health Organization 
classification system for hematopoietic tumors. Along these lines, several 
important modifications were implemented in the classification of 
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). For chronic myeloid leukemia, 
BCR::ABL1-positive, the definition of accelerated and blast phase was 
simplified, and in the BCR::ABL1-negative MPNs, the classification was slightly 
updated to improve diagnostic specificity with a more detailed and better 
validated morphologic approach and the recommendation of more sensitive 
molecular techniques to capture in particular early stage diseases. In this 
regard, high sensitive single target (RT-qPCR, ddPCR) or multi-target 
next-generation sequencing assays with a minimal sensitivity of VAF 1% are now 
important for a proper diagnostic identification of MPN cases with low allelic 
frequencies at initial presentation. This review discusses the updated 
diagnostic criteria of MPN according to the ICC, particularly by highlighting 
the new concepts and how they can be applied in clinical settings to obtain an 
appropriate prognostic relevant diagnosis.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-022-03480-8
PMCID: PMC9852206
PMID: 36580136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.