---
reference_id: "PMID:16817013"
title: "Maple syrup urine disease: favourable effect of early diagnosis by newborn screening on the neonatal course of the disease."
authors:
- Simon E
- Fingerhut R
- Baumkötter J
- Konstantopoulou V
- Ratschmann R
- Wendel U
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-006-0315-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maple syrup urine disease: favourable effect of early diagnosis by newborn screening on the neonatal course of the disease.
**Authors:** Simon E, Fingerhut R, Baumkötter J, Konstantopoulou V, Ratschmann R, Wendel U
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-006-0315-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-006-0315-y)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2006 Aug;29(4):532-7. doi: 10.1007/s10545-006-0315-y.

Maple syrup urine disease: favourable effect of early diagnosis by newborn
screening on the neonatal course of the disease.

Simon E(1), Fingerhut R, Baumkötter J, Konstantopoulou V, Ratschmann R, Wendel
U.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Paediatrics, University Children's Hospital,
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
simon@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

BACKGROUND: In the rare autosomal recessive disorder maple syrup urine disease
(MSUD) the accumulation of the branched-chain amino acids and their metabolic
products results in acute and chronic brain dysfunction. Since 2002, MSUD has
been part of the extended newborn screening programme in Germany and Austria.
Early diagnosis and intervention during the presymptomatic or early symptomatic
period should improve the outcome of the patients, which would make the case for
screening for MSUD.
AIM: The aim of the study was to evaluate the clinical course and alterations of
marker metabolites during the first weeks of life in 10 patients with classical
MSUD detected by newborn screening (NBS) in comparison with the 10 youngest
German patients diagnosed clinically.
METHOD: Laboratory data as well as information on clinical course and management
during the neonatal period were obtained retrospectively.
RESULTS: Patients detected in NBS presented with lower plasma leucine
concentrations at confirmation of diagnosis and less severe clinical symptoms.
Lowering of leucine to below a critical threshold of 1000 micromol/L was
achieved earlier than in patients diagnosed on clinical grounds.
CONCLUSION: After diagnosis in screening, treatment can be initiated before the
occurrence of severe metabolic decompensation. However, a favourable effect can
only be achieved with immediate transfer of the neonate to a metabolic centre
for adequate treatment in case of a positive screening result.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-006-0315-y
PMID: 16817013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
