---
reference_id: "PMID:39026465"
title: STX16 exon 5-7 deletion in a patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1B.
authors:
- Chen L
- Yang C
- Zhang X
- Chen B
- Zheng P
- Li T
- Song W
- Gao H
- Yue X
- Yang J
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2023-0562
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STX16 exon 5-7 deletion in a patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1B.
**Authors:** Chen L, Yang C, Zhang X, Chen B, Zheng P, Li T, Song W, Gao H, Yue X, Yang J
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2023-0562](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2023-0562)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2024 Jul 22;37(8):734-740. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2023-0562. Print 2024 Aug 27.

STX16 exon 5-7 deletion in a patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1B.

Chen L(1)(2), Yang C(1)(2), Zhang X(1)(2), Chen B(3), Zheng P(1)(2), Li T(1)(2), 
Song W(4), Gao H(1)(2), Yue X(1)(2), Yang J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Neurological Rare Disease Biobank and Precision Diagnostic Technical 
Service Platform, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Henan 
University, Henan Province, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVES: Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) comprises a cluster of heterogeneous 
diseases characterized by hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia due to parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) resistance. PHP type 1B (PHP1B) is caused by heterozygous maternal 
deletions within GNAS or STX16. STX16 exon 2-6 deletion is commonly observed in 
autosomal dominant (AD)-PHP1B, while sporadic PHP1B commonly results from 
methylation abnormalities of maternal differentially methylated regions and 
remains unclear at the molecular level.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 39-year-old male patient with PHP1B, who had his first 
seizure at 15 years of age, presented to our hospital. The methylation-specific 
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification results showed a half-reduced 
copy number of STX16 exon 5-7 and loss of methylation at GNAS exon A/B. His 
mother also had a half-reduced copy number of STX16 exon 5-7 but with normal 
methylation of GNAS. His father has a normal copy number of STX16 and normal 
methylation of GNAS.
CONCLUSIONS: For the recognition and early diagnosis of this kind of disease, 
here we report the clinical symptoms, auxiliary examinations, genetic testing 
characteristics, and treatment of the patient.

© 2024 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2023-0562
PMID: 39026465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]