---
reference_id: "PMID:21056448"
title: Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.
authors:
- Monson DM
- Smith JR
journal: Surv Ophthalmol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.survophthal.2010.07.004
keywords:
- Adult
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Diagnostic Imaging
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Scotoma/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- White Dot Syndromes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.
**Authors:** Monson DM, Smith JR
**Journal:** Surv Ophthalmol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.survophthal.2010.07.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.survophthal.2010.07.004)

## Content

1. Surv Ophthalmol. 2011 Jan-Feb;56(1):23-35. doi:
10.1016/j.survophthal.2010.07.004. Epub 2010 Nov 5.

Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.

Monson DM(1), Smith JR.

Author information:
(1)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon,
USA.

Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) is a rare unilateral or bilateral
disease of unknown etiology characterized by focal degeneration of
photoreceptors. A total of 131 cases of AZOOR (205 eyes), including the variant
known as acute annular outer retinopathy, have been reported in the English
language literature. In this group of predominantly white individuals, average
age at presentation was 36.7 years, and the male:female ratio was 1:3.2. The
majority of patients complained of the acute onset of a scotoma, which was
associated with photopsia. Visual acuity was 20/40 or better in 74% of tested
eyes, and fundus examination was unremarkable in 76% of eyes. Blind spot
enlargement, with or without other field defects, was observed in 75% of the
visual fields examined, and electroretinographic abnormalities were recorded in
99% of patients tested. Typically patients retained good visual acuity, although
retinal pigment epithelial disturbances commonly developed over time. It was
unusual for visual field loss to continue beyond six months. Various treatments
have been attempted in patients with AZOOR--including systemic corticosteroids,
other systemic immunosuppressive agents, and different antimicrobials--but none
have been proven effective.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.survophthal.2010.07.004
PMID: 21056448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
