---
reference_id: "PMID:29651624"
title: "In papillary thyroid carcinoma, expression by immunohistochemistry of BRAF V600E, PD-L1, and PD-1 is closely related."
authors:
- Bai Y
- Guo T
- Huang X
- Wu Q
- Niu D
- Ji X
- Feng Q
- Li Z
- Kakudo K
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-018-2357-6
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "B7-H1 Antigen/analysis, biosynthesis"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/analysis, biosynthesis"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/analysis, biosynthesis"
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary"
- Thyroid Neoplasms/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In papillary thyroid carcinoma, expression by immunohistochemistry of BRAF V600E, PD-L1, and PD-1 is closely related.
**Authors:** Bai Y, Guo T, Huang X, Wu Q, Niu D, Ji X, Feng Q, Li Z, Kakudo K
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-018-2357-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-018-2357-6)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2018 May;472(5):779-787. doi: 10.1007/s00428-018-2357-6. Epub
2018 Apr 12.

In papillary thyroid carcinoma, expression by immunohistochemistry of BRAF
V600E, PD-L1, and PD-1 is closely related.

Bai Y(1), Guo T(2), Huang X(3), Wu Q(3), Niu D(3), Ji X(4), Feng Q(3), Li Z(3),
Kakudo K(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Pathology, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing, 100142, China. byh0425@sina.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Division of Gastrointestinal Cancer Translational Research
Laboratory, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing, 100142,
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Pathology, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing, 100142, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Medical Statistics, Peking University Cancer Hospital
& Institute, Beijing, 100142, China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Nara Hospital, Kindai University Faculty of
Medicine, Ikoma, Nara, 630-0293, Japan.

Immune checkpoint inhibitor therapies targeting PD-L1/PD-1 have been shown to be
effective in treating several types of human cancer. In papillary thyroid
carcinoma (PTC), little is known about the expression of PD-L1/PD-1 in the tumor
microenvironment or its potential correlation with BRAF V600E mutation status.
In this study, we examined the expression of PD-L1, PD-1, and BRAF V600E in PTC
by immunohistochemistry and investigated the clinical significance of expression
status. We studied the expression of PD-L1, PD-1, and BRAF V600E by
immunohistochemical staining in 110 cases of PTC with a diameter > 1 cm. Cases
with a background of chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis (CLT) were excluded, as
differentiating lymphocytes in the context of CLT from tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) is difficult. We classified PD-L1+/PD-1+ expression as type 1
(41%), PD-L1-/PD-1- as type 2 (17%), PD-L1+/PD-1- as type 3 (5%), and
PD-L1-/PD-1+ as type 4 (37%). Significant correlations were found between
expression of BRAF V600E and that of PD-L1 and PD-1. The positive correlation
observed between expression of BRAF V600E and PD-L1/PD-1 suggests that
immunotherapies targeting PD-L1/PD-1 might be effective for PTC patients with
the BRAF V600E mutation, which are refractory to radioiodine therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-018-2357-6
PMID: 29651624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
