---
reference_id: "PMID:26199263"
title: Rheumatoid Factor, Anti-Cyclic Citrullinated Peptide Antibody, C-Reactive Protein, and Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate for the Clinical Diagnosis of Rheumatoid Arthritis.
authors:
- Shen R
- Ren X
- Jing R
- Shen X
- Chen J
- Ju S
- Yang C
journal: Lab Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1309/LMZYTSO5RHIHV93T
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid Factor, Anti-Cyclic Citrullinated Peptide Antibody, C-Reactive Protein, and Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate for the Clinical Diagnosis of Rheumatoid Arthritis.
**Authors:** Shen R, Ren X, Jing R, Shen X, Chen J, Ju S, Yang C
**Journal:** Lab Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1309/LMZYTSO5RHIHV93T](https://doi.org/10.1309/LMZYTSO5RHIHV93T)

## Content

1. Lab Med. 2015 Summer;46(3):226-9. doi: 10.1309/LMZYTSO5RHIHV93T.

Rheumatoid Factor, Anti-Cyclic Citrullinated Peptide Antibody, C-Reactive 
Protein, and Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate for the Clinical Diagnosis of 
Rheumatoid Arthritis.

Shen R(1), Ren X(1), Jing R(1), Shen X(2), Chen J(1), Ju S(1), Yang C(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Medicine Center, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, 
Nantong, China.
(2)Surgical Comprehensive Laboratory, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, 
Nantong, China.
(3)Laboratory Medicine Center, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, 
Nantong, China jsq814@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the value of rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-cyclic 
citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibody, C-reactive protein (CRP), and the 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) in the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA).
METHODS: Using rate nephelometry, chemiluminescence microparticle immunoassay 
(CMIA), and Westergren sedimentation rate testing, we detected RF, anti-CCP 
antibody, CRP, and ESR in 134 patients with RA and 50 healthy control 
individuals.
RESULTS: We observed significant differences in RF, anti-CCP antibody, CRP, and 
ESR concentrations between the RA and control groups (P <.01). The sensitivity, 
specificity and accuracy in the diagnosis of RA were 91.0%, 74.4%, and 87.0%, 
respectively, for RF; 88.0%, 90.4%, and 88.1%, respectively, for anti-CCP 
antibody; and 90.2%, 83.3%, and 89.5%, respectively, for the detection of RA via 
the combination of RF and anti-CCP antibody.
CONCLUSION: Anti-CCP is more specific than the other parameters we reviewed for 
the diagnosis of RA. Combined detection of the 4 parameters is beneficial when 
confirming a diagnosis of RA.

DOI: 10.1309/LMZYTSO5RHIHV93T
PMID: 26199263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]