---
reference_id: "PMID:28320181"
title: Ataxic form of autosomal recessive PEX10-related peroxisome biogenesis disorders with a novel compound heterozygous gene mutation and characteristic clinical phenotype.
authors:
- Yamashita T
- Mitsui J
- Shimozawa N
- Takashima S
- Umemura H
- Sato K
- Takemoto M
- Hishikawa N
- Ohta Y
- Matsukawa T
- Ishiura H
- Yoshimura J
- Doi K
- Morishita S
- Tsuji S
- Abe K
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2017.02.058
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxic form of autosomal recessive PEX10-related peroxisome biogenesis disorders with a novel compound heterozygous gene mutation and characteristic clinical phenotype.
**Authors:** Yamashita T, Mitsui J, Shimozawa N, Takashima S, Umemura H, Sato K, Takemoto M, Hishikawa N, Ohta Y, Matsukawa T, Ishiura H, Yoshimura J, Doi K, Morishita S, Tsuji S, Abe K
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2017.02.058](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2017.02.058)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2017 Apr 15;375:424-429. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2017.02.058. Epub
2017  Feb 27.

Ataxic form of autosomal recessive PEX10-related peroxisome biogenesis disorders 
with a novel compound heterozygous gene mutation and characteristic clinical 
phenotype.

Yamashita T(1), Mitsui J(2), Shimozawa N(3), Takashima S(3), Umemura H(4), Sato 
K(1), Takemoto M(1), Hishikawa N(1), Ohta Y(1), Matsukawa T(2), Ishiura H(2), 
Yoshimura J(5), Doi K(5), Morishita S(5), Tsuji S(2), Abe K(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University, 2-5-1 Shikatacho, Okayama 700-8558, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(3)Division of Genomic Research, Life Science Research Center, Gifu University, 
Gifu 501-1193, Japan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University, 2-5-1 Shikatacho, Okayama 700-8558, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of 
Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University, 2-5-1 Shikatacho, Okayama 700-8558, 
Japan.. Electronic address: abekabek@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp.

Peroxisome biogenesis factor 10 (PEX10) is involved in the import of peroxisomal 
matrix proteins, and the mutation of this gene causes 3 subtypes of peroxisome 
biogenesis disorders, namely Zellweger syndrome (severe), neonatal 
adrenoleukodystrophy (moderate) and an ataxic form (mild). Here, we report 3 
siblings of the ataxic form with cerebellar ataxia, mild mental retardation, and 
3 additional characteristic features: mydriasis, hyperreflexia and involuntary 
head movement. All 3 siblings are compound heterozygous for a previously 
reported mutation, c.2T>C (p.M1T), and a novel mutation, c.920G>A, causing a 
missense change (p.C307Y) located in the RING finger domain of PEX10. The 
present cases suggest that these PEX10 mutations involve not only cerebellar but 
also more multiple nervous systems including pupillary autonomic, pyramidal and 
extrapyramidal systems.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2017.02.058
PMID: 28320181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]