---
reference_id: "PMID:26302410"
title: Defects in autophagy caused by glaucoma-associated mutations in optineurin.
authors:
- Sirohi K
- Swarup G
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.08.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defects in autophagy caused by glaucoma-associated mutations in optineurin.
**Authors:** Sirohi K, Swarup G
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2015.08.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2015.08.020)

## Content

1. Exp Eye Res. 2016 Mar;144:54-63. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.08.020. Epub 2015
Aug  21.

Defects in autophagy caused by glaucoma-associated mutations in optineurin.

Sirohi K(1), Swarup G(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, Hyderabad 500 007, India.
(2)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, Hyderabad 500 007, India. Electronic address: 
gshyam@ccmb.res.in.

Certain mutations in optineurin (gene OPTN) are associated with primary open 
angle glaucoma. Optineurin is ubiquitously expressed but it shows high level of 
expression in certain cells and tissues including retinal ganglion cells. It 
interacts with many proteins, often acting as an adaptor to link two or more 
proteins. These interactions play a crucial role in mediating various functions 
of optineurin such as membrane vesicle trafficking, autophagy, signal 
transduction etc. Autophagy is basically a quality control mechanism to remove 
damaged proteins and organelles through lysosomal degradation. Optineurin was 
identified as an autophagy receptor that directly interacts with autophagosomal 
protein, LC3, and ubiquitin. These interactions are important for autophagy 
receptor function. Autophagy receptors recruit their cargo and take it to 
autophagosomes which fuse with lysosomes to form autolysosomes where degradation 
of proteins takes place. Optineurin interacts with a motor protein, myosinVI, 
and this interaction is involved in mediating fusion of autophagosomes with 
lysosomes. A glaucoma-associated mutant of optineurin, E50K, impairs autophagy 
as well as vesicle trafficking, leading to death of retinal cells by apoptosis. 
E50K-OPTN-induced block in autophagy is dependent on a GTPase activating 
protein, TBC1D17. The E50K mutant also causes other changes in the cells such as 
altered interaction with TBK1 protein kinase, aggregate formation, generation of 
reactive oxygen species and inhibition of proteasome, which may contribute to 
pathogenesis. A polymorphism of optineurin, M98K, associated with glaucoma, 
causes enhanced autophagy leading to transferrin receptor degradation and 
apoptotic death of retinal cells. M98K-OPTN-induced autophagic cell death is 
dependent on Rab12 GTPase. Thus, an optimum level of optineurin-mediated 
autophagy is crucial for survival of retinal cells, and impaired autophagy is 
likely to contribute to glaucoma pathogenesis. How impaired autophagy caused by 
optineurin mutants leads to apoptosis and cell death, is yet to be explored.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.08.020
PMID: 26302410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]