---
reference_id: "PMID:39728402"
title: Evaluation of Neonatal Screening Programs for Tyrosinemia Type 1 Worldwide.
authors:
- Kuypers AM
- Bouva MJ
- Loeber JG
- Boelen A
- Dekkers E
- Petritis K
- Pickens CA
- The Isns Representatives
- van Spronsen FJ
- Heiner-Fokkema MR
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijns10040082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of Neonatal Screening Programs for Tyrosinemia Type 1 Worldwide.
**Authors:** Kuypers AM, Bouva MJ, Loeber JG, Boelen A, Dekkers E, Petritis K, Pickens CA, The Isns Representatives, van Spronsen FJ, Heiner-Fokkema MR
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns10040082](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns10040082)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2024 Dec 16;10(4):82. doi: 10.3390/ijns10040082.

Evaluation of Neonatal Screening Programs for Tyrosinemia Type 1 Worldwide.

Kuypers AM(1), Bouva MJ(2), Loeber JG(3), Boelen A(4), Dekkers E(5), Petritis 
K(6), Pickens CA(6), The Isns Representatives, van Spronsen FJ(1), 
Heiner-Fokkema MR(7).

Author information:
(1)Section of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Centre for Health Protection, National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment (RIVM), 3720 BA Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
(3)International Society for Neonatal Screening (ISNS) Office, 3721 CK 
Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
(4)Endocrine Laboratory, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam 
Gastroenterology, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Amsterdam UMC, University of 
Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Centre for Population Research, National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment (RIVM), 3720 BA Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
(6)Newborn Screening and Molecular Biology Branch, Division of Laboratory 
Sciences, National Center for Environmental Health, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30341, USA.
(7)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 30 001, 
9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Int J Neonatal Screen. 2025 Sep 01;11(3):72. doi: 10.3390/ijns11030072.

In The Netherlands, newborn screening (NBS) for tyrosinemia type 1 (TT1) uses 
dried blood spot (DBS) succinylacetone (SUAC) as a biomarker. However, high 
false-positive (FP) rates and a false-negative (FN) case show that the Dutch TT1 
NBS protocol is suboptimal. In search of optimization options, we evaluated the 
protocols used by other NBS programs and their performance. We distributed an 
online survey to NBS program representatives worldwide (N = 41). Questions 
focused on the organization and performance of the programs and on changes since 
implementation. Thirty-three representatives completed the survey. TT1 incidence 
ranged from 1/13,636 to 1/750,000. Most NBS samples are taken between 36 and 72 
h after birth. Most used biomarkers were DBS SUAC (78.9%), DBS Tyrosine (Tyr; 
5.3%), or DBS Tyr with second tier SUAC (15.8%). The pooled median cut-off for 
SUAC was 1.50 µmol/L (range 0.3-7.0 µmol/L). The median cut-off from programs 
using laboratory-developed tests was significantly higher (2.63 µmol/L) than the 
medians from programs using commercial kits (range 1.0-1.7 µmol/L). The pooled 
median cut-off for Tyr was 216 µmol/L (range 120-600 µmol/L). Overall positive 
predictive values were 27.3% for SUAC, 1.2% for Tyr solely, and 90.1% for Tyr + 
SUAC. One FN result was reported for TT1 NBS using SUAC, while three FN results 
were reported for TT1 NBS using Tyr. The NBS programs for TT1 vary worldwide in 
terms of analytical methods, biochemical markers, and cut-off values. There is 
room for improvement through method standardization, cut-off adaptation, and 
integration of new biomarkers. Further enhancement is likely to be achieved by 
the application of post-analytical tools.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns10040082
PMCID: PMC11677071
PMID: 39728402

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention. Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification 
only and does not constitute endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services or the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Division 
of Laboratory Sciences).