---
reference_id: "PMID:34524979"
title: "The broad phenotypic spectrum of 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1) deficiency: a case series."
authors:
- Sun M
- Mueller JW
- Gilligan LC
- Taylor AE
- Shaheen F
- Noczyńska A
- "T'Sjoen G"
- Denvir L
- Shenoy S
- Fulton P
- Cheetham TD
- Gleeson H
- Rahman M
- Krone NP
- Taylor NF
- Shackleton CHL
- Arlt W
- Idkowiak J
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1530/EJE-21-0152
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/genetics"
- Amenorrhea/genetics
- Computer Simulation
- Corticosterone/urine
- "Failure to Thrive/enzymology, genetics"
- Female
- Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
- Gonadal Steroid Hormones/deficiency
- "Gynecomastia/etiology, genetics"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Hydrocortisone/deficiency
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mineralocorticoids/metabolism
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- Steroid 17-alpha-Hydroxylase/genetics
- Steroids/urine
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The broad phenotypic spectrum of 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1) deficiency: a case series.
**Authors:** Sun M, Mueller JW, Gilligan LC, Taylor AE, Shaheen F, Noczyńska A, T'Sjoen G, Denvir L, Shenoy S, Fulton P, Cheetham TD, Gleeson H, Rahman M, Krone NP, Taylor NF, Shackleton CHL, Arlt W, Idkowiak J
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EJE-21-0152](https://doi.org/10.1530/EJE-21-0152)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2021 Oct 11;185(5):729-741. doi: 10.1530/EJE-21-0152.

The broad phenotypic spectrum of 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1)
deficiency: a case series.

Sun M(1)(2), Mueller JW(1)(2), Gilligan LC(1)(2), Taylor AE(1)(2), Shaheen
F(1)(2), Noczyńska A(3), T'Sjoen G(4), Denvir L(5), Shenoy S(6), Fulton P(7),
Cheetham TD(8), Gleeson H(2)(9), Rahman M(10), Krone NP(11), Taylor NF(12),
Shackleton CHL(1)(2)(13), Arlt W(1)(2), Idkowiak J(1)(2)(14).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, College of Medical and Dental
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(2)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Birmingham Health
Partners, University of Birmingham and University Hospitals Birmingham NHS
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology for Children and Adolescents,
Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham, UK.
(6)Children's and Adolescent Services, University Hospitals of Leicester NHS
Trust, Leicester, UK.
(7)West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women's and Children's
NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(8)Newcastle University c/o Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal
Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(9)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation
Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(10)Department of Endocrinology, Northwick Park Hospital, London Northwest
University Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(11)Academic Unit of Child Health, Department of Oncology & Metabolism,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(12)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, King's College Hospital, London, UK.
(13)Benioff Children's Hospital, University of California San Francisco,
Oakland, California, USA.
(14)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Birmingham Children's Hospital,
Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.

CONTEXT: 17α-Hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency (17OHD) caused by mutations in
the CYP17A1 gene is a rare form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia typically
characterised by cortisol deficiency, mineralocorticoid excess and sex steroid
deficiency.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the phenotypic spectrum of 17OHD by clinical and
biochemical assessment and corresponding in silico and in vitro functional
analysis.
DESIGN: Case series.
PATIENTS AND RESULTS: We assessed eight patients with 17OHD, including four with
extreme 17OHD phenotypes: two siblings presented with failure to thrive in early
infancy and two with isolated sex steroid deficiency and normal cortisol
reserve. Diagnosis was established by mass spectrometry-based urinary steroid
profiling and confirmed by genetic CYP17A1 analysis, revealing homozygous and
compound heterozygous sequence variants. We found novel (p.Gly111Val,
p.Ala398Glu, p.Ile371Thr) and previously described sequence variants
(p.Pro409Leu, p.Arg347His, p.Gly436Arg, p.Phe53/54del, p.Tyr60IlefsLys88X). In
vitro functional studies employing an overexpression system in HEK293 cells
showed that 17,20-lyase activity was invariably decreased while mutant
17α-hydroxylase activity retained up to 14% of WT activity in the two patients
with intact cortisol reserve. A ratio of urinary corticosterone over cortisol
metabolites reflective of 17α-hydroxylase activity correlated well with clinical
phenotype severity.
CONCLUSION: Our findings illustrate the broad phenotypic spectrum of 17OHD.
Isolated sex steroid deficiency with normal stimulated cortisol has not been
reported before. Attenuation of 17α-hydroxylase activity is readily detected by
urinary steroid profiling and predicts phenotype severity.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Here we report, supported by careful phenotyping,
genotyping and functional analysis, a prismatic case series of patients with
congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 17α-hydroxylase (CYP17A1) deficiency
(17OHD). These range in severity from the abolition of function, presenting in
early infancy, and unusually mild with isolated sex steroid deficiency but
normal ACTH-stimulated cortisol in adult patients. These findings will guide
improved diagnostic detection of CYP17A1 deficiency.

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-21-0152
PMCID: PMC8558848
PMID: 34524979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
