---
reference_id: "PMID:23408678"
title: Phenotypic variability of osteogenesis imperfecta type V caused by an IFITM5 mutation.
authors:
- Shapiro JR
- Lietman C
- Grover M
- Lu JT
- Nagamani SC
- Dawson BC
- Baldridge DM
- Bainbridge MN
- Cohn DH
- Blazo M
- Roberts TT
- Brennen FS
- Wu Y
- Gibbs RA
- Melvin P
- Campeau PM
- Lee BH
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1891
keywords:
- "5' Untranslated Regions/genetics"
- Adult
- Bone Density
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Codon, Initiator/genetics"
- Family
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Membrane Proteins
- Middle Aged
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Point Mutation
- Radiography
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic variability of osteogenesis imperfecta type V caused by an IFITM5 mutation.
**Authors:** Shapiro JR, Lietman C, Grover M, Lu JT, Nagamani SC, Dawson BC, Baldridge DM, Bainbridge MN, Cohn DH, Blazo M, Roberts TT, Brennen FS, Wu Y, Gibbs RA, Melvin P, Campeau PM, Lee BH
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.1891](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.1891)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Jul;28(7):1523-30. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1891.

Phenotypic variability of osteogenesis imperfecta type V caused by an IFITM5
mutation.

Shapiro JR(1), Lietman C, Grover M, Lu JT, Nagamani SC, Dawson BC, Baldridge DM,
Bainbridge MN, Cohn DH, Blazo M, Roberts TT, Brennen FS, Wu Y, Gibbs RA, Melvin
P, Campeau PM, Lee BH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bone and Osteogenesis Imperfecta, Kennedy Krieger Institution,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Comment in
    J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Jul;28(7):1519-22. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1982.

In a large cohort of osteogenesis imperfecta type V (OI type V) patients (17
individuals from 12 families), we identified the same mutation in the 5'
untranslated region (5'UTR) of the interferon-induced transmembrane protein 5
(IFITM5) gene by whole exome and Sanger sequencing (IFITM5 c.-14C > T) and
provide a detailed description of their phenotype. This mutation leads to the
creation of a novel start codon adding five residues to IFITM5 and was recently
reported in several other OI type V families. The variability of the phenotype
was quite large even within families. Whereas some patients presented with the
typical calcification of the forearm interosseous membrane, radial head
dislocation and hyperplastic callus (HPC) formation following fractures, others
had only some of the typical OI type V findings. Thirteen had calcification of
interosseous membranes, 14 had radial head dislocations, 10 had HPC, 9 had long
bone bowing, 11 could ambulate without assistance, and 1 had mild unilateral
mixed hearing loss. The bone mineral density varied greatly, even within
families. Our study thus highlights the phenotypic variability of OI type V
caused by the IFITM5 mutation.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.1891
PMCID: PMC3688672
PMID: 23408678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
