---
reference_id: "PMID:16532400"
title: GDF5 is a second locus for multiple-synostosis syndrome.
authors:
- Dawson K
- Seeman P
- Sebald E
- King L
- Edwards M
- Williams J 3rd
- Mundlos S
- Krakow D
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1086/503204
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GDF5 is a second locus for multiple-synostosis syndrome.
**Authors:** Dawson K, Seeman P, Sebald E, King L, Edwards M, Williams J 3rd, Mundlos S, Krakow D
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1086/503204](https://doi.org/10.1086/503204)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Apr;78(4):708-12. doi: 10.1086/503204. Epub 2006 Feb 24.

GDF5 is a second locus for multiple-synostosis syndrome.

Dawson K(1), Seeman P, Sebald E, King L, Edwards M, Williams J 3rd, Mundlos S, 
Krakow D.

Author information:
(1)Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, CA, USA.

Multiple-synostosis syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by 
progressive symphalangism, carpal/tarsal fusions, deafness, and mild facial 
dysmorphism. Heterozygosity for functional null mutations in the NOGGIN gene has 
been shown to be responsible for the disorder. However, in a cohort of six 
probands with multiple-synostosis syndrome, only one was found to be 
heterozygous for a NOGGIN mutation (W205X). Linkage studies involving the 
four-generation family of one of the mutation-negative patients excluded the 
NOGGIN locus, providing genetic evidence of locus heterogeneity. In this family, 
polymorphic markers flanking the GDF5 locus were found to cosegregate with the 
disease, and sequence analysis demonstrated that affected individuals in the 
family were heterozygous for a novel missense mutation that predicts an R438L 
substitution in the GDF5 protein. Unlike mutations that lead to 
haploinsufficiency for GDF5 and produce brachydactyly C, the protein encoded by 
the multiple-synostosis-syndrome allele was secreted as a mature GDF5 dimer. 
These data establish locus heterogeneity in multiple-synostosis syndrome and 
demonstrate that the disorder can result from mutations in either the NOGGIN or 
the GDF5 gene.

DOI: 10.1086/503204
PMCID: PMC1424701
PMID: 16532400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]