---
reference_id: "PMID:38579669"
title: Genetic and functional correction of argininosuccinate lyase deficiency using CRISPR adenine base editors.
authors:
- Jalil S
- Keskinen T
- Juutila J
- Sartori Maldonado R
- Euro L
- Suomalainen A
- Lapatto R
- Kuuluvainen E
- Hietakangas V
- Otonkoski T
- Hyvönen ME
- Wartiovaara K
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.03.004
keywords:
- Humans
- Argininosuccinate Lyase/genetics
- "Argininosuccinic Aciduria/genetics, therapy"
- Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
- "RNA, Guide, CRISPR-Cas Systems"
- Urea
- Gene Editing/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and functional correction of argininosuccinate lyase deficiency using CRISPR adenine base editors.
**Authors:** Jalil S, Keskinen T, Juutila J, Sartori Maldonado R, Euro L, Suomalainen A, Lapatto R, Kuuluvainen E, Hietakangas V, Otonkoski T, Hyvönen ME, Wartiovaara K
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.03.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.03.004)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2024 Apr 4;111(4):714-728. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.03.004.

Genetic and functional correction of argininosuccinate lyase deficiency using
CRISPR adenine base editors.

Jalil S(1), Keskinen T(1), Juutila J(2), Sartori Maldonado R(1), Euro L(1),
Suomalainen A(1), Lapatto R(3), Kuuluvainen E(2), Hietakangas V(2), Otonkoski
T(3), Hyvönen ME(3), Wartiovaara K(4).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland; Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki Institute of Life
Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; New Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research
Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland.
(4)Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: kirmo.wartiovaara@helsinki.fi.

Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) is a recessive metabolic disorder
caused by variants in ASL. In an essential step in urea synthesis, ASL breaks
down argininosuccinate (ASA), a pathognomonic ASLD biomarker. The severe disease
forms lead to hyperammonemia, neurological injury, and even early death. The
current treatments are unsatisfactory, involving a strict low-protein diet,
arginine supplementation, nitrogen scavenging, and in some cases, liver
transplantation. An unmet need exists for improved, efficient therapies. Here,
we show the potential of a lipid nanoparticle-mediated CRISPR approach using
adenine base editors (ABEs) for ASLD treatment. To model ASLD, we first
generated human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) from biopsies of
individuals homozygous for the Finnish founder variant (c.1153C>T [p.Arg385Cys])
and edited this variant using the ABE. We then differentiated the hiPSCs into
hepatocyte-like cells that showed a 1,000-fold decrease in ASA levels compared
to those of isogenic non-edited cells. Lastly, we tested three different
FDA-approved lipid nanoparticle formulations to deliver the ABE-encoding RNA and
the sgRNA targeting the ASL variant. This approach efficiently edited the ASL
variant in fibroblasts with no apparent cell toxicity and minimal off-target
effects. Further, the treatment resulted in a significant decrease in ASA, to
levels of healthy donors, indicating restoration of the urea cycle. Our work
describes a highly efficient approach to editing the disease-causing ASL variant
and restoring the function of the urea cycle. This method relies on RNA
delivered by lipid nanoparticles, which is compatible with clinical
applications, improves its safety profile, and allows for scalable production.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.03.004
PMCID: PMC11023919
PMID: 38579669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
