---
reference_id: "PMID:40717084"
title: "Mevalonate kinase deficiency: genetic and clinical characteristics of a Chinese pediatric cohort."
authors:
- Guan C
- Wang W
- Zhou Q
- Sun J
- Liu L
- Liu L
- Sun B
- Hou J
- Wang X
journal: Pediatr Rheumatol Online J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12969-025-01131-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency/genetics, diagnosis"
- Male
- Female
- Child
- Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Mutation
- China
- Infant
- Phenotype
- Adolescent
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mevalonate kinase deficiency: genetic and clinical characteristics of a Chinese pediatric cohort.
**Authors:** Guan C, Wang W, Zhou Q, Sun J, Liu L, Liu L, Sun B, Hou J, Wang X
**Journal:** Pediatr Rheumatol Online J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12969-025-01131-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12969-025-01131-1)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2025 Jul 27;23(1):78. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-025-01131-1.

Mevalonate kinase deficiency: genetic and clinical characteristics of a Chinese 
pediatric cohort.

Guan C(1), Wang W(1), Zhou Q(1), Sun J(1), Liu L(1), Liu L(1), Sun B(2), Hou 
J(3), Wang X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Children's Hospital of Fudan 
University, 399 Wanyuan Road, Shanghai, 201102, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Children's Hospital of Fudan 
University, 399 Wanyuan Road, Shanghai, 201102, China. sunbijun1990@163.com.
(3)Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Children's Hospital of Fudan 
University, 399 Wanyuan Road, Shanghai, 201102, China. doctorhoujia@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Children's Hospital of Fudan 
University, 399 Wanyuan Road, Shanghai, 201102, China. xchwang@shmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD) is a rare autoinflammatory 
disease, and mevalonic aciduria (MA) is a severe phenotype of MKD. The present 
study reports the characteristics of MKD and four novel mutations in the 
mevalonate kinase (MVK) gene in a Chinese cohort.
METHOD: A retrospective study was conducted on patients diagnosed with MKD from 
July 2013 to December 2024. The clinical, immunological, and follow-up data were 
collected from electronic medical records. Next-generation sequencing and Sanger 
sequencing were performed to identify gene mutations. A literature review was 
performed on MKD patients to further investigate the associations between 
genotype and phenotype.
RESULTS: Eleven MKD patients were enrolled from a Chinese cohort of prolonged 
and recurrent fever of unknown origin. Ten patients were classified as having 
hyperimmunoglobulin D syndrome (HIDS), and one patient was classified as having 
MA. The median follow-up duration was 5 years (IQR: 1.5-6 years). Recurrent 
fever and gastrointestinal symptoms were the most common symptoms. Anemia was 
observed in 8 of the 11 patients, including one patient with severe 
hematological complications. Growth restriction (5/11 patients) and 
developmental delay (4/11 patients) were also observed. IgD levels were measured 
in ten patients, and the median IgD level was 85.23 µg/ml (IQR: 
18.74-385.19 µg/ml). Four novel mutation sites in the MVK gene were discovered: 
c.78G > A, c.463G > A, c.1076C > T and c.1088G > A. Etanercept was the effective 
biological agent tested, leading to complete or partial remission in 5 of the 6 
patients. A literature review of 20 MA patients suggested that homozygous MVK 
gene mutations are more frequently associated with MA. Moreover, MA patients 
with the homozygous A334T mutation present a milder phenotype, and those with 
the I268T homozygous mutation present a more severe phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the largest case series of MKD pediatric patients 
from China. Four new mutation sites in MVK were identified, further expanding 
the phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of MKD and emphasizing the significance of 
MVK mutation patterns in influencing disease severity.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-025-01131-1
PMCID: PMC12297814
PMID: 40717084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study was reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of the 
Children's Hospital of Fudan University. The patients and their parents provided 
written informed consent for enrollment in this study. Consent for publication: 
Not applicable. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.