---
reference_id: "PMID:30173675"
title: "Impact, economic evaluation, and sustainability of integrated vector management in urban settings to prevent vector-borne diseases: a scoping review."
authors:
- Marcos-Marcos J
- Olry de Labry-Lima A
- Toro-Cardenas S
- Lacasaña M
- Degroote S
- Ridde V
- Bermudez-Tamayo C
journal: Infect Dis Poverty
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s40249-018-0464-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact, economic evaluation, and sustainability of integrated vector management in urban settings to prevent vector-borne diseases: a scoping review.
**Authors:** Marcos-Marcos J, Olry de Labry-Lima A, Toro-Cardenas S, Lacasaña M, Degroote S, Ridde V, Bermudez-Tamayo C
**Journal:** Infect Dis Poverty (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40249-018-0464-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40249-018-0464-x)

## Content

1. Infect Dis Poverty. 2018 Sep 3;7(1):83. doi: 10.1186/s40249-018-0464-x.

Impact, economic evaluation, and sustainability of integrated vector management 
in urban settings to prevent vector-borne diseases: a scoping review.

Marcos-Marcos J(1)(2), Olry de Labry-Lima A(2)(3)(4), Toro-Cardenas S(2), 
Lacasaña M(2)(3)(4), Degroote S(5), Ridde V(5)(6), Bermudez-Tamayo C(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Public Health Research Group, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(2)Andalusian School of Public Health, Granada, Spain.
(3)Biomedical Research Centre Network for Epidemiology and Public Health 
(CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain.
(4)Biomedical Research Centre (ibs.GRANADA), Granada, Spain.
(5)Public Health Research Institute (IRSPUM), University of Montreal, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(6)IRD (French Institute for Research on Sustainable Development), CEPED 
(IRD-Université Paris Descartes), Universités Paris Sorbonne Cités, ERL INSERM 
SAGESUD, Paris, France.
(7)Andalusian School of Public Health, Granada, Spain. 
clara.bermudez.easp@juntadeandalucia.es.
(8)Biomedical Research Centre Network for Epidemiology and Public Health 
(CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain. clara.bermudez.easp@juntadeandalucia.es.
(9)Biomedical Research Centre (ibs.GRANADA), Granada, Spain. 
clara.bermudez.easp@juntadeandalucia.es.

BACKGROUND: The control of vector-borne diseases (VBD) is one of the greatest 
challenges on the global health agenda. Rapid and uncontrolled urbanization has 
heightened the interest in addressing these challenges through an integrated 
vector management (IVM) approach. The aim was to identify components related to 
impacts, economic evaluation, and sustainability that might contribute to this 
integrated approach to VBD prevention.
MAIN BODY: We conducted a scoping review of available literature (2000-2016) 
using PubMed, Web of Science, Cochrane, CINAHL, Econlit, LILACS, Global Health 
Database, Scopus, and Embase, as well as Tropical Diseases Bulletin, WHOLIS, WHO 
Pesticide Evaluation Scheme, and Google Scholar. MeSH terms and free-text terms 
were used. A data extraction form was used, including TIDieR and ASTAIRE. MMAT 
and CHEERS were used to evaluate quality. Of the 42 documents reviewed, 30 were 
focused on dengue, eight on malaria, and two on leishmaniasis. More than a half 
of the studies were conducted in the Americas. Half used a quantitative 
descriptive approach (n = 21), followed by cluster randomized controlled trials 
(n = 11). Regarding impacts, outcomes were: a) use of measures for vector 
control; b) vector control; c) health measures; and d) social measures. IVM 
reduced breeding sites, the entomology index, and parasite rates. Results were 
heterogeneous, with variable magnitudes, but in all cases were favourable to the 
intervention. Evidence of IVM impacts on health outcomes was very limited but 
showed reduced incidence. Social outcomes were improved abilities and 
capacities, empowerment, and community knowledge. Regarding economic evaluation, 
only four studies performed an economic analysis, and intervention benefits 
outweighed costs. Cost-effectiveness was dependent on illness incidence. The 
results provided key elements to analyze sustainability in terms of three 
dimensions (social, economic, and environmental), emphasizing the implementation 
of a community-focused eco-bio-social approach.
CONCLUSIONS: IVM has an impact on reducing vector breeding sites and the 
entomology index, but evidence of impacts on health outcomes is limited. Social 
outcomes are improved abilities and capacities, empowerment, and community 
knowledge. Economic evaluations are scarce, and cost-effectiveness is dependent 
on illness incidence. Community capacity building is the main component of 
sustainability, together with collaboration, institutionalization, and 
routinization of activities. Findings indicate a great heterogeneity in the 
interventions and highlight the need for characterizing interventions rigorously 
to facilitate transferability.

DOI: 10.1186/s40249-018-0464-x
PMCID: PMC6120095
PMID: 30173675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study protocol was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee, University 
of Montreal. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests.