---
reference_id: "PMID:35131999"
title: Mean arterial pressure drop is an independent risk factor of hepatorenal syndrome in patients with HBV-ACLF.
authors:
- Zheng X
- Lian Y
- Wang P
- Zheng L
- Wu H
- Lin J
- Chen X
- Gao Z
- Peng L
- Xie C
journal: Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/MEG.0000000000002314
keywords:
- "Acute-On-Chronic Liver Failure/diagnosis, etiology"
- Arterial Pressure
- End Stage Liver Disease/complications
- Female
- Hepatitis B virus
- "Hepatorenal Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology"
- Humans
- Hypotension
- Male
- Prognosis
- ROC Curve
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mean arterial pressure drop is an independent risk factor of hepatorenal syndrome in patients with HBV-ACLF.
**Authors:** Zheng X, Lian Y, Wang P, Zheng L, Wu H, Lin J, Chen X, Gao Z, Peng L, Xie C
**Journal:** Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MEG.0000000000002314](https://doi.org/10.1097/MEG.0000000000002314)

## Content

1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2022 May 1;34(5):576-584. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0000000000002314.

Mean arterial pressure drop is an independent risk factor of hepatorenal
syndrome in patients with HBV-ACLF.

Zheng X(1), Lian Y(1), Wang P(1), Zheng L(1), Wu H(1), Lin J(1), Chen X(1), Gao
Z(1)(2)(3), Peng L(1), Xie C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases,The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-Sen University.
(2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control, Ministry of Education, Sun
Yat-sen University.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Liver Disease, Guangzhou, Guangdong
Province, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: In patients with acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF), type 1
hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) is a critical organ failure complication that
resulted in rapid mortality. There are no efficient parameters to predict HRS in
hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related ACLF. To assess HBV-ACLF risk factors and
evaluate the association between mean arterial pressures (MAP), HRS and survival
in patients with HBV-ACLF.
METHODS: A total of 420 ACLF patients were screened from June 2015 to June 2016,
and 57 HBV-ACLF patients were included in the study. Clinical data and MAP
measurements of these patients were collected. Multivariate analyses, Cox
proportional hazards regression and receiver operator characteristic (ROC)
curves were used to analyze.
RESULTS: In a 30-day study period, 43 (75.44%) patients survived. Patients in
the HRS group were older and had higher Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD)
scores than patients in the non-HRS group. A MAP drop of ≥9.5 mmHg was an
independent predictor of HRS with a sensitivity and specificity of 92.86 and
69.77%, respectively. The baseline MELD score was also an independent risk
factor of HRS. MAP drop (OR, 1.582; P = 0.000), prothrombin time, HRS, MELD and
FIB were independent prognostic factors for 30-day mortality. The area under the
ROC curve of MAP drop was 0.808 (P = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: A decrease in MAP was a valuable predictor of HRS in patients with
HBV-related ACLF. MAP drop ≥9.5 mmHg may be useful for predicting patient
prognosis and exploring new treatment measures in patients with HBV-related
ACLF.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0000000000002314
PMCID: PMC9076250
PMID: 35131999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.
