---
reference_id: "PMID:11107690"
title: "The histopathology of routine tonsillectomy specimens: results of a study and review of literature."
authors:
- Ikram M
- Khan MA
- Ahmed M
- Siddiqui T
- Mian MY
journal: Ear Nose Throat J
year: '2000'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The histopathology of routine tonsillectomy specimens: results of a study and review of literature.
**Authors:** Ikram M, Khan MA, Ahmed M, Siddiqui T, Mian MY
**Journal:** Ear Nose Throat J (2000)

## Content

1. Ear Nose Throat J. 2000 Nov;79(11):880-2.

The histopathology of routine tonsillectomy specimens: results of a study and 
review of literature.

Ikram M(1), Khan MA, Ahmed M, Siddiqui T, Mian MY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Aga Khan University 
Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan. mubasher.ikram@aku.edu

Controversy continues to attend the routine histologic examination of 
tonsillectomy specimens. We performed a retrospective evaluation of 400 tonsil 
specimens removed from 200 patients. We found that 68.3% of the specimens 
contained reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, 13.5% had follicular hyperplasia, 10.0% 
represented acute or chronic tonsillitis, and 7.5% were normal. Only one case of 
malignancy was detected: a non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in one tonsil of a patient who 
was a cigarette smoker and who had asymmetric tonsils. The results of our study, 
taken in combination with data already published in the literature, indicate 
that routine histologic examination of tonsillectomy specimens is unnecessary 
and results only in added costs and a loss of man-hours. However, in patients 
who have certain preoperative risk factors, a histopathologic evaluation of 
tonsillar specimens remains mandatory.

PMID: 11107690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]