---
reference_id: "PMID:20628027"
title: High levels of nucleolar expression of nucleolin are associated with better prognosis in patients with stage II pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Peng L
- Liang J
- Wang H
- Song X
- Rashid A
- Gomez HF
- Corley LJ
- Abbruzzese JL
- Fleming JB
- Evans DB
- Wang H
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-3411
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Carcinoma, Pancreatic Ductal/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Cell Nucleolus/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- "Image Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Phosphoproteins/biosynthesis
- Prognosis
- RNA-Binding Proteins/biosynthesis
- Retrospective Studies
- Tissue Array Analysis
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Nucleolin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High levels of nucleolar expression of nucleolin are associated with better prognosis in patients with stage II pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Peng L, Liang J, Wang H, Song X, Rashid A, Gomez HF, Corley LJ, Abbruzzese JL, Fleming JB, Evans DB, Wang H
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-3411](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-3411)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Jul 15;16(14):3734-42. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-3411.  Epub 2010 Jul 13.

High levels of nucleolar expression of nucleolin are associated with better 
prognosis in patients with stage II pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Peng L(1), Liang J, Wang H, Song X, Rashid A, Gomez HF, Corley LJ, Abbruzzese 
JL, Fleming JB, Evans DB, Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: Nucleolin is a major nucleolar protein that has been shown to be 
overexpressed in rapidly dividing cells and plays an essential role in cell 
proliferation and survival. However, the expression and significance of 
nucleolin in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) have not been studied.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used a tissue microarray consisting of 1.0-mm cores of 
tumor and paired nonneoplastic pancreatic tissue from 69 pancreaticoduodenectomy 
specimens with stage II PDA. Nucleolin expression was evaluated by 
immunohistochemistry and scored quantitatively by image analysis. Nucleolin 
expression was classified as nucleolin-high or nucleolin-low using the median 
nucleolin labeling index of 3.5% as cutoff. Staining results were correlated 
with clinicopathologic features and survival.
RESULTS: Both PDAs and PDA cell lines showed nucleolar staining for nucleolin. 
Nucleolin expression was higher in PDAs and PDA cell lines than in nonneoplastic 
ductal epithelial cells. Among the 69 stage II PDAs, 34 (49%) were 
nucleolin-high. The median overall survival was 65.2 +/- 16.3 months for 
patients who had nucleolin-high PDAs compared with 19.5 +/- 3.3 months for 
patients whose tumors were nucleolin-low (P = 0.03, log-rank method). No 
significant correlation between nucleolin expression and other clinicopathologic 
parameters was found. In multivariate analysis, nucleolin expression was a 
prognostic factor for overall survival in patients with stage II PDA independent 
of patient's age, gender, tumor size, differentiation, and lymph node status.
CONCLUSIONS: Nucleolin was overexpressed in PDAs and PDA cell lines. A high 
level of nucleolar expression of nucleolin was an independent prognostic marker 
for better survival for patients with stage II PDAs.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-3411
PMID: 20628027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]