---
reference_id: PMID:10449787
title: "CoREST: a functional corepressor required for regulation of neural-specific gene expression."
authors:
- Andrés ME
- Burger C
- Peral-Rubio MJ
- Battaglioli E
- Anderson ME
- Grimes J
- Dallman J
- Ballas N
- Mandel G
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.17.9873
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Co-Repressor Proteins
- DNA-Binding Proteins/physiology
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/chemistry, genetics, physiology"
- Neurons/physiology
- Rabbits
- "Repressor Proteins/chemistry, genetics, physiology"
- Transcription Factors
- Transfection
- Zinc Fingers
- RE1-Silencing Transcription Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CoREST: a functional corepressor required for regulation of neural-specific gene expression.
**Authors:** Andrés ME, Burger C, Peral-Rubio MJ, Battaglioli E, Anderson ME, Grimes J, Dallman J, Ballas N, Mandel G
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.17.9873](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.17.9873)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Aug 17;96(17):9873-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.96.17.9873.

CoREST: a functional corepressor required for regulation of neural-specific gene 
expression.

Andrés ME(1), Burger C, Peral-Rubio MJ, Battaglioli E, Anderson ME, Grimes J, 
Dallman J, Ballas N, Mandel G.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, 
State University of New York, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Several genes encoding proteins critical to the neuronal phenotype, such as the 
brain type II sodium channel gene, are expressed to high levels only in neurons. 
This cell specificity is due, in part, to long-term repression in nonneural 
cells mediated by the repressor protein REST/NRSF (RE1 silencing transcription 
factor/neural-restrictive silencing factor). We show here that CoREST, a newly 
identified human protein, functions as a corepressor for REST. A single zinc 
finger motif in REST is required for CoREST interaction. Mutations of the motif 
that disrupt binding also abrogate repression. When fused to a Gal4 DNA-binding 
domain, CoREST functions as a repressor. CoREST is present in cell lines that 
express REST, and the proteins are found in the same immunocomplex. CoREST 
contains two SANT (SW13/ADA2/NCoR/TFIIIB B) domains, a structural feature of the 
nuclear receptor and silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid human receptors 
(SMRT)-extended corepressors that mediate inducible repression by steroid 
hormone receptors. Together, REST and CoREST mediate repression of the type II 
sodium channel promoter in nonneural cells, and the REST/CoREST complex may 
mediate long-term repression essential to maintenance of cell identity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.17.9873
PMCID: PMC22303
PMID: 10449787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]