---
reference_id: "PMID:34198614"
title: "Monogenic Autoinflammatory Diseases: State of the Art and Future Perspectives."
authors:
- Di Donato G
- "d'Angelo DM"
- Breda L
- Chiarelli F
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22126360
keywords:
- Animals
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Inflammasomes/metabolism
- "Inflammation/immunology, pathology"
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monogenic Autoinflammatory Diseases: State of the Art and Future Perspectives.
**Authors:** Di Donato G, d'Angelo DM, Breda L, Chiarelli F
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22126360](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22126360)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jun 14;22(12):6360. doi: 10.3390/ijms22126360.

Monogenic Autoinflammatory Diseases: State of the Art and Future Perspectives.

Di Donato G(1), d'Angelo DM(1), Breda L(1), Chiarelli F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chieti, 66100 Chieti, Italy.

Systemic autoinflammatory diseases are a heterogeneous family of disorders 
characterized by a dysregulation of the innate immune system, in which sterile 
inflammation primarily develops through antigen-independent hyperactivation of 
immune pathways. In most cases, they have a strong genetic background, with 
mutations in single genes involved in inflammation. Therefore, they can derive 
from different pathogenic mechanisms at any level, such as dysregulated 
inflammasome-mediated production of cytokines, intracellular stress, defective 
regulatory pathways, altered protein folding, enhanced NF-kappaB signalling, 
ubiquitination disorders, interferon pathway upregulation and complement 
activation. Since the discover of pathogenic mutations of the pyrin-encoding 
gene MEFV in Familial Mediterranean Fever, more than 50 monogenic 
autoinflammatory diseases have been discovered thanks to the advances in genetic 
sequencing: the advent of new genetic analysis techniques and the discovery of 
genes involved in autoinflammatory diseases have allowed a better understanding 
of the underlying innate immunologic pathways and pathogenetic mechanisms, thus 
opening new perspectives in targeted therapies. Moreover, this field of research 
has become of great interest, since more than a hundred clinical trials for 
autoinflammatory diseases are currently active or recently concluded, allowing 
us to hope for considerable acquisitions for the next few years. General 
paediatricians need to be aware of the importance of this group of diseases and 
they should consider autoinflammatory diseases in patients with clinical 
hallmarks, in order to guide further examinations and refer the patient to a 
specialist rheumatologist. Here we resume the pathogenesis, clinical aspects and 
diagnosis of the most important autoinflammatory diseases in children.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22126360
PMCID: PMC8232320
PMID: 34198614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.