---
reference_id: "PMID:17163530"
title: COL2A1-related skeletal dysplasias with predominant metaphyseal involvement.
authors:
- Walter K
- Tansek M
- Tobias ES
- Ikegawa S
- Coucke P
- Hyland J
- Mortier G
- Iwaya T
- Nishimura G
- Superti-Furga A
- Unger S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31516
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COL2A1-related skeletal dysplasias with predominant metaphyseal involvement.
**Authors:** Walter K, Tansek M, Tobias ES, Ikegawa S, Coucke P, Hyland J, Mortier G, Iwaya T, Nishimura G, Superti-Furga A, Unger S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.31516](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.31516)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Jan 15;143A(2):161-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31516.

COL2A1-related skeletal dysplasias with predominant metaphyseal involvement.

Walter K(1), Tansek M, Tobias ES, Ikegawa S, Coucke P, Hyland J, Mortier G, 
Iwaya T, Nishimura G, Superti-Furga A, Unger S.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.

Skeletal dysplasias induced by mutations in the collagen 2 gene (the so-called 
"type 2 collagenopathies") form a wide spectrum in severity and are 
distinguished by subtle clinical and radiographic differential signs. The 
unifying features are predominant involvement of the vertebral bodies and the 
epiphyses of the long bones ("spondylo-epiphyseal" pattern). A mild degree of 
metaphyseal dysplasia can be seen in the so-called Strudwick variant of 
spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia and is generally mild or absent in other forms. 
We report here on four individuals with COL2A1 mutations associated with marked 
metaphyseal involvement with only mild epiphyseal and spondylar changes. One 
patient who carried a Gly283Arg substitution had a pattern of metaphyseal 
dysplasia that corresponded precisely to what was termed "Murdoch type 
metaphyseal dysplasia" in 1960s and was renamed Strudwick type SEMD in 1980s; 
the second patient carried a Gly181Arg substitution and had severe metaphyseal 
dysplasia with fractures at the metaphyses reminiscent of the "corner fractures" 
or Sutcliffe type spondylometaphyseal dysplasia. The third patient also had 
major metaphyseal involvement but more epiphyseal changes than the others in 
this study and had a Gly922Arg mutation in COL2A1. The final patient had a small 
in-frame deletion and unusually ballooned and distorted metaphyses. While it 
remains true that most individuals with COL2A1 mutations have chondrodysplasia 
with a spondylo-epiphyseal pattern, metaphyseal involvement is not incompatible 
with a COL2A1 dysplasia and mutation analysis can be indicated. The observation 
of these individuals with metaphyseal dysplasia indicates that the phenotypic 
spectrum associated with mutations in type 2 collagen, the main cartilage 
protein, is even wider than hitherto assumed.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31516
PMID: 17163530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]