---
reference_id: "PMID:21282188"
title: Mutations in PPIB (cyclophilin B) delay type I procollagen chain association and result in perinatal lethal to moderate osteogenesis imperfecta phenotypes.
authors:
- Pyott SM
- Schwarze U
- Christiansen HE
- Pepin MG
- Leistritz DF
- Dineen R
- Harris C
- Burton BK
- Angle B
- Kim K
- Sussman MD
- Weis M
- Eyre DR
- Russell DW
- McCarthy KJ
- Steiner RD
- Byers PH
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr037
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Collagen Type I/metabolism
- Cyclophilins/genetics
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Femur/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- Hydroxylation
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics
- Molecular Chaperones
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, mortality"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Procollagen/metabolism
- Procollagen-Proline Dioxygenase/metabolism
- Proline/metabolism
- Proline-Rich Protein Domains
- Prolyl Hydroxylases
- Protein Disulfide-Isomerases/metabolism
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Protein Stability
- Proteoglycans/genetics
- Radiography
- "Ribs/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Sequence Deletion
- "Skull/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in PPIB (cyclophilin B) delay type I procollagen chain association and result in perinatal lethal to moderate osteogenesis imperfecta phenotypes.
**Authors:** Pyott SM, Schwarze U, Christiansen HE, Pepin MG, Leistritz DF, Dineen R, Harris C, Burton BK, Angle B, Kim K, Sussman MD, Weis M, Eyre DR, Russell DW, McCarthy KJ, Steiner RD, Byers PH
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddr037](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddr037)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Apr 15;20(8):1595-609. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr037. Epub 2011 
Jan 31.

Mutations in PPIB (cyclophilin B) delay type I procollagen chain association and 
result in perinatal lethal to moderate osteogenesis imperfecta phenotypes.

Pyott SM(1), Schwarze U, Christiansen HE, Pepin MG, Leistritz DF, Dineen R, 
Harris C, Burton BK, Angle B, Kim K, Sussman MD, Weis M, Eyre DR, Russell DW, 
McCarthy KJ, Steiner RD, Byers PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7470, 
USA.

Recessive mutations in the cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP), leucine 
proline-enriched proteoglycan 1 (LEPRE1) and peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase 
B (PPIB) genes result in phenotypes that range from lethal in the perinatal 
period to severe deforming osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). These genes encode 
CRTAP (encoded by CRTAP), prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1 (P3H1; encoded by LEPRE1) and 
cyclophilin B (CYPB; encoded by PPIB), which reside in the rough endoplasmic 
reticulum (RER) and can form a complex involved in prolyl 3-hydroxylation in 
type I procollagen. CYPB, a prolyl cis-trans isomerase, has been thought to 
drive the prolyl-containing peptide bonds to the trans configuration needed for 
triple helix formation. Here, we describe mutations in PPIB identified in cells 
from three individuals with OI. Cultured dermal fibroblasts from the most 
severely affected infant make some overmodified type I procollagen molecules. 
Proα1(I) chains are slow to assemble into trimers, and abnormal procollagen 
molecules concentrate in the RER, and bind to protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) 
and prolyl 4-hydroxylase 1 (P4H1). These findings suggest that although CYPB 
plays a role in helix formation another effect is on folding of the C-terminal 
propeptide and trimer formation. The extent of procollagen accumulation and 
PDI/P4H1 binding differs among cells with mutations in PPIB, CRTAP and LEPRE1 
with the greatest amount in PPIB-deficient cells and the least in 
LEPRE1-deficient cells. These findings suggest that prolyl cis-trans isomerase 
may be required to effectively fold the proline-rich regions of the C-terminal 
propeptide to allow proα chain association and suggest an order of action for 
CRTAP, P3H1 and CYPB in procollagen biosynthesis and pathogenesis of OI.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr037
PMCID: PMC3063987
PMID: 21282188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]