---
reference_id: "PMID:27287282"
title: Renal Artery Pseudoaneurysm in Kawasaki Disease.
authors:
- Chen A
- DeBartolo M
- Darras F
- Ferretti J
- Wasnick R
journal: Urology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2016.05.053
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Aneurysm, False/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Angiography
- "Embolization, Therapeutic/methods"
- Female
- Humans
- Mucocutaneous Lymph Node Syndrome/complications
- Renal Artery
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal Artery Pseudoaneurysm in Kawasaki Disease.
**Authors:** Chen A, DeBartolo M, Darras F, Ferretti J, Wasnick R
**Journal:** Urology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.urology.2016.05.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.urology.2016.05.053)

## Content

1. Urology. 2016 Dec;98:165-166. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2016.05.053. Epub 2016
Jun  7.

Renal Artery Pseudoaneurysm in Kawasaki Disease.

Chen A(1), DeBartolo M(2), Darras F(2), Ferretti J(3), Wasnick R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Stony Brook University School of Medicine, Stony 
Brook, NY. Electronic address: a24chen@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Urology, Stony Brook University School of Medicine, Stony 
Brook, NY.
(3)Department of Radiology, Stony Brook University School of Medicine, Stony 
Brook, NY.

Whereas coronary aneurysms are commonly associated with Kawasaki disease, 
involvement of the renal vasculature is exceedingly rare. Genitourinary 
involvement in patients with Kawasaki disease is typically limited to sterile 
pyuria and proteinuria. In this case, a 13-year-old girl who presented with 
right flank pain and microhematuria was found to have an intraparenchymal 
hemorrhagic mass on computerized tomography scan. Renal arteriography confirmed 
the diagnosis of pseudoaneurysm in a lower pole segmental artery branch and 
complete occlusion was achieved with endovascular embolization.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.urology.2016.05.053
PMID: 27287282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]