---
reference_id: "PMID:19433291"
title: "Angiosarcoma of the breast: a clinicopathologic analysis of cases from the last 10 years."
authors:
- Wang XY
- Jakowski J
- Tawfik OW
- Thomas PA
- Fan F
journal: Ann Diagn Pathol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2009.02.001
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Breast Neoplasms/etiology, pathology, therapy"
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Female
- "Hemangiosarcoma/etiology, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Mastectomy
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/epidemiology"
- "Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced/pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angiosarcoma of the breast: a clinicopathologic analysis of cases from the last 10 years.
**Authors:** Wang XY, Jakowski J, Tawfik OW, Thomas PA, Fan F
**Journal:** Ann Diagn Pathol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2009.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2009.02.001)

## Content

1. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2009 Jun;13(3):147-50. doi:
10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2009.02.001.  Epub 2009 Apr 1.

Angiosarcoma of the breast: a clinicopathologic analysis of cases from the last
10 years.

Wang XY(1), Jakowski J, Tawfik OW, Thomas PA, Fan F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Breast angiosarcoma may occur de novo, or as a complication of radiation
therapy, or chronic lymphedema secondary to axillary lymph node dissection for
mammary carcinoma. In our effort to characterize the clinicopathologic features
of breast angiosarcoma, we reviewed all breast angiosarcoma cases in the
University of Kansas Medical Center and Ohio State University Medical Center
archives from 1997 to 2007. Clinical histories and follow-up data for identified
patients were reviewed. The tumors were graded histologically according to
Rosen's method. Only 11 angiosarcomas were identified among more than 5000
malignant breast neoplasms (0.1%-0.2% incidence) for the last 10 years. Eight
cases (6 high grade, 1 intermediate grade, 1 low grade) were identified as
postradiation angiosarcoma (postradiation time interval, 4-12 years), and 3
cases were identified as primary angiosarcomas (1 high grade, 2 low grade).
Follow-up (median, 36 months) revealed that 3 cases of postradiation
angiosarcoma recurred as skin and/or chest wall lesions and 1 case of primary
angiosarcoma developed liver metastases (all high-grade). In conclusion, breast
angiosarcoma remains a rare disease. Rosen's method for grading breast
angiosarcoma is easy to implement and correlates well with clinical outcome.
There are no distinct clinical or histologic differences between primary and
postradiation breast angiosarcomas.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2009.02.001
PMID: 19433291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
