---
reference_id: "PMID:12612583"
title: Localized mutations in the gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein filamin A cause diverse malformations in humans.
authors:
- Robertson SP
- Twigg SR
- Sutherland-Smith AJ
- Biancalana V
- Gorlin RJ
- Horn D
- Kenwrick SJ
- Kim CA
- Morava E
- Newbury-Ecob R
- Orstavik KH
- Quarrell OW
- Schwartz CE
- Shears DJ
- Suri M
- Kendrick-Jones J
- Wilkie AO
- OPD-spectrum Disorders Clinical Collaborative Group
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1038/ng1119
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- Contractile Proteins/genetics
- Cytoskeleton/metabolism
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Filamins
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Introns
- Male
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- "Models, Genetic"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Phylogeny
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Signal Transduction
- Syndrome
- Tissue Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Localized mutations in the gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein filamin A cause diverse malformations in humans.
**Authors:** Robertson SP, Twigg SR, Sutherland-Smith AJ, Biancalana V, Gorlin RJ, Horn D, Kenwrick SJ, Kim CA, Morava E, Newbury-Ecob R, Orstavik KH, Quarrell OW, Schwartz CE, Shears DJ, Suri M, Kendrick-Jones J, Wilkie AO, OPD-spectrum Disorders Clinical Collaborative Group
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1119](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1119)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2003 Apr;33(4):487-91. doi: 10.1038/ng1119. Epub 2003 Mar 3.

Localized mutations in the gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein filamin A 
cause diverse malformations in humans.

Robertson SP(1), Twigg SR, Sutherland-Smith AJ, Biancalana V, Gorlin RJ, Horn D, 
Kenwrick SJ, Kim CA, Morava E, Newbury-Ecob R, Orstavik KH, Quarrell OW, 
Schwartz CE, Shears DJ, Suri M, Kendrick-Jones J, Wilkie AO; OPD-spectrum 
Disorders Clinical Collaborative Group.

Author information:
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Room 304, The John Radcliffe, 
Headley Way, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. stephen.robertson@stonebow.otago.ac.nz

Remodeling of the cytoskeleton is central to the modulation of cell shape and 
migration. Filamin A, encoded by the gene FLNA, is a widely expressed protein 
that regulates re-organization of the actin cytoskeleton by interacting with 
integrins, transmembrane receptor complexes and second messengers. We identified 
localized mutations in FLNA that conserve the reading frame and lead to a broad 
range of congenital malformations, affecting craniofacial structures, skeleton, 
brain, viscera and urogenital tract, in four X-linked human disorders: 
otopalatodigital syndrome types 1 (OPD1; OMIM 311300) and 2 (OPD2; OMIM 304120), 
frontometaphyseal dysplasia (FMD; OMIM 305620) and Melnick-Needles syndrome 
(MNS; OMIM 309350). Several mutations are recurrent, and all are clustered into 
four regions of the gene: the actin-binding domain and rod domain repeats 3, 10 
and 14/15. Our findings contrast with previous observations that loss of 
function of FLNA is embryonic lethal in males but manifests in females as a 
localized neuronal migration disorder, called periventricular nodular 
heterotopia (PVNH; refs. 3-6). The patterns of mutation, X-chromosome 
inactivation and phenotypic manifestations in the newly described mutations 
indicate that they have gain-of-function effects, implicating filamin A in 
signaling pathways that mediate organogenesis in multiple systems during 
embryonic development.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1119
PMID: 12612583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]