---
reference_id: "PMID:24049096"
title: Novel cases of D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria with IDH1 or IDH2 mosaic mutations identified by amplicon deep sequencing.
authors:
- Nota B
- Hamilton EM
- Sie D
- Ozturk S
- van Dooren SJ
- Ojeda MR
- Jakobs C
- Christensen E
- Kirk EP
- Sykut-Cegielska J
- Lund AM
- van der Knaap MS
- Salomons GS
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-101961
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel cases of D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria with IDH1 or IDH2 mosaic mutations identified by amplicon deep sequencing.
**Authors:** Nota B, Hamilton EM, Sie D, Ozturk S, van Dooren SJ, Ojeda MR, Jakobs C, Christensen E, Kirk EP, Sykut-Cegielska J, Lund AM, van der Knaap MS, Salomons GS
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-101961](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-101961)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2013 Nov;50(11):754-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-101961. Epub 
2013 Sep 18.

Novel cases of D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria with IDH1 or IDH2 mosaic mutations 
identified by amplicon deep sequencing.

Nota B(1), Hamilton EM, Sie D, Ozturk S, van Dooren SJ, Ojeda MR, Jakobs C, 
Christensen E, Kirk EP, Sykut-Cegielska J, Lund AM, van der Knaap MS, Salomons 
GS.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Unit, Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Mosaic IDH1 mutations are described as the cause of metaphyseal 
chondromatosis with increased urinary excretion of D-2-hydroxyglutarate 
(MC-HGA), and mutations in IDH2 as the cause of D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria 
(D-2HGA) type II. Mosaicism for IDH2 mutations has not previously been reported 
as a cause of D-2HGA. Here we describe three cases: one MC-HGA case with IDH1 
mosaic mutations, and two D-2HGA type II cases. In one D-2HGA case we identified 
mosaicism for an IDH2 mutation as the genetic cause of this disorder; the other 
D-2HGA case was caused by a heterozygous IDH2 mutation, while the unaffected 
mother was a mosaic carrier.
METHODS: We performed amplicon deep sequencing using the 454 GS Junior platform, 
next to Sanger sequencing, to identify and confirm mosaicism of IDH1 or IDH2 
mutations in MC-HGA or D-2HGA, respectively.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We identified different mutant allele percentages in 
DNA samples derived from different tissues (blood vs fibroblasts). Furthermore, 
we found that mutant allele percentages of IDH1 decreased after more passages 
had occurred in fibroblast cell cultures. We describe a method for the detection 
and validation of mosaic mutations in IDH1 and IDH2, making quantification with 
laborious cloning techniques obsolete.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-101961
PMID: 24049096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]