---
reference_id: "PMID:3057886"
title: "Type II achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis: morphologic and immunohistopathologic studies."
authors:
- Godfrey M
- Keene DR
- Blank E
- Hori H
- Sakai LY
- Sherwin LA
- Hollister DW
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1988'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type II achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis: morphologic and immunohistopathologic studies.
**Authors:** Godfrey M, Keene DR, Blank E, Hori H, Sakai LY, Sherwin LA, Hollister DW
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1988)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1988 Dec;43(6):894-903.

Type II achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis: morphologic and 
immunohistopathologic studies.

Godfrey M(1), Keene DR, Blank E, Hori H, Sakai LY, Sherwin LA, Hollister DW.

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children, Portland, OR 97201.

A 32-wk-gestation female with type II achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis has 
been studied. The clinical features were typical, and radiographs revealed short 
ribs, hypoplastic ilia, absence of ossification of sacrum, pubis, ischia, tali, 
calcanei, and many vertebral bodies; the long bones were short with mild 
metaphyseal flaring. The femoral cylinder index was 6.3. Comparison with 
previous cases placed the patient toward the mild end of the 
achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis spectrum (Whitley-Gorlin prototype IV). Light 
microscopy revealed hypercellular cartilage with decreased matrix traversed by 
numerous fibrous vascular canals. The growth plate was markedly abnormal. 
Ultrastructural studies revealed prominently dilated rough endoplasmic reticulum 
containing a fine granular material with occasional fibrils in all chondrocytes. 
Immunohistologic studies indicated irregular large areas of cartilage matrix 
staining with monoclonal antibody to human type III collagen. The relative 
intensity of matrix staining for type II collagen appeared diminished. More 
striking, however, were intense focal accumulations of type II collagen within 
small rounded perinuclear structures of most chondrocytes but not other cell 
types. These results strongly suggest intracellular retention of type II 
collagen within vacuolar structures, probably within the dilated rough 
endoplasmic reticulum observed in all chondrocytes by electron microscopy (EM), 
and imply the presence of an abnormal, poorly secreted type II collagen 
molecule. Biochemical studies (see companion paper) suggest that this patient 
had a new dominant lethal disorder caused by a structural abnormality of type II 
collagen.

PMCID: PMC1715601
PMID: 3057886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]