---
reference_id: "PMID:38344303"
title: Tbx5 maintains atrial identity in post-natal cardiomyocytes by regulating an atrial-specific enhancer network.
authors:
- Sweat ME
- Cao Y
- Zhang X
- Burnicka-Turek O
- Perez-Cervantes C
- Arulsamy K
- Lu F
- Keating EM
- Akerberg BN
- Ma Q
- Wakimoto H
- Gorham JM
- Hill LD
- Kyoung Song M
- Trembley MA
- Wang P
- Gianeselli M
- Prondzynski M
- Bortolin RH
- Bezzerides VJ
- Chen K
- Seidman JG
- Seidman CE
- Moskowitz IP
- Pu WT
journal: Nat Cardiovasc Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s44161-023-00334-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tbx5 maintains atrial identity in post-natal cardiomyocytes by regulating an atrial-specific enhancer network.
**Authors:** Sweat ME, Cao Y, Zhang X, Burnicka-Turek O, Perez-Cervantes C, Arulsamy K, Lu F, Keating EM, Akerberg BN, Ma Q, Wakimoto H, Gorham JM, Hill LD, Kyoung Song M, Trembley MA, Wang P, Gianeselli M, Prondzynski M, Bortolin RH, Bezzerides VJ, Chen K, Seidman JG, Seidman CE, Moskowitz IP, Pu WT
**Journal:** Nat Cardiovasc Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s44161-023-00334-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44161-023-00334-7)

## Content

1. Nat Cardiovasc Res. 2023 Oct;2(10):881-898. doi: 10.1038/s44161-023-00334-7. 
Epub 2023 Oct 12.

Tbx5 maintains atrial identity in post-natal cardiomyocytes by regulating an 
atrial-specific enhancer network.

Sweat ME(1), Cao Y(1)(2), Zhang X(1), Burnicka-Turek O(3), Perez-Cervantes C(3), 
Arulsamy K(1), Lu F(1), Keating EM(1), Akerberg BN(1), Ma Q(1), Wakimoto H(4), 
Gorham JM(4), Hill LD(1), Kyoung Song M(1)(5), Trembley MA(1), Wang P(1), 
Gianeselli M(1), Prondzynski M(1), Bortolin RH(1), Bezzerides VJ(1), Chen K(1), 
Seidman JG(3), Seidman CE(3), Moskowitz IP(2), Pu WT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave, 
Boston, MA 02115.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Southern University of 
Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Pathology, and Human Genetics, The University of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(4)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.

Erratum in
    Nat Cardiovasc Res. 2023 Nov;2(11):1095. doi: 10.1038/s44161-023-00373-0.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Apr 22:2023.04.21.537535. doi: 10.1101/2023.04.21.537535.

Understanding how the atrial and ventricular heart chambers maintain distinct 
identities is a prerequisite for treating chamber-specific diseases. Here, we 
selectively knocked out (KO) the transcription factor Tbx5 in the atrial working 
myocardium to evaluate its requirement for atrial identity. Atrial Tbx5 
inactivation downregulated atrial cardiomyocyte (aCM) selective gene expression. 
Using concurrent single nucleus transcriptome and open chromatin profiling, 
genomic accessibility differences were identified between control and Tbx5 KO 
aCMs, revealing that 69% of the control-enriched ATAC regions were bound by 
TBX5. Genes associated with these regions were downregulated in KO aCMs, 
suggesting they function as TBX5-dependent enhancers. Comparing enhancer 
chromatin looping using H3K27ac HiChIP identified 510 chromatin loops sensitive 
to TBX5 dosage, and 74.8% of control-enriched loops contained anchors in 
control-enriched ATAC regions. Together, these data demonstrate TBX5 maintains 
the atrial gene expression program by binding to and preserving the 
tissue-specific chromatin architecture of atrial enhancers.

DOI: 10.1038/s44161-023-00334-7
PMCID: PMC10854392
PMID: 38344303

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS The authors have no 
competing interests to declare.