---
reference_id: "PMID:26033643"
title: "FVC deterioration, airway obstruction determination, and life span in Ataxia telangiectasia."
authors:
- Vilozni D
- Lavie M
- Sarouk I
- Bar-Aluma BE
- Dagan A
- Ashkenazi M
- Ofek M
- Efrati O
journal: Respir Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.05.013
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Airway Obstruction/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/complications, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Lung/physiopathology
- Male
- Maximal Midexpiratory Flow Rate/physiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Vital Capacity/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FVC deterioration, airway obstruction determination, and life span in Ataxia telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Vilozni D, Lavie M, Sarouk I, Bar-Aluma BE, Dagan A, Ashkenazi M, Ofek M, Efrati O
**Journal:** Respir Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2015.05.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2015.05.013)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2015 Jul;109(7):890-6. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.05.013. Epub 2015
May 21.

FVC deterioration, airway obstruction determination, and life span in Ataxia
telangiectasia.

Vilozni D(1), Lavie M(2), Sarouk I(2), Bar-Aluma BE(2), Dagan A(2), Ashkenazi
M(2), Ofek M(2), Efrati O(2).

Author information:
(1)The Pediatric Pulmonary Unit and the Ataxia Telangiectasia National Clinic,
The Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Affiliated
with the Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel. Electronic
address: daphna.vilozni@sheba.health.gov.il.
(2)The Pediatric Pulmonary Unit and the Ataxia Telangiectasia National Clinic,
The Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Affiliated
with the Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel.

RATIONALE: Forced vital capacity (FVC) values decrease with progress of the
disease in Ataxia telangiectasia (AT).
OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of this process on airway obstruction
determination and life span in AT.
METHODS: Clinical data and yearly best spirometry maneuvers were collected
retrospectively from 37 AT patients (196 spirometry tests) during 5.4 ± 1.8yrs
(initial age 4-21 y). Twelve patients were walking (7 of them had recurrent
respiratory system infections); 25 subjects were confined to wheelchair, of them
8 patients were towards end-stage lung disease. Spirometry indices included
Forced Vital Capacity (FVC), mid-expiratory-flow (FEF25-75), and tidal volume
(VT). We calculated FEF25-75/FVC and VT/FVC ratios.
RESULTS: FVC declined from 67 ± 8 while walking to 19 ± 6 %predicted values.
FEF25-75 values that were elevated (116 ± 23 %predicted) while walking,
decreased to 69 ± 27 %predicted at end-stage where 7 patients responded to
bronchodilators. VT/FVC ratio was 0.25 ± 0.06 while walking, increased to 0.35
once on wheelchairs, and further increased to 0.57 ± 0.19 at end-stage disease.
FEF25-75/FVC ratio was 2.54 ± 0.70 above normal (∼1.0) increasing to
4.16 ± 0.75 at end stage. A sharp elevation was seen in FEF25-75/FVC ratio when
FEV1 was still ∼45 %predicted and 2-years prior to death.
CONCLUSIONS: Having a low baseline-FVC (60% predicted) artificially raises
FEF25-75 values, so FEF25-75 of "mild obstruction" values may indicate severe
airway obstruction in AT subjects. VT/FVC and FEF25-75/FVC ratios may therefore
assist in revealing higher than normal breathing effort. The results further
suggest adding VT/FVC and FEF25-75/FVC ratios to pulmonary function assessments
in patients with AT.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.05.013
PMID: 26033643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
