---
reference_id: "PMID:12454961"
title: "Prenatal diagnosis of atelosteogenesis type I at 21 weeks' gestation."
authors:
- Ueno K
- Tanaka M
- Miyakoshi K
- Zhao C
- Shinmoto H
- Nishimura G
- Yoshimura Y
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1002/pd.470
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal diagnosis of atelosteogenesis type I at 21 weeks' gestation.
**Authors:** Ueno K, Tanaka M, Miyakoshi K, Zhao C, Shinmoto H, Nishimura G, Yoshimura Y
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.470](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.470)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 2002 Dec;22(12):1071-5. doi: 10.1002/pd.470.

Prenatal diagnosis of atelosteogenesis type I at 21 weeks' gestation.

Ueno K(1), Tanaka M, Miyakoshi K, Zhao C, Shinmoto H, Nishimura G, Yoshimura Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Keio University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan. kueno@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

We describe prenatal diagnosis in a male fetus at 21 weeks of gestation with 
atelosteogenesis type I (AO I). Fetal ultrasonography (US) revealed absent or 
deficient ossification of the posterior neural arches of the thoracic spine, 
humeri, radii, ulnae, fibulae, and short tubular bones other than the distal 
phalanges, in addition to extremely short, thick femora. Fetal magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) using an ultrafast imaging sequence depicted dysmorphic 
features, pulmonary hypoplasia, and large cisterna magna. Postmortem radiographs 
warranted a diagnosis of AO I. Autopsy corroborated not only pulmonary 
hypoplasia but also laryngeal stenosis. The chondro-osseous histological 
findings were consistent with those of AO I. Meticulous evaluation using fetal 
US and MRI permits a definitive prenatal diagnosis of AO I to be made.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.470
PMID: 12454961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]