---
reference_id: "PMID:34494333"
title: "Reproductive prognosis of patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: Retrospective review of 16 cases with amenorrhea."
authors:
- Oride A
- Kanasaki H
- Okada H
- Kyo S
journal: J Obstet Gynaecol Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jog.15006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reproductive prognosis of patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: Retrospective review of 16 cases with amenorrhea.
**Authors:** Oride A, Kanasaki H, Okada H, Kyo S
**Journal:** J Obstet Gynaecol Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jog.15006](https://doi.org/10.1111/jog.15006)

## Content

1. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2021 Nov;47(11):3895-3902. doi: 10.1111/jog.15006. Epub
 2021 Sep 7.

Reproductive prognosis of patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: 
Retrospective review of 16 cases with amenorrhea.

Oride A(1), Kanasaki H(1), Okada H(1), Kyo S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shimane University School of 
Medicine, Izumo, Japan.

AIM: The aim of this study was to evaluate the general characteristics, 
menstruation status, and fertility outcomes of patients with hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism (HH).
METHODS: We evaluated 16 patients with HH who visited our institution between 
April 2012 and March 2016 with a complaint of amenorrhea.
RESULTS: Four (25%) patients had primary amenorrhea and the remaining 12 (75%) 
cases had secondary amenorrhea. Among the patients with primary amenorrhea, 
weight loss was considered to be the underlying cause in one (25%) patient, 
whereas the remaining three (75%) cases were idiopathic HH. Among HH cases with 
secondary amenorrhea, six (50%) developed amenorrhea following weight loss, 
whereas the remaining six cases were of unknown etiology. Among the 16 patients 
with HH, we observed the sporadic restart of the menstrual cycle in four (25%) 
women during follow-up. Infertility treatment was administered to nine patients 
with HH who wished to become pregnant. Clomiphene citrate was effective in four 
patients with secondary amenorrhea and induced follicular development. Seven of 
nine patients with HH (77.8%) became pregnant following infertility treatment. 
In some cases of HH, the serum levels of gonadotropin increased sporadically 
during follow-up, regardless of the recovery of menstruation. We followed one 
patient with HH for more than 20 years. Although her gonadotropin levels were 
generally low and sometimes fluctuated without spontaneous menstruation, they 
increased dramatically to menopausal levels at 50 years of age. However, they 
again decreased to hypogonadotropic levels.
CONCLUSION: As the pathophysiology varied widely among patients, the etiologic 
factors underlying HH might also vary.

© 2021 Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

DOI: 10.1111/jog.15006
PMID: 34494333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]