---
reference_id: "PMID:16420246"
title: "HLA class II haplotype DRB1*04-DQB1*0301 contributes to risk of familial generalized vitiligo and early disease onset."
authors:
- Fain PR
- Babu SR
- Bennett DC
- Spritz RA
journal: Pigment Cell Res
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0749.2005.00279.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA class II haplotype DRB1*04-DQB1*0301 contributes to risk of familial generalized vitiligo and early disease onset.
**Authors:** Fain PR, Babu SR, Bennett DC, Spritz RA
**Journal:** Pigment Cell Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0749.2005.00279.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0749.2005.00279.x)

## Content

1. Pigment Cell Res. 2006 Feb;19(1):51-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0749.2005.00279.x.

HLA class II haplotype DRB1*04-DQB1*0301 contributes to risk of familial 
generalized vitiligo and early disease onset.

Fain PR(1), Babu SR, Bennett DC, Spritz RA.

Author information:
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, University of Colorado at Denver and Health 
Sciences Center, Aurora, USA.

Generalized vitiligo is a common autoimmune disorder characterized by white 
patches of skin and overlying hair caused by loss of pigment-forming melanocytes 
from involved areas. Familial clustering of vitiligo is not uncommon, and 
patients and their relatives are at increased risk for a specific complex of 
other autoimmune diseases. Compared with sporadic vitiligo, familial vitiligo is 
characterized by earlier disease onset and greater risk and broader repertoire 
of autoimmunity, suggesting a stronger genetic component, and perhaps stronger 
associations with specific alleles. To determine whether the major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) contributes to the familial clustering of 
vitiligo and vitiligo-associated autoimmune/autoinflammatory diseases, we 
performed case-control and family-based association analyses of HLA class 
II-DRB1 and -DQB1 alleles and haplotypes in affected probands and their parents 
from 76 European-American Caucasian families with familial vitiligo. Affected 
probands showed a significantly increased frequency of DRB1*04-DQB1*0301 and a 
significantly decreased frequency of DRB1*15-DQB1*0602 compared with a large 
sample of reference chromosomes. Family-based association analyses confirmed 
these results. Probands with DRB1*04-DQB1*0301 developed vitiligo an average of 
13.32 yr earlier than probands with DRB1*15-DQB1*0602. Overall, our results 
indicate that specific MHC-linked genetic variation contributes to risk of 
familial vitiligo, although HLA does not completely explain familial clustering 
of vitiligo-associated autoimmune/autoinflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0749.2005.00279.x
PMID: 16420246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]