---
reference_id: "PMID:24429902"
title: Etiology and pathogenesis of late-onset Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Balin BJ
- Hudson AP
journal: Curr Allergy Asthma Rep
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s11882-013-0417-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etiology and pathogenesis of late-onset Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Balin BJ, Hudson AP
**Journal:** Curr Allergy Asthma Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11882-013-0417-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11882-013-0417-1)

## Content

1. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2014 Mar;14(3):417. doi: 10.1007/s11882-013-0417-1.

Etiology and pathogenesis of late-onset Alzheimer's disease.

Balin BJ(1), Hudson AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, Immunology, and Forensic Medicine, 
Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, 4170 City Avenue, Philadelphia, 
PA, 1913, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative condition that occurs in two 
forms, an early-onset form that is genetically determined and a far more common 
late-onset form that is not. In both cases, the disease results in severe 
cognitive dysfunction, among other problems, and the late-onset form of the 
disease is now considered to be the most common cause of dementia among the 
elderly. While a good deal of research has been focused on elucidating the 
etiology of the late-onset form for more than two decades, results to date have 
been modest and have not yet engendered useful therapeutic strategies for cure 
of the disease. In this review, we discuss the prevalent ideas that have 
governed this research for several years, and we challenge these ideas with 
alternative findings suggesting a multifactorial etiology. We review promising 
newer ideas that may prove effective as therapeutic interventions for late-onset 
AD, as well as providing reliable means of earlier and more specific diagnosis 
of the disease process. In the discussions included here, we reference relevant 
clinical and basic science literature underlying research into disease etiology 
and pathogenesis, and we highlight current reviews on the various topics 
addressed.

DOI: 10.1007/s11882-013-0417-1
PMID: 24429902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]