---
reference_id: "PMID:2380628"
title: Abnormal urinary excretion of unsaturated dicarboxylic acids in patients with medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
authors:
- Tserng KY
- Jin SJ
- Kerr DS
- Hoppel CL
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '1990'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal urinary excretion of unsaturated dicarboxylic acids in patients with medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** Tserng KY, Jin SJ, Kerr DS, Hoppel CL
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (1990)

## Content

1. J Lipid Res. 1990 May;31(5):763-71.

Abnormal urinary excretion of unsaturated dicarboxylic acids in patients with 
medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.

Tserng KY(1), Jin SJ, Kerr DS, Hoppel CL.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Administration Medical Center, Cleveland, OH 44106.

Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency is the most frequently 
described metabolic disorder of fatty acid oxidation in humans. Acute episodes 
are usually characterized biochemically by the appearance of nonketotic 
dicarboxylic aciduria. In addition, other abnormal metabolites, such as 
suberylglycine, n-hexanoylglycine, 3-phenylpropionylglycine, and 
octanoylcarnitine, are excreted in the urine. Urinary organic acids were 
determined using dual capillary column gas-liquid chromatography and gas-liquid 
chromatography/mass spectrometry. In three cases of MCAD deficiency we observed 
a disproportionate increase in the excretion of unsaturated dicarboxylic acids 
compared to either fasting control children with expected ketotic dicarboxylic 
aciduria or patients with nonketotic dicarboxylic aciduria not associated with 
MCAD deficiency. The most significant increase was in the urinary excretion of 
cis-4-decendioic acid. Additionally, the urinary excretions of cis-3-octenedioic 
and cis-5-decenedioic acids were slightly decreased whereas the excretion of 
cis-5-dodecenedioic acid was increased. These data are consistent with the 
notion that as a result of MCAD deficiency the metabolic oxidation of 
unsaturated fatty acids such as linoleate and oleate is inhibited more than 
saturated fatty acids.

PMID: 2380628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]