---
reference_id: "PMID:2720234"
title: "Prevention of HIV transmission through blood and blood products: experiences in Mexico."
authors:
- Sepúlveda Amor J
- de Lourdes García M
- Domínguez Tórix JL
- Valdespino Gómez JL
journal: Bull Pan Am Health Organ
year: '1989'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of HIV transmission through blood and blood products: experiences in Mexico.
**Authors:** Sepúlveda Amor J, de Lourdes García M, Domínguez Tórix JL, Valdespino Gómez JL
**Journal:** Bull Pan Am Health Organ (1989)

## Content

1. Bull Pan Am Health Organ. 1989;23(1-2):108-14.

Prevention of HIV transmission through blood and blood products: experiences in 
Mexico.

Sepúlveda Amor J, de Lourdes García M, Domínguez Tórix JL, Valdespino Gómez JL.

As of August 1988, 1,628 cases of AIDS had been reported in Mexico, of which 12% 
were ascribed to transmission through blood. Of the 201 subjects infected by 
blood, 159 (79%) were infected through transfusions. The relatively high number 
of such cases was found to be associated with a prevalence of HIV infection of 
7% among paid donors as compared with a prevalence of 0.1% among volunteer 
donors. A National AIDS Prevention Committee has been established in Mexico, and 
amendments to the country's General Health Law mandate compulsory screening to 
detect HIV infection among all donors and prohibit the sale of blood. A national 
network of screening laboratories was established and an educational campaign 
initiated among health personnel. Evaluation of this program shows that the 
current frequency of HIV infection in donors is 0.04%.

PMID: 2720234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]