---
reference_id: "PMID:6119011"
title: Serotonin and dopamine synthesis in phenylketonuria.
authors:
- Curtius HC
- Niederwieser A
- Viscontini M
- Leimbacher W
- Wegmann H
- Blehova B
- Rey F
- Schaub J
- Schmidt H
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '1981'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4684-3860-4_16
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serotonin and dopamine synthesis in phenylketonuria.
**Authors:** Curtius HC, Niederwieser A, Viscontini M, Leimbacher W, Wegmann H, Blehova B, Rey F, Schaub J, Schmidt H
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (1981)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4684-3860-4_16](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4684-3860-4_16)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1981;133:277-91. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4684-3860-4_16.

Serotonin and dopamine synthesis in phenylketonuria.

Curtius HC, Niederwieser A, Viscontini M, Leimbacher W, Wegmann H, Blehova B, 
Rey F, Schaub J, Schmidt H.

Two regulation systems of the serotonin and dopamine biosynthesis in patients 
with classical and atypical PKU were investigated. In classical PKU, the 
serotonin and dopamine biosynthesis is inhibited by high L-phenylalanine in 
blood and tissues. The dopamine formation in vivo was inhibited by phenylalanine 
blood concentrations higher than 25 mg/dl: the serotonin formation was inhibited 
even at a phenylalanine blood concentration of only 8 mg/dl. In two patients 
with dihydrobiopterin synthetase deficiency, the dopamine, and even more 
pronounced the serotonin, excretions are considerably reduced. The dopamine 
excretion was reduced to about 50% and the serotonin excretion to only 10% 
compared to controls. Under BH4 therapy (16 mg daily), the dopamine values 
increased about twice, serotonin threefold and the phenylalanine blood 
concentration normalized to 1-1.5 mg/dl. On loading a patient with BH2 
synthetase deficiency with 50 mg/kg deuterated tryptophan-d5 and 150 mg/kg 
deuterated tyrosine d2 (phenylalanine blood concentration of 16 mg/dl), 
deuterated dopamine d1 and serotonin d4 could only be formed in detectable 
amounts after BH4 administration. During BH4 therapy the amount of dopamine d1 
and serotonin d4 formed was lower than but comparable to normal controls.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4684-3860-4_16
PMID: 6119011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]