---
reference_id: "PMID:31789967"
title: "Intratympanic Treatment in Menière's Disease, Efficacy of Aminoglycosides Versus Corticosteroids in Comparison Studies: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Yaz F
- Ziylan F
- Smeeing DPJ
- Thomeer HGXM
journal: Otol Neurotol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000002451
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intratympanic Treatment in Menière's Disease, Efficacy of Aminoglycosides Versus Corticosteroids in Comparison Studies: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Yaz F, Ziylan F, Smeeing DPJ, Thomeer HGXM
**Journal:** Otol Neurotol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MAO.0000000000002451](https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0000000000002451)

## Content

1. Otol Neurotol. 2020 Jan;41(1):1-10. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000002451.

Intratympanic Treatment in Menière's Disease, Efficacy of Aminoglycosides Versus 
Corticosteroids in Comparison Studies: A Systematic Review.

Yaz F(1), Ziylan F(2), Smeeing DPJ(3), Thomeer HGXM(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, University 
Medical Center Utrecht.
(2)Amsterdam University Medical Center, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Ear & Hearing, Amsterdam Public 
Health Research Institute, De Boelelaan 1117, Amsterdam.
(3)Department of Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht.
(4)Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Otol Neurotol. 2020 Sep;41(8):e1066-e1067. doi: 
10.1097/MAO.0000000000002816.
    Otol Neurotol. 2020 Sep;41(8):e1067-e1068. doi: 
10.1097/MAO.0000000000002817.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the functional outcomes and complications of intratympanic 
gentamicin (ITG) versus intratympanic corticosteroids (ITC) in Menière's 
disease.
DATA SOURCES: An electronic search was conducted in the Cochrane Library, 
PubMed, and Embase databases on February 3, 2019. Articles written in English, 
Dutch, German, French, or Turkish language were included.
STUDY SELECTION: Study inclusion criteria were: 1) patients diagnosed with 
definite Menière's disease according to the criteria of the American Academy of 
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, 2) treated with ITG or ITC in a comparison 
study, and 3) reported subjective and objective outcomes concerning Menière's 
disease.
DATA EXTRACTION: The quality of eligible studies was assessed according to an 
adjusted version of the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool. The extracted data were 
study characteristics (study design, publication year, and number of relevant 
patients), patient's characteristics (sex and age), disease characteristics (uni 
or bilateral and duration of Menière's disease), treatment protocol, and 
different therapeutic outcomes (vertigo, tinnitus, aural fullness, and hearing 
loss).
DATA SYNTHESIS: A total of eight articles were included for data extraction and 
analysis. For subjective outcomes, ITG was slightly favored compared to 
intratympanic corticosteroids. This was significant only in three studies 
(p < 0.05). For objective outcomes and complications, no significant differences 
were seen.
CONCLUSIONS: The result of this systematic review shows some benefit of ITG over 
ITC for subjective outcomes and no difference regarding objective outcomes or 
complication rate. However, this superiority of ITG is rather weak. Both 
interventions can be effectively and safely used in controlling Menière's 
disease in acute situations.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000002451
PMID: 31789967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]