---
reference_id: "PMID:28799855"
title: Surgical management of cervical spine deformity in chondrodysplasia punctata.
authors:
- Morota N
- Ihara S
- Ogiwara H
- Tamura G
journal: J Neurosurg Pediatr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3171/2017.5.PEDS16554
keywords:
- Bone Screws
- "Cervical Cord/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata/complications, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Decompression, Surgical/methods"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Joint Instability/etiology, surgery"
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- "Spinal Diseases/etiology, surgery"
- Spinal Fusion/methods
- "Tomography Scanners, X-Ray Computed"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical management of cervical spine deformity in chondrodysplasia punctata.
**Authors:** Morota N, Ihara S, Ogiwara H, Tamura G
**Journal:** J Neurosurg Pediatr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3171/2017.5.PEDS16554](https://doi.org/10.3171/2017.5.PEDS16554)

## Content

1. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2017 Oct;20(4):378-387. doi: 10.3171/2017.5.PEDS16554.
Epub  2017 Aug 11.

Surgical management of cervical spine deformity in chondrodysplasia punctata.

Morota N(1), Ihara S(1), Ogiwara H(2), Tamura G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical Center; and.
(2)Divison of Neurosurgery, National Center for Child Health and Development, 
Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP), a rare skeletal dysplasia, can lead 
to cervical spine instability and deformity. However, an optimal neurosurgical 
intervention has yet to be established. Thus, a retrospective study was 
conducted to assess the efficacy of various surgical interventions for children 
with CDP. METHODS The authors retrospectively reviewed 9 cases of CDP in which 
cervical decompression with or without posterior fusion was performed between 
April 2007 and May 2016. Patient demographics, preoperative clinical conditions, 
radiographic findings, surgical procedures, and the postoperative course were 
analyzed in detail. RESULTS A total of 12 operations were carried out in 9 
patients (8 male, 1 female) during the study period. The patients' ages at the 
initial surgery ranged from 2 months to 2 years. Seven of the children had 
CDPX1, 1 had CDPX2, and 1 had tibia-metacarpal type CDP (CDP-TM). The lesion 
occurred at the craniovertebral junction (CVJ) in 7 cases and involved a 
subaxial deformity in 2 cases. The initial surgery was C-1 laminectomy with 
occipitocervical fusion (OCF) followed by halo external fixation in 5 cases, OCF 
alone in 1 case, and C-1 laminectomy alone in 3 cases. Three children required 
additional surgery. In one of these cases, a staged operation was required 
because the patient's head was too small to attach a halo ring at the time of 
the initial procedure (C-1 laminectomy). In another case, OCF was performed 11 
months after C-1 laminectomy because of intramedullary signal change on serial 
MRI, although the child remained asymptomatic. In the third case, additional 
posterior fusion was performed 17 months after an initial laminectomy and OCF 
due to newly developed cervical dislocation caudal to the original fusion. This 
last patient required a third operation 9 months after the second because of 
deep wound infection. Surgery improved the motor function of all 7 children with 
CDPX1, but 3 children who had already suffered respiratory failure 
preoperatively required continued respiratory support. At the time of this 
report, 7 of the 9 children were alive and in stable condition. One child died 
due to restrictive respiratory insufficiency, and another died in an accident 
unrelated to CDP. CONCLUSIONS Surgical decompression with or without fusion for 
CVJ and subaxial cervical lesions in infants and toddlers with CDP generally 
saves lives and increases the likelihood of motor function recovery. However, in 
this case series the patients' preoperative condition had a strong effect on 
postoperative respiratory function. The surgery was not straightforward, and a 
second operation was required in some cases. Nevertheless, the findings indicate 
that early surgical intervention for CDP with cervical involvement is feasible, 
suggesting that the role of neurosurgery should be reevaluated.

DOI: 10.3171/2017.5.PEDS16554
PMID: 28799855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]