---
reference_id: "PMID:31076506"
title: Biophysical characterization of full-length human phenylalanine hydroxylase provides a deeper understanding of its quaternary structure equilibrium.
authors:
- Arturo EC
- Gupta K
- Hansen MR
- Borne E
- Jaffe EK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008294
keywords:
- Allosteric Regulation
- Biophysics
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Phenylalanine/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Phenylalanine Hydroxylase/chemistry, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Multimerization
- "Protein Structure, Quaternary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biophysical characterization of full-length human phenylalanine hydroxylase provides a deeper understanding of its quaternary structure equilibrium.
**Authors:** Arturo EC, Gupta K, Hansen MR, Borne E, Jaffe EK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA119.008294](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.008294)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Jun 28;294(26):10131-10145. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008294.
Epub 2019 May 10.

Biophysical characterization of full-length human phenylalanine hydroxylase
provides a deeper understanding of its quaternary structure equilibrium.

Arturo EC(1)(2), Gupta K(3), Hansen MR(1), Borne E(1), Jaffe EK(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Temple
University Health Systems, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111.
(2)the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University
College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, and.
(3)the Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.
(4)From the Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Temple
University Health Systems, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111,
eileen.jaffe@fccc.edu.

Dysfunction of human phenylalanine hydroxylase (hPAH, EC 1.14.16.1) is the
primary cause of phenylketonuria, the most common inborn error of amino acid
metabolism. The dynamic domain rearrangements of this multimeric protein have
thwarted structural study of the full-length form for decades, until now. In
this study, a tractable C29S variant of hPAH (C29S) yielded a 3.06 Å resolution
crystal structure of the tetrameric resting-state conformation. We used
size-exclusion chromatography in line with small-angle X-ray scattering
(SEC-SAXS) to analyze the full-length hPAH solution structure both in the
presence and absence of Phe, which serves as both substrate and allosteric
activators. Allosteric Phe binding favors accumulation of an activated PAH
tetramer conformation, which is biophysically distinct in solution. Protein
characterization with enzyme kinetics and intrinsic fluorescence revealed that
the C29S variant and hPAH are otherwise equivalent in their response to Phe,
further supported by their behavior on various chromatography resins and by
analytical ultracentrifugation. Modeling of resting-state and activated forms of
C29S against SAXS data with available structural data created and evaluated
several new models for the transition between the architecturally distinct
conformations of PAH and highlighted unique intra- and inter-subunit
interactions. Three best-fitting alternative models all placed the allosteric
Phe-binding module 8-10 Å farther from the tetramer center than do all previous
models. The structural insights into allosteric activation of hPAH reported here
may help inform ongoing efforts to treat phenylketonuria with novel therapeutic
approaches.

© 2019 Arturo et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008294
PMCID: PMC6664189
PMID: 31076506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest with the contents of this article
