---
reference_id: "PMID:38278208"
title: "Phenotyping and genotyping inherited retinal diseases: Molecular genetics, clinical and imaging features, and therapeutics of macular dystrophies, cone and cone-rod dystrophies, rod-cone dystrophies, Leber congenital amaurosis, and cone dysfunction syndromes."
authors:
- Georgiou M
- Robson AG
- Fujinami K
- de Guimarães TAC
- Fujinami-Yokokawa Y
- Daich Varela M
- Pontikos N
- Kalitzeos A
- Mahroo OA
- Webster AR
- Michaelides M
journal: Prog Retin Eye Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2024.101244
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotyping and genotyping inherited retinal diseases: Molecular genetics, clinical and imaging features, and therapeutics of macular dystrophies, cone and cone-rod dystrophies, rod-cone dystrophies, Leber congenital amaurosis, and cone dysfunction syndromes.
**Authors:** Georgiou M, Robson AG, Fujinami K, de Guimarães TAC, Fujinami-Yokokawa Y, Daich Varela M, Pontikos N, Kalitzeos A, Mahroo OA, Webster AR, Michaelides M
**Journal:** Prog Retin Eye Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preteyeres.2024.101244](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2024.101244)

## Content

1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2024 May;100:101244. doi:
10.1016/j.preteyeres.2024.101244.  Epub 2024 Jan 24.

Phenotyping and genotyping inherited retinal diseases: Molecular genetics, 
clinical and imaging features, and therapeutics of macular dystrophies, cone and 
cone-rod dystrophies, rod-cone dystrophies, Leber congenital amaurosis, and cone 
dysfunction syndromes.

Georgiou M(1), Robson AG(2), Fujinami K(3), de Guimarães TAC(4), 
Fujinami-Yokokawa Y(5), Daich Varela M(6), Pontikos N(7), Kalitzeos A(8), Mahroo 
OA(9), Webster AR(10), Michaelides M(11).

Author information:
(1)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; Jones Eye 
Institute, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA. 
Electronic address: michalis.georgiou.16@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: anthony.robson3@nhs.net.
(3)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; Laboratory of 
Visual Physiology, Division of Vision Research, National Institute of Sensory 
Organs, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan. 
Electronic address: k.fujinami@ucl.ac.uk.
(4)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: thales.guimaraes.19@ucl.ac.uk.
(5)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom; Laboratory of Visual Physiology, Division of Vision Research, National 
Institute of Sensory Organs, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical 
Center, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Health Policy and Management, Keio 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: 
y.fujinami@keio.jp.
(6)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: m.daichvarela@ucl.ac.uk.
(7)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: n.pontikos@ucl.ac.uk.
(8)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: a.kalitzeos@ucl.ac.uk.
(9)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; Section of 
Ophthalmology, King s College London, St Thomas Hospital Campus, London, United 
Kingdom; Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, 
Downing Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Department of Translational 
Ophthalmology, Wills Eye Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
o.mahroo@ucl.ac.uk.
(10)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: andrew.webster@ucl.ac.uk.
(11)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: michel.michaelides@ucl.ac.uk.

Inherited retinal diseases (IRD) are a leading cause of blindness in the working 
age population and in children. The scope of this review is to familiarise 
clinicians and scientists with the current landscape of molecular genetics, 
clinical phenotype, retinal imaging and therapeutic prospects/completed trials 
in IRD. Herein we present in a comprehensive and concise manner: (i) macular 
dystrophies (Stargardt disease (ABCA4), X-linked retinoschisis (RS1), Best 
disease (BEST1), PRPH2-associated pattern dystrophy, Sorsby fundus dystrophy 
(TIMP3), and autosomal dominant drusen (EFEMP1)), (ii) cone and cone-rod 
dystrophies (GUCA1A, PRPH2, ABCA4, KCNV2 and RPGR), (iii) predominant rod or 
rod-cone dystrophies (retinitis pigmentosa, enhanced S-Cone syndrome (NR2E3), 
Bietti crystalline corneoretinal dystrophy (CYP4V2)), (iv) Leber congenital 
amaurosis/early-onset severe retinal dystrophy (GUCY2D, CEP290, CRB1, RDH12, 
RPE65, TULP1, AIPL1 and NMNAT1), (v) cone dysfunction syndromes (achromatopsia 
(CNGA3, CNGB3, PDE6C, PDE6H, GNAT2, ATF6), X-linked cone dysfunction with myopia 
and dichromacy (Bornholm Eye disease; OPN1LW/OPN1MW array), oligocone 
trichromacy, and blue-cone monochromatism (OPN1LW/OPN1MW array)). Whilst we use 
the aforementioned classical phenotypic groupings, a key feature of IRD is that 
it is characterised by tremendous heterogeneity and variable expressivity, with 
several of the above genes associated with a range of phenotypes.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2024.101244
PMID: 38278208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.