---
reference_id: "PMID:40789865"
title: Systems biology-based assessment of immune responses to whole cell and acellular pertussis vaccines.
authors:
- Leguia M
- Vila-Sanjurjo A
- Juarez D
- Garcia-Glaessner A
- Gil AI
- Alvarez M
- Cornejo R
- Cherikh S
- Gelber CE
- Goll JB
- Howard LM
- Jimenez-Truque N
- Edwards KM
- Creech CB
- Lanata CF
journal: NPJ Vaccines
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41541-025-01121-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systems biology-based assessment of immune responses to whole cell and acellular pertussis vaccines.
**Authors:** Leguia M, Vila-Sanjurjo A, Juarez D, Garcia-Glaessner A, Gil AI, Alvarez M, Cornejo R, Cherikh S, Gelber CE, Goll JB, Howard LM, Jimenez-Truque N, Edwards KM, Creech CB, Lanata CF
**Journal:** NPJ Vaccines (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41541-025-01121-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-025-01121-0)

## Content

1. NPJ Vaccines. 2025 Aug 11;10(1):188. doi: 10.1038/s41541-025-01121-0.

Systems biology-based assessment of immune responses to whole cell and acellular 
pertussis vaccines.

Leguia M(1), Vila-Sanjurjo A(2), Juarez D(3), Garcia-Glaessner A(3), Gil AI(4), 
Alvarez M(4), Cornejo R(4), Cherikh S(5), Gelber CE(5), Goll JB(5), Howard 
LM(6), Jimenez-Truque N(6), Edwards KM(6), Creech CB(6), Lanata CF(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Genomics Laboratory, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú (PUCP), Lima, 
Peru. mariana.leguia@pucp.edu.pe.
(2)CICA - Centro Interdisciplinar de Química e Bioloxía, Departamento de 
Bioloxía, Facultade de Ciencias, Universidade da Coruña, Campus de Elviña, 
Coruña, Spain.
(3)Genomics Laboratory, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú (PUCP), Lima, 
Peru.
(4)Instituto de Investigación Nutricional, Lima, Peru.
(5)The Emmes Company, Rockville, MD, USA.
(6)Vanderbilt Vaccine Research Program, Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

Given the local and systemic adverse reactions associated with whole-cell 
pertussis vaccines combined with diphtheria and tetanus toxoids (DTP), acellular 
pertussis vaccines combined with the same toxoids (DTaP) were developed in the 
1990s. In comparison to DTP, DTaP vaccines demonstrated reduced reactogenicity 
and equivalent or improved immunogenicity and efficacy. However, there has been 
a resurgence of pertussis disease, particularly in DTaP-vaccinated children, 
suggesting that immunity wanes more quickly with DTaP vaccination. To elucidate 
the differences in immune responses to DTP and DTaP vaccines, we employed a 
systems biology-based strategy to compare global changes in gene expression 
following primary vaccination with either DTP or DTaP. We used RNA-Seq and 
ribosome profiling (RP) to identify transcriptional and translational 
signatures, respectively, in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) 
collected from 50 infant recipients of DTP or DTaP at two time-points (baseline 
(pre-vaccination at Day 1) and either Day 2 or 8 post-vaccination). We also used 
standard serologic methods to assess immunogenicity, and correlated these 
results with transcriptional and translational signatures. Here, we provide a 
detailed description of the rationale, experimental design, methodology, and 
enrollment procedures used. Given the technical complexity of our approach, our 
objective is to fill knowledge gaps, describe key quality metrics, and support 
future publications. In brief, we recovered 4-12 million PBMCs (average 8.9 
million) with 99% viability per 2.5 mL blood sample, enabling excellent nucleic 
acid recovery yields for the preparation of high-quality sequencing libraries. 
In turn, these generated RNA-Seq and RP datasets with sufficient genome coverage 
breadth and depth to enable differential gene expression analyses, demonstrating 
the validity of this approach to study pertussis vaccine immunology 
specifically, and its utility to characterize mechanisms of the human immune 
response to vaccination generally.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41541-025-01121-0
PMCID: PMC12340147
PMID: 40789865

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors (except CFL and 
KME) declare no financial or non-financial competing interests. CFL has funding 
from and is a consultant to HilleVax. He is also a member of the Data Safety 
Monitoring Board of Merck. KME has funding from NIH and CDC and is a consultant 
for Bionet, Dynavax and IBM. She is also a member of the Data Safety Monitoring 
Boards of Sanofi, X-4 Pharma, Seqirus, Moderna, Pfizer, Merck, Roche, Novavax, 
and Brighton Collaboration.