---
reference_id: "PMID:7761412"
title: "The protein deficient in Lowe syndrome is a phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 5-phosphatase."
authors:
- Zhang X
- Jefferson AB
- Auethavekiat V
- Majerus PW
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.92.11.4853
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Blood Platelets/enzymology
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- DNA Primers
- Humans
- Isoenzymes/metabolism
- Kinetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/enzymology, genetics"
- "Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Protein Biosynthesis
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Recombinant Proteins/biosynthesis, metabolism"
- Spodoptera
- Transfection
- X Chromosome
- Phosphoinositide 5-Phosphatases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The protein deficient in Lowe syndrome is a phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 5-phosphatase.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Jefferson AB, Auethavekiat V, Majerus PW
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.92.11.4853](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.92.11.4853)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 23;92(11):4853-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.92.11.4853.

The protein deficient in Lowe syndrome is a
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 5-phosphatase.

Zhang X(1), Jefferson AB, Auethavekiat V, Majerus PW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

Lowe syndrome, also known as oculocerebrorenal syndrome, is caused by mutations
in the X chromosome-encoded OCRL gene. The OCRL protein is 51% identical to
inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase II (5-phosphatase II) from human platelets
over a span of 744 aa, suggesting that OCRL may be a similar enzyme. We
engineered a construct of the OCRL cDNA that encodes amino acids homologous to
the platelet 5-phosphatase for expression in baculovirus-infected Sf9 insect
cells. This cDNA encodes aa 264-968 of the OCRL protein. The recombinant protein
was found to catalyze the reactions also carried out by platelet 5-phosphatase
II. Thus OCRL converts inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate to inositol
1,4-bisphosphate, and it converts inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate to inositol
1,3,4-trisphosphate. Most important, the enzyme converts phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate to phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate. The relative ability of
OCRL to catalyze the three reactions is different from that of 5-phosphatase II
and from that of another 5-phosphatase isoenzyme from platelets, 5-phosphatase
I. The recombinant OCRL protein hydrolyzes the phospholipid substrate 10- to
30-fold better than 5-phosphatase II, and 5-phosphatase I does not cleave the
lipid at all. We also show that OCRL functions as a phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate 5-phosphatase in OCRL-expressing Sf9 cells. These results
suggest that OCRL is mainly a lipid phosphatase that may control cellular levels
of a critical metabolite, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate. Deficiency of
this enzyme apparently causes the protean manifestations of Lowe syndrome.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.11.4853
PMCID: PMC41805
PMID: 7761412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
