---
reference_id: "PMID:28137912"
title: L2hgdh Deficiency Accumulates l-2-Hydroxyglutarate with Progressive Leukoencephalopathy and Neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Ma S
- Sun R
- Jiang B
- Gao J
- Deng W
- Liu P
- He R
- Cui J
- Ji M
- Yi W
- Yang P
- Wu X
- Xiong Y
- Qiu Z
- Ye D
- Guan KL
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00492-16
content_type: abstract_only
---

# L2hgdh Deficiency Accumulates l-2-Hydroxyglutarate with Progressive Leukoencephalopathy and Neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Ma S, Sun R, Jiang B, Gao J, Deng W, Liu P, He R, Cui J, Ji M, Yi W, Yang P, Wu X, Xiong Y, Qiu Z, Ye D, Guan KL
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00492-16](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00492-16)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2017 Mar 31;37(8):e00492-16. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00492-16. Print 
2017 Apr 15.

L2hgdh Deficiency Accumulates l-2-Hydroxyglutarate with Progressive 
Leukoencephalopathy and Neurodegeneration.

Ma S(1), Sun R(1), Jiang B(1), Gao J(2)(3), Deng W(4), Liu P(1), He R(5), Cui 
J(1), Ji M(5), Yi W(3), Yang P(2), Wu X(1), Xiong Y(1)(6), Qiu Z(7), Ye D(8)(9), 
Guan KL(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Shanghai Medical College, Key Laboratory of Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, 
Ministry of Education, and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering 
and National Center for International Research of Development and Disease, 
Institute of Developmental Biology and Molecular Medicine, Collaborative 
Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry & Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(3)China Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai Institute of 
Hematology, SJTU-SM, Shanghai, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics and Department of Physics, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Biochemistry and 
Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, USA.
(7)Institute of Neuroscience, Key Laboratory of Primate Neurobiology, State Key 
Laboratory of Neuroscience, CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and 
Intelligence Technology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China zqiu@ion.ac.cn yedan@fudan.edu.cn.
(8)Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Shanghai Medical College, Key Laboratory of Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, 
Ministry of Education, and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering 
and National Center for International Research of Development and Disease, 
Institute of Developmental Biology and Molecular Medicine, Collaborative 
Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China zqiu@ion.ac.cn yedan@fudan.edu.cn.
(9)Department of General Surgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(10)Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.

l-2-Hydroxyglutarate aciduria (L-2-HGA) is an autosomal recessive neurometabolic 
disorder caused by a mutation in the l-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (L2HGDH) 
gene. In this study, we generated L2hgdh knockout (KO) mice and observed a 
robust increase of l-2-hydroxyglutarate (L-2-HG) levels in multiple tissues. The 
highest levels of L-2-HG were observed in the brain and testis, with a 
corresponding increase in histone methylation in these tissues. L2hgdh KO mice 
exhibit white matter abnormalities, extensive gliosis, microglia-mediated 
neuroinflammation, and an expansion of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs). 
Moreover, L2hgdh deficiency leads to impaired adult hippocampal neurogenesis and 
late-onset neurodegeneration in mouse brains. Our data provide in vivo evidence 
that L2hgdh mutation leads to L-2-HG accumulation, leukoencephalopathy, and 
neurodegeneration in mice, thereby offering new insights into the 
pathophysiology of L-2-HGA in humans.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00492-16
PMCID: PMC5376639
PMID: 28137912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]