---
reference_id: "PMID:22887466"
title: "Pemetrexed-based chemotherapy in patients with advanced, ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer."
authors:
- Shaw AT
- Varghese AM
- Solomon BJ
- Costa DB
- Novello S
- Mino-Kenudson M
- Awad MM
- Engelman JA
- Riely GJ
- Monica V
- Yeap BY
- Scagliotti GV
journal: Ann Oncol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds242
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, enzymology"
- Female
- Glutamates/therapeutic use
- "Guanine/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, enzymology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pemetrexed
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/metabolism
- Thymidylate Synthase/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pemetrexed-based chemotherapy in patients with advanced, ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Shaw AT, Varghese AM, Solomon BJ, Costa DB, Novello S, Mino-Kenudson M, Awad MM, Engelman JA, Riely GJ, Monica V, Yeap BY, Scagliotti GV
**Journal:** Ann Oncol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/annonc/mds242](https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mds242)

## Content

1. Ann Oncol. 2013 Jan;24(1):59-66. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds242. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Pemetrexed-based chemotherapy in patients with advanced, ALK-positive non-small
cell lung cancer.

Shaw AT(1), Varghese AM, Solomon BJ, Costa DB, Novello S, Mino-Kenudson M, Awad
MM, Engelman JA, Riely GJ, Monica V, Yeap BY, Scagliotti GV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine Hematology/Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital
Cancer Center, Boston, MA 02114, USA. ashaw1@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is highly responsive to crizotinib. To determine whether ALK-positive
NSCLC is also sensitive to pemetrexed, we retrospectively evaluated
progression-free survival (PFS) of ALK-positive versus ALK-negative patients who
had been treated with pemetrexed-based chemotherapy for advanced NSCLC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We identified 121 patients with advanced, ALK-positive
NSCLC in the USA, Australia, and Italy. For comparison, we evaluated 266
patients with advanced, ALK-negative, epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-wild-type NSCLC, including 79 with KRAS mutations and 187 with wild-type
KRAS (WT/WT/WT). We determined PFS on different pemetrexed regimens.
RESULTS: Among 70 ALK-positive patients treated with a platinum/pemetrexed
regimen, the median PFS (mPFS) was 7.3 months (95% confidence interval (CI)
5.5-9.5). The mPFS of 51 ALK-positive patients treated with single-agent
pemetrexed or nonplatinum/pemetrexed combinations was 5.5 months (2.8-9.0). For
ALK-negative patients, PFS on all pemetrexed-based regimens was similar to that
of ALK-positive patients, except in the specific setting of first-line
platinum/pemetrexed where the mPFS was only 4.2 and 5.4 months in KRAS and
WT/WT/WT patients, respectively. However, among patients with a
never/light-smoking history (0-10 pack-year smoking history) treated with
first-line platinum/pemetrexed, there was no difference in PFS between
ALK-positive and ALK-negative patients.
CONCLUSIONS: PFS on pemetrexed or nonplatinum/pemetrexed combinations was
similar in ALK-positive and ALK-negative patients. PFS on first-line
platinum/pemetrexed may be prolonged in never/light-smoking patients regardless
of ALK status.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mds242
PMCID: PMC3525134
PMID: 22887466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
