---
reference_id: "PMID:25271314"
title: Treatment of autoimmune hemolytic anemias.
authors:
- Zanella A
- Barcellini W
journal: Haematologica
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.114561
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/therapy"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Splenectomy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of autoimmune hemolytic anemias.
**Authors:** Zanella A, Barcellini W
**Journal:** Haematologica (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2014.114561](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2014.114561)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2014 Oct;99(10):1547-54. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.114561.

Treatment of autoimmune hemolytic anemias.

Zanella A(1), Barcellini W(1).

Author information:
(1)U.O. Ematologia, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milan, Italy zanella@policlinico.mi.it wbarcel@policlinico.mi.it.

Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) is a relatively uncommon disorder caused by 
autoantibodies directed against self red blood cells. It can be idiopathic or 
secondary, and classified as warm, cold (cold hemagglutinin disease (CAD) and 
paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria) or mixed, according to the thermal range of the 
autoantibody. AIHA may develop gradually, or have a fulminant onset with 
life-threatening anemia. The treatment of AIHA is still not evidence-based. The 
first-line therapy for warm AIHA are corticosteroids, which are effective in 
70-85% of patients and should be slowly tapered over a time period of 6-12 
months. For refractory/relapsed cases, the current sequence of second-line 
therapy is splenectomy (effective approx. in 2 out of 3 cases but with a 
presumed cure rate of up to 20%), rituximab (effective in approx. 80-90% of 
cases), and thereafter any of the immunosuppressive drugs (azathioprine, 
cyclophosphamide, cyclosporin, mycophenolate mofetil). Additional therapies are 
intravenous immunoglobulins, danazol, plasma-exchange, and alemtuzumab and 
high-dose cyclophosphamide as last resort option. As the experience with 
rituximab evolves, it is likely that this drug will be located at an earlier 
point in therapy of warm AIHA, before more toxic immunosuppressants, and in 
place of splenectomy in some cases. In CAD, rituximab is now recommended as 
first-line treatment.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2014.114561
PMCID: PMC4181250
PMID: 25271314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]