---
reference_id: "PMID:17056637"
title: "Nonsense mutation in pseudouridylate synthase 1 (PUS1) in two brothers affected by myopathy, lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anaemia (MLASA)."
authors:
- Fernandez-Vizarra E
- Berardinelli A
- Valente L
- Tiranti V
- Zeviani M
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.045252
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/enzymology, genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Anemia, Sideroblastic/enzymology, genetics"
- Cell Nucleus/enzymology
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Consanguinity
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics
- Electron Transport Complex I/deficiency
- Fatal Outcome
- "Fibroblasts/enzymology, pathology"
- HeLa Cells
- Human Growth Hormone/deficiency
- Humans
- "Hydro-Lyases/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- "Mitochondria, Muscle/enzymology"
- "Mitochondrial Myopathies/enzymology, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscle, Skeletal/enzymology, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Protein Isoforms/analysis, genetics"
- Protein Precursors/metabolism
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Protein Transport/drug effects
- Syndrome
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Transfection
- Valinomycin/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonsense mutation in pseudouridylate synthase 1 (PUS1) in two brothers affected by myopathy, lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anaemia (MLASA).
**Authors:** Fernandez-Vizarra E, Berardinelli A, Valente L, Tiranti V, Zeviani M
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2006.045252](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2006.045252)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2007 Mar;44(3):173-80. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.045252. Epub 2006
Oct  20.

Nonsense mutation in pseudouridylate synthase 1 (PUS1) in two brothers affected
by myopathy, lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anaemia (MLASA).

Fernandez-Vizarra E(1), Berardinelli A, Valente L, Tiranti V, Zeviani M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Neurogenetics, Pierfranco and Luisa Mariani Center for
the Study of Mitochondrial Disorders of Infancy and Childhood, National
Institute of Neurology C. Besta, Milan, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Myopathy, lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anaemia (MLASA) is a
rare condition that combines early-onset myopathy with lactic acidosis and
sideroblastic anaemia. MLASA has been associated with a missense mutation in
pseudouridylate synthase 1 (PUS1), an enzyme located in both nucleus and
mitochondria, which converts uridine into pseudouridine in several cytosolic and
mitochondrial tRNA positions and increases the efficiency of protein synthesis
in both compartments.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We have identified two Italian brothers, offspring of
distantly related parents, both of whom are affected by MLASA. The six exons of
the PUS1 gene were analysed by automated sequencing.
RESULTS: We found combined defects in mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes
in muscle and fibroblast homogenates of both patients, and low levels of mtDNA
translation products in fibroblast mitochondria. A novel, homozygous stop
mutation was present in PUS1 (E220X). We have investigated the structural and
mechanistic aspects of the double localisation of PUS1, demonstrating that the
isoform located in the nucleus contains an N-terminal extension which is absent
in the mature mitochondrial isoform.
CONCLUSIONS: The stop mutation in PUS1 is likely to determine the loss of
function of the protein, since it predicts the synthesis of a protein missing
208/427 amino acid residues on the C terminus, and was associated with low mtDNA
translation. The structural differences in nuclear versus mitochondrial isoforms
of PUS1 may be implicated in the variability of the clinical presentations in
MLASA.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2006.045252
PMCID: PMC2598032
PMID: 17056637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
