---
reference_id: "PMID:25143588"
title: Primary cilia signaling mediates intraocular pressure sensation.
authors:
- Luo N
- Conwell MD
- Chen X
- Kettenhofen CI
- Westlake CJ
- Cantor LB
- Wells CD
- Weinreb RN
- Corson TW
- Spandau DF
- Joos KM
- Iomini C
- Obukhov AG
- Sun Y
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1323292111
keywords:
- Animals
- Cadaver
- Child
- Cilia/metabolism
- Humans
- Intraocular Pressure/physiology
- Male
- "Mechanotransduction, Cellular/physiology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/metabolism
- Sensation/physiology
- TRPV Cation Channels/metabolism
- "Trabecular Meshwork/cytology, metabolism"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary cilia signaling mediates intraocular pressure sensation.
**Authors:** Luo N, Conwell MD, Chen X, Kettenhofen CI, Westlake CJ, Cantor LB, Wells CD, Weinreb RN, Corson TW, Spandau DF, Joos KM, Iomini C, Obukhov AG, Sun Y
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1323292111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1323292111)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 2;111(35):12871-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1323292111. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Primary cilia signaling mediates intraocular pressure sensation.

Luo N(1), Conwell MD(1), Chen X(2), Kettenhofen CI(3), Westlake CJ(3), Cantor
LB(1), Wells CD(4), Weinreb RN(5), Corson TW(6), Spandau DF(7), Joos KM(8),
Iomini C(9), Obukhov AG(2), Sun Y(10).

Author information:
(1)Glick Eye Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202; Department of Ophthalmology.
(2)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology.
(3)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201;
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92037;
(6)Glick Eye Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202; Department of Ophthalmology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology.
(7)Department of Dermatology, and.
(8)Vanderbilt Eye Institute, Nashville, TN 37212; and.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029.
(10)Glick Eye Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202; Department of Ophthalmology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Department of Dermatology, and sunyo@iupui.edu.

Lowe syndrome is a rare X-linked congenital disease that presents with
congenital cataracts and glaucoma, as well as renal and cerebral dysfunction.
OCRL, an inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase, is mutated in Lowe syndrome. We
previously showed that OCRL is involved in vesicular trafficking to the primary
cilium. Primary cilia are sensory organelles on the surface of eukaryotic cells
that mediate mechanotransduction in the kidney, brain, and bone. However, their
potential role in the trabecular meshwork (TM) in the eye, which regulates
intraocular pressure, is unknown. Here, we show that TM cells, which are
defective in glaucoma, have primary cilia that are critical for response to
pressure changes. Primary cilia in TM cells shorten in response to fluid flow
and elevated hydrostatic pressure, and promote increased transcription of TNF-α,
TGF-β, and GLI1 genes. Furthermore, OCRL is found to be required for primary
cilia to respond to pressure stimulation. The interaction of OCRL with transient
receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4), a ciliary mechanosensory channel,
suggests that OCRL may act through regulation of this channel. A novel
disease-causing OCRL allele prevents TRPV4-mediated calcium signaling. In
addition, TRPV4 agonist GSK 1016790A treatment reduced intraocular pressure in
mice; TRPV4 knockout animals exhibited elevated intraocular pressure and
shortened cilia. Thus, mechanotransduction by primary cilia in TM cells is
implicated in how the eye senses pressure changes and highlights OCRL and TRPV4
as attractive therapeutic targets for the treatment of glaucoma. Implications of
OCRL and TRPV4 in primary cilia function may also shed light on mechanosensation
in other organ systems.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1323292111
PMCID: PMC4156748
PMID: 25143588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: Y.S. is an
inventor on a patent related to the work described, which is managed by Indiana
University School of Medicine.
