---
reference_id: "PMID:30291826"
title: Durable remission of a patient with primary cutaneous CD8(+) aggressive epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Al Aoun SM
- Iqbal S
- AlHalouli TM
- Zaidi SZ
- Motabi IH
journal: Hematol Oncol Stem Cell Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.hemonc.2018.09.004
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage"
- "CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cyclophosphamide/administration & dosage"
- "Cytarabine/administration & dosage"
- "Dexamethasone/administration & dosage"
- "Doxorubicin/administration & dosage"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Male
- "Methotrexate/administration & dosage"
- Remission Induction
- "Skin Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Vincristine/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Durable remission of a patient with primary cutaneous CD8(+) aggressive epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Al Aoun SM, Iqbal S, AlHalouli TM, Zaidi SZ, Motabi IH
**Journal:** Hematol Oncol Stem Cell Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hemonc.2018.09.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hemonc.2018.09.004)

## Content

1. Hematol Oncol Stem Cell Ther. 2021 Mar;14(1):71-75. doi: 
10.1016/j.hemonc.2018.09.004. Epub 2018 Sep 28.

Durable remission of a patient with primary cutaneous CD8(+) aggressive 
epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma.

Al Aoun SM(1), Iqbal S(2), AlHalouli TM(3), Zaidi SZ(2), Motabi IH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Asseer Central Hospital, Abha, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Adult Hematology/Bone Marrow Transplant, King Fahd Medical 
City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pathology, King Fahd Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Adult Hematology/Bone Marrow Transplant, King Fahd Medical 
City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: imotabi@kfmc.med.sa.

Primary cutaneous CD8+ aggressive epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma (CD8+ 
PCAETL) is a rare disease characterized by aggressive clinical course and short 
survival. All available data are extracted from case reports and case series. 
The outcome is dismal and only two reported cases were cured after several lines 
of therapies including stem cell transplant. We herein present the case of a 
patient with CD8+ PCAETL who presented with rapidly progressive skin lesions and 
systemic symptoms. He was treated with aggressive multiagent chemotherapy 
comprising cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone 
alternating with high-dose methotrexate and cytarabine (hyper-CVAD). The 
treatment resulted in durable complete remission with no evidence of disease 
recurrence after 58 months of follow-up. This is the first reported case of 
durable remission after first-line treatment.

Copyright © 2020 King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hemonc.2018.09.004
PMID: 30291826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]