---
reference_id: "PMID:12720118"
title: "Clinicopathological definition of Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: consensus panel recommendations from the Second International Workshop on Waldenstrom's Macroglobulinemia."
authors:
- Owen RG
- Treon SP
- Al-Katib A
- Fonseca R
- Greipp PR
- McMaster ML
- Morra E
- Pangalis GA
- San Miguel JF
- Branagan AR
- Dimopoulos MA
journal: Semin Oncol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1053/sonc.2003.50082
keywords:
- CD5 Antigens
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin A/immunology
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Immunoglobulin M/immunology
- Immunophenotyping
- Lymphoma/immunology
- "Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia/classification, diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathological definition of Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: consensus panel recommendations from the Second International Workshop on Waldenstrom's Macroglobulinemia.
**Authors:** Owen RG, Treon SP, Al-Katib A, Fonseca R, Greipp PR, McMaster ML, Morra E, Pangalis GA, San Miguel JF, Branagan AR, Dimopoulos MA
**Journal:** Semin Oncol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1053/sonc.2003.50082](https://doi.org/10.1053/sonc.2003.50082)

## Content

1. Semin Oncol. 2003 Apr;30(2):110-5. doi: 10.1053/sonc.2003.50082.

Clinicopathological definition of Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: consensus
panel recommendations from the Second International Workshop on Waldenstrom's
Macroglobulinemia.

Owen RG(1), Treon SP, Al-Katib A, Fonseca R, Greipp PR, McMaster ML, Morra E,
Pangalis GA, San Miguel JF, Branagan AR, Dimopoulos MA.

Author information:
(1)Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds, UK.

This presentation represents consensus recommendations for the
clinicopathological definition of Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia (WM), which
were prepared in conjunction with the Second International Workshop held in
Athens, Greece during September 2002. WM is an uncommon lymphoproliferative
disorder characterized primarily by bone marrow infiltration and IgM monoclonal
gammopathy. It should be considered a distinct clinicopathological entity rather
than a clinical syndrome secondary to IgM secretion. The underlying pathological
diagnosis in WM is lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma as defined by the World Health
Organization (WHO) and Revised European-American Lymphoma (REAL) classification
criteria. The concentration of monoclonal IgM can vary widely in WM and it is
not possible to define a concentration that reliably distinguishes WM from
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) and other
lymphoproliferative disorders. A diagnosis of WM can therefore be made
irrespective of IgM concentration if there is evidence on a bone marrow trephine
biopsy of bone marrow infiltration by lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma with
predominantly an intertrabecular pattern, supported by appropriate
immunophenotypic studies. Simple criteria to distinguish patients with
symptomatic WM who require therapy from those with asymptomatic WM and MGUS were
also proposed. Patients with clinical features attributable to IgM monoclonal
gammopathy but no overt evidence of lymphoma are considered to constitute a
distinct clinical group and the term "IgM-related disorders" is proposed.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/sonc.2003.50082
PMID: 12720118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
