---
reference_id: "PMID:35163330"
title: "Immunopathogenesis of Acute Flare of Chronic Hepatitis B: With Emphasis on the Role of Cytokines and Chemokines."
authors:
- Liu C
- Shih YF
- Liu CJ
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23031407
keywords:
- Chemokines
- Cytokines/therapeutic use
- Hepatitis B/complications
- Hepatitis B virus
- "Hepatitis B, Chronic/drug therapy"
- Hepatitis C/complications
- Humans
- Liver Neoplasms/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunopathogenesis of Acute Flare of Chronic Hepatitis B: With Emphasis on the Role of Cytokines and Chemokines.
**Authors:** Liu C, Shih YF, Liu CJ
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23031407](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23031407)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 26;23(3):1407. doi: 10.3390/ijms23031407.

Immunopathogenesis of Acute Flare of Chronic Hepatitis B: With Emphasis on the
Role of Cytokines and Chemokines.

Liu C(1), Shih YF(2), Liu CJ(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Chung-Shan Medical University, Taichung 40201,
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy and Assistive Technology, National Yang Ming
Chiao Tung University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan.
(3)Hepatitis Research Center, National Taiwan University College of Medicine and
Hospital, Taipei 10002, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University College
of Medicine and Hospital, Taipei 10002, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine and Hospital, Taipei 10002, Taiwan.

Acute flares (AFs) of chronic hepatitis B usually occur during the immune-active
stage (both immune clearance phase and immune reactivation phase), as the host
immune system tries to control the virus. Successful host immune control over
viral replication is usually presented as hepatitis B surface antigen
seroclearance; however, 20-30% individuals with chronic hepatitis B may
encounter repeated AFs with accumulative liver injuries, finally leading to the
development of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. AF can also develop in
other clinical situations such as organ transplantation, cancer chemotherapy,
and under treatment for chronic hepatitis B or treatment for chronic hepatitis C
in patients with co-infected hepatitis B/hepatitis C. Understanding the natural
history and immunopathogenesis of AF would help develop effective strategies to
eradicate the virus and improve the clinical outcomes of patients with chronic
hepatitis B. In this review article, the immunopathogenesis of AF, and the
involvement of innate and adaptive immune responses on the development of
hepatitis B flare will be briefly reviewed, with the emphasis on the role of
cytokines and chemokines.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23031407
PMCID: PMC8835919
PMID: 35163330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
