---
reference_id: "PMID:34035645"
title: "Heterozygous GJA1 variants with ocular phenotype: Missense in domain but truncation out of domain."
authors:
- Li X
- Xiao X
- Li S
- Ouyang J
- Sun W
- Liu X
- Zhang Q
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2021'
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Connexin 43/genetics
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Glaucoma/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Syndactyly/genetics
- Tooth Abnormalities/genetics
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterozygous GJA1 variants with ocular phenotype: Missense in domain but truncation out of domain.
**Authors:** Li X, Xiao X, Li S, Ouyang J, Sun W, Liu X, Zhang Q
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2021)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2021 May 13;27:309-322. eCollection 2021.

Heterozygous GJA1 variants with ocular phenotype: Missense in domain but 
truncation out of domain.

Li X(1), Xiao X(1), Li S(1), Ouyang J(1), Sun W(1), Liu X(1), Zhang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD) is a group disorder caused by GJA1 
variants, of which glaucoma leading to blindness is a frequent complication of 
the ocular phenotype. In this study, the correlation of the GJA1 genotype with 
the ocular phenotype was analyzed systematically.
METHODS: GJA1 variants were collected from in-house whole-exome sequencing data 
of 5,307 individuals. Potentially pathogenic variants (PPVs) were defined based 
on prediction of multiple in silico tools, related phenotypes, and previously 
established evidence. The characteristics of GJA1 PPVs were evaluated based on 
our data, gnomAD, and HGMD.
RESULTS: In total, 21 rare variants in GJA1 were detected in 32 subjects from 
the study cohort. Four of the 21 variants were classified as PPVs, including two 
frameshift, one missense, and one in-frame deletion. The four PPVs were detected 
in four probands with microcornea or high hyperopia; two developed glaucoma. A 
systematic review of GJA1 variants in literature suggested that most 
heterozygous missense PPVs are located inside the connexin domain. All 
truncations downstream of the connexin domain are associated with autosomal 
dominant disease, while most truncations within the domain are associated with 
autosomal recessive ODDD. Ocular signs were present in 80.0% (116/145) of 
patients with GJA1 PPVs. Of the 116 patients, glaucoma was observed in 26.7% 
(31/116), among whom 77.4% (24/31) of cases occurred in patients ≥10 years old.
CONCLUSIONS: Eye abnormalities are the most common signs associated with GJA1 
PPVs, and they carry a high risk of developing glaucoma. The identification of 
GJA1 PPVs needs further attention and clarification.

Copyright © 2021 Molecular Vision.

PMCID: PMC8131177
PMID: 34035645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]