---
reference_id: "PMID:37243446"
title: Biomarkers to predict disease progression and therapeutic response in isolated methylmalonic acidemia.
authors:
- Manoli I
- Gebremariam A
- McCoy S
- Pass AR
- Gagné J
- Hall C
- Ferry S
- Van Ryzin C
- Sloan JL
- Sacchetti E
- Catesini G
- Rizzo C
- Martinelli D
- Spada M
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Venditti CP
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12636
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers to predict disease progression and therapeutic response in isolated methylmalonic acidemia.
**Authors:** Manoli I, Gebremariam A, McCoy S, Pass AR, Gagné J, Hall C, Ferry S, Van Ryzin C, Sloan JL, Sacchetti E, Catesini G, Rizzo C, Martinelli D, Spada M, Dionisi-Vici C, Venditti CP
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12636](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12636)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2023 Jul;46(4):554-572. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12636. Epub
2023  Jun 6.

Biomarkers to predict disease progression and therapeutic response in isolated 
methylmalonic acidemia.

Manoli I(1), Gebremariam A(1), McCoy S(1), Pass AR(1), Gagné J(1), Hall C(1), 
Ferry S(1), Van Ryzin C(1), Sloan JL(1), Sacchetti E(2), Catesini G(2), Rizzo 
C(2), Martinelli D(2), Spada M(3)(4), Dionisi-Vici C(2), Venditti CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Medicine Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Division of Metabolic Diseases, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Division of Hepato-Bilio-Pancreatic Surgery, Liver and Kidney Tranplantation, 
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)European Research Network TransplantChild, Rome, Italy.

Methylmalonic Acidemia (MMA) is a heterogenous group of inborn errors of 
metabolism caused by a defect in the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MMUT) enzyme or 
the synthesis and transport of its cofactor, 5'-deoxy-adenosylcobalamin. It is 
characterized by life-threatening episodes of ketoacidosis, chronic kidney 
disease, and other multiorgan complications. Liver transplantation can improve 
patient stability and survival and thus provides clinical and biochemical 
benchmarks for the development of hepatocyte-targeted genomic therapies. Data 
are presented from a US natural history protocol that evaluated subjects with 
different types of MMA including mut-type (N = 91), cblB-type (15), and 
cblA-type MMA (17), as well as from an Italian cohort of mut-type (N = 19) and 
cblB-type MMA (N = 2) subjects, including data before and after organ 
transplantation in both cohorts. Canonical metabolic markers, such as serum 
methylmalonic acid and propionylcarnitine, are variable and affected by dietary 
intake and renal function. We have therefore explored the use of the 1-13 
C-propionate oxidation breath test (POBT) to measure metabolic capacity and the 
changes in circulating proteins to assess mitochondrial dysfunction (fibroblast 
growth factor 21 [FGF21] and growth differentiation factor 15 [GDF15]) and 
kidney injury (lipocalin-2 [LCN2]). Biomarker concentrations are higher in 
patients with the severe mut0 -type and cblB-type MMA, correlate with a 
decreased POBT, and show a significant response postliver transplant. Additional 
circulating and imaging markers to assess disease burden are necessary to 
monitor disease progression. A combination of biomarkers reflecting disease 
severity and multisystem involvement will be needed to help stratify patients 
for clinical trials and assess the efficacy of new therapies for MMA.

© 2023 SSIEM. This article has been contributed to by U.S. Government employees 
and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12636
PMCID: PMC10330948
PMID: 37243446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Authors have no conflicts 
of interest to declare. I.M and C.P.V. are inventors on patents related to 
isotopic biomarkers in organic acidemias filed by the NIH on their behalf.