---
reference_id: "PMID:37024676"
title: "Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: translating genetic discoveries into therapies."
authors:
- Akçimen F
- Lopez ER
- Landers JE
- Nath A
- Chiò A
- Chia R
- Traynor BJ
journal: Nat Rev Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41576-023-00592-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: translating genetic discoveries into therapies.
**Authors:** Akçimen F, Lopez ER, Landers JE, Nath A, Chiò A, Chia R, Traynor BJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41576-023-00592-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-023-00592-y)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Genet. 2023 Sep;24(9):642-658. doi: 10.1038/s41576-023-00592-y. Epub 
2023 Apr 6.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: translating genetic discoveries into therapies.

Akçimen F(1), Lopez ER(2), Landers JE(3), Nath A(4), Chiò A(5)(6)(7), Chia R(8), 
Traynor BJ(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. fulya.akcimen@nih.gov.
(2)Therapeutic Development Branch, National Center for Advancing Translational 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA.
(4)Section of Infections of the Nervous System, National Institute for 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(5)Rita Levi Montalcini Department of Neuroscience, University of Turin, Turin, 
Italy.
(6)Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, C.N.R, Rome, Italy.
(7)Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Citta' della Salute e della Scienza, Turin, 
Italy.
(8)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(9)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. bryan.traynor@nih.gov.
(10)Therapeutic Development Branch, National Center for Advancing Translational 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA. 
bryan.traynor@nih.gov.
(11)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University Medical Center, Baltimore, 
MD, USA. bryan.traynor@nih.gov.

Recent advances in sequencing technologies and collaborative efforts have led to 
substantial progress in identifying the genetic causes of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS). This momentum has, in turn, fostered the development of 
putative molecular therapies. In this Review, we outline the current genetic 
knowledge, emphasizing recent discoveries and emerging concepts such as the 
implication of distinct types of mutation, variability in mutated genes in 
diverse genetic ancestries and gene-environment interactions. We also propose a 
high-level model to synthesize the interdependent effects of genetics, 
environmental and lifestyle factors, and ageing into a unified theory of ALS. 
Furthermore, we summarize the current status of therapies developed on the basis 
of genetic knowledge established for ALS over the past 30 years, and we discuss 
how developing treatments for ALS will advance our understanding of targeting 
other neurological diseases.

© 2023. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41576-023-00592-y
PMCID: PMC10611979
PMID: 37024676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests B.J.T. holds a patent on the 
diagnostic and therapeutic applications of the pathogenic repeat expansion in 
C9orf72. The other authors declare no competing interests.