---
reference_id: "PMID:29206991"
title: Clinical Predictors of Malaria, Acute Bacterial Meningitis and Treatment Outcomes among Febrile Children Admitted with Altered Mental Status in Northwestern Tanzania.
authors:
- Jumanne S
- Meda J
- Hokororo A
- Leshabari K
journal: J Trop Pediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmx090
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Predictors of Malaria, Acute Bacterial Meningitis and Treatment Outcomes among Febrile Children Admitted with Altered Mental Status in Northwestern Tanzania.
**Authors:** Jumanne S, Meda J, Hokororo A, Leshabari K
**Journal:** J Trop Pediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/tropej/fmx090](https://doi.org/10.1093/tropej/fmx090)

## Content

1. J Trop Pediatr. 2018 Oct 1;64(5):426-433. doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmx090.

Clinical Predictors of Malaria, Acute Bacterial Meningitis and Treatment 
Outcomes among Febrile Children Admitted with Altered Mental Status in 
Northwestern Tanzania.

Jumanne S(1)(2), Meda J(1), Hokororo A(2), Leshabari K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics & Child Health, College of Health Sciences, 
University of Dodoma, Dodoma, Tanzania.
(2)Department of Pediatrics & Child Health, Catholic University of Health and 
Allied sciences, Mwanza, Mwanza, Tanzania.
(3)Department of Medicine, Walter Hospital, Dar es, Salaam, Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: Malaria and acute bacterial meningitis (ABM) are the leading 
infectious causes of febrile encephalopathy in malaria endemic settings. The 
clinical distinction of the two conditions is complicated by overlap in clinical 
features.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the clinical predictors for malaria, ABM and treatment 
outcome in febrile children aged 2 months to 12 years with altered mentation at 
two tertiary hospitals in Northwestern Tanzania.
METHODS: Prospective study of 103 children to document demographic data and 
physical examination findings, such as level of consciousness and meningeal 
irritations. Laboratory results for cerebrospinal fluid, hemoglobin, malaria and 
HIV were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Age >60 months and hemoglobin ≤5 g/dl were independent predictors of 
malaria; (p = 0.013 and 0.004, respectively). HIV infection was the only 
predictor of meningitis, p = 0.037, and mortality was high if the diagnosis was 
unconfirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: Children with febrile encephalopathy are more likely to have 
malaria than ABM if they have severe anemia.

DOI: 10.1093/tropej/fmx090
PMID: 29206991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]