---
reference_id: "PMID:19621417"
title: "Newborn screening for Fabry disease in Taiwan reveals a high incidence of the later-onset GLA mutation c.936+919G>A (IVS4+919G>A)."
authors:
- Hwu WL
- Chien YH
- Lee NC
- Chiang SC
- Dobrovolny R
- Huang AC
- Yeh HY
- Chao MC
- Lin SJ
- Kitagawa T
- Desnick RJ
- Hsu LW
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21074
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Fabry Disease/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Neonatal Screening
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Taiwan/epidemiology
- "alpha-Galactosidase/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newborn screening for Fabry disease in Taiwan reveals a high incidence of the later-onset GLA mutation c.936+919G>A (IVS4+919G>A).
**Authors:** Hwu WL, Chien YH, Lee NC, Chiang SC, Dobrovolny R, Huang AC, Yeh HY, Chao MC, Lin SJ, Kitagawa T, Desnick RJ, Hsu LW
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21074](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21074)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2009 Oct;30(10):1397-405. doi: 10.1002/humu.21074.

Newborn screening for Fabry disease in Taiwan reveals a high incidence of the 
later-onset GLA mutation c.936+919G>A (IVS4+919G>A).

Hwu WL(1), Chien YH, Lee NC, Chiang SC, Dobrovolny R, Huang AC, Yeh HY, Chao MC, 
Lin SJ, Kitagawa T, Desnick RJ, Hsu LW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Fabry disease (alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A, GLA) deficiency) is a 
panethnic inborn error of glycosphingolipid metabolism. Because optimal 
therapeutic outcomes depend on early intervention, a pilot program was designed 
to assess newborn screening for this disease in 171,977 consecutive Taiwanese 
newborns by measuring their dry blood spot (DBS) alpha-Gal A activities and 
beta-galactosidase/alpha-Gal A ratios. Of the 90,288 male screenees, 638 (0.7%) 
had DBS alpha-Gal A activity <30% of normal mean and/or activity ratios >10. A 
second DBS assay reduced these to 91 (0.1%). Of these, 11 (including twins) had 
<5% (Group-A), 64 had 5-30% (Group-B), and 11 had >30% (Group-C) of mean normal 
leukocyte alpha-Gal A activity. All 11 Group-A, 61 Group-B, and 1 Group-C males 
had GLA gene mutations. Surprisingly, 86% had the later-onset cryptic splice 
mutation c.936+919G>A (also called IVS4+919G>A). In contrast, screening 81,689 
females detected two heterozygotes. The novel mutations were expressed in vitro, 
predicting their classical or later-onset phenotypes. Newborn screening 
identified a surprisingly high frequency of Taiwanese males with Fabry disease 
(approximately 1 in 1,250), 86% having the IVS4+919G>A mutation previously found 
in later-onset cardiac phenotype patients. Further studies of the IVS4 
later-onset phenotype will determine its natural history and optimal timing for 
therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21074
PMCID: PMC2769558
PMID: 19621417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]