---
reference_id: "PMID:39405112"
title: Type 2 innate immunity promotes the development of pulmonary fibrosis in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome.
authors:
- Sorkhdini P
- Klubock-Shukla K
- Sheth S
- Yang D
- Yang AX
- Norbrun C
- Introne WJ
- Gochuico BR
- Zhou Y
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.178381
keywords:
- "Hermanski-Pudlak Syndrome/immunology, genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Animals
- Mice
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Humans
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Pulmonary Fibrosis/immunology, pathology, genetics"
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, immunology"
- "Lung/immunology, pathology"
- "Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Male
- Bleomycin/toxicity
- Female
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Chitinase-3-Like Protein 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Cell Proliferation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 2 innate immunity promotes the development of pulmonary fibrosis in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome.
**Authors:** Sorkhdini P, Klubock-Shukla K, Sheth S, Yang D, Yang AX, Norbrun C, Introne WJ, Gochuico BR, Zhou Y
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.178381](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.178381)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Nov 22;9(22):e178381. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.178381.

Type 2 innate immunity promotes the development of pulmonary fibrosis in 
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome.

Sorkhdini P(1), Klubock-Shukla K(1), Sheth S(1), Yang D(1), Yang AX(1), Norbrun 
C(1), Introne WJ(2), Gochuico BR(2), Zhou Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Brown University, 
Providence, Rhode Island, USA.
(2)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), 
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS), particularly types 1 and 4, is characterized by 
progressive pulmonary fibrosis, a major cause of morbidity and mortality. 
However, the precise mechanisms driving pulmonary fibrosis in HPS are not fully 
elucidated. Our previous studies suggested that CHI3L1-driven fibroproliferation 
may be a notable factor in HPS-associated fibrosis. This study aimed to explore 
the role of CHI3L1-CRTH2 interaction on type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) and 
explored the potential contribution of ILC2-fibroblast crosstalk in the 
development of pulmonary fibrosis in HPS. We identified ILC2s in lung tissues 
from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and HPS. Using 
bleomycin-challenged WT and Hps1-/- mice, we observed that ILC2s were recruited 
and appeared to contribute to fibrosis development in the Hps1-/- mice, with 
CRTH2 playing a notable role in ILC2 accumulation. We sorted ILC2s, profiled 
fibrosis-related genes and mediators, and conducted coculture experiments with 
primary lung ILC2s and fibroblasts. Our findings suggest that ILC2s may directly 
stimulate the proliferation and differentiation of primary lung fibroblasts 
partially through amphiregulin-EGFR-dependent mechanisms. Additionally, specific 
overexpression of CHI3L1 in the ILC2 population using the IL-7Rcre driver, which 
was associated with increased fibroproliferation, indicates that ILC2-mediated, 
CRTH2-dependent mechanisms might contribute to optimal CHI3L1-induced 
fibroproliferative repair in HPS-associated pulmonary fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.178381
PMCID: PMC11601950
PMID: 39405112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: YZ holds a patent, titled 
“Methods for the diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary fibrosis in subjects with 
Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome.” BRG is a paid full-time employee of AstraZeneca.