---
reference_id: "PMID:27888001"
title: Antioxidants and HNE in redox homeostasis.
authors:
- Łuczaj W
- Gęgotek A
- Skrzydlewska E
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antioxidants and HNE in redox homeostasis.
**Authors:** Łuczaj W, Gęgotek A, Skrzydlewska E
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.033)

## Content

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2017 Oct;111:87-101. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.033. Epub 2016 Nov 22.

Antioxidants and HNE in redox homeostasis.

Łuczaj W(1), Gęgotek A(1), Skrzydlewska E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Medical University of Bialystok, 
Mickiewicza 2d, 15-222 Bialystok, Poland.
(2)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Medical University of Bialystok, 
Mickiewicza 2d, 15-222 Bialystok, Poland. Electronic address: 
elzbieta.skrzydlewska@umb.edu.pl.

Under physiological conditions, cells are in a stable state known as redox 
homeostasis, which is maintained by the balance between continuous ROS/RNS 
generation and several mechanisms involved in antioxidant activity. ROS 
overproduction results in alterations in the redox homeostasis that promote 
oxidative damage to major components of the cell, including the biomembrane 
phospholipids. Lipid peroxidation subsequently generates a diverse set of 
products, including α,β-unsaturated aldehydes. Of these products, 
4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE) is the most studied aldehyde on the basis of its 
involvement in cellular physiology and pathology. This review summarizes the 
current knowledge in the field of HNE generation, metabolism, and 
detoxification, as well as its interactions with various cellular macromolecules 
(protein, phospholipid, and nucleic acid). The formation of HNE-protein adducts 
enables HNE to participate in multi-step regulation of cellular metabolic 
pathways that include signaling and transcription of antioxidant enzymes, 
pro-inflammatory factors, and anti-apoptotic proteins. The most widely described 
roles for HNE in the signaling pathways are associated with its activation of 
kinases, as well as transcription factors that are responsible for redox 
homeostasis (Ref-1, Nrf2, p53, NFκB, and Hsf1). Depending on its level, HNE 
exerts harmful or protective effects associated with the induction of 
antioxidant defense mechanisms. These effects make HNE a key player in 
maintaining redox homeostasis, as well as producing imbalances in this system 
that participate in aging and the development of pathological conditions.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.033
PMID: 27888001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]