---
reference_id: "PMID:38917675"
title: "Cardiomyopathy, an uncommon phenotype of congenital disorders of glycosylation: Recommendations for baseline screening and follow-up evaluation."
authors:
- Zemet R
- Hope KD
- Edmondson AC
- Shah R
- Patino M
- Yesso AM
- Berger JH
- Sarafoglou K
- Larson A
- Lam C
- Morava E
- Scaglia F
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108513
keywords:
- Humans
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Female
- Male
- "Cardiomyopathies/genetics, diagnosis"
- Phenotype
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Infant
- Glycosylation
- Follow-Up Studies
- Adult
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
- Prospective Studies
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiomyopathy, an uncommon phenotype of congenital disorders of glycosylation: Recommendations for baseline screening and follow-up evaluation.
**Authors:** Zemet R, Hope KD, Edmondson AC, Shah R, Patino M, Yesso AM, Berger JH, Sarafoglou K, Larson A, Lam C, Morava E, Scaglia F
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108513](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108513)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2024 Aug;142(4):108513. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108513.
Epub  2024 Jun 13.

Cardiomyopathy, an uncommon phenotype of congenital disorders of glycosylation: 
Recommendations for baseline screening and follow-up evaluation.

Zemet R(1), Hope KD(2), Edmondson AC(3), Shah R(4), Patino M(3), Yesso AM(5), 
Berger JH(6), Sarafoglou K(7), Larson A(8), Lam C(9), Morava E(10), Scaglia 
F(11).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA; Lillie Frank Abercrombie 
Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA; Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA; 
Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York City, NY, USA.
(5)Dept of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA; Lillie Frank Abercrombie 
Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Divisions of Endocrinology, and Genetics and Metabolism, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
CO, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington and Seattle Children's 
Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA; Norcliffe Foundation Center for Integrative Brain 
Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(10)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA; Department 
of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York City, NY, USA; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(11)Dept of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA; Joint BCM-CUHK Center of 
Medical Genetics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China. Electronic 
address: fscaglia@bcm.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a continuously 
expanding group of monogenic disorders that disrupt glycoprotein and glycolipid 
biosynthesis, leading to multi-systemic manifestations. These disorders are 
categorized into various groups depending on which part of the glycosylation 
process is impaired. The cardiac manifestations in CDG can significantly differ, 
not only across different types but also among individuals with the same genetic 
cause of CDG. Cardiomyopathy is an important phenotype in CDG. The clinical 
manifestations and progression of cardiomyopathy in CDG patients have not been 
well characterized. This study aims to delineate common patterns of 
cardiomyopathy across a range of genetic causes of CDG and to propose baseline 
screening and follow-up evaluation for this patient population.
METHODS: Patients with molecular confirmation of CDG who were enrolled in the 
prospective or memorial arms of the Frontiers in Congenital Disorders of 
Glycosylation Consortium (FCDGC) natural history study were ascertained for the 
presence of cardiomyopathy based on a retrospective review of their medical 
records. All patients were evaluated by clinical geneticists who are members of 
FCDGC at their respective academic centers. Patients were screened for 
cardiomyopathy, and detailed data were retrospectively collected. We analyzed 
their clinical and molecular history, imaging characteristics of cardiac 
involvement, type of cardiomyopathy, age at initial presentation of 
cardiomyopathy, additional cardiac features, the treatments administered, and 
their clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: Of the 305 patients with molecularly confirmed CDG participating in the 
FCDGC natural history study as of June 2023, 17 individuals, nine females and 
eight males, were identified with concurrent diagnoses of cardiomyopathy. Most 
of these patients were diagnosed with PMM2-CDG (n = 10). However, cardiomyopathy 
was also observed in other diagnoses, including PGM1-CDG (n = 3), ALG3-CDG 
(n = 1), DPM1-CDG (n = 1), DPAGT1-CDG (n = 1), and SSR4-CDG (n = 1). All 
PMM2-CDG patients were reported to have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Dilated 
cardiomyopathy was observed in three patients, two with PGM1-CDG and one with 
ALG3-CDG; left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy was diagnosed in two 
patients, one with PGM1-CDG and one with DPAGT1-CDG; two patients, one with 
DPM1-CDG and one with SSR4-CDG, were diagnosed with non-ischemic cardiomyopathy. 
The estimated median age of diagnosis for cardiomyopathy was 5 months (range: 
prenatal-27 years). Cardiac improvement was observed in three patients with 
PMM2-CDG. Five patients showed a progressive course of cardiomyopathy, while the 
condition remained unchanged in eight individuals. Six patients demonstrated 
pericardial effusion, with three patients exhibiting cardiac tamponade. One 
patient with SSR4-CDG has been recently diagnosed with cardiomyopathy; thus, the 
progression of the disease is yet to be determined. One patient with PGM1-CDG 
underwent cardiac transplantation. Seven patients were deceased, including five 
with PMM2-CDG, one with DPAGT1-CDG, and one with ALG3-CDG. Two patients died of 
cardiac tamponade from pericardial effusion; for the remaining patients, 
cardiomyopathy was not necessarily the primary cause of death.
CONCLUSIONS: In this retrospective study, cardiomyopathy was identified in ∼6% 
of patients with CDG. Notably, the majority, including all those with PMM2-CDG, 
exhibited hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Some cases did not show progression, yet 
pericardial effusions were commonly observed, especially in PMM2-CDG patients, 
occasionally escalating to life-threatening cardiac tamponade. It is recommended 
that clinicians managing CDG patients, particularly those with PMM2-CDG and 
PGM1-CDG, be vigilant of the cardiomyopathy risk and risk for potentially 
life-threatening pericardial effusions. Cardiac surveillance, including an 
echocardiogram and EKG, should be conducted at the time of diagnosis, annually 
throughout the first 5 years, followed by check-ups every 2-3 years if no 
concerns arise until adulthood. Subsequently, routine cardiac examinations every 
five years are advisable. Additionally, patients with diagnosed cardiomyopathy 
should receive ongoing cardiac care to ensure the effective management and 
monitoring of their condition. A prospective study will be required to determine 
the true prevalence of cardiomyopathy in CDG.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108513
PMCID: PMC11296892
PMID: 38917675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
report no conflict of interest.