---
reference_id: "PMID:15734960"
title: Hepatocellular carcinoma and polymorphisms in carcinogen-metabolizing and DNA repair enzymes in a population with aflatoxin exposure and hepatitis B virus endemicity.
authors:
- Kirk GD
- Turner PC
- Gong Y
- Lesi OA
- Mendy M
- Goedert JJ
- Hall AJ
- Whittle H
- Hainaut P
- Montesano R
- Wild CP
journal: Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0161
keywords:
- Adult
- "Aflatoxins/metabolism, toxicity"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/chemically induced, enzymology, epidemiology, genetics, virology"
- "DNA Repair Enzymes/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Epoxide Hydrolases/genetics
- Female
- Gambia/epidemiology
- Genotype
- Glutathione Transferase/genetics
- Hepatitis B/complications
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, enzymology, epidemiology, genetics, virology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Risk Factors
- X-ray Repair Cross Complementing Protein 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatocellular carcinoma and polymorphisms in carcinogen-metabolizing and DNA repair enzymes in a population with aflatoxin exposure and hepatitis B virus endemicity.
**Authors:** Kirk GD, Turner PC, Gong Y, Lesi OA, Mendy M, Goedert JJ, Hall AJ, Whittle H, Hainaut P, Montesano R, Wild CP
**Journal:** Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0161](https://doi.org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0161)

## Content

1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005 Feb;14(2):373-9. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0161.

Hepatocellular carcinoma and polymorphisms in carcinogen-metabolizing and DNA
repair enzymes in a population with aflatoxin exposure and hepatitis B virus
endemicity.

Kirk GD(1), Turner PC, Gong Y, Lesi OA, Mendy M, Goedert JJ, Hall AJ, Whittle H,
Hainaut P, Montesano R, Wild CP.

Author information:
(1)Viral Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, NIH/Department of Health and Human Services,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. kirkg@mail.nih.gov

High rates of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in The Gambia, West Africa, are
primarily due to a high prevalence of chronic hepatitis B virus infection and
heavy aflatoxin exposure via groundnut consumption. We investigated genetic
polymorphisms in carcinogen-metabolizing (GSTM1, GSTT1, HYL1*2) and DNA repair
(XRCC1) enzymes in a hospital-based case-control study. Incident HCC cases (n =
216) were compared with frequency-matched controls (n = 408) with no clinically
apparent liver disease. Although the prevalence of variant genotypes was
generally low, in multivariable analysis (adjusting for demographic factors,
hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and TP53 status), the GSTM1-null genotype
[odds ratio (OR), 2.45; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 1.21-4.95] and the
heterozygote XRCC1-399 AG genotype (OR, 3.18; 95% CI, 1.35-7.51) were
significantly associated with HCC. A weak association of the HYL1*2 polymorphism
with HCC was observed but did not reach statistical significance. GSTT1 was not
associated with HCC. The risk for HCC with null GSTM1 was most prominent among
those with the highest groundnut consumption (OR, 4.67; 95% CI, 1.45-15.1) and
was not evident among those with less than the mean groundnut intake (OR, 0.64;
95% CI, 0.20-2.02). Among participants who had all three suspected
aflatoxin-related high-risk genotypes [GSTM1 null, HLY1*2 (HY/HH), and XRCC1
(AG/GG)], a significant 15-fold increased risk of HCC was observed albeit with
imprecise estimates (OR, 14.7; 95% CI, 1.27-169). Our findings suggest that
genetic modulation of carcinogen metabolism and DNA repair can alter
susceptibility to HCC and that these effects may be modified by environmental
factors.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0161
PMID: 15734960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
