---
reference_id: "PMID:29111175"
title: "Recognizing Symptom Burden in Advanced Prostate Cancer: A Global Patient and Caregiver Survey."
authors:
- Drudge-Coates L
- Oh WK
- Tombal B
- Delacruz A
- Tomlinson B
- Ripley AV
- Mastris K
- "O'Sullivan JM"
- Shore ND
journal: Clin Genitourin Cancer
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.clgc.2017.09.015
keywords:
- Aged
- "Bone Neoplasms/psychology, secondary"
- Brazil
- Caregivers/psychology
- Communication
- Cost of Illness
- Europe
- "Fatigue/epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
- Japan
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pain/epidemiology, etiology"
- Physician-Patient Relations
- Prostatic Neoplasms/psychology
- Quality of Life/psychology
- Singapore
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Taiwan
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recognizing Symptom Burden in Advanced Prostate Cancer: A Global Patient and Caregiver Survey.
**Authors:** Drudge-Coates L, Oh WK, Tombal B, Delacruz A, Tomlinson B, Ripley AV, Mastris K, O'Sullivan JM, Shore ND
**Journal:** Clin Genitourin Cancer (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clgc.2017.09.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clgc.2017.09.015)

## Content

1. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2018 Apr;16(2):e411-e419. doi:
10.1016/j.clgc.2017.09.015. Epub 2017 Oct 5.

Recognizing Symptom Burden in Advanced Prostate Cancer: A Global Patient and
Caregiver Survey.

Drudge-Coates L(1), Oh WK(2), Tombal B(3), Delacruz A(4), Tomlinson B(5), Ripley
AV(6), Mastris K(7), O'Sullivan JM(8), Shore ND(9).

Author information:
(1)King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address:
ldrudge-coates@nhs.net.
(2)Tisch Cancer Institute-Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY.
(3)Institut de Recherche Clinique, Université Catholique de Louvain,
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(4)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(5)CancerCare, New York, NY.
(6)Harris Poll, New York, NY.
(7)Europa Uomo, The European Prostate Cancer Coalition, Essex, UK.
(8)Queen's University School of Medicine, Belfast, UK.
(9)Carolina Urologic Research Center, Myrtle Beach, SC.

BACKGROUND: Bone metastases in men with prostate cancer are often initially
asymptomatic, resulting in delayed identification, diagnosis, and appropriate
treatment. To assess how patients with advanced prostate cancer (aPC)
communicate symptoms to health care providers, an international patient survey
was conducted.
METHODS: An online and phone survey was conducted by Harris Poll in 11 countries
(Brazil, France, Germany, Japan, Italy, Netherlands, Singapore, Spain, Taiwan,
United Kingdom, United States) from February 12 to October 27, 2015, in men with
aPC (ie, those who reported as having PC beyond the prostate [metastatic]) and
their caregivers. Cell weighting was used to ensure equal weight of data across
countries. Percentages are based on weighted n values.
RESULTS: A total of 927 men with aPC (weighted n = 664) and 400 caregivers
completed the survey. Most commonly reported symptoms were fatigue (73%),
urinary symptoms (63%), sexual function symptoms (62%), and bone pain (52%). Of
568 patients with bone metastases (weighted n = 421), most (73%) noticed pain
before receiving a diagnosis of metastatic PC. Most patients with aPC (56%) were
uncertain if their pain was cancer related, 55% felt they had to live with daily
pain, 45% sometimes ignored pain, and 39% had difficulty talking about pain.
Patients who had a caregiver were more likely than those without to discuss pain
at every visit (45% vs. 32%, P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Disease symptoms in aPC are often underrecognized. Tools
encouraging effective communication among patients, caregivers, and health care
providers on early symptom reporting may lead to enhanced symptom and disease
management.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clgc.2017.09.015
PMID: 29111175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
