---
reference_id: "PMID:23775962"
title: "Imatinib for melanomas harboring mutationally activated or amplified KIT arising on mucosal, acral, and chronically sun-damaged skin."
authors:
- Hodi FS
- Corless CL
- Giobbie-Hurder A
- Fletcher JA
- Zhu M
- Marino-Enriquez A
- Friedlander P
- Gonzalez R
- Weber JS
- Gajewski TF
- "O'Day SJ"
- Kim KB
- Lawrence D
- Flaherty KT
- Luke JJ
- Collichio FA
- Ernstoff MS
- Heinrich MC
- Beadling C
- Zukotynski KA
- Yap JT
- Van den Abbeele AD
- Demetri GD
- Fisher DE
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.47.7836
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imatinib for melanomas harboring mutationally activated or amplified KIT arising on mucosal, acral, and chronically sun-damaged skin.
**Authors:** Hodi FS, Corless CL, Giobbie-Hurder A, Fletcher JA, Zhu M, Marino-Enriquez A, Friedlander P, Gonzalez R, Weber JS, Gajewski TF, O'Day SJ, Kim KB, Lawrence D, Flaherty KT, Luke JJ, Collichio FA, Ernstoff MS, Heinrich MC, Beadling C, Zukotynski KA, Yap JT, Van den Abbeele AD, Demetri GD, Fisher DE
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2012.47.7836](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2012.47.7836)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Sep 10;31(26):3182-90. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.47.7836. Epub 
2013 Jun 17.

Imatinib for melanomas harboring mutationally activated or amplified KIT arising 
on mucosal, acral, and chronically sun-damaged skin.

Hodi FS(1), Corless CL, Giobbie-Hurder A, Fletcher JA, Zhu M, Marino-Enriquez A, 
Friedlander P, Gonzalez R, Weber JS, Gajewski TF, O'Day SJ, Kim KB, Lawrence D, 
Flaherty KT, Luke JJ, Collichio FA, Ernstoff MS, Heinrich MC, Beadling C, 
Zukotynski KA, Yap JT, Van den Abbeele AD, Demetri GD, Fisher DE.

Author information:
(1)F. Stephen Hodi, Anita Giobbie-Hurder, Philip Friedlander, Jason J. Luke, 
Katherine A. Zukotynski, Jeffrey T. Yap, Annick D. Van den Abbeele, and George 
D. Demetri, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute; Jonathan A. Fletcher, Meijun Zhu, and 
Adrian Marino-Enriquez, Brigham and Women's Hospital; Donald Lawrence, Keith T. 
Flaherty, and David E. Fisher, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; 
Christopher L. Corless, Michael C. Heinrich, and Carol Beadling, Portland 
Veterans Administration Medical Center and Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, OR; Philip Friedlander, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY; Rene 
Gonzalez, University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, CO; Jeffrey S. Weber, H. 
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL; Thomas F. Gajewski, 
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL; Steven J. O'Day, Beverly Hills Cancer 
Center, Beverly Hills, CA; Kevin B. Kim, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Frances A. Collichio, The University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; and Marc S. Ernstoff, Geisel School of 
Medicine and Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Hanover, NH.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2013 Sep 10;31(26):3173-5. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2013.50.3144.

PURPOSE: Amplifications and mutations in the KIT proto-oncogene in subsets of 
melanomas provide therapeutic opportunities.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a multicenter phase II trial of imatinib in 
metastatic mucosal, acral, or chronically sun-damaged (CSD) melanoma with KIT 
amplifications and/or mutations. Patients received imatinib 400 mg once per day 
or 400 mg twice per day if there was no initial response. Dose reductions were 
permitted for treatment-related toxicities. Additional oncogene mutation 
screening was performed by mass spectroscopy.
RESULTS: Twenty-five patients were enrolled (24 evaluable). Eight patients (33%) 
had tumors with KIT mutations, 11 (46%) with KIT amplifications, and five (21%) 
with both. Median follow-up was 10.6 months (range, 3.7 to 27.1 months). Best 
overall response rate (BORR) was 29% (21% excluding nonconfirmed responses) with 
a two-stage 95% CI of 13% to 51%. BORR was significantly greater than the 
hypothesized null of 5% and statistically significantly different by mutation 
status (7 of 13 or 54% KIT mutated v 0% KIT amplified only). There were no 
statistical differences in rates of progression or survival by mutation status 
or by melanoma site. The overall disease control rate was 50% but varied 
significantly by KIT mutation status (77% mutated v 18% amplified). Four 
patients harbored pretreatment NRAS mutations, and one patient acquired 
increased KIT amplification after treatment.
CONCLUSION: Melanomas that arise on mucosal, acral, or CSD skin should be 
assessed for KIT mutations. Imatinib can be effective when tumors harbor KIT 
mutations, but not if KIT is amplified only. NRAS mutations and KIT copy number 
gain may be mechanisms of therapeutic resistance to imatinib.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.47.7836
PMCID: PMC4878082
PMID: 23775962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' disclosures of potential conflicts of 
interest and author contributions are found at the end of this article.