---
reference_id: "PMID:25385679"
title: "The clinical spectrum and therapeutic management of hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis: data from a French nationwide study of fifty-seven patients."
authors:
- Jachiet M
- Flageul B
- Deroux A
- Le Quellec A
- Maurier F
- Cordoliani F
- Godmer P
- Abasq C
- Astudillo L
- Belenotti P
- Bessis D
- Bigot A
- Doutre MS
- Ebbo M
- Guichard I
- Hachulla E
- Héron E
- Jeudy G
- Jourde-Chiche N
- Jullien D
- Lavigne C
- Machet L
- Macher MA
- Martel C
- Melboucy-Belkhir S
- Morice C
- Petit A
- Simorre B
- Zenone T
- Bouillet L
- Bagot M
- Frémeaux-Bacchi V
- Guillevin L
- Mouthon L
- Dupin N
- Aractingi S
- Terrier B
- French Vasculitis Study Group
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/art.38956
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Colchicine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Comorbidity
- Complement C1q/deficiency
- Female
- France/epidemiology
- Humans
- "Hydroxychloroquine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/drug therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Skin/drug effects, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Urticaria/drug therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- "Vasculitis/drug therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical spectrum and therapeutic management of hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis: data from a French nationwide study of fifty-seven patients.
**Authors:** Jachiet M, Flageul B, Deroux A, Le Quellec A, Maurier F, Cordoliani F, Godmer P, Abasq C, Astudillo L, Belenotti P, Bessis D, Bigot A, Doutre MS, Ebbo M, Guichard I, Hachulla E, Héron E, Jeudy G, Jourde-Chiche N, Jullien D, Lavigne C, Machet L, Macher MA, Martel C, Melboucy-Belkhir S, Morice C, Petit A, Simorre B, Zenone T, Bouillet L, Bagot M, Frémeaux-Bacchi V, Guillevin L, Mouthon L, Dupin N, Aractingi S, Terrier B, French Vasculitis Study Group
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.38956](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.38956)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Feb;67(2):527-34. doi: 10.1002/art.38956.

The clinical spectrum and therapeutic management of hypocomplementemic
urticarial vasculitis: data from a French nationwide study of fifty-seven
patients.

Jachiet M(1), Flageul B, Deroux A, Le Quellec A, Maurier F, Cordoliani F, Godmer
P, Abasq C, Astudillo L, Belenotti P, Bessis D, Bigot A, Doutre MS, Ebbo M,
Guichard I, Hachulla E, Héron E, Jeudy G, Jourde-Chiche N, Jullien D, Lavigne C,
Machet L, Macher MA, Martel C, Melboucy-Belkhir S, Morice C, Petit A, Simorre B,
Zenone T, Bouillet L, Bagot M, Frémeaux-Bacchi V, Guillevin L, Mouthon L, Dupin
N, Aractingi S, Terrier B; French Vasculitis Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, and Université Paris Descartes, Paris 5, Paris,
France.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Jul;67(7):1984-5. doi: 10.1002/art.39097.
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Jul;67(7):1985-6. doi: 10.1002/art.39101.

OBJECTIVE: Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis (HUV) is an uncommon
vasculitis of unknown etiology that is rarely described in the literature. We
undertook this study to analyze the clinical spectrum and the therapeutic
management of patients with HUV.
METHODS: We conducted a French nationwide retrospective study that included 57
patients with chronic urticaria, histologic leukocytoclastic vasculitis, and
hypocomplementemia. We assessed clinical and laboratory data and evaluated the
patients' cutaneous and immunologic responses to therapy. We evaluated treatment
efficacy by measuring the time to treatment failure.
RESULTS: Urticarial lesions were typically more pruritic than painful and were
associated with angioedema in 51% of patients, purpura in 35%, and livedo
reticularis in 14%. Extracutaneous manifestations included constitutional
symptoms (in 56% of patients) as well as musculoskeletal involvement (in 82%),
ocular involvement (in 56%), pulmonary involvement (in 19%), gastrointestinal
involvement (in 18%), and kidney involvement (in 14%). Patients with HUV
typically presented with low C1q levels and normal C1 inhibitor levels, in
association with anti-C1q antibodies in 55% of patients. Hydroxychloroquine or
colchicine seemed to be as effective as corticosteroids as first-line therapy.
In patients with relapsing and/or refractory disease, rates of cutaneous and
immunologic response to therapy seemed to be higher with conventional
immunosuppressive agents, in particular, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, or
cyclophosphamide, while a rituximab-based regimen tended to have higher
efficacy. Finally, a cutaneous response to therapy was strongly associated with
an immunologic response to therapy.
CONCLUSION: HUV represents an uncommon systemic and relapsing vasculitis with
various manifestations, mainly, musculoskeletal and ocular involvement
associated with anti-C1q antibodies, which were found in approximately half of
the patients. The best strategy for treating HUV has yet to be defined.

Copyright © 2015 by the American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.38956
PMID: 25385679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
