---
reference_id: "PMID:28947114"
title: The role of rehabilitation therapy in Huntington disease.
authors:
- Quinn L
- Busse M
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801893-4.00013-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of rehabilitation therapy in Huntington disease.
**Authors:** Quinn L, Busse M
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-12-801893-4.00013-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801893-4.00013-4)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2017;144:151-165. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801893-4.00013-4.

The role of rehabilitation therapy in Huntington disease.

Quinn L(1), Busse M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biobehavioral Sciences, Teachers College, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, United States. Electronic address: QuinnL1@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Trials Research, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

The role of rehabilitation interventions is increasingly considered a key 
component to effective management of people with Huntington disease (HD). 
Lifestyle factors, such as activity level and exercise, as well as specific 
motor training may be helpful in managing the functional sequelae of HD and 
possibly slowing disease progression. In this chapter, we focus on the role of 
rehabilitation therapy in secondary and tertiary prevention of the potentially 
devastating consequences of HD. We provide a brief overview of the range of 
motor and cognitive impairments in HD and their effect on functional abilities. 
We further discuss emerging evidence in terms of the role of exercise, physical 
activity, and physical therapies in helping to minimize functional loss and 
maximize quality of life throughout the disease process. Future directions with 
respect to intensive and goal-directed exercise, including aerobic and 
strengthening programs, are also discussed. This is an area of particular 
importance alongside exploring the potential that motor-training paradigms have 
in mediating the effects of disease-modifying drugs, cell replacement therapy, 
or genetic manipulations, when available.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801893-4.00013-4
PMID: 28947114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]