---
reference_id: "PMID:15210535"
title: Stiff-person syndrome following West Nile fever.
authors:
- Hassin-Baer S
- Kirson ED
- Shulman L
- Buchman AS
- Bin H
- Hindiyeh M
- Markevich L
- Mendelson E
journal: Arch Neurol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.6.938
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stiff-person syndrome following West Nile fever.
**Authors:** Hassin-Baer S, Kirson ED, Shulman L, Buchman AS, Bin H, Hindiyeh M, Markevich L, Mendelson E
**Journal:** Arch Neurol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archneur.61.6.938](https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.61.6.938)

## Content

1. Arch Neurol. 2004 Jun;61(6):938-41. doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.6.938.

Stiff-person syndrome following West Nile fever.

Hassin-Baer S(1), Kirson ED, Shulman L, Buchman AS, Bin H, Hindiyeh M, Markevich 
L, Mendelson E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. 
shassin@post.tau.ac.il

BACKGROUND: Stiff-person syndrome is a rare autoimmune disorder associated with 
antibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), the key enzyme in 
gamma-aminobutyric acid synthesis. In most cases, a trigger cannot be 
identified.
OBJECTIVE: To describe a 41-year-old man who developed stiff-person syndrome and 
antibodies to GAD following acute West Nile virus infection.
DESIGN: A case report and a search in GenBank for common epitopes.
RESULT: The search revealed a stretch of 12 amino acids in the NS1 protein of 
West Nile virus with a high degree of homology to the GAD65 region (an isoform 
of GAD) containing the PEVKEK motif.
CONCLUSION: Cross-reactivity between antibodies directed against West Nile virus 
and GAD may have contributed to the development of stiff-person syndrome in this 
patient.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.61.6.938
PMID: 15210535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]