---
reference_id: PMID:23797415
title: "Ankylosing spondylitis: Chinese perspective, clinical phenotypes, and associated extra-articular systemic features."
authors:
- Ho HH
- Chen JY
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-013-0344-0
keywords:
- Asian People/genetics
- Cardiovascular Diseases/etiology
- China/epidemiology
- HLA-B27 Antigen/analysis
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Respiratory Tract Diseases/etiology
- "Spondylitis, Ankylosing/complications, ethnology, genetics, therapy"
- "Uveitis, Anterior/etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ankylosing spondylitis: Chinese perspective, clinical phenotypes, and associated extra-articular systemic features.
**Authors:** Ho HH, Chen JY
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-013-0344-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-013-0344-0)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2013 Aug;15(8):344. doi: 10.1007/s11926-013-0344-0.

Ankylosing spondylitis: Chinese perspective, clinical phenotypes, and associated 
extra-articular systemic features.

Ho HH(1), Chen JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, 
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, College of Medicine, No. 5, 
Fu-Shin St, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, 33375, Taiwan.

Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a common rheumatic disease in the Chinese 
population, which is the largest population in the world associated with the 
global burden of health care. Herein we review and report the epidemiology and 
specific clinical characteristics of Chinese AS. More than 90 % of Chinese AS 
patients are HLA-B27 positive with the predominant HLA-B*2704 subtype; the 
incidence of HLA-B27 positivity ranges from 4 to 8 % in the general Chinese 
population. The first-degree relatives of AS probands often develop atypical AS 
with relatively mild disease and particularly undifferentiated 
spondyloarthropathy in females. Chinese AS patients have higher frequencies of 
juvenile-onset AS and peripheral arthritis. Of extra-articular manifestations, 
AS patients have earlier onset and more recurrent attacks of HLA-B27-related 
acute anterior uveitis. Cardiac arrhythmias or other cardiovascular disorders 
and metabolic syndrome are not infrequently found. Importantly, apical lung 
diseases in Chinese AS patients are also frequently associated with tuberculosis 
infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-013-0344-0
PMID: 23797415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]