---
reference_id: "PMID:22759192"
title: Two novel mutations of the NCSTN gene in Chinese familial acne inverse.
authors:
- Zhang C
- Wang L
- Chen L
- Ren W
- Mei A
- Chen X
- Deng Y
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2012.04627.x
keywords:
- Adult
- Amyloid Precursor Protein Secretases/genetics
- China
- Female
- Hidradenitis Suppurativa/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel mutations of the NCSTN gene in Chinese familial acne inverse.
**Authors:** Zhang C, Wang L, Chen L, Ren W, Mei A, Chen X, Deng Y
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-3083.2012.04627.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-3083.2012.04627.x)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2013 Dec;27(12):1571-4. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2012.04627.x. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Two novel mutations of the NCSTN gene in Chinese familial acne inverse.

Zhang C(1), Wang L, Chen L, Ren W, Mei A, Chen X, Deng Y.

Author information:
(1)Core Laboratory, Department of Anesthesiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, 
ChinaDepartment of Dermatology, Qichun County Renmin Hospital, Qichun, Hubei 
435300, ChinaDepartment of Dermatology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

BACKGROUND: Acne inversa (AI; MIM 142690), or hidradenitis suppurativa (HS), is 
a type of autosomal-dominant genodermatosis caused by mutations in γ-secretase. 
The complex of γ-secretase is a transmembrane protease that catalyses the 
cleavage of a set of membrane proteins and is comprised of four subunits encoded 
by four genes, including PSEN1, PSENEN, NCSTN and APH1. However, mutations 
associated with AI vary significantly, and it is important to define the 
specific mutation with a particular AI patient.
OBJECTIVE: To determine specific mutations in the γ-secretase gene associated 
with two Chinese AI families.
METHODS: Two families of three generations with apparent AI symptoms were 
examined through proband analysis. Genomic DNAs of the family members and a 
cohort of 100 healthy individuals were isolated and subjected to polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) and direct DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Two heterozygous missense mutations, c.647A>C (p.Q216P) in the exon 6, 
and c.223G>A (p.V75I) in the exon 3 of the NCSTN gene, were identified in the 
two families respectively. No mutations were found in 100 healthy individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified two novel mutations within the NCSTN gene 
associated with AI.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology © 2012 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2012.04627.x
PMID: 22759192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]