---
reference_id: "PMID:10433620"
title: Cancer risks in BRCA2 mutation carriers.
authors:
- Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/91.15.1310
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biliary Tract Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Breast Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- "Genes, Tumor Suppressor"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Melanoma/epidemiology, genetics"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Neoplasms, Second Primary/epidemiology, genetics"
- North America/epidemiology
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- Risk
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Stomach Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer risks in BRCA2 mutation carriers.
**Authors:** Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/91.15.1310](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/91.15.1310)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1999 Aug 4;91(15):1310-6. doi: 10.1093/jnci/91.15.1310.

Cancer risks in BRCA2 mutation carriers.

Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium(1).

Collaborators: Easton D, Thompson D, McGuffog L, Haites N, Schofield A, Scott
RJ, King MC, Schubert E, Bignon Y, Stratton M, Ford D, Peto J, Eeles R, Ponder
B, Gayther S, Chang-Claude J, Weber BH, Hamann U, Benitez J, Osorio A, Eerola H,
Nevanlinna H, Lynch HT, Narod S, Goldgar D, Lenoir G, Arason A, Barkardottir R,
Egilsson V, Eyfjord J, Tulinius H, Bishop DT, Borg A, Loman N, Johannsson O,
Olsson H, Tonin P, Foulkes W, Ghadirian P, Mes-Masson AM, Weber B, Devilee P,
Vasen H, Cornelisse CJ, Meijers-Heijboer H, Klijn JG, Narod S, Brunet JS,
Moslehi R, Neuhausen S, Cannon-Albright L.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Campaign (CRC) Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Strangeways
Research Laboratory, Cambridge, U.K.

BACKGROUND: Carriers of germline mutations in the BRCA2 gene are known to be at
high risk of breast and ovarian cancers, but the risks of other cancers in
mutation carriers are uncertain. We investigated these risks in 173
breast-ovarian cancer families with BRCA2 mutations identified at 20 centers in
Europe and North America.
METHODS: Other cancer occurrence was determined in a final cohort of 3728
individuals, among whom 681 persons had breast or ovarian cancer and 3047
persons either were known mutation carriers, were first-degree relatives of
known mutation carriers, or were first-degree relatives of breast or ovarian
cancer patients. Incidence rates were compared with population-specific
incidence rates, and relative risks (RRs) to carriers, together with 95%
confidence intervals (CIs), were estimated by use of a maximum likelihood
approach. Three hundred thirty-three other cancers occurred in this cohort.
RESULTS: Statistically significant increases in risks were observed for prostate
cancer (estimated RR = 4.65; 95% CI = 3.48-6.22), pancreatic cancer (RR = 3.51;
95% CI = 1. 87-6.58), gallbladder and bile duct cancer (RR = 4.97; 95% CI = 1.
50-16.52), stomach cancer (RR = 2.59; 95%CI = 1.46-4.61), and malignant melanoma
(RR = 2.58; 95% CI = 1.28-5.17). The RR for prostate cancer for men below the
age of 65 years was 7.33 (95% CI = 4.66-11.52). Among women who had already
developed breast cancer, the cumulative risks of a second, contralateral breast
cancer and of ovarian cancer by the age of 70 years were estimated to be 52.3%
(95% CI = 41.7%-61.0%) and 15.9% (95% CI = 8.8%-22.5%), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to the large risks of breast and ovarian cancers, BRCA2
mutations may be associated with increased risks of several other cancers.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/91.15.1310
PMID: 10433620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
