---
reference_id: "PMID:16426990"
title: "Effects of non-invasive ventilation on survival and quality of life in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a randomised controlled trial."
authors:
- Bourke SC
- Tomlinson M
- Williams TL
- Bullock RE
- Shaw PJ
- Gibson GJ
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70326-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of non-invasive ventilation on survival and quality of life in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a randomised controlled trial.
**Authors:** Bourke SC, Tomlinson M, Williams TL, Bullock RE, Shaw PJ, Gibson GJ
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70326-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70326-4)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2006 Feb;5(2):140-7. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70326-4.

Effects of non-invasive ventilation on survival and quality of life in patients 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a randomised controlled trial.

Bourke SC(1), Tomlinson M, Williams TL, Bullock RE, Shaw PJ, Gibson GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Newcastle upon Tyne and the 
Newcastle Hospitals Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 
Stephen.bourke@northumbria-healthcare.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2006 Feb;5(2):105-6. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70330-1.
    Lancet Neurol. 2006 Apr;5(4):291-2; author reply 292-3. doi: 
10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70390-8.

BACKGROUND: Few patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis currently receive 
non-invasive ventilation (NIV), reflecting clinical uncertainty about the role 
of this intervention. We aimed to assess the effect of NIV on quality of life 
and survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in a randomised controlled trial.
METHODS: 92 of 102 eligible patients participated. They were assessed every 2 
months and randomly assigned to NIV (n=22) or standard care (n=19) when they 
developed either orthopnoea with maximum inspiratory pressure less than 60% of 
that predicted or symptomatic hypercapnia. Primary validated quality-of-life 
outcome measures were the short form 36 mental component summary (MCS) and the 
sleep apnoea quality-of-life index symptoms domain (sym). Both time maintained 
above 75% of baseline (T(i)MCS and T(i)sym) and mean improvement (microMCS and 
microsym) were measured.
FINDINGS: NIV improved T(i)MCS, T(i)sym, microMCS, microsym, and survival in all 
patients and in the subgroup with better bulbar function (n=20). This subgroup 
showed improvement in several measures of quality of life and a median survival 
benefit of 205 days (p=0.006) with maintained quality of life for most of this 
period. NIV improved some quality-of-life indices in those with poor bulbar 
function, including microsym (p=0.018), but conferred no survival benefit.
INTERPRETATION: In patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis without severe 
bulbar dysfunction, NIV improves survival with maintenance of, and improvement 
in, quality of life. The survival benefit from NIV in this group is much greater 
than that from currently available neuroprotective therapy. In patients with 
severe bulbar impairment, NIV improves sleep-related symptoms, but is unlikely 
to confer a large survival advantage.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70326-4
PMID: 16426990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]