---
reference_id: "PMID:23071237"
title: "Adjuvant procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine chemotherapy in newly diagnosed anaplastic oligodendroglioma: long-term follow-up of EORTC brain tumor group study 26951."
authors:
- van den Bent MJ
- Brandes AA
- Taphoorn MJ
- Kros JM
- Kouwenhoven MC
- Delattre JY
- Bernsen HJ
- Frenay M
- Tijssen CC
- Grisold W
- Sipos L
- Enting RH
- French PJ
- Dinjens WN
- Vecht CJ
- Allgeier A
- Lacombe D
- Gorlia T
- Hoang-Xuan K
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.43.2229
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Brain Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, radiotherapy"
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Follow-Up Studies
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Lomustine/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Oligodendroglioma/drug therapy, genetics, radiotherapy"
- "Procarbazine/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Vincristine/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adjuvant procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine chemotherapy in newly diagnosed anaplastic oligodendroglioma: long-term follow-up of EORTC brain tumor group study 26951.
**Authors:** van den Bent MJ, Brandes AA, Taphoorn MJ, Kros JM, Kouwenhoven MC, Delattre JY, Bernsen HJ, Frenay M, Tijssen CC, Grisold W, Sipos L, Enting RH, French PJ, Dinjens WN, Vecht CJ, Allgeier A, Lacombe D, Gorlia T, Hoang-Xuan K
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2012.43.2229](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2012.43.2229)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jan 20;31(3):344-50. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.43.2229. Epub
2012  Oct 15.

Adjuvant procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine chemotherapy in newly 
diagnosed anaplastic oligodendroglioma: long-term follow-up of EORTC brain tumor 
group study 26951.

van den Bent MJ(1), Brandes AA, Taphoorn MJ, Kros JM, Kouwenhoven MC, Delattre 
JY, Bernsen HJ, Frenay M, Tijssen CC, Grisold W, Sipos L, Enting RH, French PJ, 
Dinjens WN, Vecht CJ, Allgeier A, Lacombe D, Gorlia T, Hoang-Xuan K.

Author information:
(1)Neuro-Oncology Unit, Erasmus MC-Daniel den Hoed Cancer Center, PO Box 5201, 
3008AE Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.vandenbent@erasmusmc.nl

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 Dec;9(12):670. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2012.198.

PURPOSE: Anaplastic oligodendroglioma are chemotherapy-sensitive tumors. We now 
present the long-term follow-up findings of a randomized phase III study on the 
addition of six cycles of procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine (PCV) 
chemotherapy to radiotherapy (RT).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Adult patients with newly diagnosed anaplastic 
oligodendroglial tumors were randomly assigned to either 59.4 Gy of RT or the 
same RT followed by six cycles of adjuvant PCV. An exploratory analysis of the 
correlation between 1p/19q status and survival was part of the study. 
Retrospectively, the methylation status of the methyl-guanine methyl transferase 
gene promoter and the mutational status of the isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) 
gene were determined. The primary end points were overall survival (OS) and 
progression-free survival based on intent-to-treat analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 368 patients were enrolled. With a median follow-up of 140 
months, OS in the RT/PCV arm was significantly longer (42.3 v 30.6 months in the 
RT arm, hazard ratio [HR], 0.75; 95% CI, 0.60 to 0.95). In the 80 patients with 
a 1p/19q codeletion, OS was increased, with a trend toward more benefit from 
adjuvant PCV (OS not reached in the RT/PCV group v 112 months in the RT group; 
HR, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.31 to 1.03). IDH mutational status was also of prognostic 
significance.
CONCLUSION: The addition of six cycles of PCV after 59.4 Gy of RT increases both 
OS and PFS in anaplastic oligodendroglial tumors. 1p/19q-codeleted tumors derive 
more benefit from adjuvant PCV compared with non-1p/19q-deleted tumors.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.43.2229
PMID: 23071237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]