---
reference_id: "PMID:35779842"
title: Validation of inhalation challenge test and serum immunoglobulin G test for bird-related fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
authors:
- Okuda R
- Hagiwara E
- Baba T
- Kitamura H
- Komatsu S
- Kaburaki S
- Mikami Y
- Takemura T
- Ogura T
journal: Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.anai.2022.06.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Validation of inhalation challenge test and serum immunoglobulin G test for bird-related fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Okuda R, Hagiwara E, Baba T, Kitamura H, Komatsu S, Kaburaki S, Mikami Y, Takemura T, Ogura T
**Journal:** Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anai.2022.06.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2022.06.019)

## Content

1. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2022 Sep;129(3):313-318. doi: 
10.1016/j.anai.2022.06.019. Epub 2022 Jun 30.

Validation of inhalation challenge test and serum immunoglobulin G test for 
bird-related fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Okuda R(1), Hagiwara E(2), Baba T(2), Kitamura H(2), Komatsu S(2), Kaburaki 
S(2), Mikami Y(3), Takemura T(4), Ogura T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory 
Center, Yokohama, Japan. Electronic address: b980013@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory 
Center, Yokohama, Japan.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center, 
Yokohama, Japan.

Comment in
    Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2022 Nov;129(5):544-545. doi: 
10.1016/j.anai.2022.09.002.

BACKGROUND: The inhalation challenge test is considered to be the item for 
diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) and identifying the causative 
antigen in patients with fibrotic HP. However, the inhalation challenge test is 
not widely used.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the values of the inhalation challenge test by comparing 
with serum immunoglobulin (Ig)G test.
METHODS: This was a single-center, retrospective study. The patients with 
fibrotic HP were diagnosed pathologically by surgical lung biopsy or 
transbronchial lung cryobiopsy and were assumed to have bird-related fibrotic HP 
if they had a history of obvious avian exposure.
RESULTS: On the basis of pathologic findings and history of avian exposure, 43 
of 86 patients were diagnosed with having bird-related fibrotic HP. In 43 
patients with bird-related fibrotic HP, 15 (35%) were positive for anti-bird IgG 
antibody and 36 (84%) were positive for the inhalation challenge test; in 
addition, the specificity of the inhalation challenge test was 67%. Patients 
with both positive results from inhalation challenge test and anti-bird IgG 
antibodies had a 2.7% decline in annual forced vital capacity (FVC) before the 
inhalation (P = .02). In patients with positive result from inhalation challenge 
test and negative result from anti-bird IgG antibodies, the annual FVC decreased 
by 5.8% (P = .03). FVC was not consistent in patients with positive result from 
the anti-bird IgG antibodies.
CONCLUSION: The inhalation challenge test for bird-related fibrotic HP was more 
sensitive than the anti-bird IgG antibodies. Furthermore, the inhalation 
challenge test could select patients with similar disease progression.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anai.2022.06.019
PMID: 35779842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]