---
reference_id: "PMID:23392880"
title: Taurine deficiency and MELAS are closely related syndromes.
authors:
- Schaffer SW
- Jong CJ
- Warner D
- Ito T
- Azuma J
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-6093-0_16
keywords:
- Animals
- Growth and Development
- Humans
- "MELAS Syndrome/complications, metabolism"
- Organ Specificity
- "Taurine/deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Taurine deficiency and MELAS are closely related syndromes.
**Authors:** Schaffer SW, Jong CJ, Warner D, Ito T, Azuma J
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4614-6093-0_16](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-6093-0_16)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;776:153-65. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-6093-0_16.

Taurine deficiency and MELAS are closely related syndromes.

Schaffer SW(1), Jong CJ, Warner D, Ito T, Azuma J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, USA. 
sschaffe@jaguar1.usouthal.edu

MELAS (mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like 
episodes) is a mitochondrial disease caused by one or more mutations of 
tRNA(Leu(UUR)). These mutations reduce both the aminoacylation of tRNA(Leu(UUR)) 
and a posttranslational modification in the wobble position of tRNA(Leu(UUR)). 
Both changes result in reduced transcription of mitochondria-encoded proteins; 
however, reduced aminoacylation affects the decoding of both UUG and UUA while 
the wobble defect specifically diminishes UUG decoding. Because 12 out of the 13 
mitochondria-encoded proteins are more dependent on UUA decoding than UUG 
decoding, the aminoacylation defect should have a more profound effect on 
protein synthesis than the wobble defect, which more specifically alters the 
expression of one mitochondria-encoded protein, ND6. Taurine serves as a 
substrate in the formation of 5-taurinomethyluridine-tRNA(Leu(UUR)); therefore, 
taurine deficiency should mimic 5-taurinomethyluridine-tRNA(Leu(UUR)) 
deficiency. Hence, the wobble hypothesis predicts that the symptoms of MELAS 
mimic those of taurine deficiency, provided that the dominant defect in MELAS is 
wobble modification deficiency. On the other hand, if the aminoacylation defect 
dominates, significant differences should exist between taurine deficiency and 
MELAS. The present review tests this hypothesis by comparing the symptoms of 
MELAS and taurine deficiency.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-6093-0_16
PMID: 23392880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]