---
reference_id: "PMID:7051848"
title: Androgen resistance syndromes.
authors:
- Griffin JE
- Leshin M
- Wilson JD
journal: Am J Physiol
year: '1982'
doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.1982.243.2.E81
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Androgen resistance syndromes.
**Authors:** Griffin JE, Leshin M, Wilson JD
**Journal:** Am J Physiol (1982)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpendo.1982.243.2.E81](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.1982.243.2.E81)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol. 1982 Aug;243(2):E81-7. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.1982.243.2.E81.

Androgen resistance syndromes.

Griffin JE, Leshin M, Wilson JD.

Hereditary defects that impede androgen action cause resistance to the hormone 
both during embryogenesis and in later life and hence usually cause 
developmental defects of the male urogenital tract. In genetic males such 
defects produce a phenotypic spectrum ranging from infertile but otherwise 
normal men to individuals with varying degrees of ambiguous genitalia to 
phenotypic women. These disorders can be classified on the basis of the step in 
androgen action that is impeded by the individual mutations. 5 alpha-Reductase 
deficiency is an autosomal recessive enzyme defect that impairs the conversion 
of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. The internal male genital tract 
virilizes normally, but the external genitalia are predominantly female in 
character. The syndrome is the result of one of several mutations that impair 
the function of the 5 alpha-reductase enzyme. A variety of disorders influence 
the androgen receptor that mediates the action of both testosterone and 
dihydrotestosterone. At least four phenotypic variants can be distinguished: 
complete testicular feminization, incomplete testicular feminization, the 
Reifenstein syndrome, and the infertile male syndrome, each of which is 
inherited as an X-linked trait. Absence of receptor binding is found commonly in 
complete testicular feminization, but qualitative and/or less severe 
quantitative defects in receptor function can be associated with all four 
variants. A third type of disorder, receptor positive resistance, also causes 
variable defects in male development and is associated with normal 5 
alpha-reductase activity and normal androgen receptor. The underlying defect is 
presumed to lie at the intranuclear site or sites of action of the 
hormone-receptor complex.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.1982.243.2.E81
PMID: 7051848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]