---
reference_id: "PMID:37456765"
title: Management of Coronary Artery Spasm.
authors:
- Lanza GA
- Shimokawa H
journal: Eur Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15420/ecr.2022.47
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Coronary Artery Spasm.
**Authors:** Lanza GA, Shimokawa H
**Journal:** Eur Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15420/ecr.2022.47](https://doi.org/10.15420/ecr.2022.47)

## Content

1. Eur Cardiol. 2023 May 22;18:e38. doi: 10.15420/ecr.2022.47. eCollection 2023.

Management of Coronary Artery Spasm.

Lanza GA(1), Shimokawa H(2).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione Policlinico A Gemelli IRCCS, Department of Cardiovascular 
Medicine, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore Rome, Italy.
(2)International University of Health and Welfare Narita, Japan.

Calcium channel blockers (CCBs) are the first-line treatment for coronary artery 
spasm (CAS). When CAS-related angina symptoms are not well controlled by CCB 
therapy, long-acting nitrates or (where available) nicorandil can be added as 
second-line medications. In the case of CAS refractory to standard treatments, 
several other alternative drugs and interventions have been proposed, including 
the Rho-kinase inhibitor fasudil, anti-adrenergic drugs, neural therapies and 
percutaneous coronary interventions. In patients with syncope or cardiac arrest 
caused by CAS-related tachyarrhythmias, or even bradyarrhythmias, implantation 
of an ICD or pacemaker, respectively, should be considered according to the risk 
of recurrence and efficacy of vasodilator therapy.

Copyright © 2023, Radcliffe Cardiology.

DOI: 10.15420/ecr.2022.47
PMCID: PMC10345953
PMID: 37456765

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: GAL and HS are on the European 
Cardiology Review editorial board; this did not influence peer review. The 
authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.