---
reference_id: "PMID:25357015"
title: Clinicopathological characteristics and mutation profiling in primary cutaneous melanoma.
authors:
- Yaman B
- Akalin T
- Kandiloğlu G
journal: Am J Dermatopathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000241
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Chi-Square Distribution
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Female
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Gene Frequency
- "Genes, p16"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Logistic Models
- Male
- "Melanoma/genetics, pathology"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Odds Ratio
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Risk Factors
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Turkey
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathological characteristics and mutation profiling in primary cutaneous melanoma.
**Authors:** Yaman B, Akalin T, Kandiloğlu G
**Journal:** Am J Dermatopathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DAD.0000000000000241](https://doi.org/10.1097/DAD.0000000000000241)

## Content

1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2015 May;37(5):389-97. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000241.

Clinicopathological characteristics and mutation profiling in primary cutaneous
melanoma.

Yaman B(1), Akalin T, Kandiloğlu G.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Ege University, İzmir, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of mutations in malignant melanoma varies remarkably
according to the subtype of melanoma, and this in itself is affected by racial
and geographical factors. Studies screening melanoma case series for different
types of mutations are relatively rare.
METHOD: The authors analyzed the frequency of various somatic point mutations of
10 genes in 106 primary cutaneous melanoma cases. The mutations (BRAF, NRAS,
KIT, CDKN2A, KRAS, HRAS, PIK3CA, STK11, GNAQ, CTNNB1) were evaluated with
real-time PCR-based PCR-Array through allele-specific amplification, and the
results were correlated with various clinicopathological characteristics.
RESULTS: Mutations were found in 64.2% of the melanomas overall. BRAF (42.5%),
NRAS (15.1%), and CDKN2A (13.2%) were the 3 most common mutations. BRAF and NRAS
mutations were more frequent in nodular and superficial spreading melanomas (P <
0.001). Associations with BRAF mutation were as follows: male gender [odds ratio
(OR) = 2.4], younger age (OR = 2.7), superficial spreading (OR = 15.6) and
nodular melanoma (OR = 9.5), trunk localization (OR = 6.3), and intermittent sun
exposure (OR = 4.6). A considerable percentage of V600K (44.4%) mutations were
found among the BRAF mutations, whereas KIT mutations (3.8%) were less frequent.
Multiple mutations were detected in 13.2% of the melanomas. The most common
co-occurrences were in the BRAF, NRAS, and CDKN2A genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors analyzed 10 somatic mutations in the main subtypes of
primary cutaneous melanomas from the western region of Turkey. Mutations were
found in 64.2% of the melanomas overall. The most common mutations were in the
BRAF and NRAS genes. In addition to other less common mutations, a notable
number of multiple mutations were encountered. The multiplicity and concurrence
of mutations in this study may provide further study areas for personalized
targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000241
PMID: 25357015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
