---
reference_id: "PMID:20682460"
title: "l-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency: clinical presentation and response to treatment in two patients with a novel mutation."
authors:
- Edvardson S
- Korman SH
- Livne A
- Shaag A
- Saada A
- Nalbandian R
- Allouche-Arnon H
- Gomori JM
- Katz-Brull R
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.06.021
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Amidinotransferases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- Child
- Cognition/drug effects
- Creatine/therapeutic use
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Humans
- Male
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# l-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency: clinical presentation and response to treatment in two patients with a novel mutation.
**Authors:** Edvardson S, Korman SH, Livne A, Shaag A, Saada A, Nalbandian R, Allouche-Arnon H, Gomori JM, Katz-Brull R
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.06.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.06.021)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2010 Oct-Nov;101(2-3):228-32. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.06.021.  Epub 2010 Jul 7.

l-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency: clinical presentation
and response to treatment in two patients with a novel mutation.

Edvardson S(1), Korman SH, Livne A, Shaag A, Saada A, Nalbandian R,
Allouche-Arnon H, Gomori JM, Katz-Brull R.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel. simon@hadassah.org.il

Creatine and creatine phosphate provide storage and transmission of
phosphate-bound energy in muscle and brain. Of the three inborn errors of
creatine metabolism causing brain creatine depletion, l-arginine:glycine
amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency has been described in only two families. We
describe clinical and biochemical features, magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS) findings and response to creatine supplementation in two siblings with a
novel mutation in the AGAT-encoding GATM gene. The sister and brother were
evaluated at age 12 and 18years, respectively, because of mild mental
retardation, muscle weakness and low weight. Extensive work-up had previously
yielded negative results. Electron microscopy of the muscle revealed tubular
aggregates and the activity of respiratory chain complexes was decreased in the
muscle. Urine organic acid concentrations normalized to urine creatinine
concentration were all increased, suggesting a creatine metabolism disorder.
Brain MRS was remarkable for absence of creatine. Urine guanidinoacetate levels
by tandem mass spectrometry were low, suggesting AGAT deficiency. GATM
sequencing revealed a homozygous single nucleotide insertion 1111_1112insA,
producing a frame-shift at Met-371 and premature termination at codon 376.
Eleven months after commencing treatment with oral creatine monohydrate
100mg/kg/day, repeat MRI/MRS showed significantly increased brain creatine in
the sister and a slight increase in the older brother. The parents' impression
of improved strength and stamina was substantiated by increased post-treatment
versus pre-treatment scores in the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale,
straight-arm raising and timed up-and-go tests. Similarly, there was an apparent
improvement in cognitive function, with significantly increased IQ-scores in the
sister and marginal improvement in the brother.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.06.021
PMID: 20682460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
