---
reference_id: "PMID:33452690"
title: Long-term effects of pallidal and thalamic deep brain stimulation in myoclonus dystonia.
authors:
- Krause P
- Koch K
- Gruber D
- Kupsch A
- Gharabaghi A
- Schneider GH
- Kühn AA
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/ene.14737
keywords:
- Deep Brain Stimulation
- Globus Pallidus
- Humans
- Myoclonus
- Quality of Life
- Retrospective Studies
- Torticollis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term effects of pallidal and thalamic deep brain stimulation in myoclonus dystonia.
**Authors:** Krause P, Koch K, Gruber D, Kupsch A, Gharabaghi A, Schneider GH, Kühn AA
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ene.14737](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.14737)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2021 May;28(5):1566-1573. doi: 10.1111/ene.14737. Epub 2021 Feb
6.

Long-term effects of pallidal and thalamic deep brain stimulation in myoclonus
dystonia.

Krause P(1), Koch K(2), Gruber D(3), Kupsch A(4), Gharabaghi A(5), Schneider
GH(6), Kühn AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorder and Neuromodulation Unit, Charité University Medicine
Berlin, Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité University Medicine
Berlin, Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Kliniken Beelitz, Movement Disorder Clinic, Beelitz-Heilstätten, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology & Stereotactic Neurosurgery, University Medicine of
Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Charité University Medicine Berlin, Campus Mitte,
Berlin, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Observational study to evaluate long-term effects of deep brain
stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus internus (GPi) and the ventral
intermediate thalamic nucleus (VIM) on patients with medically refractory
myoclonus dystonia (MD).
BACKGROUND: More recently, pallidal as well as thalamic DBS have been applied
successfully in MD but long-term data are sparse.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed a cohort of seven MD patients with either
separate (n = 1, VIM) or combined GPi- DBS and VIM-DBS (n = 6). Myoclonus,
dystonia and disability were rated at baseline (BL), short-term (ST-FU) and
long-term follow-up (LT-FU) using the United Myoclonus Rating Scale,
Burke-Fahn-Marsden Dystonia Rating Scale (BFMDRS) and Tsui rating scale,
respectively. Quality of life (QoL) and mood were evaluated using the SF-36 and
Beck Depression Inventory questionnaires, respectively.
RESULTS: Patients reached a significant reduction of myoclonus at ST-FU (62% ±
7.3%; mean ± SE) and LT-FU (68% ± 3.4%). While overall motor BFMDRS changes were
not significant at LT-FU, patients with GPi-DBS alone responded better and
predominant cervical dystonia ameliorated significantly up to 54% ± 9.7% at
long-term. Mean disability scores significantly improved by 44% ± 11.4% at ST-FU
and 58% ± 14.8% at LT-FU. Mood and QoL remained unchanged between 5 and up to
20 years postoperatively. No serious long-lasting stimulation-related adverse
events were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a cohort of MD patients with very long follow-up of
pallidal and/or thalamic DBS that supports the GPi as the favourable stimulation
target in MD with safe and sustaining effects on motor symptoms
(myoclonus>dystonia) and disability.

© 2021 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.14737
PMID: 33452690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
