---
reference_id: "PMID:36119806"
title: "An open-label study evaluating the safety, behavioral, and electrophysiological outcomes of low-dose ketamine in children with ADNP syndrome."
authors:
- Kolevzon A
- Levy T
- Barkley S
- Bedrosian-Sermone S
- Davis M
- Foss-Feig J
- Halpern D
- Keller K
- Kostic A
- Layton C
- Lee R
- Lerman B
- Might M
- Sandin S
- Siper PM
- Sloofman LG
- Walker H
- Zweifach J
- Buxbaum JD
journal: HGG Adv
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2022.100138
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An open-label study evaluating the safety, behavioral, and electrophysiological outcomes of low-dose ketamine in children with ADNP syndrome.
**Authors:** Kolevzon A, Levy T, Barkley S, Bedrosian-Sermone S, Davis M, Foss-Feig J, Halpern D, Keller K, Kostic A, Layton C, Lee R, Lerman B, Might M, Sandin S, Siper PM, Sloofman LG, Walker H, Zweifach J, Buxbaum JD
**Journal:** HGG Adv (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xhgg.2022.100138](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2022.100138)

## Content

1. HGG Adv. 2022 Aug 27;3(4):100138. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2022.100138. eCollection
 2022 Oct 13.

An open-label study evaluating the safety, behavioral, and electrophysiological 
outcomes of low-dose ketamine in children with ADNP syndrome.

Kolevzon A(1)(2)(3), Levy T(1)(2), Barkley S(1)(2), Bedrosian-Sermone S(4), 
Davis M(4), Foss-Feig J(1)(2), Halpern D(1)(2), Keller K(1)(2), Kostic A(1)(2), 
Layton C(1)(2), Lee R(5), Lerman B(1)(2), Might M(6), Sandin S(1)(2)(7), Siper 
PM(1)(2), Sloofman LG(1)(2), Walker H(1)(2), Zweifach J(1)(2), Buxbaum 
JD(1)(2)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(4)ADNP Kids Research Foundation, Vancouver, WA, USA.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.
(6)Hugh Kaul Precision Medicine Institute, Heersink School of Medicine, 
University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(7)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(9)Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.

Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) syndrome is a rare genetic 
condition associated with intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder. 
Preclinical evidence suggests that low-dose ketamine may induce expression of 
ADNP and that neuroprotective effects of ketamine may be mediated by ADNP. The 
goal of the proposed research was to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and 
behavioral outcomes of low-dose ketamine in children with ADNP syndrome. We also 
sought to explore the feasibility of using electrophysiological markers of 
auditory steady-state response and computerized eye tracking to assess biomarker 
sensitivity to treatment. This study utilized a single-dose (0.5 mg/kg), 
open-label design, with ketamine infused intravenously over 40 min. Ten children 
with ADNP syndrome ages 6 to 12 years were enrolled. Ketamine was generally well 
tolerated, and there were no serious adverse events. The most common adverse 
events were elation/silliness (50%), fatigue (40%), and increased aggression 
(40%). Using parent-report instruments to assess treatment effects, ketamine was 
associated with nominally significant improvement in a wide array of domains, 
including social behavior, attention deficit and hyperactivity, restricted and 
repetitive behaviors, and sensory sensitivities, a week after administration. 
Results derived from clinician-rated assessments aligned with findings from the 
parent reports. Overall, nominal improvement was evident based on the Clinical 
Global Impressions - Improvement scale, in addition to clinician-based scales 
reflecting key domains of social communication, attention deficit and 
hyperactivity, restricted and repetitive behaviors, speech, thinking, and 
learning, activities of daily living, and sensory sensitivities. Results also 
highlight the potential utility of electrophysiological measurement of auditory 
steady-state response and eye-tracking to index change with ketamine treatment. 
Findings are intended to be hypothesis generating and provide preliminary 
support for the safety and efficacy of ketamine in ADNP syndrome in addition to 
identifying useful endpoints for a ketamine clinical development program. 
However, results must be interpreted with caution given limitations of this 
study, most importantly the small sample size and absence of a placebo-control 
group.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2022.100138
PMCID: PMC9471202
PMID: 36119806

Conflict of interest statement: Alexander Kolevzon is on the scientific advisory 
boards of Ovid Therapeutics, Ritrova Therapeutics, and Jaguar Therapeutics and 
consults to Acadia, Alkermes, GW Pharmaceuticals, Neuren Pharmaceuticals, 
Clinilabs Drug Development Corporation, and Scioto Biosciences. Paige M. Siper 
and Mount Sinai licensed the Sensory Assessment for Neurodevelopmental Disorders 
(SAND) developed by PMS to Stoelting, Co. Sandra Sermone is on the board of 
directors of ADNP Kids Research Foundation, has patent applications filed for 
ketamine and ketamine/NAP for the treatment of ADNP syndrome and related 
neurological conditions, and is a parent of a child with ADNP syndrome. Matthew 
Davis is on the scientific advisory board of ADNP Kids Research Foundation, has 
patent applications filed for ketamine and ketamine/NAP for the treatment of 
ADNP syndrome and related neurological conditions, and is a parent of a child 
with ADNP syndrome. Joseph D. Buxbaum consults for BridgeBio Pharma. The 
remainder of the authors declare no competing interests.