---
reference_id: "PMID:31849359"
title: "Management of incidentally discovered unaffected Meckel's diverticulum - a review."
authors:
- Żyluk A
journal: Pol Przegl Chir
year: '2019'
doi: 10.5604/01.3001.0013.3400
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of incidentally discovered unaffected Meckel's diverticulum - a review.
**Authors:** Żyluk A
**Journal:** Pol Przegl Chir (2019)
**DOI:** [10.5604/01.3001.0013.3400](https://doi.org/10.5604/01.3001.0013.3400)

## Content

1. Pol Przegl Chir. 2019 Aug 12;91(6):41-46. doi: 10.5604/01.3001.0013.3400.

Management of incidentally discovered unaffected Meckel's diverticulum - a 
review.

Żyluk A(1).

Author information:
(1)Klinika Chirurgii Ogólnej i Chirurgii Ręki, Pomorski Uniwersytet Medyczny w 
Szczecinie.

Meckel's diverticulum is the most common congenital malformation of the 
gastrointestinal tract, with its incidence estimated at 1-4% in the general 
population. In most cases Meckel's diverticulum is a latent, asymptomatic 
anomaly, but in some cases, it may lead to complications such as intestinal 
obstruction, bleeding and inflammation. The literature provides no precise 
recommendations for the management of accidentally diagnosed, unaffected 
Meckel's diverticulum. The aim of this study was to review the literature on the 
subject to determine the current state of knowledge. Based on an analysis of 17 
papers, the following criteria (risk factors) were identified justifying 
'preventive' resection of an accidentally found, unaffected Meckel's 
diverticulum: age &lt;50 years, male gender, length &gt;2 cm, macroscopic 
abnormalities suggesting the presence of ectopic gastric mucosa as well as 
narrow neck of the diverticulum. When the criteria are not met, there is a 
minimal lifetime risk of complications. Leaving diverticulum intact is 
recommended in cases of peritonitis, major abdominal trauma and at older age. 
Nevertheless, indications or contraindications for resection are relative, and 
surgeons are safe to make their decision depending on individual patient's 
situation.

DOI: 10.5604/01.3001.0013.3400
PMID: 31849359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]