---
reference_id: "PMID:11937583"
title: "A role for IL-15 in driving the onset of spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis?"
authors:
- Kaiser P
- Rothwell L
- Vasícek D
- Hala K
journal: J Immunol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.8.4216
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Chick Embryo
- Chickens
- Cytokines/biosynthesis
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Interleukin-15/biosynthesis, genetics, physiology"
- "RNA, Messenger/biosynthesis"
- Species Specificity
- "Spleen/immunology, metabolism"
- "Thyroid Gland/immunology, metabolism"
- "Thyroiditis, Autoimmune/etiology, immunology"
- "Up-Regulation/genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A role for IL-15 in driving the onset of spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis?
**Authors:** Kaiser P, Rothwell L, Vasícek D, Hala K
**Journal:** J Immunol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.168.8.4216](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.168.8.4216)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2002 Apr 15;168(8):4216-20. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.8.4216.

A role for IL-15 in driving the onset of spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis?

Kaiser P(1), Rothwell L, Vasícek D, Hala K.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Animal Health, Compton, Berkshire, United Kingdom. 
pete.kaiser@bbsrc.ac.uk

The obese strain (OS) of chickens, which suffers from spontaneous autoimmune 
thyroiditis, is an excellent animal model for Hashimoto's thyroiditis and 
provides a unique opportunity to investigate the mechanisms underlying and 
driving the onset of the disease. Following recent advances in cloning chicken 
cytokines, we can now begin to investigate the role of cytokines in driving the 
lymphoid infiltration of the thyroid seen in these birds from day 7 posthatch. 
Using real-time quantitative RT-PCR, we characterized the expression of 
IFN-gamma, IL-1beta, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, IL-15, and IL-18 in thyroids from OS 
birds and control CB line birds, both in the embryo just before hatch (embryonic 
day 20) and at 3 and 5 days posthatch. All of these cytokines were up-regulated 
compared with levels in thyroids from CB birds, at least at some time points, 
with some evidence for coordination of regulation, e.g., for the proinflammatory 
cytokines IL-1beta and IL-8. Only IL-15 was up-regulated at all time points. 
IL-15 was also shown to be up-regulated in spleens of OS birds at embryonic day 
20 and 5 days posthatch, suggesting that IL-15 is constitutively up-regulated in 
this line of birds. This could explain the general immune system hyperreactivity 
exhibited by OS chickens and may be a factor driving the lymphoid infiltration 
of the thyroid.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.8.4216
PMID: 11937583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]