---
reference_id: "PMID:39129839"
title: "A Novel ZBTB20 Variant in a Patient with Primrose Syndrome: A Rare Clinical Entity with Distinctive Features."
authors:
- Soğukpınar M
- Karaosmanoğlu B
- Utine GE
- Boduroğlu K
- Şimşek-Kiper PÖ
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000537952
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel ZBTB20 Variant in a Patient with Primrose Syndrome: A Rare Clinical Entity with Distinctive Features.
**Authors:** Soğukpınar M, Karaosmanoğlu B, Utine GE, Boduroğlu K, Şimşek-Kiper PÖ
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000537952](https://doi.org/10.1159/000537952)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2024 Aug;15(4):347-354. doi: 10.1159/000537952. Epub 2024 Mar
22.

A Novel ZBTB20 Variant in a Patient with Primrose Syndrome: A Rare Clinical 
Entity with Distinctive Features.

Soğukpınar M(1), Karaosmanoğlu B(2), Utine GE(1), Boduroğlu K(1), Şimşek-Kiper 
PÖ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe 
University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Primrose syndrome (PS; MIM #259050) is a rare autosomal dominant 
genetic condition characterized by macrocephaly with or without tall stature, 
hypotonia, moderate to severe intellectual disability (ID) with delay in 
expressive speech development, behavioral abnormalities, and a recognizable 
facial phenotype including deep set eyes, ptosis, narrow and frequently 
downslanting palpebral fissures, and depressed nasal bridge. PS is caused by a 
heterozygous pathogenic variant in ZBTB20 (MIM #606025) on chromosome 3q13. 
Among other characteristic findings are ocular abnormalities, hearing loss, 
calcification of the external ear cartilage, nonspecific brain magnetic 
resonance imaging findings, and cryptorchidism. Adults may exhibit joint 
contractures, distal muscle wasting, sparse body hair, cataract, and disturbed 
glucose metabolism as well. The majority of affected individuals have typically 
been adults until recently since the phenotype becomes more recognizable in 
time.
CASE PRESENTATION: In this study, we report on a 14-month-old girl who presented 
with neurodevelopmental findings, facial features, and hearing loss. The glucose 
metabolism was normal, and muscle atrophy, joint contractures, and external ear 
cartilage calcification were yet hitherto not evident. A novel de novo missense 
variant in ZBTB20 was identified with the aid of exome sequencing.
CONCLUSION: PS is a rare clinical entity with various recognizable features, yet 
the phenotype may be indistinguishable from other neurodevelopmental disorders. 
Exome sequencing is a useful diagnostic tool especially in patients with no 
specific diagnosis despite detailed examinations and imaging studies.

© 2024 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000537952
PMCID: PMC11316443
PMID: 39129839

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interests.