---
reference_id: "PMID:33894732"
title: "The correlation between selenium levels and autoimmune thyroid disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zuo Y
- Li Y
- Gu X
- Lei Z
journal: Ann Palliat Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.21037/apm-21-449
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The correlation between selenium levels and autoimmune thyroid disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zuo Y, Li Y, Gu X, Lei Z
**Journal:** Ann Palliat Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.21037/apm-21-449](https://doi.org/10.21037/apm-21-449)

## Content

1. Ann Palliat Med. 2021 Apr;10(4):4398-4408. doi: 10.21037/apm-21-449. Epub 2021
 Apr 16.

The correlation between selenium levels and autoimmune thyroid disease: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zuo Y(1), Li Y(1), Gu X(1), Lei Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Affiliated Hospital of North 
Sichuan Medical College, Nanchong, China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical 
College, Nanchong, China.

BACKGROUND: This investigation systematically evaluated the selenium levels and 
the effects of selenium supplementation in patients with autoimmune thyroid 
disease (AITD).
METHODS: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) related to selenium supplementation 
in patients with AITD were selected from the PubMed, Medline, Web of Sciences, 
Embase, Cochrane Library, and Spring databases. All related literature published 
between January 2000 and November 2020 were included. The RCT bias risk 
assessment was conducted according to the Cochrane Handbook 5.0.2. The Review 
Manager 5.3 software was applied for meta-analysis of the included literature.
RESULTS: A total of 17 articles meeting the requirements were selected, 
including a total of 1,911 subjects. Meta-analysis results showed that the serum 
free triiodothyronine (FT3) levels in patients was greatly reduced after 
selenium supplementation compared to placebo treatment (MD =-0.40; 95% 
confidential interval (CI): -0.70--0.10; Z=2.61; P=0.009). Serum free thyroxine 
(FT4) levels and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb) levels were also 
significantly reduced (MD = -0.76; 95% CI: -1.58--0.07; Z=1.79; P=0.07), and 
anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb) level was decreased observably (MD 
=-150.25; 95% CI: -04.06--96.43; Z=5.47; P<0.00001). The thyroid stimulating 
hormone (TSH) levels (MD =0.06; 95% CI: -0.53-0.66; Z=0.21; P=0.83) and 
anti-thyroglobulin antibody (TGAb) levels (MD =17.19; 95% CI: -254.86-289.25; 
Z=0.12; P=0.90) were not significantly different between the experimental group 
and the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: Selenium-containing drugs were effective in treating AITD patients, 
and greatly reduced the levels of FT3, FT4, and TPOAb in AITD patients. These 
results suggested that selenium level had a great effect on AITD and selenium 
supplementation showed a very important effect on AITD.

DOI: 10.21037/apm-21-449
PMID: 33894732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]