---
reference_id: "PMID:22771120"
title: MCM8- and MCM9-deficient mice reveal gametogenesis defects and genome instability due to impaired homologous recombination.
authors:
- Lutzmann M
- Grey C
- Traver S
- Ganier O
- Maya-Mendoza A
- Ranisavljevic N
- Bernex F
- Nishiyama A
- Montel N
- Gavois E
- Forichon L
- de Massy B
- Méchali M
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.048
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Chromatin/genetics
- DNA Repair
- DNA Replication/genetics
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Gametogenesis/genetics
- Genomic Instability
- Germ Cells/metabolism
- Homologous Recombination/genetics
- Male
- Meiotic Prophase I/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Minichromosome Maintenance Proteins
- Ovary/metabolism
- Spermatocytes/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MCM8- and MCM9-deficient mice reveal gametogenesis defects and genome instability due to impaired homologous recombination.
**Authors:** Lutzmann M, Grey C, Traver S, Ganier O, Maya-Mendoza A, Ranisavljevic N, Bernex F, Nishiyama A, Montel N, Gavois E, Forichon L, de Massy B, Méchali M
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.048)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2012 Aug 24;47(4):523-34. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.048. Epub
2012  Jul 5.

MCM8- and MCM9-deficient mice reveal gametogenesis defects and genome 
instability due to impaired homologous recombination.

Lutzmann M(1), Grey C, Traver S, Ganier O, Maya-Mendoza A, Ranisavljevic N, 
Bernex F, Nishiyama A, Montel N, Gavois E, Forichon L, de Massy B, Méchali M.

Author information:
(1)DNA Replication and Genome Dynamics, Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS, 141 
Rue de la Cardonille, 34396 Montpellier, Cedex 5, France.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2012 Aug 24;47(4):493-4. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.08.006.

We generated knockout mice for MCM8 and MCM9 and show that deficiency for these 
genes impairs homologous recombination (HR)-mediated DNA repair during 
gametogenesis and somatic cells cycles. MCM8(-/-) mice are sterile because 
spermatocytes are blocked in meiotic prophase I, and females have only arrested 
primary follicles and frequently develop ovarian tumors. MCM9(-/-) females also 
are sterile as ovaries are completely devoid of oocytes. In contrast, MCM9(-/-) 
testes produce spermatozoa, albeit in much reduced quantity. Mcm8(-/-) and 
Mcm9(-/-) embryonic fibroblasts show growth defects and chromosomal damage and 
cannot overcome a transient inhibition of replication fork progression. In these 
cells, chromatin recruitment of HR factors like Rad51 and RPA is impaired and HR 
strongly reduced. We further demonstrate that MCM8 and MCM9 form a complex and 
that they coregulate their stability. Our work uncovers essential functions of 
MCM8 and MCM9 in HR-mediated DSB repair during gametogenesis, replication fork 
maintenance, and DNA repair.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.048
PMID: 22771120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]