---
reference_id: "PMID:33862140"
title: "Free sialic acid storage disorder: Progress and promise."
authors:
- Huizing M
- Hackbarth ME
- Adams DR
- Wasserstein M
- Patterson MC
- Walkley SU
- Gahl WA
- FSASD Consortium
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.135896
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Free sialic acid storage disorder: Progress and promise.
**Authors:** Huizing M, Hackbarth ME, Adams DR, Wasserstein M, Patterson MC, Walkley SU, Gahl WA, FSASD Consortium
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2021.135896](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2021.135896)

## Content

1. Neurosci Lett. 2021 Jun 11;755:135896. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.135896. Epub
 2021 Apr 20.

Free sialic acid storage disorder: Progress and promise.

Huizing M(1), Hackbarth ME(2), Adams DR(2), Wasserstein M(3), Patterson MC(4), 
Walkley SU(5), Gahl WA(2); FSASD Consortium.

Collaborators: Adams DR(2), Dobrenis K(5), Foglio J(6), Gahl WA(2), Gasnier 
B(7), Hackbarth M(2), Huizing M(2), Lek M(8), Malicdan MCV(2), Paavola LE(9), 
Patterson MC(4), Reimer R(10), Walkley SU(5), Wasserstein M(3), Wang RY(11), 
Zoncu R(12).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, United States. Electronic address: 
mhuizing@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, United States.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, The Children's Hospital at 
Montefiore, Bronx, NY, 10467, United States; Dominick P. Purpura Department of 
Neuroscience, Rose F. Kennedy Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities 
Research Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 10461, United 
States.
(4)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905, United States.
(5)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Rose F. Kennedy Intellectual 
and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, 10461, United States.
(6)Salla Treatment and Research (STAR) Foundation, Bronx, NY, 10471, United 
States.
(7)Université de Paris, Saints-Pères Paris Institute for the Neurosciences 
(SPPIN), Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), 75006, Paris, 
France.
(8)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06519, United 
States.
(9)Neural Ltd, Center of Neuropsychology, 90100, Oulu, Finland; Oulu University 
Hospital, Department of Neurology, 90029, Oulu, Finland.
(10)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, 94305, CA, United States; Palo Alto Veterans 
Administration Health Care System, Palo Alto, 94304, CA, United States.
(11)Division of Metabolic Disorders, Children's Hospital of Orange County, 
92868, CA, United States; University of California-Irvine School of Medicine, 
Irvine, 92868, CA, United States.
(12)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, 94729, CA, United States.

Lysosomal free sialic acid storage disorder (FSASD) is an extremely rare, 
autosomal recessive, neurodegenerative, multisystemic disorder caused by defects 
in the lysosomal sialic acid membrane exporter SLC17A5 (sialin). SLC17A5 defects 
cause free sialic acid and some other acidic hexoses to accumulate in lysosomes, 
resulting in enlarged lysosomes in some cell types and 10-100-fold increased 
urinary excretion of free sialic acid. Clinical features of FSASD include coarse 
facial features, organomegaly, and progressive neurodegenerative symptoms with 
cognitive impairment, cerebellar ataxia and muscular hypotonia. Central 
hypomyelination with cerebellar atrophy and thinning of the corpus callosum are 
also prominent disease features. Around 200 FSASD cases are reported worldwide, 
with the clinical spectrum ranging from a severe infantile onset form, often 
lethal in early childhood, to a mild, less severe form with subjects living into 
adulthood, also called Salla disease. The pathobiology of FSASD remains poorly 
understood and FSASD is likely underdiagnosed. Known patients have experienced a 
diagnostic delay due to the rarity of the disorder, absence of routine urine 
sialic acid testing, and non-specific clinical symptoms, including developmental 
delay, ataxia and infantile hypomyelination. There is no approved therapy for 
FSASD. We initiated a multidisciplinary collaborative effort involving worldwide 
academic clinical and scientific FSASD experts, the National Institutes of 
Health (USA), and the FSASD patient advocacy group (Salla Treatment and Research 
[S.T.A.R.] Foundation) to overcome the scientific, clinical and financial 
challenges facing the development of new treatments for FSASD. We aim to collect 
data that incentivize industry to further develop, obtain approval for, and 
commercialize FSASD treatments. This review summarizes current aspects of FSASD 
diagnosis, prevalence, etiology, and disease models, as well as challenges on 
the path to therapeutic approaches for FSASD.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.135896
PMCID: PMC8175077
PMID: 33862140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: none