---
reference_id: "PMID:39417401"
title: "Weather conditions and legionellosis: a nationwide case-crossover study among Medicare recipients."
authors:
- Wade TJ
- Herbert C
journal: Epidemiol Infect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1017/S0950268824000979
keywords:
- Humans
- United States/epidemiology
- Legionellosis/epidemiology
- "Medicare/statistics & numerical data"
- Weather
- Aged
- Female
- Male
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cross-Over Studies
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- Risk Factors
- "Legionella/isolation & purification"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Weather conditions and legionellosis: a nationwide case-crossover study among Medicare recipients.
**Authors:** Wade TJ, Herbert C
**Journal:** Epidemiol Infect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0950268824000979](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268824000979)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Infect. 2024 Oct 17;152:e125. doi: 10.1017/S0950268824000979.

Weather conditions and legionellosis: a nationwide case-crossover study among 
Medicare recipients.

Wade TJ(1), Herbert C(2).

Author information:
(1)United States Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and 
Development, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(2)Oak Ridge Associated Universities, United States Environmental Protection 
Agency, Office of Research and Development, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

Legionellosis is a respiratory infection caused by Legionella sp. that is found 
in water and soil. Infection may cause pneumonia (Legionnaires' Disease) and a 
milder form (Pontiac Fever). Legionella colonizes water systems and results in 
exposure by inhalation of aerosolized bacteria. The incubation period ranges 
from 2 to 14 days. Precipitation and humidity may be associated with increased 
risk. We used Medicare records from 1999 to 2020 to identify hospitalizations 
for legionellosis. Precipitation, temperature, and relative humidity were 
obtained from the PRISM Climate Group for the zip code of residence. We used a 
time-stratified bi-directional case-crossover design with lags of 20 days. Data 
were analyzed using conditional logistic regression and distributed lag 
non-linear models. A total of 37 883 hospitalizations were identified. 
Precipitation and relative humidity at lags 8 through 13 days were associated 
with an increased risk of legionellosis. The strongest association was 
precipitation at day 10 lag (OR = 1.08, 95% CI = 1.05-1.11 per 1 cm). Over 20 
days, 3 cm of precipitation increased the odds of legionellosis over four times. 
The association was strongest in the Northeast and Midwest and during summer and 
fall. Precipitation and humidity were associated with hospitalization among 
Medicare recipients for legionellosis at lags consistent with the incubation 
period for infection.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268824000979
PMCID: PMC11502464
PMID: 39417401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]