---
reference_id: PMID:14608368
title: A DNA damage checkpoint response in telomere-initiated senescence.
authors:
- "d'Adda di Fagagna F"
- Reaper PM
- Clay-Farrace L
- Fiegler H
- Carr P
- Von Zglinicki T
- Saretzki G
- Carter NP
- Jackson SP
journal: Nature
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1038/nature02118
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Cycle
- Cell Cycle Proteins/metabolism
- Cellular Senescence
- Checkpoint Kinase 1
- Checkpoint Kinase 2
- Chromatin/metabolism
- DNA Damage
- DNA Repair
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Nuclear Proteins/metabolism
- Phosphoproteins
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Binding
- Protein Kinases/metabolism
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
- S Phase
- "Telomere/metabolism, pathology"
- Trans-Activators/metabolism
- Tumor Suppressor p53-Binding Protein 1
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# A DNA damage checkpoint response in telomere-initiated senescence.
**Authors:** d'Adda di Fagagna F, Reaper PM, Clay-Farrace L, Fiegler H, Carr P, Von Zglinicki T, Saretzki G, Carter NP, Jackson SP
**Journal:** Nature (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature02118](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02118)

## Content

1. Nature. 2003 Nov 13;426(6963):194-8. doi: 10.1038/nature02118. Epub 2003 Nov
5.

A DNA damage checkpoint response in telomere-initiated senescence.

d'Adda di Fagagna F(1), Reaper PM, Clay-Farrace L, Fiegler H, Carr P, Von 
Zglinicki T, Saretzki G, Carter NP, Jackson SP.

Author information:
(1)[1] The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Institute of Cancer and 
Developmental Biology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK [2] 
Present address: IFOM-FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, via Adamello 16, 
20139 Milan, Italy.

Most human somatic cells can undergo only a limited number of population 
doublings in vitro. This exhaustion of proliferative potential, called 
senescence, can be triggered when telomeres--the ends of linear 
chromosomes-cannot fulfil their normal protective functions. Here we show that 
senescent human fibroblasts display molecular markers characteristic of cells 
bearing DNA double-strand breaks. These markers include nuclear foci of 
phosphorylated histone H2AX and their co-localization with DNA repair and DNA 
damage checkpoint factors such as 53BP1, MDC1 and NBS1. We also show that 
senescent cells contain activated forms of the DNA damage checkpoint kinases 
CHK1 and CHK2. Furthermore, by chromatin immunoprecipitation and whole-genome 
scanning approaches, we show that the chromosome ends of senescent cells 
directly contribute to the DNA damage response, and that uncapped telomeres 
directly associate with many, but not all, DNA damage response proteins. 
Finally, we show that inactivation of DNA damage checkpoint kinases in senescent 
cells can restore cell-cycle progression into S phase. Thus, we propose that 
telomere-initiated senescence reflects a DNA damage checkpoint response that is 
activated with a direct contribution from dysfunctional telomeres.

DOI: 10.1038/nature02118
PMID: 14608368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]