---
reference_id: "PMID:38841035"
title: "Metastatic Fibrosarcomatous Transformation of Dermatofibrosarcoma Protuberans With Lung Metastasis: A Case Report."
authors:
- Khan S
- Yetiskul E
- Niazi M
- Zeb Khan MW
- Pokima N
- Khattar G
- Terjanian T
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.59742
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metastatic Fibrosarcomatous Transformation of Dermatofibrosarcoma Protuberans With Lung Metastasis: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Khan S, Yetiskul E, Niazi M, Zeb Khan MW, Pokima N, Khattar G, Terjanian T
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.59742](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.59742)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 May 6;16(5):e59742. doi: 10.7759/cureus.59742. eCollection 2024 
May.

Metastatic Fibrosarcomatous Transformation of Dermatofibrosarcoma Protuberans 
With Lung Metastasis: A Case Report.

Khan S(1), Yetiskul E(1), Niazi M(1), Zeb Khan MW(2), Pokima N(1), Khattar G(1), 
Terjanian T(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Staten Island University Hospital, New York, USA.
(2)Medicine, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, PAK.
(3)Hematology and Oncology, Staten Island University Hospital, New York, USA.

Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) is a low- to intermediate-grade dermal 
soft tissue malignant tumor (sarcoma) with a high local recurrence rate but low 
metastatic potential. DFSP is characterized by uniform spindle cell fascicles 
arranged classically in a storiform pattern and by CD34 immunoreactivity. On 
gross examination, DFSP usually manifests as a white or yellow soft tissue mass 
with a smooth outer surface and poor circumscription. In this study, we report a 
case of DFSP with fibrosarcomatous transformation, a rare but well-known 
phenomenon encountered in DFSP that is correlated with an increased risk of 
adverse outcomes in patients with DFSP. A 45-year-old male presented with a 
progressively enlarging lump on his left shoulder, initially suspected of being 
a lipoma but diagnosed as a fibrosarcomatous transformation of DFSP. Surgical 
resection was performed, with the subsequent identification of metastatic 
sarcoma in pulmonary nodules. Robotic-assisted thoracoscopy excised the nodules, 
confirming metastatic sarcoma with aggressive behavior. Despite negative 
adjuvant treatment plans, the patient remains under surveillance with imaging, 
showing no recurrence in recent scans. Continued follow-up with medical and 
surgical oncology is planned. DFSP is a rare soft tissue sarcoma characterized 
by indolent growth and low metastatic potential, except in fibrosarcomatous 
transformation cases. Molecularly, DFSP is defined by a COL1A1-PDGFB fusion 
transcript that is targetable with imatinib therapy. Treatment involves wide 
surgical resection, with adjuvant radiation therapy in select cases. Radiation 
therapy may be employed in cases with close or positive margins, while 
conventional chemotherapy has limited utility. Multidisciplinary collaboration 
is crucial for optimal management. Overall, this case underscores the challenges 
in diagnosing and managing aggressive sarcomas like fibrosarcomatous DFSP, 
emphasizing the importance of vigilant surveillance and multidisciplinary 
collaboration in optimizing patient outcomes. Further research is needed to 
understand the mechanisms underlying fibrosarcomatous transformation and to 
explore novel therapeutic avenues for this challenging malignancy.

Copyright © 2024, Khan et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.59742
PMCID: PMC11152207
PMID: 38841035

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.