---
reference_id: "PMID:25575358"
title: Management of Thoracic Insufficiency Syndrome in Patients With Jeune Syndrome Using the 70 mm Radius Vertical Expandable Prosthetic Titanium Rib.
authors:
- "O'Brien A"
- Roth MK
- Athreya H
- Reinker K
- Koeck W
- Patil V
- Trevino H
- Simmons J
- Joshi AP
- Smith MD
- Campbell RM
journal: J Pediatr Orthop
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/BPO.0000000000000383
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Thoracic Insufficiency Syndrome in Patients With Jeune Syndrome Using the 70 mm Radius Vertical Expandable Prosthetic Titanium Rib.
**Authors:** O'Brien A, Roth MK, Athreya H, Reinker K, Koeck W, Patil V, Trevino H, Simmons J, Joshi AP, Smith MD, Campbell RM
**Journal:** J Pediatr Orthop (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BPO.0000000000000383](https://doi.org/10.1097/BPO.0000000000000383)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Orthop. 2015 Dec;35(8):783-97. doi: 10.1097/BPO.0000000000000383.

Management of Thoracic Insufficiency Syndrome in Patients With Jeune Syndrome 
Using the 70 mm Radius Vertical Expandable Prosthetic Titanium Rib.

O'Brien A(1), Roth MK, Athreya H, Reinker K, Koeck W, Patil V, Trevino H, 
Simmons J, Joshi AP, Smith MD, Campbell RM.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Orthopaedics, College of Medicine, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio (UTHSCSA) †Spinal & Thoracic Treatment and 
Research (STTAR) Center, Children's Hospital of San Antonio §Pediatric, 
Orthopaedic, & Scoliosis Center of South Texas, San Antonio ‡University of Texas 
Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX ∥Division of Orthopaedics, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.

BACKGROUND: Jeune syndrome (JS) often results in lethal thoracic insufficiency 
syndrome. Since 1991, vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib Dynamic 
PosteroLateral Expansion Thoracoplasty was used at our institution for treatment 
of JS. This study assesses the safety and efficacy of this procedure.
METHODS: Twenty-four JS patients were treated, 2 lost to follow-up, 17 with a 
minimum of 2-year follow-up retrospectively reviewed for clinical course: 
Assisted Ventilation Rate, respiratory rate, capillary blood gases, pulmonary 
function testings, and complications. Upright anteroposterior/lateral 
radiographs were measured for Cobb angle, kyphosis, lordosis, thoracic width, 
and thoracic/lumbar spinal height. Computed tomography scan lung volumes were 
obtained in 12 patients.
RESULTS: Mean age at initial implant was 23 months (7 to 62 mo) with an average 
8.4 years (2.3 to 15.6 y) of follow-up. Average chest width increased from 121 
to 168 mm at follow-up (P<0.001). Preoperatively, 7/17 (41%) patients had 
scoliosis. The remainder developed scoliosis during treatment, 8 requiring 
additional implants. Thoracic and lumbar spinal height was normal preoperatively 
and stayed normal during treatment. Thoracic kyphosis/lumbar lordosis was 
stable. Average computed tomography scan total lung volumes increased 484 to 740 
mm3 (P<0.001), and Assisted Ventilation Rate status tended to improve (P=0.07). 
Average forced vital capacity was 34% predicted at first test and 27% predicted 
at last follow-up. Early demise after surgery was common with multisystem 
disease. Mean respiratory rate decreased from 35 to 24 bpm at last follow-up 
(P<0.05). Survival rate of the 22 patients was 68%. Migration of the rib 
cradles/titanium slings occurred in 12 patients, superficial infections in 5 
patients, deep infections in 4 patients, and wound dehiscence in 5 patients. 
Infection rate was 4.6% per procedure.
CONCLUSIONS: The survival rate in JS with surgery was nearly 70% (compared with 
70% to 80% mortality without treatment) with less ventilator dependence. Both C1 
stenosis and scoliosis are common in JS. Spinal height in JS is normal. 
Complications are frequent, but tolerable in view of the clinical gains and 
increase in survival.

DOI: 10.1097/BPO.0000000000000383
PMID: 25575358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]