---
reference_id: "PMID:20808828"
title: Altered ultrasonic vocalization and impaired learning and memory in Angelman syndrome mouse model with a large maternal deletion from Ube3a to Gabrb3.
authors:
- Jiang YH
- Pan Y
- Zhu L
- Landa L
- Yoo J
- Spencer C
- Lorenzo I
- Brilliant M
- Noebels J
- Beaudet AL
journal: PLoS One
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012278
keywords:
- "Adenosine Triphosphatases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Angelman Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Animals
- Cerebral Cortex/physiopathology
- Chromosome Deletion
- Darkness
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Exploratory Behavior
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Homozygote
- Male
- "Membrane Transport Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Memory
- Mice
- Mothers
- Motor Activity/genetics
- "Receptors, GABA-A/deficiency, genetics"
- Seizures/genetics
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
- Ultrasonics
- "Vocalization, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered ultrasonic vocalization and impaired learning and memory in Angelman syndrome mouse model with a large maternal deletion from Ube3a to Gabrb3.
**Authors:** Jiang YH, Pan Y, Zhu L, Landa L, Yoo J, Spencer C, Lorenzo I, Brilliant M, Noebels J, Beaudet AL
**Journal:** PLoS One (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0012278](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0012278)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 20;5(8):e12278. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012278.

Altered ultrasonic vocalization and impaired learning and memory in Angelman
syndrome mouse model with a large maternal deletion from Ube3a to Gabrb3.

Jiang YH(1), Pan Y, Zhu L, Landa L, Yoo J, Spencer C, Lorenzo I, Brilliant M,
Noebels J, Beaudet AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. yong-hui.jiang@duke.edu

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurobehavioral disorder associated with mental
retardation, absence of language development, characteristic
electroencephalography (EEG) abnormalities and epilepsy, happy disposition,
movement or balance disorders, and autistic behaviors. The molecular defects
underlying AS are heterogeneous, including large maternal deletions of
chromosome 15q11-q13 (70%), paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) of chromosome 15
(5%), imprinting mutations (rare), and mutations in the E6-AP ubiquitin ligase
gene UBE3A (15%). Although patients with UBE3A mutations have a wide spectrum of
neurological phenotypes, their features are usually milder than AS patients with
deletions of 15q11-q13. Using a chromosomal engineering strategy, we generated
mutant mice with a 1.6-Mb chromosomal deletion from Ube3a to Gabrb3, which
inactivated the Ube3a and Gabrb3 genes and deleted the Atp10a gene. Homozygous
deletion mutant mice died in the perinatal period due to a cleft palate
resulting from the null mutation in Gabrb3 gene. Mice with a maternal deletion
(m-/p+) were viable and did not have any obvious developmental defects.
Expression analysis of the maternal and paternal deletion mice confirmed that
the Ube3a gene is maternally expressed in brain, and showed that the Atp10a and
Gabrb3 genes are biallelically expressed in all brain sub-regions studied.
Maternal (m-/p+), but not paternal (m+/p-), deletion mice had increased
spontaneous seizure activity and abnormal EEG. Extensive behavioral analyses
revealed significant impairment in motor function, learning and memory tasks,
and anxiety-related measures assayed in the light-dark box in maternal deletion
but not paternal deletion mice. Ultrasonic vocalization (USV) recording in
newborns revealed that maternal deletion pups emitted significantly more USVs
than wild-type littermates. The increased USV in maternal deletion mice suggests
abnormal signaling behavior between mothers and pups that may reflect abnormal
communication behaviors in human AS patients. Thus, mutant mice with a maternal
deletion from Ube3a to Gabrb3 provide an AS mouse model that is molecularly more
similar to the contiguous gene deletion form of AS in humans than mice with
Ube3a mutation alone. These mice will be valuable for future comparative studies
to mice with maternal deficiency of Ube3a alone.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012278
PMCID: PMC2924885
PMID: 20808828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
