---
reference_id: "PMID:10802668"
title: Heterozygous loss of Six5 in mice is sufficient to cause ocular cataracts.
authors:
- Sarkar PS
- Appukuttan B
- Han J
- Ito Y
- Ai C
- Tsai W
- Chai Y
- Stout JT
- Reddy S
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/75500
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cataract/etiology, genetics"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Loss of Heterozygosity/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Restriction Mapping
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterozygous loss of Six5 in mice is sufficient to cause ocular cataracts.
**Authors:** Sarkar PS, Appukuttan B, Han J, Ito Y, Ai C, Tsai W, Chai Y, Stout JT, Reddy S
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/75500](https://doi.org/10.1038/75500)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 May;25(1):110-4. doi: 10.1038/75500.

Heterozygous loss of Six5 in mice is sufficient to cause ocular cataracts.

Sarkar PS(1), Appukuttan B, Han J, Ito Y, Ai C, Tsai W, Chai Y, Stout JT, Reddy
S.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by
skeletal muscle wasting, myotonia, cardiac arrhythmia, hyperinsulinaemia, mental
retardation and ocular cataracts. The genetic defect in DM is a CTG repeat
expansion located in the 3' untranslated region of DMPK and 5' of a
homeodomain-encoding gene, SIX5 (formerly DMAHP; refs 2-5). There are three
mechanisms by which CTG expansion can result in DM. First, repeat expansion may
alter the processing or transport of the mutant DMPK mRNA and consequently
reduce DMPK levels. Second, CTG expansion may establish a region of
heterochromatin 3' of the repeat sequence and decrease SIX5 transcription.
Third, toxic effects of the repeat expansion may be intrinsic to the repeated
elements at the level of DNA or RNA (refs 10,11). Previous studies have
demonstrated that a dose-dependent loss of Dm15 (the mouse DMPK homologue) in
mice produces a partial DM phenotype characterized by decreased development of
skeletal muscle force and cardiac conduction disorders. To test the role of Six5
loss in DM, we have analysed a strain of mice in which Six5 was deleted. Our
results demonstrate that the rate and severity of cataract formation is
inversely related to Six5 dosage and is temporally progressive. Six5+/- and
Six5-/- mice show increased steady-state levels of the Na+/K+-ATPase alpha-1
subunit and decreased Dm15 mRNA levels. Thus, altered ion homeostasis within the
lens may contribute to cataract formation. As ocular cataracts are a
characteristic feature of DM, these results demonstrate that decreased SIX5
transcription is important in the aetiology of DM. Our data support the
hypothesis that DM is a contiguous gene syndrome associated with the partial
loss of both DMPK and SIX5.

DOI: 10.1038/75500
PMID: 10802668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
