---
reference_id: "PMID:36555640"
title: "Unraveling the Link between Interferon-α and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: From the Molecular Mechanisms to Target Therapies."
authors:
- Infante B
- Mercuri S
- Dello Strologo A
- Franzin R
- Catalano V
- Troise D
- Cataldo E
- Pontrelli P
- Alfieri C
- Binda V
- Frontini G
- Netti GS
- Ranieri E
- Gesualdo L
- Castellano G
- Stallone G
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232415998
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unraveling the Link between Interferon-α and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: From the Molecular Mechanisms to Target Therapies.
**Authors:** Infante B, Mercuri S, Dello Strologo A, Franzin R, Catalano V, Troise D, Cataldo E, Pontrelli P, Alfieri C, Binda V, Frontini G, Netti GS, Ranieri E, Gesualdo L, Castellano G, Stallone G
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232415998](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232415998)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Dec 15;23(24):15998. doi: 10.3390/ijms232415998.

Unraveling the Link between Interferon-α and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: From 
the Molecular Mechanisms to Target Therapies.

Infante B(1), Mercuri S(1), Dello Strologo A(1), Franzin R(2), Catalano V(3), 
Troise D(1), Cataldo E(2), Pontrelli P(2), Alfieri C(4)(5), Binda V(4), Frontini 
G(4), Netti GS(3), Ranieri E(3), Gesualdo L(2), Castellano G(4)(5), Stallone 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Nephology, Dialysis and Transplantation, Advanced Research Center on 
Kidney Aging (A.R.K.A.), Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University 
of Foggia, 71122 Foggia, Italy.
(2)Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Department of Emergency and 
Organ Transplantation, University of Bari Aldo Moro, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(3)Unit of Clinical Pathology, Center for Molecular Medicine, Advanced Research 
Center on Kidney Aging (A.R.K.A.), Department of Medical and Surgical Science, 
University of Foggia, 71122 Foggia, Italy.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Dialysis and Renal Transplantation, Fondazione 
IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Policlinico, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
20122 Milan, Italy.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic, systemic autoimmune disease 
with a wide range of clinical expressions. The kidney is often affected, usually 
within 5 years of the onset of SLE, and lupus nephropathy (LN) carries a high 
risk for increased morbidity. The clinical heterogeneity of the disease is 
accompanied by complex disturbances affecting the immune system with 
inflammation and tissue damage due to loss of tolerance to nuclear antigens and 
the deposition of immune complexes in tissues. Several studies have reported 
that in human SLE, there is an important role of the Type-I-interferons (INF) 
system suggested by the upregulation of INF-inducible genes observed in serial 
gene expression microarray studies. This review aims to describe the 
transduction pathways of Type-I-interferons, in particular INFα, and its 
immune-regulatory function in the pathogenesis of SLE and, in particular, in LN. 
In addition, recent novelties concerning biologic therapy in LN will be 
discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232415998
PMCID: PMC9783870
PMID: 36555640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.