---
reference_id: "PMID:37086716"
title: Early immune pressure initiated by tissue-resident memory T cells sculpts tumor evolution in non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Weeden CE
- Gayevskiy V
- Marceaux C
- Batey D
- Tan T
- Yokote K
- Ribera NT
- Clatch A
- Christo S
- Teh CE
- Mitchell AJ
- Trussart M
- Rankin L
- Obers A
- McDonald JA
- Sutherland KD
- Sharma VJ
- Starkey G
- D'Costa R
- Antippa P
- Leong T
- Steinfort D
- Irving L
- Swanton C
- Gordon CL
- Mackay LK
- Speed TP
- Gray DHD
- Asselin-Labat ML
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.03.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early immune pressure initiated by tissue-resident memory T cells sculpts tumor evolution in non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Weeden CE, Gayevskiy V, Marceaux C, Batey D, Tan T, Yokote K, Ribera NT, Clatch A, Christo S, Teh CE, Mitchell AJ, Trussart M, Rankin L, Obers A, McDonald JA, Sutherland KD, Sharma VJ, Starkey G, D'Costa R, Antippa P, Leong T, Steinfort D, Irving L, Swanton C, Gordon CL, Mackay LK, Speed TP, Gray DHD, Asselin-Labat ML
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2023.03.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2023.03.019)

## Content

1. Cancer Cell. 2023 May 8;41(5):837-852.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.03.019.
Epub  2023 Apr 21.

Early immune pressure initiated by tissue-resident memory T cells sculpts tumor 
evolution in non-small cell lung cancer.

Weeden CE(1), Gayevskiy V(1), Marceaux C(1), Batey D(2), Tan T(3), Yokote K(2), 
Ribera NT(4), Clatch A(5), Christo S(5), Teh CE(6), Mitchell AJ(7), Trussart 
M(8), Rankin L(6), Obers A(5), McDonald JA(9), Sutherland KD(9), Sharma VJ(10), 
Starkey G(11), D'Costa R(12), Antippa P(13), Leong T(14), Steinfort D(15), 
Irving L(15), Swanton C(16), Gordon CL(17), Mackay LK(5), Speed TP(18), Gray 
DHD(19), Asselin-Labat ML(20).

Author information:
(1)Personalised Oncology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, the 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(2)Personalised Oncology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(3)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(4)Advanced Technology and Biology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of 
Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, the University of Melbourne, at 
the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia.
(6)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, the University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(7)Materials Characterisation and Fabrication Platform, Department of Chemical 
Engineering, the University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(8)Bioinformatics Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(9)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of 
Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, the 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(10)Department of Surgery, the University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia; Liver and Intestinal Transplant Unit, Austin Health, Heidelberg, VIC, 
Australia; Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Austin Health, Heidelberg, VIC, 
Australia.
(11)Department of Surgery, the University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia; Liver and Intestinal Transplant Unit, Austin Health, Heidelberg, VIC, 
Australia.
(12)DonateLife Victoria, Carlton, VIC, Australia; Department of Intensive Care 
Medicine, Melbourne Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(13)Department of Surgery, the University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia; The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(14)Personalised Oncology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, the 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia; Department of Respiratory 
and Sleep Medicine, Austin Health, Heidelberg, VIC, Australia.
(15)Department of Medicine, the University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia; The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(16)Cancer Research UK Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence, University College 
London Cancer Institute, London, UK; Cancer Evolution and Genome Instability 
Laboratory, Francis Crick Institute, London, UK; University College London 
Hospitals, London, UK.
(17)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, the University of Melbourne, at 
the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia; Department of Infectious Diseases, Austin Health, Heidelberg, VIC, 
Australia; North Eastern Public Health Unit, Austin Health, Heidelberg, VIC, 
Australia.
(18)Bioinformatics Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; School of Mathematics and Statistics, the 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(19)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, the University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia. Electronic address: dgray@wehi.edu.au.
(20)Personalised Oncology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, the 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia. Electronic address: 
labat@wehi.edu.au.

Tissue-resident memory T (TRM) cells provide immune defense against local 
infection and can inhibit cancer progression. However, it is unclear to what 
extent chronic inflammation impacts TRM activation and whether TRM cells 
existing in tissues before tumor onset influence cancer evolution in humans. We 
performed deep profiling of healthy lungs and lung cancers in never-smokers 
(NSs) and ever-smokers (ESs), finding evidence of enhanced immunosurveillance by 
cells with a TRM-like phenotype in ES lungs. In preclinical models, 
tumor-specific or bystander TRM-like cells present prior to tumor onset boosted 
immune cell recruitment, causing tumor immune evasion through loss of MHC class 
I protein expression and resistance to immune checkpoint inhibitors. In humans, 
only tumors arising in ES patients underwent clonal immune evasion, unrelated to 
tobacco-associated mutagenic signatures or oncogenic drivers. These data 
demonstrate that enhanced TRM-like activity prior to tumor development shapes 
the evolution of tumor immunogenicity and can impact immunotherapy outcomes.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.03.019
PMID: 37086716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests C.S. acknowledges grant 
support from AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, 
Roche-Ventana, Invitae (previously Archer Dx Inc–collaboration in minimal 
residual disease sequencing technologies), and Ono Pharmaceutical. C.S. is an 
AstraZeneca Advisory Board member and Chief Investigator for the AZ MeRmaiD 1 
and 2 clinical trials and is also Co-Chief Investigator of the NHS Galleri trial 
funded by GRAIL and a paid member of GRAIL’s SAB. He receives consultant fees 
from Achilles Therapeutics (also SAB member), Bicycle Therapeutics (also a SAB 
member), Genentech, Medicxi, Roche Innovation Centre– Shanghai, Metabomed (until 
July 2022), and the Sarah Cannon Research Institute. He had stock options in 
Apogen Biotechnologies and GRAIL until June 2021, and currently has stock 
options in Epic Bioscience, Bicycle Therapeutics, and has stock options and is 
co-founder of Achilles Therapeutics. C.S. is an inventor on a European patent 
application relating to assay technology to detect tumour recurrence 
(PCT/GB2017/053289), the patent has been licensed to commercial entities, and 
under his terms of employment, C.S. is due a revenue share of any revenue 
generated from such licence(s). C.S. holds patents relating to targeting 
neoantigens (PCT/EP2016/059401), identifying patient response to immune 
checkpoint blockade (PCT/EP2016/071471), determining HLA LOH 
(PCT/GB2018/052004), predicting survival rates of patients with cancer 
(PCT/GB2020/050221), identifying patients who respond to cancer treatment 
(PCT/GB2018/051912), a US patent relating to detecting tumour mutations 
(PCT/US2017/28013), methods for lung cancer detection (US20190106751A1) and both 
a European and US patent related to identifying insertion/deletion mutation 
targets (PCT/GB2018/051892) and is co-inventor to a patent application to 
determine methods and systems for tumour monitoring (PCT/EP2022/077987). C.S has 
received honoraria from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, 
MSD, Bristol Myers Squibb, Illumina, and Roche-Ventana.