---
reference_id: "PMID:39180607"
title: "Good syndrome combined with multiple microbial pulmonary infections: case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Ye Y
- Wang J
- Bao B
- Chen G
- Hu A
- Sun J
- Liu W
journal: Immunol Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12026-024-09528-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Adult
- "Agammaglobulinemia/diagnosis, complications, immunology, therapy"
- "Thymoma/diagnosis, complications, immunology"
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/diagnosis, microbiology, immunology"
- "Thymus Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, immunology, therapy"
- "Neutropenia/diagnosis, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Good syndrome combined with multiple microbial pulmonary infections: case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Ye Y, Wang J, Bao B, Chen G, Hu A, Sun J, Liu W
**Journal:** Immunol Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12026-024-09528-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12026-024-09528-y)

## Content

1. Immunol Res. 2024 Dec;72(6):1288-1298. doi: 10.1007/s12026-024-09528-y. Epub
2024 Aug 24.

Good syndrome combined with multiple microbial pulmonary infections: case report
and review of the literature.

Ye Y(1), Wang J(1), Bao B(1), Chen G(1), Hu A(1), Sun J(1), Liu W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Clinical Medical College of
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 730000, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, the First Hospital of
Lanzhou University, No.1 Donggang West Road, Chengguan District, Lanzhou City,
730000, Gansu Province, China. Lwy70828@126.com.

Good syndrome (GS), a rare acquired immunodeficiency disorder characterized by
thymoma and hypogammaglobulinemia, predisposes individuals to recurrent
infections. This study reports a case of a 37-year-old male GS with multiple
pulmonary infections and reviews relevant literature. The patient, with a
history of thymoma resection, experienced multiple hospitalizations due to lung
infections and neutropenia. The alveolar lavage fluid was detected by
macro-genomic sequencing (NGS) to detect multiple pathogens, and targeted
anti-infective and immunity-enhancing treatments led to improved symptoms and
normal neutrophil counts. A literature review of 98 case reports from 2000 to
2023 was conducted, summarizing the associated diseases and pathogens in GS
patients. Regular immunoglobulin monitoring in thymoma patients is essential for
early GS diagnosis. When empirical antimicrobial therapy fails, mNGS for
pathogen detection and targeted therapy are crucial, and regular IVIG injections
can reduce infection rates in GS patients.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-024-09528-y
PMID: 39180607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval: Not applicable.
Consent to participate: Informed consent was obtained from all individual
participants included in the study. Consent for publication: The authors affirm
that human participants provided informed consent for publication of the images
in Supplementary Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests.
