---
reference_id: "PMID:33650410"
title: Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Type IV - Anaesthetic Considerations.
authors:
- Kazakov D
- Pavlov G
- Stefanov C
journal: Folia Med (Plovdiv)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3897/folmed.63.e53968
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Type IV - Anaesthetic Considerations.
**Authors:** Kazakov D, Pavlov G, Stefanov C
**Journal:** Folia Med (Plovdiv) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3897/folmed.63.e53968](https://doi.org/10.3897/folmed.63.e53968)

## Content

1. Folia Med (Plovdiv). 2021 Feb 28;63(1):153-155. doi: 10.3897/folmed.63.e53968.

Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Type IV - Anaesthetic Considerations.

Kazakov D(1), Pavlov G(1), Stefanov C(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical University of Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a rare disorder that occurs due to genetic 
defect in the collagen synthesis. The vascular subtype of EDS (type IV) is 
defined by characteristic facial features, translucent skin, easy bruising, and 
spontaneous arterial rupture and visceral perforation of such organs as the 
uterus and intestines, with possible life-threatening consequences. We report a 
case of a 15-year-old male patient with no past medical history undergoing 
emergency laparotomy after a spontaneous sigmoid colon perforation. 
Post-operatively and during the ICU stay complications developed and several 
revision operations and invasive procedures were necessary. A chest CT 
angiography revealed a right subclavian artery aneurysm, which was treated by an 
endovascular stent grafting. Taking into consideration the family history and 
clinical presentation EDS type IV was discussed as a possible cause of the 
patient's condition. DNA analysis confirmed the diagnosis. Due to the lack of 
evidence-based recommendations the anaesthetic management of these patients is 
still challenging.

This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and 
source are credited.

DOI: 10.3897/folmed.63.e53968
PMID: 33650410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]