---
reference_id: "PMID:27581777"
title: Treatment Outcomes for Malassezia Folliculitis in theDermatology Department of a University Hospital in Japan.
authors:
- Suzuki C
- Hase M
- Shimoyama H
- Sei Y
journal: Med Mycol J
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3314/mmj.16-00003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment Outcomes for Malassezia Folliculitis in theDermatology Department of a University Hospital in Japan.
**Authors:** Suzuki C, Hase M, Shimoyama H, Sei Y
**Journal:** Med Mycol J (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3314/mmj.16-00003](https://doi.org/10.3314/mmj.16-00003)

## Content

1. Med Mycol J. 2016;57(3):E63-6. doi: 10.3314/mmj.16-00003.

Treatment Outcomes for Malassezia Folliculitis in theDermatology Department of a 
University Hospital in Japan.

Suzuki C(1), Hase M, Shimoyama H, Sei Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Teikyo University Hospital.

Topical or systemic antifungal therapy was administered to patients diagnosed 
with Malassezia folliculitis during the 5-year period between March 2007 and 
October 2013. The diagnosis of Malassezia folliculitis was established on the 
basis of characteristic clinical features and direct microscopic findings (10 or 
more yeast-like fungi per follicle). Treatment consisted of topical application 
of 2% ketoconazole cream or 100 mg oral itraconazole based on symptom severity 
and patients' preferences. Treatment was given until papules flattened, and flat 
papules were examined to determine whether the patient's clinical condition had 
"improved" and the treatment had been "effective". The subjects were 44 patients 
(35 men, 9 women), with a mean disease period of 25±15 days. In regard to the 
lesion site, the frontal portion of the chest was the most common, accounting 
for 60% of all patients. The mean period required for improvement was 27±16 days 
in 37 patients receiving the topical antifungal agent and 14±4 days in the 7 
patients receiving the systemic antifungal agent. The results were "improved" 
and the treatment was "effective" in all patients. Neither treatment resulted in 
any adverse reactions. Although administration of oral agents has been 
recommended for the treatment of Malassezia folliculitis, this study revealed 
that beneficial results are safely obtained with topical antifungal therapy 
alone, similar to those of systemic antifungal agents.

DOI: 10.3314/mmj.16-00003
PMID: 27581777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]