---
reference_id: "PMID:31031004"
title: Hypoxia Rescues Frataxin Loss by Restoring Iron Sulfur Cluster Biogenesis.
authors:
- Ast T
- Meisel JD
- Patra S
- Wang H
- Grange RMH
- Kim SH
- Calvo SE
- Orefice LL
- Nagashima F
- Ichinose F
- Zapol WM
- Ruvkun G
- Barondeau DP
- Mootha VK
journal: Cell
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.03.045
keywords:
- Activating Transcription Factor 4/metabolism
- Animals
- Caenorhabditis elegans/metabolism
- Female
- Friedreich Ataxia/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Hypoxia/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Iron/metabolism
- Iron Regulatory Protein 2/metabolism
- "Iron-Binding Proteins/metabolism, physiology"
- "Iron-Sulfur Proteins/metabolism, physiology"
- K562 Cells
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Mitochondrial Proteins/metabolism
- NF-E2-Related Factor 2/metabolism
- Oxidative Stress
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae/metabolism
- Sulfur/metabolism
- Frataxin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypoxia Rescues Frataxin Loss by Restoring Iron Sulfur Cluster Biogenesis.
**Authors:** Ast T, Meisel JD, Patra S, Wang H, Grange RMH, Kim SH, Calvo SE, Orefice LL, Nagashima F, Ichinose F, Zapol WM, Ruvkun G, Barondeau DP, Mootha VK
**Journal:** Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2019.03.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.03.045)

## Content

1. Cell. 2019 May 30;177(6):1507-1521.e16. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.03.045. Epub
2019 Apr 25.

Hypoxia Rescues Frataxin Loss by Restoring Iron Sulfur Cluster Biogenesis.

Ast T(1), Meisel JD(1), Patra S(2), Wang H(1), Grange RMH(3), Kim SH(1), Calvo
SE(1), Orefice LL(4), Nagashima F(3), Ichinose F(3), Zapol WM(3), Ruvkun G(4),
Barondeau DP(2), Mootha VK(5).

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114, USA; Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843,
USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care, and Pain Medicine, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114, USA; Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic
address: vamsi@hms.harvard.edu.

Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is a devastating, multisystemic disorder caused by
recessive mutations in the mitochondrial protein frataxin (FXN). FXN
participates in the biosynthesis of Fe-S clusters and is considered to be
essential for viability. Here we report that when grown in 1% ambient O2, FXN
null yeast, human cells, and nematodes are fully viable. In human cells, hypoxia
restores steady-state levels of Fe-S clusters and normalizes ATF4, NRF2, and
IRP2 signaling events associated with FRDA. Cellular studies and in vitro
reconstitution indicate that hypoxia acts through HIF-independent mechanisms
that increase bioavailable iron as well as directly activate Fe-S synthesis. In
a mouse model of FRDA, breathing 11% O2 attenuates the progression of ataxia,
whereas breathing 55% O2 hastens it. Our work identifies oxygen as a key
environmental variable in the pathogenesis associated with FXN depletion, with
important mechanistic and therapeutic implications.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.03.045
PMCID: PMC6911770
PMID: 31031004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests: VKM is on the
scientific advisory boards of Raze Therapeutics, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, and
5AM Ventures. WMZ is on the scientific advisory board of Third Pole
Therapeutics. GR is on the scientific advisory boards of Calico Life Sciences
and the Glenn Medical Foundation and is cofounder of Marvelbiome. GR has filed
for patents on the interaction of mitochondrial mutants with bacterial
siderophore mutations and acetobacteria. VKM and WMZ are listed as an inventors
on a patent application filed by Massachusetts General Hospital on the use of
hypoxia as a therapy for mitochondrial and degenerative diseases.
