---
reference_id: "PMID:29794201"
title: Clinical Pharmacology of Bronchodilator Medications.
authors:
- Williams DM
- Rubin BK
journal: Respir Care
year: '2018'
doi: 10.4187/respcare.06051
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Pharmacology of Bronchodilator Medications.
**Authors:** Williams DM, Rubin BK
**Journal:** Respir Care (2018)
**DOI:** [10.4187/respcare.06051](https://doi.org/10.4187/respcare.06051)

## Content

1. Respir Care. 2018 Jun;63(6):641-654. doi: 10.4187/respcare.06051.

Clinical Pharmacology of Bronchodilator Medications.

Williams DM(1), Rubin BK(2).

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina Eshelman School of Pharmacy, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina.
(2)The Children's Hospital of Richmond at Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, Virginia. bruce.rubin@vcuhealth.org.

Obstructive lung diseases, including asthma and COPD, are characterized by 
air-flow limitation. Bronchodilator therapy can often decrease symptoms of 
air-flow obstruction by relaxing airway smooth muscle (bronchodilation), 
decreasing dyspnea, and improving quality of life. In this review, we discuss 
the pharmacology of the β agonist and anticholinergic bronchodilators and their 
use, particularly in asthma and COPD. Expanding knowledge of receptor subtypes 
and G-protein signaling, agonist and antagonist specificity, and drug delivery 
have led to the introduction of safer medications with fewer off-target effects, 
medications with longer duration of action that may improve adherence, and more 
effective and efficient aerosol delivery devices.

Copyright © 2018 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.06051
PMID: 29794201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have disclosed no conflicts of 
interest.