---
reference_id: "PMID:14501998"
title: Giardia intestinalis.
authors:
- Ali SA
- Hill DR
journal: Curr Opin Infect Dis
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1097/00001432-200310000-00012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giardia intestinalis.
**Authors:** Ali SA, Hill DR
**Journal:** Curr Opin Infect Dis (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00001432-200310000-00012](https://doi.org/10.1097/00001432-200310000-00012)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2003 Oct;16(5):453-60. doi: 
10.1097/00001432-200310000-00012.

Giardia intestinalis.

Ali SA(1), Hill DR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Connecticut School of 
Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Giardia intestinalis (syn. duodenalis or lamblia) is one of 
the most common intestinal parasites in the world, with an estimated 2.8 x 10(6) 
infections per year in humans, and it contributes to diarrhea and nutritional 
deficiencies in children in developing regions. The wide prevalence of Giardia 
and its unique place in evolutionary biology have led to ongoing research.
RECENT FINDINGS: Research into the basic biology of Giardia has highlighted some 
of its unique properties as an 'early-branching' eukaryote. Although Giardia do 
not contain mitochondria, they have developed pathways to perform some 
mitochondrial functions. Investigations into encystation and excystation have 
identified new gene products that are important in cyst wall formation, and 
signal transduction events that occur during excystation. The ability to 
transfect Giardia stably will lead to an improved understanding of its 
development and metabolism. Molecular typing of G. intestinalis isolates 
indicates that most animal parasites are not associated with human infection. 
Insights into immunology have helped define the role of IL-6 in the early 
control of murine giardiasis, and the contributions of IgA in controlling 
infection. Further studies of giardiasis in poorly nourished children in 
developing regions supports an important contributing role of Giardia in 
stunting and cognitive impairment. Finally, new diagnostic assays using antigen 
detection are being evaluated and a new agent, nitazoxanide, has been approved 
in the USA for the treatment of giardiasis and cryptosporidiosis in children.
SUMMARY: Research into the biology of Giardia should increase knowledge about 
protist differentiation and will complement studies in other biological systems. 
Continued study of the role of Giardia in chronic diarrhea and malnutrition in 
developing regions will help focus strategies to improve childhood growth and 
nutrition.

DOI: 10.1097/00001432-200310000-00012
PMID: 14501998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]