---
reference_id: "PMID:36375032"
title: The dementia apraxia test can detect early-onset Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Yliranta A
- Nuorva J
- Karjalainen VL
- Ahmasalo R
- Jehkonen M
journal: Neuropsychology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1037/neu0000873
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The dementia apraxia test can detect early-onset Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Yliranta A, Nuorva J, Karjalainen VL, Ahmasalo R, Jehkonen M
**Journal:** Neuropsychology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1037/neu0000873](https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000873)

## Content

1. Neuropsychology. 2023 Jan;37(1):44-51. doi: 10.1037/neu0000873. Epub 2022 Nov 
14.

The dementia apraxia test can detect early-onset Alzheimer's disease.

Yliranta A(1), Nuorva J(2), Karjalainen VL(3), Ahmasalo R(2), Jehkonen M(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere University.
(2)Neurology Clinic, Lapland Central Hospital.
(3)Central Finland Hospital District.

OBJECTIVE: Limb apraxia is a common early sign of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
is thought to occur specifically in early-onset (before the age of 65) AD. The 
Dementia Apraxia Test (DATE), a test of limb and face praxis developed to 
support the differential diagnosis of dementia, has shown good diagnostic 
accuracy in detecting AD in older patients, but it has not been validated for 
younger age groups. We investigated how accurately DATE can detect AD in 
middle-aged individuals and whether apraxia is a distinctive feature in 
early-onset AD.
METHOD: A sample of mild-stage AD patients (n = 24; Mage = 61, SD = 4) was drawn 
from a prospective consecutive series of individuals referred to our neurology 
clinic for dementia investigations. A healthy comparison group (HC) of 
comparable age (n = 22; Mage = 61, SD = 7), sex distribution, and education was 
recruited. DATE was administered as a blinded experimental measure, and a 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was used to define the optimal 
diagnostic cutoff point.
RESULTS: The DATE classified 93% of the participants correctly as AD or HC 
(sensitivity 0.88, specificity 1.00, area under curve 0.968). The optimal 
diagnostic cutoff point was higher (49 points) than in a previous sample of 
older patients (45 points). Early onset did not seem to be associated with worse 
praxis performance in AD.
CONCLUSIONS: DATE is an accurate tool for detecting early-onset AD within 2 
years of symptom onset. The diagnostic cutoff point should be higher for 
middle-aged populations than for late-onset AD. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 
2023 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/neu0000873
PMID: 36375032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]