---
reference_id: "PMID:25864995"
title: "Thyroid stimulating hormone suppression post-therapy in patients with Graves' disease: a systematic review of pathophysiology and clinical data."
authors:
- Yu H
- Farahani P
journal: Clin Invest Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.25011/cim.v38i1.22574
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyroid stimulating hormone suppression post-therapy in patients with Graves' disease: a systematic review of pathophysiology and clinical data.
**Authors:** Yu H, Farahani P
**Journal:** Clin Invest Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.25011/cim.v38i1.22574](https://doi.org/10.25011/cim.v38i1.22574)

## Content

1. Clin Invest Med. 2015 Apr 8;38(2):E31-44. doi: 10.25011/cim.v38i1.22574.

Thyroid stimulating hormone suppression post-therapy in patients with Graves' 
disease: a systematic review of pathophysiology and clinical data.

Yu H(1), Farahani P.

Author information:
(1). hyu@qmed.ca.

BACKGROUND: Post-treatment hypothyroidism is common in Graves' disease, and 
clinical guidelines recommend monitoring for it; however, thyroid stimulating 
hormone (TSH) can remain suppressed in these patients following treatment. The 
objectives of this study were to explore the proposed pathophysiology behind the 
phenomenon of post-therapy TSH suppression and to systematically review existing 
clinical data on post-therapy TSH suppression in patients with Graves' disease.
SOURCE: A systematic literature search was performed using EMBASE and PubMed 
databases, with several combinations of MeSH terms. Bibliography mining was also 
done on relevant articles to be as inclusive as possible.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A total of 18 articles described possible mechanisms for 
post-therapy TSH suppression. Several of the studies demonstrate evidence of 
thyrotroph atrophy and hypothesize that this contributes to the ongoing 
suppression. TSH receptors have been identified in folliculo-stellate cells of 
the pituitary as well as astroglial cells of the hypothalamus, mediating 
paracrine feedback. A few studies have demonstrated inverse correlation between 
autoantibody titres and TSH levels, suggestive of their role in mediating 
ongoing TSH suppression in patients with Graves' disease. In addition, five 
studies were identified that provided clinical data on the duration of TSH 
suppression. Combined data show that 45.5% of patients recover TSH by 3 months 
after treatment, increasing to 69.3% by 6 months, and plateauing to 73.8% by 12 
months (p>0.0001). Sub-analysis also shows that for patients who are TBII 
negative, 80.7% recover their TSH by 6 months compared with only 58.7% in those 
who are TBII positive (p= 0.003).
CONCLUSION: Clinical data suggests that TSH recovery is most likely to occur 
within the first 6 months after treatment, with recovery plateauing at 
approximately 70% of patients, suggesting that reliance on this assay for 
monitoring can be very misleading. Furthermore, TBII positivity is associated 
with lower likelihood of TSH recovery. Pathophysiology behind suppressed TSH 
involves not only anatomical but also autoimmune mechanisms.

DOI: 10.25011/cim.v38i1.22574
PMID: 25864995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]