---
reference_id: "PMID:22978395"
title: Peroxisomes, peroxisomal diseases, and the hepatotoxicity induced by peroxisomal metabolites.
authors:
- Wanders RJ
- Ferdinandusse S
journal: Curr Drug Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2174/138920012803762747
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisomes, peroxisomal diseases, and the hepatotoxicity induced by peroxisomal metabolites.
**Authors:** Wanders RJ, Ferdinandusse S
**Journal:** Curr Drug Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2174/138920012803762747](https://doi.org/10.2174/138920012803762747)

## Content

1. Curr Drug Metab. 2012 Dec;13(10):1401-11. doi: 10.2174/138920012803762747.

Peroxisomes, peroxisomal diseases, and the hepatotoxicity induced by peroxisomal 
metabolites.

Wanders RJ(1), Ferdinandusse S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Depts. of Clinical Chemistry and 
Paediatrics, Emma Children’s Hospital, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. r.j.wanders@amc.uva.nl

The group of peroxisomal disorders represents a growing number of genetically 
determined diseases in humans in which there is an impairment in one or more 
peroxisomal functions. The peroxisomal disorders are usually subdivided in two 
major subgroups including (1) the peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs) and (2) 
the single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies. Liver pathology is a frequent 
finding in patients affected by a peroxisomal disorder. This is not only true 
for patients affected by a PBD, but also for patients with a single enzyme 
defect in one of the metabolic pathways in which peroxisomes are involved. By 
comparing the different peroxisomal disorders, we provide evidence suggesting 
that the main hepatotoxic metabolites responsible for the liver pathology found 
in patients, are the bile acid synthesis intermediates di- and 
trihydroxycholestanoic acid (DHCA and THCA). Studies in different experimental 
systems have shown that DHCA and THCA, especially in the unconjugated form, 
interfere with different physiological processes including mitochondrial 
oxidative phosphorylation. The implications of these findings will be discussed 
with special emphasis on patients with di- and trihydroxycholestanoic acidaemia.

DOI: 10.2174/138920012803762747
PMID: 22978395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]