---
reference_id: "PMID:39395384"
title: "Combination kinase inhibitors and immunotherapy for unresectable anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: A retrospective single-center study."
authors:
- Song Y
- Zhang Y
- Bai Y
- Wang T
- Xu G
- Ma X
- Fei K
- Zhang B
journal: Oral Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2024.107067
keywords:
- Humans
- "Thyroid Carcinoma, Anaplastic/drug therapy"
- Male
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Immunotherapy/methods
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/drug therapy, therapy"
- Oximes/therapeutic use
- Quinolines/therapeutic use
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Indoles/therapeutic use
- Pyridones/therapeutic use
- Phenylurea Compounds/therapeutic use
- Pyrimidinones/therapeutic use
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Imidazoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Combination kinase inhibitors and immunotherapy for unresectable anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: A retrospective single-center study.
**Authors:** Song Y, Zhang Y, Bai Y, Wang T, Xu G, Ma X, Fei K, Zhang B
**Journal:** Oral Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.oraloncology.2024.107067](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oraloncology.2024.107067)

## Content

1. Oral Oncol. 2024 Dec;159:107067. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2024.107067. Epub
 2024 Oct 11.

Combination kinase inhibitors and immunotherapy for unresectable anaplastic
thyroid carcinoma: A retrospective single-center study.

Song Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Bai Y(2), Wang T(1), Xu G(1), Ma X(1), Fei K(1), Zhang
B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Peking University Cancer Hospital and
Institute, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry
of Education/Beijing), Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute. Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education/Beijing), Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Peking University Cancer Hospital and
Institute, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry
of Education/Beijing), Beijing, China. Electronic address:
docbinzhang@hotmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is rare but has a very poor
prognosis. New therapeutic options such as multikinase inhibitors and selective
tyrosine kinase inhibitors have revolutionized the treatment of ATC, with
immunotherapy also showing encouraging effects. This study evaluated the
efficacy and safety of kinase inhibitors combined with an anti-PD-1 inhibitor as
first-line treatment, as well as in the neoadjuvant setting for patients with
unresectable ATC.
MATERIALS & METHODS: This retrospective single-center study recruited
consecutive patients with stage IVB and IVC ATC who received first-line kinase
inhibitors plus immunotherapy between June 2021 and June 2023. The patients were
treated with either selective or multi-kinase inhibitors (dabrafenib/trametinib,
lenvatinib, or anlotinib) in combination with one immune checkpoint inhibitor
(pembrolizumab, sintilimab, or camrelizumab). The endpoints included overall
survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), response evaluation, and
feasibility of R0/R1 resection.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients were included in this analysis. The median OS (mOS)
was 14.0 months and the 12-month survival rate was 55.6 %. The mOS in BRAF V600E
mutated ATC was not reached, significantly longer than non-BRAF V600E mutated
ATC (4.0 months [95 %CI, 1.1-6.9], p = 0.049). Among evaluable patients, 5
achieved a complete response (CR) and 6 patients achieved partial response (PR).
The best ORR was 61.1 %. Surgical resection was feasible in 7/18 (38.9 %)
patients. One grade 5 adverse event (AE) occurred. Most AEs were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Combination kinase inhibitors with immunotherapy as first-line
therapy are safe and effective for the treatment of unresectable ATC, especially
with BRAF V600E mutation.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2024.107067
PMID: 39395384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
