---
reference_id: "PMID:27064064"
title: "National G6PD neonatal screening program in Gaza Strip of Palestine: rationale, challenges and recommendations."
authors:
- Sirdah MM
- Al-Kahlout MS
- Reading NS
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12786
content_type: abstract_only
---

# National G6PD neonatal screening program in Gaza Strip of Palestine: rationale, challenges and recommendations.
**Authors:** Sirdah MM, Al-Kahlout MS, Reading NS
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12786](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12786)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2016 Sep;90(3):191-8. doi: 10.1111/cge.12786. Epub 2016 May 4.

National G6PD neonatal screening program in Gaza Strip of Palestine: rationale, 
challenges and recommendations.

Sirdah MM(1)(2), Al-Kahlout MS(3), Reading NS(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, Al Azhar University-Gaza, Gaza, Palestine.
(2)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(3)Al Nasser Pediatric Hospital, Palestinian Ministry of Health, Gaza, 
Palestine.
(4)Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, ARUP Laboratories, Salt 
Lake City, UT, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, UT, USA.

Congenital genetic disorders affecting neonates or young children can have 
serious clinical consequences if undiagnosed and left untreated. Early detection 
and an accurate diagnosis are, therefore, of major importance for preventing 
negative patient outcomes. Even though the occurrence of each specific metabolic 
disorder may be rare, their collective impact of preventable complications may 
be of considerable importance to the public health. Our previous studies showed 
that glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is a problem of public 
health importance that has been shown to be a predominant cause of acute 
hemolytic anemia requiring hospitalization in Palestinian young children in Gaza 
Strip. Intriguingly, the majority of these children had one of the three 
variants, Mediterranean(c.) (563T) , African G6PD A-(c.) (202A) (/c.) (376G) and 
heretofore unrecognized as a common G6PD-deficient variant G6PD Cairo(c.) (404C) 
. The high prevalence of G6PD deficiency, as well as dietary factors in the 
region that precipitate anemia, argues for a need to protect the Palestinian 
children from a treatable and manageable genetic and metabolic disorder. This 
work reviews and discusses rationales and challenges of G6PD screening program 
in Gaza Strip. We advocate adopting a national neonatal G6PD screening program 
in Gaza Strip to identify children at risk and promote wellness and health for 
Palestine.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12786
PMID: 27064064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]