---
reference_id: "PMID:19188187"
title: Associations of high-grade prostate cancer with BRCA1 and BRCA2 founder mutations.
authors:
- Agalliu I
- Gern R
- Leanza S
- Burk RD
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1822
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Case-Control Studies
- Family Health
- Founder Effect
- "Genes, BRCA1"
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Jews/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Associations of high-grade prostate cancer with BRCA1 and BRCA2 founder mutations.
**Authors:** Agalliu I, Gern R, Leanza S, Burk RD
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1822](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1822)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 1;15(3):1112-20. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1822.

Associations of high-grade prostate cancer with BRCA1 and BRCA2 founder
mutations.

Agalliu I(1), Gern R, Leanza S, Burk RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

PURPOSE: Protein-truncating mutations in BRCA1 and in particular BRCA2 genes
have been associated with prostate cancer. However, there is still uncertainty
about the magnitude of association particularly with Gleason score, and family
history of prostate, breast, and ovary cancers.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To further examine associations between three founder
mutations located in BRCA1 (185delAG, 5382insC) or BRCA2 (6174delT) genes and
prostate cancer, we conducted a study of 979 prostate cancer cases and 1,251
controls among Ashkenazi Jewish men. Detailed information was obtained on
prostate cancer pathology, age at diagnosis, and family history of all cancers.
Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using
logistic regression models.
RESULTS: Prostate cancer risk was increased (OR, 1.9; 95% CI 0.9-4.1) for BRCA2
mutation carriers but not for BRCA1 mutation carriers. BRCA2 mutation carriers
had an OR of 3.2 (95% CI, 1.4-7.3) for Gleason score of 7 to 10, but no
association was observed for Gleason score of < 7. Carriers of BRCA1-185delAG
mutation also had an OR of 3.5 (95% CI, 1.2-10.3) for Gleason score of > or =7
tumors; however, the association of either BRCA1-185delAG or 5382insC mutation
was not statistically significant. Associations between founder mutations and
prostate cancer were stronger in men with no first-degree family history of
breast and/or ovarian cancers but were unaffected by family history of prostate
cancer.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the BRCA2 founder mutation confers a
3-fold elevated risk of high-grade prostate cancer. Although BRCA1 mutations
were not associated with prostate cancer, the BRCA1-185delAG was associated with
high Gleason score tumors. These findings should be carefully considered in
genetic counseling and/or evaluating therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1822
PMCID: PMC3722558
PMID: 19188187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
