---
reference_id: "PMID:31723531"
title: CLOVES Syndrome in a Nine-month-old Infant.
authors:
- Alomar S
- Khedr RE
- Alajlan S
journal: Cureus
year: '2019'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.5772
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CLOVES Syndrome in a Nine-month-old Infant.
**Authors:** Alomar S, Khedr RE, Alajlan S
**Journal:** Cureus (2019)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.5772](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.5772)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2019 Sep 26;11(9):e5772. doi: 10.7759/cureus.5772.

CLOVES Syndrome in a Nine-month-old Infant.

Alomar S(1), Khedr RE(1), Alajlan S(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, SAU.
(2)Dermatology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, 
SAU.

CLOVES syndrome is a recently described overgrowth syndrome. Clinically, it is 
characterized by congenital lipomatous overgrowth (CLO), vascular anomalies (V), 
epidermal nevi (E), and skeletal deformities (S). Genetically, it is 
characterized by a somatic gain-of-function mutation of 
the phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha 
(PIK3CA) gene. This somatic mutation is, in turn, associated with the activation 
of the protein kinase B-mammalian target of the rapamycin (AKT-mTOR) pathway 
that drives various signaling cascades. The end result is eventually promoting 
cell proliferation, growth, and survival. CLOVES syndrome is exceedingly 
uncommon, with less than 200 cases currently documented. Herein, we describe a 
case of CLOVES syndrome in a nine-month-old male infant who was referred to our 
dermatology clinic for further assessment and management. The diagnosis was made 
based on clinical findings and confirmed by genetic testing.

Copyright © 2019, Alomar et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.5772
PMCID: PMC6825489
PMID: 31723531

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.