---
reference_id: "PMID:36591717"
title: Estimation of a cut-off value for immature platelet fraction (IPF) in predicting platelet recovery in dengue patients with thrombocytopenia.
authors:
- Ahmad J
- Md Noor S
- Mustapha SZ
- Idris F
journal: Malays J Pathol
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimation of a cut-off value for immature platelet fraction (IPF) in predicting platelet recovery in dengue patients with thrombocytopenia.
**Authors:** Ahmad J, Md Noor S, Mustapha SZ, Idris F
**Journal:** Malays J Pathol (2022)

## Content

1. Malays J Pathol. 2022 Dec;44(3):499-508.

Estimation of a cut-off value for immature platelet fraction (IPF) in predicting 
platelet recovery in dengue patients with thrombocytopenia.

Ahmad J(1), Md Noor S(1), Mustapha SZ(2), Idris F(1).

Author information:
(1)Universiti Putra Malaysia, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Department of Pathology, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah, Department of Pathology, Persiaran Tengku 
AmpuanRahimah, 41200 Klang, Selangor, Malaysia.

INTRODUCTION: Thrombocytopenia is a common complication in dengue that sometimes 
necessitates platelet transfusion. Immature platelet fraction (IPF) measures 
immature platelets that indirectly reflect thrombopoiesis and is helpful in 
predicting platelet recovery.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to evaluate the role of IPF% and identify its 
cut-off value in predicting platelet recovery in dengue patients with 
thrombocytopenia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Serial platelet count and IPF results were obtained from 
fifty-four confirmed dengue patients with platelet count <50x109 /L. Median peak 
IPF% and number of patients with platelet recovery were determined. Receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) curve is generated to identify the IPF% cut-off 
value to predict platelet recovery.
RESULTS: Median peak IPF% among dengue patients was 12.15% with 83.3% of them 
achieving platelet recovery after reaching the peak IPF%. There was a 
significant difference between median IPF% on day one of admission with peak 
IPF% among dengue patients. ROC curve analysis showed IFP% of 10.55% can be used 
to predict platelet recovery with a sensitivity of 69% and a specificity of 67%.
CONCLUSION: IPF% is a reliable and useful parameter in predicting platelet 
recovery in dengue patients. This would assist the clinician in managing dengue 
patients especially those with severe thrombocytopenia without giving 
unnecessary platelet transfusion.

PMID: 36591717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]