---
reference_id: "PMID:32327601"
title: Structures of cell wall arabinosyltransferases with the anti-tuberculosis drug ethambutol.
authors:
- Zhang L
- Zhao Y
- Gao Y
- Wu L
- Gao R
- Zhang Q
- Wang Y
- Wu C
- Wu F
- Gurcha SS
- Veerapen N
- Batt SM
- Zhao W
- Qin L
- Yang X
- Wang M
- Zhu Y
- Zhang B
- Bi L
- Zhang X
- Yang H
- Guddat LW
- Xu W
- Wang Q
- Li J
- Besra GS
- Rao Z
journal: Science
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1126/science.aba9102
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structures of cell wall arabinosyltransferases with the anti-tuberculosis drug ethambutol.
**Authors:** Zhang L, Zhao Y, Gao Y, Wu L, Gao R, Zhang Q, Wang Y, Wu C, Wu F, Gurcha SS, Veerapen N, Batt SM, Zhao W, Qin L, Yang X, Wang M, Zhu Y, Zhang B, Bi L, Zhang X, Yang H, Guddat LW, Xu W, Wang Q, Li J, Besra GS, Rao Z
**Journal:** Science (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aba9102](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba9102)

## Content

1. Science. 2020 Jun 12;368(6496):1211-1219. doi: 10.1126/science.aba9102. Epub 
2020 Apr 23.

Structures of cell wall arabinosyltransferases with the anti-tuberculosis drug 
ethambutol.

Zhang L(#)(1)(2), Zhao Y(#)(1)(3)(4), Gao Y(5), Wu L(1), Gao R(4)(6), Zhang 
Q(1), Wang Y(1)(4), Wu C(1), Wu F(2), Gurcha SS(7), Veerapen N(7), Batt SM(7), 
Zhao W(2), Qin L(1), Yang X(1), Wang M(1), Zhu Y(1), Zhang B(1), Bi L(6), Zhang 
X(6), Yang H(1), Guddat LW(8), Xu W(1), Wang Q(9)(6), Li J(9), Besra GS(10), Rao 
Z(9)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Institute for Advanced Immunochemical Studies, iHuman Institute, 
School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Frontiers Science Center 
for Cell Response, College of Life Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Nankai 
University, Tianjin 300353, China.
(3)CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Shanghai Institute of 
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, 
China.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(5)Laboratory of Structural Biology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(6)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules and Key Laboratory of RNA Biology, 
CAS Center for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, CAS, 
Beijing 100101, China.
(7)Institute of Microbiology and Infection, School of Biosciences, University of 
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(8)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.
(9)Shanghai Institute for Advanced Immunochemical Studies, iHuman Institute, 
School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, 
China. wangq@ibp.ac.cn lijun1@shanghaitech.edu.cn g.besra@bham.ac.uk 
raozh@tsinghua.edu.cn.
(10)Institute of Microbiology and Infection, School of Biosciences, University 
of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. wangq@ibp.ac.cn 
lijun1@shanghaitech.edu.cn g.besra@bham.ac.uk raozh@tsinghua.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The arabinosyltransferases EmbA, EmbB, and EmbC are involved in Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis cell wall synthesis and are recognized as targets for the 
anti-tuberculosis drug ethambutol. In this study, we determined cryo-electron 
microscopy and x-ray crystal structures of mycobacterial EmbA-EmbB and EmbC-EmbC 
complexes in the presence of their glycosyl donor and acceptor substrates and 
with ethambutol. These structures show how the donor and acceptor substrates 
bind in the active site and how ethambutol inhibits arabinosyltransferases by 
binding to the same site as both substrates in EmbB and EmbC. Most 
drug-resistant mutations are located near the ethambutol binding site. 
Collectively, our work provides a structural basis for understanding the 
biochemical function and inhibition of arabinosyltransferases and the 
development of new anti-tuberculosis agents.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aba9102
PMID: 32327601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]