---
reference_id: "PMID:2674196"
title: Stool diagnosis of giardiasis using a commercially available enzyme immunoassay to detect Giardia-specific antigen 65 (GSA 65).
authors:
- Rosoff JD
- Sanders CA
- Sonnad SS
- De Lay PR
- Hadley WK
- Vincenzi FF
- Yajko DM
- "O'Hanley PD"
journal: J Clin Microbiol
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1128/jcm.27.9.1997-2002.1989
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stool diagnosis of giardiasis using a commercially available enzyme immunoassay to detect Giardia-specific antigen 65 (GSA 65).
**Authors:** Rosoff JD, Sanders CA, Sonnad SS, De Lay PR, Hadley WK, Vincenzi FF, Yajko DM, O'Hanley PD
**Journal:** J Clin Microbiol (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jcm.27.9.1997-2002.1989](https://doi.org/10.1128/jcm.27.9.1997-2002.1989)

## Content

1. J Clin Microbiol. 1989 Sep;27(9):1997-2002. doi: 
10.1128/jcm.27.9.1997-2002.1989.

Stool diagnosis of giardiasis using a commercially available enzyme immunoassay 
to detect Giardia-specific antigen 65 (GSA 65).

Rosoff JD(1), Sanders CA, Sonnad SS, De Lay PR, Hadley WK, Vincenzi FF, Yajko 
DM, O'Hanley PD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Infectious Disease), Stanford University, California 
94305.

A commercially available enzyme immunoassay for the diagnosis of giardiasis was 
evaluated in a clinical trial. The ProSpecT/Giardia diagnostic test (Alexon, 
Inc., Mountain View, Calif.) was compared with the standard ova and parasite 
(O&P) microscopic examination. Additionally, several widely used stool fixatives 
and a commonly used transport medium were assessed for compatibility with the 
immunoassay. A total of 325 stool specimens were collected and used to evaluate 
assay performance. Of those, 93 specimens were collected from symptomatic 
Giardia O&P-positive patients and 232 specimens were randomly collected from 
patients as part of a routine health screening procedure. All 93 Giardia 
O&P-positive stool specimens were strongly positive by visual and 
spectrophotometric examination using the immunoassay. Of the 232 randomly 
collected specimens, 16 were positive by O&P examination and immunoassay, 6 were 
negative by O&P examination but positive by immunoassay, and 1 was positive by 
O&P examination and negative by immunoassay. There was substantial supportive 
evidence that indicated that the six immunoassay-positive, O&P-negative 
specimens were true-positives. When these six specimens were accepted as 
true-positives, the immunoassay detected almost 30% more cases of Giardia 
infection than did O&P examination. Its sensitivity and specificity were 96 and 
100%, respectively, while the sensitivity and specificity of O&P examination 
were 74 and 100%, respectively. The immunoassay also performed well on specimens 
treated with 10% neutral Formalin, sodium acetate-Formalin fixative, and 
Cary-Blair transport medium. However, the test was not compatible with polyvinyl 
alcohol-treated specimens. Overall, the ProSpecT/Giardia test was a sensitive, 
specific immunoassay which was easy to run and interpret. It offers a simple 
solution to traditional difficulties encountered in diagnosing Giardia 
infection.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.27.9.1997-2002.1989
PMCID: PMC267726
PMID: 2674196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]