---
reference_id: "PMID:26845771"
title: Parvovirus B19 Replication and Expression in Differentiating Erythroid Progenitor Cells.
authors:
- Bua G
- Manaresi E
- Bonvicini F
- Gallinella G
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148547
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parvovirus B19 Replication and Expression in Differentiating Erythroid Progenitor Cells.
**Authors:** Bua G, Manaresi E, Bonvicini F, Gallinella G
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0148547](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0148547)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 4;11(2):e0148547. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148547. 
eCollection 2016.

Parvovirus B19 Replication and Expression in Differentiating Erythroid 
Progenitor Cells.

Bua G(1), Manaresi E(1), Bonvicini F(1), Gallinella G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.
(2)S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital - Microbiology, University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.

The pathogenic Parvovirus B19 (B19V) is characterized by a strict adaptation to 
erythroid progenitor cells (EPCs), a heterogeneous population of differentiating 
cells with diverse phenotypic and functional properties. In our work, we studied 
the dynamics of B19V infection in EPCs in dependence on the cell differentiation 
stage, in terms of distribution of infected cells, synthesis of viral nucleic 
acids and production of infectious virus. EPCs at early differentiation stage 
led to an abortive infection, without viral genome replication and a very low 
transcriptional activity. EPCs at later stages were permissive, with highest 
levels of viral replicative activity at day 9 (+3.0 Log from 2 to 48 hpi) and 
lower levels at day 18 (+1.5 Log from 2 to 48 hpi). B19V DNA increment was in 
accordance with the percentage of cells positive to flow-FISH assay (41.4% at 
day 9, 1.1% at day 18). Quantitation of total RNA indicated a close association 
of genome replication and transcription with viral RNA accumulation within 
infected cells related to viral DNA increase during the course of infection. 
Analysis of the different classes of mRNAs revealed two distinct pattern of 
genome expression profile with a fine regulation in the frequency utilization of 
RNA processing signals: an early phase, when cleavage at the proximal site 
leading to a higher relative production of mRNA for NS protein, and a late 
phase, when cleavage at the distal site was more frequent leading to higher 
relative abundance of mRNA for VP and 11 kDA proteins. Infectious virus was 
released from cells at day 6-15, but not at day 18. Our results, providing a 
detailed description of B19V replication and expression profile in 
differentiating EPCs, highlight the very tight adaptation of B19V to a specific 
cellular target defined both by its erythroid lineage and its differentiation 
stage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148547
PMCID: PMC4742074
PMID: 26845771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist