---
reference_id: "PMID:15714079"
title: "Late-onset Tay-Sachs disease: phenotypic characterization and genotypic correlations in 21 affected patients."
authors:
- Neudorfer O
- Pastores GM
- Zeng BJ
- Gianutsos J
- Zaroff CM
- Kolodny EH
journal: Genet Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/01.gim.0000154300.84107.75
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Cerebellum/pathology
- Female
- Genotype
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neurologic Examination
- Phenotype
- Physical Examination
- "Psychotic Disorders/etiology, genetics"
- "Tay-Sachs Disease/complications, genetics, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-onset Tay-Sachs disease: phenotypic characterization and genotypic correlations in 21 affected patients.
**Authors:** Neudorfer O, Pastores GM, Zeng BJ, Gianutsos J, Zaroff CM, Kolodny EH
**Journal:** Genet Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.gim.0000154300.84107.75](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.gim.0000154300.84107.75)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2005 Feb;7(2):119-23. doi: 10.1097/01.gim.0000154300.84107.75.

Late-onset Tay-Sachs disease: phenotypic characterization and genotypic
correlations in 21 affected patients.

Neudorfer O(1), Pastores GM, Zeng BJ, Gianutsos J, Zaroff CM, Kolodny EH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to describe the phenotype (and
corresponding genotype) of adult patients with late-onset Tay-Sachs disease, a
clinical variant of the GM2-gangliosidoses.
METHODS: A comprehensive physical examination, including neurological
assessments, was performed to establish the current disease pattern and
severity. In addition, the patients' past medical histories were reviewed. The
patients' alpha-subunit mutations (beta-Hexosaminidase A genotype) were
determined and correlated with their corresponding clinical findings and disease
course.
RESULTS: Twenty-one patients (current mean age: 27.0 years; range: 14-47 years)
were identified. The pedigree revealed a relative with the "classic" infantile
or late-onset form of Tay-Sachs disease in four (out of 18) unrelated families.
The patients were predominantly male (15/21 individuals) and of Ashkenazi Jewish
ancestry (15/18 families). Mean age at onset was 18.1 years; balance problems
and difficulty climbing stairs were the most frequent presenting complaints. In
several cases, the diagnosis was delayed (mean age at diagnosis: 27.0 years).
Analysis of the beta-hex A gene revealed the G269S mutation as the most common
disease allele; found in homozygosity (N = 1) or heterozygosity (N = 18;
including 2 sib pairs). Disease onset (age 36 years) was delayed and progression
relatively slower in the homozygous G269S patient. Two siblings (ages 28 and 31
years), of non-Jewish ancestry, were compound heterozygotes (TATC1278/W474C);
their clinical course is dominated by psychiatric problems. Brain imaging
studies revealed marked cerebellar atrophy in all patients (N = 18) tested,
regardless of disease stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Late-onset Tay-Sachs disease is an infrequent disorder and the
diagnosis is often missed or delayed (by approximately 8 years). Early on, the
majority of patients develop signs of either cerebellar or anterior motor neuron
involvement. Affected individuals may also develop psychotic episodes. In most
cases, the later-onset of expression results from the presence of at least one
allele (usually the G269S mutation), associated with residual enzyme
(beta-hexosaminidase A) activity. A positive family history is a valuable clue,
enabling early diagnosis. Nonspecific cerebellar atrophy on brain imaging is
another important finding. This entity should be considered among patients
presenting with speech, gait, and balance problems, and those with psychiatric
disorders even when focal neurologic deficits may be initially absent. Accurate
diagnosis will permit appropriate genetic counseling regarding disease prognosis
and reproductive risks.

DOI: 10.1097/01.gim.0000154300.84107.75
PMID: 15714079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
