---
reference_id: "PMID:20301509"
title: Isolated Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Balasubramanian R
- Crowley WF Jr
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolated Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Balasubramanian R, Crowley WF Jr

## Content

1. Isolated Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) Deficiency.

Balasubramanian R(1), Crowley WF Jr(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 May 23 [updated 2022 May 12].

Author information:
(1)Instructor, Harvard Medical School, Reproductive Endocrine Unit, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Chief, Reproductive Endocrine 
Unit of the Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Isolated gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
deficiency (IGD) is characterized by inappropriately low serum concentrations of 
the gonadotropins LH (luteinizing hormone) and FSH (follicle-stimulating 
hormone) in the presence of low circulating concentrations of sex steroids. IGD 
is associated with a normal sense of smell (normosmic IGD) in approximately 40% 
of affected individuals and an impaired sense of smell (Kallmann syndrome) in 
approximately 60%. IGD can first become apparent in infancy, adolescence, or 
adulthood. Infant boys with congenital IGD often have micropenis and 
cryptorchidism. Adolescents and adults with IGD have clinical evidence of 
hypogonadism and incomplete sexual maturation on physical examination. Adult 
males with IGD tend to have prepubertal testicular volume (i.e., <4 mL), absence 
of secondary sexual features (e.g., facial and axillary hair growth, deepening 
of the voice), decreased muscle mass, diminished libido, erectile dysfunction, 
and infertility. Adult females have little or no breast development and primary 
amenorrhea. Although skeletal maturation is delayed, the rate of linear growth 
is usually normal except for the absence of a distinct pubertal growth spurt.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: IGD is typically diagnosed in adolescents presenting with 
absent or partial puberty using biochemical testing that reveals low serum 
testosterone or estradiol (hypogonadism) that results from complete or partial 
absence of GnRH-mediated release of LH and FSH (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
[HH]) in the setting of otherwise normal anterior pituitary anatomy and function 
and in the absence of secondary causes of HH. Pathogenic variants in more than 
25 genes account for about half of all IGD; the genetic cause for the remaining 
cases of IGD is unknown.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: To induce and maintain secondary sex 
characteristics, gradually increasing doses of testosterone or human chorionic 
gonadotropin (hCG) injections in males or estrogen and progestin in females; to 
stimulate spermatogenesis or folliculogenesis, either combined gonadotropin 
therapy (hCG and human menopausal gonadotropins [hMG] or recombinant FSH) or 
pulsatile GnRH therapy. If conception fails despite spermatogenesis in a male or 
ovulation induction in a female, in vitro fertilization may be an option. 
Prevention of secondary complications: Optimal calcium and vitamin D intake 
should be encouraged and specific treatment for decreased bone mass as needed. 
Surveillance: For children of both sexes with findings suggestive of IGD, 
monitor at regular intervals after age 11 years: sexual maturation (by Tanner 
staging on physical examination); gonadotropin and sex hormone levels; bone age. 
In individuals with confirmed IGD, monitor at regular intervals: serum sex 
steroid levels (to guide optimal hormone replacement); bone mineral density. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: If the pathogenic variant(s) in a family are 
known, genetic testing of prepubertal at-risk relatives may be indicated to 
clarify their genetic status. Because of variable expressivity, a prepubertal 
child with a known pathogenic variant may progress through puberty in a normal 
or delayed fashion, or not at all; therefore, clinical reevaluation over time is 
necessary.
GENETIC COUNSELING: IGD can be inherited in an X-linked, autosomal dominant, or 
autosomal recessive manner. Almost all IGD-related genes have also been 
associated with indeterminate or oligogenic inheritance. Recurrence risk 
counseling is based on family history and the results of molecular genetic 
testing when available. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives in families with 
X-linked IGD or autosomal recessive IGD is possible if the pathogenic variant(s) 
in the family are known. Prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk is 
possible if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301509