---
reference_id: "PMID:28123028"
title: "C-Terminal Region Truncation of RELN Disrupts an Interaction with VLDLR, Causing Abnormal Development of the Cerebral Cortex and Hippocampus."
authors:
- Ha S
- Tripathi PP
- Mihalas AB
- Hevner RF
- Beier DR
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1826-16.2016
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules, Neuronal/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities, metabolism"
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- "Hippocampus/abnormalities, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Binding/physiology
- "Receptors, LDL/genetics, metabolism"
- Reelin Protein
- "Serine Endopeptidases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C-Terminal Region Truncation of RELN Disrupts an Interaction with VLDLR, Causing Abnormal Development of the Cerebral Cortex and Hippocampus.
**Authors:** Ha S, Tripathi PP, Mihalas AB, Hevner RF, Beier DR
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1826-16.2016](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1826-16.2016)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2017 Jan 25;37(4):960-971. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1826-16.2016.

C-Terminal Region Truncation of RELN Disrupts an Interaction with VLDLR, Causing
Abnormal Development of the Cerebral Cortex and Hippocampus.

Ha S(1)(2), Tripathi PP(3), Mihalas AB(3), Hevner RF(3)(4), Beier DR(5)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine and.
(2)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, and.
(3)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute,
Seattle, Washington 98101, and.
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195.
(5)Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine and
David.Beier@seattlechildrens.org.

We discovered a hypomorphic reelin (Reln) mutant with abnormal cortical
lamination and no cerebellar hypoplasia. This mutant, RelnCTRdel, carries a
chemically induced splice-site mutation that truncates the C-terminal region
(CTR) domain of RELN protein and displays remarkably distinct phenotypes from
reeler The mutant does not have an inverted cortex, but cortical neurons
overmigrate and invade the marginal zone, which are characteristics similar to a
phenotype seen in the cerebral cortex of Vldlrnull mice. The dentate gyrus shows
a novel phenotype: the infrapyramidal blade is absent, while the suprapyramidal
blade is present and laminated. Genetic epistasis analysis showed that
RelnCTRdel/Apoer2null double homozygotes have phenotypes akin to those of reeler
mutants, while RelnCTRdel/Vldlrnull mice do not. Given that the receptor double
knock-out mice resemble reeler mutants, we infer that RelnCTRdel/Apoer2null
double homozygotes have both receptor pathways disrupted. This suggests that
CTR-truncation disrupts an interaction with VLDLR (very low-density lipoprotein
receptor), while the APOER2 signaling pathway remains active, which accounts for
the hypomorphic phenotype in RelnCTRdel mice. A RELN-binding assay confirms that
CTR truncation significantly decreases RELN binding to VLDLR, but not to APOER2.
Together, the in vitro and in vivo results demonstrate that the CTR domain
confers receptor-binding specificity of RELN.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Reelin signaling is important for brain development and
is associated with human type II lissencephaly. Reln mutations in mice and
humans are usually associated with cerebellar hypoplasia. A new Reln mutant with
a truncation of the C-terminal region (CTR) domain shows that Reln mutation can
cause abnormal phenotypes in the cortex and hippocampus without cerebellar
hypoplasia. Genetic analysis suggested that CTR truncation disrupts an
interaction with the RELN receptor VLDLR (very low-density lipoprotein
receptor); this was confirmed by a RELN-binding assay. This result provides a
mechanistic explanation for the hypomorphic phenotype of the CTR-deletion
mutant, and further suggests that Reln mutations may cause more subtle forms of
human brain malformation than classic lissencephalies.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/370960-12$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1826-16.2016
PMCID: PMC5296787
PMID: 28123028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
