---
reference_id: "PMID:15362569"
title: A clinical and genetic study in a large cohort of patients with spinocerebellar ataxia type 6.
authors:
- Takahashi H
- Ishikawa K
- Tsutsumi T
- Fujigasaki H
- Kawata A
- Okiyama R
- Fujita T
- Yoshizawa K
- Yamaguchi S
- Tomiyasu H
- Yoshii F
- Mitani K
- Shimizu N
- Yamazaki M
- Miyamoto T
- Orimo T
- Shoji S
- Kitamura K
- Mizusawa H
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1007/s10038-004-0142-7
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Alleles
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- "DNA/chemistry, genetics"
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeats/genetics
- Vertigo/complications
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A clinical and genetic study in a large cohort of patients with spinocerebellar ataxia type 6.
**Authors:** Takahashi H, Ishikawa K, Tsutsumi T, Fujigasaki H, Kawata A, Okiyama R, Fujita T, Yoshizawa K, Yamaguchi S, Tomiyasu H, Yoshii F, Mitani K, Shimizu N, Yamazaki M, Miyamoto T, Orimo T, Shoji S, Kitamura K, Mizusawa H
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10038-004-0142-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10038-004-0142-7)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2004;49(5):256-64. doi: 10.1007/s10038-004-0142-7.

A clinical and genetic study in a large cohort of patients with spinocerebellar 
ataxia type 6.

Takahashi H(1), Ishikawa K, Tsutsumi T, Fujigasaki H, Kawata A, Okiyama R, 
Fujita T, Yoshizawa K, Yamaguchi S, Tomiyasu H, Yoshii F, Mitani K, Shimizu N, 
Yamazaki M, Miyamoto T, Orimo T, Shoji S, Kitamura K, Mizusawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 
113-8519, Japan.

In order to clarify the clinical and genetic features of SCA6, we 
retrospectively analyzed 140 patients. We observed an inverse correlation 
between the age of onset and the length of the expanded allele, and also between 
the age of onset and the sum of CAG repeats in the normal and the expanded 
alleles. The ages of onset of four homozygous patients correlated better with 
the sum of CAG repeats in both alleles rather than with the expanded allele 
calculated from heterozygous SCA6 subjects. Clinically, unsteadiness of gait was 
the main initial symptom, followed by vertigo and oscillopsia, and cerebellar 
signs were detected in nearly 100% of the patients. In contrast, extracerebellar 
signs were relatively mild and infrequent. The results of neuro-otological 
examination performed in 22 patients suggested the purely cerebellar 
abnormalities of ocular movements in nature. There was a close relationship 
between downbeat positioning nystagmus (DPN) and positioning vertigo, which 
became more common in the later stage. We conclude that total number of CAG 
repeat-units in both alleles is a good parameter for assessment of age of onset 
in SCA6 including homozygous patients. In addition, clinical and 
neuro-otological examinations suggested that SCA6 is a disease with 
predominantly cerebellar dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1007/s10038-004-0142-7
PMID: 15362569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]