---
reference_id: "PMID:15699784"
title: Selective phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors in chronic obstructive lung disease.
authors:
- Soto FJ
- Hanania NA
journal: Curr Opin Pulm Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/01.mcp.0000151715.58124.9e
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selective phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors in chronic obstructive lung disease.
**Authors:** Soto FJ, Hanania NA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pulm Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.mcp.0000151715.58124.9e](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.mcp.0000151715.58124.9e)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2005 Mar;11(2):129-34. doi: 
10.1097/01.mcp.0000151715.58124.9e.

Selective phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors in chronic obstructive lung disease.

Soto FJ(1), Hanania NA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA. fsoto@mail.mcw.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a disease 
state characterized by airflow limitation that is usually progressive. In 
addition, an abnormal inflammatory response of the lungs to noxious particles or 
gases can be seen throughout the airways, parenchyma, and pulmonary vasculature. 
So far, anti-inflammatory medications (eg, inhaled corticosteroids) have failed 
to show a major effect on the decline of lung function in COPD patients. Novel 
anti-inflammatory therapies such as selective phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) 
inhibitors are in clinical development. Their potential role in the management 
of COPD is described in this review.
RECENT FINDINGS: Some of the selective PDE4 inhibitors have demonstrated in 
vitro and in vivo anti-inflammatory activity on cells commonly linked to airway 
inflammation in COPD, such as neutrophils. While these agents seem to offer only 
a modest improvement in lung function compared with other bronchodilators, their 
anti-inflammatory effects appear to provide some substantial benefits in 
reducing exacerbations and improving health-related quality of life.
SUMMARY: Based on the available data, the second generation of selective PDE4 
inhibitors will likely provide additional therapeutic options for the management 
of COPD. These agents may become an important tool in the treatment of this 
disease, since they target three important components of COPD: airway 
obstruction, inflammation, and structural changes.

DOI: 10.1097/01.mcp.0000151715.58124.9e
PMID: 15699784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]