---
reference_id: "PMID:36867021"
title: FZD2 regulates limb development by mediating β-catenin-dependent and -independent Wnt signaling pathways.
authors:
- Zhu X
- Xu M
- Leu NA
- Morrisey EE
- Millar SE
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.049876
keywords:
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital"
- Metacarpal Bones/abnormalities
- Facies
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- beta Catenin/metabolism
- Humans
- Dwarfism
- Urogenital Abnormalities
- Mice
- Humerus/abnormalities
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- Animals
- "Frizzled Receptors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FZD2 regulates limb development by mediating β-catenin-dependent and -independent Wnt signaling pathways.
**Authors:** Zhu X, Xu M, Leu NA, Morrisey EE, Millar SE
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.049876](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.049876)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2023 Mar 1;16(3):dmm049876. doi: 10.1242/dmm.049876. Epub 2023
 Mar 24.

FZD2 regulates limb development by mediating β-catenin-dependent and 
-independent Wnt signaling pathways.

Zhu X(1)(2), Xu M(1)(2), Leu NA(3), Morrisey EE(4), Millar SE(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)Department of Cell, Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029, USA.
(6)Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA.

Human Robinow syndrome (RS) and dominant omodysplasia type 2 (OMOD2), 
characterized by skeletal limb and craniofacial defects, are associated with 
heterozygous mutations in the Wnt receptor FZD2. However, as FZD2 can activate 
both canonical and non-canonical Wnt pathways, its precise functions and 
mechanisms of action in limb development are unclear. To address these 
questions, we generated mice harboring a single-nucleotide insertion in Fzd2 
(Fzd2em1Smill), causing a frameshift mutation in the final 
Dishevelled-interacting domain. Fzd2em1Smill mutant mice had shortened limbs, 
resembling those of RS and OMOD2 patients, indicating that FZD2 mutations are 
causative. Fzd2em1Smill mutant embryos displayed decreased canonical Wnt 
signaling in developing limb mesenchyme and disruption of digit chondrocyte 
elongation and orientation, which is controlled by the β-catenin-independent 
WNT5A/planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway. In line with these observations, we 
found that disruption of FZD function in limb mesenchyme caused formation of 
shortened bone elements and defects in Wnt/β-catenin and WNT5A/PCP signaling. 
These findings indicate that FZD2 controls limb development by mediating both 
canonical and non-canonical Wnt pathways and reveal causality of pathogenic FZD2 
mutations in RS and OMOD2 patients.

© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.049876
PMCID: PMC10073008
PMID: 36867021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.