---
reference_id: "PMID:34019305"
title: "Prevalence of mental disorders in school children and adolescents in China: diagnostic data from detailed clinical assessments of 17,524 individuals."
authors:
- Li F
- Cui Y
- Li Y
- Guo L
- Ke X
- Liu J
- Luo X
- Zheng Y
- Leckman JF
journal: J Child Psychol Psychiatry
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/jcpp.13445
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Attention Deficit and Disruptive Behavior Disorders
- Child
- China/epidemiology
- Comorbidity
- Major Depressive Disorder
- Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mental Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of mental disorders in school children and adolescents in China: diagnostic data from detailed clinical assessments of 17,524 individuals.
**Authors:** Li F, Cui Y, Li Y, Guo L, Ke X, Liu J, Luo X, Zheng Y, Leckman JF
**Journal:** J Child Psychol Psychiatry (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jcpp.13445](https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.13445)

## Content

1. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2022 Jan;63(1):34-46. doi: 10.1111/jcpp.13445.
Epub  2021 May 21.

Prevalence of mental disorders in school children and adolescents in China:
diagnostic data from detailed clinical assessments of 17,524 individuals.

Li F(1), Cui Y(2), Li Y(2), Guo L(3), Ke X(4), Liu J(5), Luo X(6), Zheng Y(7),
Leckman JF(8).

Author information:
(1)Key Lab of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, National Center for
Children's Health, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China.
(4)Nanjing Brain Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(5)Sixth hospital, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(6)Mental Health Institute, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, China.
(7)Beijing Anding Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(8)Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

BACKGROUND: To date, no national-scale psychiatric epidemiological survey for
children and adolescents has been conducted in China. In order to inform
government officials and policymakers and to develop a comprehensive plan for
service providers, there was a clear need to conduct an up-to-date systematic
nationwide psychiatric epidemiological survey.
METHODS: We conducted a two-stage large-scale psychiatric point prevalence
survey. Multistage cluster stratified random sampling was used as the sampling
strategy. Five provinces were selected by comprehensively considering
geographical partition, economic development, and rural/urban factors. In Stage
1, the Child Behavior Checklist was used as the screening tool. In Stage 2,
Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview for Children and Adolescents and a
diagnostic process based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual were used to
make the diagnoses. Sampling weights and poststratification weights were
employed to match the population distributions. Exploratory analyses were also
performed using socio-demographic factors. Prevalence in socio-demographic
factor subgroups and overall were estimated. Rao-Scott adjusted chi-square tests
were utilized to determine if between-group differences were present. Factor
interactions were checked by logistic regression analyses.
RESULTS: A total of 73,992 participants aged 6-16 years of age were selected in
Stage 1. In Stage 2, 17,524 individuals were screened and diagnosed. The
weighted prevalence of any disorder was 17.5% (95% CI: 17.2-18.0). Statistically
significant differences in prevalence of any psychiatric disorder were observed
between sexes [χ2 (1, N = 71,929) = 223.0, p < .001], age groups [χ2 (1,
N = 71,929) = 18.6, p < .001] and developed vs. developing areas [χ2 (1,
N = 71,929) = 2,129.6, p < .001], while no difference was found between rural
and urban areas [χ2 (1, N = 71,929) = 1.4, p = .239]. Male, younger individuals,
children, and adolescents from developed areas had higher prevalence of any
psychiatric disorder. The prevalence of any psychiatric disorder was found to
decrease with the age in the male group, while the female group increased with
the age. Individuals diagnosed with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder,
oppositional defiant disorder, a tic disorder, conduct disorder, and major
depression disorder had the highest rates of comorbidity.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of any psychiatric disorder we found is the highest
ever reported in China. These results urgently need to be addressed by public
mental health service providers and policymakers in order to provide access to
the necessary treatments and to reduce the long-term negative impact of these
conditions on families and the society as a whole.

© 2021 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpp.13445
PMID: 34019305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
