---
reference_id: "PMID:17691946"
title: Viral infection--a cure for type 1 diabetes?
authors:
- Hintermann E
- Christen U
journal: Curr Med Chem
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2174/092986707781368397
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Viral infection--a cure for type 1 diabetes?
**Authors:** Hintermann E, Christen U
**Journal:** Curr Med Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2174/092986707781368397](https://doi.org/10.2174/092986707781368397)

## Content

1. Curr Med Chem. 2007;14(19):2048-52. doi: 10.2174/092986707781368397.

Viral infection--a cure for type 1 diabetes?

Hintermann E(1), Christen U.

Author information:
(1)Pharmazentrum Frankfurt / ZAFES, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt 
am Main, Germany.

Autoimmune diseases are thought to arise as a detrimental combination of genetic 
predisposition and environmental factors. Because of their potential for direct 
cellular damage and causing extensive inflammation, viruses are one of the major 
candidates for triggering autoimmunity. Although there is epidemiological 
evidence, direct proof for viruses as causative agents for autoimmune disease is 
hard to get since most viruses have been eliminated from the system by the time 
of diagnosis. However, evidence from various animal models suggests that viruses 
can indeed initiate or accelerate autoimmune diseases, such as type 1 diabetes 
or experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. In contrast, viruses have been also 
demonstrated to abrogate autoimmune disease in animal models. These observations 
might offer one explanation why increased frequencies of allergies and 
autoimmune diseases parallel with higher hygienic standards. This review 
reflects on the epidemiological evidence for the association of viruses with 
autoimmune diseases, the experimental evidence for viruses to abrogate an 
ongoing autoimmune destruction and evaluates the possibility for a therapeutic 
application.

DOI: 10.2174/092986707781368397
PMID: 17691946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]