---
reference_id: "PMID:8422677"
title: DNA deletion associated with hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies.
authors:
- Chance PF
- Alderson MK
- Leppig KA
- Lensch MW
- Matsunami N
- Smith B
- Swanson PD
- Odelberg SJ
- Disteche CM
- Bird TD
journal: Cell
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90058-x
keywords:
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Demyelinating Diseases/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- Myelin Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA deletion associated with hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies.
**Authors:** Chance PF, Alderson MK, Leppig KA, Lensch MW, Matsunami N, Smith B, Swanson PD, Odelberg SJ, Disteche CM, Bird TD
**Journal:** Cell (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(93)90058-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(93)90058-x)

## Content

1. Cell. 1993 Jan 15;72(1):143-51. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90058-x.

DNA deletion associated with hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure
palsies.

Chance PF(1), Alderson MK, Leppig KA, Lensch MW, Matsunami N, Smith B, Swanson
PD, Odelberg SJ, Disteche CM, Bird TD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah Medical Center, Salt Lake City
84132.

Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) is an autosomal
dominant disorder that causes episodes of focal demyelinating neuropathy
following minor trauma to peripheral nerves. We assign the HNPP locus to
chromosome 17p11.2 and demonstrate the presence of a large interstitial deletion
associated with this disorder in three unrelated pedigrees. De novo deletion is
documented in one pedigree. The deleted region appears uniform in all pedigrees
and includes the gene for peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP-22), suggesting that
underexpression of PMP-22 may cause HNPP. The deletion in HNPP spans
approximately 1.5 Mb and includes all markers that are known to map within the
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 1A (CMT1A) duplication. Furthermore, the
breakpoints in HNPP and CMT1A map to the same intervals in 17p11.2, suggesting
that these genetic disorders may be the result of reciprocal products of unequal
crossover.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90058-x
PMID: 8422677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
