---
reference_id: "PMID:35608843"
title: "Different Phenotypes Represent Advancing Stages of ABCA4-Associated Retinopathy: A Longitudinal Study of 212 Chinese Families From a Tertiary Center."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Sun W
- Zhou J
- Li X
- Jiang Y
- Li S
- Jia X
- Xiao X
- Ouyang J
- Wang Y
- Zhou L
- Long Y
- Liu M
- Li Y
- Yi Z
- Wang P
- Zhang Q
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.63.5.28
keywords:
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Child
- China/epidemiology
- Cone-Rod Dystrophies/genetics
- Disease Progression
- Electroretinography
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Stargardt Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Different Phenotypes Represent Advancing Stages of ABCA4-Associated Retinopathy: A Longitudinal Study of 212 Chinese Families From a Tertiary Center.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Sun W, Zhou J, Li X, Jiang Y, Li S, Jia X, Xiao X, Ouyang J, Wang Y, Zhou L, Long Y, Liu M, Li Y, Yi Z, Wang P, Zhang Q
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.63.5.28](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.63.5.28)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2022 May 2;63(5):28. doi: 10.1167/iovs.63.5.28.

Different Phenotypes Represent Advancing Stages of ABCA4-Associated Retinopathy: 
A Longitudinal Study of 212 Chinese Families From a Tertiary Center.

Wang Y(1), Sun W(1), Zhou J(1), Li X(1), Jiang Y(1), Li S(1), Jia X(1), Xiao 
X(1), Ouyang J(1), Wang Y(1), Zhou L(1), Long Y(1), Liu M(1), Li Y(1), Yi Z(1), 
Wang P(1), Zhang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology and 
Visual Science, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the nature and association of different phenotypes 
associated with ABCA4 mutations in Chinese.
METHODS: All patients were recruited from our pediatric and genetic eye clinic. 
Detailed ocular phenotypes were characterized. The disease course was evaluated 
by long-term follow-up observation, with a focus on fundus changes. Cox 
regression was used to identify the factors associated with disease progression.
RESULTS: A systematic review of genetic and clinical data for 228 patients and 
follow-up data for 42 patients indicated specific features in patients with two 
ABCA4 variants. Of 185 patients with available fundus images, 107 (57.8%) showed 
focal lesions restricted to the central macula without flecks. Among these 107 
patients, 30 patients (28.0%) initially presented with relatively preserved 
visual acuity and inconspicuous performance on routine fundus screening. A 
pigmentary change in the posterior pole was observed in 22 of 185 patients 
(11.9%), and this change mimicked retinitis pigmentosa in 10 cases (45.5%). 
Follow-up visits and sibling comparisons demonstrated disease progression from 
cone-rod dystrophy, Stargardt disease, to retinitis pigmentosa. An earlier age 
of onset was associated with a more rapid decrease in visual acuity (P = 0.03). 
Patients with two truncation variants had an earlier age of onset.
CONCLUSION: Phenotypic variation in ABCA4-associated retinopathy may represent 
sequential changes in a single disease: early-stage Stargardt disease may 
resemble cone-rod dystrophy, whereas the presence of diffuse pigmentation in the 
late stage may mimic retinitis pigmentosa. Recognizing the natural progression 
of fundus changes, especially those visualized by wide-field fundus 
autofluorescence, is valuable for diagnostics and therapeutic decision-making.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.63.5.28
PMCID: PMC9150840
PMID: 35608843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Y. Wang, None; W. Sun, None; J. 
Zhou, None; X. Li, None; Y. Jiang, None; S. Li, None; X. Jia, None; X. Xiao, 
None; J. Ouyang, None; Y. Wang, None; L. Zhou, None; Y. Long, None; M. Liu, 
None; Y. Li, None; Z. Yi, None; P. Wang, None; Q. Zhang, None