---
reference_id: "PMID:5300876"
title: Studies on cholera carriers.
authors:
- Dizon JJ
- Fukumi H
- Barua D
- Valera J
- Jayme F
- Gomez F
- Yamamoto SI
- Wake A
- Gomez CZ
- Takahira Y
- Paraan A
- Rolda L
- Alvero M
- Abou-Gareeb AH
- Kobari K
- Azurin JC
journal: Bull World Health Organ
year: '1967'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Studies on cholera carriers.
**Authors:** Dizon JJ, Fukumi H, Barua D, Valera J, Jayme F, Gomez F, Yamamoto SI, Wake A, Gomez CZ, Takahira Y, Paraan A, Rolda L, Alvero M, Abou-Gareeb AH, Kobari K, Azurin JC
**Journal:** Bull World Health Organ (1967)

## Content

1. Bull World Health Organ. 1967;37(5):737-43.

Studies on cholera carriers.

Dizon JJ, Fukumi H, Barua D, Valera J, Jayme F, Gomez F, Yamamoto SI, Wake A, 
Gomez CZ, Takahira Y, Paraan A, Rolda L, Alvero M, Abou-Gareeb AH, Kobari K, 
Azurin JC.

Cholera carrier studies in the Philippines in 1964-66 showed a prevalence rate 
of 21.7% among household contacts of cholera patients, and 8.4% in occupants of 
houses next door to one where a cholera patient lived, as opposed to 0.34% in 
the general population. The duration of the carrier state among 19 household 
carriers isolated for examination varied from 5 to 19 days. The vibrio 
concentration in the stool of contact carriers was 10(2)-15(5) per gram, as 
compared with 10(6)-19(9) per ml of rice-water stool in cholera cases.The 
agglutinin titre increased with time for carriers, as it does for patients. It 
declined to a very low level 8-12 weeks after recovery, with the exception of 
one proved long-term carrier.The strains isolated from carriers were identical 
in all respects, including virulence in infant rabbits, with strains isolated 
from patients-except that 3 carrier strains were rough.

PMCID: PMC2554918
PMID: 5300876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]