---
reference_id: "PMID:28411601"
title: Kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of GaN homoepitaxy on c- and m-plane surfaces.
authors:
- Xu D
- Zapol P
- Stephenson GB
- Thompson C
journal: J Chem Phys
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1063/1.4979843
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of GaN homoepitaxy on c- and m-plane surfaces.
**Authors:** Xu D, Zapol P, Stephenson GB, Thompson C
**Journal:** J Chem Phys (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1063/1.4979843](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4979843)

## Content

1. J Chem Phys. 2017 Apr 14;146(14):144702. doi: 10.1063/1.4979843.

Kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of GaN homoepitaxy on c- and m-plane surfaces.

Xu D(1), Zapol P(1), Stephenson GB(1), Thompson C(2).

Author information:
(1)Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 
60439, USA.
(2)Department of Physics, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois 60115, 
USA.

The surface orientation can have profound effects on the atomic-scale processes 
of crystal growth and is essential to such technologies as GaN-based 
light-emitting diodes and high-power electronics. We investigate the dependence 
of homoepitaxial growth mechanisms on the surface orientation of a hexagonal 
crystal using kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. To model GaN metal-organic vapor 
phase epitaxy, in which N species are supplied in excess, only Ga atoms on a 
hexagonal close-packed (HCP) lattice are considered. The results are thus 
potentially applicable to any HCP material. Growth behaviors on c-plane (0001) 
and m-plane (011¯0) surfaces are compared. We present a reciprocal space 
analysis of the surface morphology, which allows extraction of growth mode 
boundaries and direct comparison with surface X-ray diffraction experiments. For 
each orientation, we map the boundaries between 3-dimensional, layer-by-layer, 
and step flow growth modes as a function of temperature and growth rate. Two 
models for surface diffusion are used, which produce different effective 
Ehrlich-Schwoebel step-edge barriers and different adatom diffusion anisotropies 
on m-plane surfaces. Simulation results in agreement with observed GaN island 
morphologies and growth mode boundaries are obtained. These indicate that 
anisotropy of step edge energy, rather than adatom diffusion, is responsible for 
the elongated islands observed on m-plane surfaces. Island nucleation spacing 
obeys a power-law dependence on growth rate, with exponents of -0.24 and -0.29 
for the m- and c-plane, respectively.

DOI: 10.1063/1.4979843
PMID: 28411601