---
reference_id: "PMID:20152770"
title: "Ewing's sarcoma."
authors:
- Balamuth NJ
- Womer RB
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70286-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/diagnosis, drug therapy, secondary, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ewing's sarcoma.
**Authors:** Balamuth NJ, Womer RB
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70286-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70286-4)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2010 Feb;11(2):184-92. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70286-4.

Ewing's sarcoma.

Balamuth NJ(1), Womer RB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

Progress in the treatment of Ewing's sarcoma, the second most common bone tumour
in children and adolescents, has improved survival from about 10% in the period
before chemotherapy was introduced to about 75% today for patients with
localised tumours. However, patients with metastases still fare badly, and the
therapy carries short-term and long-term toxicities. Multidisciplinary care is
indispensable for these patients. Molecular techniques and new imaging
modalities are affecting the diagnosis and classification of patients with
Ewing's sarcoma. Cooperative group studies have led to chemotherapy regimens
using the same drugs (vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide,
and etoposide), although the exact regimens differ in Europe and North America.
The EWS-ETS family of gene fusions and their downstream effects in Ewing's
sarcomas provide opportunities for new approaches to treatment. These include
the inhibition of the fusion gene or its protein product, and pathways related
to IGF1 and mTOR. Inhibition of tyrosine kinases, exploitation of non-apoptotic
cell death, and interference with angiogenesis are promising new approaches.
With many new approaches and relatively few patients, it will be challenging to
integrate new and established treatments through clinical trials.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70286-4
PMID: 20152770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
