---
reference_id: PMID:19483677
title: A histone H3 lysine 36 trimethyltransferase links Nkx2-5 to Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.
authors:
- Nimura K
- Ura K
- Shiratori H
- Ikawa M
- Okabe M
- Schwartz RJ
- Kaneda Y
journal: Nature
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/nature08086
keywords:
- Animals
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Histones/metabolism
- Homeobox Protein Nkx-2.5
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Lysine/metabolism
- Methylation
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Nanog Homeobox Protein
- Protein Binding
- Repressor Proteins/metabolism
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A histone H3 lysine 36 trimethyltransferase links Nkx2-5 to Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.
**Authors:** Nimura K, Ura K, Shiratori H, Ikawa M, Okabe M, Schwartz RJ, Kaneda Y
**Journal:** Nature (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature08086](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08086)

## Content

1. Nature. 2009 Jul 9;460(7252):287-91. doi: 10.1038/nature08086. Epub 2009 May
31.

A histone H3 lysine 36 trimethyltransferase links Nkx2-5 to Wolf-Hirschhorn 
syndrome.

Nimura K(1), Ura K, Shiratori H, Ikawa M, Okabe M, Schwartz RJ, Kaneda Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gene Therapy Science, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Diverse histone modifications are catalysed and recognized by various specific 
proteins, establishing unique modification patterns that act as transcription 
signals. In particular, histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 36 (H3K36me3) is 
associated with actively transcribed regions and has been proposed to provide 
landmarks for continuing transcription; however, the control mechanisms and 
functions of H3K36me3 in higher eukaryotes are unknown. Here we show that the 
H3K36me3-specific histone methyltransferase (HMTase) Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome 
candidate 1 (WHSC1, also known as NSD2 or MMSET) functions in transcriptional 
regulation together with developmental transcription factors whose defects 
overlap with the human disease Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS). We found that 
mouse Whsc1, one of five putative Set2 homologues, governed H3K36me3 along 
euchromatin by associating with the cell-type-specific transcription factors 
Sall1, Sall4 and Nanog in embryonic stem cells, and Nkx2-5 in embryonic hearts, 
regulating the expression of their target genes. Whsc1-deficient mice showed 
growth retardation and various WHS-like midline defects, including congenital 
cardiovascular anomalies. The effects of Whsc1 haploinsufficiency were increased 
in Nkx2-5 heterozygous mutant hearts, indicating their functional link. We 
propose that WHSC1 functions together with developmental transcription factors 
to prevent the inappropriate transcription that can lead to various 
pathophysiologies.

DOI: 10.1038/nature08086
PMID: 19483677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]