---
reference_id: "PMID:29968072"
title: "Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase (PARP) and PARP Inhibitors: Mechanisms of Action and Role in Cardiovascular Disorders."
authors:
- Henning RJ
- Bourgeois M
- Harbison RD
journal: Cardiovasc Toxicol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12012-018-9462-2
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cardiovascular Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/drug therapy, enzymology, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Cardiovascular System/drug effects, enzymology, pathology, physiopathology"
- DNA Damage
- DNA Repair/drug effects
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Energy Metabolism/drug effects
- Humans
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/drug effects, enzymology, pathology"
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
- "Poly (ADP-Ribose) Polymerase-1/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase (PARP) and PARP Inhibitors: Mechanisms of Action and Role in Cardiovascular Disorders.
**Authors:** Henning RJ, Bourgeois M, Harbison RD
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Toxicol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12012-018-9462-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12012-018-9462-2)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2018 Dec;18(6):493-506. doi: 10.1007/s12012-018-9462-2.

Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase (PARP) and PARP Inhibitors: Mechanisms of Action and
Role in Cardiovascular Disorders.

Henning RJ(1), Bourgeois M(2), Harbison RD(2).

Author information:
(1)James A. Haley Veteran's Hospital and The University of South Florida College
of Public Health, 13000 Bruce B. Downs Blvd, Tampa, FL, 90012, USA.
roberthenningmd@gmail.com.
(2)James A. Haley Veteran's Hospital and The University of South Florida College
of Public Health, 13000 Bruce B. Downs Blvd, Tampa, FL, 90012, USA.

Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is an immediate cellular repair response to DNA damage
and is catalyzed primarily by poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase-1 (PARP1), which is the
most abundant of the 18 different PARP isoforms and accounts for more than 90%
of the catalytic activity of PARP in the cell nucleus. Upon detection of a DNA
strand break, PARP1 binds to the DNA, cleaves nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
between nicotinamide and ribose and then modifies the DNA nuclear acceptor
proteins by formation of a bond between the protein and the ADP-ribose residue.
This generates ribosyl-ribosyl linkages that act as a signal for other
DNA-repairing enzymes and DNA base repair. Extensive DNA breakage in cells
results in excessive activation of PARP with resultant depletion of the cellular
stores of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) which slows the rate of
glycolysis, mitochondrial electron transport, and ultimately ATP formation in
these cells. This paper focuses on PARP in DNA repair in atherosclerosis, acute
myocardial infarction/reperfusion injury, and congestive heart failure and the
role of PARP inhibitors in combating the effects of excessive PARP activation in
these diseases. Free oxygen radicals and nitrogen radicals in arteries
contribute to disruption of the vascular endothelial glycocalyx, which increase
the permeability of the endothelium to inflammatory cells and also low-density
lipoproteins and the accumulation of lipid in the vascular intima. Mild
inflammation and DNA damage within vascular cells promote PARP1 activation and
DNA repair. Moderate DNA damage induces caspase-dependent PARP cleavage and
vascular cell apoptosis. Severe DNA damage due to vascular inflammation causes
excessive activation of PARP1. This causes endothelial cell depletion of NAD+
and ATP, downregulation of atheroprotective SIRT1, necrotic cell death, and
ultimately atherosclerotic plaque disruption. Inhibition of PARP decreases
vascular endothelial cell adhesion P-selectin and ICAM-1 molecules, inflammatory
cells, pro-death caspase-3, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation and
upregulates prosurvival extracellular signal-regulated kinases and AKT, which
decrease vascular cell apoptosis and necrosis and limit atherosclerosis and
plaque disruption. In myocardial infarction with coronary occlusion then
reperfusion, which occurs with coronary angioplasty or thrombolytic therapy,
reperfusion injury occurs in as many as 31% of patients and is caused by
inflammatory cells, free oxygen and nitrogen radicals, the rapid transcriptional
activation of inflammatory cytokines, and the activation of PARP1. Inhibition of
PARP attenuates neutrophil infiltration and inflammatory cytokine expression in
the reperfused myocardium and preserves myocardial NAD+ and ATP. In addition,
PARP inhibition increases the activation of myocyte survival enzymes protein
kinase B (Akt) and protein kinase C epsilon (PKCε), and decreases the activity
of myocardial ventricular remodeling enzymes PKCα/β, PKCζ/λ, and PKCδ. As a
consequence, cardiomyocyte and vascular endothelial cell necrosis is decreased
and myocardial contractility is preserved. In heart failure and circulatory
shock in animal models, PARP inhibition significantly attenuates decreases in
left ventricular systolic pressure, ventricular contractility and relaxation,
stroke volume, and increases survival by limiting or preventing upregulation of
adhesion molecules, proinflammatory cytokines, myocardial mononuclear cell
infiltration, and PKCα/β and PKC λ/ζ. In this manner, PARP inhibition partially
restores the myocardial concentrations of NAD+, limits ventricular remodeling
and fibrosis, and prevents significant decreases in myocardial contractility.
Based primarily on investigations in preclinical models of atherosclerosis,
myocardial infarction, and heart failure, PARP inhibition appears to be
beneficial in limiting or inhibiting cardiovascular dysfunction. These studies
indicate that investigations of acute and chronic PARP inhibition are warranted
in patients with atherosclerotic coronary artery disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s12012-018-9462-2
PMID: 29968072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
