---
reference_id: "PMID:22243966"
title: "Mutations in C12orf62, a factor that couples COX I synthesis with cytochrome c oxidase assembly, cause fatal neonatal lactic acidosis."
authors:
- Weraarpachai W
- Sasarman F
- Nishimura T
- Antonicka H
- Auré K
- Rötig A
- Lombès A
- Shoubridge EA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.027
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/genetics"
- Cyclooxygenase 1/biosynthesis
- Electron Transport Complex IV/biosynthesis
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Mitochondria/enzymology, genetics"
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in C12orf62, a factor that couples COX I synthesis with cytochrome c oxidase assembly, cause fatal neonatal lactic acidosis.
**Authors:** Weraarpachai W, Sasarman F, Nishimura T, Antonicka H, Auré K, Rötig A, Lombès A, Shoubridge EA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.027)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jan 13;90(1):142-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.027.

Mutations in C12orf62, a factor that couples COX I synthesis with cytochrome c 
oxidase assembly, cause fatal neonatal lactic acidosis.

Weraarpachai W(1), Sasarman F, Nishimura T, Antonicka H, Auré K, Rötig A, Lombès 
A, Shoubridge EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

We investigated a family in which the index subject presented with severe 
congenital lactic acidosis and dysmorphic features associated with a cytochrome 
c oxidase (COX)-assembly defect and a specific decrease in the synthesis of COX 
I, the subunit that nucleates COX assembly. Using a combination of 
microcell-mediated chromosome transfer, homozygosity mapping, and transcript 
profiling, we mapped the gene defect to chromosome 12 and identified a 
homozygous missense mutation (c.88G>A) in C12orf62. C12orf62 was not detectable 
by immunoblot analysis in subject fibroblasts, and retroviral expression of the 
wild-type C12orf62 cDNA rescued the biochemical phenotype. Furthermore, 
siRNA-mediated knockdown of C12orf 62 recapitulated the biochemical defect in 
control cells and exacerbated it in subject cells. C12orf62 is apparently 
restricted to the vertebrate lineage. It codes for a very small (6 kDa), 
uncharacterized, single-transmembrane protein that localizes to mitochondria and 
elutes in a complex of ∼110 kDa by gel filtration. COX I, II, and IV 
coimmunoprecipated with an epitope-tagged version of C12orf62, and 2D 
blue-native-polyacrylamide-gel-electrophoresis analysis of newly synthesized 
mitochondrial COX subunits in subject fibroblasts showed that COX assembly was 
impaired and that the nascent enzyme complex was unstable. We conclude that 
C12orf62 is required for coordination of the early steps of COX assembly with 
the synthesis of COX I.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.027
PMCID: PMC3257963
PMID: 22243966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]