---
reference_id: "PMID:35130995"
title: Vibrio cholerae was found in cultured bullfrog.
authors:
- Yang Y
- Zhu X
- Zhang H
- Chen Y
- Liu Y
- Song Y
- Ai X
journal: Epidemiol Infect
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1017/S0950268822000164
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vibrio cholerae was found in cultured bullfrog.
**Authors:** Yang Y, Zhu X, Zhang H, Chen Y, Liu Y, Song Y, Ai X
**Journal:** Epidemiol Infect (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0950268822000164](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268822000164)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Infect. 2022 Feb 8;150:e30. doi: 10.1017/S0950268822000164.

Vibrio cholerae was found in cultured bullfrog.

Yang Y(1)(2), Zhu X(1), Zhang H(3), Chen Y(4)(5), Liu Y(1)(2), Song Y(2), Ai 
X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Yangtze River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery 
Sciences, Wuhan430223, China.
(2)The Key Laboratory for Quality and Safety Control of Aquatic Products, 
Ministry of Agriculture, Beijing100037, China.
(3)Jiangxi Fisheries Research Institute, Nanchang, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, 
Wuhan430227, China.
(5)Hubei Clinical Center & Key Lab of Intestinal & Colorectal Diseases, 
Wuhan430227, China.

Bullfrog is one of the most important economic aquatic animals in China that is 
widely cultured in southern China and is a key breed recommended as an industry 
of poverty alleviation in China. During recent years, a fatal bacterial disease 
has often been found in cultured bullfrogs. The clinical manifestations of the 
diseased bullfrogs were severe intestinal inflammation and an anal prolapse. A 
bacterial pathogen was isolated from the diseased bullfrog intestines. The 
bacterium was identified as Vibrio cholerae using morphological, biochemical and 
16S rRNA phylogenetic analysis. In this study, V. cholerae was isolated and 
identified in diseased bullfrogs for the first time, providing a basis for the 
diagnosis and control of the disease. Therefore, attention should be paid to the 
modes of transmission of V. cholerae from bullfrog and formulate reasonable 
safety measures.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268822000164
PMCID: PMC8888276
PMID: 35130995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.