---
reference_id: "PMID:24865460"
title: mTOR pathway is activated by PKA in adrenocortical cells and participates in vivo to apoptosis resistance in primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD).
authors:
- de Joussineau C
- Sahut-Barnola I
- Tissier F
- Dumontet T
- Drelon C
- Batisse-Lignier M
- Tauveron I
- Pointud JC
- Lefrançois-Martinez AM
- Stratakis CA
- Bertherat J
- Val P
- Martinez A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu265
keywords:
- "Adrenal Cortex Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Animals
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinase RIalpha Subunit/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Humans
- Male
- Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 1
- Mice
- Multiprotein Complexes/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Sirolimus/pharmacology
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- bcl-Associated Death Protein/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# mTOR pathway is activated by PKA in adrenocortical cells and participates in vivo to apoptosis resistance in primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD).
**Authors:** de Joussineau C, Sahut-Barnola I, Tissier F, Dumontet T, Drelon C, Batisse-Lignier M, Tauveron I, Pointud JC, Lefrançois-Martinez AM, Stratakis CA, Bertherat J, Val P, Martinez A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu265](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu265)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Oct 15;23(20):5418-28. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu265. Epub 2014 
May 27.

mTOR pathway is activated by PKA in adrenocortical cells and participates in 
vivo to apoptosis resistance in primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease 
(PPNAD).

de Joussineau C(1), Sahut-Barnola I(1), Tissier F(2), Dumontet T(1), Drelon 
C(1), Batisse-Lignier M(3), Tauveron I(3), Pointud JC(1), Lefrançois-Martinez 
AM(1), Stratakis CA(4), Bertherat J(5), Val P(1), Martinez A(6).

Author information:
(1)Génétique Reproduction et Développement (GReD), Clermont Université, 
Université Blaise Pascal, Clermont-Ferrand Cedex 1 63012, France, CNRS, UMR 
6293, GReD, INSERM, U1103, Aubière Cedex 63171, France, GReD, INSERM, U1103, 
Aubière Cedex 63171, France.
(2)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, 
Paris 75014, France, Department of Endocrinology and Department of Pathology, 
Reference Center for Rare Adrenal Diseases, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Paris 75014, France, Department of Pathology, Hôpital 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75013 Paris, France.
(3)Génétique Reproduction et Développement (GReD), Clermont Université, 
Université Blaise Pascal, Clermont-Ferrand Cedex 1 63012, France, CNRS, UMR 
6293, GReD, INSERM, U1103, Aubière Cedex 63171, France, GReD, INSERM, U1103, 
Aubière Cedex 63171, France, Service d'Endocrinologie, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand 63003, France and.
(4)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, PDEGEN, Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(5)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, 
Paris 75014, France, Department of Endocrinology and Department of Pathology, 
Reference Center for Rare Adrenal Diseases, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Paris 75014, France.
(6)Génétique Reproduction et Développement (GReD), Clermont Université, 
Université Blaise Pascal, Clermont-Ferrand Cedex 1 63012, France, CNRS, UMR 
6293, GReD, INSERM, U1103, Aubière Cedex 63171, France, GReD, INSERM, U1103, 
Aubière Cedex 63171, France, antoine.martinez@univ-bpclermont.fr.

Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD) is associated with 
inactivating mutations of the PRKAR1A tumor suppressor gene that encodes the 
regulatory subunit R1α of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). In human and 
mouse adrenocortical cells, these mutations lead to increased PKA activity, 
which results in increased resistance to apoptosis that contributes to the 
tumorigenic process. We used in vitro and in vivo models to investigate the 
possibility of a crosstalk between PKA and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) 
pathways in adrenocortical cells and its possible involvement in apoptosis 
resistance. Impact of PKA signaling on activation of the mTOR pathway and 
apoptosis was measured in a mouse model of PPNAD (AdKO mice), in human and mouse 
adrenocortical cell lines in response to pharmacological inhibitors and in PPNAD 
tissues by immunohistochemistry. AdKO mice showed increased mTOR complex 1 
(mTORC1) pathway activity. Inhibition of mTORC1 by rapamycin restored 
sensitivity of adrenocortical cells to apoptosis in AdKO but not in wild-type 
mice. In both cell lines and mouse adrenals, rapid phosphorylation of mTORC1 
targets including BAD proapoptotic protein was observed in response to PKA 
activation. Accordingly, BAD hyperphosphorylation, which inhibits its 
proapoptotic activity, was increased in both AdKO mouse adrenals and human PPNAD 
tissues. In conclusion, mTORC1 pathway is activated by PKA signaling in human 
and mouse adrenocortical cells, leading to increased cell survival, which is 
correlated with BAD hyperphosphorylation. These alterations could be causative 
of tumor formation.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu265
PMCID: PMC4184389
PMID: 24865460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]