---
reference_id: "PMID:19415691"
title: Linear clinical progression, independent of age of onset, in Niemann-Pick disease, type C.
authors:
- Yanjanin NM
- Vélez JI
- Gropman A
- King K
- Bianconi SE
- Conley SK
- Brewer CC
- Solomon B
- Pavan WJ
- Arcos-Burgos M
- Patterson MC
- Porter FD
journal: Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30969
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Linear clinical progression, independent of age of onset, in Niemann-Pick disease, type C.
**Authors:** Yanjanin NM, Vélez JI, Gropman A, King K, Bianconi SE, Conley SK, Brewer CC, Solomon B, Pavan WJ, Arcos-Burgos M, Patterson MC, Porter FD
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.b.30969](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.30969)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Jan 5;153B(1):132-40. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30969.

Linear clinical progression, independent of age of onset, in Niemann-Pick 
disease, type C.

Yanjanin NM(1), Vélez JI, Gropman A, King K, Bianconi SE, Conley SK, Brewer CC, 
Solomon B, Pavan WJ, Arcos-Burgos M, Patterson MC, Porter FD.

Author information:
(1)Program on Developmental Endocrinology and Genetics, NICHD, NIH, DHHS, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Niemann-Pick disease, type C is a neurodegenerative, lysosomal storage disorder 
with a broad clinical spectrum and a variable age of onset. The absence of a 
universally accepted clinical outcome measure is an impediment to the design of 
a therapeutic trial for NPC. Thus, we developed a clinical severity scale to 
characterize and quantify disease progression. Clinical signs and symptoms in 
nine major (ambulation, cognition, eye movement, fine motor, hearing, memory, 
seizures, speech, and swallowing) and eight minor (auditory brainstem response, 
behavior, gelastic cataplexy, hyperreflexia, incontinence, narcolepsy, 
psychiatric, and respiratory problems) domains were scored. Data were collected 
from 18 current NPC patients and were extracted from records of 19 patients. 
Both patient cohorts showed a linear increase in severity scores over time. 
Cross-sectional evaluation of current patients showed a linear increase in the 
severity score. Longitudinal chart review of historical data demonstrated that 
although age of onset varied significantly, the rate of progression appeared 
linear, independent of age of onset, and similar in all patients. Combining the 
data from both cohorts, disease progression could be modeled by the following 
equation: ŝ(t0+x) = ŝ(t0) + 1.87x; where ŝ(t0) is the initial score and ŝ(t0+x) 
is the predicted future score after x years. Our observation that disease 
progression is similar across patients and independent of age of onset is 
consistent with a biphasic pathological model for NPC. This scale may prove 
useful in the characterization of potential biomarkers, and as an outcome 
measure to monitor disease progression in NPC patients.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30969
PMCID: PMC2798912
PMID: 19415691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]