---
reference_id: "PMID:19709100"
title: "Polyphenon E: a new treatment for external anogenital warts."
authors:
- Tatti S
- Stockfleth E
- Beutner KR
- Tawfik H
- Elsasser U
- Weyrauch P
- Mescheder A
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09375.x
keywords:
- "Administration, Topical"
- Adult
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Anus Diseases/drug therapy
- "Catechin/adverse effects, analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Condylomata Acuminata/drug therapy
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- "Genital Diseases, Female/drug therapy"
- "Genital Diseases, Male/drug therapy"
- Humans
- Male
- "Plant Preparations/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Warts/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polyphenon E: a new treatment for external anogenital warts.
**Authors:** Tatti S, Stockfleth E, Beutner KR, Tawfik H, Elsasser U, Weyrauch P, Mescheder A
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09375.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09375.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2010 Jan;162(1):176-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09375.x. 
Epub 2009 Jul 27.

Polyphenon E: a new treatment for external anogenital warts.

Tatti S(1), Stockfleth E, Beutner KR, Tawfik H, Elsasser U, Weyrauch P, 
Mescheder A.

Author information:
(1)The Hospital Clinicas, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Av. Cordoba 2351, Buenos 
Aires 1120, Argentina.

Background External genital warts (EGWs, condylomata acuminata) are a common, 
highly contagious disease caused by human papillomavirus (HPV), predominantly 
HPV 6 and HPV 11. Green tea catechins have been identified for their 
immunostimulatory, antiproliferative and antitumour properties. Two phase III 
trials evaluated treatment of EGWs with ointment containing a mixture of green 
tea catechins (Polyphenon E), U.S. adopted name: sinecatechins). Objectives To 
obtain additional data on the efficacy and safety of Polyphenon E ointment in 
the treatment of EGWs from two randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled 
trials. Methods Men and women aged > or = 18 years (n = 1005), with two to 30 
EGWs (12-600 mm(2) total area) applied vehicle (G(Veh); n = 207), Polyphenon E 
ointment 10% (G(10%); n = 401) or Polyphenon E ointment 15% (G(15%); n = 397) 
three times daily until complete clearance of all EGWs (baseline + new EGWs) or 
for a maximum of 16 weeks. Results A total of 1004 patients were evaluable for 
safety and 986 for efficacy; 838 completed treatment after 16 weeks. Complete 
clearance of all EGWs was obtained in 53.6% (G(10%)) and 54.9% (G(15%)) of 
patients with Polyphenon E vs. vehicle (35.4%) (P < 0.001). Statistically 
significant differences in clearance rates appeared after 6 weeks of active 
treatment. Odds ratios vs. G(Veh) for G(10%) [2.10; 95% confidence interval (CI) 
1.49-2.98] and G(15%) (2.22; 95% CI 1.57-3.14) indicated about a twofold higher 
chance of complete clearance under active treatment. Time to complete clearance 
was shorter with active treatment (hazard ratios 1.57 and 1.87, respectively, 
for G(10%) and G(15%) vs. G(Veh) groups; P < 0.001). Recurrence rates during 
follow-up were low and similar across groups: 5.8%, 6.8% and 6.5% (G(Veh), 
G(10%) and G(15%) groups, respectively). Adverse events were evenly distributed 
across groups ( approximately 30% of patients). Severe local signs were more 
frequent but moderate in the active treatment groups (1.5%, 9.2% and 13.5% for 
G(Veh), G(10%) and G(15%) groups, respectively). Conclusions Polyphenon E 
ointment is effective and well tolerated in the treatment of EGWs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09375.x
PMID: 19709100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]