---
reference_id: "PMID:29316193"
title: Thrombocytopenia in high-risk patients with antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Pontara E
- Banzato A
- Bison E
- Cattini MG
- Baroni G
- Denas G
- Calligaro A
- Marson P
- Tison T
- Ruffatti A
- Pengo V
journal: J Thromb Haemost
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/jth.13947
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thrombocytopenia in high-risk patients with antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Pontara E, Banzato A, Bison E, Cattini MG, Baroni G, Denas G, Calligaro A, Marson P, Tison T, Ruffatti A, Pengo V
**Journal:** J Thromb Haemost (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jth.13947](https://doi.org/10.1111/jth.13947)

## Content

1. J Thromb Haemost. 2018 Mar;16(3):529-532. doi: 10.1111/jth.13947. Epub 2018
Jan  25.

Thrombocytopenia in high-risk patients with antiphospholipid syndrome.

Pontara E(1), Banzato A(1), Bison E(1), Cattini MG(1), Baroni G(1), Denas G(1), 
Calligaro A(2), Marson P(3), Tison T(3), Ruffatti A(2), Pengo V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, Cardiology Clinic, 
Thrombosis Center, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, Clinical Rheumatology, University of Padova, Padova, 
Italy.
(3)Apheresis Unit, Blood Transfusion Service, University of Padova, Padova, 
Italy.

Essentials The prevalence of thrombocytopenia in patients with antiphospholipid 
syndrome is not well defined. We studied triple positive patients with 
antiphospholipid syndrome and its catastrophic variant. Prevalence of 
thrombocytopenia was 6% and 100% in patients who developed the catastrophic 
form. In triple positive patients thrombocytopenia is low and platelets drop 
during the catastrophic form.
SUMMARY: Background Thrombocytopenia is the most common non-criteria 
hematological feature in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). This 
condition is more common in patients with catastrophic APS (CAPS). Objectives To 
evaluate the prevalence of thrombocytopenia in a large series of high-risk 
patients with APS, and to assess the behavior of the platelet count during CAPS. 
Methods/Patients This was a cross-sectional study in which we analyzed the 
platelet counts of a homogeneous group of high-risk APS patients 
(triple-positive). Six of these patients developed a catastrophic phase of the 
disease, and the platelet count was recorded before the acute phase, during the 
acute phase, and at recovery. Results The mean platelet count in 119 high-risk 
triple-positive patients was 210 × 109 L-1 . With a cut-off value for 
thrombocytopenia of 100 × 109 L-1 , the prevalence of thrombocytopenia was 6% 
(seven patients). No difference between primary APS and secondary APS was found. 
In patients who suffered from CAPS, a significant decrease from the basal count 
(212 ± 51 × 109 L-1 ) to that at the time of diagnosis (60 ± 33 × 109 L-1 ) was 
observed. The platelet count became normal again at the time of complete 
remission (220 ± 57 × 109 L-1 ). A decrease in platelet count always preceded 
the full clinical picture. Conclusions This study shows that, in high-risk APS 
patients, the prevalence of thrombocytopenia is low. A decrease in platelet 
count was observed in all of the patients who developed the catastrophic form of 
the disease. A decrease in platelet count in high-risk APS patients should be 
considered a warning signal for disease progression to CAPS.

© 2018 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.13947
PMID: 29316193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]