---
reference_id: "PMID:23680331"
title: "Hantavirus infection in North America: a clinical review."
authors:
- Hartline J
- Mierek C
- Knutson T
- Kang C
journal: Am J Emerg Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2013.02.001
keywords:
- Orthohantavirus
- "Hantavirus Infections/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Humans
- North America/epidemiology
- Prognosis
- Travel
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hantavirus infection in North America: a clinical review.
**Authors:** Hartline J, Mierek C, Knutson T, Kang C
**Journal:** Am J Emerg Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajem.2013.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2013.02.001)

## Content

1. Am J Emerg Med. 2013 Jun;31(6):978-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2013.02.001. Epub 
2013 May 13.

Hantavirus infection in North America: a clinical review.

Hartline J(1), Mierek C, Knutson T, Kang C.

Author information:
(1)Madigan Army Medical Center, Department of Emergency Medicine, Fort Lewis 
(Tacoma), WA, USA. james.hartline@amedd.army.mil

The recent outbreak of hantavirus in Yosemite National Park has attracted 
national attention, with 10 confirmed cases of hantavirus cardiopulmonary 
syndrome and thousands of more people exposed. This article will review the 
epidemiology, presentation, workup, and treatment for this rare but potentially 
lethal illness. The possibility of infection with hantavirus deserves 
consideration in patients with severe respiratory symptoms with rodent exposure 
or rural/wilderness travel. Accurate diagnosis requires a high index of 
suspicion. Hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome presents as a vague prodrome of 
fever, cough, myalgias, chills, and nausea followed by a rapidly worsening 
respiratory phase. Presumptive diagnosis can be made based on pulmonary 
interstitial edema on chest radiographs in association with leukocytosis, 
thrombocytopenia, and hemoconcentration. Suspected cases should be confirmed 
with a reference laboratory and reported to the appropriate public health 
authorities. Although treatment is primarily supportive, aggressive fluid 
administration should be avoided due to the risk of pulmonary edema. The 
cardiopulmonary phase of the disease can progress rapidly with catastrophic 
decompensation in as little as a few hours. Patients require rapid intensive 
care unit admission for monitoring, mechanical ventilation, vasoactive agents, 
and possibly extracorporeal mechanical ventilation. Emergency physicians should 
be aware of outbreaks and vigilant for hantavirus exposures, especially during 
the summer and early fall months.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajem.2013.02.001
PMID: 23680331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]