---
reference_id: "PMID:25363158"
title: Lenz-Majewski hyperostotic dwarfism with hyperphosphoserinuria from a novel mutation in PTDSS1 encoding phosphatidylserine synthase 1.
authors:
- Whyte MP
- Blythe A
- McAlister WH
- Nenninger AR
- Bijanki VN
- Mumm S
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2398
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acids/urine
- Animals
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Bone and Bones/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Female
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Nitrogenous Group Transferases/chemistry, genetics"
- Phosphoserine/urine
- Radiography
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lenz-Majewski hyperostotic dwarfism with hyperphosphoserinuria from a novel mutation in PTDSS1 encoding phosphatidylserine synthase 1.
**Authors:** Whyte MP, Blythe A, McAlister WH, Nenninger AR, Bijanki VN, Mumm S
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.2398](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2398)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2015 Apr;30(4):606-14. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2398.

Lenz-Majewski hyperostotic dwarfism with hyperphosphoserinuria from a novel
mutation in PTDSS1 encoding phosphatidylserine synthase 1.

Whyte MP(1), Blythe A, McAlister WH, Nenninger AR, Bijanki VN, Mumm S.

Author information:
(1)Center for Metabolic Bone Disease and Molecular Research, Shriners Hospital
for Children, St. Louis, MO; Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, Washington
University School of Medicine at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, MO.

Lenz-Majewski hyperostotic dwarfism (LMHD) is an ultra-rare Mendelian
craniotubular dysostosis that causes skeletal dysmorphism and widely distributed
osteosclerosis. Biochemical and histopathological characterization of the bone
disease is incomplete and nonexistent, respectively. In 2014, a publication
concerning five unrelated patients with LMHD disclosed that all carried one of
three heterozygous missense mutations in PTDSS1 encoding phosphatidylserine
synthase 1 (PSS1). PSS1 promotes the biosynthesis of phosphatidylserine (PTDS),
which is a functional constituent of lipid bilayers. In vitro, these PTDSS1
mutations were gain-of-function and increased PTDS production. Notably, PTDS
binds calcium within matrix vesicles to engender hydroxyapatite crystal
formation, and may enhance mesenchymal stem cell differentiation leading to
osteogenesis. We report an infant girl with LMHD and a novel heterozygous
missense mutation (c.829T>C, p.Trp277Arg) within PTDSS1. Bone turnover markers
suggested that her osteosclerosis resulted from accelerated formation with an
unremarkable rate of resorption. Urinary amino acid quantitation revealed a
greater than sixfold elevation of phosphoserine. Our findings affirm that PTDSS1
defects cause LMHD and support enhanced biosynthesis of PTDS in the pathogenesis
of LMHD.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2398
PMID: 25363158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
