---
reference_id: "PMID:38042167"
title: "Low-dose CT screening among never-smokers with or without a family history of lung cancer in Taiwan: a prospective cohort study."
authors:
- Chang GC
- Chiu CH
- Yu CJ
- Chang YC
- Chang YH
- Hsu KH
- Wu YC
- Chen CY
- Hsu HH
- Wu MT
- Yang CT
- Chong IW
- Lin YC
- Hsia TC
- Lin MC
- Su WC
- Lin CB
- Lee KY
- Wei YF
- Lan GY
- Chan WP
- Wang KL
- Wu MH
- Tsai HH
- Chian CF
- Lai RS
- Shih JY
- Wang CL
- Hsu JS
- Chen KC
- Chen CK
- Hsia JY
- Peng CK
- Tang EK
- Hsu CL
- Chou TY
- Shen WC
- Tsai YH
- Tsai CM
- Chen YM
- Lee YC
- Chen HY
- Yu SL
- Chen CJ
- Wan YL
- Hsiung CA
- Yang PC
- TALENT Investigators
journal: Lancet Respir Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00338-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- Smokers
- Prospective Studies
- Early Detection of Cancer/methods
- Adenocarcinoma in Situ
- Taiwan/epidemiology
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
- Adenocarcinoma
- Mass Screening
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low-dose CT screening among never-smokers with or without a family history of lung cancer in Taiwan: a prospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Chang GC, Chiu CH, Yu CJ, Chang YC, Chang YH, Hsu KH, Wu YC, Chen CY, Hsu HH, Wu MT, Yang CT, Chong IW, Lin YC, Hsia TC, Lin MC, Su WC, Lin CB, Lee KY, Wei YF, Lan GY, Chan WP, Wang KL, Wu MH, Tsai HH, Chian CF, Lai RS, Shih JY, Wang CL, Hsu JS, Chen KC, Chen CK, Hsia JY, Peng CK, Tang EK, Hsu CL, Chou TY, Shen WC, Tsai YH, Tsai CM, Chen YM, Lee YC, Chen HY, Yu SL, Chen CJ, Wan YL, Hsiung CA, Yang PC, TALENT Investigators
**Journal:** Lancet Respir Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00338-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00338-7)

## Content

1. Lancet Respir Med. 2024 Feb;12(2):141-152. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00338-7.
 Epub 2023 Nov 29.

Low-dose CT screening among never-smokers with or without a family history of
lung cancer in Taiwan: a prospective cohort study.

Chang GC(1), Chiu CH(2), Yu CJ(3), Chang YC(4), Chang YH(5), Hsu KH(6), Wu
YC(7), Chen CY(8), Hsu HH(9), Wu MT(10), Yang CT(11), Chong IW(12), Lin YC(13),
Hsia TC(14), Lin MC(15), Su WC(16), Lin CB(17), Lee KY(18), Wei YF(19), Lan
GY(20), Chan WP(21), Wang KL(22), Wu MH(23), Tsai HH(24), Chian CF(25), Lai
RS(26), Shih JY(27), Wang CL(28), Hsu JS(29), Chen KC(30), Chen CK(31), Hsia
JY(32), Peng CK(33), Tang EK(34), Hsu CL(27), Chou TY(35), Shen WC(36), Tsai
YH(37), Tsai CM(38), Chen YM(39), Lee YC(40), Chen HY(41), Yu SL(42), Chen
CJ(43), Wan YL(44), Hsiung CA(45), Yang PC(46); TALENT Investigators.

Collaborators: Chan CC, Chan SW, Chang IS, Chang JH, Chao KS, Chen CJ, Chen HW,
Chiang CJ, Chiou HY, Chou MC, Chung CL, Chung TJ, Guo YL, Hsiao CF, Huang CS, Ko
SF, Lee MH, Li YJ, Liao YS, Lu YH, Ou HY, Wu PA, Yang HI, Yang SY, Yang SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Chung Shan
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; School of Medicine, Chung Shan
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan; Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Chung
Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan; School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao
Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, Division of
Chest Medicine, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan;
Taipei Cancer Center, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan; National Taiwan University Hospital, Hsinchu,
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Radiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Medical Imaging, National Taiwan University
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Statistical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute
of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli,
Taiwan.
(6)Division of Critical Care and Respiratory Therapy, Taichung Veterans General
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Taipei Medical
University Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of
Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, School of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Chung Shan Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Radiology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei,
Taiwan; Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Radiology, Kaohsiung Veterans General
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(11)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Taoyuan, Taiwan; College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Yang Ming Chiao
Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; College of
Medicine, Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(13)School of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi,
Taiwan; Department of Respiratory Care, Chang Gung University of Science and
Technology, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(14)Department of Respiratory Therapy, China Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, China Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan.
(15)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Chang Gung
Respirology Center of Excellence, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(16)Department of Oncology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan,
Taiwan; College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Chest Medicine, Hualien Tzu Chi
Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Hualien, Taiwan; School of
Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.
(18)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, School of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine,
Division of Thoracic Medicine, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(19)Department of Internal Medicine, E-Da Cancer Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan;
School of Medicine for International Students, College of Medicine, I-Shou
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(20)Department of Medical Imaging, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(21)Department of Radiology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Radiology, Wan Fang Hospital,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(22)Department of Radiology, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.
(23)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Radiology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Medical Imaging, Cheng Hsin General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(24)Department of Medical Imaging, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan; School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan; Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(25)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(26)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(27)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(28)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of Respiratory Therapy, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(29)Department of Medical Imaging, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Radiology, School of Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(30)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Chung Shan
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; School of Medicine, Chung Shan
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, Division
of Chest Medicine, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan;
Department of Applied Chemistry, National Chi Nan University, Nantou, Taiwan.
(31)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Radiology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan; Division of Cardiopulmonary Radiology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(32)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Chung Shan Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(33)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Medical Planning, Medical Affairs Bureau Ministry of
National Defense, Taipei, Taiwan.
(34)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Kaohsiung Veterans
General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Shu-Zen Junior College of Medicine and
Management, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(35)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University,
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pathology, Taipei Medical University Hospital,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(36)Artificial Intelligence Center, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Medical Informatics, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(37)Department of Respiratory Therapy, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan;
Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Xiamen Chang Gung Hospital, Xiamen,
China.
(38)Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;
Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(39)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(40)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Pulmonary Medicine, West Garden Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(41)Institute of Statistical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(42)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology,
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(43)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(44)Department of Medical Imaging and Intervention, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of Medical Imaging and Radiological
Sciences, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(45)Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research
Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan.
(46)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: pcyang@ntu.edu.tw.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2024 Feb;12(2):93-94. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00378-8.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2024 Apr;12(4):e13-e14. doi:
10.1016/S2213-2600(24)00036-5.

BACKGROUND: In Taiwan, lung cancers occur predominantly in never-smokers, of
whom nearly 60% have stage IV disease at diagnosis. We aimed to assess the
efficacy of low-dose CT (LDCT) screening among never-smokers, who had other risk
factors for lung cancer.
METHODS: The Taiwan Lung Cancer Screening in Never-Smoker Trial (TALENT) was a
nationwide, multicentre, prospective cohort study done at 17 tertiary medical
centres in Taiwan. Eligible individuals had negative chest radiography, were
aged 55-75 years, had never smoked or had smoked fewer than 10 pack-years and
stopped smoking for more than 15 years (self-report), and had one of the
following risk factors: a family history of lung cancer; passive smoke exposure;
a history of pulmonary tuberculosis or chronic obstructive pulmonary disorders;
a cooking index of 110 or higher; or cooking without using ventilation. Eligible
participants underwent LDCT at baseline, then annually for 2 years, and then
every 2 years up to 6 years thereafter, with follow-up assessments at each LDCT
scan (ie, total follow-up of 8 years). A positive scan was defined as a solid or
part-solid nodule larger than 6 mm in mean diameter or a pure ground-glass
nodule larger than 5 mm in mean diameter. Lung cancer was diagnosed through
invasive procedures, such as image-guided aspiration or biopsy or surgery. Here,
we report the results of 1-year follow-up after LDCT screening at baseline. The
primary outcome was lung cancer detection rate. The p value for detection rates
was estimated by the χ2 test. Univariate and multivariable logistic regression
analyses were used to assess the association between lung cancer incidence and
each risk factor. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV),
and negative predictive value (NPV) of LDCT screening were also assessed. This
study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02611570, and is ongoing.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 1, 2015, and July 31, 2019, 12 011 participants (8868
females) were enrolled, of whom 6009 had a family history of lung cancer. Among
12 011 LDCT scans done at baseline, 2094 (17·4%) were positive. Lung cancer was
diagnosed in 318 (2·6%) of 12 011 participants (257 [2·1%] participants had
invasive lung cancer and 61 [0·5%] had adenocarcinomas in situ). 317 of 318
participants had adenocarcinoma and 246 (77·4%) of 318 had stage I disease. The
prevalence of invasive lung cancer was higher among participants with a family
history of lung cancer (161 [2·7%] of 6009 participants) than in those without
(96 [1·6%] of 6002 participants). In participants with a family history of lung
cancer, the detection rate of invasive lung cancer increased significantly with
age, whereas the detection rate of adenocarcinoma in situ remained stable. In
multivariable analysis, female sex, a family history of lung cancer, and age
older than 60 years were associated with an increased risk of lung cancer and
invasive lung cancer; passive smoke exposure, cumulative exposure to cooking,
cooking without ventilation, and a previous history of chronic lung diseases
were not associated with lung cancer, even after stratification by family
history of lung cancer. In participants with a family history of lung cancer,
the higher the number of first-degree relatives affected, the higher the risk of
lung cancer; participants whose mother or sibling had lung cancer were also at
an increased risk. A positive LDCT scan had 92·1% sensitivity, 84·6%
specificity, a PPV of 14·0%, and a NPV of 99·7% for lung cancer diagnosis.
INTERPRETATION: TALENT had a high invasive lung cancer detection rate at 1 year
after baseline LDCT scan. Overdiagnosis could have occurred, especially in
participants diagnosed with adenocarcinoma in situ. In individuals who do not
smoke, our findings suggest that a family history of lung cancer among
first-degree relatives significantly increases the risk of lung cancer as well
as the rate of invasive lung cancer with increasing age. Further research on
risk factors for lung cancer in this population is needed, particularly for
those without a family history of lung cancer.
FUNDING: Ministry of Health and Welfare of Taiwan.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00338-7
PMID: 38042167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests We declare no competing
interests.
