---
reference_id: "PMID:28709447"
title: Cryptic amyloidogenic elements in mutant NEFH causing Charcot-Marie-Tooth 2 trigger aggresome formation and neuronal death.
authors:
- Jacquier A
- Delorme C
- Belotti E
- Juntas-Morales R
- Solé G
- Dubourg O
- Giroux M
- Maurage CA
- Castellani V
- Rebelo A
- Abrams A
- Züchner S
- Stojkovic T
- Schaeffer L
- Latour P
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-017-0457-1
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- Apoptosis/physiology
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- Chick Embryo
- Family
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neurofilament Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological/metabolism"
- "Spinal Cord/metabolism, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cryptic amyloidogenic elements in mutant NEFH causing Charcot-Marie-Tooth 2 trigger aggresome formation and neuronal death.
**Authors:** Jacquier A, Delorme C, Belotti E, Juntas-Morales R, Solé G, Dubourg O, Giroux M, Maurage CA, Castellani V, Rebelo A, Abrams A, Züchner S, Stojkovic T, Schaeffer L, Latour P
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-017-0457-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-017-0457-1)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2017 Jul 14;5(1):55. doi: 10.1186/s40478-017-0457-1.

Cryptic amyloidogenic elements in mutant NEFH causing Charcot-Marie-Tooth 2 
trigger aggresome formation and neuronal death.

Jacquier A(1)(2), Delorme C(3), Belotti E(1), Juntas-Morales R(4), Solé G(5), 
Dubourg O(6), Giroux M(7), Maurage CA(8), Castellani V(1), Rebelo A(9), Abrams 
A(9), Züchner S(9), Stojkovic T(10), Schaeffer L(11)(12), Latour P(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut NeuroMyoGène, Université Lyon1 - CNRS UMR 5310 - INSERM U1217, Lyon, 
France.
(2)Unité fonctionnelle de neurogénétique moléculaire, CHU de Lyon - HCL 
groupement Est, Bron, France.
(3)Département de Neurologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(4)Clinique du motoneurone et pathologies neuromusculaires, CHRU de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(5)Centre de références des maladies neuromusculaires, CHU de Bordeaux, 
Bordeaux, France.
(6)Centre de référence des maladies neuromusculaires, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
Paris, France.
(7)Service de Neurologie, CH de Valenciennes, Valenciennes, France.
(8)Institut de pathologie, CHU de Lille, Lille, France.
(9)Dr John T. MacDonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics, Institute of 
Human Genomics, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, USA.
(10)Institut de Myologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47-83 boulevard de 
l'Hôpital, 75013, Paris, France. tanya.stojkovic@aphp.fr.
(11)Institut NeuroMyoGène, Université Lyon1 - CNRS UMR 5310 - INSERM U1217, 
Lyon, France. laurent.schaeffer@univ-lyon1.fr.
(12)Centre de Biotechnologie Cellulaire, CBC Biotec, CHU de Lyon - HCL 
groupement Est, Bron, France. laurent.schaeffer@univ-lyon1.fr.

Neurofilament heavy chain (NEFH) gene was recently identified to cause autosomal 
dominant axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2cc). However, the clinical 
spectrum of this condition and the physio-pathological pathway remain to be 
delineated. We report 12 patients from two French families with axonal 
dominantly inherited form of CMT caused by two new mutations in the NEFH gene. A 
remarkable feature was the early involvement of proximal muscles of the lower 
limbs associated with pyramidal signs in some patients. Nerve conduction 
velocity studies indicated a predominantly motor axonal neuropathy. Unique 
deletions of two nucleotides causing frameshifts near the end of the NEFH coding 
sequence were identified: in family 1, c.3008_3009del (p.Lys1003Argfs*59), and 
in family 2 c.3043_3044del (p.Lys1015Glyfs*47). Both frameshifts lead to 40 
additional amino acids translation encoding a cryptic amyloidogenic element. 
Consistently, we show that these mutations cause protein aggregation which are 
recognised by the autophagic pathway in motoneurons and triggered caspase 3 
activation leading to apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells. Using electroporation of 
chick embryo spinal cord, we confirm that NEFH mutants form aggregates in vivo 
and trigger apoptosis of spinal cord neurons. Thus, our results provide a 
physiological explanation for the overlap between CMT and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) clinical features in affected patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-017-0457-1
PMCID: PMC5513089
PMID: 28709447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance 
with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research 
committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or 
comparable ethical standards. Informed consent was obtained from all individual 
participants included in the study. All procedures performed in studies 
involving animals were in accordance with the ethical standards of the 
institution or practice at which the studies were conducted. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.