---
reference_id: "PMID:21812941"
title: Explained variance for blood gases in a population with COPD.
authors:
- Saure EW
- Eagan TM
- Jensen RL
- Voll-Aanerud M
- Aukrust P
- Bakke PS
- Hardie JA
journal: Clin Respir J
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2011.00248.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Explained variance for blood gases in a population with COPD.
**Authors:** Saure EW, Eagan TM, Jensen RL, Voll-Aanerud M, Aukrust P, Bakke PS, Hardie JA
**Journal:** Clin Respir J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1752-699X.2011.00248.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-699X.2011.00248.x)

## Content

1. Clin Respir J. 2012 Apr;6(2):72-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2011.00248.x.
Epub  2011 Aug 3.

Explained variance for blood gases in a population with COPD.

Saure EW(1), Eagan TM, Jensen RL, Voll-Aanerud M, Aukrust P, Bakke PS, Hardie 
JA.

Author information:
(1)Section of Pulmonary Medicine, Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway. eirunn.saure@med.uib.no

Comment in
    Clin Respir J. 2012 Apr;6(2):65-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2012.00284.x.

INTRODUCTION: Variation of blood gas levels in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) patients has not been extensively reported and there is limited 
knowledge about predictors of chronic respiratory failure in COPD patients.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to identify predictors of hypoxemia, 
hypercapnia and increased alveolar-arterial oxygen difference in COPD patients. 
We hypothesized that prediction of arterial blood gases will be improved in 
multivariate models including measurements of lung function, anthropometry and 
systemic inflammation.
METHODS: A cross-sectional sample of 382 Norwegian COPD patients, age 40-76, 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease stage II-IV, with a 
smoking history of at least 10 pack-years, underwent extensive measurements, 
including medical examination, arterial blood gases, systemic inflammatory 
markers, spirometry, plethysmography, respiratory impedance and bioelectrical 
impedance. Possible predictors of arterial oxygen (PaO(2)), arterial carbon 
dioxide (PaCO(2)) and alveolar-arterial oxygen difference (AaO(2)) were analyzed 
with both bivariate and multiple regression methods.
RESULTS: We found that various lung function measurements were significantly 
associated with PaO2, PaCO(2) and AaO(2). In addition, heart rate and Fat Mass 
Index were predictors of PaO(2) and AaO(2), while heart failure and current 
smoking status were associated with PaCO(2). The explained variance (R(2)) in 
the final multivariate regression models was 0.14-0.20.
CONCLUSIONS: With a wide assortment of possible clinical predictors, we could 
explain 14-20% of the variation in blood gas measurements in COPD patients.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2011.00248.x
PMID: 21812941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]