---
reference_id: "PMID:32339686"
title: Type A Aortic Dissection Caused by Loeys-Dietz Syndrome with Novel Variation.
authors:
- Skeik N
- Golden M
- Berg A
- North M
journal: Ann Vasc Surg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2020.04.038
keywords:
- Blood Vessel Prosthesis Implantation
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heart Valve Prosthesis Implantation
- Humans
- "Loeys-Dietz Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, genetics, surgery"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Transforming Growth Factor-beta Type I/genetics"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type A Aortic Dissection Caused by Loeys-Dietz Syndrome with Novel Variation.
**Authors:** Skeik N, Golden M, Berg A, North M
**Journal:** Ann Vasc Surg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.avsg.2020.04.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avsg.2020.04.038)

## Content

1. Ann Vasc Surg. 2020 Oct;68:567.e1-567.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2020.04.038.
Epub  2020 Apr 24.

Type A Aortic Dissection Caused by Loeys-Dietz Syndrome with Novel Variation.

Skeik N(1), Golden M(2), Berg A(3), North M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine, Minneapolis Heart Institute at Abbott 
Northwestern Hospital, Minneapolis, MN. Electronic address: 
nedaa.skeik@allina.com.
(2)Research Department, Minneapolis Heart Institute Foundation, Minneapolis, MN.
(3)Genetic Department, Children's Minnesota Genetics, Minneapolis, MN.

Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a rare autosomal-dominant connective tissue 
disorder that can lead to aortic aneurysm and dissection. There are 5 different 
types caused by mutations in TGFβR1 (transforming growth factor β receptor), 
TGFβR2, SMAD3, TGFβ2 (transforming growth factor β), and TGFβ3 respectively. The 
prevalence of LDS is estimated to be less than 1 in 100,000. There is 
considerable variability in the phenotype of LDS, from mild features to severe 
systemic abnormalities. There is overlap in the manifestations of LDS and Marfan 
syndrome, including increased risk of ascending aortic aneurysm and aortic 
dissection, as well as abnormally long limbs and fingers. Management can be very 
challenging with a high risk of complications with revascularization. We report 
a 60-year-old female who presented with a type A aortic dissection that 
originated from the aortic root and extended to the bilateral common femoral 
arteries. Genetic testing revealed a novel alteration of the TGFβR1 gene 
(c689 C>A in exon 4) that to our knowledge has not been previously reported or 
found in large population cohorts. She was managed through a Bentall procedure 
that was complicated by a graft tear and stenosis of the distal anastomosis 
site, in addition to requiring a temporary pacemaker implantation and 
hemodialysis after the procedure. Ultimately, the patient was able to recover 
fully.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2020.04.038
PMID: 32339686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]