---
reference_id: "PMID:31724813"
title: "Phase 1/2 trial of talazoparib in combination with temozolomide in children and adolescents with refractory/recurrent solid tumors including Ewing sarcoma: A Children's Oncology Group Phase 1 Consortium study (ADVL1411)."
authors:
- Schafer ES
- Rau RE
- Berg SL
- Liu X
- Minard CG
- Bishop AJR
- Romero JC
- Hicks MJ
- Nelson MD Jr
- Voss S
- Reid JM
- Fox E
- Weigel BJ
- Blaney SM
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.28073
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- "Bone Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Maximum Tolerated Dose
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Phthalazines/administration & dosage"
- Prognosis
- Salvage Therapy
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/drug therapy, pathology"
- Survival Rate
- "Temozolomide/administration & dosage"
- Tissue Distribution
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase 1/2 trial of talazoparib in combination with temozolomide in children and adolescents with refractory/recurrent solid tumors including Ewing sarcoma: A Children's Oncology Group Phase 1 Consortium study (ADVL1411).
**Authors:** Schafer ES, Rau RE, Berg SL, Liu X, Minard CG, Bishop AJR, Romero JC, Hicks MJ, Nelson MD Jr, Voss S, Reid JM, Fox E, Weigel BJ, Blaney SM
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.28073](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.28073)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2020 Feb;67(2):e28073. doi: 10.1002/pbc.28073. Epub 2019
 Nov 14.

Phase 1/2 trial of talazoparib in combination with temozolomide in children and
adolescents with refractory/recurrent solid tumors including Ewing sarcoma: A
Children's Oncology Group Phase 1 Consortium study (ADVL1411).

Schafer ES(1)(2), Rau RE(1)(2), Berg SL(1)(2), Liu X(3), Minard CG(1), Bishop
AJR(4)(5), Romero JC(4), Hicks MJ(1), Nelson MD Jr(6), Voss S(7), Reid JM(8),
Fox E(9), Weigel BJ(10), Blaney SM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(2)Texas Children's Cancer and Hematology Centers, Houston, Texas.
(3)Children's Oncology Group, Monrovia, California.
(4)Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute, UT Health San Antonio, San
Antonio, Texas.
(5)Department of Cell Systems and Anatomy, UT Health San Antonio, San Antonio,
Texas.
(6)Children's Hospital of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(7)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(8)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(9)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(10)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.

PURPOSE: We conducted a phase 1/2 trial of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1/2
inhibitor talazoparib in combination with low-dose temozolomide (TMZ) to
determine the dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs), recommended phase 2 dose (RP2D),
and pharmacokinetics of this combination in children with recurrent/refractory
solid tumors; and to explore clinical activity in Ewing sarcoma (EWS)
(NCT02116777).
METHODS: Talazoparib (400-600 µg/m2 /dose, maximum daily dose 800-1000 µg) was
administered q.d. or b.i.d. orally on day 1 followed by q.d. dosing concomitant
with q.d. dosing of oral TMZ (20-55 mg/m2 /day) on days 2 to 6, every 28 days.
RESULTS: Forty patients, aged 4 to 25 years, were enrolled. Talazoparib was
increased to 600 µg/m2 /dose b.i.d. on day 1, and q.d. thereafter, with 20 mg/m2
/day of TMZ, without DLTs. TMZ was subsequently increased, during which
dose-limiting neutropenia and thrombocytopenia occurred in two of three subjects
at 55 mg/m2 /day, two of six subjects at 40 mg/m2 /day, and one of six subjects
at 30 mg/m2 /day. During dose-finding, two of five EWS and four of 25 non-EWS
subjects experienced prolonged stable disease (SD), and one subject with
malignant glioma experienced a partial response. In phase 2, 0 of 10 EWS
subjects experienced an objective response; two experienced prolonged SD.
CONCLUSIONS: Talazoparib and low-dose TMZ are tolerated in children with
recurrent/refractory solid tumors. Reversible neutropenia and thrombocytopenia
were dose limiting. The RP2D is talazoparib 600 µg/m2 b.i.d. on day 1 followed
by 600 µg/m2 q.d. on days 2 to 6 (daily maximum 1000 µg) in combination with
temozolomide 30 mg/m2 /day on days 2 to 6. Antitumor activity was not observed
in EWS, and limited antitumor activity was observed in central nervous system
tumors.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.28073
PMCID: PMC9134216
PMID: 31724813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT: J.M.R. declares
immediate family members who have ownership interests (stock) in BioMarin and
Novartis. All other authors declare that they have no COI to disclose.
