---
reference_id: "PMID:41196684"
title: Active surveillance for small papillary thyroid carcinoma.
authors:
- Ito Y
- Miyauchi A
- Fujishima M
journal: Endocr Relat Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1530/ERC-25-0287
keywords:
- Humans
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/pathology, therapy, surgery"
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/pathology, therapy, surgery"
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary"
- Watchful Waiting
- Prognosis
- Thyroidectomy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Active surveillance for small papillary thyroid carcinoma.
**Authors:** Ito Y, Miyauchi A, Fujishima M
**Journal:** Endocr Relat Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ERC-25-0287](https://doi.org/10.1530/ERC-25-0287)

## Content

1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2025 Nov 19;32(11):e250287. doi: 10.1530/ERC-25-0287.
Print  2025 Nov 1.

Active surveillance for small papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Ito Y, Miyauchi A, Fujishima M.

Active surveillance (AS) of low-risk papillary thyroid microcarcinoma (PTMC;
T1aN0M0) in adults was initiated in 1993 at Kuma Hospital (Kobe, Japan) and in
1995 at the Cancer Institute Hospital (Tokyo, Japan). Since then, numerous
studies from various countries have reported favorable outcomes for patients
managed with AS. Notably, no cases of thyroid carcinoma-related death have been
reported among patients who have undergone AS. Young age has been identified as
a predictor of high tumor growth activity; however, previous studies have shown
that young adult patients may still be suitable candidates for AS. Although
surgery for PTMC is not technically complex, it carries risks, even when
performed by experienced thyroid surgeons, including permanent recurrent
laryngeal nerve paralysis and hypoparathyroidism. No significant difference in
prognosis has been observed between patients managed with AS and those who
undergo immediate surgery (IS). Some patients initially on AS later opt for
conversion surgery (CS) for various reasons. Importantly, the postoperative
prognosis and incidence of unfavorable events in patients undergoing CS do not
differ significantly from those in patients undergoing IS. However, the overall
incidence of unfavorable events has been reported to be higher among patients
who initially chose IS than among those who began with AS. Patients managed with
AS have demonstrated better physical quality of life (QOL) than those who
underwent IS. Although findings on mental QOL have been inconsistent, this may
depend on the attitudes and approach of the attending clinicians. Presently, AS
is considered an excellent initial management strategy for patients with PTMC.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-25-0287
PMID: 41196684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
