---
reference_id: "PMID:34489952"
title: Urine Proteomics Differentiate Primary Thrombotic Antiphospholipid Syndrome From Obstetric Antiphospholipid Syndrome.
authors:
- Zhou Z
- You Y
- Wang F
- Sun Y
- Teng J
- Liu H
- Cheng X
- Su Y
- Shi H
- Hu Q
- Chi H
- Jia J
- Wan L
- Liu T
- Wang M
- Shi C
- Yang C
- Ye J
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.702425
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, urine"
- Biomarkers/urine
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications/diagnosis, urine"
- Proteomics
- Urinalysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urine Proteomics Differentiate Primary Thrombotic Antiphospholipid Syndrome From Obstetric Antiphospholipid Syndrome.
**Authors:** Zhou Z, You Y, Wang F, Sun Y, Teng J, Liu H, Cheng X, Su Y, Shi H, Hu Q, Chi H, Jia J, Wan L, Liu T, Wang M, Shi C, Yang C, Ye J
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.702425](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.702425)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Aug 19;12:702425. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.702425. 
eCollection 2021.

Urine Proteomics Differentiate Primary Thrombotic Antiphospholipid Syndrome From 
Obstetric Antiphospholipid Syndrome.

Zhou Z(1), You Y(1), Wang F(1), Sun Y(1), Teng J(1), Liu H(1), Cheng X(1), Su 
Y(1), Shi H(1), Hu Q(1), Chi H(1), Jia J(1), Wan L(1), Liu T(1), Wang M(1), Shi 
C(2), Yang C(1), Ye J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is a multisystem disorder characterized by 
thrombosis and/or recurrent fetal loss. This clinical phenotype heterogeneity 
may result in differences in response to treatment and prognosis. In this study, 
we aimed to identify primary thrombotic APS (TAPS) from primary obstetric APS 
(OAPS) using urine proteomics as a non-invasive method. Only patients with 
primary APS were enrolled in this study from 2016 to 2018 at a single clinical 
center in Shanghai. Urine samples from 15 patients with TAPS, 9 patients with 
OAPS, and 15 healthy controls (HCs) were collected and analyzed using isobaric 
tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling combined with 
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis to identify 
differentially expressed proteins. Cluster analysis of urine proteomics 
identified differentiated proteins among the TAPS, OAPS, and HC groups. Urinary 
proteins were enriched in cytokine and cytokine receptor pathways. 
Representative secreted cytokines screened out (fold change >1.20, or <0.83, 
p<0.05) in these differentiated proteins were measured by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay in a validation cohort. The results showed that the levels 
of C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 12 (CXCL12) were higher in the urine of patients 
with TAPS than in those with OAPS (p=0.035), while the levels of 
platelet-derived growth factor subunit B (PDGFB) were lower in patients with 
TAPS than in those with OAPS (p=0.041). In addition, correlation analysis showed 
that CXCL12 levels were positively correlated with immunoglobulin G 
anti-β2-glycoprotein I antibody (r=0.617, p=0.016). Our results demonstrated 
that urinary CXCL12 and PDGFB might serve as potential non-invasive markers to 
differentiate primary TAPS from primary OAPS.

Copyright © 2021 Zhou, You, Wang, Sun, Teng, Liu, Cheng, Su, Shi, Hu, Chi, Jia, 
Wan, Liu, Wang, Shi, Yang and Ye.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.702425
PMCID: PMC8416615
PMID: 34489952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.