---
reference_id: "PMID:26663720"
title: "Monocyte-Derived Dendritic Cells Promote Th Polarization, whereas Conventional Dendritic Cells Promote Th Proliferation."
authors:
- Chow KV
- Lew AM
- Sutherland RM
- Zhan Y
journal: J Immunol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501202
keywords:
- Animals
- Antigen Presentation/immunology
- Cell Differentiation/immunology
- Cell Lineage
- Cell Proliferation
- Coculture Techniques
- "Dendritic Cells/cytology, immunology"
- Flow Cytometry
- Lymphocyte Activation/immunology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Monocytes/cytology
- "T-Lymphocytes, Helper-Inducer/cytology, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monocyte-Derived Dendritic Cells Promote Th Polarization, whereas Conventional Dendritic Cells Promote Th Proliferation.
**Authors:** Chow KV, Lew AM, Sutherland RM, Zhan Y
**Journal:** J Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1501202](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1501202)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2016 Jan 15;196(2):624-36. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501202. Epub 2015
 Dec 9.

Monocyte-Derived Dendritic Cells Promote Th Polarization, whereas Conventional 
Dendritic Cells Promote Th Proliferation.

Chow KV(1), Lew AM(2), Sutherland RM(3), Zhan Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University 
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Department of Nephrology, 
Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia; and.
(2)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University 
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia 
lew@wehi.edu.au zhan@wehi.edu.au.
(3)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University 
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia;
(4)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University 
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; lew@wehi.edu.au 
zhan@wehi.edu.au.

Monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs) dramatically increase in numbers upon 
infection and inflammation; accordingly, we found that this also occurs during 
allogeneic responses. Despite their prominence, how emergent moDCs and resident 
conventional DCs (cDCs) divide their labor as APCs remain undefined. Hence, we 
compared both direct and indirect presentation by murine moDCs versus cDCs. We 
found that, despite having equivalent MHC class II expression and in vitro 
survival, moDCs were 20-fold less efficient than cDCs at inducing CD4(+) T cell 
proliferation through both direct and indirect Ag presentation. Despite this, 
moDCs were more potent at inducing Th1 and Th17 differentiation (e.g., 8-fold 
higher IFN-γ and 2-fold higher IL-17A in T cell cocultures), whereas cDCs 
induced 10-fold higher IL-2 production. Intriguingly, moDCs potently reduced the 
ability of cDCs to stimulate T cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo, 
partially through NO production. We surmise that such division of labor between 
moDCs and cDCs has implications for their respective roles in the immune 
response.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501202
PMID: 26663720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]