---
reference_id: "PMID:32317841"
title: "Papillary Cystadenofibroma of Fallopian Tube: Case Report with a Literature Review."
authors:
- Hodzic E
- Pusina S
- Bajramagic S
- Salibasic M
- Holjan S
journal: Med Arch
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5455/medarh.2020.74.73-76
keywords:
- Adult
- "Cystadenofibroma/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Fallopian Tube Neoplasms/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Leiomyoma/surgery
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Uterine Neoplasms/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Papillary Cystadenofibroma of Fallopian Tube: Case Report with a Literature Review.
**Authors:** Hodzic E, Pusina S, Bajramagic S, Salibasic M, Holjan S
**Journal:** Med Arch (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5455/medarh.2020.74.73-76](https://doi.org/10.5455/medarh.2020.74.73-76)

## Content

1. Med Arch. 2020 Feb;74(1):73-76. doi: 10.5455/medarh.2020.74.73-76.

Papillary Cystadenofibroma of Fallopian Tube: Case Report with a Literature 
Review.

Hodzic E(1), Pusina S(1), Bajramagic S(1), Salibasic M(1), Holjan S(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of General and Abdominal Surgery, Clinical Center University of 
Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

INTRODUCTION: Tumors of Fallopian tubes are rare in general, and they are the 
rarest tumors of female genital tract. According to clasification of World 
health organisation (WHO), papillomas, cystadenoma, adenofibroma, 
cystadenofibroma (CAF), metaplastic papillary tumors and endometrioid polyps 
belong to group of benign tumors. Serous papillary cystadenofibroma (SPCAF) is 
rare tumor and it is ususally located on fimbrial end of the tube and it is 
considered that it has "Müllerian" origin.
AIM: The aim of this article is to show a rare case of cystadenofibroma of 
Fallopian tube which was found as random sample during histopathological 
analysis of specimen which was extracted during laparatomy due to the large 
tumor mass in abdomen.
CASE REPORT: A 43-year-old patient underwent surgery for a large tumor mass in 
the abdomen, unknown lesions and pathohistology, which was radiologically 
verified four years before hospitalization. We removed the specimen that made up 
the tumor, along with the uterus and adnexes, weighing 14 kg and sent for 
histopatology. A large tumor mass is made up of a giant uterine myoma, and in 
the analysis of the other preparation, in addition to endometrial 
adenocarcinoma, there is also a rare Fallopian tube cystadenofibroma. On the 
sixth day of hospitalization, the patient is discharged home. At control after 
three months, the patient was without problems, with ongoing adjuvant 
brachytherapy.
CONCLUSION: Improvement of prevention measures and work on the continuing 
education of patients and physicians at the primary care level are needed to 
ensure that patients receive the best treatment in a timely manner. 
Cystadenofibroma is a rare tumor in general and gynecologic oncology, and as 
authors it is a great honor for us to contribute to the world literature and to 
present the twentieth case of this tumor.

© 2020 Edin Hodzic, Sadat Pusina, Salem Bajramagic, Mirhan Salibasic, Sandin 
Holjan.

DOI: 10.5455/medarh.2020.74.73-76
PMCID: PMC7164734
PMID: 32317841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest to declare.