---
reference_id: "PMID:32662935"
title: Phenotypic features of ciliary dyskinesia among patients with congenital cardiovascular malformations.
authors:
- Sherman F
- Wodrich M
- Zampi JD
- Lee J
- McCaffery H
- Saba TG
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.24959
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic features of ciliary dyskinesia among patients with congenital cardiovascular malformations.
**Authors:** Sherman F, Wodrich M, Zampi JD, Lee J, McCaffery H, Saba TG
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.24959](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.24959)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2020 Oct;55(10):2674-2682. doi: 10.1002/ppul.24959. Epub
2020  Jul 31.

Phenotypic features of ciliary dyskinesia among patients with congenital 
cardiovascular malformations.

Sherman F(1), Wodrich M(1), Zampi JD(1), Lee J(1), McCaffery H(2), Saba TG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(2)Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan.

BACKGROUND: Cilia are cell membrane-bound organelles responsible for airway 
mucus clearance, establishment of left-right organ asymmetry, cardiogenesis, and 
many other functions in utero. Phenotypic features suggestive of respiratory 
ciliary dyskinesia among patients with heterotaxy syndrome, defined as complex 
cardiovascular malformations (CVM) and situs ambiguus (SA), has not been 
adequately explored.
OBJECTIVES: We hypothesized that there is a greater incidence of phenotypic 
features consistent with ciliary dyskinesia among patients with heterotaxy 
syndrome compared to patients with other CVM and laterality defects without 
heterotaxy syndrome.
METHODS: Thirty six subjects were identified by medical record search and 
divided into four groups based on situs status and type of CVM as follows: SA 
and complex CVM (group 1); SA and simple CVM (group 2); situs solitus and 
complex CVM (group 3); and situs solitus and simple CVM (group 4). Phenotype was 
assessed with a clinical questionnaire, nasal nitric oxide (NO) level, and 
pulmonary function testing. Those with complex CVM underwent additional testing 
for variants in genes involved in ciliary structure and function.
RESULTS: The mean nasal NO level was significantly lower among all subjects with 
complex CVM regardless of situs anomalies (groups 1 and 3). There was no 
significant difference in respiratory symptoms or lung function among the four 
groups. No bi-allelic genetic mutations were detected among patients with 
complex CVM.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified a relatively lower mean nasal NO level, 
suggestive of relative ciliary dyskinesia, among subjects with complex CVM. 
Pulmonary function and clinical symptoms did not reflect significant pulmonary 
disease among those with complex CVM.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.24959
PMID: 32662935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]