---
reference_id: "PMID:38540235"
title: An Approach for Personalized Dynamic Assessment of Chronic Kidney Disease Progression Using Joint Model.
authors:
- Liao CM
- Kao YW
- Chang YP
- Lin CM
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12030622
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Approach for Personalized Dynamic Assessment of Chronic Kidney Disease Progression Using Joint Model.
**Authors:** Liao CM, Kao YW, Chang YP, Lin CM
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12030622](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12030622)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 Mar 11;12(3):622. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12030622.

An Approach for Personalized Dynamic Assessment of Chronic Kidney Disease 
Progression Using Joint Model.

Liao CM(1), Kao YW(1), Chang YP(2)(3), Lin CM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Statistics and Information Science, Ming Chuan 
University, Taoyuan 333, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Taoyuan Branch of Taipei Veterans General Hospital, 
Taoyuan 333, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Healthcare Information and Management, Ming Chuan University, 
Taoyuan 333, Taiwan.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) poses significant challenges to public health and 
healthcare systems, demanding a comprehensive understanding of its progressive 
nature. Prior methods have often fallen short in capturing the dynamic and 
individual variability of renal function. This study aims to address this gap by 
introducing a novel approach for the individualized assessment of CKD 
progression. A cohort of 1042 patients, comprising 700 with stage 3a and 342 
with stage 3b to stage 5 CKD, treated at a veteran general hospital in Taiwan 
from 2006 to 2019, was included in the study. A comprehensive dataset spanning 
12 years, consisting of clinical measurements, was collected and analyzed using 
joint models to predict the progression to hemodialysis treatment. The study 
reveals that the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) can be considered 
an endogenous factor influenced by innate biochemical markers. Serum creatinine, 
blood pressure, and urinary protein excretion emerged as valuable factors for 
predicting CKD progression. The joint model, combining longitudinal and survival 
analyses, demonstrated predictive versatility across various CKD severities. 
This innovative approach enhances conventional models by concurrently 
incorporating both longitudinal and survival analyses and provides a nuanced 
understanding of the variables influencing renal function in CKD patients. This 
personalized model enables a more precise assessment of renal failure risk, 
tailored to each patient's unique clinical profile. The findings contribute to 
improving the management of CKD patients and provide a foundation for 
personalized healthcare interventions in the context of renal diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12030622
PMCID: PMC10968651
PMID: 38540235

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.