---
reference_id: "PMID:36558412"
title: Assessment of Dietary Adequacy and Quality in a Sample of Patients with Crohn's Disease.
authors:
- Karachaliou A
- Yannakoulia M
- Bletsa M
- Mantzaris GJ
- Archavlis E
- Karampekos G
- Tzouvala M
- Bamias G
- Kokkotis G
- Kontogianni MD
journal: Nutrients
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/nu14245254
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of Dietary Adequacy and Quality in a Sample of Patients with Crohn's Disease.
**Authors:** Karachaliou A, Yannakoulia M, Bletsa M, Mantzaris GJ, Archavlis E, Karampekos G, Tzouvala M, Bamias G, Kokkotis G, Kontogianni MD
**Journal:** Nutrients (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu14245254](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14245254)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2022 Dec 9;14(24):5254. doi: 10.3390/nu14245254.

Assessment of Dietary Adequacy and Quality in a Sample of Patients with Crohn's 
Disease.

Karachaliou A(1), Yannakoulia M(1), Bletsa M(2), Mantzaris GJ(3), Archavlis 
E(3), Karampekos G(3), Tzouvala M(4), Bamias G(5), Kokkotis G(5), Kontogianni 
MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition & Dietetics, School of Health Sciences and Education, 
Harokopio University of Athens, 70 El. Venizelou Avenue, 176 76 Kallithea, 
Greece.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, ''Sotiria'' Thoracic Diseases 
Hospital, 152 Mesogion Avenue, 115 27 Athens, Greece.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, ''Evangelismos-Ophthalmiatreion 
Athinon-Polykliniki'' General Hospital, 45-47 Ypsilantou Street, 106 76 Athens, 
Greece.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, General Hospital of Nikaia Piraeus "Agios 
Panteleimon"-General Hospital Dytikis Attikis "Agia Varvara", 3 Dim. Mantouvalou 
Street, 184 54 Athens, Greece.
(5)GI Unit, 3rd Academic Department of Internal Medicine, "Sotiria'' Thoracic 
Diseases Hospital, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, 152 Mesogion Avenue, 115 27 Athens, Greece.

Both under-and over-nutrition are prevalent in patients with Crohn's Disease 
(CD). The aim of the present study was to evaluate dietary intake and compare it 
with relevant recommendations during active disease and remission, also taking 
into consideration the adequacy of energy reporting. Dietary quality was 
assessed through adherence to the Mediterranean diet and to the European dietary 
guidelines for cardiovascular disease prevention (CVD-score). Malnutrition was 
diagnosed with the GLIM criteria. There were 237 patients evaluated (54.9% 
males, 41.3 ± 14.1 years and 37.6% with active disease). In the total sample, 
high prevalence of overweight/obesity (61.6%) and low prevalence of malnutrition 
(11.4%) were observed, whereas 25.5% reported low protein intake in the 
sub-sample of adequate energy reporters. The mean MedDietScore was 28.0 ± 5.5 
and the mean CVD-score was 5.25 ± 1.36, both reflecting moderate dietary 
quality. Patients with active disease reported higher prevalence of low protein 
intake, lower carbohydrate, fibers, fruits, vegetables, legumes, and sweets 
consumption and a lower MedDietScore compared to patients in remission. 
Consumption of fibers, fruits, vegetables, and legumes while in remission did 
not result in reaching the recommended intakes, and dietary quality was low as 
reflected by the MedDietScore. In conclusion, both protein undernutrition and 
energy overconsumption were prevalent in the current sample and overall patients 
adhered to a moderate quality diet irrespective of disease stage.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14245254
PMCID: PMC9780994
PMID: 36558412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.