---
reference_id: "PMID:29985349"
title: Modeling Osteosarcoma Using Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Patient-derived Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells.
authors:
- Zhou R
- Xu A
- Tu J
- Liu M
- Gingold JA
- Zhao R
- Lee DF
journal: J Vis Exp
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3791/57664
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cell Differentiation
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "Li-Fraumeni Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mesenchymal Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Osteosarcoma/diagnosis, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling Osteosarcoma Using Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Patient-derived Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells.
**Authors:** Zhou R, Xu A, Tu J, Liu M, Gingold JA, Zhao R, Lee DF
**Journal:** J Vis Exp (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3791/57664](https://doi.org/10.3791/57664)

## Content

1. J Vis Exp. 2018 Jun 13;(136):57664. doi: 10.3791/57664.

Modeling Osteosarcoma Using Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Patient-derived Induced 
Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Zhou R(1), Xu A(2), Tu J(3), Liu M(2), Gingold JA(4), Zhao R(5), Lee DF(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, McGovern Medical School, 
The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston; Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center UTHealth.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, McGovern Medical School, 
The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, McGovern Medical School, 
The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston; Department of 
Musculoskeletal Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University.
(4)Women's Health Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation.
(5)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, McGovern Medical School, 
The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston; 
ruiying.zhao@uth.tmc.edu.
(6)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, McGovern Medical School, 
The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston; Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center UTHealth; 
Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, The Brown Foundation Institute 
of Molecular Medicine for the Prevention of Human Diseases, The University of 
Texas Health Science Center at Houston; Center for Precision Health, School of 
Biomedical Informatics and School of Public Health, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston; dung-fang.lee@uth.tmc.edu.

Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant hereditary cancer disorder. 
Patients with LFS are predisposed to a various type of tumors, including 
osteosarcoma--one of the most frequent primary non-hematologic malignancies in 
the childhood and adolescence. Therefore, LFS provides an ideal model to study 
this malignancy. Taking advantage of iPSC methodologies, LFS-associated 
osteosarcoma can be successfully modeled by differentiating LFS patient iPSCs to 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), and then to osteoblasts--the cells of origin for 
osteosarcomas. These LFS osteoblasts recapitulate oncogenic properties of 
osteosarcoma, providing an attractive model system for delineating the 
pathogenesis of osteosarcoma. This manuscript demonstrates a protocol for the 
generation of iPSCs from LFS patient fibroblasts, differentiation of iPSCs to 
MSCs, differentiation of MSCs to osteoblasts, and in vivo tumorigenesis using 
LFS osteoblasts. This iPSC disease model can be extended to identify potential 
biomarkers or therapeutic targets for LFS-associated osteosarcoma.

DOI: 10.3791/57664
PMCID: PMC6101728
PMID: 29985349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]