---
reference_id: "PMID:28406602"
title: Myhre Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Lin AE
- Brunetti-Pierri N
- Lindsay ME
- Schimmenti LA
- Starr LJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myhre Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Lin AE, Brunetti-Pierri N, Lindsay ME, Schimmenti LA, Starr LJ

## Content

1. Myhre Syndrome.

Lin AE(1), Brunetti-Pierri N(2), Lindsay ME(1), Schimmenti LA(3), Starr LJ(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2017 Apr 13 [updated 2024 Dec 12].

Author information:
(1)MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Naples "Federico II", 
Naples, Italy
(3)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
(4)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Myhre syndrome is a multisystem progressive connective 
tissue disorder that often results in significant complications. The highly 
distinctive (and often severe) findings of joint stiffness, restrictive lung and 
cardiovascular disease, progressive and proliferative fibrosis, and thickening 
of the skin usually occur spontaneously. Some proliferation such as abnormal 
scarring or adhesions may follow trauma, invasive medical procedures, or 
surgery. Effusions of the heart, airways, lungs, uterus, and peritoneum may 
occur and can progress to fibrosis. Most affected individuals have 
characteristic facial features (short palpebral fissures, deeply set eyes, 
maxillary underdevelopment, short philtrum, thin vermilion of the upper lip, 
narrow mouth, and prognathism) and developmental delay / cognitive disability, 
typically in the mild-to-moderate range. Neurobehavioral issues may include 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 
and/or anxiety. Although immunoglobulin (Ig) G and IgA deficiency are rare, 
affected individuals can experience recurrent infections (including otitis 
media, sinusitis, mastoiditis, or croup). Hearing loss can progress over time. 
Growth may be impaired in early life. Most adolescents develop obesity. Eye 
findings can include refractive errors, astigmatism, corectopia, and optic nerve 
anomalies. Gastrointestinal (GI) issues may include gastroesophageal reflux 
disease, constipation, and encopresis. Less commonly, stenosis of the GI tract, 
Hirschsprung disease, and/or metabolic dysfunction-associated liver disease may 
be observed.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Myhre syndrome is established in a proband 
with characteristic clinical findings and a heterozygous (typically recurrent) 
pathogenic variant in SMAD4 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Feeding therapy for those with poor 
weight gain or feeding issues; gastrostomy tube placement may be required for 
persistent feeding issues; referral to nutrition for those who develop obesity; 
consideration of balloon dilation or long-term tracheostomy for those with 
complete or recurrent tracheal stenosis; use of smaller-size, uncuffed 
endotracheal tubes for anesthesia; intralesional steroids for some keloids; 
physical therapy for decreased range of motion of joints; orthotics for tiptoe 
walking; dietary management, stool softeners, prokinetics, osmotic agents, or 
laxatives for constipation; guarded treatment with minimal instrumentation of 
the GI tract for gastrointestinal stenosis. Standard treatment for orofacial 
clefting, velopharyngeal insufficiency, developmental delay / intellectual 
disability, cardiovascular disease including systemic/pulmonary hypertension, 
restrictive lung disease, sleep apnea, immunodeficiency, tethered spinal cord, 
frequent fractures, eye/vision issues, hearing loss, protein-losing enteropathy, 
liver dysfunction, diabetes mellitus, cryptorchidism, hypospadias, and epilepsy. 
Prevention of secondary complications: Limiting tissue trauma appears to be the 
single most important preventive measure. When possible, alternative noninvasive 
approaches should be pursued during diagnosis and management. Surveillance: At 
each visit, measure growth parameters; right upper arm blood pressure (if 
tolerated); monitor for evidence of respiratory insufficiency and obtain pulse 
oxygen measurement; evaluate for signs/symptoms of upper airway stenosis and 
sleep apnea; monitor for constipation and signs/symptoms of GI stenosis; monitor 
developmental progress and educational needs, including mobility and self-help 
skills; assess for signs/symptoms of anxiety, ASD, and ADHD; assess for 
signs/symptoms of frequent infections; monitor for premature puberty in 
childhood; encourage nonstrenuous exercise, healthy eating, and weight 
management. Annually (or as clinically indicated), pulmonary function studies or 
impulse oscillometry in children age six years and older, if able to cooperate 
with test maneuvers; ophthalmology evaluation; hearing evaluation; assessment 
for abnormal scarring. Every two years, echocardiogram (in an asymptomatic 
person with a normal echocardiogram at initial diagnosis). Every five to ten 
years starting in childhood (age 5-10 years), CT or MR angiogram of the aorta, 
the exact frequency of which is based on the presence and degree of aortic 
disease. The decision to use CT or MR depends on the age and behavior of 
individual, the imaging center, and the availability of supportive services 
("Child Life") to accomplish without anesthesia. Starting in the second decade, 
low threshold for fasting blood sugar and hemoglobin A1c to assess for diabetes 
mellitus; periodic DXA scan to assess bone mineral density; monitor for heavy 
menses. As clinically indicated, more extensive cardiovascular imaging in 
persons with abnormal findings at initial diagnosis; renal bladder ultrasound, 
if there is intractable incontinence. As needed, in the third decade of life, 
coronary CT angiography; evaluation for sleep apnea and need for intervention. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Smoking; tissue trauma; elective tracheal 
surgery/intubation (if possible); tracheal resection; growth hormone therapy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Myhre syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder typically 
caused by a de novo pathogenic variant. De novo SMAD4 pathogenic variants that 
have been evaluated for parent of origin to date have all been paternal and have 
been associated with advanced paternal age. A few individuals diagnosed with 
Myhre syndrome have the disorder as the result of a SMAD4 pathogenic variant 
inherited from an affected parent. Each child of an individual with Myhre 
syndrome has a 50% chance of inheriting the SMAD4 pathogenic variant. Once the 
SMAD4 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 28406602