---
reference_id: "PMID:37628569"
title: Brain Targeted AAV1-GALC Gene Therapy Reduces Psychosine and Extends Lifespan in a Mouse Model of Krabbe Disease.
authors:
- Herdt AR
- Peng H
- Dickson DW
- Golde TE
- Eckman EA
- Lee CW
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14081517
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Galactosylceramidase
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/genetics, therapy"
- Psychosine
- Longevity/genetics
- Hydrolases
- Prosencephalon
- White Matter
- Body Weight
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain Targeted AAV1-GALC Gene Therapy Reduces Psychosine and Extends Lifespan in a Mouse Model of Krabbe Disease.
**Authors:** Herdt AR, Peng H, Dickson DW, Golde TE, Eckman EA, Lee CW
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14081517](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14081517)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jul 25;14(8):1517. doi: 10.3390/genes14081517.

Brain Targeted AAV1-GALC Gene Therapy Reduces Psychosine and Extends Lifespan in 
a Mouse Model of Krabbe Disease.

Herdt AR(1)(2)(3), Peng H(1)(2)(3), Dickson DW(4), Golde TE(5)(6)(7), Eckman 
EA(1)(2)(3), Lee CW(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Institute of New Jersey, Cedar Knolls, NJ 07927, USA.
(2)MidAtlantic Neonatology Associates (MANA), Morristown, NJ 07960, USA.
(3)Atlantic Health System, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA 30322, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(7)Emory Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.

Krabbe disease (KD) is a progressive and devasting neurological disorder that 
leads to the toxic accumulation of psychosine in the white matter of the central 
nervous system (CNS). The condition is inherited via biallelic, loss-of-function 
mutations in the galactosylceramidase (GALC) gene. To rescue GALC gene function 
in the CNS of the twitcher mouse model of KD, an adeno-associated virus serotype 
1 vector expressing murine GALC under control of a chicken β-actin promoter 
(AAV1-GALC) was administered to newborn mice by unilateral 
intracerebroventricular injection. AAV1-GALC treatment significantly improved 
body weight gain and survival of the twitcher mice (n = 8) when compared with 
untreated controls (n = 5). The maximum weight gain after postnatal day 10 was 
significantly increased from 81% to 217%. The median lifespan was extended from 
43 days to 78 days (range: 74-88 days) in the AAV1-GALC-treated group. 
Widespread expression of GALC protein and alleviation of KD neuropathology were 
detected in the CNS of the treated mice when examined at the moribund stage. 
Functionally, elevated levels of psychosine were completely normalized in the 
forebrain region of the treated mice. In the posterior region, which includes 
the mid- and the hindbrain, psychosine was reduced by an average of 77% (range: 
53-93%) compared to the controls. Notably, psychosine levels in this region were 
inversely correlated with body weight and lifespan of AAV1-GALC-treated mice, 
suggesting that the degree of viral transduction of posterior brain regions 
following ventricular injection determined treatment efficacy on growth and 
survivability, respectively. Overall, our results suggest that viral vector 
delivery via the cerebroventricular system can partially correct psychosine 
accumulation in brain that leads to slower disease progression in KD.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14081517
PMCID: PMC10454254
PMID: 37628569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interest.