---
reference_id: "PMID:21529751"
title: "Human mutations in NDE1 cause extreme microcephaly with lissencephaly [corrected]."
authors:
- Alkuraya FS
- Cai X
- Emery C
- Mochida GH
- Al-Dosari MS
- Felie JM
- Hill RS
- Barry BJ
- Partlow JN
- Gascon GG
- Kentab A
- Jan M
- Shaheen R
- Feng Y
- Walsh CA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.003
keywords:
- Animals
- CDC2 Protein Kinase/metabolism
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Line
- Cell Movement
- Centrosome/metabolism
- "Cerebral Cortex/embryology, growth & development"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Genetic Linkage
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Lissencephaly/genetics
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- Neurons/cytology
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Stability
- Spindle Apparatus/metabolism
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human mutations in NDE1 cause extreme microcephaly with lissencephaly [corrected].
**Authors:** Alkuraya FS, Cai X, Emery C, Mochida GH, Al-Dosari MS, Felie JM, Hill RS, Barry BJ, Partlow JN, Gascon GG, Kentab A, Jan M, Shaheen R, Feng Y, Walsh CA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.003)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 May 13;88(5):536-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.003.
Epub  2011 Apr 28.

Human mutations in NDE1 cause extreme microcephaly with lissencephaly
[corrected].

Alkuraya FS(1), Cai X, Emery C, Mochida GH, Al-Dosari MS, Felie JM, Hill RS,
Barry BJ, Partlow JN, Gascon GG, Kentab A, Jan M, Shaheen R, Feng Y, Walsh CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2011 May 13;88(5):677.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2011 Sep;80(3):241-2. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01753.x.

Genes disrupted in human microcephaly (meaning "small brain") define key
regulators of neural progenitor proliferation and cell-fate specification. In
comparison, genes mutated in human lissencephaly (lissos means smooth and
cephalos means brain) highlight critical regulators of neuronal migration. Here,
we report two families with extreme microcephaly and grossly simplified cortical
gyral structure, a condition referred to as microlissencephaly, and show that
they carry homozygous frameshift mutations in NDE1, which encodes a multidomain
protein that localizes to the centrosome and mitotic spindle poles. Both human
mutations in NDE1 truncate the C-terminal NDE1domains, which are essential for
interactions with cytoplasmic dynein and thus for regulation of cytoskeletal
dynamics in mitosis and for cell-cycle-dependent phosphorylation of NDE1 by
Cdk1. We show that the patient NDE1 proteins are unstable, cannot bind
cytoplasmic dynein, and do not localize properly to the centrosome.
Additionally, we show that CDK1 phosphorylation at T246, which is within the
C-terminal region disrupted by the mutations, is required for cell-cycle
progression from the G2 to the M phase. The role of NDE1 in cell-cycle
progression probably contributes to the profound neuronal proliferation defects
evident in Nde1-null mice and patients with NDE1 mutations, demonstrating the
essential role of NDE1 in human cerebral cortical neurogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.003
PMCID: PMC3146728
PMID: 21529751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
