---
reference_id: "PMID:35896857"
title: "Radiofrequency echographic multispectrometry (REMS): an innovative technique for the assessment of bone status in young women with anorexia nervosa."
authors:
- Caffarelli C
- Al Refaie A
- De Vita M
- Tomai Pitinca MD
- Goracci A
- Fagiolini A
- Gonnelli S
journal: Eat Weight Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s40519-022-01450-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Bone Density
- "Anorexia Nervosa/diagnostic imaging, complications"
- Cohort Studies
- Reproducibility of Results
- "Fractures, Bone/complications"
- "Absorptiometry, Photon/adverse effects, methods"
- Spinal Fractures/etiology
- Femur Neck/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiofrequency echographic multispectrometry (REMS): an innovative technique for the assessment of bone status in young women with anorexia nervosa.
**Authors:** Caffarelli C, Al Refaie A, De Vita M, Tomai Pitinca MD, Goracci A, Fagiolini A, Gonnelli S
**Journal:** Eat Weight Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40519-022-01450-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40519-022-01450-2)

## Content

1. Eat Weight Disord. 2022 Dec;27(8):3207-3213. doi: 10.1007/s40519-022-01450-2.
Epub 2022 Jul 28.

Radiofrequency echographic multispectrometry (REMS): an innovative technique for
the assessment of bone status in young women with anorexia nervosa.

Caffarelli C(1), Al Refaie A(2), De Vita M(2), Tomai Pitinca MD(2), Goracci
A(3), Fagiolini A(3), Gonnelli S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Surgery and
Neuroscience, University of Siena, Policlinico Le Scotte, Viale Bracci 2, 53100,
Siena, Italy. carlacaffarelli@yahoo.it.
(2)Division of Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Surgery and
Neuroscience, University of Siena, Policlinico Le Scotte, Viale Bracci 2, 53100,
Siena, Italy.
(3)Division of Psychiatry, Department of Molecular Medicine, University of
Siena, Siena, Italy.

PURPOSE: Reduced bone mineral density (BMD) and increase risk of fragility
fracture are common complication of anorexia nervosa (AN). BMD by dual-energy
X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) present several limits in subjects with AN. This
study aimed to evaluate the usefulness of the new Radiofrequency echographic
multispectrometry (REMS) technique in the assessment of bone status in young
women with AN.
METHODS: In a cohort of 50 subjects with restrictive AN and in 30 healthy
controls, we measured BMD at the lumbar spine (LS-BMD), at femoral neck (FN-BMD)
and total hip (TH-BMD) using both DXA and REMS technique.
RESULTS: BMD evaluated by DXA and REMS technique at all measurement sites were
all significantly (p < 0.01) lower in subjects suffering from AN subjects than
in controls. Good correlations were detected between BMD by DXA and BMD by REMS
measurements at LS (r = 0.64, p < 0.01) at FN (r = 0.86, p < 0.01) and at TH
(r = 0.84, p < 0.01) in subjects suffering from AN. Moreover, Bland-Altman
analysis confirmed the good agreement between the two techniques. The subjects
suffering from AN with previous vertebral fragility fractures presented lower
values of both BMD-LS and BMD-TH by DXA and by REMS with respect to those
without fractures; however, the difference was significant only for BMD-TH by
REMS (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that REMS technique due to its characteristic of
precision and reproducibility may represent an important tool for the evaluation
of the changes in bone status in AN young women, especially during the fertile
age and in case of pregnancy and breastfeeding.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level of evidence: level III cohort study.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40519-022-01450-2
PMCID: PMC9803747
PMID: 35896857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding
author states that there is no conflict of interest.
