---
reference_id: "PMID:31187658"
title: Characterizing environmental asthma triggers and healthcare use patterns in Puerto Rico.
authors:
- Lewis LM
- Mirabelli MC
- Beavers SF
- Kennedy CM
- Shriber J
- Stearns D
- Morales González JJ
- Santiago MS
- Félix IM
- Ruiz-Serrano K
- Dirlikov E
- Lozier MJ
- Sircar K
- Flanders WD
- Rivera-García B
- Irizarry-Ramos J
- Bolaños-Rosero B
journal: J Asthma
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/02770903.2019.1612907
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterizing environmental asthma triggers and healthcare use patterns in Puerto Rico.
**Authors:** Lewis LM, Mirabelli MC, Beavers SF, Kennedy CM, Shriber J, Stearns D, Morales González JJ, Santiago MS, Félix IM, Ruiz-Serrano K, Dirlikov E, Lozier MJ, Sircar K, Flanders WD, Rivera-García B, Irizarry-Ramos J, Bolaños-Rosero B
**Journal:** J Asthma (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/02770903.2019.1612907](https://doi.org/10.1080/02770903.2019.1612907)

## Content

1. J Asthma. 2020 Aug;57(8):886-897. doi: 10.1080/02770903.2019.1612907. Epub
2019  Jun 12.

Characterizing environmental asthma triggers and healthcare use patterns in 
Puerto Rico.

Lewis LM(1)(2), Mirabelli MC(1), Beavers SF(1), Kennedy CM(3), Shriber J(3), 
Stearns D(1), Morales González JJ(4), Santiago MS(5), Félix IM(6), Ruiz-Serrano 
K(6), Dirlikov E(2)(5), Lozier MJ(7), Sircar K(1), Flanders WD(8), Rivera-García 
B(5), Irizarry-Ramos J(6), Bolaños-Rosero B(9).

Author information:
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Asthma and Community Health 
Branch, National Center for Environmental Health, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Epidemic Intelligence Service, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Lead Poisoning Prevention and 
Environmental Health Tracking Branch, National Center for Environmental Health, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Puerto Rico Department of Health, Auxiliary Secretariat of Planning and 
Development, San Juan, Puerto Rico, USA.
(5)Puerto Rico Department of Health, Office of Epidemiology and Investigation, 
San Juan, Puerto Rico, USA.
(6)Puerto Rico Department of Health, Puerto Rico Asthma Program, Division for 
the Prevention and Control of Chronic Diseases, San Juan, Puerto Rico, USA.
(7)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Dengue Branch, National Center 
for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(9)Department of Microbiology, Medical Sciences Campus, University of Puerto 
Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico, USA.

Objective: Asthma carries a high burden of disease for residents of Puerto Rico. 
We conducted this study to better understand asthma-related healthcare use and 
to examine potential asthma triggers.Methods: We characterized asthma-related 
healthcare use in 2013 by demographics, region, and date using outpatient, 
hospital, and emergency department (ED) insurance claims with a primary 
diagnostic ICD-9-CM code of 493.XX. We examined environmental asthma triggers, 
including outdoor allergens (i.e., mold and pollen), particulate pollution, and 
influenza-like illness. Analyses included descriptive statistics and Poisson 
time-series regression.Results: During 2013, there were 550,655 medical asthma 
claims reported to the Puerto Rico Healthcare Utilization database, representing 
148 asthma claims/1,000 persons; 71% of asthma claims were outpatient visits, 
19% were hospitalizations, and 10% were ED visits. Females (63%), children aged 
≤9 years (77% among children), and adults aged ≥45 years (80% among adults) had 
the majority of asthma claims. Among health regions, Caguas had the highest 
asthma claim-rate at 142/1,000 persons (overall health region claim-rate = 108). 
Environmental exposures varied across the year and demonstrated seasonal 
patterns. Metro health region regression models showed positive associations 
between increases in mold and particulate matter <10 microns in diameter (PM10) 
and outpatient asthma claims.Conclusions: This study provides information about 
patterns of asthma-related healthcare use across Puerto Rico. Increases in mold 
and PM10 were associated with increases in asthma claims. Targeting educational 
interventions on exposure awareness and reduction techniques, especially to 
persons with higher asthma-related healthcare use, can support asthma control 
activities in public health and clinical settings.

DOI: 10.1080/02770903.2019.1612907
PMCID: PMC8225466
PMID: 31187658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest The authors report no 
conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and 
writing of the paper.