---
reference_id: "PMID:31623876"
title: Novel amyloid precursor protein mutation, Val669Leu ("Seoul APP"), in a Korean patient with early-onset Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Bagyinszky E
- Kang MJ
- Van Giau V
- Shim K
- Pyun JM
- Suh J
- An SSA
- Kim S
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.08.026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel amyloid precursor protein mutation, Val669Leu ("Seoul APP"), in a Korean patient with early-onset Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Bagyinszky E, Kang MJ, Van Giau V, Shim K, Pyun JM, Suh J, An SSA, Kim S
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.08.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.08.026)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Aging. 2019 Dec;84:236.e1-236.e7. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.08.026. Epub 2019 Aug 31.

Novel amyloid precursor protein mutation, Val669Leu ("Seoul APP"), in a Korean 
patient with early-onset Alzheimer's disease.

Bagyinszky E(1), Kang MJ(2), Van Giau V(1), Shim K(1), Pyun JM(3), Suh J(3), An 
SSA(4), Kim S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bionano Technology, Gachon University, Seongnam, Gyeonggi-do, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Veterans Medical Research Institute, Veterans Health 
Service Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University College of Medicine and 
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam-si, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Bionano Technology, Gachon University, Seongnam, Gyeonggi-do, 
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: seong.an@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University College of Medicine and 
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam-si, Republic of Korea. 
Electronic address: neuroksy@snu.ac.kr.

In this study, a novel mutation in APP gene, Val669Leu ("Seoul APP"), was 
reported in a Korean female patient with Alzheimer's disease. She developed 
cognitive decline at 56 years of age, and her memory declined rapidly over 
one-year period from her 1st visit to the hospital. Her Mini-Mental State 
Examination scores dropped from 25/30 to 13/30. Two years later, she developed 
parkinsonian features, myoclonic jerk, and generalized seizure. As the disease 
progressed, aggravated diffuse brain atrophy and small-vessel ischemic lesion 
was also observed, and she became mute and vegetative in 4 years from the 
symptom onset. Magnetic resonance imaging showed mild medial temporal lobe and 
hippocampal atrophy, and 18F-fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography 
showed bilateral temporoparietal hypometabolism. Plasma amyloid oligomer 
analysis revealed highly elevated Aβ oligomers levels in the proband patient. 
Family history revealed positive without biochemical confirmation because family 
members testified similar type of cognitive decline from the proband's mother 
and one of her aunt/uncle. Her half-siblings did not present any signs of memory 
impairment. Sanger sequencing of the proband patient revealed a novel mutation 
in APP gene, Val669Leu, but mutation was not found in her unaffected 
half-sisters. A designed algorithm by Guerreiro et al. on early-onset 
Alzheimer's disease-associated mutations suggested the mutation as possibly 
pathogenic mutation. On the other hand, PolyPhen2 and SIFT tools suggested as 
otherwise. Since the mutation was located nearby the β-secretase cleavage site 
of APP, right next to the Swedish APP (Lys,Met670/671Asn,Leu) mutation, it was 
named as "Seoul APP" mutation. 3D modeling revealed that this mutation could 
result in significant changes in loop orientation of APP and also its 
intramolecular interactions. Hence, a novel APP Val669Leu mutation could alter 
the binding interactions between APP and β-secretase, which may influence the 
Aβ40 and Aβ42 generations.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.08.026
PMID: 31623876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]