---
reference_id: "PMID:17561467"
title: Sustained phosphorylation of mutated FGFR3 is a crucial feature of genetic dwarfism and induces apoptosis in the ATDC5 chondrogenic cell line via PLCgamma-activated STAT1.
authors:
- Harada D
- Yamanaka Y
- Ueda K
- Nishimura R
- Morishima T
- Seino Y
- Tanaka H
journal: Bone
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2006.11.030
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/physiology
- Cell Line
- "Chondrocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- "Dwarfism/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- "Phospholipase C gamma/genetics, metabolism"
- Phosphorylation
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics, metabolism"
- "STAT1 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sustained phosphorylation of mutated FGFR3 is a crucial feature of genetic dwarfism and induces apoptosis in the ATDC5 chondrogenic cell line via PLCgamma-activated STAT1.
**Authors:** Harada D, Yamanaka Y, Ueda K, Nishimura R, Morishima T, Seino Y, Tanaka H
**Journal:** Bone (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2006.11.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2006.11.030)

## Content

1. Bone. 2007 Aug;41(2):273-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2006.11.030. Epub 2007 Feb 9.

Sustained phosphorylation of mutated FGFR3 is a crucial feature of genetic 
dwarfism and induces apoptosis in the ATDC5 chondrogenic cell line via 
PLCgamma-activated STAT1.

Harada D(1), Yamanaka Y, Ueda K, Nishimura R, Morishima T, Seino Y, Tanaka H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University, Graduate School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-Cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

The most frequent type of rhizomelic dwarfism, achondroplasia (ACH), is caused 
by mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene. Mutations 
in FGFR3 result in skeletal dysplasias of variable severity, including mild 
phenotypic effects in hypochondroplasia (HCH), severe phenotypic effects in 
thanatophoric dysplasia types I (TDI) and II (TDII), and severe but survivable 
phenotypic effects in severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and 
acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN). To explore the molecular mechanisms that result 
in the different phenotypes, we investigated the kinetics of mutated versions of 
FGFR3. First, we assayed the phosphorylation states of the mutated FGFR3s and 
found that the level of phosphorylation in TDI-FGFR3 was lower than in 
ACH-FGFR3, although the other mutants were phosphorylated according to 
phenotypic severity. Second, we analyzed the duration of the phosphorylation. 
TDI-FGFR3 was not highly phosphorylated under ligand-free conditions, but the 
peak phosphorylation levels of TDI-FGFR3 and ACH-FGFR3 were maintained for 30 
min after stimulation with FGF-1. Moreover, ligand-dependent phosphorylation of 
TDI-FGFR3, but not ACH-FGFR3, lasted for more than 8 h after FGF-1 
administration. The other mutant proteins showed sustained phosphorylation 
independent of ligand presence. Third, we investigated the intracellular 
localization of the mutant proteins. Immunofluorescence analysis showed 
accumulations of TDII-FGFR3, SADDAN-FGFR3, and a portion of TDI-FGFR3 in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Based on these data, we concluded that sustained 
phosphorylation of FGFR3 causes chondrodysplasia, and the phenotypic severity 
depends on the proportion of ER-localized mutant FGFR3. In FGFR3 signaling, the 
transcription factor, signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) 
inhibit proliferation and induce apoptosis of chondrocytes. Here we reveal that 
phospholipase C gamma (PLCgamma) mediates FGFR3-induced STAT1 activation. Both 
PLCgamma and STAT1 were activated by FGFR3 signaling, but a dominant-negative 
form of PLCgamma (DN-PLCgamma) remarkably reduced STAT1 phosphorylation. 
Apoptosis assays revealed that the constitutively active forms of FGFR3 
(TDII-FGFR3) and STAT1 (STAT1-C) induce apoptosis of chondrogenic ATDC5 cells 
via caspase activity. DN-PLCgamma reduced the apoptosis of ATDC5 cells 
expressing TDII-FGFR3, but over-expression of both DN-PLCgamma and STAT1-C 
induced apoptosis. Therefore, we conclude that a PLCgamma-STAT1 pathway mediates 
apoptotic signaling by FGFR3.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2006.11.030
PMID: 17561467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]