---
reference_id: "PMID:35169541"
title: "Early Lyme disease-associated Guillain Barre Syndrome: A case report."
authors:
- Schrestha K
- Kadkhoda K
journal: IDCases
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2022.e01432
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Lyme disease-associated Guillain Barre Syndrome: A case report.
**Authors:** Schrestha K, Kadkhoda K
**Journal:** IDCases (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.idcr.2022.e01432](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idcr.2022.e01432)

## Content

1. IDCases. 2022 Jan 31;27:e01432. doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2022.e01432. eCollection 
2022.

Early Lyme disease-associated Guillain Barre Syndrome: A case report.

Schrestha K(1), Kadkhoda K(2).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Division, Akron General, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 
USA.
(2)Immunopathology Laboratory, Robert J. Tomsich Pathology & Laboratory Medicine 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Lyme disease is the most common tick-borne disease in the United States. Left 
untreated, it can lead to neuroborreliosis. Here we describe a case of early 
disseminated Lyme disease-associated Guillain Barre Syndrome in a previously 
healthy adult that early clinical suspicion and accurate testing led to proper 
diagnosis and case management. It is important to be aware of Guillain Barre 
Syndrome as an early consequence of Lyme disease especially during tick activity 
season. This case report is meant to raise awareness among clinicians and calls 
for protective measures especially where there is significant outdoor activity.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idcr.2022.e01432
PMCID: PMC8829552
PMID: 35169541

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.