---
reference_id: "PMID:32871349"
title: "The cerebellar degeneration in ataxia-telangiectasia: A case for genome instability."
authors:
- Shiloh Y
journal: DNA Repair (Amst)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2020.102950
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/metabolism
- Cerebellum/pathology
- DNA Damage
- DNA Repair
- Genomic Instability
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The cerebellar degeneration in ataxia-telangiectasia: A case for genome instability.
**Authors:** Shiloh Y
**Journal:** DNA Repair (Amst) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.dnarep.2020.102950](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dnarep.2020.102950)

## Content

1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2020 Nov;95:102950. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2020.102950. Epub
 2020 Aug 23.

The cerebellar degeneration in ataxia-telangiectasia: A case for genome
instability.

Shiloh Y(1).

Author information:
(1)The David and Inez Myers Laboratory for Cancer Genetics, Department of Human
Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Tel Aviv University Medical School, Tel
Aviv, 69978, Israel. Electronic address: yossih@tauex.tau.ac.il.

Research on the molecular pathology of genome instability disorders has advanced
our understanding of the complex mechanisms that safeguard genome stability and
cellular homeostasis at large. Once the culprit genes and their protein products
are identified, an ongoing dialogue develops between the research lab and the
clinic in an effort to link specific disease symptoms to the functions of the
proteins that are missing in the patients. Ataxi A-T elangiectasia (A-T) is a
prominent example of this process. A-T's hallmarks are progressive cerebellar
degeneration, immunodeficiency, chronic lung disease, cancer predisposition,
endocrine abnormalities, segmental premature aging, chromosomal instability and
radiation sensitivity. The disease is caused by absence of the powerful protein
kinase, ATM, best known as the mobilizer of the broad signaling network induced
by double-strand breaks (DSBs) in the DNA. In parallel, ATM also functions in
the maintenance of the cellular redox balance, mitochondrial function and
turnover and many other metabolic circuits. An ongoing discussion in the A-T
field revolves around the question of which ATM function is the one whose
absence is responsible for the most debilitating aspect of A-T - the cerebellar
degeneration. This review suggests that it is the absence of a comprehensive
role of ATM in responding to ongoing DNA damage induced mainly by endogenous
agents. It is the ensuing deterioration and eventual loss of cerebellar Purkinje
cells, which are very vulnerable to ATM absence due to a unique combination of
physiological features, which kindles the cerebellar decay in A-T.

Copyright © 2020 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2020.102950
PMID: 32871349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
