---
reference_id: "PMID:9292944"
title: "Increased production of B-cell growth factor by T lymphocytes in Graves' thyroid: possible role of CD4+ CD29+ cells."
authors:
- Goto Y
- Itoh M
- Ohta Y
- Ogawa N
- Goto Y
- Ohashi H
journal: Thyroid
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1089/thy.1997.7.567
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased production of B-cell growth factor by T lymphocytes in Graves' thyroid: possible role of CD4+ CD29+ cells.
**Authors:** Goto Y, Itoh M, Ohta Y, Ogawa N, Goto Y, Ohashi H
**Journal:** Thyroid (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.1997.7.567](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.1997.7.567)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 1997 Aug;7(4):567-73. doi: 10.1089/thy.1997.7.567.

Increased production of B-cell growth factor by T lymphocytes in Graves' 
thyroid: possible role of CD4+ CD29+ cells.

Goto Y(1), Itoh M, Ohta Y, Ogawa N, Goto Y, Ohashi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
Japan.

The possible role of B-cell growth factor (BCGF) in the abnormal activation of B 
cells in Graves' disease was investigated by measuring the production of BCGF 
by, and analyzing lymphocyte subsets of, peripheral blood cells and thyroid 
infiltrates from 10 patients with Graves' disease and peripheral blood cells 
from 9 healthy controls. Medium from peripheral blood and intrathyroidal T cells 
cultured in the absence or presence of phytohemagglutinin (PHA) was subjected to 
a bioassay with a cell line, KS-3.F10, responsive only to BCGF. The percentages 
of activated (DR+CD4+ and DR+CD8+) T cells in the thyroid of Graves' patients 
were significantly higher than those in the peripheral blood of patients or 
controls, whereas the percentage of naive (CD4+CD45RA+) T cells was lower. The 
percentage of B (CD20+) cells in peripheral blood was increased in patients 
compared with controls. BCGF production by T cells from the thyroid or 
peripheral blood of Graves' patients, in the absence or presence of PHA, was 
significantly greater than that by peripheral T cells from healthy controls. 
PHA-stimulated BCGF production by peripheral T cells of Graves' patients showed 
a significant negative correlation with the percentage of DR+CD8+ cells in 
peripheral blood, whereas spontaneous and PHA-stimulated BCGF production by 
intrathyroidal T cells from Graves' patients showed a positive correlation with 
the serum concentrations of triiodothyronine (T3) or thyroxine (T4). The 
different distributions of CD4+ T-cell subsets between thyroid and peripheral 
blood suggest an important role for intrathyroidal helper/suppressor-inducer 
(CD4+CD29+) cells in the increased production of BCGF and consequent 
exacerbation of autoimmunity in Graves' disease.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.1997.7.567
PMID: 9292944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]