---
reference_id: "PMID:18307994"
title: Enhanced binding of TBK1 by an optineurin mutant that causes a familial form of primary open angle glaucoma.
authors:
- Morton S
- Hesson L
- Peggie M
- Cohen P
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.047
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enhanced binding of TBK1 by an optineurin mutant that causes a familial form of primary open angle glaucoma.
**Authors:** Morton S, Hesson L, Peggie M, Cohen P
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.047)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2008 Mar 19;582(6):997-1002. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.047.
Epub  2008 Feb 26.

Enhanced binding of TBK1 by an optineurin mutant that causes a familial form of 
primary open angle glaucoma.

Morton S(1), Hesson L, Peggie M, Cohen P.

Author information:
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, College of Life Sciences, Sir James Black 
Centre, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) was identified as a binding partner for Optineurin 
(OPTN) in two-hybrid screens, an interaction confirmed by 
overexpression/immunoprecipitation experiments in HEK293 cells and by 
coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous OPTN and TBK1 from cell extracts. A TBK1 
binding site was located between residues 1-127 of OPTN, residues 78-121 
displaying striking homology to the TBK1-binding domain of TANK. The 
OPTN-binding domain was localised to residues 601-729 of TBK1, while TBK1[1-688] 
which cannot bind to TANK, did not interact with OPTN. The OPTN[E50K] mutant 
associated with Primary Open Angle Glaucoma (POAG) displayed strikingly enhanced 
binding to TBK1, suggesting that this interaction may contribute to familial 
POAG caused by this mutation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.047
PMID: 18307994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]