---
reference_id: "PMID:21961213"
title: Principles of epidemiological modelling.
authors:
- Garner MG
- Hamilton SA
journal: Rev Sci Tech
year: '2011'
doi: 10.20506/rst.30.2.2045
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Principles of epidemiological modelling.
**Authors:** Garner MG, Hamilton SA
**Journal:** Rev Sci Tech (2011)
**DOI:** [10.20506/rst.30.2.2045](https://doi.org/10.20506/rst.30.2.2045)

## Content

1. Rev Sci Tech. 2011 Aug;30(2):407-16. doi: 10.20506/rst.30.2.2045.

Principles of epidemiological modelling.

Garner MG(1), Hamilton SA.

Author information:
(1)Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer, Biosecurity Services Group, 
Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, G.P.O. 
Box 858 Canberra, ACT, 2601, Australia.

Epidemiological modelling can be a powerful tool to assist animal health policy 
development and disease prevention and control. Models can vary from simple 
deterministic mathematical models through to complex spatially-explicit 
stochastic simulations and decision support systems. The approach used will vary 
depending on the purpose of the study, how well the epidemiology of a disease is 
understood, the amount and quality of data available, and the background and 
experience of the modellers. Epidemiological models can be classified into 
various categories depending on their treatment of variability, chance and 
uncertainty (deterministic or stochastic), time (continuous or discrete 
intervals), space (non-spatial or spatial) and the structure of the population 
(homogenous or heterogeneous mixing). The increasing sophistication of 
computers, together with greater recognition of the importance of spatial 
elements in the spread and control of disease, mean that models which 
incorporate spatial components are becoming more important in epidemiological 
studies. Multidisciplinary approaches using a range of new technologies make it 
possible to build more sophisticated models of animal disease. New generation 
epidemiological models enable disease to be studied in the context of physical, 
economic, technological, health, media and political infrastructures. To be 
useful in policy development, models must be fit for purpose and appropriately 
verified and validated. This involves ensuring that the model is an adequate 
representation of the system under study and that its outputs are sufficiently 
accurate and precise for the intended purpose. Finally, models are just one tool 
for providing technical advice, and should not be considered in isolation from 
data from experimental and field studies.

DOI: 10.20506/rst.30.2.2045
PMID: 21961213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]