---
reference_id: "PMID:11532718"
title: The emerging role of glutamate in the pathophysiology and treatment of schizophrenia.
authors:
- Goff DC
- Coyle JT
journal: Am J Psychiatry
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.158.9.1367
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The emerging role of glutamate in the pathophysiology and treatment of schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Goff DC, Coyle JT
**Journal:** Am J Psychiatry (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1176/appi.ajp.158.9.1367](https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.158.9.1367)

## Content

1. Am J Psychiatry. 2001 Sep;158(9):1367-77. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.158.9.1367.

The emerging role of glutamate in the pathophysiology and treatment of 
schizophrenia.

Goff DC(1), Coyle JT.

Author information:
(1)Schizophrenia Program, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Research has implicated dysfunction of glutamatergic 
neurotransmission in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. This review evaluates 
evidence from preclinical and clinical studies that brain glutamatergic 
neurotransmission is altered in schizophrenia, may affect symptom expression, 
and is modulated by antipsychotic drugs.
METHOD: A comprehensive review of scientific articles published over the last 
decade that address the role of glutamate in the pathophysiology of 
schizophrenia was carried out.
RESULTS: Glutamatergic neurons are the major excitatory pathways linking the 
cortex, limbic system, and thalamus, regions that have been implicated in 
schizophrenia. Postmortem studies have revealed alterations in pre- and 
postsynaptic markers for glutamatergic neurons in several brain regions in 
schizophrenia. The N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) subtype of glutamate receptor 
may be particularly important as blockade of this receptor by the dissociative 
anesthetics reproduces in normal subjects the symptomatic manifestations of 
schizophrenia, including negative symptoms and cognitive impairments, and 
increases dopamine release in the mesolimbic system. Agents that indirectly 
enhance NMDA receptor function via the glycine modulatory site reduce negative 
symptoms and variably improve cognitive functioning in schizophrenic subjects 
receiving typical antipsychotics.
CONCLUSIONS: Dysfunction of glutamatergic neurotransmission may play an 
important role in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, especially of the 
negative symptoms and cognitive impairments associated with the disorder, and is 
a promising target for drug development.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.158.9.1367
PMID: 11532718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]