---
reference_id: "PMID:36899876"
title: Role of Oligodendrocyte Lineage Cells in Multiple System Atrophy.
authors:
- Hsiao JH
- Tanglay O
- Li AA
- Strobbe AYG
- Kim WS
- Halliday GM
- Fu YH
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12050739
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Oligodendrocyte Lineage Cells in Multiple System Atrophy.
**Authors:** Hsiao JH, Tanglay O, Li AA, Strobbe AYG, Kim WS, Halliday GM, Fu YH
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12050739](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12050739)

## Content

Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a debilitating movement disorder with unknown etiology. Patients present characteristic parkinsonism and/or cerebellar dysfunction in the clinical phase, resulting from progressive deterioration in the nigrostriatal and olivopontocerebellar regions. MSA patients have a prodromal phase subsequent to the insidious onset of neuropathology. Therefore, understanding the early pathological events is important in determining the pathogenesis, which will assist with developing disease-modifying therapy. Although the definite diagnosis of MSA relies on the positive post-mortem finding of oligodendroglial inclusions composed of α-synuclein, only recently has MSA been verified as an oligodendrogliopathy with secondary neuronal degeneration. We review up-to-date knowledge of human oligodendrocyte lineage cells and their association with α-synuclein, and discuss the postulated mechanisms of how oligodendrogliopathy develops, oligodendrocyte progenitor cells as the potential origins of the toxic seeds of α-synuclein, and the possible networks through which oligodendrogliopathy induces neuronal loss. Our insights will shed new light on the research directions for future MSA studies.

PMID: 36899876
