---
reference_id: "PMID:35756986"
title: "Exercise and Rehabilitation in People With Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Buryk-Iggers S
- Mittal N
- Santa Mina D
- Adams SC
- Englesakis M
- Rachinsky M
- Lopez-Hernandez L
- Hussey L
- McGillis L
- McLean L
- Laflamme C
- Rozenberg D
- Clarke H
journal: Arch Rehabil Res Clin Transl
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.arrct.2022.100189
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exercise and Rehabilitation in People With Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Buryk-Iggers S, Mittal N, Santa Mina D, Adams SC, Englesakis M, Rachinsky M, Lopez-Hernandez L, Hussey L, McGillis L, McLean L, Laflamme C, Rozenberg D, Clarke H
**Journal:** Arch Rehabil Res Clin Transl (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arrct.2022.100189](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arrct.2022.100189)

## Content

1. Arch Rehabil Res Clin Transl. 2022 Mar 4;4(2):100189. doi: 
10.1016/j.arrct.2022.100189. eCollection 2022 Jun.

Exercise and Rehabilitation in People With Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: A Systematic 
Review.

Buryk-Iggers S(1)(2), Mittal N(1)(2)(3), Santa Mina D(1)(2)(4), Adams 
SC(1)(5)(6), Englesakis M(7), Rachinsky M(2)(4), Lopez-Hernandez L(2), Hussey 
L(2), McGillis L(2), McLean L(2), Laflamme C(2)(3), Rozenberg D(3)(8), Clarke 
H(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology and Physical Education, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)GoodHope Ehlers Danlos Syndrome Clinic, Toronto General Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Division of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Management, University Health Network, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Ted Rogers Cardiotoxicity Prevention Program, Peter Munk Cardiac Centre, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Library and Information Services Toronto General Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(8)Department of Medicine, Respirology, Toronto General Hospital Research 
Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To conduct a systematic review examining the effect of exercise and 
rehabilitation in people with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS).
DATA SOURCES: The following databases were systematically searched: MEDLINE, 
MEDLINE In-Process/ePubs, Embase, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled 
Trials, PsycINFO, and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health. The final 
time point captured by the search is November 27, 2020.
STUDY SELECTION: Eligible study designs included case-control, case-series, 
prospective cohort, retrospective cohort, and intervention studies of structured 
exercise or rehabilitation interventions. Eligible populations included adults 
(18 years or older) with EDS (all subtypes) and hypermobility spectrum 
disorders. The search was restricted to articles published in English.
DATA EXTRACTION: Data were extracted by 2 independent reviewers. Risk of bias 
was assessed using the Physiotherapy Evidence Database (PEDro) scale for 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and Risk Of Bias In Nonrandomized Studies of 
Interventions (ROBINS-I) for non-RCTs. Reporting quality of RCTs was assessed 
using the Consolidated Standards for Reporting of Trials statement with the 
harms extension. Reporting was guided by the Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses checklist.
DATA SYNTHESIS: The search yielded 10 eligible studies including 330 
participants. The study designs included 5 RCTs, 1 cohort, 2 single-arm 
interventions, 1 retrospective, and 1 feasibility study. All studies showed some 
improvement in a physical and/or psychological outcome after the intervention 
period. One adverse event (nonserious) potentially related to the intervention 
was reported. Of the 5 RCTs, 2 were rated as high quality with low risk of bias 
using PEDro, and the majority of non-RCTs were rated as critical risk of bias by 
ROBINS-I.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that exercise and rehabilitation may be 
beneficial for various physical and psychological outcomes. Adequately powered 
and rigorous RCTs of exercise and rehabilitation interventions for people with 
EDS are needed.

Crown Copyright © 2022 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of American Congress 
of Rehabilitation Medicine.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arrct.2022.100189
PMCID: PMC9214343
PMID: 35756986