---
reference_id: "PMID:11175341"
title: Grb2 downregulation leads to Akt inactivation in heregulin-stimulated and ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells.
authors:
- Lim SJ
- Lopez-Berestein G
- Hung MC
- Lupu R
- Tari AM
journal: Oncogene
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1204014
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- "Breast Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Division/drug effects
- Down-Regulation
- Female
- GRB2 Adaptor Protein
- Humans
- "Liposomes/administration & dosage"
- "Neuregulin-1/genetics, pharmacology"
- "Oligodeoxyribonucleotides, Antisense/pharmacology"
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/metabolism
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt
- "Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Transfection
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Grb2 downregulation leads to Akt inactivation in heregulin-stimulated and ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells.
**Authors:** Lim SJ, Lopez-Berestein G, Hung MC, Lupu R, Tari AM
**Journal:** Oncogene (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1204014](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1204014)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 14;19(54):6271-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1204014.

Grb2 downregulation leads to Akt inactivation in heregulin-stimulated and
ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells.

Lim SJ(1), Lopez-Berestein G, Hung MC, Lupu R, Tari AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioimmunotherapy, Section of Immunobiology and Drug Carriers,
The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

ErbB2 can be activated by its own overexpression or be transactivated by the
heregulin polypeptide growth factor. Activation of ErbB2 leads to breast cancer
cell proliferation, presumably by inducing the activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1,2 (Erk1,2) and Akt. We have previously reported that
the growth factor receptor bound protein-2 (Grb2) is required for the
proliferation of ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. We investigated here
whether Grb2 protein plays a role in heregulin-stimulated proliferation. Grb2
protein inhibition led to growth inhibition of heregulin-stimulated breast
cancer cells, but not Erk1,2 inactivation. These findings are similar to our
earlier observations in ErbB2-overexpressing cells. Since Akt can also be
activated by heregulin, the effects of Grb2 inhibition on Akt were examined. Akt
was inactivated following Grb2 downregulation in heregulin-stimulated breast
cancer cells. We then examined the effects of Grb2 downregulation on Akt in
ErbB2-overexpressing cells in the absence of heregulin. Similar to
heregulin-stimulated cells, Grb2 inhibition also led to Akt inactivation in
ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. Our results indicate that the
activation of ErbB2 by heregulin or by its overexpression requires Grb2 to
stimulate the Akt pathway to propagate mitogenic signals.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1204014
PMID: 11175341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
