---
reference_id: "PMID:29799516"
title: Epstein Barr Virus-Associated Hodgkin Lymphoma.
authors:
- Carbone A
- Gloghini A
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3390/cancers10060163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epstein Barr Virus-Associated Hodgkin Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Carbone A, Gloghini A
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers10060163](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers10060163)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2018 May 25;10(6):163. doi: 10.3390/cancers10060163.

Epstein Barr Virus-Associated Hodgkin Lymphoma.

Carbone A(1), Gloghini A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico Aviano, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, IRCCS, Via F. Gallini 2, 33081 Aviano, Italy. acarbone@cro.it.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS,
Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Via G. Venezian 1, I-20133 Milano, Italy.
annunziata.gloghini@istitutotumori.mi.it.

Abstract: Classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) is a distinct clinical and
pathological entity with heterogeneous genetic and virological features, with
regards to Epstein⁻Barr virus (EBV) infection. The variable association of cHL
with EBV infection is probably related to the different levels of patient
immunosuppression, both locally in the tumour tissue and at the systemic level.
This review paper focuses on EBV-related cHL highlighting pathogenetic and
pathological features that may impact pathobiology-driven treatment for the
affected patients.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers10060163
PMCID: PMC6025037
PMID: 29799516

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest
