---
reference_id: "PMID:41033542"
title: Re-evaluating ferritin thresholds to diagnose iron deficiency.
authors:
- Troike KM
- McShane AJ
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2025.111020
keywords:
- Humans
- Ferritins/blood
- Female
- Male
- "Anemia, Iron-Deficiency/diagnosis, blood"
- Adult
- Biomarkers/blood
- Middle Aged
- ROC Curve
- Reference Values
- Iron Deficiencies
- Iron/blood
- Aged
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Hemoglobins/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Re-evaluating ferritin thresholds to diagnose iron deficiency.
**Authors:** Troike KM, McShane AJ
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2025.111020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2025.111020)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 2025 Dec;140:111020. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2025.111020.
Epub  2025 Sep 29.

Re-evaluating ferritin thresholds to diagnose iron deficiency.

Troike KM(1), McShane AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States.
(2)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States. Electronic address: 
mcshana@ccf.org.

BACKGROUND: Iron deficiency (ID) and iron deficiency anemia (IDA) are prevalent 
and treatable conditions which disproportionately affect women. Serum ferritin 
is the most sensitive biomarker for ID and IDA, but its utility in clinical 
decision making is limited by sex-specific reference intervals (RIs) that are 
frequently lower than evidence-based recommendations. The inclusion of 
asymptomatic, iron-depleted individuals in RI studies likely accounts for 
inappropriate ferritin thresholds, and a lower cutoff of 30 µg/L has been 
proposed by an expert consensus panel to improve sensitivity.In this study, we 
assessed ferritin RIs for diagnosing ID and IDA in our patient population.
METHODS: Patient data, including age, sex assigned at birth, hemoglobin, and 
iron markers, were extracted from the laboratory information system (LIS). 
Patients were stratified into iron replete (IR), ID, or IDA groups based on 
measurements for iron, transferrin saturation, and hemoglobin. Ferritin values 
from the IR group were used to generate new reference ranges and receiver 
operator characteristic (ROC) curves were plotted to define optimal ferritin 
cutoffs for diagnosis of ID and IDA.
RESULTS: Ferritin RIs generated from the IR group had lower limit cutoffs of 
16.9 µg/L and 30 µg/L for females and males, respectively. Youden Index analysis 
of ROC curves identified optimal cutoffs of 45 µg/L and 70 µg/L for ID in 
females and males, respectively, improving diagnostic sensitivity by 44 % in the 
female group.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings are consistent with recommendations for increasing 
ferritin cutoffs and demonstrate the need for clinical laboratories to 
re-examine ferritin RIs, particularly for ID diagnosis in the female patient 
population.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2025.111020
PMID: 41033542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.