---
reference_id: "PMID:36741086"
title: "Case report: A de novo Non-sense SOX9 mutation (p.Q417*) located in transactivation domain is Responsible for Campomelic Dysplasia."
authors:
- Qiao X
- Wu L
- Tang J
- Xiang R
- Fan L
- Huang H
- Chen Y
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.1089194
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: A de novo Non-sense SOX9 mutation (p.Q417*) located in transactivation domain is Responsible for Campomelic Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Qiao X, Wu L, Tang J, Xiang R, Fan L, Huang H, Chen Y
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2022.1089194](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.1089194)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Jan 18;10:1089194. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.1089194. 
eCollection 2022.

Case report: A de novo Non-sense SOX9 mutation (p.Q417*) located in 
transactivation domain is Responsible for Campomelic Dysplasia.

Qiao X(1), Wu L(2)(3), Tang J(1), Xiang R(4)(5)(6), Fan L(4)(5)(6), Huang 
H(4)(5)(6), Chen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Second Xiangya Hospital Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics and Prenatal Diagnosis, Longgang District 
Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Obstetric Inpatient Department, Shenzhen Longgang District Maternity and 
Child Healthcare Hospital, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(5)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, China.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.

BACKGROUND: Campomelic dysplasia (CD) is an autosomal dominant skeletal 
dysplasia syndrome characterized by shortness and bowing of lower extremities, 
and often accompanied by XY sex reversal. Heterozygous pathogenic variants of 
SOX9 or rearrangement involving the long arm of chromosome 17 are the causes of 
disease. However, evidence for pathogenesis of SOX9 haploinsufficiency is 
insufficient.
METHODS: We enrolled a Chinese family where the fetus was diagnosed with CD. The 
affected fetus was selected for whole-exome sequencing to identify the 
pathogenic mutations in this family.
RESULTS: After data filtering, a novel non-sense SOX9 variant (NM_000346.3; 
c.1249C > T; p.Q417*) was identified as the pathogenic lesion in the fetus. 
Further co-segregation analysis using Sanger sequencing confirmed that this 
novel SOX9 mutation (c.1249C > T; p.Q417*) was a de novo mutation in the 
affected fetus. This terminated codon mutation identified by bioinformatics was 
located at an evolutionarily conserved site of SOX9. The bioinformatics-based 
analysis predicted this variant was pathogenic and affected SOX9 transactivation 
activity.
CONCLUSION: CD is a rare condition, which connected with SOX9 tightly. We 
identified a novel heterozygous SOX9 variant (p.Q417*) in a Chinese CD family. 
Our study supports the putative reduced transactivation of SOX9 variants in the 
pathogenicity of CD.

© 2023 Qiao, Wu, Tang, Xiang, Fan, Huang, Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.1089194
PMCID: PMC9890166
PMID: 36741086

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.