---
reference_id: "PMID:21565303"
title: Study on urinary metabolic profile of phenylketonuria by micellar electrokinetic capillary chromatography with dual electrochemical detection--potential clinical application in fast diagnosis of phenylketonuria.
authors:
- Zhang D
- Li W
- Zhang J
- Tang W
- Qian C
- Feng M
- Chu Q
- Ye J
journal: Anal Chim Acta
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2011.03.044
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Study on urinary metabolic profile of phenylketonuria by micellar electrokinetic capillary chromatography with dual electrochemical detection--potential clinical application in fast diagnosis of phenylketonuria.
**Authors:** Zhang D, Li W, Zhang J, Tang W, Qian C, Feng M, Chu Q, Ye J
**Journal:** Anal Chim Acta (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.aca.2011.03.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2011.03.044)

## Content

1. Anal Chim Acta. 2011 May 23;694(1-2):61-6. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2011.03.044.
Epub  2011 Mar 30.

Study on urinary metabolic profile of phenylketonuria by micellar electrokinetic 
capillary chromatography with dual electrochemical detection--potential clinical 
application in fast diagnosis of phenylketonuria.

Zhang D(1), Li W, Zhang J, Tang W, Qian C, Feng M, Chu Q, Ye J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.

The urinary metabolic marker compounds, namely phenylpyruvic acid (PPA), 
2-hydroxyphenylacetic acid (oOPAA), 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid (pOPAA), 
phenyllactic acid (PLA) and phenylacetic acid (PAA) of phenylketonuric 
individuals were detected by a novel method of micellar electrokinetic capillary 
chromatography with capacitively coupled contactless conductivity detection and 
amperometric detection (MECC-C(4)D/AD). Electrophoretic runs were performed in a 
35 mmol L(-1) SDS/60 mmol L(-1) H(3)BO(3)-Na(2)B(4)O(7) running buffer (pH 8.2) 
at a separation voltage of 16 kV, and five marker compounds and the major 
coexisting compound uric acid (UA) could be well separated within 23 min. Highly 
linear response was obtained for five marker compounds over three orders of 
magnitude with detection limits ranging from 6.6×10(-6) to 6.4×10(-8) g mL(-1) 
(S/N=3). The proposed method has been used to detect the marker compounds 
simultaneously in urine samples with the advantages of obtaining more 
information about target analytes and avoiding redundant measurements and high 
assay cost. Urinary patterns in phenylketonuric babies were distinct and easily 
distinguished from those of healthy newborns. The proposed MECC-C(4)D/AD method 
could find clinical application in early noninvasive diagnosis of 
phenylketonuria (PKU), as significant differences could be found in the urinary 
content of five marker compounds among the phenylketonuric babies without or 
with dietotherapy and the healthy babies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aca.2011.03.044
PMID: 21565303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]