---
reference_id: "PMID:10551281"
title: Tetramethylpyradizine prevents inducible NO synthase expression and improves survival in rodent models of endotoxic shock.
authors:
- Wu CC
- Liao MH
- Chen SJ
- Yen MH
journal: Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1007/s002109900046
keywords:
- Animals
- "Aorta/drug effects, enzymology"
- Blood Pressure/drug effects
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Heart Rate/drug effects
- In Vitro Techniques
- Lipopolysaccharides/toxicity
- "Lung/drug effects, enzymology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Muscle, Smooth, Vascular/drug effects"
- "Nitric Oxide Synthase/genetics, metabolism"
- Nitric Oxide Synthase Type II
- Norepinephrine/pharmacology
- Pyrazines/pharmacology
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred WKY"
- "Shock, Septic/enzymology, metabolism, mortality"
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/metabolism
- Vasodilator Agents/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tetramethylpyradizine prevents inducible NO synthase expression and improves survival in rodent models of endotoxic shock.
**Authors:** Wu CC, Liao MH, Chen SJ, Yen MH
**Journal:** Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s002109900046](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002109900046)

## Content

1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1999 Oct;360(4):435-44. doi:
10.1007/s002109900046.

Tetramethylpyradizine prevents inducible NO synthase expression and improves
survival in rodent models of endotoxic shock.

Wu CC(1), Liao MH, Chen SJ, Yen MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National Defense Medical Centre, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC. ccwu@ndmc1.ndmctsgh.edu.tw

This study is to investigate the possible mechanism of beneficial effects of
tetramethylpyrazine (TMP) on endotoxic shock which we showed in our preliminary
study (Liao et al. 1998; Proc Natl Sci Counc Repub China B 22:46-54). Here, we
have confirmed the beneficial effects of TMP on the hypotension, vascular
hyporeactivity to noradrenaline (NA), release of tumour necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) and nitric oxide (NO) in a rat model of circulatory shock induced by
bacterial endotoxin (E. coli lipopolysaccharide, LPS). In addition, we further
examined the expression of inducible NO synthase in the lung and in the aorta
from these rats and evaluated the effect of TMP on the 36-h survival rate in a
murine model of endotoxaemia. Male Wistar-Kyoto rats were anaesthetised and
instrumented for the measurement of mean arterial pressure (MAP) and heart rate
(HR). Injection of LPS (10 mg kg(-1), i.v.) resulted in an acute fall followed
by a substantial fall in MAP within 4 h and an increase in HR. In contrast,
animals pretreated with TMP (10 mg kg(-1), i.p.; at 30 min prior to LPS)
maintained a significantly higher MAP but the tachycardia was further enhanced
at 1-2 h when compared to rats given only LPS (LPS rats). The pressor effect of
NA (1 microg kg(-1), i.v.) was also significantly reduced after the treatment of
rats with LPS. Similarly, the thoracic aorta obtained from rats at 4 h after LPS
showed a significant reduction in the contractile responses elicited by NA (1
microM). Pretreatment of LPS rats with TMP partially, but significantly,
prevented this LPS-induced hyporeactivity to NA in vivo and ex vivo. The
injection of LPS resulted in a bell-shaped change in plasma TNF-alpha level
which reached a maximum at 1 h, whereas the effect of LPS on the plasma level of
nitrate (an indicator of NO formation) was increased in a time-dependent manner.
This increment of both TNF-alpha and nitrate levels was significantly reduced in
LPS rats pretreated with TMP. Endotoxaemia for 4 h caused a significantly
increased protein expression of iNOS in the lung and the aorta. In LPS rats
pretreated with TMP, iNOS protein expression in lung and aorta homogenates was
attenuated by 75+/-3% and 57+/-6%, respectively. In addition, the lack of
evidence of pressor effect of TMP on rats with endotoxaemia for 4 h suggested
that TMP inhibits the induction of iNOS rather than directly inhibiting NOS
activity. Treatment of conscious ICR mice with a high dose of endotoxin (60 mg
kg(-1), i.p.) resulted in a survival rate of only 15% at 36 h (n=20). However,
therapeutic application of TMP (10 mg kg(-1), i.p.; at 0, 6, 15 and 24 h after
LPS) increased the 36 h survival rate to 55% (n=20). Thus, TMP inhibits the
expression of iNOS and mitigates the delayed circulatory failure caused by
endotoxic shock in the rat. In addition, TMP also improves survival in a murine
model of severe endotoxaemia.

DOI: 10.1007/s002109900046
PMID: 10551281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
