---
reference_id: "PMID:25422482"
title: Reproducible and sustained efficacy of targeted therapy with vemurafenib in patients with BRAF(V600E)-mutated Erdheim-Chester disease.
authors:
- Haroche J
- Cohen-Aubart F
- Emile JF
- Maksud P
- Drier A
- Tolédano D
- Barete S
- Charlotte F
- Cluzel P
- Donadieu J
- Benameur N
- Grenier PA
- Besnard S
- Ory JP
- Lifermann F
- Idbaih A
- Granel B
- Graffin B
- Hervier B
- Arnaud L
- Amoura Z
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.57.1950
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reproducible and sustained efficacy of targeted therapy with vemurafenib in patients with BRAF(V600E)-mutated Erdheim-Chester disease.
**Authors:** Haroche J, Cohen-Aubart F, Emile JF, Maksud P, Drier A, Tolédano D, Barete S, Charlotte F, Cluzel P, Donadieu J, Benameur N, Grenier PA, Besnard S, Ory JP, Lifermann F, Idbaih A, Granel B, Graffin B, Hervier B, Arnaud L, Amoura Z
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2014.57.1950](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2014.57.1950)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2015 Feb 10;33(5):411-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.57.1950. Epub
2014  Nov 24.

Reproducible and sustained efficacy of targeted therapy with vemurafenib in 
patients with BRAF(V600E)-mutated Erdheim-Chester disease.

Haroche J(1), Cohen-Aubart F(2), Emile JF(2), Maksud P(2), Drier A(2), Tolédano 
D(2), Barete S(2), Charlotte F(2), Cluzel P(2), Donadieu J(2), Benameur N(2), 
Grenier PA(2), Besnard S(2), Ory JP(2), Lifermann F(2), Idbaih A(2), Granel 
B(2), Graffin B(2), Hervier B(2), Arnaud L(2), Amoura Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Julien Haroche, Fleur Cohen-Aubart, Philippe Maksud, Aurélie Drier, Dan 
Tolédano, Stéphane Barete, Frédéric Charlotte, Philippe Cluzel, Neïla Benameur, 
Philippe A. Grenier, Ahmed Idbaih, Baptiste Hervier, Laurent Arnaud, and Zahir 
Amoura, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Hôpital 
Pitié-Salpêtrière; Philippe Maksud, Stéphane Barete, Frédéric Charlotte, 
Philippe Cluzel, Philippe A. Grenier, Ahmed Idbaih, Julien Haroche, Fleur 
Cohen-Aubart, Baptiste Hervier, Laurent Arnaud, and Zahir Amoura, Paris VI 
University Pierre et Marie Curie; Jean Donadieu, AP-HP, Hôpital Trousseau, 
French National Center for Histiocytosis, Paris; Jean-François Emile, 
EA4340-BCOH, Versailles University, and AP-HP, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne; 
Sophie Besnard, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes, Pontchaillou 
University Hospital, Rennes Cedex; Jean-Paul Ory, Centre Hospitalier Régional de 
Vesoul, Vesoul; François Lifermann, Hôpital de Dax-Côte d'Argent, Dax; Brigitte 
Granel, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital Nord, Marseille; and 
Bruno Graffin, Hôpital d'Instruction des Armées Legouest, Metz, France. 
julien.haroche@psl.aphp.fr.
(2)Julien Haroche, Fleur Cohen-Aubart, Philippe Maksud, Aurélie Drier, Dan 
Tolédano, Stéphane Barete, Frédéric Charlotte, Philippe Cluzel, Neïla Benameur, 
Philippe A. Grenier, Ahmed Idbaih, Baptiste Hervier, Laurent Arnaud, and Zahir 
Amoura, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Hôpital 
Pitié-Salpêtrière; Philippe Maksud, Stéphane Barete, Frédéric Charlotte, 
Philippe Cluzel, Philippe A. Grenier, Ahmed Idbaih, Julien Haroche, Fleur 
Cohen-Aubart, Baptiste Hervier, Laurent Arnaud, and Zahir Amoura, Paris VI 
University Pierre et Marie Curie; Jean Donadieu, AP-HP, Hôpital Trousseau, 
French National Center for Histiocytosis, Paris; Jean-François Emile, 
EA4340-BCOH, Versailles University, and AP-HP, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne; 
Sophie Besnard, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes, Pontchaillou 
University Hospital, Rennes Cedex; Jean-Paul Ory, Centre Hospitalier Régional de 
Vesoul, Vesoul; François Lifermann, Hôpital de Dax-Côte d'Argent, Dax; Brigitte 
Granel, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital Nord, Marseille; and 
Bruno Graffin, Hôpital d'Instruction des Armées Legouest, Metz, France.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2015 Feb 10;33(5):383-5. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.58.9804.

PURPOSE: Histiocytoses are rare disorders with heterogeneous prognosis. 
BRAF(V600E) mutations have been observed in half of patients with Langerhans 
cell histiocytosis (LCH) and in 50% to 100% of patients with Erdheim-Chester 
disease (ECD) patients. We recently reported short-term efficacy of a BRAF 
inhibitor (vemurafenib) in three patients with multisystemic ECD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Vemurafenib was given to eight patients with multisystemic 
ECD with CNS and/or cardiac involvement. All patients were refractory to 
first-line treatment and harbored a BRAF(V600E) mutation. Four patients also had 
LCH lesions. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan response at month 6 was 
used as the main evaluation criterion. Secondary evaluation criteria were 
comparison at baseline and at last visit of PET and of cardiovascular and 
cerebral infiltrations (computed tomography scan and magnetic resonance imaging 
[MRI]).
RESULTS: All patients were partial metabolic responders at 6 months of 
vemurafenib, and the median reduction in maximum standardized uptake value was 
63.5% (range, 41.3% to 86.9%). Evaluation of cardiac and aortic infiltrations 
showed that seven patients had a partial response and one patient had stable 
disease according to surface measurements derived from RECIST criteria. The four 
patients with infratentorial CNS infiltration had an objective decrease of the 
lesions on MRI. All patients had an improvement of general symptoms and a 
persistent response to vemurafenib, with a median follow-up time of 10.5 months 
(range, 6 to 16 months). Skin adverse effects were frequent and severe.
CONCLUSION: Vemurafenib has an objective and sustained efficacy in 
BRAF(V600E)-mutated ECD as second-line therapy. In contrast to melanoma, no 
resistance has emerged to date after 6 to 16 months.

© 2014 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2014.57.1950
PMID: 25422482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]