---
reference_id: "PMID:1309916"
title: Herpes simplex virus infection can occur without involvement of the fibroblast growth factor receptor.
authors:
- Muggeridge MI
- Cohen GH
- Eisenberg RJ
journal: J Virol
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.66.2.824-830.1992
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Herpes simplex virus infection can occur without involvement of the fibroblast growth factor receptor.
**Authors:** Muggeridge MI, Cohen GH, Eisenberg RJ
**Journal:** J Virol (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.66.2.824-830.1992](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.66.2.824-830.1992)

## Content

1. J Virol. 1992 Feb;66(2):824-30. doi: 10.1128/JVI.66.2.824-830.1992.

Herpes simplex virus infection can occur without involvement of the fibroblast 
growth factor receptor.

Muggeridge MI(1), Cohen GH, Eisenberg RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104-6003.

Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) has been reported to block uptake of 
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and plaque formation on arterial smooth 
muscle cells, suggesting a role for the bFGF receptor in HSV entry (R. J. Kaner, 
A. Baird, A. Mansukhani, C. Basilico, B. D. Summers, R. Z. Florkiewicz, and D. 
P. Hajjar, Science 248:1410-1413, 1990). We confirmed the effect of bFGF on 
infection of this cell type with HSV-1 and HSV-2 and found the same result with 
umbilical vein endothelial cells. However, bFGF does not inhibit plaque 
formation on any other cell type we tested. Furthermore, there is no correlation 
between the level of expression of the bFGF receptor and the effect of bFGF. 
HEp-2 and A431 cells express barely detectable levels of receptor, and yet they 
are fully permissive for HSV infection in a bFGF-insensitive manner. Thus, 
interaction of virus with the bFGF receptor is not required for infection of 
many cell types. In addition, infection of smooth muscle cells is not prevented 
by incubation of virus with an anti-bFGF antibody, arguing against the 
hypothesis that virion-associated bFGF acts as a bridge between virus and 
receptor (A. Baird, R. Z. Florkiewicz, P. A. Maher, R. J. Kaner, and D. P. 
Hajjar, Nature [London] 348:344-346, 1990).

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.66.2.824-830.1992
PMCID: PMC240782
PMID: 1309916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]