---
reference_id: "PMID:37069638"
title: "Consensus clinical management guidelines for acid sphingomyelinase deficiency (Niemann-Pick disease types A, B and A/B)."
authors:
- Geberhiwot T
- Wasserstein M
- Wanninayake S
- Bolton SC
- Dardis A
- Lehman A
- Lidove O
- Dawson C
- Giugliani R
- Imrie J
- Hopkin J
- Green J
- de Vicente Corbeira D
- Madathil S
- Mengel E
- Ezgü F
- Pettazzoni M
- Sjouke B
- Hollak C
- Vanier MT
- McGovern M
- Schuchman E
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02686-6
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Consensus
- Mutation
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type A/genetics"
- Niemann-Pick Diseases
- Sphingomyelin Phosphodiesterase/genetics
- Systematic Reviews as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consensus clinical management guidelines for acid sphingomyelinase deficiency (Niemann-Pick disease types A, B and A/B).
**Authors:** Geberhiwot T, Wasserstein M, Wanninayake S, Bolton SC, Dardis A, Lehman A, Lidove O, Dawson C, Giugliani R, Imrie J, Hopkin J, Green J, de Vicente Corbeira D, Madathil S, Mengel E, Ezgü F, Pettazzoni M, Sjouke B, Hollak C, Vanier MT, McGovern M, Schuchman E
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02686-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02686-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Apr 17;18(1):85. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02686-6.

Consensus clinical management guidelines for acid sphingomyelinase deficiency 
(Niemann-Pick disease types A, B and A/B).

Geberhiwot T(1)(2), Wasserstein M(3), Wanninayake S(4), Bolton SC(4), Dardis 
A(5), Lehman A(6), Lidove O(7), Dawson C(4), Giugliani R(8), Imrie J(9), Hopkin 
J(10), Green J(9), de Vicente Corbeira D(11), Madathil S(12), Mengel E(13), Ezgü 
F(14), Pettazzoni M(15), Sjouke B(16), Hollak C(16), Vanier MT(17), McGovern 
M(18), Schuchman E(19).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK. 
Tarekegn.hiwot@uhb.nhs.uk.
(2)Institute of Metabolism and System Research, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK. Tarekegn.hiwot@uhb.nhs.uk.
(3)Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY, USA.
(4)University Hospital Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Regional Coordinator Centre for Rare Disease, AMC Hospital of Udine, Udine, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, V6T 1Z2, Canada.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Hôpital de La Croix Saint Simon, Paris, 
France.
(8)BioDiscovery and DR BRASIL Research Group, HCPA, Department of Genetics and 
PPGBM, UFRGS, INAGEMP, DASA, and Casa Dos Raros, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(9)International Niemann-Pick Disease Registry, Newcastle, UK.
(10)National Niemann-Pick Disease Foundation, Fort Atkinson, WI, USA.
(11)ASMD España, Madrid, Spain.
(12)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Birmingham NHS 
Foundation Trust, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(13)Institute of Clinical Science in LSD, SphinCS, Hochheim, Germany.
(14)Division of Pediatric Metabolism and Division of Pediatric Genetics, 
Department of Pediatrics, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, 06560, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(15)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Reference Center for Inherited 
Metabolic Disorders, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 59 Boulevard Pinel, 69677, Bron 
Cedex, France.
(16)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, F5-169, P.O. Box 
22660, 1100 DD, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(17)INSERM, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(18)Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(19)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, 1425 Madison Avenue, Room 14-20A, New York, NY, 10029, USA.

BACKGROUND: Acid Sphingomyelinase Deficiency (ASMD) is a rare autosomal 
recessive disorder caused by mutations in the SMPD1 gene. This rarity 
contributes to misdiagnosis, delayed diagnosis and barriers to good care. There 
are no published national or international consensus guidelines for the 
diagnosis and management of patients with ASMD. For these reasons, we have 
developed clinical guidelines that defines standard of care for ASMD patients.
METHODS: The information contained in these guidelines was obtained through a 
systematic literature review and the experiences of the authors in their care of 
patients with ASMD. We adopted the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and 
Evaluation (AGREE II) system as method of choice for the guideline development 
process.
RESULTS: The clinical spectrum of ASMD, although a continuum, varies 
substantially with subtypes ranging from a fatal infantile neurovisceral 
disorder to an adult-onset chronic visceral disease. We produced 39 conclusive 
statements and scored them according to level of evidence, strengths of 
recommendations and expert opinions. In addition, these guidelines have 
identified knowledge gaps that must be filled by future research.
CONCLUSION: These guidelines can inform care providers, care funders, patients 
and their carers about best clinical practice and leads to a step change in the 
quality of care for patients with ASMD with or without enzyme replacement 
therapy (ERT).

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02686-6
PMCID: PMC10108815
PMID: 37069638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Sanofi has provided financial support to AD, AL, 
ES, OL, RG, SCB and TH, research grant to ES and TH, and honorarium to AD, ES, 
OL, MTV and RG. Honorarium has been provided by Orphazyme to AD and MTV.