---
reference_id: "PMID:29358789"
title: Crohn's disease - genetic factors and progress of the disease.
authors:
- Kupka T
- Simova J
- Dvorackova J
- Martinek L
- Motyka O
- Uvirova M
- Dite P
journal: Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub
year: '2018'
doi: 10.5507/bp.2017.058
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crohn's disease - genetic factors and progress of the disease.
**Authors:** Kupka T, Simova J, Dvorackova J, Martinek L, Motyka O, Uvirova M, Dite P
**Journal:** Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub (2018)
**DOI:** [10.5507/bp.2017.058](https://doi.org/10.5507/bp.2017.058)

## Content

1. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2018 Jun;162(2):139-143. 
doi: 10.5507/bp.2017.058. Epub 2018 Jan 18.

Crohn's disease - genetic factors and progress of the disease.

Kupka T(1)(2), Simova J(2)(3), Dvorackova J(2)(4), Martinek L(2)(5), Motyka 
O(6), Uvirova M(2)(3), Dite P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(3)CGB laborator, a.s., Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Pathology, Ostrava, 
Czech Republic.
(4)Institute of Clinical Pathology, University Hospital Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(5)Clinic of Surgery, University Hospital Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Inorganic Analysis, Centre of Nanotechnology, VSB - Technical 
University of Ostrava, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Crohn's disease is a multifactorial inflammatory 
disease affecting mainly the gastrointestinal tract. The genetic factors that 
are involved in the disease include mainly three mutations of the gene 
NOD2/CARD15 (R702W, G908R, 3020insC). The aim of this study was to determine the 
relationship between the presence of these variants and disease phenotype.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 70 patients with Crohn's disease were examined for the 
presence of the above-mentioned mutations. The researchers used the medical 
records to retrospectively obtain clinical data and together with the 
information obtained prospectively according to the protocol they analysed the 
connection between gene mutations and disease phenotype.
RESULTS: At least one mutation was found in 22 patients with Crohn's disease 
(32%), four patients were found to have two different mutations (composed 
heterozygotes - 6%) and six patients (9%) were homozygotes for the 3020insC 
gene. No significant differences were found between the groups with wild-type 
form and the mutated form of the NOD2 / CARD15 gene with respect to age at the 
time of diagnosis, form of the disease or localization according to the Montreal 
classification.
CONCLUSION: Mutations of the NOD2 / CARD15 gene did not significantly affect the 
frequency of reoperations, homozygotes with 3020insC gene mutations, however, 
represented a high risk group. The phenotype was not related significantly to 
the presence of the examined mutations.

DOI: 10.5507/bp.2017.058
PMID: 29358789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]