---
reference_id: "PMID:25402387"
title: Precocious presentation of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 2 associated with an AIRE mutation.
authors:
- Resende E
- Gόmez GN
- Nascimento M
- Loidi L
- Saborido Fiaño R
- Cabanas Rodrίguez P
- Castro-Feijoo L
- Barreiro Conde J
journal: Hormones (Athens)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.14310/horm.2002.1513
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Precocious presentation of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 2 associated with an AIRE mutation.
**Authors:** Resende E, Gόmez GN, Nascimento M, Loidi L, Saborido Fiaño R, Cabanas Rodrίguez P, Castro-Feijoo L, Barreiro Conde J
**Journal:** Hormones (Athens) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.14310/horm.2002.1513](https://doi.org/10.14310/horm.2002.1513)

## Content

1. Hormones (Athens). 2015 Apr-Jun;14(2):312-6. doi: 10.14310/horm.2002.1513.

Precocious presentation of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 2 associated 
with an AIRE mutation.

Resende E(1), Gόmez GN(2), Nascimento M(3), Loidi L(4), Saborido Fiaño R(5), 
Cabanas Rodrίguez P(6), Castro-Feijoo L(6), Barreiro Conde J(6).

Author information:
(1)Servio de Endocrinologia, Hospital Central do Funchal, Portugal.
(2)Servicio de Pediatrίa, Hospital Clίnico de Ourense, Spain.
(3)Servio de Pediatria, Hospital Pedro Hispano, Matosinhos, Portugal.
(4)Fundaciόn Pública Galega de Medicina Xenόmica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(5)Departamento de Pediatrίa, Hospital Clίnico Universitario de Santiago de 
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(6)Unidad de Endocrinologίa Pediátrica y Crecimiento, Departamento de Pediatrίa, 
Hospital Clίnico Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, Universidad de 
Santiago de Compostela; Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 2 (type 2 APS), or Schmidt's syndrome, is 
defined by the presence of Addison's disease in combination with type 1 diabetes 
and/or autoimmune thyroid disease. The estimated prevalence of this syndrome is 
1.4-4.5 per 100,000 inhabitants and it is more frequent in middle-aged females, 
whilst it is quite rare in children. Type 2 APS, which shows a pattern of 
autosomal dominant inheritance with low penetrance, has been associated with HLA 
specific DR3/DQ2 and DR4/DQ8 haplotypes. However, it has been hypothesized that 
genetic variability in the AIRE gene, which causing type 1 APS, may play a role 
in more common organ-specific autoimmune conditions like type 1 diabetes, 
Hashimoto's disease and type 2 APS, among others. Here we present the case of an 
8-year-old girl, with a past medical history of type 1 diabetes diagnosed at the 
age of 3. She was taken to the Emergency Department because she complained of 
abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, and her blood analysis revealed a severe 
hyponatremia. She also had seizures as a consequence of the hyponatremia and 
frequent hypoglycemia. She was ultimately found to be suffering from autoimmune 
primary adrenal insufficiency. The combination of both mentioned conditions, 
type 1 diabetes and Addison's disease, in the absence of chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, made a diagnosis of type 2 APS plausible in this girl. The genetic 
study showed two heterozygous variants: NM_000383.2:C.1411C>T (p. Arg471Cys) in 
exon 12 and IVS9+6G>A in intron 9 of the AIRE gene. The description of an 
uncommon case of type 2 APS with precocious presentation associated with an AIRE 
mutation in a very young girl could help to clarify the role of AIRE in the 
development of autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.14310/horm.2002.1513
PMID: 25402387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]