---
reference_id: "PMID:38493958"
title: "Epidemiology, clinical features, risk factors, and outcomes in anti-glomerular basement membrane disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Kuang H
- Jiang N
- Jia XY
- Cui Z
- Zhao MH
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103531
keywords:
- Humans
- "Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease/epidemiology, immunology, diagnosis"
- Risk Factors
- Prognosis
- Incidence
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic/immunology"
- Prevalence
- "Autoantibodies/immunology, blood"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology, clinical features, risk factors, and outcomes in anti-glomerular basement membrane disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Kuang H, Jiang N, Jia XY, Cui Z, Zhao MH
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103531](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103531)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2024 Apr;23(4):103531. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103531. Epub 
2024 Mar 16.

Epidemiology, clinical features, risk factors, and outcomes in anti-glomerular 
basement membrane disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Kuang H(1), Jiang N(1), Jia XY(2), Cui Z(1), Zhao MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China; Institute 
of Nephrology, Peking University, Beijing, China; Key Laboratory of Renal 
Disease, Ministry of Health of China, Beijing, China; Key Laboratory of CKD 
Prevention and Treatment, Ministry of Education of China, Beijing, China; 
Research Units of Diagnosis and Treatment of Immune-mediated Kidney Diseases, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Renal Division, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China; Institute 
of Nephrology, Peking University, Beijing, China; Key Laboratory of Renal 
Disease, Ministry of Health of China, Beijing, China; Key Laboratory of CKD 
Prevention and Treatment, Ministry of Education of China, Beijing, China; 
Research Units of Diagnosis and Treatment of Immune-mediated Kidney Diseases, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. Electronic address: 
constancej@163.com.

Anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) disease is a small-vessel vasculitis 
that represents the most aggressive form of autoimmune glomerulonephritis. The 
study aimed to investigate the prevalence, clinical characteristics, risk 
factors, and outcomes of anti-GBM disease through a systematic review and 
meta-analysis involving 47 studies with 2830 patients. The overall incidence of 
anti-GBM disease ranged from 0.60 to 1.79 per million population per annum. In 
rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis and crescentic glomerulonephritis, the 
pooled incidence rates were 8.0% and 12.8%, respectively. The pooled prevalence 
rates of anti-GBM antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), and 
lung hemorrhage were 88.8%, 27.4%, and 32.6%, respectively. Patients with 
combined ANCA positivity demonstrated a prognosis comparable to those patients 
with only anti-GBM antibodies, though with differing clinical features. The 
pooled one-year patient and kidney survival rates were 76.2% and 30.2%, 
respectively. Kidney function on diagnosis and normal glomeruli percentage were 
identified as strong prognostic factors. This study represents the first 
comprehensive meta-analysis on anti-GBM disease, providing insights into its 
management. However, caution is warranted in interpreting some results due to 
the observational nature of the included studies and high heterogeneity.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103531
PMID: 38493958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]