---
reference_id: "PMID:28691557"
title: Emicizumab Prophylaxis in Hemophilia A with Inhibitors.
authors:
- Oldenburg J
- Mahlangu JN
- Kim B
- Schmitt C
- Callaghan MU
- Young G
- Santagostino E
- Kruse-Jarres R
- Negrier C
- Kessler C
- Valente N
- Asikanius E
- Levy GG
- Windyga J
- Shima M
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1703068
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emicizumab Prophylaxis in Hemophilia A with Inhibitors.
**Authors:** Oldenburg J, Mahlangu JN, Kim B, Schmitt C, Callaghan MU, Young G, Santagostino E, Kruse-Jarres R, Negrier C, Kessler C, Valente N, Asikanius E, Levy GG, Windyga J, Shima M
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1703068](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1703068)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2017 Aug 31;377(9):809-818. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1703068. Epub
2017  Jul 10.

Emicizumab Prophylaxis in Hemophilia A with Inhibitors.

Oldenburg J(1), Mahlangu JN(1), Kim B(1), Schmitt C(1), Callaghan MU(1), Young 
G(1), Santagostino E(1), Kruse-Jarres R(1), Negrier C(1), Kessler C(1), Valente 
N(1), Asikanius E(1), Levy GG(1), Windyga J(1), Shima M(1).

Author information:
(1)From Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Bonn, Germany (J.O.); the Haemophilia 
Comprehensive Care Centre, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the 
Witwatersrand and National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg (J.N.M.); 
Genentech, South San Francisco (B.K., N.V., G.G.L.), and Children's Hospital Los 
Angeles, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles 
(G.Y.) - both in California; F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland (C.S., 
E.A.); Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit (M.U.C.); the Angelo Bianchi 
Bonomi Hemophilia and Thrombosis Center, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere 
Scientifico Ca' Granda Foundation, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan (E.S.); 
Bloodworks Northwest, Seattle (R.K.-J.); Louis Pradel Cardiology Hospital, 
University Claude Bernard, Lyon, France (C.N.); Georgetown University Medical 
Center, Washington, DC (C.K.); the Department of Disorders of Hemostasis and 
Internal Medicine, Institute of Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Warsaw, 
Poland (J.W.); and the Department of Pediatrics, Nara Medical University, 
Kashihara, Japan (M.S.).

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2017 Nov;190:287-290. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.08.053.
    N Engl J Med. ;377(22):2193. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1712683.
    N Engl J Med. ;377(22):2193-4. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1712683.

BACKGROUND: Emicizumab (ACE910) bridges activated factor IX and factor X to 
restore the function of activated factor VIII, which is deficient in persons 
with hemophilia A. This phase 3, multicenter trial assessed once-weekly 
subcutaneous emicizumab prophylaxis in persons with hemophilia A with factor 
VIII inhibitors.
METHODS: We enrolled participants who were 12 years of age or older. Those who 
had previously received episodic treatment with bypassing agents were randomly 
assigned in a 2:1 ratio to emicizumab prophylaxis (group A) or no prophylaxis 
(group B). The primary end point was the difference in bleeding rates between 
group A and group B. Participants who had previously received prophylactic 
treatment with bypassing agents received emicizumab prophylaxis in group C.
RESULTS: A total of 109 male participants with hemophilia A with inhibitors were 
enrolled. The annualized bleeding rate was 2.9 events (95% confidence interval 
[CI], 1.7 to 5.0) among participants who were randomly assigned to emicizumab 
prophylaxis (group A, 35 participants) versus 23.3 events (95% CI, 12.3 to 43.9) 
among those assigned to no prophylaxis (group B, 18 participants), representing 
a significant difference of 87% in favor of emicizumab prophylaxis (P<0.001). A 
total of 22 participants in group A (63%) had zero bleeding events, as compared 
with 1 participant (6%) in group B. Among 24 participants in group C who had 
participated in a noninterventional study, emicizumab prophylaxis resulted in a 
bleeding rate that was significantly lower by 79% than the rate with previous 
bypassing-agent prophylaxis (P<0.001). Overall, 198 adverse events were reported 
in 103 participants receiving emicizumab prophylaxis; the most frequent events 
were injection-site reactions (in 15% of participants). Thrombotic 
microangiopathy and thrombosis were reported in 2 participants each (in the 
primary analysis) who had received multiple infusions of activated prothrombin 
complex concentrate for breakthrough bleeding. No antidrug antibodies were 
detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Emicizumab prophylaxis was associated with a significantly lower 
rate of bleeding events than no prophylaxis among participants with hemophilia A 
with inhibitors. (Funded by F. Hoffmann-La Roche and Chugai Pharmaceutical; 
HAVEN 1 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02622321 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1703068
PMID: 28691557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]