---
reference_id: "PMID:23916859"
title: Refractory infantile spasms associated with mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome.
authors:
- Akasaka N
- Tohyama J
- Ogawa A
- Takachi T
- Watanabe A
- Asami K
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2013.05.014
keywords:
- Aneuploidy
- Chromosome Disorders/complications
- Developmental Disabilities/complications
- Humans
- Infant
- Karyotyping
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Microcephaly/etiology
- Mosaicism
- "Spasms, Infantile/complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Refractory infantile spasms associated with mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome.
**Authors:** Akasaka N, Tohyama J, Ogawa A, Takachi T, Watanabe A, Asami K
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2013.05.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2013.05.014)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2013 Nov;49(5):364-7. doi:
10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2013.05.014.  Epub 2013 Aug 2.

Refractory infantile spasms associated with mosaic variegated aneuploidy
syndrome.

Akasaka N(1), Tohyama J, Ogawa A, Takachi T, Watanabe A, Asami K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Neurology, Nishi-Niigata Chuo National Hospital, Niigata,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome (Online Mendelian Inheritance
in Man 257300), or premature chromatid separation syndrome, is a rare
cancer-prone disorder associated with an autosomal recessive trait related to
BUB1B gene mutations. The risk of malignancy is high, with rhabdomyosarcoma,
Wilms tumor, and leukemia reported in several cases. Clinical features also
include prenatal-onset growth retardation, microcephaly, mild dysmorphism,
feeding difficulty, hypotonia, seizures, and developmental delay.
PATIENT: A boy patient exhibited severe developmental delay, microcephaly,
hypotonia, intractable seizures including infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia
at 6 months old, and Dandy-Walker malformation on magnetic resonance imaging.
Seizures were refractory to conventional antiepileptics and treatment with
adrenocorticotropic hormone. Wilms tumor and an unidentified intraorbital tumor
also developed at 22 months old.
RESULTS: Chromosomal analysis showed multiple aneuploid cells, and premature
chromatid separation was found in all chromosomes in 59.5% of 119 cells,
indicating mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: The present case report demonstrates that mosaic variegated
aneuploidy syndrome can be associated with developmental brain anomalies that
lead to early-onset epileptic encephalopathy. Awareness of this disorder is
important not only for proper diagnosis but also for genetic counseling of the
family.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2013.05.014
PMID: 23916859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
