---
reference_id: "PMID:17242135"
title: "Colchicine use in children and adolescents with familial Mediterranean fever: literature review and consensus statement."
authors:
- Kallinich T
- Haffner D
- Niehues T
- Huss K
- Lainka E
- Neudorf U
- Schaefer C
- Stojanov S
- Timmann C
- Keitzer R
- Ozdogan H
- Ozen S
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-1434
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Colchicine use in children and adolescents with familial Mediterranean fever: literature review and consensus statement.
**Authors:** Kallinich T, Haffner D, Niehues T, Huss K, Lainka E, Neudorf U, Schaefer C, Stojanov S, Timmann C, Keitzer R, Ozdogan H, Ozen S
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2006-1434](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2006-1434)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2007 Feb;119(2):e474-83. doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-1434. Epub 2007
Jan  22.

Colchicine use in children and adolescents with familial Mediterranean fever: 
literature review and consensus statement.

Kallinich T(1), Haffner D, Niehues T, Huss K, Lainka E, Neudorf U, Schaefer C, 
Stojanov S, Timmann C, Keitzer R, Ozdogan H, Ozen S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, 
Charite-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Augustenburger 
Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany. tilmann.kallinich@charite.de

The daily application of colchicine is the standard therapy for prophylaxis of 
attacks and amyloid deposition in familial Mediterranean fever. However, because 
of many issues (eg, dosage, time of introduction, etc), no standardized 
treatment recommendations have been established. In this work we review the 
available literature on colchicine use with respect to its indication, efficacy, 
mode of application, and safety in children and adolescents with familial 
Mediterranean fever. On the basis of this analysis, a consensus statement on the 
application of colchicine in children and adolescents with familial 
Mediterranean fever was developed by caregivers from Germany, Austria, and 
Turkey.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2006-1434
PMID: 17242135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]