---
reference_id: "PMID:20301724"
title: Campomelic Dysplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Unger S
- Scherer G
- Superti-Furga A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Campomelic Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Unger S, Scherer G, Superti-Furga A

## Content

1. Campomelic Dysplasia.

Unger S(1), Scherer G(2), Superti-Furga A(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 Jul 31 [updated 2023 Apr 6].

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, 
Switzerland
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
(3)Leenaards Professor of Pediatrics, University of Lausanne;, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Campomelic dysplasia (CD) is a skeletal dysplasia 
characterized by distinctive facies, Pierre Robin sequence with cleft palate, 
shortening and bowing of long bones, and clubfeet. Other findings include 
laryngotracheomalacia with respiratory compromise and ambiguous genitalia or 
normal female external genitalia in most individuals with a 46,XY karyotype. 
Many affected infants die in the neonatal period; additional findings identified 
in long-term survivors include short stature, cervical spine instability with 
cord compression, progressive scoliosis, and hearing impairment.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CD is usually based on clinical and 
radiographic findings. Identification of a heterozygous pathogenic variant in 
SOX9 by molecular genetic testing can confirm the diagnosis if clinical and 
radiographic features are inconclusive.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Care of children with cleft palate by a 
craniofacial team using routine measures; in persons with a 46,XY karyotype and 
undermasculinization of the genitalia, the gonads should be removed because of 
the increased risk for gonadoblastoma; care of hip subluxation and clubfeet 
using standard protocols; hearing aids for those with hearing impairment; 
surgery as needed for cervical vertebral instability and progressive 
cervicothoracic kyphoscoliosis that compromises lung function. Prevention of 
secondary complications: If a cervical spine abnormality is identified, special 
care should be exercised for any surgical procedure. Surveillance: Annual 
monitoring of spinal curvature.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CD is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. To date, 
most probands have CD as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant in SOX9; 
thus, parents of probands are not typically affected. However, a few adults have 
been diagnosed with CD following the birth of an affected child. Recurrence in 
sibs has occurred and somatic and germline mosaicism have been reported. 
Prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk is possible if the pathogenic 
variant in the family is known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301724