---
reference_id: "PMID:21233671"
title: "What's new in non-small cell lung cancer for pathologists: the importance of accurate subtyping, EGFR mutations and ALK rearrangements."
authors:
- Cooper WA
- O'toole S
- Boyer M
- Horvath L
- Mahar A
journal: Pathology
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e328342629d
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What's new in non-small cell lung cancer for pathologists: the importance of accurate subtyping, EGFR mutations and ALK rearrangements.
**Authors:** Cooper WA, O'toole S, Boyer M, Horvath L, Mahar A
**Journal:** Pathology (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAT.0b013e328342629d](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAT.0b013e328342629d)

## Content

1. Pathology. 2011 Feb;43(2):103-15. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e328342629d.

What's new in non-small cell lung cancer for pathologists: the importance of 
accurate subtyping, EGFR mutations and ALK rearrangements.

Cooper WA(1), O'toole S, Boyer M, Horvath L, Mahar A.

Author information:
(1)Tissue Pathology and Diagnostic Oncology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, 
Sydney, Australia. wendy.cooper@sswahs.nsw.gov.au

In the past, the only critical point of distinction in the pathological 
diagnosis of lung cancer was between small cell and non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). The emergence of new targeted therapies and clinical trials 
demonstrating differing efficacy and toxicity of treatments according to 
specific histological subtypes of NSCLC, has resulted in an increasing need for 
improvements in pathological diagnosis. Accurate distinction between 
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma is now critical as histological 
subtyping has the potential to influence clinical decision making and impact on 
patient outcome. While morphological criteria remain the most important feature 
to distinguish NSCLC subtypes, use of mucin and immunohistochemical stains 
(TTF-1, p63 and CK5/6) can be of assistance in difficult small biopsy cases. 
With the emergence of selective kinase inhibitors targeting epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), there is a 
corresponding need to identify the subset of NSCLCs harbouring specific genetic 
mutations associated with sensitivity to these agents, almost all of which are 
found in adenocarcinomas. In this review, the importance of accurately subtyping 
NSCLC is discussed, along with a suggested approach for distinguishing 
histological subtypes in small biopsy specimens. The significance of EGFR and 
ALK mutations in NSCLC and the impact of these genotypes on pathology and 
clinical practice are also reviewed.

DOI: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e328342629d
PMID: 21233671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]