---
reference_id: "PMID:37812328"
title: "Esophageal Cancer: Overview, Risk Factors, and Reasons for the Rise."
authors:
- Lander S
- Lander E
- Gibson MK
journal: Curr Gastroenterol Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11894-023-00899-0
keywords:
- Humans
- United States/epidemiology
- Risk Factors
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- "Adenocarcinoma/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Asia
- Incidence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Esophageal Cancer: Overview, Risk Factors, and Reasons for the Rise.
**Authors:** Lander S, Lander E, Gibson MK
**Journal:** Curr Gastroenterol Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11894-023-00899-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11894-023-00899-0)

## Content

1. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2023 Nov;25(11):275-279. doi: 
10.1007/s11894-023-00899-0. Epub 2023 Oct 9.

Esophageal Cancer: Overview, Risk Factors, and Reasons for the Rise.

Lander S(1), Lander E(2), Gibson MK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center, 
Memphis, TN, USA. slandermd@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Esophageal cancer (EC) is a common cancer affecting many 
regions of the world and carries significant morbidity and mortality. In this 
article, we review the key risk factors and their associated impact on the 
changing incidence and prevalence of EC subtypes within different global 
regions. We also highlight potential reasons for the ever-changing epidemiology 
of this prevalent cancer type.
RECENT FINDINGS: There has been a shift in incidence of Esophageal 
Adenocarcinoma (AC) and Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC) within certain populations 
primarily due to an increase prevalence of primary risk factors. In Western 
nations, more often the United States, there has been a shift from SCC 
predominance to the majority of new cases of EC being adenocarcinoma. This shift 
within the United States has largely correlated with a rise in obesity. The 
prevalence of AC in Asia is also starting to rise as more countries adopt a 
western diet. The pathophysiology, associated risk factors, and presentation of 
ESCC and AC are different. This difference is seen in varying lifestyles, 
population health, and certain genetic risks. With further development closer 
analysis of primary risk factors and implementation of policies and programs 
that promote public health literacy, there is a potential to decrease esophageal 
cancer's global disease burden.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11894-023-00899-0
PMID: 37812328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]