---
reference_id: "PMID:32352191"
title: Canine tonsillar neoplasia and tonsillar metastasis from various primary neoplasms.
authors:
- Mickelson MA
- Regan D
- Randall EK
- Worley D
- Seguin B
journal: Vet Comp Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/vco.12604
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Canine tonsillar neoplasia and tonsillar metastasis from various primary neoplasms.
**Authors:** Mickelson MA, Regan D, Randall EK, Worley D, Seguin B
**Journal:** Vet Comp Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/vco.12604](https://doi.org/10.1111/vco.12604)

## Content

1. Vet Comp Oncol. 2020 Dec;18(4):770-777. doi: 10.1111/vco.12604. Epub 2020 May 
18.

Canine tonsillar neoplasia and tonsillar metastasis from various primary 
neoplasms.

Mickelson MA(1)(2)(3), Regan D(2)(4), Randall EK(2)(5), Worley D(1)(2), Seguin 
B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 
Colorado, USA.
(2)Flint Animal Cancer Center, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 
Colorado, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 
Colorado, USA.
(5)Department of Environmental and Radiological Health Sciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort 
Collins, Colorado, USA.

Tonsillar metastasis from distant primary tumours has not been described in 
dogs, and reports are rare in humans. The aims of this study were to determine 
whether tumour metastasis occurs to the canine palatine tonsils and evaluate 
whether afferent lymphatics drain to the palatine tonsils via skull indirect 
computed tomography lymphangiography (ICTL). Retrospective review of the 
diagnostic laboratory tonsillar histopathology submissions was performed. ICTL 
studies (n = 53) were retrospectively reviewed by a single radiologist. Of 882 
total tonsil histopathology samples, 492 (56%) were considered neoplastic, with 
8% of them benign. Of the primary malignant neoplasms of the tonsil, squamous 
cell carcinoma (55%), lymphoma (17%) and melanoma (12%) were most common. 
Tonsillar metastasis was confirmed in 41 cases; histopathologic evaluation 
revealed melanoma (25), carcinoma (10), hemangiosarcoma (2) and one each of 
fibrosarcoma, malignant histiocytosis, basal cell tumour and undifferentiated 
sarcoma. A total of 53 tonsillar melanoma cases were identified, of which 25 
represented metastasis from a known distant primary tumour and 28 were solely 
tonsillar, with 9 of these cases having concurrent lymph node metastasis. No 
ICTL cases had lymphatic contrast drainage to the palatine tonsil. The palatine 
tonsil is an important site of metastasis for a variety of primary tumour types 
from many locations. ICTL did not reveal lymphatics draining to the palatine 
tonsil, which is highly supportive of hematogenous route of metastasis to the 
tonsil. Tonsillar metastasis may be more common than previously thought. It is 
recommended to perform a thorough oral examination, including the tonsils, for 
all oral tumours and melanoma cases.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/vco.12604
PMCID: PMC7606310
PMID: 32352191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest related to this publication.