---
reference_id: "PMID:33200838"
title: Mechanisms of melanocyte death in vitiligo.
authors:
- Chen J
- Li S
- Li C
journal: Med Res Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/med.21754
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of melanocyte death in vitiligo.
**Authors:** Chen J, Li S, Li C
**Journal:** Med Res Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/med.21754](https://doi.org/10.1002/med.21754)

## Content

1. Med Res Rev. 2021 Mar;41(2):1138-1166. doi: 10.1002/med.21754. Epub 2020 Nov
17.

Mechanisms of melanocyte death in vitiligo.

Chen J(1), Li S(1), Li C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Xijing hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, Shannxi, China.

Vitiligo is an autoimmune depigment disease results from extensive melanocytes 
destruction. The destruction of melanocyte is thought to be of multifactorial 
causation. Genome-wide associated studies have identified single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms in a panel of susceptible loci as risk factors in melanocyte 
death. But vitiligo onset can't be solely attributed to a susceptive genetic 
background. Oxidative stress triggered by elevated levels of reactive oxygen 
species accounts for melanocytic molecular and organelle dysfunction, a minority 
of melanocyte demise, and melanocyte-specific antigens exposure. Of note, the 
self-responsive immune function directly contributes to the bulk of melanocyte 
deaths in vitiligo. The aberrantly heightened innate immunity, type-1-skewed T 
helper, and incompetent regulatory T cells tip the balance 
toward autoreaction and CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes finally execute the killing 
of melanocytes, possibly alarmed by resident memory T cells. In addition to the 
well-established apoptosis and necrosis, we discuss several death modalities 
like oxeiptosis, ferroptosis, and necroptosis that are probably employed in 
melanocyte destruction. This review focuses on the various mechanisms of 
melanocytic death in vitiligo pathogenesis to demonstrate a panorama of that. We 
hope to provide new insights into vitiligo pathogenesis and treatment strategies 
by the review.

© 2020 The Authors. Medicinal Research Reviews published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/med.21754
PMCID: PMC7983894
PMID: 33200838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]