---
reference_id: "PMID:25772309"
title: The Fibroblast Growth Factor signaling pathway.
authors:
- Ornitz DM
- Itoh N
journal: Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/wdev.176
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
- Cell Movement/physiology
- Cell Proliferation/physiology
- Embryonic Development/physiology
- Energy Metabolism/physiology
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/metabolism
- Homeostasis/physiology
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- Organogenesis/physiology
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Voltage-Gated Sodium Channels/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Fibroblast Growth Factor signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Ornitz DM, Itoh N
**Journal:** Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/wdev.176](https://doi.org/10.1002/wdev.176)

## Content

1. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2015 May-Jun;4(3):215-66. doi:
10.1002/wdev.176.  Epub 2015 Mar 13.

The Fibroblast Growth Factor signaling pathway.

Ornitz DM(1), Itoh N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

The signaling component of the mammalian Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF) family
is comprised of eighteen secreted proteins that interact with four signaling
tyrosine kinase FGF receptors (FGFRs). Interaction of FGF ligands with their
signaling receptors is regulated by protein or proteoglycan cofactors and by
extracellular binding proteins. Activated FGFRs phosphorylate specific tyrosine
residues that mediate interaction with cytosolic adaptor proteins and the
RAS-MAPK, PI3K-AKT, PLCγ, and STAT intracellular signaling pathways. Four
structurally related intracellular non-signaling FGFs interact with and regulate
the family of voltage gated sodium channels. Members of the FGF family function
in the earliest stages of embryonic development and during organogenesis to
maintain progenitor cells and mediate their growth, differentiation, survival,
and patterning. FGFs also have roles in adult tissues where they mediate
metabolic functions, tissue repair, and regeneration, often by reactivating
developmental signaling pathways. Consistent with the presence of FGFs in almost
all tissues and organs, aberrant activity of the pathway is associated with
developmental defects that disrupt organogenesis, impair the response to injury,
and result in metabolic disorders, and cancer. For further resources related to
this article, please visit the WIREs website.

© 2015 The Authors. WIREs Developmental Biology published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/wdev.176
PMCID: PMC4393358
PMID: 25772309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
