---
reference_id: "PMID:22526352"
title: TRPV4 mutations in children with congenital distal spinal muscular atrophy.
authors:
- Fiorillo C
- Moro F
- Brisca G
- Astrea G
- Nesti C
- Bálint Z
- Olschewski A
- Meschini MC
- Guelly C
- Auer-Grumbach M
- Battini R
- Pedemonte M
- Romano A
- Menchise V
- Biancheri R
- Santorelli FM
- Bruno C
journal: Neurogenetics
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s10048-012-0328-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- Humans
- Introns
- Male
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/congenital, genetics"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- TRPV Cation Channels/genetics
- Vocal Cord Paralysis/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRPV4 mutations in children with congenital distal spinal muscular atrophy.
**Authors:** Fiorillo C, Moro F, Brisca G, Astrea G, Nesti C, Bálint Z, Olschewski A, Meschini MC, Guelly C, Auer-Grumbach M, Battini R, Pedemonte M, Romano A, Menchise V, Biancheri R, Santorelli FM, Bruno C
**Journal:** Neurogenetics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10048-012-0328-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10048-012-0328-7)

## Content

1. Neurogenetics. 2012 Aug;13(3):195-203. doi: 10.1007/s10048-012-0328-7. Epub
2012  Apr 25.

TRPV4 mutations in children with congenital distal spinal muscular atrophy.

Fiorillo C(1), Moro F, Brisca G, Astrea G, Nesti C, Bálint Z, Olschewski A, 
Meschini MC, Guelly C, Auer-Grumbach M, Battini R, Pedemonte M, Romano A, 
Menchise V, Biancheri R, Santorelli FM, Bruno C.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Unit, IRCCS Stella Maris, Via dei Giacinti 2, 56028 Pisa, 
Italy. chiara.fiorillo@inpe.unipi.it

Inherited disorders characterized by motor neuron loss and muscle weakness are 
genetically heterogeneous. The recent identification of mutations in the gene 
encoding transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4) in distal spinal 
muscular atrophy (dSMA) prompted us to screen for TRPV4 mutations in a small 
group of children with compatible phenotype. In a girl with dSMA and vocal cord 
paralysis, we detected a new variant (p.P97R) localized in the cytosolic 
N-terminus of the TRPV4 protein, upstream of the ankyrin-repeat domain, where 
the great majority of disease-associated mutations reside. In another child with 
congenital dSMA, in this case associated with bone abnormalities, we detected a 
previously reported mutation (p.R232C). Functional analysis of the novel p.P97R 
mutation in a heterologous system demonstrated a loss-of-function mechanism. 
Protein localization studies in muscle, skin, and cultured skin fibroblasts from 
both patients showed normal protein expression. No TRPV4 mutations were detected 
in four children with dSMA without bone or vocal cord involvement. Adding to the 
clinical and molecular heterogeneity of TRPV4-associated diseases, our results 
suggest that molecular testing of the TRPV4 gene is warranted in cases of 
congenital dSMA with bone abnormalities and vocal cord paralysis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-012-0328-7
PMID: 22526352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]