---
reference_id: "PMID:15459318"
title: Stimulatory G protein directly regulates hypertrophic differentiation of growth plate cartilage in vivo.
authors:
- Bastepe M
- Weinstein LS
- Ogata N
- Kawaguchi H
- Jüppner H
- Kronenberg HM
- Chung UI
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0405091101
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Differentiation/genetics, physiology"
- Chondrocytes/cytology
- Cyclic AMP/metabolism
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Growth Plate/cytology
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- "Receptor, Parathyroid Hormone, Type 1/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- "Signal Transduction/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stimulatory G protein directly regulates hypertrophic differentiation of growth plate cartilage in vivo.
**Authors:** Bastepe M, Weinstein LS, Ogata N, Kawaguchi H, Jüppner H, Kronenberg HM, Chung UI
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0405091101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0405091101)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Oct 12;101(41):14794-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0405091101. Epub 2004 Sep 30.

Stimulatory G protein directly regulates hypertrophic differentiation of growth
plate cartilage in vivo.

Bastepe M(1), Weinstein LS, Ogata N, Kawaguchi H, Jüppner H, Kronenberg HM,
Chung UI.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Stimulatory heterotrimeric G protein (Gs) transduces signals from various
cell-surface receptors to adenylyl cyclases, which generate cAMP. The alpha
subunit of Gs (Gsalpha) is encoded by GNAS (Gnas in mice), and heterozygous
Gsalpha inactivating mutations lead to Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. The
in vivo role of Gsalpha in skeletogenesis is largely unknown, because of early
embryonic lethality of mice with disruption of Gnas exon 2 (Gnas(E2-/E2-)) and
the absence of easily detectable phenotypes in growth plate chondrocytes of
heterozygous mutant mice (Gnas(+/E2-)). We generated chimeric mice containing
wild-type cells and either Gnas(E2-/E2-) or Gnas(+/E2-) cells. Gnas(E2-/E2-)
chondrocytes phenocopied PTH/PTHrP receptor (PPR)(-/-) cells by prematurely
undergoing hypertrophy. Introduction of a transgene expressing Gsalpha, one of
several gene products that include Gnas exon 2, into Gnas(E2-/E2-) cells
prevented premature hypertrophy. Gsalpha mRNA expression detected by real-time
RT-PCR analysis was reduced to approximately half that of the wild-type in both
paternal and maternal Gnas(+/E2-) growth plate chondrocytes, indicating
biallelic expression of Gsalpha in these cells. Hypertrophy of Gnas(+/E2-)
chondrocytes was modestly but significantly premature in chimeric growth plates
of mice containing wild-type and Gnas(+/E2-) cells. These data suggest that
Gsalpha is the primary mediator of the actions of PPR in growth plate
chondrocytes and that there is haploinsufficiency of Gsalpha signaling in
Gnas(+/E2-) chondrocytes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0405091101
PMCID: PMC522030
PMID: 15459318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
