---
reference_id: "PMID:34884963"
title: A Brief Journey through Protein Misfolding in Transthyretin Amyloidosis (ATTR Amyloidosis).
authors:
- Gonzalez-Duarte A
- Ulloa-Aguirre A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms222313158
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Brief Journey through Protein Misfolding in Transthyretin Amyloidosis (ATTR Amyloidosis).
**Authors:** Gonzalez-Duarte A, Ulloa-Aguirre A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms222313158](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222313158)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Dec 6;22(23):13158. doi: 10.3390/ijms222313158.

A Brief Journey through Protein Misfolding in Transthyretin Amyloidosis (ATTR 
Amyloidosis).

Gonzalez-Duarte A(1), Ulloa-Aguirre A(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Neurología, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y 
Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Vasco de Quiroga 15, Col. Belisario Dominguez 
Sección XV, Tlalpan, Mexico City 14080, Mexico.
(2)Red de Apoyo a la Investigación, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y 
Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Coordinación de la Investigación Científica, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City 14080, Mexico.

Transthyretin (TTR) amyloidogenesis involves the formation, aggregation, and 
deposition of amyloid fibrils from tetrameric TTR in different organs and 
tissues. While the result of amyloidoses is the accumulation of amyloid fibrils 
resulting in end-organ damage, the nature, and sequence of the molecular causes 
leading to amyloidosis may differ between the different variants. In addition, 
fibril accumulation and toxicity vary between different mutations. Structural 
changes in amyloidogenic TTR have been difficult to identify through X-ray 
crystallography; but nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy has revealed 
different chemical shifts in the backbone structure of mutated and wild-type 
TTR, resulting in diverse responses to the cellular conditions or proteolytic 
stress. Toxic mechanisms of TTR amyloidosis have different effects on different 
tissues. Therapeutic approaches have evolved from orthotopic liver transplants 
to novel disease-modifying therapies that stabilize TTR tetramers and 
gene-silencing agents like small interfering RNA and antisense oligonucleotide 
therapies. The underlying molecular mechanisms of the different TTR variants 
could be responsible for the tropisms to specific organs, the age at onset, 
treatment responses, or disparities in the prognosis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222313158
PMCID: PMC8658192
PMID: 34884963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.