---
reference_id: "PMID:34961483"
title: "Cholera outbreak caused by drinking unprotected well water contaminated with faeces from an open storm water drainage: Kampala City, Uganda, January 2019."
authors:
- Eurien D
- Mirembe BB
- Musewa A
- Kisaakye E
- Kwesiga B
- Ogole F
- Ayen DO
- Kadobera D
- Bulage L
- Ario AR
- Zhu BP
journal: BMC Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12879-021-07011-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera outbreak caused by drinking unprotected well water contaminated with faeces from an open storm water drainage: Kampala City, Uganda, January 2019.
**Authors:** Eurien D, Mirembe BB, Musewa A, Kisaakye E, Kwesiga B, Ogole F, Ayen DO, Kadobera D, Bulage L, Ario AR, Zhu BP
**Journal:** BMC Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12879-021-07011-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-021-07011-9)

## Content

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2021 Dec 27;21(1):1281. doi: 10.1186/s12879-021-07011-9.

Cholera outbreak caused by drinking unprotected well water contaminated with 
faeces from an open storm water drainage: Kampala City, Uganda, January 2019.

Eurien D(1), Mirembe BB(2), Musewa A(2), Kisaakye E(2), Kwesiga B(2), Ogole 
F(3), Ayen DO(4), Kadobera D(2), Bulage L(2), Ario AR(2), Zhu BP(5).

Author information:
(1)Uganda Public Health Fellowship Program, Kampala, Uganda. 
euriend56@gmail.com.
(2)Uganda Public Health Fellowship Program, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Central Public Health Laboratories, Ministry of Health, Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Kampala Capital City Authority, Kampala, Uganda.
(5)US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Kampala, Uganda.

BACKGROUND: Kampala city slums, with one million dwellers living in poor 
sanitary conditions, frequently experience cholera outbreaks. On 6 January 2019, 
Rubaga Division notified the Uganda Ministry of Health of a suspected cholera 
outbreak in Sembule village. We investigated to identify the source and mode of 
transmission, and recommended evidence-based interventions.
METHODS: We defined a suspected case as onset of profuse, painless, acute watery 
diarrhoea in a Kampala City resident (≥ 2 years) from 28 December 2018 to 11 
February 2019. A confirmed case was a suspected case with Vibrio cholerae 
identified from the patient's stool specimen by culture. We found cases by 
record review and active community case-finding. We conducted a case-control 
study in Sembule village, the epi-center of this outbreak, to compare exposures 
between confirmed case-persons and asymptomatic controls, individually matched 
by age group. We overlaid rainfall data with the epidemic curve to identify 
temporal patterns between rain and illnesses. We conducted an environmental 
assessment, interviewed village local council members, and tested water samples 
from randomly-selected households and water sources using culture and PCR to 
identify V. cholerae.
RESULTS: We identified 50 suspected case-patients, with three deaths 
(case-fatality rate: 6.0%). Of 45 case-patients with stool samples tested, 22 
were confirmed positive for V. cholerae O1, serotype Ogawa. All age groups were 
affected; persons aged 5-14 years had the highest attack rate (AR) 
(8.2/100,000). The epidemic curve showed several point-source outbreaks; cases 
repeatedly spiked immediately following rainfall. Sembule village had a 
token-operated water tap, which had broken down 1 month before the outbreak, 
forcing residents to obtain water from one of three wells (Wells A, B, C) or a 
public tap. Environmental assessment showed that residents emptied their feces 
into a drainage channel connected to Well C. Drinking water from Well C was 
associated with illness (ORM-H = 21, 95% CI 4.6-93). Drinking water from a 
public tap (ORM-H = 0.07, 95% CI 0.014-0.304) was protective. Water from a 
container in one of eight households sampled tested positive for V. cholerae; 
water from Well C had coliform counts ˃ 900/100 ml.
CONCLUSIONS: Drinking contaminated water from an unprotected well was associated 
with this cholera outbreak. We recommended emergency chlorination of drinking 
water, fixing the broken token tap, and closure of Well C.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-021-07011-9
PMCID: PMC8711146
PMID: 34961483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.