---
reference_id: PMID:22627108
title: Functions of plasmalogen lipids in health and disease.
authors:
- Braverman NE
- Moser AB
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.05.008
keywords:
- Alzheimer Disease/metabolism
- Animals
- Biological Transport
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Glyceryl Ethers/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Lipid Metabolism
- Organ Specificity
- Oxidation-Reduction
- "Peroxisomal Disorders/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Plasmalogens/biosynthesis, metabolism, physiology"
- Respiratory Tract Diseases/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functions of plasmalogen lipids in health and disease.
**Authors:** Braverman NE, Moser AB
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.05.008)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Sep;1822(9):1442-52. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.05.008. Epub 2012 May 22.

Functions of plasmalogen lipids in health and disease.

Braverman NE(1), Moser AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Pediatrics, McGill University-Montreal 
Childrens Hospital Research Institute, Montreal, Canada. 
nancy.braverman@mcgill.ca

Plasmalogens are a unique class of membrane glycerophospholipids containing a 
fatty alcohol with a vinyl-ether bond at the sn-1 position, and enriched in 
polyunsaturated fatty acids at the sn-2 position of the glycerol backbone. These 
two features provide novel properties to these compounds. Although plasmalogens 
represent up to 20% of the total phospholipid mass in humans their physiological 
roles have been challenging to identify, and are likely to be particular to 
different tissues, metabolic processes and developmental stages. Their 
biosynthesis starts in peroxisomes, and defects at these steps cause the 
malformation syndrome, Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctata (RCDP). The RCDP 
phenotype predicts developmental roles for plasmalogens in bone, brain, lens, 
lung, kidney and heart. Recent studies have revealed secondary plasmalogen 
deficiencies associated with more common disorders and allow us to tease out 
additional pathways dependent on plasmalogen functions. In this review, we 
present current knowledge of plasmalogen biology in health and disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.05.008
PMID: 22627108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]