---
reference_id: "PMID:35405680"
title: Poor Treatment Outcomes with Second-Line Chemotherapy in Advanced Synovial Sarcoma.
authors:
- Kojima Y
- Shimoi T
- Seo T
- Yazaki S
- Okuya T
- Ohtake Y
- Okuma HS
- Shimomura A
- Nishikawa T
- Tanioka M
- Sudo K
- Noguchi E
- Tamura K
- Yoshida A
- Iwata S
- Kobayashi E
- Kawai A
- Fujiwara Y
- Yonemori K
journal: Oncology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000524500
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects
- Doxorubicin
- Humans
- Ifosfamide
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sarcoma, Synovial/drug therapy, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Poor Treatment Outcomes with Second-Line Chemotherapy in Advanced Synovial Sarcoma.
**Authors:** Kojima Y, Shimoi T, Seo T, Yazaki S, Okuya T, Ohtake Y, Okuma HS, Shimomura A, Nishikawa T, Tanioka M, Sudo K, Noguchi E, Tamura K, Yoshida A, Iwata S, Kobayashi E, Kawai A, Fujiwara Y, Yonemori K
**Journal:** Oncology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000524500](https://doi.org/10.1159/000524500)

## Content

1. Oncology. 2022;100(7):370-375. doi: 10.1159/000524500. Epub 2022 Apr 11.

Poor Treatment Outcomes with Second-Line Chemotherapy in Advanced Synovial
Sarcoma.

Kojima Y(1), Shimoi T(2), Seo T(2), Yazaki S(2), Okuya T(2), Ohtake Y(2), Okuma
HS(2), Shimomura A(2)(3), Nishikawa T(2), Tanioka M(2), Sudo K(2), Noguchi E(2),
Tamura K(2), Yoshida A(4), Iwata S(5), Kobayashi E(5), Kawai A(5), Fujiwara
Y(2), Yonemori K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Chuo-ku,
Japan, yuukojim@ncc.go.jp.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Chuo-ku,
Japan.
(3)Department of Breast and Medical Oncology, National Center for Global Health
and Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Japan.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Chuo-ku,
Japan.
(5)Department of Musculoskeletal Oncology and Rehabilitation, National Cancer
Center Hospital, Chuo-ku, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Synovial sarcoma (SS) predominantly affects adolescents and young
adults. Doxorubicin with or without ifosfamide therapy is the standard
first-line treatment for unresectable or metastatic SS. However, there is no
standard second-line chemotherapy regimen. The purpose of the current study was
to evaluate the outcomes of second-line chemotherapy for patients with SS.
METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated the outcomes of 61 patients with
unresectable or metastatic SS who had received first-line chemotherapy at our
institution between 1997 and 2017. Patients who received second-line
chemotherapy were included in the analysis. Outcomes of the chemotherapy were
evaluated.
RESULTS: Among the 61 patients treated with first-line chemotherapy, we
identified 32 patients who received second-line chemotherapy. Most patients
(62.5%) were under 40 years of age. Regarding second-line chemotherapy regimens,
6 (18.8%) patients were treated with doxorubicin with/without ifosfamide, 6
(18.8%) with ifosfamide and etoposide, 4 (12.5%) with docetaxel and gemcitabine,
5 (15.6%) with pazopanib, 2 (6.2%) with trabectedin, and 1 (3.1%) with eribulin.
The overall response rate according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid
Tumors for all patients was 9.4%. Eleven patients (34.3%) achieved
disease-control for >6 months. The median follow-up duration was 15.2 months.
The 1-year progression-free and overall survival rates were 33.1% and 67.1%,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our exploratory study revealed that the response rate of second-line
chemotherapy regimens for patients with SS was 9.4%. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to develop more active therapeutic regimens for SSs.

© 2022 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000524500
PMID: 35405680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
