---
reference_id: "PMID:32638005"
title: The genetics of rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Dedmon LE
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keaa232
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetics of rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Dedmon LE
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keaa232](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keaa232)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2020 Oct 1;59(10):2661-2670. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keaa232.

The genetics of rheumatoid arthritis.

Dedmon LE(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL Medical School, London, UK.

RA is a chronic systemic inflammatory disease that primarily affects the small 
joints of the hands and feet, and results in a mean reduction in life expectancy 
of 3-10 years. RA is a multigene disorder with a substantial genetic component 
and a heritability estimate of 60%. Large-scale Genome-Wide Association Studies 
(GWAS) and meta-analyses have revealed common disease-associated variants in the 
population that may contribute cumulatively to RA pathogenesis. This review 
identifies the most significant genetic variants associated with RA 
susceptibility to date, with particular focus on the contribution of the HLA 
class II genes across different ethnic groups. Also discussed are the potential 
applications of pharmacogenomics to RA management by identifying polymorphisms 
associated with variation in treatment response or toxicity. The use of genetic 
variants to guide treatment strategy has the potential to not only reduce 
National Health Service costs, but also drastically improve patient experience 
and quality of life.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keaa232
PMID: 32638005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]