---
reference_id: "PMID:20301304"
title: Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Pfendner EG
- Lucky AW
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Pfendner EG, Lucky AW

## Content

1. Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa.

Pfendner EG(1), Lucky AW(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 Feb 22 [updated 2018 Dec 20].

Author information:
(1)Director, EBDx Program GeneDx, Inc Gaithersburg, Maryland
(2)Director, Cincinnati Children's Epidermolysis Bullosa Center Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Cincinnati, Ohio

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB) is 
characterized by fragility of the skin and mucous membranes, manifest by 
blistering with little or no trauma. Blistering may be severe and granulation 
tissue can form on the skin around the oral and nasal cavities, fingers and 
toes, and internally around the upper airway. Blisters generally heal with no 
significant scarring. Broad classification of JEB includes JEB generalized 
severe and JEB generalized intermediate. In JEB generalized severe, blisters are 
present at birth or become apparent in the neonatal period. Congenital 
malformations of the urinary tract and bladder may also occur. In JEB 
generalized intermediate, the phenotype may be mild with blistering localized to 
hands, feet, knees, and elbows with or without renal or ureteral involvement. 
Some individuals never blister after the newborn period. Additional features 
shared by JEB and the other major forms of epidermolysis bullosa (EB) include 
congenital localized absence of skin (aplasia cutis congenita), milia, nail 
dystrophy, scarring alopecia, hypotrichosis, pseudosyndactyly, and other 
contractures.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of JEB is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical findings by molecular genetic testing that identifies 
biallelic pathogenic variants in one of the genes associated with JEB: COL17A1, 
ITGB4, LAMA3, LAMB3, or LAMC2. Skin biopsy using transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM) and/or immunofluorescent antibody/antigen mapping can be 
performed but is no longer the preferred method of diagnosis.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Lance and drain new blisters and dress 
with three layers (primary: non-adherent; secondary: for stability and 
protection; third: elastic properties to ensure integrity); protect skin from 
shearing forces; teach caretakers proper handling of infants and children; 
treatment of granulation tissue with high-potency topical steroids, silver 
nitrate, electrocautery, or autologous skin grafts; antibiotics and antiseptics 
as needed for wound care and infection; dilation of esophageal strictures 
(rare); tracheostomy if appropriate; gastrostomy tube if needed; standard 
treatment of gastroesophageal disease; appropriate footwear and physical therapy 
to promote/preserve ambulation; psychosocial support, including social services 
and psychological counseling; appropriate management of chronic pain; regular 
dental care; treatment of urologic and renal disease using standard treatments. 
Prevention of secondary complications: Attention to fluid and electrolyte 
balance in severely affected infants (especially sodium levels); nutritional 
support including feeding gastrostomy when necessary; calcium, vitamin D, zinc, 
and iron supplements. Surveillance: Annual screening for iron-deficiency anemia, 
zinc deficiency, vitamin D deficiency; periodic bone mineral density scanning 
for osteopenia and/or osteoporosis; periodic echocardiograms to evaluate for 
dilated cardiomyopathy; in the second decade of life, surveillance for squamous 
cell carcinoma is appropriate. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Ordinary medical 
tape or Band-Aids®, poorly fitting or coarse-textured clothing and footwear, 
activities that can traumatize the skin (e.g., hiking, mountain biking, contact 
sports). Pregnancy management: Consider cesarean section delivery to reduce 
trauma to the skin of an affected fetus.
GENETIC COUNSELING: JEB is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The 
parents of an affected child are usually obligate heterozygotes (i.e., 
carriers). Because germline mosaicism and uniparental isodisomy have been 
reported, carrier status of parents needs to be confirmed with molecular genetic 
testing. At conception, each sib of an affected individual whose parents are 
both carriers has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an 
asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. 
The offspring of an individual with autosomal recessive JEB are obligate 
heterozygotes (carriers) for a pathogenic variant. Carrier testing for family 
members at increased risk and prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk 
are possible if both pathogenic variants have been identified in the family.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301304