---
reference_id: "PMID:25673086"
title: "Milestones of Lynch syndrome: 1895-2015."
authors:
- Lynch HT
- Snyder CL
- Shaw TG
- Heinen CD
- Hitchins MP
journal: Nat Rev Cancer
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nrc3878
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Milestones of Lynch syndrome: 1895-2015.
**Authors:** Lynch HT, Snyder CL, Shaw TG, Heinen CD, Hitchins MP
**Journal:** Nat Rev Cancer (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrc3878](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc3878)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015 Mar;15(3):181-94. doi: 10.1038/nrc3878. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Milestones of Lynch syndrome: 1895-2015.

Lynch HT(1), Snyder CL(1), Shaw TG(1), Heinen CD(2), Hitchins MP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Creighton University, 
2500 California Plaza, Omaha, Nebraska 68178, USA.
(2)Center for Molecular Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263 
Farmington Avenue, Farmington, Connecticut 06030-3101, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine (Oncology), Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford 
University, Grant Building S169, 1291 Welch Road, Stanford, California 94305, 
USA.

Lynch syndrome, which is now recognized as the most common hereditary colorectal 
cancer condition, is characterized by the predisposition to a spectrum of 
cancers, primarily colorectal cancer and endometrial cancer. We chronicle over a 
century of discoveries that revolutionized the diagnosis and clinical management 
of Lynch syndrome, beginning in 1895 with Warthin's observations of familial 
cancer clusters, through the clinical era led by Lynch and the genetic era 
heralded by the discovery of causative mutations in mismatch repair (MMR) genes, 
to ongoing challenges.

DOI: 10.1038/nrc3878
PMID: 25673086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]