---
reference_id: "PMID:7030903"
title: "Hepatitis B virus DNA in the sera of HBsAg carriers: a marker of active hepatitis B virus replication in the liver."
authors:
- Bonino F
- Hoyer B
- Nelson J
- Engle R
- Verme G
- Gerin J
journal: Hepatology
year: '1981'
doi: 10.1002/hep.1840010503
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B virus DNA in the sera of HBsAg carriers: a marker of active hepatitis B virus replication in the liver.
**Authors:** Bonino F, Hoyer B, Nelson J, Engle R, Verme G, Gerin J
**Journal:** Hepatology (1981)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.1840010503](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.1840010503)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 1981 Sep-Oct;1(5):386-91. doi: 10.1002/hep.1840010503.

Hepatitis B virus DNA in the sera of HBsAg carriers: a marker of active 
hepatitis B virus replication in the liver.

Bonino F, Hoyer B, Nelson J, Engle R, Verme G, Gerin J.

Sera and liver biopsies from 30 Italian patients, carriers of HBsAg for at least 
3 years, were examined for markers of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection by 
serological assays and immunofluorescence. Biopsies were analyzed for HBcAg, 
HBsAg, and delta antigen by immunofluorescence; sera were assayed for 
HBsAg/anti-HBs, HBcAg/anti-HBc, HBeAg/anti-HBe, delta/anti-delta, HBV-specific 
DNA polymerase activity and the presence of HBV DNA. HBcAg, HBeAg, and DNA 
polymerase tests were positive in the sera of 71, 86, and 57%, respectively, of 
carriers with intrahepatic HBcAg. HBV DNA was detected in 100% of patients 
expressing HBcAg in the liver with a strong correlation between the 
concentration of serum DNA and the intensity of HBcAg immunofluorescence in the 
liver. HBV DNA was detected in the sera of 63% of carriers with intrahepatic 
delta where the other markers of HBV replication (HBeAg, DNA polymerase) were 
undetectable. The assay for serum HBV DNA appears to be an excellent noninvasive 
method for detecting active replication of HBV in HBsAg carriers.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.1840010503
PMID: 7030903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]