---
reference_id: "PMID:32210488"
title: "Founder Effect of KHDC3L, p.M1V Mutation, on Iranian Patients with Recurrent Hydatidiform Moles."
authors:
- Fallahi J
- Anvar Z
- Razban V
- Momtahan M
- Namavar-Jahromi B
- Fardaei M
journal: Iran J Med Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.30476/IJMS.2019.45335
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Founder Effect of KHDC3L, p.M1V Mutation, on Iranian Patients with Recurrent Hydatidiform Moles.
**Authors:** Fallahi J, Anvar Z, Razban V, Momtahan M, Namavar-Jahromi B, Fardaei M
**Journal:** Iran J Med Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.30476/IJMS.2019.45335](https://doi.org/10.30476/IJMS.2019.45335)

## Content

1. Iran J Med Sci. 2020 Mar;45(2):118-124. doi: 10.30476/IJMS.2019.45335.

Founder Effect of KHDC3L, p.M1V Mutation, on Iranian Patients with Recurrent 
Hydatidiform Moles.

Fallahi J(1), Anvar Z(2)(3), Razban V(1), Momtahan M(3), Namavar-Jahromi 
B(2)(3), Fardaei M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, School of Advanced Medical Sciences and 
Technologies, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Infertility Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(4)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent hydatidiform moles (RHMs) are an unusual pregnancy with at 
least two molar gestations that are associated with abnormal proliferation of 
trophoblastic tissue and a failure in the embryonic tissues development. Three 
maternal-effect genes, including NLRP7, KHDC3L, and PADI6 have been identified 
as the cause of RHMs. The present study aimed to understand the association of a 
founder mutation with the incidence and prevalence of a disease in different 
individuals of a population.
METHODS: 14 unrelated Iranian patients with recurrent reproductive wastage, 
including at least two HMs, entered this study. In order to find a possible 
mutation in KHDC3L, all the 14 samples were Sanger sequenced. For haplotype 
analysis, three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were selected with 
highest Minor Allele Frequency along KHDC3L.
RESULTS: A common KHDC3L mutation with the same haplotype was identified in four 
out of 14 patients with RHM. Regarding the present study, c.1A>G is the highest 
reported mutation in KHDC3L so far and is also the first report of the 
homozygous state that has led to RHM.
CONCLUSION: c.1A>G mutation in KHDC3L is the highest reported mutation around 
the world. Our data also demonstrated the presence of founder effects for this 
particular mutation in Iranian populations. These data suggest that the high 
frequency of this mutation is potentially responsible for a higher rate of RHM 
in Iran.

Copyright: © Iranian Journal of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.30476/IJMS.2019.45335
PMCID: PMC7071548
PMID: 32210488