---
reference_id: "PMID:14761355"
title: "[Renal dysfunction in workers exposed to arsenic and cadmium]."
authors:
- Hong F
- Jin TY
- Lu GD
- Yin ZY
journal: Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Renal dysfunction in workers exposed to arsenic and cadmium].
**Authors:** Hong F, Jin TY, Lu GD, Yin ZY
**Journal:** Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi (2003)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2003 Dec;21(6):432-6.

[Renal dysfunction in workers exposed to arsenic and cadmium].

[Article in Chinese]

Hong F(1), Jin TY, Lu GD, Yin ZY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational Health & Toxicology, School of Public Health, 
Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the nephrotoxicity induced caused by combined effect of 
arsenic and cadmium in exposed workers.
METHODS: Urinary cadmium and arsenic were used as the exposure biomarkers of 
cadmium and arsenic. Urinary beta2-microglobulin (Ubeta2-MG), albumin (UALB) and 
N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase (UNAG) were measured as the effective biomarkers 
of tubular and glomerular dysfunction induced by cadmium and arsenic.
RESULTS: The combination of cadmium and arsenic induced more severe renal injury 
than that caused by either of the chemicals given alone. There were positive 
correlations and significant dose-effect among the concentrations of urinary 
cadmium, arsenic and levels of Ubeta2-MG, UALB, UNAG (P<0.05, P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Cadmium combined with arsenic may have additive effect on renal 
dysfunction in workers exposed to arsenic and cadmium.

PMID: 14761355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]