---
reference_id: "PMID:28796966"
title: Adult T-Cell Leukemia/Lymphoma.
authors:
- Mehta-Shah N
- Ratner L
- Horwitz SM
journal: J Oncol Pract
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1200/JOP.2017.021907
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult T-Cell Leukemia/Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Mehta-Shah N, Ratner L, Horwitz SM
**Journal:** J Oncol Pract (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JOP.2017.021907](https://doi.org/10.1200/JOP.2017.021907)

## Content

1. J Oncol Pract. 2017 Aug;13(8):487-492. doi: 10.1200/JOP.2017.021907.

Adult T-Cell Leukemia/Lymphoma.

Mehta-Shah N(1), Ratner L(1), Horwitz SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Washington University, St Louis, MO; and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY.

Comment in
    J Oncol Pract. 2017 Aug;13(8):495-497. doi: 10.1200/JOP.2017.024331.
    J Oncol Pract. 2017 Aug;13(8):493-494. doi: 10.1200/JOP.2017.024323.

Adult T-cell lymphoma/leukemia (ATL) is a rare T-cell lymphoproliferative 
neoplasm caused by human T-lymphotrophic virus 1. In its more common, aggressive 
forms, ATL carries one of the poorest prognoses of the non-Hodgkin lymphomas. 
The disease has clinical subtypes (ie, acute, lymphoma, chronic, and smoldering 
forms) defined by the presenting features, and therefore, the clinical course 
can vary. For the smoldering and lower-risk chronic forms, combinations 
involving antiviral therapies have shown some success. However, in many 
patients, the more indolent forms will evolve into the more aggressive subtypes. 
In the more aggressive acute, lymphoma, and higher-risk chronic forms, the 
literature supports initial treatment with combination chemotherapy followed by 
allogeneic transplantation as a potentially curative approach. Recently, 
mogamulizumab and lenalidomide have shown promise in the treatment of ATL. With 
better understanding of the molecular drivers of this disease, we hope that the 
therapeutic landscape will continue to expand.

DOI: 10.1200/JOP.2017.021907
PMCID: PMC6366298
PMID: 28796966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]