---
reference_id: "PMID:32656345"
title: "Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: A Review of Potential Mechanisms."
authors:
- DeVuono MV
- Parker LA
journal: Cannabis Cannabinoid Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1089/can.2019.0059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: A Review of Potential Mechanisms.
**Authors:** DeVuono MV, Parker LA
**Journal:** Cannabis Cannabinoid Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1089/can.2019.0059](https://doi.org/10.1089/can.2019.0059)

## Content

1. Cannabis Cannabinoid Res. 2020 Jun 5;5(2):132-144. doi: 10.1089/can.2019.0059.
 eCollection 2020 Jun 1.

Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: A Review of Potential Mechanisms.

DeVuono MV(1), Parker LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Collabortive Neuroscience Program, University of
Guelph, Guelph, Canada.

Introduction: Cannabinoids have long been known for their ability to treat
nausea and vomiting. Recent reports, however, have highlighted the paradoxical
proemetic effects of cannabinoids. Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) is
characterized by cyclical episodes of nausea and vomiting, accompanied by
abdominal pain following prolonged, high-dose cannabis use, which is alleviated
by hot baths and showers. Little is known about the cause of this syndrome.
Discussion: Cannabinoids produce a biphasic effect on nausea and vomiting, with
low doses having an antiemetic effect and high doses producing emesis.
Presentation and treatment of CHS are similar to cyclical vomiting syndrome as
well as chemotherapy-related anticipatory nausea and vomiting, suggesting that
these phenomena may share mechanisms. The prevalence of CHS is not known because
of the symptomatic overlap with other disorders and the lack of knowledge of the
syndrome by the public and physicians. Treatment with typical antiemetic drugs
is ineffective for CHS, but anxiolytic and sedative drugs, along with hot
showers, seem to be consistently effective at reducing symptoms. The only known
way to permanently end CHS, however, is abstinence from cannabinoids. Case
studies and limited pre-clinical data on CHS indicate that prolonged high doses
of the main psychotropic compound in cannabis, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
result in changes to the endocannabinoid system by acting on the cannabinoid 1
(CB1) receptor. These endocannabinoid system changes can dysregulate stress and
anxiety responses, thermoregulation, the transient receptor potential vanilloid
system, and several neurotransmitters systems, and are thus potential candidates
for mediating the pathophysiology of CHS. Conclusions: Excessive cannabinoid
administration disrupts the normal functioning of the endocannabinoid system,
which may cause CHS. More clinical and pre-clinical research is needed to fully
understand the underlying pathophysiology of this disorder and the negative
consequences of prolonged high-dose cannabis use.

Copyright 2020, Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., publishers.

DOI: 10.1089/can.2019.0059
PMCID: PMC7347072
PMID: 32656345

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
