---
reference_id: "PMID:23958592"
title: "Metabolic encephalopathy in beta-ketothiolase deficiency: the first report from India."
authors:
- Akella RR
- Aoyama Y
- Mori C
- Lingappa L
- Cariappa R
- Fukao T
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2013.07.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metabolic encephalopathy in beta-ketothiolase deficiency: the first report from India.
**Authors:** Akella RR, Aoyama Y, Mori C, Lingappa L, Cariappa R, Fukao T
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2013.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2013.07.007)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2014 Jun;36(6):537-40. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2013.07.007. Epub
2013  Aug 16.

Metabolic encephalopathy in beta-ketothiolase deficiency: the first report from 
India.

Akella RR(1), Aoyama Y(2), Mori C(3), Lingappa L(1), Cariappa R(4), Fukao T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Rainbow Hospital 
for Women and Children, Hyderabad, India.
(2)Medical Information Sciences Division, United Graduate School of Drug 
Discovery and Medical Information Sciences, Gifu University, Gifu, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, Gifu, 
Japan.
(4)Neogen Laboratories, Bengaluru, India.
(5)Medical Information Sciences Division, United Graduate School of Drug 
Discovery and Medical Information Sciences, Gifu University, Gifu, Japan; 
Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, Gifu, 
Japan. Electronic address: toshi-gif@umin.net.

Beta-ketothiolase deficiency, or mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2) 
deficiency, is a rare autosomal recessive disorder affecting isoleucine 
catabolism and ketone body metabolism. A patient from South India presented with 
acute ketoacidosis at 11 months of age. During the acute crisis the C5OH 
(2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl) carnitine and C5:1 (tiglyl) carnitine were elevated 
and large amounts of 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyrate, tiglylglycine, and 
2-methylacetoacetate were excreted. Brain CT showed bilateral basal ganglia 
lesions. Potassium ion-activated acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase activity was deficient 
in the patient's fibroblasts. The patient is a homozygote for a novel c.578T>G 
(M193R) mutation. This is the first report of T2 deficiency confirmed by enzyme 
and molecular analysis from India.

Copyright © 2013 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2013.07.007
PMID: 23958592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]