---
reference_id: "PMID:23075819"
title: "Kawasaki disease: late cardiovascular sequelae."
authors:
- Daniels LB
- Gordon JB
- Burns JC
journal: Curr Opin Cardiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/HCO.0b013e3283588f06
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease: late cardiovascular sequelae.
**Authors:** Daniels LB, Gordon JB, Burns JC
**Journal:** Curr Opin Cardiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HCO.0b013e3283588f06](https://doi.org/10.1097/HCO.0b013e3283588f06)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2012 Nov;27(6):572-7. doi: 10.1097/HCO.0b013e3283588f06.

Kawasaki disease: late cardiovascular sequelae.

Daniels LB(1), Gordon JB, Burns JC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of California, La 
Jolla, San Diego, California, USA. lbdaniels@ucsd.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Kawasaki disease was first described in Japanese in 1967, and 
the first English language report appeared in 1974. Consequently, only recently 
have Kawasaki disease patients reached adulthood and come to the attention of 
adult cardiologists. As children with Kawasaki disease grow up, adult 
cardiologists are likely to see increasing numbers of these patients with 
cardiovascular complications. The purpose of this review is to highlight recent 
advances in our understanding of the late cardiac sequelae of Kawasaki disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Patients with persistent or remodeled coronary aneurysms after 
Kawasaki disease have a high rate of complications including thrombosis or 
stenosis leading to myocardial infarction. Whether patients with Kawasaki 
disease are at risk of accelerated atherosclerosis remains controversial, but 
there may be persistent inflammation in the arterial wall of coronary aneurysms 
long after Kawasaki disease, and myofibroblasts likely play a central role in 
the arterial remodeling process.
SUMMARY: The vasculopathy of Kawasaki disease appears to be distinct from that 
of atherosclerosis, and optimal management strategies for the two conditions 
differ. Patients with persistent or remodeled coronary aneurysms or regressed 
aneurysms after Kawasaki disease are at increased risk and require long-term 
follow-up by cardiologists knowledgeable about management issues in this patient 
population.

DOI: 10.1097/HCO.0b013e3283588f06
PMID: 23075819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]