---
reference_id: "PMID:32771711"
title: The effect of race on clinical presentation and outcomes in neurosarcoidosis.
authors:
- Affan M
- Mahajan A
- Rehman T
- Kananeh M
- Schultz L
- Cerghet M
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2020.117073
keywords:
- Black or African American
- Central Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnostic imaging, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effect of race on clinical presentation and outcomes in neurosarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Affan M, Mahajan A, Rehman T, Kananeh M, Schultz L, Cerghet M
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2020.117073](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2020.117073)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2020 Oct 15;417:117073. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2020.117073. Epub
2020  Aug 1.

The effect of race on clinical presentation and outcomes in neurosarcoidosis.

Affan M(1), Mahajan A(2), Rehman T(3), Kananeh M(4), Schultz L(5), Cerghet M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA; Department of
Neurology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.. Electronic address:
affan004@umn.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Cincinnati
Gardner Neuroscience Institute, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Beaumont Hospital Dearborn, Dearborn, MI,
USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Nervous system is affected in 25% of patients with sarcoidosis.
Current literature is largely limited to case reports with disproportionate
Caucasian population. We aim to evaluate differences in presentation, management
and outcomes by race in neurosarcoidosis.
METHODS: Clinical and demographic data on consecutive patients fulfilling
Zajicek criteria for neurosarcoidosis from 1995 to 2016 at Henry Ford Hospital
were extracted. Disparities in clinical presentation, laboratory values,
radiological features, treatment and outcomes, were compared between two groups:
African Americans (AA) and non-AA using chi-squared tests, two sample t-test for
age and Wilcoxon two sample tests.
RESULTS: A total of 118 patients were included, of which 58% were female and 73%
were AA. The diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis was noted to be definite (25%),
probable (64%) and possible (11%). AA patients had a significantly higher rate
of elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (62% vs 24%, P = .005) and had lower
resolution of abnormalities on follow-up imaging (14% vs 41%, P = .017). There
was no difference in disability on follow-up (25% vs 33%, P = .43) or mortality
(13% vs 9%, P = .6).
CONCLUSIONS: There were no differences in presentation, management and outcomes
by race. Discordance in the clinical and radiological data by race has clinical
implications and needs further investigation.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2020.117073
PMID: 32771711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.
