---
reference_id: "PMID:23246003"
title: Mutations in the β-tubulin gene TUBB5 cause microcephaly with structural brain abnormalities.
authors:
- Breuss M
- Heng JI
- Poirier K
- Tian G
- Jaglin XH
- Qu Z
- Braun A
- Gstrein T
- Ngo L
- Haas M
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Moutard ML
- Passemard S
- Verloes A
- Gressens P
- Xie Y
- Robson KJ
- Rani DS
- Thangaraj K
- Clausen T
- Chelly J
- Cowan NJ
- Keays DA
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.11.017
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- "Brain/abnormalities, embryology, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Microcephaly/embryology, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Neural Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Neurogenesis/genetics
- "Tubulin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the β-tubulin gene TUBB5 cause microcephaly with structural brain abnormalities.
**Authors:** Breuss M, Heng JI, Poirier K, Tian G, Jaglin XH, Qu Z, Braun A, Gstrein T, Ngo L, Haas M, Bahi-Buisson N, Moutard ML, Passemard S, Verloes A, Gressens P, Xie Y, Robson KJ, Rani DS, Thangaraj K, Clausen T, Chelly J, Cowan NJ, Keays DA
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2012.11.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2012.11.017)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2012 Dec 27;2(6):1554-62. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.11.017. Epub
2012  Dec 13.

Mutations in the β-tubulin gene TUBB5 cause microcephaly with structural brain
abnormalities.

Breuss M(1), Heng JI, Poirier K, Tian G, Jaglin XH, Qu Z, Braun A, Gstrein T,
Ngo L, Haas M, Bahi-Buisson N, Moutard ML, Passemard S, Verloes A, Gressens P,
Xie Y, Robson KJ, Rani DS, Thangaraj K, Clausen T, Chelly J, Cowan NJ, Keays DA.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr Bohr-Gasse, Vienna 1030, Austria.

The formation of the mammalian cortex requires the generation, migration, and
differentiation of neurons. The vital role that the microtubule cytoskeleton
plays in these cellular processes is reflected by the discovery that mutations
in various tubulin isotypes cause different neurodevelopmental diseases,
including lissencephaly (TUBA1A), polymicrogyria (TUBA1A, TUBB2B, TUBB3), and an
ocular motility disorder (TUBB3). Here, we show that Tubb5 is expressed in
neurogenic progenitors in the mouse and that its depletion in vivo perturbs the
cell cycle of progenitors and alters the position of migrating neurons. We
report the occurrence of three microcephalic patients with structural brain
abnormalities harboring de novo mutations in TUBB5 (M299V, V353I, and E401K).
These mutant proteins, which affect the chaperone-dependent assembly of tubulin
heterodimers in different ways, disrupt neurogenic division and/or migration in
vivo. Our results provide insight into the functional repertoire of the tubulin
gene family, specifically implicating TUBB5 in embryonic neurogenesis and
microcephaly.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.11.017
PMCID: PMC3595605
PMID: 23246003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
