---
reference_id: "PMID:19741523"
title: Neutropenia in type Ib glycogen storage disease.
authors:
- Chou JY
- Jun HS
- Mansfield BC
journal: Curr Opin Hematol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e328331df85
keywords:
- Animals
- Antiporters/pharmacology
- Glycogen Storage Disease Type I/physiopathology
- Humans
- Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/pharmacology
- Neutropenia/physiopathology
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutropenia in type Ib glycogen storage disease.
**Authors:** Chou JY, Jun HS, Mansfield BC
**Journal:** Curr Opin Hematol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOH.0b013e328331df85](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOH.0b013e328331df85)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2010 Jan;17(1):36-42. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e328331df85.

Neutropenia in type Ib glycogen storage disease.

Chou JY(1), Jun HS, Mansfield BC.

Author information:
(1)aProgram on Developmental Endocrinology and Genetics, Section on Cellular
Differentiation, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1830, USA.
chouja@mail.nih.gov

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Glycogen storage disease type Ib, characterized by disturbed
glucose homeostasis, neutropenia, and neutrophil dysfunction, is caused by a
deficiency in a ubiquitously expressed glucose-6-phosphate transporter (G6PT).
G6PT translocates glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) from the cytoplasm into the lumen of
the endoplasmic reticulum, in which it is hydrolyzed to glucose either by a
liver/kidney/intestine-restricted glucose-6-phosphatase-alpha (G6Pase-alpha) or
by a ubiquitously expressed G6Pase-beta. The role of the G6PT/G6Pase-alpha
complex is well established and readily explains why G6PT disruptions disturb
interprandial blood glucose homeostasis. However, the basis for neutropenia and
neutrophil dysfunction in glycogen storage disease type Ib is poorly understood.
Recent studies that are now starting to unveil the mechanisms are presented in
this review.
RECENT FINDINGS: Characterization of G6Pase-beta and generation of mice lacking
either G6PT or G6Pase-beta have shown that neutrophils express the
G6PT/G6Pase-beta complex capable of producing endogenous glucose. Loss of G6PT
activity leads to enhanced endoplasmic reticulum stress, oxidative stress, and
apoptosis that underlie neutropenia and neutrophil dysfunction in glycogen
storage disease type Ib.
SUMMARY: Neutrophil function is intimately linked to the regulation of glucose
and G6P metabolism by the G6PT/G6Pase-beta complex. Understanding the molecular
mechanisms that govern energy homeostasis in neutrophils has revealed a
previously unrecognized pathway of intracellular G6P metabolism in neutrophils.

DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e328331df85
PMCID: PMC3099242
PMID: 19741523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
