---
reference_id: "PMID:15921244"
title: "X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia as a tangential migration disorder causing intractable epilepsy: proposal for a new term, \"interneuronopathy\"."
authors:
- Kato M
- Dobyns WB
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1177/08830738050200042001
keywords:
- Cell Movement/physiology
- Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities
- Doublecortin Protein
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/complications"
- "Genitalia, Male/abnormalities"
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Interneurons/physiology
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Prognosis
- "Spasms, Infantile/etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia as a tangential migration disorder causing intractable epilepsy: proposal for a new term, "interneuronopathy".
**Authors:** Kato M, Dobyns WB
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1177/08830738050200042001](https://doi.org/10.1177/08830738050200042001)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2005 Apr;20(4):392-7. doi: 10.1177/08830738050200042001.

X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia as a tangential migration
disorder causing intractable epilepsy: proposal for a new term,
"interneuronopathy".

Kato M(1), Dobyns WB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata,
Japan. mkato@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp

X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia is the first human disorder in
which deficient tangential migration in the brain has been demonstrated. Male
patients with X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia show intractable
seizures, especially clonic convulsions or myoclonus from the first day of life,
but neither infantile spasms nor hypsarrhythmia on electroencephalograms so far.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging shows anterior pachygyria and posterior agyria
with a mildly thick cortex, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and dysplastic
basal ganglia. ARX, a paired-class homeobox gene with four polyalanine
sequences, is a responsible gene for X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal
genitalia. The brain of Arx knockout mice shows aberrant tangential migration
and differentiation of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic interneurons. In
human X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia, a neuropathologic study
has suggested a loss of interneurons. Meanwhile, polyalanine expansion of ARX
causes symptomatic or nonsymptomatic West's syndrome and nonsyndromic mental
retardation. The striking epileptogenicity of X-linked lissencephaly with
abnormal genitalia and West's syndrome associated with ARX mutations i s
considered to be caused by a disorder of interneurons involving a
tangentialmigration disorder. We propose "interneuronopathy" as a term for this.

DOI: 10.1177/08830738050200042001
PMID: 15921244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
