---
reference_id: "PMID:41536100"
title: "All-cause and cause-specific mortality risk in individuals with eating disorders: systematic review and meta-analysis of relative risk and aggravating or attenuating factors."
authors:
- Semchishen SN
- Højlund M
- Lemaire D
- Obeegadoo I
- Hammond NG
- Frangione B
- Ogawa H
- Sunderland R
- Singh A
- Wafy G
- Campana M
- Sakeah J
- Brousseau K
- Correll CU
- Wagner E
- Colman I
- Solmi M
journal: World Psychiatry
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1002/wps.70014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# All-cause and cause-specific mortality risk in individuals with eating disorders: systematic review and meta-analysis of relative risk and aggravating or attenuating factors.
**Authors:** Semchishen SN, Højlund M, Lemaire D, Obeegadoo I, Hammond NG, Frangione B, Ogawa H, Sunderland R, Singh A, Wafy G, Campana M, Sakeah J, Brousseau K, Correll CU, Wagner E, Colman I, Solmi M
**Journal:** World Psychiatry (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1002/wps.70014](https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.70014)

## Content

1. World Psychiatry. 2026 Feb;25(1):125-140. doi: 10.1002/wps.70014.

All-cause and cause-specific mortality risk in individuals with eating
disorders: systematic review and meta-analysis of relative risk and aggravating
or attenuating factors.

Semchishen SN(1), Højlund M(2)(3)(4), Lemaire D(1), Obeegadoo I(1), Hammond
NG(1), Frangione B(1), Ogawa H(5), Sunderland R(6), Singh A(7), Wafy G(1),
Campana M(8), Sakeah J(1), Brousseau K(1), Correll CU(9)(10)(11)(12)(13)(14),
Wagner E(15)(16), Colman I(1), Solmi M(9)(17)(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)School of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada.
(2)Department of Psychiatry Aabenraa, Mental Health Services in the Region of
Southern Denmark, Aabenraa, Denmark.
(3)Clinical Pharmacology, Pharmacy, and Environmental Medicine, Department of
Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(4)Child and Adolescent Mental Health Centre, Mental Health Services Capital
Region of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(6)School of Psychology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(7)Faculty of Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(8)Department of General Psychiatry 2, LVR Hospital, H. Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(9)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Charité Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(10)German Center for Mental Health (DZPG), partner site Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(11)German Center for Child and Adolescent Health (DZKJ), partner site Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, Zucker Hillside Hospital, Northwell Health, Glen
Oaks, NY, USA.
(13)Department of Psychiatry and Molecular Medicine, Zucker School of Medicine
at Hofstra/Northwell, Hempstead, NY, USA.
(14)Center for Psychiatric Neuroscience, Feinstein Institute for Medical
Research, Northwell Health, New Hyde Park, NY, USA.
(15)Evidence-based Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany.
(16)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Medical Faculty,
University of Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany.
(17)SCIENCES lab, Department of Psychiatry, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada.
(18)Regional Centre for Treatment of Eating Disorders and On Track: Champlain
First Episode Psychosis Program, Department of Mental Health, Ottawa Hospital,
Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(19)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Previous meta-analyses estimating mortality risk in eating disorders (EDs) were
restricted to specific disorders or causes of death, and were published before
the release of the DSM-5, which introduced significant changes in ED
classification. We conducted a PRISMA 2020-compliant systematic review and
random-effects meta-analysis assessing all-cause (primary outcome) and
cause-specific mortality risk ratio (RR) in cohort/case-control studies of
individuals with EDs versus the general population or groups matched by physical
and/or psychiatric comorbidities. Meta-regression/subgroup analyses assessed
risk aggravating or attenuating factors. Study quality was evaluated using
design-specific US National Institutes of Health tools. Altogether, 83 studies
were meta-analyzed (patients with EDs: N=307,710, general population controls:
N=15,719,076; mean follow-up: 11.96 years, females: 94.35%, mean age: 25.52
years). The quality was rated as "good" in 65.0%, "fair" in 21.7%, and "poor" in
13.3% of the studies. Any ED was associated with higher all-cause mortality vs.
the general population (RR=4.92, 95% CI: 4.03-6.00, ranging from RR=5.52, 95%
CI: 4.47-6.82 in anorexia nervosa (AN) to non-significant difference in binge
eating disorder), as well as with higher suicide-related mortality (RR=8.45, 95%
CI: 5.73-12.47, ranging from RR=9.86, 95% CI: 5.63-17.27 in AN to RR=6.15, 95%
CI: 2.52-15.04 in bulimia nervosa). Mortality risk from both natural and
non-natural causes was also increased in individuals with EDs vs. the general
population (RR=3.47, 95% CI: 2.29-5.25, and RR=6.46, 95% CI: 4.62-9.04,
respectively). All-cause mortality increased with lower body mass index and
shorter follow-ups. Male sex, any psychiatric comorbidity, and comorbid
substance use, alcohol use, mood or personality disorders were significantly
associated with higher all-cause mortality risk in any ED. These data confirm
that EDs are associated with a high all-cause, suicide-related and other
cause-specific mortality risk, and indicate that monitoring of physical and
psychiatric complications and suicide risk early after diagnosis, particularly
in AN, males and individuals with low body mass index, is absolutely needed.
Further research is warranted to identify actionable factors that can reduce
ED-associated mortality risk.

© 2026 World Psychiatric Association.

DOI: 10.1002/wps.70014
PMCID: PMC12805073
PMID: 41536100
