---
reference_id: "PMID:37717413"
title: "Monitoring the treatment of urea cycle disorders using phenylbutyrate metabolite analyses: Still many lessons to learn."
authors:
- Glinton KE
- Minard CG
- Liu N
- Sun Q
- Elsea SH
- Burrage LC
- Nagamani SCS
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107699
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monitoring the treatment of urea cycle disorders using phenylbutyrate metabolite analyses: Still many lessons to learn.
**Authors:** Glinton KE, Minard CG, Liu N, Sun Q, Elsea SH, Burrage LC, Nagamani SCS
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107699](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107699)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2023 Nov;140(3):107699. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107699.
Epub  2023 Sep 11.

Monitoring the treatment of urea cycle disorders using phenylbutyrate metabolite 
analyses: Still many lessons to learn.

Glinton KE(1), Minard CG(2), Liu N(3), Sun Q(3), Elsea SH(4), Burrage LC(5), 
Nagamani SCS(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: Kevin.Glinton@bcm.edu.
(2)Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Baylor Genetics, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.

Medications that elicit an alternate pathway for nitrogen excretion such as oral 
sodium phenylbutyrate (NaPBA) and glycerol phenylbutyrate (GPB) and intravenous 
sodium phenylacetate (NaPAA) are important for the management of urea cycle 
disorders (UCDs). Plasma concentrations of their primary metabolite, 
phenylacetate (PAA), as well as the ratio of PAA to phenylacetylglutamine (PAGN) 
are useful for guiding dosing and detecting toxicity. However, the frequency of 
toxic elevations of metabolites and associated clinical covariates is relatively 
unknown. A retrospective analysis was conducted on 1255 plasma phenylbutyrate 
metabolite measurements from 387 individuals. An additional analysis was also 
conducted on a subset of 68 individuals in whom detailed clinical information 
was available. In the course of these analyses, abnormally elevated plasma PAA 
and PAA:PAGN were identified in 39 individuals (4.15% of samples) and 42 
individuals (4.30% of samples), respectively. Abnormally elevated PAA and 
PAA:PAGN values were more likely to occur in younger individuals and associate 
positively with dose of NAPBA and negatively with plasma glutamine and glycine 
levels. These results demonstrate that during routine clinical management, the 
majority of patients have PAA levels that are deemed safe. As age is negatively 
associated with PAA levels however, children undergoing treatment with NaPBA may 
need close monitoring of their phenylbutyrate metabolite levels.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107699
PMCID: PMC11162249
PMID: 37717413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest K.E.G., N.L., 
Q.S., S.H.E., L.C.B., and S.C.S.N. are employees of the Baylor College of 
Medicine, which generates genetic testing revenue in a partnership with Baylor 
Genetics.