---
reference_id: "PMID:26939208"
title: Extended Antiphospholipid Antibodies Screening in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients.
authors:
- Dima A
- Caraiola S
- Jurcut C
- Balanescu E
- Balanescu P
- Ramba D
- Badea C
- Pompilian V
- Ionescu R
- Baicus A
- Baicus C
- Dan GA
journal: Rom J Intern Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1515/rjim-2015-0041
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extended Antiphospholipid Antibodies Screening in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients.
**Authors:** Dima A, Caraiola S, Jurcut C, Balanescu E, Balanescu P, Ramba D, Badea C, Pompilian V, Ionescu R, Baicus A, Baicus C, Dan GA
**Journal:** Rom J Intern Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1515/rjim-2015-0041](https://doi.org/10.1515/rjim-2015-0041)

## Content

1. Rom J Intern Med. 2015 Oct-Dec;53(4):321-8. doi: 10.1515/rjim-2015-0041.

Extended Antiphospholipid Antibodies Screening in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 
Patients.

Dima A, Caraiola S, Jurcut C, Balanescu E, Balanescu P, Ramba D, Badea C, 
Pompilian V, Ionescu R, Baicus A, Baicus C, Dan GA.

BACKGROUND: The antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is one of the most encountered 
autoimmunity in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients and pathogenesis of 
these two seems to be intricate.
AIM: To investigate the association of antiphospholipid antibodies (APLAs) titer 
with the presence of secondary APS diagnosis in SLE patients.
METHODS: 65 patients fulfilling the 2012 Systemic Lupus Collaborating 
International Clinics (SLICC) SLE's criteria were included. The APS diagnosis 
was sustained according to the 2006 Sydney APS's criteria. Three groups of 
patients were defined: SLE patients with secondary APS, SLE with history of 
positive "criteria" APLAs but without APS clinical features, respectively SLE 
patients without positive APLAs or clinical APS criteria. An extended APLAs 
panel was searched in all cases: both IgM and IgG of anticardiolipin antibodies 
(aCL), anti-P2 glycoprotein I antibodies (aβ2GPI), antiphosphatidylethanolamine 
antibodies (aPE), antiphosphatidylserine antibodies (aPS), respectively 
antiprothrombin antibodies (aPT). Results. Only the aβ2GPI, both IgM and IgG 
serotypes, had significantly higher titers in patients with SLE and secondary 
APS compared to no APS (with/ without positive APLAs): median (min; max) 7.0 
(0.0-300.0) vs. 1.0 (0.0-28.0) vs. 1.0 (0.0-12.0), respectively 3.0 (0.0-79.0) 
vs. 1.0 (0.0-3.0) vs. 1.0 (0.0-12.0) (p<0.001, Kruskal-Wallis test)]. Also, in 
regression logistic models, only the aβ2 GPI (IgG and IgM ) were identified as 
risk factors for secondary APS diagnosis in the SLE patients: OR(95%CI) 5.9 
(2.2-15.7), respectively 1.3 (1.1-1.5). In regard with the SLE markers, the IgG 
serotypes of the "non-criteria" APLAs analyzed (aPS, aPT, aPE) were correlated 
with the antiDNA titers while the IgM serotypes inversely associated with the 
complement C3 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: IgG aβ2 GPI are accompanied by almost 6-fold increase risk of 
secondary APS when screening SLE patients. On the contrary, the "non-criteria" 
APLAs do not seem associated with the APS diagnosis in SLE patients. Some 
correlates of the "non-criteria" APLAs with the antiDNA and complement C3 levels 
were also observed.

DOI: 10.1515/rjim-2015-0041
PMID: 26939208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]