---
reference_id: "PMID:17217855"
title: Guillain-barré syndrome.
authors:
- Kuwabara S
journal: Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/s11910-007-0022-6
keywords:
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/classification, immunology, physiopathology"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Guillain-barré syndrome.
**Authors:** Kuwabara S
**Journal:** Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11910-007-0022-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-007-0022-6)

## Content

1. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2007 Jan;7(1):57-62. doi: 10.1007/s11910-007-0022-6.

Guillain-barré syndrome.

Kuwabara S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chiba University School of Medicine, Chiba, Japan.
kuwabara-s@faculty.chiba-u.jp

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is currently divided into the two major subtypes:
acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) and acute motor axonal
neuropathy (AMAN). This review highlights relevant recent publications,
particularly on the pathophysiology of AMAN. Molecular mimicry of the bacterial
lipo-oligosaccharide by the human gangliosides is now considered an important
cause of AMAN. Gangliosides GM1, GM1b, GD1a, and GalNAc-GD1a expressed on the
motor axolemma are likely to be the epitopes for antibodies in AMAN. At the
nodes or paranodes, deposition of antiganglioside antibodies initially cause
reversible conduction block followed by axonal degeneration. Electrodiagnostic
findings support this process. Disruption of glycolipids, which are important to
maintain ion channel clustering at the nodes and paranode, may impair nerve
conduction. Genetic polymorphisms of Campylobacter jejuni determine the
expression of the gangliosides on the bacterial wall. In contrast, target
molecules in AIDP have not yet been identified. Meta-analyses show efficacy of
plasmapheresis and immunoglobulin therapy, but not corticosteroids, in hastening
recovery.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-007-0022-6
PMID: 17217855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
