---
reference_id: "PMID:40024692"
title: Recent Antimicrobial Resistance Situation and Mechanisms of Resistance to Key Antimicrobials in Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.
authors:
- Morita D
- Kuroda T
journal: Biol Pharm Bull
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1248/bpb.b24-00649
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent Antimicrobial Resistance Situation and Mechanisms of Resistance to Key Antimicrobials in Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.
**Authors:** Morita D, Kuroda T
**Journal:** Biol Pharm Bull (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1248/bpb.b24-00649](https://doi.org/10.1248/bpb.b24-00649)

## Content

1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2025;48(3):222-229. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b24-00649.

Recent Antimicrobial Resistance Situation and Mechanisms of Resistance to Key 
Antimicrobials in Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.

Morita D(1), Kuroda T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health 
Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, 
Japan.

Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) is a major cause of diarrhea in 
developing countries and is regularly imported into developed countries as a 
major cause of traveler's diarrhea. ETEC is usually self-limiting and not 
necessarily treated with antimicrobials, although antimicrobial treatment is 
recommended in malnourished children, severe cases, and traveler's diarrhea. 
However, resistant strains to representative therapeutic agents such as 
ciprofloxacin and azithromycin have been reported in recent years, and 
multidrug-resistant ETEC has also emerged. This review discusses the recent 
antimicrobial resistance surveillance in ETEC and the mechanisms of resistance 
to major antimicrobials.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.b24-00649
PMID: 40024692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]