---
reference_id: "PMID:11443545"
title: "Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome with a nucleotide excision-repair defect and a mutated XPD gene, with prenatal diagnosis in a triplet pregnancy."
authors:
- Graham JM Jr
- Anyane-Yeboa K
- Raams A
- Appeldoorn E
- Kleijer WJ
- Garritsen VH
- Busch D
- Edersheim TG
- Jaspers NG
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/321295
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Pair Mismatch/genetics
- Base Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cockayne Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- DNA Helicases
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA Repair/genetics
- "DNA Replication/genetics, radiation effects"
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Female
- "Fetal Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Jews/genetics
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Syndrome
- Transcription Factors
- Triplets/genetics
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/genetics, physiopathology"
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group D Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome with a nucleotide excision-repair defect and a mutated XPD gene, with prenatal diagnosis in a triplet pregnancy.
**Authors:** Graham JM Jr, Anyane-Yeboa K, Raams A, Appeldoorn E, Kleijer WJ, Garritsen VH, Busch D, Edersheim TG, Jaspers NG
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/321295](https://doi.org/10.1086/321295)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Aug;69(2):291-300. doi: 10.1086/321295. Epub 2001 Jul 3.

Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome with a nucleotide excision-repair defect 
and a mutated XPD gene, with prenatal diagnosis in a triplet pregnancy.

Graham JM Jr(1), Anyane-Yeboa K, Raams A, Appeldoorn E, Kleijer WJ, Garritsen 
VH, Busch D, Edersheim TG, Jaspers NG.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Birth Defects Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA 
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. john.graham@cshs.org

Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal (COFS) syndrome is a recessively inherited rapidly 
progressive neurologic disorder leading to brain atrophy, with calcifications, 
cataracts, microcornea, optic atrophy, progressive joint contractures, and 
growth failure. Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a recessively inherited 
neurodegenerative disorder characterized by low to normal birth weight, growth 
failure, brain dysmyelination with calcium deposits, cutaneous photosensitivity, 
pigmentary retinopathy and/or cataracts, and sensorineural hearing loss. 
Cultured CS cells are hypersensitive to UV radiation, because of impaired 
nucleotide-excision repair (NER) of UV-induced damage in actively transcribed 
DNA, whereas global genome NER is unaffected. The abnormalities in CS are caused 
by mutated CSA or CSB genes. Another class of patients with CS symptoms have 
mutations in the XPB, XPD, or XPG genes, which result in UV hypersensitivity as 
well as defective global NER; such patients may concurrently have clinical 
features of another NER syndrome, xeroderma pigmentosum (XP). Clinically 
observed similarities between COFS syndrome and CS have been followed by 
discoveries of cases of COFS syndrome that are associated with mutations in the 
XPG and CSB genes. Here we report the first involvement of the XPD gene in a new 
case of UV-sensitive COFS syndrome, with heterozygous substitutions-a R616W null 
mutation (previously seen in patients in XP complementation group D) and a 
unique D681N mutation-demonstrating that a third gene can be involved in COFS 
syndrome. We propose that COFS syndrome be included within the already known 
spectrum of NER disorders: XP, CS, and trichothiodystrophy. We predict that 
future patients with COFS syndrome will be found to have mutations in the CSA or 
XPB genes, and we document successful use of DNA repair for prenatal diagnosis 
in triplet and singleton pregnancies at risk for COFS syndrome. This result 
strongly underlines the need for screening of patients with COFS syndrome, for 
either UV sensitivity or DNA-repair abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1086/321295
PMCID: PMC1235303
PMID: 11443545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]