---
reference_id: "PMID:34821081"
title: "Mantle cell lymphoma: A clinical review of the changing treatment paradigms with the advent of novel therapies, and an insight into Indian data."
authors:
- Radhakrishnan VS
- Lokireddy P
- Parihar M
- Prakash PS
- Menon H
journal: Cancer Rep (Hoboken)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/cnr2.1590
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Immunotherapy, Adoptive"
- India/epidemiology
- "Lymphoma, Mantle-Cell/drug therapy, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mantle cell lymphoma: A clinical review of the changing treatment paradigms with the advent of novel therapies, and an insight into Indian data.
**Authors:** Radhakrishnan VS, Lokireddy P, Parihar M, Prakash PS, Menon H
**Journal:** Cancer Rep (Hoboken) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cnr2.1590](https://doi.org/10.1002/cnr2.1590)

## Content

1. Cancer Rep (Hoboken). 2022 Jul;5(7):e1590. doi: 10.1002/cnr2.1590. Epub 2021
Nov  24.

Mantle cell lymphoma: A clinical review of the changing treatment paradigms with 
the advent of novel therapies, and an insight into Indian data.

Radhakrishnan VS(1), Lokireddy P(2), Parihar M(3), Prakash PS(4), Menon H(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Hematology Oncology and HCT, Tata Medical Center, Kolkata, India.
(2)Hemato-Oncology and Stem Cell Transplant, Apollo Hospitals, Hyderabad, India.
(3)Laboratory Hematology and Cytogenetics, Tata Medical Center, Kolkata, India.
(4)Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca Pharma India Limited, Bangalore, India.
(5)Hemato-Oncology and Bone Marrow Transplant, Cytecare Hospitals, Bangalore, 
India.

BACKGROUND: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a rare type of mature B-cell lymphoid 
malignancy with the pathologic hallmark of translocation t(11;14) (q13, q32), 
which leads to an overexpression of Cyclin D1 (CCND1). The disease is also 
characterized by the presence of a high number of recurrent genetic alterations, 
which include aberrations in several cellular pathways. MCL is a heterogeneous 
disease with a wide range of clinical presentations and a majority presenting 
with aggressive disease in advanced stages.
RECENT FINDINGS: Management of MCL is bereft with challenges due to its 
resistant and relapsing pattern. Despite improvements in remission durations, 
the disease is currently incurable with standard therapy and has a median 
survival of about 3-5 years. The use of small molecules like the bruton tyrosine 
kinase (BTK) and BCL2 inhibitors, for treating relapsed MCL has been established 
leading to a diminishing role for conventional chemotherapy. Combinations of 
small molecule inhibitors with or without chemoimmunotherapy, are showing 
promising results. Cellular therapy in the form of CAR-T cell therapy, has been 
approved recently.
CONCLUSIONS: Personalized cancer treatment and chemo-free regimens are showing 
promise and results from well-planned long-term studies are evolving. In India, 
there is a paucity of epidemiological, clinical, and research data in this 
field.

© 2021 The Authors. Cancer Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cnr2.1590
PMCID: PMC9327661
PMID: 34821081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Vivek S. Radhakrishnan reports advisory fees 
(institutional) and non‐financial Institutional support from PFIZER, 
Institutional grants and non‐financial support from INTAS Pharmaceuticals, 
Institutional grants from NATCO Pharmaceuticals, Institutional grants from 
ROCHE, Institutional grants from BMS, Institutional grants and non‐financial 
support from CIPLA Pharmaceuticals, Institutional grants from EMCURE, personal 
fees (institutional) from ASTRA ZENECA, non‐financial institutional support from 
Dr. REDDY's Laboratories, outside the submitted work. Prashanth S.P. is an 
employee of AstraZeneca Pharma India Limited. Other authors do not report any 
significant conflicts of interest with regards to the submitted work.