---
reference_id: PMID:34416512
title: Antiviral strategies targeting host factors and mechanisms obliging +ssRNA viral pathogens.
authors:
- Mahajan S
- Choudhary S
- Kumar P
- Tomar S
journal: Bioorg Med Chem
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2021.116356
keywords:
- Animals
- Antiviral Agents/pharmacology
- Cytokines/metabolism
- "Frameshifting, Ribosomal/drug effects, physiology"
- Glycosylation/drug effects
- Humans
- "Immunity/drug effects, physiology"
- "Lipid Metabolism/drug effects, physiology"
- "Metabolic Networks and Pathways/drug effects, physiology"
- Polyamines/metabolism
- "Positive-Strand RNA Viruses/drug effects, physiology"
- "Signal Transduction/drug effects, physiology"
- "Ubiquitination/drug effects, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiviral strategies targeting host factors and mechanisms obliging +ssRNA viral pathogens.
**Authors:** Mahajan S, Choudhary S, Kumar P, Tomar S
**Journal:** Bioorg Med Chem (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bmc.2021.116356](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bmc.2021.116356)

## Content

1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2021 Sep 15;46:116356. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2021.116356. Epub 
2021 Aug 8.

Antiviral strategies targeting host factors and mechanisms obliging +ssRNA viral 
pathogens.

Mahajan S(1), Choudhary S(1), Kumar P(1), Tomar S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Roorkee, Uttarakhand 247667, India.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Roorkee, Uttarakhand 247667, India. Electronic address: 
shailly.tomar@bt.iitr.ac.in.

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, periodic recurrence of viral infections, and the 
emergence of challenging variants has created an urgent need of alternative 
therapeutic approaches to combat the spread of viral infections, failing to 
which may pose a greater risk to mankind in future. Resilience against antiviral 
drugs or fast evolutionary rate of viruses is stressing the scientific community 
to identify new therapeutic approaches for timely control of disease. Host 
metabolic pathways are exquisite reservoir of energy to viruses and contribute a 
diverse array of functions for successful replication and pathogenesis of virus. 
Targeting the host factors rather than viral enzymes to cease viral infection, 
has emerged as an alternative antiviral strategy. This approach offers advantage 
in terms of increased threshold to viral resistance and can provide 
broad-spectrum antiviral action against different viruses. The article here 
provides substantial review of literature illuminating the host factors and 
molecular mechanisms involved in innate/adaptive responses to viral infection, 
hijacking of signalling pathways by viruses and the intracellular metabolic 
pathways required for viral replication. Host-targeted drugs acting on the 
pathways usurped by viruses are also addressed in this study. Host-directed 
antiviral therapeutics might prove to be a rewarding approach in controlling the 
unprecedented spread of viral infection, however the probability of cellular 
side effects or cytotoxicity on host cell should not be ignored at the time of 
clinical investigations.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2021.116356
PMCID: PMC8349405
PMID: 34416512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.