---
reference_id: "PMID:34667062"
title: Prenatal hydrops fetalis associated with infantile free sialic acid storage disease due to a novel homozygous deletion in the SLC17A5 gene.
authors:
- Hasnain A
- Burnett S
- Agatep R
- Spriggs E
- Chodirker B
- Mhanni AAA
journal: Cold Spring Harb Mol Case Stud
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1101/mcs.a006106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal hydrops fetalis associated with infantile free sialic acid storage disease due to a novel homozygous deletion in the SLC17A5 gene.
**Authors:** Hasnain A, Burnett S, Agatep R, Spriggs E, Chodirker B, Mhanni AAA
**Journal:** Cold Spring Harb Mol Case Stud (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1101/mcs.a006106](https://doi.org/10.1101/mcs.a006106)

## Content

1. Cold Spring Harb Mol Case Stud. 2021 Oct 19;7(5):a006106. doi: 
10.1101/mcs.a006106. Print 2021 Oct.

Prenatal hydrops fetalis associated with infantile free sialic acid storage 
disease due to a novel homozygous deletion in the SLC17A5 gene.

Hasnain A(1), Burnett S(2), Agatep R(1), Spriggs E(1)(2), Chodirker B(1)(2), 
Mhanni AAA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Max Rady College of 
Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba R3A 1R9, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady 
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3A 1R9, 
Canada.

Nonimmune hydrops fetalis, the excessive accumulation of serous fluid in the 
subcutaneous tissues and serous cavities of the fetus, has many possible 
etiologies, providing a diagnostic challenge for the physician. Lysosomal 
storage diseases have been reported in up to 5%-16% of nonimmune hydrops fetalis 
pregnancies. Infantile free sialic acid storage disease (ISSD) (OMIM #269920) is 
a severe form of autosomal recessive sialic acid storage disease. ISSD is caused 
by mutations in SLC17A5 (OMIM #604322), which encodes sialin, a 
lysosomal-membrane sialic acid transporter. We describe a case of fetal hydrops 
due to a novel homozygous deletion in the SLC17A5 gene. Prenatal 
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis was performed on amniocytes 
after the discovery of fetal hydrops at 24 wk gestation revealing no copy-number 
variants. The SNP array, however, reported several regions of homozygosity 
(ROHs) including one on Chromosome 6 encompassing the SLC17A5 gene. High levels 
of urine sialic acid in the newborn were detected. SLC17A5 gene sequencing was 
initiated with no sequence variants identified; however, the assay failed to 
amplify exons 8 and 9, prompting an exon-level copy-number analysis that 
revealed a novel homozygous deletion of exons 8 and 9, inherited from 
heterozygous carrier parents. ISSD should be considered in the workup of 
patients with nonimmune hydrops fetalis, and analysis for SLC17A5 deletions 
should be carried out when variants are not detected by gene sequencing.

© 2021 Hasnain et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/mcs.a006106
PMCID: PMC8559617
PMID: 34667062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]