---
reference_id: "PMID:36714460"
title: Clinical Manifestation of Nebulin-Associated Nemaline Myopathy.
authors:
- Moreno CAM
- Artilheiro MC
- Fonseca ATQSM
- Camelo CG
- de Medeiros GC
- Sassi FC
- de Andrade CRF
- Donkervoort S
- Silva AMS
- Dalfior-Junior L
- Abath-Neto OL
- Reed UC
- Bönnemann C
- Zanoteli E
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200056
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Manifestation of Nebulin-Associated Nemaline Myopathy.
**Authors:** Moreno CAM, Artilheiro MC, Fonseca ATQSM, Camelo CG, de Medeiros GC, Sassi FC, de Andrade CRF, Donkervoort S, Silva AMS, Dalfior-Junior L, Abath-Neto OL, Reed UC, Bönnemann C, Zanoteli E
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200056](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200056)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2023 Jan 25;9(1):e200056. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200056. 
eCollection 2023 Feb.

Clinical Manifestation of Nebulin-Associated Nemaline Myopathy.

Moreno CAM(1), Artilheiro MC(1), Fonseca ATQSM(1), Camelo CG(1), de Medeiros 
GC(1), Sassi FC(1), de Andrade CRF(1), Donkervoort S(1), Silva AMS(1), 
Dalfior-Junior L(1), Abath-Neto OL(1), Reed UC(1), Bönnemann C(1), Zanoteli 
E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology (C.A.M.M., M.C.A., A.T.Q.S.M.F., C.G.C., A.M.S.S., 
U.C.R., E.Z.), School of Medicine, Universidade de São Paulo (FMUSP), Brazil; 
Department of Physical Therapy (G.C.M., F.C.S., C.R.F.A.), Speech Language and 
Hearing Science Adn Occupational Therapy, School of Medicine, Universidade de 
São Paulo (FMUSP), Brazil; Neuromuscular and Neurogenetic Disorders of Childhood 
Section (S.D., C.B.), National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; Department of Neurology, Hospital 
Santa Marcelina (L.D.J.), São Paulo, Brazil; and Department of Pathology 
(O.L.A.-N.), Division of Neuropathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Nemaline myopathy (NM) is a genetically heterogeneous 
inherited myopathy related with at least 12 genes, whereas pathogenic variants 
in NEB gene are the most common genetic cause. The clinical spectrum of NM 
caused by NEB pathogenic variants (NM-NEB) is very broad, ranging from mild to 
severe presentations manifesting with generalized weakness, as well as 
respiratory and bulbar involvement. There is currently not enough data regarding 
the progression of the disease. In this study, we present a genotypic and 
phenotypic spectrum of 33 patients with NM caused by NEB variants (NM-NEB) 
classified according to age groups and the use of ventilatory support. We 
focused on interventional support, genotype-phenotype correlation, and 
association between respiratory, bulbar, and motor systems in groups of patients 
stratified by age and by the use of ventilatory support (VS).
METHODS: Clinical and genetic data from patients with NM-NEB followed up in one 
specialized center were collected through regular consultations. Patients were 
evaluated regarding motor, bulbar, and respiratory functions.
RESULTS: Thirty-three patients with NM-NEB were evaluated consisting of 15 
females and 18 males with an average age of 18 (±12) years and a median of 17 
(±11) years. 32% of patients with NM-NEB used a G tube, 35% were not able to 
walk without support, and 55% needed VS. Scoliosis and dysphagia were more 
common among patients who used VS. Described for the first time, half of the 
patients presented tongue atrophy in a triple furrow pattern, and the presence 
of the atrophy was associated with dysphagia. Comparing the patients grouped by 
age, we found that, proportionally, older patients had more scoliosis and 
respiratory dysfunction than younger groups, suggesting the progression of the 
disease in these domains. In addition to that, we showed that VS use was 
associated with scoliosis and dysphagia.
DISCUSSION: NM-NEB is a very debilitating disease. There is an association 
between scoliosis and respiratory dysfunction while patients using VS have more 
often scoliosis than the no-VS group. Triple furrow tongue atrophy is a novel 
and frequent finding, which is directly associated with dysphagia. Grouping 
patients by age suggested disease stability in motor and swallow function, but a 
progression in respiratory dysfunction and skeletal deformities. All 
observations are relevant in the management care of patients with NM.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200056
PMCID: PMC9879277
PMID: 36714460