---
reference_id: "PMID:34680797"
title: Integrating the Human and Animal Sides of Mycoplasmas Resistance to Antimicrobials.
authors:
- Pereyre S
- Tardy F
journal: Antibiotics (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/antibiotics10101216
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrating the Human and Animal Sides of Mycoplasmas Resistance to Antimicrobials.
**Authors:** Pereyre S, Tardy F
**Journal:** Antibiotics (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/antibiotics10101216](https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics10101216)

## Content

1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2021 Oct 7;10(10):1216. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics10101216.

Integrating the Human and Animal Sides of Mycoplasmas Resistance to 
Antimicrobials.

Pereyre S(1)(2), Tardy F(3).

Author information:
(1)USC EA 3671, Mycoplasmal and Chlamydial Infections in Humans, Univ. Bordeaux, 
INRAE, F-33000 Bordeaux, France.
(2)Bacteriology Department, National Reference Center for Bacterial Sexually 
Transmitted Infections, CHU Bordeaux, F-33000 Bordeaux, France.
(3)UMR Mycoplasmoses Animales, Anses, VetAgro Sup, Université de Lyon, F-69007 
Lyon, France.

Mycoplasma infections are frequent in humans, as well as in a broad range of 
animals. However, antimicrobial treatment options are limited, partly due to the 
lack of a cell wall in these peculiar bacteria. Both veterinary and human 
medicines are facing increasing resistance prevalence for the most commonly used 
drugs, despite different usage practices. To date, very few reviews have 
integrated knowledge on resistance to antimicrobials in humans and animals, the 
latest dating back to 2014. To fill this gap, we examined, in parallel, 
antimicrobial usage, resistance mechanisms and either phenotype or 
genotype-based methods for antimicrobial susceptibility testing, as well as 
epidemiology of resistance of the most clinically relevant human and animal 
mycoplasma species. This review unveiled common features and differences that 
need to be taken into consideration in a "One Health" perspective. Lastly, two 
examples of critical cases of multiple drug resistance are highlighted, namely, 
the human M. genitalium and the animal M. bovis species, both of which can lead 
to the threat of untreatable infections.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics10101216
PMCID: PMC8532757
PMID: 34680797

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.