---
reference_id: "PMID:36611091"
title: Epidemiology and risk factors for resistance to treatment of Kawasaki disease in Cyprus.
authors:
- Koliou MG
- Aristidou A
- Mazeri S
- Georgiou E
- Agathocleous M
- Kousparou M
- Elia A
- Jossif A
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-27694-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and risk factors for resistance to treatment of Kawasaki disease in Cyprus.
**Authors:** Koliou MG, Aristidou A, Mazeri S, Georgiou E, Agathocleous M, Kousparou M, Elia A, Jossif A
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-27694-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-27694-1)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Jan 7;13(1):352. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-27694-1.

Epidemiology and risk factors for resistance to treatment of Kawasaki disease in 
Cyprus.

Koliou MG(1)(2)(3), Aristidou A(4), Mazeri S(5), Georgiou E(6), Agathocleous 
M(6), Kousparou M(4), Elia A(4), Jossif A(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, 6 Korytsas Str, 
Acropolis 1474, Nicosia, Cyprus. Koliou-mazeri.maria@ucy.ac.cy.
(2)Medical School, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus. 
Koliou-mazeri.maria@ucy.ac.cy.
(3), 5 Agiou Symeou Street, 2037 Strovolos, Nicosia, Cyprus. 
Koliou-mazeri.maria@ucy.ac.cy.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, 6 Korytsas Str, 
Acropolis 1474, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(5)Epidemiology and Public Health, Roslin Institute, Royal Dick School of 
Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
(6)Paediatric Department, Limassol General Hospital, Limassol, Cyprus.
(7)Paedi Center for Specialized Paediatrics, Athalassis 178, Strovolos 2024, 
Nicosia, Cyprus.

Kawasaki disease (KD) is one of the most common vasculitides of early childhood. 
There are no previous studies on KD in Cyprus. The aim of this study was to 
evaluate the epidemiology of KD in Cyprus, risk factors for resistance to 
treatment and the development of cardiac complications. This is a retrospective 
multicenter study of pediatric patients with KD hospitalized between January 
2000 and-December 2019. The data were collected from medical records. A total of 
136 patients with KD were included in the study. 83% of patients were < 5 years 
of age and 10% were < 6 months. Thirty patients (22%) developed coronary artery 
lesions. Serum sodium ≤ 133 mmol/L, albumin ≤ 3.2 g/dl, ALT ≥ 80 U/L and 
neutrophils percentage ≥ 80% at diagnosis, were identified as risk factors for 
resistance to IVIG. Clinical and epidemiological characteristics of KD in Cyprus 
population were similar to those reported in the literature. Although the 
majority of cases received appropriate treatment in time, cardiac complications 
still occurred.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-27694-1
PMCID: PMC9825398
PMID: 36611091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.