---
reference_id: "PMID:23670176"
title: Mechanisms of action and resistance to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (As2O 3) in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Tomita A
- Kiyoi H
- Naoe T
journal: Int J Hematol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s12185-013-1354-4
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Arsenic Trioxide
- Arsenicals/therapeutic use
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/drug therapy, genetics"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Oxides/therapeutic use
- Tretinoin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of action and resistance to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (As2O 3) in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Tomita A, Kiyoi H, Naoe T
**Journal:** Int J Hematol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12185-013-1354-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12185-013-1354-4)

## Content

1. Int J Hematol. 2013 Jun;97(6):717-25. doi: 10.1007/s12185-013-1354-4. Epub
2013  May 14.

Mechanisms of action and resistance to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and
arsenic trioxide (As2O 3) in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Tomita A(1), Kiyoi H, Naoe T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tsurumai-cho 65, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. atomita@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Since the introduction of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide
(As2O3) for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), the overall
survival rate has improved dramatically. However, relapse/refractory patients
showing resistance to ATRA and/or As2O3 are recognized as a clinically
significant problem. Genetic mutations resulting in amino acid substitution in
the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARα) ligand binding domain (LBD) and the
PML-B2 domain of PML-RARα, respectively, have been reported as molecular
mechanisms underlying resistance to ATRA and As2O3. In the LBD mutation, ATRA
binding with LBD is generally impaired, and ligand-dependent co-repressor
dissociation and degradation of PML-RARα by the proteasome pathway, leading to
cell differentiation, are inhibited. The PML-B2 mutation interferes with the
direct binding of As2O3 with PML-B2, and PML-RARα SUMOylation with As2O3
followed by multimerization and degradation is impaired. To overcome ATRA
resistance, utilization of As2O3 provides a preferable outcome, and recently, a
synthetic retinoid Am80, which has a higher binding affinity with PML-RARα than
ATRA, has been tested in the clinical setting. However, no strategy attempted to
date has been successful in overcoming As2O3 resistance. Detailed genomic
analyses using patient samples harvested repeatedly may help in predicting the
prognosis, selecting the effective targeting drugs, and designing new
sophisticated strategies for the treatment of APL.

DOI: 10.1007/s12185-013-1354-4
PMID: 23670176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
