---
reference_id: "PMID:35065785"
title: "Lentiviral haematopoietic stem-cell gene therapy for early-onset metachromatic leukodystrophy: long-term results from a non-randomised, open-label, phase 1/2 trial and expanded access."
authors:
- Fumagalli F
- Calbi V
- Natali Sora MG
- Sessa M
- Baldoli C
- Rancoita PMV
- Ciotti F
- Sarzana M
- Fraschini M
- Zambon AA
- Acquati S
- Redaelli D
- Attanasio V
- Miglietta S
- De Mattia F
- Barzaghi F
- Ferrua F
- Migliavacca M
- Tucci F
- Gallo V
- Del Carro U
- Canale S
- Spiga I
- Lorioli L
- Recupero S
- Fratini ES
- Morena F
- Silvani P
- Calvi MR
- Facchini M
- Locatelli S
- Corti A
- Zancan S
- Antonioli G
- Farinelli G
- Gabaldo M
- Garcia-Segovia J
- Schwab LC
- Downey GF
- Filippi M
- Cicalese MP
- Martino S
- Di Serio C
- Ciceri F
- Bernardo ME
- Naldini L
- Biffi A
- Aiuti A
journal: Lancet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02017-1
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Cerebroside-Sulfatase/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Therapy
- Genetic Vectors
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Italy
- Lentivirus/genetics
- "Leukodystrophy, Metachromatic/genetics, therapy"
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lentiviral haematopoietic stem-cell gene therapy for early-onset metachromatic leukodystrophy: long-term results from a non-randomised, open-label, phase 1/2 trial and expanded access.
**Authors:** Fumagalli F, Calbi V, Natali Sora MG, Sessa M, Baldoli C, Rancoita PMV, Ciotti F, Sarzana M, Fraschini M, Zambon AA, Acquati S, Redaelli D, Attanasio V, Miglietta S, De Mattia F, Barzaghi F, Ferrua F, Migliavacca M, Tucci F, Gallo V, Del Carro U, Canale S, Spiga I, Lorioli L, Recupero S, Fratini ES, Morena F, Silvani P, Calvi MR, Facchini M, Locatelli S, Corti A, Zancan S, Antonioli G, Farinelli G, Gabaldo M, Garcia-Segovia J, Schwab LC, Downey GF, Filippi M, Cicalese MP, Martino S, Di Serio C, Ciceri F, Bernardo ME, Naldini L, Biffi A, Aiuti A
**Journal:** Lancet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02017-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02017-1)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2022 Jan 22;399(10322):372-383. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02017-1.

Lentiviral haematopoietic stem-cell gene therapy for early-onset metachromatic 
leukodystrophy: long-term results from a non-randomised, open-label, phase 1/2 
trial and expanded access.

Fumagalli F(1), Calbi V(2), Natali Sora MG(3), Sessa M(4), Baldoli C(5), 
Rancoita PMV(6), Ciotti F(7), Sarzana M(7), Fraschini M(7), Zambon AA(3), 
Acquati S(8), Redaelli D(8), Attanasio V(8), Miglietta S(8), De Mattia F(8), 
Barzaghi F(2), Ferrua F(2), Migliavacca M(2), Tucci F(2), Gallo V(2), Del Carro 
U(3), Canale S(9), Spiga I(10), Lorioli L(7), Recupero S(11), Fratini ES(11), 
Morena F(12), Silvani P(13), Calvi MR(13), Facchini M(8), Locatelli S(8), Corti 
A(8), Zancan S(8), Antonioli G(2), Farinelli G(8), Gabaldo M(8), Garcia-Segovia 
J(14), Schwab LC(14), Downey GF(14), Filippi M(15), Cicalese MP(2), Martino 
S(16), Di Serio C(17), Ciceri F(18), Bernardo ME(19), Naldini L(20), Biffi 
A(21), Aiuti A(22).

Author information:
(1)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Pediatric Immunohematology Unit and 
BMT Program, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Units of 
Neurology and Neurophysiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, 
Italy.
(2)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Pediatric Immunohematology Unit and 
BMT Program, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(3)Units of Neurology and Neurophysiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Milan, Italy.
(4)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Department of Neurology, ASST Papa 
Giovanni XXIII Bergamo, Italy.
(5)Neuroradiology Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(6)University Centre of Statistics in the Biomedical Sciences (CUSSB), Milan, 
Italy; Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(7)Pediatric Immunohematology Unit and BMT Program, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(8)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(9)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Department of Specialistic 
Neurological Rehabilitation, IRCCS Multimedica, Sesto San Giovanni, Italy.
(10)Clinical Molecular Biology Laboratory, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Milan, Italy.
(11)Pediatric Immunohematology Unit and BMT Program, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, 
Italy.
(12)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Department of Chemistry, Biology 
and Biotechnologies, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(13)Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Milan, Italy.
(14)Orchard Therapeutics (Europe), London, UK.
(15)Units of Neurology and Neurophysiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Milan, Italy; Unit of Neurorehabilitation, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Neuroimaging Research Unit, Division of 
Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Vita-Salute 
San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(16)Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnologies, University of Perugia, 
Perugia, Italy.
(17)University Centre of Statistics in the Biomedical Sciences (CUSSB), Milan, 
Italy; Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy; Biomedical Faculty, 
Università della Svizzera Italiana, Lugano, Switzerland.
(18)Unit of Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, 
Italy.
(19)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Pediatric Immunohematology Unit and 
BMT Program, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Vita-Salute 
San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(20)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Vita-Salute San Raffaele 
University, Milan, Italy.
(21)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Division of Pediatric Hematology, 
Oncology and Stem Cell Transplant, Padua University and Padua University 
Hospital, Padua, Italy; Gene Therapy Program, Dana Farber/Boston Children's 
Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(22)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Pediatric Immunohematology Unit and 
BMT Program, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Vita-Salute 
San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: 
aiuti.alessandro@hsr.it.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2022 Jan 22;399(10322):338-339. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(22)00057-5.

BACKGROUND: Effective treatment for metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) remains a 
substantial unmet medical need. In this study we investigated the safety and 
efficacy of atidarsagene autotemcel (arsa-cel) in patients with MLD.
METHODS: This study is an integrated analysis of results from a prospective, 
non-randomised, phase 1/2 clinical study and expanded-access frameworks. 29 
paediatric patients with pre-symptomatic or early-symptomatic early-onset MLD 
with biochemical and molecular confirmation of diagnosis were treated with 
arsa-cel, a gene therapy containing an autologous haematopoietic stem and 
progenitor cell (HSPC) population transduced ex vivo with a lentiviral vector 
encoding human arylsulfatase A (ARSA) cDNA, and compared with an untreated 
natural history (NHx) cohort of 31 patients with early-onset MLD, matched by age 
and disease subtype. Patients were treated and followed up at Ospedale San 
Raffaele, Milan, Italy. The coprimary efficacy endpoints were an improvement of 
more than 10% in total gross motor function measure score at 2 years after 
treatment in treated patients compared with controls, and change from baseline 
of total peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) ARSA activity at 2 years after 
treatment compared with values before treatment. This phase 1/2 study is 
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01560182.
FINDINGS: At the time of analyses, 26 patients treated with arsa-cel were alive 
with median follow-up of 3·16 years (range 0·64-7·51). Two patients died due to 
disease progression and one due to a sudden event deemed unlikely to be related 
to treatment. After busulfan conditioning, all arsa-cel treated patients showed 
sustained multilineage engraftment of genetically modified HSPCs. ARSA activity 
in PBMCs was significantly increased above baseline 2 years after treatment by a 
mean 18·7-fold (95% CI 8·3-42·2; p<0·0001) in patients with the late-infantile 
variant and 5·7-fold (2·6-12·4; p<0·0001) in patients with the early-juvenile 
variant. Mean differences in total scores for gross motor function measure 
between treated patients and age-matched and disease subtype-matched NHx 
patients 2 years after treatment were significant for both patients with 
late-infantile MLD (66% [95% CI 48·9-82·3]) and early-juvenile MLD (42% 
[12·3-71·8]). Most treated patients progressively acquired motor skills within 
the predicted range of healthy children or had stabilised motor performance 
(maintaining the ability to walk). Further, most displayed normal cognitive 
development and prevention or delay of central and peripheral demyelination and 
brain atrophy throughout follow-up; treatment benefits were particularly 
apparent in patients treated before symptom onset. The infusion was well 
tolerated and there was no evidence of abnormal clonal proliferation or 
replication-competent lentivirus. All patients had at least one grade 3 or 
higher adverse event; most were related to conditioning or to background 
disease. The only adverse event related to arsa-cel was the transient 
development of anti-ARSA antibodies in four patients, which did not affect 
clinical outcomes.
INTERPRETATION: Treatment with arsa-cel resulted in sustained, clinically 
relevant benefits in children with early-onset MLD by preserving cognitive 
function and motor development in most patients, and slowing demyelination and 
brain atrophy.
FUNDING: Orchard Therapeutics, Fondazione Telethon, and GlaxoSmithKline.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02017-1
PMCID: PMC8795071
PMID: 35065785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests FFu, VC, MGNS, AA, CB, 
FB, FFe, MM, FT, VG, SR, ESF, MPC, and MEB are investigators of gene therapy 
clinical trials for MLD sponsored by Orchard Therapeutics, the licence holder of 
investigational medicinal product arsa-cel. FFu and VC have acted as ad-hoc 
consultants for an Orchard Therapeutics advisory board. The MLD gene therapy was 
licensed to GlaxoSmithKline in 2014, and then to Orchard Therapeutics in 2018. 
Telethon and Ospedale San Raffaele are entitled to receive milestone payments 
and royalties for such a therapy. MSe and AB left San Raffaele Hospital and 
their role as principal investigators of the pivotal study on November, 2014, 
and September, 2015, respectively. AA subsequently became study principal 
investigator and responsible physician for treatment under expanded access 
frameworks. AB is currently a member of the scientific advisory board of Orchard 
Therapeutics and holds stock in Orchard Therapeutics. PMVR and CDS have a 
contract with Orchard Therapeutics to perform statistical analyses of gene 
therapy clinical trials for MLD. SMa and FM have a service contract with 
Ospedale San Raffaele. SMa has a contract with Orchard Therapeutics to perform 
ARSA activity on CSF in the clinical trial NCT03392987. JG-S, LCS, and GFD are 
former employees and hold stock in Orchard Therapeutics, which sponsored the 
clinical trial. All other authors declare that they have no financial interest 
related to the work described in the manuscript.