---
reference_id: "PMID:34120153"
title: The genetic architecture of Plakophilin 2 cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Dries AM
- Kirillova A
- Reuter CM
- Garcia J
- Zouk H
- Hawley M
- Murray B
- Tichnell C
- Pilichou K
- Protonotarios A
- Medeiros-Domingo A
- Kelly MA
- Baras A
- Ingles J
- Semsarian C
- Bauce B
- Celeghin R
- Basso C
- Jongbloed JDH
- Nussbaum RL
- Funke B
- Cerrone M
- Mestroni L
- Taylor MRG
- Sinagra G
- Merlo M
- Saguner AM
- Elliott PM
- Syrris P
- van Tintelen JP
- Regeneron Genetics Center
- James CA
- Haggerty CM
- Parikh VN
journal: Genet Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-021-01233-7
keywords:
- Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia/genetics
- Cardiomyopathies
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Plakophilins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetic architecture of Plakophilin 2 cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Dries AM, Kirillova A, Reuter CM, Garcia J, Zouk H, Hawley M, Murray B, Tichnell C, Pilichou K, Protonotarios A, Medeiros-Domingo A, Kelly MA, Baras A, Ingles J, Semsarian C, Bauce B, Celeghin R, Basso C, Jongbloed JDH, Nussbaum RL, Funke B, Cerrone M, Mestroni L, Taylor MRG, Sinagra G, Merlo M, Saguner AM, Elliott PM, Syrris P, van Tintelen JP, Regeneron Genetics Center, James CA, Haggerty CM, Parikh VN
**Journal:** Genet Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-021-01233-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-021-01233-7)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2021 Oct;23(10):1961-1968. doi: 10.1038/s41436-021-01233-7. Epub
2021  Jun 12.

The genetic architecture of Plakophilin 2 cardiomyopathy.

Dries AM(1), Kirillova A(1), Reuter CM(1), Garcia J(2), Zouk H(3)(4), Hawley 
M(3)(4), Murray B(5), Tichnell C(5), Pilichou K(6), Protonotarios A(7), 
Medeiros-Domingo A(8), Kelly MA(9), Baras A(10), Ingles J(11), Semsarian C(12), 
Bauce B(6), Celeghin R(6), Basso C(6), Jongbloed JDH(13), Nussbaum RL(2), Funke 
B(3)(4), Cerrone M(14), Mestroni L(15), Taylor MRG(15), Sinagra G(16), Merlo 
M(16), Saguner AM(17), Elliott PM(7), Syrris P(7), van Tintelen JP(18)(19); 
Regeneron Genetics Center; James CA(#)(5), Haggerty CM(#)(9), Parikh VN(#)(20).

Author information:
(1)Stanford Center for Inherited Cardiovascular Disease, Division of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Invitae, Inc, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Mass General Brigham Personalized 
Medicine, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Dept. Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)Dept. of Cardiac-Thoracic-Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of 
Padua, Padua, Italy.
(7)Centre for Heart Muscle Disease, Institute of Cardiovascular Science, 
University College London, London, UK.
(8)SwissDNALysis-Cardiogenetics, Dübendorf Switzerland, Zurich, Switzerland.
(9)Geisinger, Danville, PA, USA.
(10)Regeneron Genetics Center, Tarrytown, NY, USA.
(11)Cardio Genomics Program at Centenary Institute, The University of Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia.
(12)Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology at Centenary Institute, 
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(13)University of Groningen Department of Genetics, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(14)Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, 
NY, US.
(15)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, US.
(16)Cardiovascular Department, Azienda Sanitaria-Universitaria Giuliano Isontina 
(ASUGI), Trieste, Italy.
(17)Department of Cardiology, University Heart Center, University Hospital, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(18)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(19)Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(20)Stanford Center for Inherited Cardiovascular Disease, Division of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. vparikh@stanford.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Genet Med. 2021 Oct;23(10):2014. doi: 10.1038/s41436-021-01298-4.

PURPOSE: The genetic architecture of Plakophilin 2 (PKP2) cardiomyopathy can 
inform our understanding of its variant pathogenicity and protein function.
METHODS: We assess the gene-wide and regional association of truncating and 
missense variants in PKP2 with arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM), and 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) specifically. A discovery 
data set compares genetic testing requisitions to gnomAD. Validation is 
performed in a rigorously phenotyped definite ARVC cohort and non-ACM 
individuals in the Geisinger MyCode cohort.
RESULTS: The etiologic fraction (EF) of ACM-related diagnoses from truncating 
variants in PKP2 is significant (0.85 [0.80,0.88], p < 2 × 10-16), increases for 
ARVC specifically (EF = 0.96 [0.94,0.97], p < 2 × 10-16), and is highest in 
definite ARVC versus non-ACM individuals (EF = 1.00 [1.00,1.00], p < 2 × 10-16). 
Regions of missense variation enriched for ACM probands include known functional 
domains and the C-terminus, which was not previously known to contain a 
functional domain. No regional enrichment was identified for truncating 
variants.
CONCLUSION: This multicohort evaluation of the genetic architecture of PKP2 
demonstrates the specificity of PKP2 truncating variants for ARVC within the ACM 
disease spectrum. We identify the PKP2 C-terminus as a potential functional 
domain and find that truncating variants likely cause disease irrespective of 
transcript position.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-021-01233-7
PMCID: PMC8486657
PMID: 34120153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.L.N. is an employee and stockholder in 
Invitae, a consultant for Pfizer Pharmaceuticals, and consultant and stock 
holder for Maze Therapeutics and Genome Medical. B.M. is a consultant for 
MyGeneCounsel. A.B. is an employee of Regeneron Genetics Center. A.M.S. received 
educational grants through his institution from Abbott, Bayer Healthcare, 
Biosense Webster, Biotronik, Boston Scientific, BMS/Pfizer, and Medtronic, and 
speaker fees from Bayer Healthcare and BMS/Pfizer. The other authors declare no 
competing interests.