---
reference_id: "PMID:29219259"
title: Nursing management of childhood chickenpox infection.
authors:
- Boyd G
- Heaton PA
- Wilkinson R
- Paul SP
journal: Emerg Nurse
year: '2017'
doi: 10.7748/en.2017.e1720
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nursing management of childhood chickenpox infection.
**Authors:** Boyd G, Heaton PA, Wilkinson R, Paul SP
**Journal:** Emerg Nurse (2017)
**DOI:** [10.7748/en.2017.e1720](https://doi.org/10.7748/en.2017.e1720)

## Content

1. Emerg Nurse. 2017 Dec 8;25(8):32-41. doi: 10.7748/en.2017.e1720.

Nursing management of childhood chickenpox infection.

Boyd G(1), Heaton PA(2), Wilkinson R(3), Paul SP(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical School, University of Bristol, England.
(2)Yeovil District Hospital, Yeovil, England.
(3)St Richard's Hospital, Chichester, England.
(4)Torbay Hospital, Torquay, England.

Chickenpox is an extremely contagious infectious disease caused by varicella 
zoster virus (VZV). It is a common childhood illness characterised by an itchy 
vesicular rash and fever, which usually resolves spontaneously without medical 
intervention. Serious, and rarely fatal, complications can occur, including 
pneumonia, central nervous system infection, overwhelming secondary bacterial 
infections, especially with Group A streptococcus, and necrotising fasciitis. 
Therefore it is crucial that emergency department (ED) nurses can recognise the 
signs and symptoms that indicate deterioration. This article reviews best 
practice management of children with chickenpox, gives up-to-date guidance on 
the safe use of antipyretics, the avoidance of ibuprofen and discusses 
immunisation against VZV. It also includes implications for nursing practice and 
a case study that illustrates some of the challenges that ED nurses may 
encounter.

©2017 RCN Publishing Company Ltd. All rights reserved. Not to be copied, 
transmitted or recorded in any way, in whole or part, without prior permission 
of the publishers.

DOI: 10.7748/en.2017.e1720
PMID: 29219259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared