---
reference_id: "PMID:30497849"
title: Squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal.
authors:
- Morton M
- Melnitchouk N
- Bleday R
journal: Curr Probl Cancer
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2018.11.001
keywords:
- "Anus Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnosis, therapy"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Humans
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal.
**Authors:** Morton M, Melnitchouk N, Bleday R
**Journal:** Curr Probl Cancer (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2018.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2018.11.001)

## Content

1. Curr Probl Cancer. 2018 Sep;42(5):486-492. doi:
10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2018.11.001. Epub 2018 Nov 23.

Squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal.

Morton M(1), Melnitchouk N(2), Bleday R(2).

Author information:
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address:
mbmorton@partners.org.
(2)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Anal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a rare cancer and accounts for
approximately 4% of all cancers of the lower alimentary tract. The dominant
etiology is infection with human papilloma virus (HPV), which is the most common
sexually transmitted disease in the United States. Integration of HPV DNA into
the host genome seems to be the driving mechanism behind carcinogenesis.
Vaccines directed against oncogenic HPV serotypes exist, and their utility for
preventing anal neoplasia is under investigation. Additional risk factors for
developing SCC include HIV infection, anal receptive intercourse, smoking, and
immunosuppression. Patients with known anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) must
be carefully screened with periodic digital rectal exam and anoscopy. The most
common presenting symptom is bleeding, with up to one third of patients
presenting asymptomatic. Once tissue diagnosis is made, staging of primary tumor
is accomplished with either MRI or transanal ultrasound. Distant disease is
evaluated with CT of chest abdomen and pelvis vs whole body PET/CT. The gold
standard treatment for stage I-III disease remains the Nigro protocol, first
described in 1974. Stage I disease not involving sphincter may be treated with
local excision. Distant disease is treated with systemic chemotherapy with
radiation reserved for locoregional symptoms. Careful surveillance is mandatory
after completion of chemoradiation. Salvage abdominoperineal resection can
achieve locoregional control in up to 77% of patients with persistent or
recurrent disease. Morbidity is high, mostly owing to wound complications, and
as such a flap reconstruction of the perineum is warranted.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2018.11.001
PMID: 30497849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
