---
reference_id: "PMID:17397592"
title: "[Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans]."
authors:
- Sanmartín O
- Llombart B
- López-Guerrero JA
- Serra C
- Requena C
- Guillén C
journal: Actas Dermosifiliogr
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/s0001-7310(07)70019-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans].
**Authors:** Sanmartín O, Llombart B, López-Guerrero JA, Serra C, Requena C, Guillén C
**Journal:** Actas Dermosifiliogr (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0001-7310(07)70019-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0001-7310(07)70019-4)

## Content

1. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2007 Mar;98(2):77-87. doi:
10.1016/s0001-7310(07)70019-4.

[Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans].

[Article in Spanish]

Sanmartín O(1), Llombart B, López-Guerrero JA, Serra C, Requena C, Guillén C.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Dermatología, Instituto Valenciano de Oncología, Valencia, 
España. osanmartinj@gmail.com

Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) is a soft tissue neoplasm of intermediate 
malignancy that is initially localized to the skin from where it can invade deep 
structures (fat, fascia, muscle and bone). It is the most frequent 
fibrohistiocytic tumor, comprising approximately 1.8 % of all soft tissue 
sarcomas and 0.1 % of all cancers. It has an estimated incidence of 0.8-5 cases 
per one million persons per year. Treatment of localized disease consists in 
complete surgical excision of the lesion by conventional surgery with wide 
margins (>3 cm) or by micrographic Mohs surgery. Although the cases of 
metastatic DFSP do not reach 5 % of the total, almost all of them appear after 
previous local relapses. The prognosis for metastatic cases is very poor with a 
survival of less than 2 years following detection of metastatic disease. 
Patients with locally advanced DFSP are not candidates for an initial radical 
surgical therapy therefore neoadyuvant treatment is required prior to surgery in 
order to reduce tumor burden. In this regard, chemotherapy and radiotherapy have 
not been highly efficacious so it is necessary to consider new alternatives. The 
demonstration of the oncogenic power of the translocation COL1A1-PDGFB in DFSP 
has allowed the successful introduction of drug therapy with antagonists of the 
PDGFB receptor for metastatic or locally advanced cases.

DOI: 10.1016/s0001-7310(07)70019-4
PMID: 17397592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]