---
reference_id: "PMID:37399103"
title: Genome-wide association study identifies multiple HLA loci for sarcoidosis susceptibility.
authors:
- Liao SY
- Jacobson S
- Hamzeh NY
- Culver DA
- Barkes BQ
- Mroz M
- Macphail K
- Pacheco K
- Patel DC
- Wasfi YS
- Koth LL
- Langefeld CD
- Leach SM
- White E
- Montgomery C
- Maier LA
- Fingerlin TE
- GRADs Investigators
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad067
keywords:
- Humans
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- HLA-DR alpha-Chains/genetics
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear"
- Sarcoidosis/genetics
- HLA-DRB1 Chains/genetics
- Alleles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association study identifies multiple HLA loci for sarcoidosis susceptibility.
**Authors:** Liao SY, Jacobson S, Hamzeh NY, Culver DA, Barkes BQ, Mroz M, Macphail K, Pacheco K, Patel DC, Wasfi YS, Koth LL, Langefeld CD, Leach SM, White E, Montgomery C, Maier LA, Fingerlin TE, GRADs Investigators
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddad067](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddad067)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Aug 7;32(16):2669-2678. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad067.

Genome-wide association study identifies multiple HLA loci for sarcoidosis
susceptibility.

Liao SY(1)(2)(3), Jacobson S(1), Hamzeh NY(4), Culver DA(5), Barkes BQ(1), Mroz
M(1), Macphail K(1), Pacheco K(1)(2)(3), Patel DC(6), Wasfi YS(7), Koth LL(8),
Langefeld CD(9)(10), Leach SM(1), White E(1), Montgomery C(11), Maier
LA(1)(2)(3), Fingerlin TE(2)(3)(12); GRADs Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(3)Colorado School of Public Health, University of Colorado Denver-Anschutz
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(7)Johnson & Johnson, Spring House, PA 19034, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of California-San Fransisco, San
Fransisco, CA 94143, USA.
(9)Department of Biostatistics and Data Science, Wake Forest University School
of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27101, USA.
(10)Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Center for Precision Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27101, USA.
(11)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(12)Department of Immunology and Genomic Medicine, National Jewish Health,
Denver, CO 80206, USA.

Sarcoidosis is a complex systemic disease. Our study aimed to (1) identify novel
alleles associated with sarcoidosis susceptibility; (2) provide an in-depth
evaluation of HLA alleles and sarcoidosis susceptibility and (3) integrate
genetic and transcription data to identify risk loci that may more directly
impact disease pathogenesis. We report a genome-wide association study of 1335
sarcoidosis cases and 1264 controls of European descent (EA) and investigate
associated alleles in a study of African Americans (AA: 1487 cases and 1504
controls). The EA and AA cohort was recruited from multiple United States sites.
HLA alleles were imputed and tested for association with sarcoidosis
susceptibility. Expression quantitative locus and colocalization analysis were
performed using a subset of subjects with transcriptome data. Forty-nine SNPs in
the HLA region in HLA-DRA, -DRB9, -DRB5, -DQA1 and BRD2 genes were significantly
associated with sarcoidosis susceptibility in EA, rs3129888 was also a risk
variant for sarcoidosis in AA. Classical HLA alleles DRB1*0101, DQA1*0101 and
DQB1*0501, which are highly correlated, were also associated with sarcoidosis.
rs3135287 near HLA-DRA was associated with HLA-DRA expression in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells and bronchoalveolar lavage from subjects and lung tissue
and whole blood from GTEx. We identified six novel SNPs (out of the seven SNPs
representing the 49 significant SNPs) and nine HLA alleles associated with
sarcoidosis susceptibility in the largest EA population. We also replicated our
findings in an AA population. Our study reiterates the potential role of antigen
recognition and/or presentation HLA class II genes in sarcoidosis pathogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddad067
PMCID: PMC10407706
PMID: 37399103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.
