---
reference_id: "PMID:21116899"
title: Deformity of the great toe in fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
authors:
- Nakashima Y
- Haga N
- Kitoh H
- Kamizono J
- Tozawa K
- Katagiri T
- Susami T
- Fukushi J
- Iwamoto Y
journal: J Orthop Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s00776-010-1542-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Early Diagnosis
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Acquired/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Hallux/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Metatarsophalangeal Joint/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- "Myositis Ossificans/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Radiography
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deformity of the great toe in fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
**Authors:** Nakashima Y, Haga N, Kitoh H, Kamizono J, Tozawa K, Katagiri T, Susami T, Fukushi J, Iwamoto Y
**Journal:** J Orthop Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00776-010-1542-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00776-010-1542-5)

## Content

1. J Orthop Sci. 2010 Nov;15(6):804-9. doi: 10.1007/s00776-010-1542-5. Epub 2010
Nov 30.

Deformity of the great toe in fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.

Nakashima Y(1), Haga N, Kitoh H, Kamizono J, Tozawa K, Katagiri T, Susami T,
Fukushi J, Iwamoto Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kyushu University, 1-3-3 Maidashi,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

BACKGROUND: As invasive medical procedures can induce permanent heterotopic
ossification in fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP), caution should be
exercised in clinical practice. The present study was conducted to examine the
characteristics of the great toe deformity in patients with FOP, which may lead
to an early diagnosis of this condition.
METHODS: The subjects consisted of 31 feet from 16 FOP patients (8 males, 8
females) with an average age of 17.3 years (range 1-47 years) at the time of
this study. Gross and radiographic findings, including the hallux valgus angles
(HVA), intermetatarsal angles (IMA), and the deformity of the proximal phalanx
and metatarsal bone, were examined.
RESULTS: Of the 31 feet, 29 (93.5%) showed several degrees of great toe
deformity. A shortened great toe was the typical gross finding and was observed
in 20 feet (64.5%). The mean HVA and IMA were 19.7° and 8.5°, respectively; and
22 (71.0%) feet satisfied the radiographic definition of hallux valgus (HVA ≥
20° or IMA ≥ 10°). The proximal phalanx was consistently shortened but
morphologically dissimilar from case to case. The metatarsal bone was also
shortened and sharpened to the medial side, deviating the proximal phalanx
laterally from the metatarsal axis. Fusion between the distal and proximal
phalanx occurred with advancing age. Only two feet in one patient showed no
obvious deformity of the great toe.
CONCLUSIONS: A shortened great toe and hallux valgus were frequently found in
patients with FOP. Shortening and sharpening of the proximal phalanx and
metatarsal bone consistently existed and contributed to the great toe deformity.
These findings were thought to exist from birth and may be a key to an early
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00776-010-1542-5
PMID: 21116899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
