---
reference_id: "PMID:36233334"
title: "Interactions between C8orf37 and FAM161A, Two Ciliary Proteins Essential for Photoreceptor Survival."
authors:
- Liu Y
- Chen J
- Sager R
- Sasaki E
- Hu H
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms231912033
keywords:
- Amino Acids/metabolism
- Epitopes/metabolism
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interactions between C8orf37 and FAM161A, Two Ciliary Proteins Essential for Photoreceptor Survival.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Chen J, Sager R, Sasaki E, Hu H
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms231912033](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms231912033)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Oct 10;23(19):12033. doi: 10.3390/ijms231912033.

Interactions between C8orf37 and FAM161A, Two Ciliary Proteins Essential for 
Photoreceptor Survival.

Liu Y(1), Chen J(1)(2), Sager R(1), Sasaki E(3), Hu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Vision Research, Departments of Neuroscience and Physiology and of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 
13210, USA.
(2)College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Hunan Agricultural University, 
Changsha 410128, China.
(3)Department of Marmoset Biology and Medicine, Central Institute for 
Experimental Animals, Tonomachi, Kawasaki 210-0821, Kanagawa, Japan.

Mutations in C8orf37 cause Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), retinitis pigmentosa 
(RP), and cone-rod dystrophy (CRD), all manifest in photoreceptor degeneration. 
Little is known about which proteins C8orf37 interacts with to contribute to 
photoreceptor survival. To determine the proteins that potentially interact with 
C8orf37, we carried out a yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screen using C8orf37 as a bait. 
FAM161A, a microtubule-binding protein localized at the photoreceptor cilium 
required for photoreceptor survival, was identified as one of the preys. Double 
immunofluorescence staining and proximity ligation assay (PLA) of marmoset 
retinal sections showed that C8orf37 was enriched and was co-localized with 
FAM161A at the ciliary base of photoreceptors. Epitope-tagged C8orf37 and 
FAM161A, expressed in HEK293 cells, were also found to be co-localized by double 
immunofluorescence staining and PLA. Furthermore, interaction domain mapping 
assays identified that the N-terminal region of C8orf37 and amino acid residues 
341-517 within the PFAM UPF0564 domain of FAM161A were critical for 
C8orf37-FAM161A interaction. These data suggest that the two photoreceptor 
survival proteins, C8orf37 and FAM161A, interact with each other which may 
contribute to photoreceptor health.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms231912033
PMCID: PMC9570145
PMID: 36233334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.