---
reference_id: "PMID:40427560"
title: "Senior-Loken Syndrome: Ocular Perspectives on Genetics, Pathogenesis, and Management."
authors:
- Zhou D
- Zeng Y
- Luo W
- Leng C
- Li C
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/biom15050667
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ciliopathies/genetics, therapy, pathology"
- "Optic Atrophies, Hereditary"
- "Kidney Diseases, Cystic"
- Leber Congenital Amaurosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Senior-Loken Syndrome: Ocular Perspectives on Genetics, Pathogenesis, and Management.
**Authors:** Zhou D, Zeng Y, Luo W, Leng C, Li C
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom15050667](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom15050667)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2025 May 5;15(5):667. doi: 10.3390/biom15050667.

Senior-Loken Syndrome: Ocular Perspectives on Genetics, Pathogenesis, and 
Management.

Zhou D(1), Zeng Y(2), Luo W(2), Leng C(2), Li C(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products Administration, Beijing 
100076, China.
(2)Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha 410013, China.

Senior-Loken syndrome (SLSN) is a group of rare autosomal recessive disorders 
caused by dysfunction of the primary cilium, primarily affecting the kidneys 
(typically leading to nephronophthisis) and eyes (typically leading to retinal 
degeneration). Moreover, patients with SLSN may experience additional 
multisystemic symptoms, such as developmental delay, intellectual disability, 
ataxia, and nystagmus. To date, eight genes have been demonstrated to cause 
SLSN, all encoding for proteins involved in the structure and functions of the 
primary cilium. This places SLSN within an expanding category of diseases known 
as "ciliopathies". Due to the genetic heterogeneity and significant phenotypic 
overlap with other ciliopathies, establishing a definitive diagnosis during the 
initial consultation remains a challenge for clinicians. Furthermore, current 
research on SLSN-related ciliopathies predominantly focuses on renal 
involvement, while the ocular manifestations remain insufficiently explored and 
lack a comprehensive review. Therefore, with the goal of offering practical 
guidance for clinical practice, this review aims to provide a comprehensive 
overview of the clinical features, along with an ocular perspective on the 
molecular mechanisms, genetic underpinnings, and advances in the treatment of 
SLSN.

DOI: 10.3390/biom15050667
PMCID: PMC12109206
PMID: 40427560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.