---
reference_id: "PMID:35627144"
title: "Central Core Disease: Facial Weakness Differentiating Biallelic from Monoallelic Forms."
authors:
- Cotta A
- Souza LS
- Carvalho E
- Feitosa LN
- Cunha A Jr
- Navarro MM
- Valicek J
- Menezes MM
- Neves SVN
- Xavier-Neto R
- Vargas AP
- Takata RI
- Paim JF
- Vainzof M
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13050760
keywords:
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics, pathology"
- Neuroblastoma
- Pedigree
- Retrospective Studies
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central Core Disease: Facial Weakness Differentiating Biallelic from Monoallelic Forms.
**Authors:** Cotta A, Souza LS, Carvalho E, Feitosa LN, Cunha A Jr, Navarro MM, Valicek J, Menezes MM, Neves SVN, Xavier-Neto R, Vargas AP, Takata RI, Paim JF, Vainzof M
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13050760](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13050760)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Apr 26;13(5):760. doi: 10.3390/genes13050760.

Central Core Disease: Facial Weakness Differentiating Biallelic from Monoallelic
Forms.

Cotta A(1), Souza LS(2), Carvalho E(1), Feitosa LN(2), Cunha A Jr(1), Navarro
MM(1), Valicek J(1), Menezes MM(1), Neves SVN(1), Xavier-Neto R(1), Vargas
AP(1), Takata RI(1), Paim JF(1), Vainzof M(2).

Author information:
(1)The SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Av. Amazonas, 5953, Belo
Horizonte 30510-000, MG, Brazil.
(2)Human Genome and Stem Cells Research Center, Genetics and Evolutionary
Biology, IBUSP, University of São Paulo, R. do Matao, 106, Cidade Universitária,
Sao Paulo 05508-900, SP, Brazil.

Central Core Disease (CCD) is a genetic neuromuscular disorder characterized by
the presence of cores in muscle biopsy. The inheritance has been described as
predominantly autosomal dominant (AD), and the disease may present as severe
neonatal or mild adult forms. Here we report clinical and molecular data on a
large cohort of Brazilian CCD patients, including a retrospective clinical
analysis and molecular screening for RYR1 variants using Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS). We analyzed 27 patients from 19 unrelated families: four
families (11 patients) with autosomal dominant inheritance (AD), two families (3
patients) with autosomal recessive (AR), and 13 sporadic cases. Biallelic RYR1
variants were found in six families (two AR and four sporadic cases) of the 14
molecularly analyzed families (~43%), suggesting a higher frequency of AR
inheritance than expected. None of these cases presented a severe phenotype.
Facial weakness was more common in biallelic than in monoallelic patients (p =
0.0043) and might be a marker for AR forms. NGS is highly effective for the
identification of RYR1 variants in CCD patients, allowing the discovery of a
higher proportion of AR cases with biallelic mutations. These data have
important implications for the genetic counseling of the families.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13050760
PMCID: PMC9141459
PMID: 35627144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ana Cotta, Lucas Santos Souza, Elmano Carvalho,
Leticia Nogueira Feitosa, Antonio Cunha-Jr, Monica Machado Navarro, Julia
Filardi Paim, Jaquelin Valicek, Miriam Melo Menezes, Simone Vilela Nunes Neves,
Rafael Xavier-Neto, Antonio Pedro Vargas, Reinaldo Issao Takata, and Mariz
Vainzof declare that there are no conflit of interest.
