---
reference_id: "PMID:36579820"
title: Respiratory sequelae of dengue fever.
authors:
- Mehmood A
- Afzal MW
- Ahmad M
- Mufti M
- Malik J
- Zaidi SMJ
journal: Trop Doct
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/00494755221127355
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory sequelae of dengue fever.
**Authors:** Mehmood A, Afzal MW, Ahmad M, Mufti M, Malik J, Zaidi SMJ
**Journal:** Trop Doct (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00494755221127355](https://doi.org/10.1177/00494755221127355)

## Content

1. Trop Doct. 2023 Apr;53(2):237-240. doi: 10.1177/00494755221127355. Epub 2022
Dec  29.

Respiratory sequelae of dengue fever.

Mehmood A(1), Afzal MW(2), Ahmad M(3), Mufti M(4), Malik J(5), Zaidi SMJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, 418648Rawalpindi Institute of Cardiology, 
Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(2)Sheikh Zayed Medical College, Rahim Yar Khan Pakistan.
(3)Department of Medicine, Bahawal Victoria Hospital, Bahawalpur, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Medicine, 66909Allama Iqbal Medical College, Lahore, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Cardiac Electrophysiology, Armed Forces Institute of 
Cardiology, National Institute of Heart Diseases, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Medicine, 123683Rawalpindi Medical University and Allied 
Hospitals, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.

Dengue viral illness is endemic in many tropical countries with temperate 
climates. The haematological and cardiovascular sequelae of dengue are well 
known; however, respiratory manifestations are still an area of active medical 
research. We conducted a literature search on PubMed, Medline CINAHIL, EMBASE 
and found 64 articles on respiratory sequelae of dengue. All relevant original 
articles and case reports were included and the relevant information regarding 
the respiratory manifestations of dengue was retrieved from the relevant 
eligible articles. Respiratory manifestations of dengue range from mild pleural 
effusion to acute respiratory distress syndrome. The former was the most common 
complication, seen in 5.1% of patients, followed by acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS) in 1.7%, pneumonia in 0.5%, respiratory distress in 0.3%, 
pulmonary hemorrhage in 0.1%, and haemothorax in 0.01%. Involvement of the 
respiratory system indicates severe disease and is difficult to manage. 
Therefore its early detection is important.

DOI: 10.1177/00494755221127355
PMID: 36579820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]