---
reference_id: "PMID:32451864"
title: Myosins and Hearing.
authors:
- Friedman TB
- Belyantseva IA
- Frolenkov GI
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-38062-5_13
keywords:
- Animals
- Deafness/genetics
- Hearing/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Myosins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myosins and Hearing.
**Authors:** Friedman TB, Belyantseva IA, Frolenkov GI
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-38062-5_13](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-38062-5_13)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1239:317-330. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-38062-5_13.

Myosins and Hearing.

Friedman TB(1), Belyantseva IA(2), Frolenkov GI(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, Porter Neuroscience Research Center, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. friedman@nidcd.nih.gov.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, Porter Neuroscience Research Center, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky College of Medicine,
Lexington, KY, USA.

Hearing loss is both genetically and clinically heterogeneous, and pathogenic
variants of over a hundred different genes are associated with this common
neurosensory disorder. A relatively large number of these "deafness genes"
encode myosin super family members. The evidence that pathogenic variants of
human MYO3A, MYO6, MYO7A, MYO15A, MYH14 and MYH9 are associated with deafness
ranges from moderate to definitive. Additional evidence for the involvement of
these six myosins for normal hearing also comes from animal models, usually
mouse or zebra fish, where mutations of these genes cause hearing loss and from
biochemical, physiological and cell biological studies of their roles in the
inner ear. This chapter focuses on these six genes for which evidence of a
causative role in deafness is substantial.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-38062-5_13
PMID: 32451864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
