---
reference_id: "PMID:12483181"
title: Anterior spinal artery syndrome after infrarenal abdominal aortic surgery.
authors:
- Alpagut U
- Dayioglu E
journal: J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino)
year: '2002'
keywords:
- "Aneurysm, Ruptured/diagnosis, surgery"
- "Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology, mortality"
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Abdominal/diagnosis, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Prognosis
- "Plastic Surgery Procedures/adverse effects, methods"
- "Renal Artery/physiopathology, surgery"
- Risk Assessment
- Sampling Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vascular Surgical Procedures/adverse effects, methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anterior spinal artery syndrome after infrarenal abdominal aortic surgery.
**Authors:** Alpagut U, Dayioglu E
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) (2002)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2002 Dec;43(6):865-8.

Anterior spinal artery syndrome after infrarenal abdominal aortic surgery.

Alpagut U(1), Dayioglu E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Istanbul Medical Faculty of Istanbul
University, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Neurological complications such as paraplegia or paraparesis due to
spinal cord ischemia has been an unpredictable, devastating event after
infrarenal abdominal aortic surgery. The aim of our study is to focus the
importance of this entity and in this connection to review the vascular anatomy
of the spinal cord, incidence and etiology of spinal cord ischemia, methods of
prevention, and management of the patient.
METHODS: Eight patients were identified with spinal cord ischemia manifested by
paraplegia or paraparesis after 1331 abdominal aortic operations. All the
patients who had spinal cord ischemia were examined for risk factors.
RESULTS: Three anterior spinal artery syndrome neurological recovery occurred
but 5 of them remained unchanged. Two patients died within 30 days of operation.
CONCLUSIONS: Complete paraplegia due to ischemic spinal cord injury was thought
to be caused by interruption of critical collateral blood supply to the spinal
cord. For this reason avoidance of prolonged aortic cross clamp time,
hypotension, and its associated low flow to the spinal cord, paying attention to
prevent atheromatous embolization of Adamkiewicz artery and pelvic circulation
can prevent this complication. If the greater medullary artery is anomalously
low from the anatomic localization the blood supply of the cord may be
inadequate, so this complication cannot be avoided.

PMID: 12483181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
