---
reference_id: "PMID:36573095"
title: Unraveling the Chemistry of meso-Cl Tricarbocyanine Dyes in Conjugation Reactions for the Creation of Peptide Bonds.
authors:
- Exner RM
- Cortezon-Tamarit F
- Ge H
- Pourzand C
- Pascu SI
journal: ACS Bio Med Chem Au
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.2c00053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unraveling the Chemistry of meso-Cl Tricarbocyanine Dyes in Conjugation Reactions for the Creation of Peptide Bonds.
**Authors:** Exner RM, Cortezon-Tamarit F, Ge H, Pourzand C, Pascu SI
**Journal:** ACS Bio Med Chem Au (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.2c00053](https://doi.org/10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.2c00053)

## Content

1. ACS Bio Med Chem Au. 2022 Dec 21;2(6):642-654. doi: 
10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.2c00053. Epub 2022 Nov 8.

Unraveling the Chemistry of meso-Cl Tricarbocyanine Dyes in Conjugation 
Reactions for the Creation of Peptide Bonds.

Exner RM(1), Cortezon-Tamarit F(1), Ge H(1), Pourzand C(2)(3), Pascu SI(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down Road, BA2 7AY 
Bath, U.K.
(2)Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Bath, Claverton Down 
Road, BA2 7AY Bath, U.K.
(3)Centre of Therapeutic Innovations, University of Bath, Claverton Down Road, 
BA2 7AY Bath, U.K.

Tricarbocyanine dyes have become popular tools in life sciences and medicine. 
Their near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence makes them ideal agents for imaging of 
thick specimens or in vivo imaging, e.g., in fluorescence-guided surgery. Among 
other types of cyanine dyes, meso-Cl tricarbocyanine dyes have received a surge 
of interest, as it emerged that their high reactivity makes them inherently 
tumor-targeting. As such, significant research efforts have focused on 
conjugating these to functional moieties. However, the syntheses generally 
suffer from low yields. Hereby, we report on the reaction of meso-Cl dyes with a 
small selection of coupling reagents to give the corresponding 
keto-polymethines, potentially explaining low yields and the prevalence of 
monofunctionalized cyanine conjugates in the current state of the art of 
functional near-infrared dyes. We present the synthesis and isolation of the 
first keto-polymethine-based conjugate and present preliminary investigation in 
the prostate cancer cell lines PC3 and DU145 by confocal microscopy and discuss 
changes to optical properties in biological media.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.2c00053
PMCID: PMC9782398
PMID: 36573095

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.