---
reference_id: "PMID:11570810"
title: Signaling and subcellular localization of the TNF receptor Edar.
authors:
- Koppinen P
- Pispa J
- Laurikkala J
- Thesleff I
- Mikkola ML
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1006/excr.2001.5331
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- "Brain/embryology, metabolism"
- "Crosses, Genetic"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Ectodysplasins
- Edar Receptor
- Enzyme Activation
- "Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Indirect"
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Genes, Reporter"
- In Situ Hybridization
- In Situ Nick-End Labeling
- "Membrane Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism
- Mutation
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Phenotype
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Binding
- "Receptors, Ectodysplasin"
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor"
- Signal Transduction
- Time Factors
- Tooth/embryology
- Transfection
- p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Signaling and subcellular localization of the TNF receptor Edar.
**Authors:** Koppinen P, Pispa J, Laurikkala J, Thesleff I, Mikkola ML
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/excr.2001.5331](https://doi.org/10.1006/excr.2001.5331)

## Content

1. Exp Cell Res. 2001 Oct 1;269(2):180-92. doi: 10.1006/excr.2001.5331.

Signaling and subcellular localization of the TNF receptor Edar.

Koppinen P(1), Pispa J, Laurikkala J, Thesleff I, Mikkola ML.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology Program, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 00014, 
Finland.

Tabby and downless mutant mice have identical phenotypes characterized by 
deficient development of several ectodermally derived organs such as teeth, 
hair, and sweat glands. Edar, encoded by the mouse downless gene and defective 
in human dominant and recessive forms of autosomal hypohidrotic ectodermal 
dysplasia (EDA) syndrome, is a new member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) 
receptor superfamily. The ligand of Edar is ectodysplasin, a TNF-like molecule 
mutated in the X-linked form of EDA and in the spontaneous mouse mutant Tabby. 
We have analyzed the response of Edar signaling in transfected cells and show 
that it activates nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) in a dose-dependent manner. 
When Edar was expressed at low levels, the NF-kappaB response was enhanced by 
coexpression of ectodysplasin. The activation of NF-kappaB was greatly reduced 
in cells expressing mutant forms of Edar associated with the downless phenotype. 
Overexpression of Edar did not activate SAPK/JNK nor p38 kinase. Even though 
Edar harbors a death domain its overexpression did not induce apoptosis in any 
of the four cell lines analyzed, nor was there any difference in apoptosis in 
developing teeth of wild-type and Tabby mice. Additionally, we show that the 
subcellular localization of dominant negative alleles of downless is 
dramatically different from that of recessive or wild-type alleles. This 
together with differences in NF-kappaB responses suggests an explanation for the 
different mode of inheritance of the different downless alleles.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/excr.2001.5331
PMID: 11570810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]