---
reference_id: "PMID:21902723"
title: "Long-term administration of prazosin improves bladder storage function: results from a study in spontaneously hypertensive rats."
authors:
- Haga N
- Aikawa K
- Ishibashi K
- Yanagida T
- Nomiya M
- Takahashi N
- Shiomi H
- Oguro T
- Ogawa S
- Yamaguchi O
journal: Int J Urol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1442-2042.2011.02849.x
keywords:
- Adrenergic alpha-1 Receptor Antagonists/pharmacology
- Animals
- Female
- Immunohistochemistry
- Lumbar Vertebrae
- "Neurons, Afferent/drug effects"
- Prazosin/pharmacology
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-fos/analysis
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred SHR"
- "Rats, Inbred WKY"
- "Spinal Cord/chemistry, pathology"
- Time Factors
- Urinary Bladder/physiology
- Urination/drug effects
- Urodynamics/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term administration of prazosin improves bladder storage function: results from a study in spontaneously hypertensive rats.
**Authors:** Haga N, Aikawa K, Ishibashi K, Yanagida T, Nomiya M, Takahashi N, Shiomi H, Oguro T, Ogawa S, Yamaguchi O
**Journal:** Int J Urol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1442-2042.2011.02849.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1442-2042.2011.02849.x)

## Content

1. Int J Urol. 2011 Nov;18(11):785-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-2042.2011.02849.x.
Epub  2011 Sep 8.

Long-term administration of prazosin improves bladder storage function: results
from a study in spontaneously hypertensive rats.

Haga N(1), Aikawa K, Ishibashi K, Yanagida T, Nomiya M, Takahashi N, Shiomi H,
Oguro T, Ogawa S, Yamaguchi O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine,
Fukushima, Japan. pessoco@fmu.ac.jp

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effects of long-term administration of the α(1)
-adrenoceptor antagonist prazosin on afferent inputs from the lower urinary
tract (LUT).
METHODS: Twenty female spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) were randomized to
receive a 4-week course of prazosin (0.12 mg/kg per day) or vehicle; 10 female
Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats were given vehicle. Prazosin or vehicle was administered
via an osmotic pump. The effect of prazosin on urodynamic parameters was
determined by continuous cystometry in conscious animals. After cystometry, rats
were killed and c-fos expression in the dorsal horn of the L6 spinal cord was
measured by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The bladder contraction interval was significantly shorter in untreated
SHR compared with WKY rats (2.36 ± 0 vs 4.27 ± 0.12 min, respectively; P < 0.05)
and cystometric capacity was decreased significantly in SHR compared with WKY
rats. L6 spinal cord c-Fos expression was also significantly greater in SHR than
WKY rats. The administration of prazosin significantly increased the micturition
interval (4.07 ± 0.58 min; P < 0.05) and bladder capacity, but it did not affect
micturition pressure. In SHR, the number of c-Fos-positive neurons was
significantly lower following the administration of prazosin compared with
vehicle.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased afferent input from the LUT may induce an increase in
urinary frequency in SHR. Furthermore, long-term administration of prazosin can
exert inhibitory effects on afferent pathways from the LUT during the storage
phase. Reductions of afferent input can result in increased bladder capacity and
increased micturition interval.

© 2011 The Japanese Urological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1442-2042.2011.02849.x
PMID: 21902723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
