---
reference_id: "PMID:41638970"
title: "Leukodystrophy-like phenotype in early-onset neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus: Case series and systematic review of the literature."
authors:
- Santiago IB
- da Silva AA
- Nóbrega ILP
- de Melo MMF
- Neto JMC
- Amadei LP
- Catunda AV
- de Assis Pereira Matos PCA
- Távora DGF
- Pitombeira MS
- Rodrigues CEM
journal: Rev Neurol (Paris)
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2026.01.004
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/complications, diagnosis, therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Adult
- Male
- Age of Onset
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- "Leukoencephalopathies/diagnosis, etiology, therapy, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leukodystrophy-like phenotype in early-onset neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus: Case series and systematic review of the literature.
**Authors:** Santiago IB, da Silva AA, Nóbrega ILP, de Melo MMF, Neto JMC, Amadei LP, Catunda AV, de Assis Pereira Matos PCA, Távora DGF, Pitombeira MS, Rodrigues CEM
**Journal:** Rev Neurol (Paris) (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurol.2026.01.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2026.01.004)

## Content

1. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2026 Mar;182(3):120-133. doi:
10.1016/j.neurol.2026.01.004.  Epub 2026 Feb 3.

Leukodystrophy-like phenotype in early-onset neuropsychiatric systemic lupus
erythematosus: Case series and systematic review of the literature.

Santiago IB(1), da Silva AA(2), Nóbrega ILP(1), de Melo MMF(3), Neto JMC(2),
Amadei LP(2), Catunda AV(4), de Assis Pereira Matos PCA(4), Távora DGF(5),
Pitombeira MS(4), Rodrigues CEM(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Medical Sciences, Fortaleza University (Unifor),
Fortaleza, Brazil.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Fortaleza University (Unifor), Fortaleza, Brazil.
(3)Rheumatology Division, Hospital Geral de Fortaleza, Fortaleza, Brazil.
(4)Neurology Division, Hospital Geral de Fortaleza, Fortaleza, Brazil.
(5)Radiology Division, Hospital Geral de Fortaleza, Fortaleza, Brazil.
(6)Graduate Program in Medical Sciences, Fortaleza University (Unifor),
Fortaleza, Brazil; Rheumatology Division, Hospital Geral de Fortaleza,
Fortaleza, Brazil; Department of Internal Medicine, Federal University of Ceara,
Fortaleza, Brazil. Electronic address: carlosewerton@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: To analyze the clinical, radiological, therapeutic, and clinical
outcomes of the leukodystrophy-like phenotype in neuropsychiatric systemic lupus
erythematosus (NPSLE).
METHODS: We conducted this systematic review following the Preferred Report
Items for Systematic Review and Meta-analysis (PRISMA). We searched Pubmed,
Embase, and Web of Science databases for articles published until May 31, 2025,
using the terms "systemic lupus erythematosus" AND ("diffuse white matter
lesions" OR "leukoencephalopathy" OR "leukodystrophies"). Additionally, we
report five patients with leukodystrophy-like phenotype in early-onset NPSLE.
RESULTS: Thirty-three cases were reviewed. The mean age was 36.9±14.9years, and
28 (84.8%) were female patients. A previous diagnosis of SLE was present in 66%
of cases. The main neurological symptoms included headache (33.3%), seizures
(15.1%), and consciousness disturbances (15.1%). Among the 17 patients with
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) abnormalities, elevated protein levels were observed
in 11 (40.7%) cases, and pleocytosis in 6 (22.2%). MRI findings were reported in
31 patients, typically showing cerebral white matter lesions characterized by
hyperintense areas with T2-weighted or fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
(FLAIR) sequences. Most patients were treated with high-dose corticosteroid
pulse therapy (22/32), while others received cyclophosphamide pulses (18/32),
therapeutic plasma exchange (PLEX) (4/32), or rituximab (6/32). Overall, the
therapeutic response was satisfactory, with clinical improvement in 23 out of 33
patients.
CONCLUSION: In light of the severe clinical presentation of the
leukodystrophy-like phenotype in NPSLE, early diagnosis and aggressive treatment
are crucial for successful outcomes, as suggested by our review, which reported
clinical improvement in 70% of patients. Future prospective studies are needed
to confirm these findings.

Copyright © 2026 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2026.01.004
PMID: 41638970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of interest The authors declare that
they have no competing interest.
