---
reference_id: "PMID:39119546"
title: Spinal cord ischemia - from diagnosis to treatment.
authors:
- Wiszniewska M
- Sankowska M
journal: Postep Psychiatr Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5114/ppn.2024.141367
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal cord ischemia - from diagnosis to treatment.
**Authors:** Wiszniewska M, Sankowska M
**Journal:** Postep Psychiatr Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5114/ppn.2024.141367](https://doi.org/10.5114/ppn.2024.141367)

## Content

1. Postep Psychiatr Neurol. 2024 Jun;33(2):93-97. doi: 10.5114/ppn.2024.141367. 
Epub 2024 Jul 11.

Spinal cord ischemia - from diagnosis to treatment.

Wiszniewska M(1)(2), Sankowska M(3).

Author information:
(1)Stanisław Staszic University of Applied Sciences, Emergency Medical Service, 
Pila, Poland.
(2)Department of Neurology and Stroke Unit, Specialist Hospital, Pila, Poland.
(3)Medical Center Alergosan, Koszalin, Poland.

PURPOSE: The aim of the article is to outline the frequency of the occurrence, 
course, diagnosis and possible treatment of spinal cord ischemia (SCI) on the 
basis of a literature overview and to raise awareness of this rare yet 
devastating condition.
VIEWS: SCI, when compared to cerebral stroke, is a relatively rare disease, 
being diagnosed 100 times less often. Our knowledge as to its root causes, 
proper treatment for it and long-term prognosis is still inconclusive. Magnetic 
resonance imaging with diffusion- weighted contrast is a main tool with which to 
confirm SCI and rule out a broad spectrum of possible alternative diagnoses. SCI 
is a condition in which prompt recognition, accurate diagnostic steps, and 
reperfusion therapy are essential to ensure a desirable functional outcome and 
reduce mortality and disability. Although there are no specific guidelines 
regarding treatment, the administration of rt-PA might be an effective therapy 
for acute ischemic stroke, preventing permanent spinal dysfunction. In surgical 
causes close cooperation between a neurologist and a neurosurgeon is necessary 
to provide combined appropriate management promptly.
CONCLUSIONS: Due to the relative rarity of SCI, multi-center studies of ischemia 
of the spinal cord and its treatment would be advisable in neurological practice 
to enhance current knowledge. A rapid diagnosis is crucial for appropriate care 
and desirable long-term outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology.

DOI: 10.5114/ppn.2024.141367
PMCID: PMC11304228
PMID: 39119546

Conflict of interest statement: Absent.