---
reference_id: "PMID:28613790"
title: Pars Planitis.
authors:
- Chauhan K
- Tripathy K
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pars Planitis.
**Authors:** Chauhan K, Tripathy K

## Content

1. Pars Planitis.

Chauhan K(1), Tripathy K(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2023 Aug 25.

Author information:
(1)University of Vermont School of Medicine
(2)ASG Eye Hospital, BT Road, Kolkata, India

Pars planitis is chronic intermediate uveitis for which no systemic disease or 
associated infection could be found. The term intermediate uveitis describes an 
intraocular inflammatory process with vitreous as the primary site of 
inflammation. Inflammation may be present in the anterior vitreous, the vitreous 
base overlying the peripheral retina-pars plana region. It is characterized by 
vitreal inflammatory aggregates (snowballs), and whitish exudates on the 
inferior pars plana (snowbanking). Intermediate uveitis includes posterior 
cyclitis, pars planitis, and hyalitis. Pars planitis refers to the subset of 
intermediate uveitis, characterized by the presence of snowball or snowbank 
formation, without an underlying infectious or systemic disease.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 28613790

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Krati Chauhan declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Koushik Tripathy 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.