---
reference_id: "PMID:7141120"
title: "Neurotrichosis: hair-shaft abnormalities associated with neurological diseases."
authors:
- Coulter DL
- Beals TF
- Allen RJ
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '1982'
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.1982.tb13674.x
keywords:
- Adult
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis"
- Argininosuccinic Acid/metabolism
- Biotin/deficiency
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Growth Disorders/diagnosis
- Hair/abnormalities
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intellectual Disability/diagnosis
- Male
- Menkes Kinky Hair Syndrome/diagnosis
- "Microscopy, Electron, Scanning"
- Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurotrichosis: hair-shaft abnormalities associated with neurological diseases.
**Authors:** Coulter DL, Beals TF, Allen RJ
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (1982)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1469-8749.1982.tb13674.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8749.1982.tb13674.x)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1982 Oct;24(5):634-44. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-8749.1982.tb13674.x.

Neurotrichosis: hair-shaft abnormalities associated with neurological diseases.

Coulter DL, Beals TF, Allen RJ.

Six children with morphological hair-shaft abnormalities and neurological
disease are presented, including two with Pollitt syndrome, one with biotin
deficiency, two with Menkes diseases and one with argininosuccinic aciduria. The
child with biotin deficiency grew normal hair following oral biotin therapy.
Although the hair-shaft abnormalities may be seen with light microscopy (LM),
they are best visualised with scanning electron-microscopy (SEM). Pili torti may
be mistaken for monilethrix by LM, but SEM shows the true defect. A review of
the literature shows that these hair-shaft abnormalities (trichorrhexis nodosa,
monilethrix and pili torti) are not specific or pathognomonic, but do indicate a
group of neurological disorders, including potentially treatable inborn errors
of metabolism. The term 'neurotrichosis' is suggested to classify this group of
disorders.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.1982.tb13674.x
PMID: 7141120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
