---
reference_id: "PMID:23027977"
title: "Crystal structure of Enpp1, an extracellular glycoprotein involved in bone mineralization and insulin signaling."
authors:
- Kato K
- Nishimasu H
- Okudaira S
- Mihara E
- Ishitani R
- Takagi J
- Aoki J
- Nureki O
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1208017109
keywords:
- Animals
- "Calcification, Physiologic/genetics"
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- "Glycoproteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- Insulin/metabolism
- Mice
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/chemistry, metabolism"
- Protein Conformation
- "Pyrophosphatases/chemistry, metabolism"
- Ribonucleotides/metabolism
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- X-Ray Diffraction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crystal structure of Enpp1, an extracellular glycoprotein involved in bone mineralization and insulin signaling.
**Authors:** Kato K, Nishimasu H, Okudaira S, Mihara E, Ishitani R, Takagi J, Aoki J, Nureki O
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1208017109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1208017109)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 16;109(42):16876-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1208017109. Epub 2012 Oct 1.

Crystal structure of Enpp1, an extracellular glycoprotein involved in bone
mineralization and insulin signaling.

Kato K(1), Nishimasu H, Okudaira S, Mihara E, Ishitani R, Takagi J, Aoki J,
Nureki O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science,
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Enpp1 is a membrane-bound glycoprotein that regulates bone mineralization by
hydrolyzing extracellular nucleotide triphosphates to produce pyrophosphate.
Enpp1 dysfunction causes human diseases characterized by ectopic calcification.
Enpp1 also inhibits insulin signaling, and an Enpp1 polymorphism is associated
with insulin resistance. However, the precise mechanism by which Enpp1 functions
in these cellular processes remains elusive. Here, we report the crystal
structures of the extracellular region of mouse Enpp1 in complex with four
different nucleotide monophosphates, at resolutions of 2.7-3.2 Å. The
nucleotides are accommodated in a pocket formed by an insertion loop in the
catalytic domain, explaining the preference of Enpp1 for an ATP substrate.
Structural mapping of disease-associated mutations indicated the functional
importance of the interdomain interactions. A structural comparison of Enpp1
with Enpp2, a lysophospholipase D, revealed marked differences in the domain
arrangements and active-site architectures. Notably, the Enpp1 mutant lacking
the insertion loop lost the nucleotide-hydrolyzing activity but instead gained
the lysophospholipid-hydrolyzing activity of Enpp2. Our findings provide
structural insights into how the Enpp family proteins evolved to exert their
diverse cellular functions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1208017109
PMCID: PMC3479499
PMID: 23027977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
