---
reference_id: "PMID:40557493"
title: Early Atrial Remodeling Drives Arrhythmia in Fabry Disease.
authors:
- Roy A
- "O'Shea C"
- Dasí A
- Patel L
- Cumberland MJ
- Nieves D
- Canagarajah HS
- Thompson S
- Azad A
- Price AM
- Hall C
- Alvior AMB
- Rath P
- Davies B
- Rodriguez B
- Holmes AP
- Pavlovic D
- Townend JN
- Geberhiwot T
- Gehmlich K
- Steeds RP
journal: Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCEP.124.013352
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fabry Disease/complications, physiopathology, diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- "Atrial Fibrillation/physiopathology, etiology, diagnosis"
- Atrial Remodeling
- Middle Aged
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism, pathology"
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Action Potentials
- Electrocardiography
- Heart Atria/physiopathology
- Heart Rate
- Case-Control Studies
- alpha-Galactosidase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Atrial Remodeling Drives Arrhythmia in Fabry Disease.
**Authors:** Roy A, O'Shea C, Dasí A, Patel L, Cumberland MJ, Nieves D, Canagarajah HS, Thompson S, Azad A, Price AM, Hall C, Alvior AMB, Rath P, Davies B, Rodriguez B, Holmes AP, Pavlovic D, Townend JN, Geberhiwot T, Gehmlich K, Steeds RP
**Journal:** Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCEP.124.013352](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.124.013352)

## Content

1. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2025 Jul;18(7):e013352. doi:
10.1161/CIRCEP.124.013352. Epub 2025 Jun 25.

Early Atrial Remodeling Drives Arrhythmia in Fabry Disease.

Roy A(1)(2), O'Shea C(1)(3), Dasí A(4), Patel L(1), Cumberland MJ(1)(5), Nieves
D(6)(7), Canagarajah HS(1)(2), Thompson S(2), Azad A(1)(8), Price AM(1), Hall
C(1), Alvior AMB(2), Rath P(9), Davies B(9)(10), Rodriguez B(4), Holmes
AP(1)(11), Pavlovic D(1), Townend JN(1)(2), Geberhiwot T(12)(13), Gehmlich
K(#)(1)(14), Steeds RP(#)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, Birmingham, United Kingdom (A.R.,
C.O.S., L.P., M.J.C., H.S.C., A.A., A.M.P., C.H., A.P.H., D.P., J.N.T., K.G.,
R.P.S.).
(2)Department of Cardiology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, University Hospital
Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom (A.R., H.S.C., S.T., A.M.B.A.,
J.N.T., R.P.S.).
(3)Heart Rhythm Research Group, Division of Biomedical Sciences, Warwick Medical
School, Clinical Sciences Research Laboratory, Coventry, United Kingdom
(C.O.S.).
(4)Department of Computer Science (A.D., B.R.), Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)The Westmead Institute of Medical Research, Westmead, New South Wales,
Australia (M.J.C.).
(6)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Birmingham, United Kingdom (D.N.).
(7)Centre of Membrane Proteins and Receptors, Birmingham, United Kingdom (D.N.).
(8)Center of Biological Design, Berlin Institute of Health at Charité,
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany (A.A.).
(9)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics (P.R., B.D.), Oxford, United Kingdom.
(10)Genetic Modification Service, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom (B.D.).
(11)School of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Birmingham,
United Kingdom (A.P.H.).
(12)Institute of Metabolism and System Research, University of Birmingham,
United Kingdom (T.G.).
(13)Department of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital Birmingham
NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom (T.G.).
(14)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Dept of Medicine and British
Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence Oxford, University of Oxford,
United Kingdom (K.G.).
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused
by α-Gal A (α-galactosidase A) deficiency, resulting in multiorgan accumulation
of sphingolipid, namely globotriaosylceramide. This triggers ventricular
myocardial hypertrophy, fibrosis, and inflammation, driving arrhythmia and
sudden death. Atrial fibrillation is common, yet the cellular mechanisms
accounting for this are unknown.
METHODS: To address this, we conducted ECG analysis from a large cohort of 115
adults with FD at varying cardiomyopathy stages. ECG P-wave characteristics were
compared with non-FD controls. Cellular contractile and electrophysiological
function were examined in a novel atrial cellular FD model developed and imputed
into in silico atrial models to provide insight into mechanisms of arrhythmia.
Induced pluripotent stem cells were genome-edited using Clustered Regularly
Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats-Cas9 to introduce the GLA p.N215S variant
and differentiated into induced pluripotent stem cell-derived atrial
cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs). Contraction, calcium handling, and electrophysiology
experiments were conducted. Bi-atrial in silico models were developed with
cellular changes as in GLA p.N215S iPSC-CMs.
RESULTS: ECG analysis demonstrated P-wave duration and PQ interval shortening in
FD adults before the onset of cardiomyopathy. Patients with FD exhibited a
higher incidence of premature atrial contractions and increased risk of atrial
fibrillation compared with healthy controls. GLA p.N215S iPSC-CMs were deficient
in α-Gal A and exhibited globotriaosylceramide accumulation. Atrial GLA p.N215S
iPSC-CMs demonstrated a more positive diastolic membrane potential, faster
action potential upstroke velocity, greater incidence of delayed
afterdepolarizations, greater contraction force, and alterations in calcium
handling compared with wild-type iPSC-CMs. Simulations with these changes in the
in silico models resulted in similar P-wave morphology changes to those seen in
early FD cardiomyopathy and increased atrial fibrillation vulnerability.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide novel insights into underpinning mechanisms
for atrial arrhythmia and a rationale for early P-wave changes in FD. These may
be targeted to develop therapeutic strategies to reduce the arrhythmic burden in
FD.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCEP.124.013352
PMCID: PMC7617850
PMID: 40557493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.
