---
reference_id: "PMID:22129856"
title: "Clinicopathologic implication of ALK rearrangement in surgically resected lung cancer: a proposal of diagnostic algorithm for ALK-rearranged adenocarcinoma."
authors:
- Paik JH
- Choi CM
- Kim H
- Jang SJ
- Choe G
- Kim DK
- Kim HJ
- Yoon H
- Lee CT
- Jheon S
- Choe JY
- Chung JH
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.11.008
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, surgery"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Algorithms
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- Early Detection of Cancer
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, surgery"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Risk Factors
- Survival Analysis
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic implication of ALK rearrangement in surgically resected lung cancer: a proposal of diagnostic algorithm for ALK-rearranged adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Paik JH, Choi CM, Kim H, Jang SJ, Choe G, Kim DK, Kim HJ, Yoon H, Lee CT, Jheon S, Choe JY, Chung JH
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.11.008)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2012 Jun;76(3):403-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.11.008. Epub
2011  Nov 30.

Clinicopathologic implication of ALK rearrangement in surgically resected lung
cancer: a proposal of diagnostic algorithm for ALK-rearranged adenocarcinoma.

Paik JH(1), Choi CM, Kim H, Jang SJ, Choe G, Kim DK, Kim HJ, Yoon H, Lee CT,
Jheon S, Choe JY, Chung JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: To characterize the clinicopathologic features of ALK-rearranged
lung cancer, and suggest a molecular test protocol for lung adenocarcinoma in
the small biopsy specimen.
METHODS: In 735 NSCLC surgical specimens, clinicopathologic features, ALK
protein over-expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC), and ALK rearrangement by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) as well as EGFR and KRAS mutation
studies were analyzed.
RESULTS: Of the 735 NSCLC cases, 28 (3.8%) were ALK FISH-positive. ALK
rearrangement, EGFR and KRAS mutation were mutually exclusive. ALK rearrangement
was significantly higher in adenocarcinomas (6.8%, p<0.001), younger age
(p<0.0007), women (7.6%, p<0.001), and never-smokers (8.9%, p<0.001) with no
gender difference in the adenocarcinoma or never-smoker subgroup. ALK
FISH-positivity was not associated with disease recurrence (HR, 0.79; 95% CI,
0.42-1.49) or overall survival (HR, 0.61; 95% CI, 0.24-1.55). However,
ALK-rearranged lung cancer tended to show more frequent lymph node metastasis
despite its lower T stage. Similar to EGFR-mutated lung cancer, ALK-rearranged
lung cancer was enriched in adenocarcinoma, women, and never-smokers. The
results of ALK IHC and FISH obtained from tissue microarray (TMA)/biopsy
specimens and whole sections after resection were concordant.
CONCLUSION: ALK rearrangement was not a significant prognostic factor in
surgically resectable NSCLC. The clinical profiles of ALK-rearranged lung cancer
patients overlapped with those of EGFR-mutated patients. Therefore, we suggest
that simultaneous tests for ALK IHC and EGFR mutation (Chung's SNUBH molecular
test protocol), which has important implications for the storage and use of
small biopsy or cytology samples for genetic analysis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.11.008
PMID: 22129856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
