---
reference_id: "PMID:23969541"
title: Humoral immune mechanism of liver injury in giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
authors:
- Whitington PF
- Vos MB
- Bass LM
- Melin-Aldana H
- Romero R
- Roy CC
- Alvarez F
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/MPG.0b013e3182a98dbe
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/immunology, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived/therapeutic use"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Azathioprine/therapeutic use
- B-Lymphocytes/metabolism
- Biopsy
- "Child, Preschool"
- Complement C3a/metabolism
- Complement C5b/metabolism
- Coombs Test
- Female
- Giant Cells
- "Hepatitis, Autoimmune/immunology, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Hepatocytes/immunology, pathology"
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/therapeutic use
- Immunotherapy
- Infant
- "Inflammation/immunology, metabolism, therapy"
- Leukocytes/metabolism
- "Liver/cytology, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Prednisone/therapeutic use
- Rituximab
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Humoral immune mechanism of liver injury in giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
**Authors:** Whitington PF, Vos MB, Bass LM, Melin-Aldana H, Romero R, Roy CC, Alvarez F
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPG.0b013e3182a98dbe](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.0b013e3182a98dbe)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2014 Jan;58(1):74-80. doi: 
10.1097/MPG.0b013e3182a98dbe.

Humoral immune mechanism of liver injury in giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune 
hemolytic anemia.

Whitington PF(1), Vos MB, Bass LM, Melin-Aldana H, Romero R, Roy CC, Alvarez F.

Author information:
(1)*Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, IL †Department of 
Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA ‡Department of Pediatrics, CHU Sainte 
Justine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia 
(GCH-AHA) is presumed to be an autoimmune disease, but the mechanism of liver 
injury is unknown. We proposed that in CGH-AHA, the humoral limb of autoimmunity 
is the dominant force driving progressive liver injury.
METHODS: We studied 6 cases of GCH-AHA and 6 cases of autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) 
with early childhood onset (3 type 1 and 3 type 2). Liver biopsies were graded 
for portal and periportal inflammation and for giant cells. Immunohistochemistry 
characterized cellular inflammation and complement involvement in injury by 
showing C5b-9 complex in hepatocytes.
RESULTS: Clinical and biochemical features at presentation were generally 
similar; however, the absence of autoantibodies and the presence of Coombs 
positivity did distinguish GCH-AHA from early-onset AIH. Liver biopsy pathology 
in CGH-AHA showed giant cells and little inflammation, whereas AIH showed the 
opposite. C5b-9 staining showed high-grade complement-mediated pan-lobular 
hepatocyte injury in all of the cases with GCH-AHA, whereas little C5b-9 was 
seen in hepatocytes in cases with AIH. Inflammation in GCH-AHA comprised mainly 
lobular macrophages and neutrophils, whereas portal and periportal T-cell and 
B-cell inflammation characterized cases with AIH. Most cases with AIH responded 
to therapy with prednisone and azathioprine, whereas most cases with GCH-AHA 
responded only to rituximab.
CONCLUSIONS: Widespread complement-mediated hepatocyte injury and typical C3a 
and C5a complement-driven liver inflammation along with Coombs-positive 
hemolytic anemia in GCH-AHA provide convincing evidence that systemic B-cell 
autoimmunity plays a central pathologic mechanism in the disease. Our findings 
support B-cell-directed immunotherapy as a first-line treatment of GCH-AHA.

DOI: 10.1097/MPG.0b013e3182a98dbe
PMID: 23969541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]