---
reference_id: "PMID:36752552"
title: "Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors of the Brachial Plexus: A Single-Center Experience on Diagnosis, Management, and Outcomes."
authors:
- Donaldson EK
- Winter JM
- Chandler RM
- Clark TA
- Giuffre JL
journal: Ann Plast Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/SAP.0000000000003462
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Neurofibrosarcoma/complications
- Nerve Sheath Neoplasms/surgery
- Neurofibroma
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- Brachial Plexus
- Margins of Excision
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors of the Brachial Plexus: A Single-Center Experience on Diagnosis, Management, and Outcomes.
**Authors:** Donaldson EK, Winter JM, Chandler RM, Clark TA, Giuffre JL
**Journal:** Ann Plast Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SAP.0000000000003462](https://doi.org/10.1097/SAP.0000000000003462)

## Content

1. Ann Plast Surg. 2023 Apr 1;90(4):339-342. doi: 10.1097/SAP.0000000000003462.
Epub 2023 Feb 4.

Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors of the Brachial Plexus: A Single-Center
Experience on Diagnosis, Management, and Outcomes.

Donaldson EK(1), Winter JM(1), Chandler RM(1), Clark TA(2), Giuffre JL(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Plastic Surgery, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, University of Manitoba, Pan Am Clinic, Winnipeg,
MB, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: The incidence of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs)
is 0.001%. Commonly, MPNST arise in neurofibromatosis; however, they can occur
sporadically, de novo or from a preexisting neurofibroma. Malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors are aggressive tumors with high rates of local recurrence
and metastasis. The prognosis is poor with 5-year survival rates of 15% to 50%.
Unfortunately, given the rarity of these tumors, it is not clear how to best
manage these patients. The purposes of this study were (1) to discuss our
experience with MPNST and particularly our difficulties with diagnosis and
management, and (2) to review the literature.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We report on all tumors of the brachial plexus excised
between 2013 and 2019. We report 3 cases of MPNST, their treatment, and their
outcomes.
RESULTS: Thirteen patients underwent surgical excision of an intrinsic brachial
plexus mass. Three of these patients (2 male, 1 female; average age, 36 years)
were diagnosed with an MPNST. Two patients with an MPNST had neurofibromatosis
type 1. All patients with an MPNST had a tumor >8 cm, motor and sensory
deficits, and pain. All 3 patients with MPNST underwent a magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) before diagnosis. The average time from initial symptom onset to
MRI was 12.3 months. Only 1 of the MRIs suggested a malignant tumor, with no MRI
identifying an MPNST. One patient underwent an excisional biopsy, and 2 had
incisional biopsies. Because of the lack of diagnosis preoperatively, all
patients had positive margins given the limited extent of surgery. Returning for
excision in an attempt to achieve negative margins in a large oncologically
contaminated field was not possible because defining the boundaries of the
initial surgical field was unachievable; therefore, the initial surgery was
their definitive surgical management. All patients were referred to oncology and
received radiation therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors must be suspected in
enlarging masses (>5 cm) with the constellation of pain, motor, and sensory
deficits. Computed tomography- or ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy under
brachial plexus block or sedation is required for definitive diagnosis to allow
for a comprehensive approach to the patient's tumor with a higher likelihood of
disease-free survival.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/SAP.0000000000003462
PMID: 36752552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest and sources of funding:
none declared.
