---
reference_id: "PMID:22747749"
title: "Genetic variation in glutathione S-transferase omega-1, arsenic methyltransferase and methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase, arsenic exposure and bladder cancer: a case-control study."
authors:
- Beebe-Dimmer JL
- Iyer PT
- Nriagu JO
- Keele GR
- Mehta S
- Meliker JR
- Lange EM
- Schwartz AG
- Zuhlke KA
- Schottenfeld D
- Cooney KA
journal: Environ Health
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-11-43
keywords:
- Aged
- "Arsenic/metabolism, toxicity"
- Case-Control Studies
- Drinking Water/analysis
- Environmental Exposure
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/epidemiology
- Genotype
- Glutathione Transferase/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (NADPH2)/genetics
- Methyltransferases/genetics
- Michigan/epidemiology
- Middle Aged
- Pilot Projects
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Risk Assessment
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic variation in glutathione S-transferase omega-1, arsenic methyltransferase and methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase, arsenic exposure and bladder cancer: a case-control study.
**Authors:** Beebe-Dimmer JL, Iyer PT, Nriagu JO, Keele GR, Mehta S, Meliker JR, Lange EM, Schwartz AG, Zuhlke KA, Schottenfeld D, Cooney KA
**Journal:** Environ Health (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1476-069X-11-43](https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-11-43)

## Content

1. Environ Health. 2012 Jun 29;11:43. doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-11-43.

Genetic variation in glutathione S-transferase omega-1, arsenic
methyltransferase and methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase, arsenic exposure and
bladder cancer: a case-control study.

Beebe-Dimmer JL(1), Iyer PT, Nriagu JO, Keele GR, Mehta S, Meliker JR, Lange EM,
Schwartz AG, Zuhlke KA, Schottenfeld D, Cooney KA.

Author information:
(1)Program of Population Studies and Disparities Research, Karmanos Cancer
Institute, 4100 John R, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. dimmerj@karmanos.org

BACKGROUND: Ingestion of groundwater with high concentrations of inorganic
arsenic has been linked to adverse health outcomes, including bladder cancer,
however studies have not consistently observed any elevation in risk at lower
concentrations. Genetic variability in the metabolism and clearance of arsenic
is an important consideration in any investigation of its potential health
risks. Therefore, we examined the association between genes thought to play a
role in the metabolism of arsenic and bladder cancer.
METHODS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in GSTO-1, As3MT and MTHFR were
genotyped using DNA from 219 bladder cancer cases and 273 controls participating
in a case-control study in Southeastern Michigan and exposed to low to moderate
(<50 μg/L) levels of arsenic in their drinking water. A time-weighted measure of
arsenic exposure was constructed using measures from household water samples
combined with past residential history, geocoded and merged with archived
arsenic data predicted from multiple resources.
RESULTS: While no single SNP in As3MT was significantly associated with bladder
cancer overall, several SNPs were associated with bladder cancer among those
exposed to higher arsenic levels. Individuals with one or more copies of the C
allele in rs11191439 (the Met287Thr polymorphism) had an elevated risk of
bladder cancer (OR = 1.17; 95% CI = 1.04-1.32 per 1 μg/L increase in average
exposure). However, no association was observed between average arsenic exposure
and bladder cancer among TT homozygotes in the same SNP. Bladder cancer cases
were also 60% less likely to be homozygotes for the A allele in rs1476413 in
MTHFR compared to controls (OR = 0.40; 95% CI = 0.18-0.88).
CONCLUSIONS: Variation in As3MT and MTHFR is associated with bladder cancer
among those exposed to relatively low concentrations of inorganic arsenic.
Further investigation is warranted to confirm these findings.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-069X-11-43
PMCID: PMC3465173
PMID: 22747749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
