---
reference_id: "PMID:29446472"
title: "Hantavirus induced cardiopulmonary syndrome: A public health concern."
authors:
- Llah ST
- Mir S
- Sharif S
- Khan S
- Mir MA
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.25054
keywords:
- Disease Management
- Early Diagnosis
- Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation
- Hantavirus Infections/complications
- "Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome/diagnosis, mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Hemofiltration
- Humans
- "Respiration, Artificial"
- "Shock, Cardiogenic/diagnosis, mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hantavirus induced cardiopulmonary syndrome: A public health concern.
**Authors:** Llah ST, Mir S, Sharif S, Khan S, Mir MA
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.25054](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25054)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2018 Jun;90(6):1003-1009. doi: 10.1002/jmv.25054. Epub 2018 Mar
15.

Hantavirus induced cardiopulmonary syndrome: A public health concern.

Llah ST(1), Mir S(2), Sharif S(3), Khan S(4), Mir MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Saint Joseph's Hospital Medical Center, Phoenix, Arizona.
(2)Applied BioCode, Santa Fe Springs, Calofornia.
(3)Mymensingh Medical College, Mymensingh, Bangladesh.
(4)University of Arkansas For Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arizona.

Hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome is characterized by pulmonary capillary 
leakage and alveolar flooding, resulting in 50% mortality due to fulminant 
hypoxic respiratory failure. In addition, depression of cardiac function ensues, 
which complicates the picture with cardiogenic shock. Early diagnosis and 
appropriate use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) are amongst the 
lifesaving interventions in this fatal illness. However, a recent case report 
demonstrates that implementation of high volume continuous hemofilteration along 
with protective ventilation reverses the cardiogenic shock within few hours in 
hantavirus infected patients. This review article is focused on the recent 
advances in clinical features, diagnosis, management, epidemiology, and 
pathogenesis of hantavirus induced cardiopulmonary syndrome. It provides 
information for clinicians to help in correct diagnosis during the early stages 
of viral infection that could improve the prognosis of this viral illness.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25054
PMID: 29446472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]