---
reference_id: "PMID:16458842"
title: Management of liver tumors in childhood.
authors:
- von Schweinitz D
journal: Semin Pediatr Surg
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2005.11.004
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Liver Diseases/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Liver Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of liver tumors in childhood.
**Authors:** von Schweinitz D
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Surg (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2005.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2005.11.004)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2006 Feb;15(1):17-24. doi:
10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2005.11.004.

Management of liver tumors in childhood.

von Schweinitz D(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Surgical Clinic, University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 
Dietrich.Schweinitz@med.uni-muenchen.de

Primary neoplasms of the liver occur rarely during childhood and constitute only 
0.3-2% of all pediatric tumors. However, they comprise a variety of entities 
including benign and malignant epithelial, as well as mesenchymal tumors, the 
most common of these being hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. Clinical 
presentation, especially in young children is relatively uniform with abdominal 
enlargement and a painless tumor, and often specific symptoms develop late. 
Prerequisites for clinical diagnosis are a comprehensive laboratory workup and 
good quality imaging mainly with ultrasound, as well as CT and/or MRI scans. 
Histological diagnosis is essential for differential diagnosis and may only be 
omitted in some hepatoblastoma patients of the typical age (6 months to 3 years) 
with an excessively elevated serum-alpha-fetoprotein. Surgery is the mainstay of 
treatment for all benign and malignant liver tumors. Hepatoblastomas mostly 
respond well to chemotherapy. Therefore, this modality should always be combined 
with surgical resection in these patients and in many cases can reduce the size 
of a large tumor to resectability. Prognosis nowadays usually is good in all 
benign tumors and hepatoblastoma, as well as in some other rare malignancies, 
but dismal in hepatocellular carcinoma and other chemotherapy non-sensitive 
malignant tumors.

DOI: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2005.11.004
PMID: 16458842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]