---
reference_id: "PMID:25129254"
title: "Pfeiffer syndrome: clinical and genetic findings in five Brazilian families."
authors:
- Júnior HM
- de Aquino SN
- Machado RA
- Leão LL
- Coletta RD
- Burle-Aguiar MJ
journal: Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal
year: '2015'
doi: 10.4317/medoral.20032
keywords:
- "Acrocephalosyndactylia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brazil
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pfeiffer syndrome: clinical and genetic findings in five Brazilian families.
**Authors:** Júnior HM, de Aquino SN, Machado RA, Leão LL, Coletta RD, Burle-Aguiar MJ
**Journal:** Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4317/medoral.20032](https://doi.org/10.4317/medoral.20032)

## Content

1. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2015 Jan 1;20(1):e52-8. doi:
10.4317/medoral.20032.

Pfeiffer syndrome: clinical and genetic findings in five Brazilian families.

Júnior HM(1), de Aquino SN, Machado RA, Leão LL, Coletta RD, Burle-Aguiar MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of
Campinas, CEP 13414-018, Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil,
sibeleaquino1@yahoo.com.br.

Pfeiffer syndrome (PS) is mainly characterized by craniosysnostosis, midface
hypoplasia, great toes with partial syndactyly of the digits, broad and medially
deviated thumbs. It is caused by allelic mutations in the fibroblast growth
factor receptor 1 and 2 (FGFR1 and 2) genes. This study describes the clinical
and genetic features of five Brazilian families affected by PS. All patients
exhibited the classical phenotypes related to PS. The genetic analysis was able
to detect the mutations Cys278Phe, Cys342Arg, and Val359Leu in three of these
families. Two mutations were de novo, with one familial. We identified
pathogenic mutations in four PS cases in five Brazilian families by PCR
sequencing of FGFR1 exon 5 and FGFR2 exons 5, 8, 10, 11, 15, and 16. The
clinical and genetic aspects of these families confirm that this syndrome can be
clinically variable, with different mutations in the FGFR2 responsible for PS.

DOI: 10.4317/medoral.20032
PMCID: PMC4320421
PMID: 25129254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors have
declared that no conflict of interest exist.
