---
reference_id: "PMID:26968981"
title: "Schizophrenia and reelin: a model based on prenatal stress to study epigenetics, brain development and behavior."
authors:
- Negrón-Oyarzo I
- Lara-Vásquez A
- Palacios-García I
- Fuentealba P
- Aboitiz F
journal: Biol Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s40659-016-0076-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schizophrenia and reelin: a model based on prenatal stress to study epigenetics, brain development and behavior.
**Authors:** Negrón-Oyarzo I, Lara-Vásquez A, Palacios-García I, Fuentealba P, Aboitiz F
**Journal:** Biol Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40659-016-0076-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40659-016-0076-5)

## Content

1. Biol Res. 2016 Mar 11;49:16. doi: 10.1186/s40659-016-0076-5.

Schizophrenia and reelin: a model based on prenatal stress to study epigenetics, 
brain development and behavior.

Negrón-Oyarzo I(1), Lara-Vásquez A(1), Palacios-García I(1), Fuentealba P(2), 
Aboitiz F(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Psiquiatría, Escuela de Medicina, and Centro 
Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.
(2)Departamento de Psiquiatría, Escuela de Medicina, and Centro 
Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile. pfuentealba@uc.cl.
(3)Departamento de Psiquiatría, Escuela de Medicina, and Centro 
Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile. faboitiz@puc.cl.

Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric disorder that results in a significant 
disability for the patient. The disorder is characterized by impairment of the 
adaptive orchestration of actions, a cognitive function that is mainly dependent 
on the prefrontal cortex. This behavioral deficit, together with cellular and 
neurophysiological alterations in the prefrontal cortex, as well as reduced 
density of GABAergic cells and aberrant oscillatory activity, all indicate 
structural and functional deficits of the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia. 
Among the several risk factors for the development of schizophrenia, stress 
during the prenatal period has been identified as crucial. Thus, it is proposed 
that prenatal stress induces neurodevelopmental alterations in the prefrontal 
cortex that are expressed as cognitive impairment observed in schizophrenia. 
However, the precise mechanisms that link prenatal stress with the impairment of 
prefrontal cortex function is largely unknown. Reelin is an extracellular matrix 
protein involved in the development of cortical neural connectivity at embryonic 
stages, and in synaptic plasticity at postnatal stages. Interestingly, 
down-regulation of reelin expression has been associated with epigenetic changes 
in the reelin gene of the prefrontal cortex of schizophrenic patients. We 
recently showed that, similar to schizophrenic patients, prenatal stress induces 
down-expression of reelin associated with the methylation of its promoter in the 
rodent prefrontal cortex. These alterations were paralleled with altered 
prefrontal cortex functional connectivity and impairment in prefrontal 
cortex-dependent behavioral tasks. Therefore, considering molecular, cellular, 
physiological and behavioral evidence, we propose a unifying framework that 
links prenatal stress and prefrontal malfunction through epigenetic alterations 
of the reelin gene.

DOI: 10.1186/s40659-016-0076-5
PMCID: PMC4787713
PMID: 26968981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]