---
reference_id: "PMID:39124764"
title: "IgA Nephropathy: Significance of IgA1-Containing Immune Complexes in Clinical Settings."
authors:
- Suzuki H
- Novak J
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13154495
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IgA Nephropathy: Significance of IgA1-Containing Immune Complexes in Clinical Settings.
**Authors:** Suzuki H, Novak J
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13154495](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13154495)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Aug 1;13(15):4495. doi: 10.3390/jcm13154495.

IgA Nephropathy: Significance of IgA1-Containing Immune Complexes in Clinical 
Settings.

Suzuki H(1), Novak J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital, 2-1-1 
Tomioka, Urayasu 279-0021, Chiba, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL 35294, USA.

IgA nephropathy (IgAN) is considered to be an autoimmune disease characterized 
by the formation of IgA1-containing immune complexes in the circulation and 
glomerular immunodeposits. Extensive research has identified multiple genetic, 
immunological, and environmental factors contributing to disease development and 
progression. The pathogenesis of IgAN is considered a multifactorial process 
involving the formation of immune complexes wherein aberrantly O-glycosylated 
IgA1 is recognized as an autoantigen. Consequently, the clinical presentation of 
IgAN is highly variable, with a wide spectrum of manifestations ranging from 
isolated microscopic hematuria or episodic macroscopic hematuria to 
nephrotic-range proteinuria. Whereas some patients may exhibit a slowly 
progressive form of IgAN, others may present with a rapidly progressive 
glomerulonephritis leading to kidney failure. Development of the treatment for 
IgAN requires an understanding of the characteristics of the pathogenic 
IgA1-containing immune complexes that enter the glomerular mesangium and induce 
kidney injury. However, not all details of the mechanisms involved in the 
production of galactose-deficient IgA1 and immune-complex formation are fully 
understood. Here, we review what we have learned about the characteristics of 
nephritogenic IgA1 in the half-century since the first description of IgAN in 
1968.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13154495
PMCID: PMC11313413
PMID: 39124764

Conflict of interest statement: J.N. and H.S. are co-inventors on US patent 
application 14/318,082 (assigned to UAB Research Foundation [UABRF] and licensed 
by UABRF to Reliant Glycosciences, LLC). J.N. is a co-founder and co-owner of 
and consultant for Reliant Glycosciences, LLC.