---
reference_id: "PMID:37682701"
title: European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society (ENETS) 2023 guidance paper for appendiceal neuroendocrine tumours (aNET).
authors:
- Kaltsas G
- Walter T
- Knigge U
- Toumpanakis C
- Santos AP
- Begum N
- Pape UF
- Volante M
- Frilling A
- Couvelard A
journal: J Neuroendocrinol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jne.13332
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/therapy, diagnosis"
- "Appendiceal Neoplasms/therapy, diagnosis"
- "Societies, Medical/standards"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic/standards
- Europe
content_type: abstract_only
---

# European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society (ENETS) 2023 guidance paper for appendiceal neuroendocrine tumours (aNET).
**Authors:** Kaltsas G, Walter T, Knigge U, Toumpanakis C, Santos AP, Begum N, Pape UF, Volante M, Frilling A, Couvelard A
**Journal:** J Neuroendocrinol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jne.13332](https://doi.org/10.1111/jne.13332)

## Content

1. J Neuroendocrinol. 2023 Oct;35(10):e13332. doi: 10.1111/jne.13332. Epub 2023
Sep  8.

European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society (ENETS) 2023 guidance paper for 
appendiceal neuroendocrine tumours (aNET).

Kaltsas G(1), Walter T(2), Knigge U(3), Toumpanakis C(4), Santos AP(5), Begum 
N(6), Pape UF(7), Volante M(8), Frilling A(9), Couvelard A(10).

Author information:
(1)1st Propaedeutic Department of Internal Medicine, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Edoard Herriot Hospital, Lyon, France.
(3)Departments of Surgery and Clinical Endocrinology, ENETS Centre of 
Excellence, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Neuroendocrine Tumour Unit, ENETS Centre of Excellence, Centre of 
Gastroenterology, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Portuguese Oncology Institute of Porto (IPO 
Porto), Porto Comprehensive Cancer Centre (P.CCC), Porto, Portugal.
(6)Department of General-, Visceral-, Thoracic- and Endocrine Surgery, Johannes 
Wesling Klinikum Minden, Minden, Germany.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, Asklepios Klinik St. 
Georg, Asklepios Tumorzentrum, Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Oncology, Pathology Unit, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(9)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(10)Department of Pathology-Bichat Hospital, AP-HP and Université Paris Cité, 
Paris, France.

The aim of the present guidance paper is to update the previous ENETS guidelines 
on well differentiated appendiceal neuroendocrine tumours (NET), providing 
practical guidance for the diagnosis and management of appendiceal NET (aNET); 
poorly differentiated neoplasms are dealt with in a separate guidance paper. 
This paper is structured on a question-answer format in order to also address 
controversial issues and areas where uncertainty regarding the management and 
follow-up of aNET exists. All recommendations are offered on the basis of the 
best available evidence, along with the authors' experiences in managing these 
neoplasms. Each recommendation for treatment will provide a level of evidence 
and grade of recommendation as per the GRADE system (adapted in Infectious 
Disease Society of United States Public Health Service grading system).

© 2023 British Society for Neuroendocrinology.

DOI: 10.1111/jne.13332
PMID: 37682701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]