---
reference_id: "PMID:19497603"
title: "[Chorea-acanthocytosis without acanthocytes]."
authors:
- Bayreuther C
- Borg M
- Ferrero-Vacher C
- Chaussenot A
- Lebrun C
journal: Rev Neurol (Paris)
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2009.03.005
keywords:
- Acanthocytes/pathology
- Adult
- "Blotting, Western"
- Brain/pathology
- "Chorea/genetics, pathology"
- Cognition Disorders/etiology
- "Dystonia/complications, pathology"
- Humans
- "Hyperkinesis/complications, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Movement Disorders/pathology
- Neostriatum/pathology
- Neurologic Examination
- Tongue/injuries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Chorea-acanthocytosis without acanthocytes].
**Authors:** Bayreuther C, Borg M, Ferrero-Vacher C, Chaussenot A, Lebrun C
**Journal:** Rev Neurol (Paris) (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurol.2009.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2009.03.005)

## Content

1. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2010 Jan;166(1):100-3. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2009.03.005. 
Epub 2009 Jun 3.

[Chorea-acanthocytosis without acanthocytes].

[Article in French]

Bayreuther C(1), Borg M, Ferrero-Vacher C, Chaussenot A, Lebrun C.

Author information:
(1)Service de neurologie, hôpital Pasteur, CHU de Nice, 30, voie Romaine, 06002 
Nice, France. bayreuther.c@chu-nice.fr

INTRODUCTION: Chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc) is one of the neuroacanthocytosis 
syndromes which form a group of disorders characterized by the association of 
neurological abnormalities and spiculated red blood cells called acanthocytes. 
ChAc patients exhibit involuntary movements, psychiatric abnormalities and 
progressive cognitive deterioration. We report a case of ChAc in which blood 
smears failed to demonstrate acanthocytes.
CASE REPORT: A 26-year-old man presented since two years with hyperkinetic 
movements. The family history was non contributive, parents were consanguineous. 
Neurological examination revealed choreatic hyperkinesia and dystonia, 
predominant in the orofacial region. Mild cognitive decline and behavior 
abnormalities were noted with repetitive activities. Brain MRI showed striatal 
atrophy. Molecular testing for Huntington's disease was negative. Routine 
biological screening was normal except for elevated CPK and LDH. Copper and 
ceruloplasmin blood levels were normal, as well as purine metabolism and 
lipoproteins. Further screening for metabolic diseases showed no significant 
abnormality. Expression of Kell antigens was normal. In several blood smears no 
acanthocytes were seen. Electromyographic studies showed slight neuropathic 
changes. Despite the absence of acanthocytes, chorein western blot was performed 
on blood samples which revealed an absent or markedly reduced level of chorein 
in erythrocyte membranes. A mutation of the ChAc gene was thus likely so the 
diagnosis of ChAc was retained. Genetic studies for VPS13A are pending.
DISCUSSION: ChAc is an autosomal recessive disorder due to mutations of the 
VPS13A gene coding for chorein. Absence or late appearance of acanthocytes in 
ChAc has been described in a few case reports. In conclusion ChAc is a rare 
disorder in which the presence of acanthocytes is not mandatory. In case of 
doubt, chorein western blot can be useful.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2009.03.005
PMID: 19497603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]