---
reference_id: "PMID:28244845"
title: "Incidence, 10-year recidivism rate and prognostic factors for cholesteatoma."
journal: J Laryngol Otol
year: "2017"
doi: 10.1017/S0022215117000299
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence, 10-year recidivism rate and prognostic factors for cholesteatoma.

## Content

Objective: Cholesteatoma patients have a high risk of recurrence with
complications, and knowledge exchange is a prerequisite for improving treatment.
This study aimed to apply appropriate statistics to provide meaningful and
transferable results from cholesteatoma surgery, to highlight independent
prognostic factors, and to assess the incidence rate.

Methods: Incidence rates were assessed for the district of Aarhus, Denmark. From
147 patients operated on mainly with canal wall up mastoidectomies for debuting
cholesteatomas, 10-year Kaplan-Meier recidivism rates were calculated and
independent prognostic factors for the recidivism were identified by Cox
multivariate regression analyses.

Results: Incidence rate was 6.8 per 100 000 per year. The 10-year cumulative
recidivism rate was 0.44 (95 per cent confidence interval, 0.37-0.53).
Independent prognostic factors for the recidivism were: age below 15 years
(hazard ratio = 2.2; p > z = 0.002), cholesteatoma localised to the mastoid
(hazard ratio = 1.7; p > z = 0.04), stapes erosion (hazard ratio = 1.9; p > z =
0.02) and incus erosion (hazard ratio = 1.9; p > z = 0.04).

Conclusion: The recidivism rate is influenced by several factors that are
important to observe, both in the clinic and when comparing results from
surgery.
