---
reference_id: "PMID:35928591"
title: "Joubert-Plus syndrome with an atretic cephalocele: a case report."
authors:
- Al-Smair A
- Younes S
- Saadeh A
- Kaoukji AR
- Jaber O
journal: Radiol Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2022.07.038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Joubert-Plus syndrome with an atretic cephalocele: a case report.
**Authors:** Al-Smair A, Younes S, Saadeh A, Kaoukji AR, Jaber O
**Journal:** Radiol Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.radcr.2022.07.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radcr.2022.07.038)

## Content

1. Radiol Case Rep. 2022 Jul 30;17(10):3630-3634. doi:
10.1016/j.radcr.2022.07.038.  eCollection 2022 Oct.

Joubert-Plus syndrome with an atretic cephalocele: a case report.

Al-Smair A(1), Younes S(2), Saadeh A(2), Kaoukji AR(2), Jaber O(3).

Author information:
(1)Medray International Radiology Center, Amman, Jordan.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, The University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Amman, 
Jordan.

Joubert syndrome is a rare heterogeneous disease affecting the cerebellum. It 
usually presents with hypotonia, abnormal breathing pattern, with distinctive 
cerebellar and brain stem malformation called the molar tooth sign. It may 
present with different organ involvement or with other neurological alterations 
such as Dandy-Walker syndrome. Joubert syndrome with dandy walker syndrome is 
called Joubert-Plus syndrome, an exceedingly rare entity. Dandy-Walker syndrome 
is defined by hypoplasia and upward rotation of the cerebellar vermis and cystic 
dilation of the fourth ventricle. Atretic cephalocele is another rare diagnosis 
which is characterized by a herniation of intracranial contents through a skull 
defect. Herein, we present a case of a 6-month-old patient who presented with 
floppiness and a scalp nodule. After further evaluation, he was diagnosed with 
Joubert-Plus syndrome with an atretic cephalocele.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of University of 
Washington.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2022.07.038
PMCID: PMC9343393
PMID: 35928591