---
reference_id: "PMID:31179301"
title: Neurologic impairment in Wilson disease.
authors:
- Dusek P
- Litwin T
- Członkowska A
journal: Ann Transl Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.21037/atm.2019.02.43
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurologic impairment in Wilson disease.
**Authors:** Dusek P, Litwin T, Członkowska A
**Journal:** Ann Transl Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.21037/atm.2019.02.43](https://doi.org/10.21037/atm.2019.02.43)

## Content

1. Ann Transl Med. 2019 Apr;7(Suppl 2):S64. doi: 10.21037/atm.2019.02.43.

Neurologic impairment in Wilson disease.

Dusek P(1)(2), Litwin T(3), Członkowska A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Center of Clinical Neuroscience, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital, Prague, Czechia.
(2)Department of Radiology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and 
General University Hospital, Prague, Czechia.
(3)2nd Department of Neurology, Institute Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, 
Poland.

Neurologic symptoms in Wilson disease (WD) appear at an older age compared to 
hepatic symptoms and manifest in patients with misdiagnosed liver disease, in 
patients when the hepatic stage is clinically silent, in the case of 
non-compliance with anti-copper treatment, or with treatment failure. Neurologic 
symptoms in WD are caused by nervous tissue damage that is primarily a 
consequence of extrahepatic copper toxicity. Copper levels in brain tissues as 
well as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are diffusely increased by a factor of 10 and 
its toxicity involves various mechanisms such as mitochondrial toxicity, 
oxidative stress, cell membrane damage, crosslinking of DNA, and inhibition of 
enzymes. Excess copper is initially taken-up and buffered by astrocytes and 
oligodendrocytes but ultimately causes dysfunction of blood-brain-barrier and 
demyelination. Most severe neuropathologic abnormalities, including tissue 
rarefaction, reactive astrogliosis, myelin palor, and presence of iron-laden 
macrophages, are typically present in the putamen while other basal ganglia, 
thalami, and brainstem are usually less affected. The most common neurologic 
symptoms of WD are movement disorders including tremor, dystonia, parkinsonism, 
ataxia and chorea which are associated with dysphagia, dysarthria and drooling. 
Patients usually manifest with various combinations of these symptoms while 
purely monosymptomatic presentation is rare. Neurologic symptoms are largely 
reversible with anti-copper treatment, but a significant number of patients are 
left with residual impairment. The approach for symptomatic treatment in WD is 
based on guidelines for management of common movement disorders. The vast 
majority of WD patients with neurologic symptoms have abnormalities on brain 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Pathologic MRI changes include T2 
hyperintensities in the basal ganglia, thalami and white matter, T2 
hypointensities in the basal ganglia, and atrophy. Most importantly, brain 
damage and neurologic symptoms can be prevented with an early initiation of 
anti-copper treatment. Introducing population WD screening, e.g., by exome 
sequencing genetic methods, would allow early treatment and decrease the 
neurologic burden of WD.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2019.02.43
PMCID: PMC6531649
PMID: 31179301

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.