---
reference_id: "PMID:40476377"
title: Research Review of Myhre Syndrome.
authors:
- Brand MR
- Monsberger R
- Hopkin RJ
- Lin AE
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.32145
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Research Review of Myhre Syndrome.
**Authors:** Brand MR, Monsberger R, Hopkin RJ, Lin AE
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.32145](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.32145)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2025 Jun 6:e32145. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.32145.  Online ahead of print.

Research Review of Myhre Syndrome.

Brand MR(1), Monsberger R(2), Hopkin RJ(2), Lin AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Mass General for Children, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

This research review of Myhre syndrome is a summary of published articles which 
provide a valuable resource for readers, researchers, and future authors. It 
traces the evolution of the Laryngotracheal-Arthropathy-Prognathism-Short 
Stature (LAPS) syndrome to the current eponym of Myhre syndrome. These allelic 
disorders are caused by pathogenic variants in SMAD4. After the initial report 
over 40 years ago, the steady publication of case reports and small series was 
accelerated following the discovery of the pathogenic variants in SMAD4. The 
articles in this review include numerous case reports and small series, reports 
about basic science, the discovery of the causative gene, the emergence of the 
natural history in larger studies, and articles about specific features, 
especially the cardiovascular system and airways. We hope this analysis provides 
a foundation for future research that may extend symptom-based treatment to 
genetic-based therapy.

© 2025 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.32145
PMID: 40476377