---
reference_id: "PMID:32621590"
title: "Osteogenesis imperfecta: an update on clinical features and therapies."
authors:
- Marom R
- Rabenhorst BM
- Morello R
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1530/EJE-20-0299
keywords:
- Animals
- "Endocrinology/methods, trends"
- "Fractures, Bone/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Humans
- Osteogenesis/physiology
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta: an update on clinical features and therapies.
**Authors:** Marom R, Rabenhorst BM, Morello R
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EJE-20-0299](https://doi.org/10.1530/EJE-20-0299)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2020 Oct;183(4):R95-R106. doi: 10.1530/EJE-20-0299.

Osteogenesis imperfecta: an update on clinical features and therapies.

Marom R(1)(2), Rabenhorst BM(3), Morello R(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(4)Division of Genetics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(5)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is an inherited skeletal dysplasia characterized by 
bone fragility and skeletal deformities. While the majority of cases are 
associated with pathogenic variants in COL1A1 and COL1A2, the genes encoding 
type I collagen, up to 25% of cases are associated with other genes that 
function within the collagen biosynthesis pathway or are involved in osteoblast 
differentiation and bone mineralization. Clinically, OI is heterogeneous in 
features and variable in severity. In addition to the skeletal findings, it can 
affect multiple systems including dental and craniofacial abnormalities, muscle 
weakness, hearing loss, respiratory and cardiovascular complications. A 
multi-disciplinary approach to care is recommended to address not only the 
fractures, reduced mobility, growth and bone pain but also other extra-skeletal 
manifestations. While bisphosphonates remain the mainstay of treatment in OI, 
new strategies are being explored, such as sclerostin inhibitory antibodies and 
TGF beta inhibition, to address not only the low bone mineral density but also 
the inherent bone fragility. Studies in animal models have expanded the 
understanding of pathomechanisms of OI and, along with ongoing clinical trials, 
will allow to develop better therapeutic approaches for these patients.

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-20-0299
PMCID: PMC7694877
PMID: 32621590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.