---
reference_id: "PMID:25400828"
title: Role of endometrial cancer abnormal MMR protein in screening Lynch-syndrome families.
authors:
- Long Q
- Peng Y
- Tang Z
- Wu C
journal: Int J Clin Exp Pathol
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of endometrial cancer abnormal MMR protein in screening Lynch-syndrome families.
**Authors:** Long Q, Peng Y, Tang Z, Wu C
**Journal:** Int J Clin Exp Pathol (2014)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):7297-303. eCollection 2014.

Role of endometrial cancer abnormal MMR protein in screening Lynch-syndrome 
families.

Long Q(1), Peng Y(2), Tang Z(1), Wu C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology Nanchong Central Hospital, North Sichuan Medical 
University Nanchong 637000, Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics Nanchong Central Hospital, North 
Sichuan Medical University Nanchong 637000, Sichuan, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify patients with endometrial cancer with potential 
Lynch-related DNA mismatch repair (MMR) protein expression defects and to 
explore the role of these defects in screening for LS.
METHODS: Endometrial cancers from 173 patients recruited to the Nanchong Central 
Hospital were tested for MMR (MLH1, MSH2, PMS2, and MSH6) protein expression 
using immunohistochemistry (IHC).
RESULTS: In the 173 tumor tissue samples, the expression loss rates of MSH6, 
MSH2, PMS2 and MLH1 protein were 16.18% (28/173), 12.14% (21/173), 7.51% 
(13/173) and 5.78% (10/173), respectively. The total loss rate of MMR protein 
was 29.89% (27/87). There were 19 patients with a family history of cancer, of 
which 18 patients demonstrated loss of expression of MMR protein. In the 22 
abnormal MMR patients without family history, five families were found to have 
Lynch-associated cancer (colorectal cancer, endometrial cancer, ovarian cancer, 
stomach cancer) after follow-up for two years.
CONCLUSION: MMR proteins play an important role in the progress of endometrial 
cancer. The routine testing of MMR proteins in endometrial cancer can contribute 
to the screening of LS families, especially small families.

PMCID: PMC4230086
PMID: 25400828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]