---
reference_id: "PMID:18394562"
title: Symptomatic treatment of Huntington disease.
authors:
- Adam OR
- Jankovic J
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2008.01.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Symptomatic treatment of Huntington disease.
**Authors:** Adam OR, Jankovic J
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nurt.2008.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nurt.2008.01.008)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2008 Apr;5(2):181-97. doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2008.01.008.

Symptomatic treatment of Huntington disease.

Adam OR(1), Jankovic J.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease Center and Movement Disorders Clinic, Department of 
Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Huntington disease (HD) is a progressive heredoneurodegenerative disease 
manifested by chorea and other hyperkinetic (dystonia, myoclonus, tics) and 
hypokinetic (parkinsonism) movement disorders. In addition, a variety of 
psychiatric and behavioral symptoms, along with cognitive decline, contribute 
significantly to the patient's disability. Because there are no effective 
neuroprotective therapies that delay the progression of the disease, symptomatic 
treatment remains the cornerstone of medical management. Several classes of 
medications have been used to ameliorate the various symptoms of HD, including 
typical and atypical neuroleptics, dopamine depleters, antidepressants, 
antiglutamatergic drugs, GABA agonists, antiepileptic medications, 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, and botulinum toxin. Recently, surgical 
approaches including pallidotomy, deep brain stimulation, and fetal cell 
transplants have been used for the symptomatic treatment of HD. The selected 
therapy must be customized to the needs of each patient, minimizing the 
potential adverse effects. The primary aim of this article is to review the role 
of the different therapies, both available and investigational, for the 
treatment of the motor, psychiatric, behavioral, and cognitive symptoms of HD, 
and to examine their impact on the patient's functionality and quality of life.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nurt.2008.01.008
PMCID: PMC5084162
PMID: 18394562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]