---
reference_id: "PMID:10330342"
title: "The spectrum of mutations in TBX3: Genotype/Phenotype relationship in ulnar-mammary syndrome."
authors:
- Bamshad M
- Le T
- Watkins WS
- Dixon ME
- Kramer BE
- Roeder AD
- Carey JC
- Root S
- Schinzel A
- Van Maldergem L
- Gardner RJ
- Lin RC
- Seidman CE
- Seidman JG
- Wallerstein R
- Moran E
- Sutphen R
- Campbell CE
- Jorde LB
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1086/302417
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The spectrum of mutations in TBX3: Genotype/Phenotype relationship in ulnar-mammary syndrome.
**Authors:** Bamshad M, Le T, Watkins WS, Dixon ME, Kramer BE, Roeder AD, Carey JC, Root S, Schinzel A, Van Maldergem L, Gardner RJ, Lin RC, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, Wallerstein R, Moran E, Sutphen R, Campbell CE, Jorde LB
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302417](https://doi.org/10.1086/302417)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Jun;64(6):1550-62. doi: 10.1086/302417.

The spectrum of mutations in TBX3: Genotype/Phenotype relationship in 
ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Bamshad M(1), Le T, Watkins WS, Dixon ME, Kramer BE, Roeder AD, Carey JC, Root 
S, Schinzel A, Van Maldergem L, Gardner RJ, Lin RC, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, 
Wallerstein R, Moran E, Sutphen R, Campbell CE, Jorde LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Eccles Institute of Human Genetics, 15 North 2030 
East, Room 2100, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5330, USA 
mike@genetics.utah.edu.

Ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) is a pleiotropic disorder affecting limb, 
apocrine-gland, tooth, hair, and genital development. Mutations that disrupt the 
DNA-binding domain of the T-box gene, TBX3, have been demonstrated to cause UMS. 
However, the 3' terminus of the open reading frame (ORF) of TBX3 was not 
identified, and mutations were detected in only two families with UMS. 
Furthermore, no substantial homology outside the T-box was found among TBX3 and 
its orthologues. The subsequent cloning of new TBX3 cDNAs allowed us to complete 
the characterization of TBX3 and to identify alternatively transcribed TBX3 
transcripts, including one that interrupts the T-box. The complete ORF of TBX3 
is predicted to encode a 723-residue protein, of which 255 amino acids are 
encoded by newly identified exons. Comparison of other T-box genes to TBX3 
indicates regions of substantial homology outside the DNA-binding domain. Novel 
mutations have been found in all of eight newly reported families with UMS, 
including five mutations downstream of the region encoding the T-box. This 
suggests that a domain(s) outside the T-box is highly conserved and important 
for the function of TBX3. We found no obvious phenotypic differences between 
those who have missense mutations and those who have deletions or frameshifts.

DOI: 10.1086/302417
PMCID: PMC1377898
PMID: 10330342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]