---
reference_id: "PMID:24195090"
title: "Pediatric parvovirus B19: spectrum of clinical manifestations."
authors:
- Valentin MN
- Cohen PJ
journal: Cutis
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric parvovirus B19: spectrum of clinical manifestations.
**Authors:** Valentin MN, Cohen PJ
**Journal:** Cutis (2013)

## Content

1. Cutis. 2013 Oct;92(4):179-84.

Pediatric parvovirus B19: spectrum of clinical manifestations.

Valentin MN(1), Cohen PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, New Jersey Medical School, 185 South Orange Ave, 
Room H-576, Newark, NJ 07103-2714, USA. Philip.Cohen@va.gov.

Parvovirus B19 (PVB19) infection has a varied spectrum of clinical 
manifestations, ranging from subclinical infection to skin and joint symptoms to 
hematologic effects with potential fatality. The most common manifestation of 
PVB19 infection in children is erythema infectiosum (EI). Also known as fifth 
disease or slapped cheek syndrome, EI presents as an erythematous exanthem 
limited to the malar eminences that follows a mild prodromal illness. In healthy 
children, infection is selflimiting and has an excellent prognosis; however, in 
high-risk pediatric groups (eg, immunocompromised patients, children with 
hemolytic anemia or prenatal infection), clinical manifestations are hematologic 
in nature and typically are more severe. Diagnosis often is made clinically. 
Serologic testing can be confirmatory. Treatment is aimed at symptomatic relief, 
and a vaccine currently is under investigation.

PMID: 24195090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]