---
reference_id: "PMID:30642913"
title: Immunotherapy for the First-Line Treatment of Patients with Metastatic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Martinez P
- Peters S
- Stammers T
- Soria JC
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3904
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Immunological/therapeutic use"
- "B7-H1 Antigen/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, immunology, secondary"
- Humans
- Immunotherapy/methods
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunotherapy for the First-Line Treatment of Patients with Metastatic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Martinez P, Peters S, Stammers T, Soria JC
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3904](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3904)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2019 May 1;25(9):2691-2698. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3904.  Epub 2019 Jan 14.

Immunotherapy for the First-Line Treatment of Patients with Metastatic Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer.

Martinez P(1), Peters S(2), Stammers T(3), Soria JC(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Development Oncology, MedImmune, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
martinezp@medimmune.com.
(2)Department of Oncology, University Hospital of Lausanne (CHUV), Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(3)Research & Development, MedImmune, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(4)Université Paris-Sud, Orsay, France.

Immunotherapy has fundamentally changed the treatment landscape for many
patients with cancer. mAbs targeting programmed cell death-1 (PD-1), programmed
cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1), and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen-4
immune checkpoints have received regulatory approval across a wide range of
tumor types, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Indeed, treatment
approaches for a majority of patients with newly diagnosed metastatic NSCLC are
evolving rapidly. Only for the small proportion of patients with metastatic
NSCLC and genomic-driven tumors with EGFR or anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK)-sensitizing mutations (5%-15%), and possibly BRAF mutations and ROS
rearrangements, have initial treatment recommendations remained unchanged, with
specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors as the preferred therapy. For the remaining
patients, an immunotherapy-based regimen alone or in combination with
chemotherapy is now the preferred option based on high-level evidence obtained
from randomized controlled trials and in accordance with all available
guidelines. Deciding between therapeutic options can be difficult due to the
lack of direct cross-comparison studies, differences in chemotherapies and
stratification factors, and differences in study populations resulting from
inclusion criteria such as histology, PD-L1 expression, or tumor mutational
burden (TMB). In an attempt to aid the decision-making process, we discuss and
summarize the most recent data from studies using immunotherapies for the
treatment of patients with previously untreated metastatic NSCLC.

©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3904
PMID: 30642913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
