---
reference_id: "PMID:38375075"
title: "Challenges in the Early Diagnosis and Treatment of Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy in Adults: Current Perspectives."
authors:
- van Doorn IN
- Eftimov F
- Wieske L
- van Schaik IN
- Verhamme C
journal: Ther Clin Risk Manag
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S360249
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Challenges in the Early Diagnosis and Treatment of Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy in Adults: Current Perspectives.
**Authors:** van Doorn IN, Eftimov F, Wieske L, van Schaik IN, Verhamme C
**Journal:** Ther Clin Risk Manag (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2147/TCRM.S360249](https://doi.org/10.2147/TCRM.S360249)

## Content

1. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2024 Feb 14;20:111-126. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S360249. 
eCollection 2024.

Challenges in the Early Diagnosis and Treatment of Chronic Inflammatory 
Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy in Adults: Current Perspectives.

van Doorn IN(1), Eftimov F(1), Wieske L(1)(2), van Schaik IN(1)(3), Verhamme 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, Amsterdam Neuroscience 
and University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, location AMC, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Sint Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, 
the Netherlands.
(3)Sanquin Blood Supply Foundation, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Diagnosing Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy (CIDP) poses 
numerous challenges. The heterogeneous presentations of CIDP variants, its 
mimics, and the complexity of interpreting electrodiagnostic criteria are just a 
few of the many reasons for misdiagnoses. Early recognition and treatment are 
important to reduce the risk of irreversible axonal damage, which may lead to 
permanent disability. The diagnosis of CIDP is based on a combination of 
clinical symptoms, nerve conduction study findings that indicate demyelination, 
and other supportive criteria. In 2021, the European Academy of Neurology (EAN) 
and the Peripheral Nerve Society (PNS) published a revision on the most widely 
adopted guideline on the diagnosis and treatment of CIDP. This updated guideline 
now includes clinical and electrodiagnostic criteria for CIDP variants 
(previously termed atypical CIDP), updated supportive criteria, and sensory 
criteria as an integral part of the electrodiagnostic criteria. Due to its many 
rules and exceptions, this guideline is complex and misinterpretation of nerve 
conduction study findings remain common. CIDP is treatable with intravenous 
immunoglobulins, corticosteroids, and plasma exchange. The choice of therapy 
should be tailored to the individual patient's situation, taking into account 
the severity of symptoms, potential side effects, patient autonomy, and past 
treatments. Treatment responses should be evaluated as objectively as possible 
using disability and impairment scales. Applying these outcome measures 
consistently in clinical practice aids in recognizing the effectiveness (or lack 
thereof) of a treatment and facilitates timely consideration of alternative 
diagnoses or treatments. This review provides an overview of the current 
perspectives on the diagnostic process and first-line treatments for managing 
the disease.

© 2024 van Doorn et al.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S360249
PMCID: PMC10875175
PMID: 38375075

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Filip Eftimov reports consultancy fees, paid 
to the institution from Dianthus, UCB Pharma, and Takeda, outside the submitted 
work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.