---
reference_id: "PMID:38453957"
title: Alkaptonuria.
authors:
- Bernardini G
- Braconi D
- Zatkova A
- Sireau N
- Kujawa MJ
- Introne WJ
- Spiga O
- Geminiani M
- Gallagher JA
- Ranganath LR
- Santucci A
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00498-x
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- "Alkaptonuria/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Quality of Life
- "Ochronosis/complications, diagnosis"
- Kidney/metabolism
- Homogentisic Acid/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alkaptonuria.
**Authors:** Bernardini G, Braconi D, Zatkova A, Sireau N, Kujawa MJ, Introne WJ, Spiga O, Geminiani M, Gallagher JA, Ranganath LR, Santucci A
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-024-00498-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-024-00498-x)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2024 Mar 7;10(1):16. doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00498-x.

Alkaptonuria.

Bernardini G(1), Braconi D(2), Zatkova A(3)(4), Sireau N(5), Kujawa MJ(6),
Introne WJ(7), Spiga O(2), Geminiani M(2), Gallagher JA(8), Ranganath LR(8)(9),
Santucci A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy. giulia.bernardini@unisi.it.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy.
(3)Institute of Clinical and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Center
of the Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(4)Geneton Ltd, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(5)AKU Society, Cambridge, UK.
(6)2nd Department of Radiology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(7)Human Biochemical Genetics Section, Medical Genetics Branch, Office of the
Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)Department of Musculoskeletal and Ageing Science, Institute of Life Course
and Medical Sciences University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(9)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolic Medicine, Royal Liverpool
University Hospital, Liverpool, UK.

Alkaptonuria is a rare inborn error of metabolism caused by the deficiency of
homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase activity. The consequent homogentisic acid (HGA)
accumulation in body fluids and tissues leads to a multisystemic and highly
debilitating disease whose main features are dark urine, ochronosis (HGA-derived
pigment in collagen-rich connective tissues), and a painful and severe form of
osteoarthropathy. Other clinical manifestations are extremely variable and
include kidney and prostate stones, aortic stenosis, bone fractures, and tendon,
ligament and/or muscle ruptures. As an autosomal recessive disorder,
alkaptonuria affects men and women equally. Debilitating symptoms appear around
the third decade of life, but a proper and timely diagnosis is often delayed due
to their non-specific nature and a lack of knowledge among physicians. In later
stages, patients' quality of life might be seriously compromised and further
complicated by comorbidities. Thus, appropriate management of alkaptonuria
requires a multidisciplinary approach, and periodic clinical evaluation is
advised to monitor disease progression, complications and/or comorbidities, and
to enable prompt intervention. Treatment options are patient-tailored and
include a combination of medications, physical therapy and surgery. Current
basic and clinical research focuses on improving patient management and
developing innovative therapies and implementing precision medicine strategies.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-024-00498-x
PMID: 38453957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
