---
reference_id: "PMID:20539841"
title: "Heart rate control with adrenergic blockade: clinical outcomes in cardiovascular medicine."
authors:
- Feldman D
- Elton TS
- Menachemi DM
- Wexler RK
journal: Vasc Health Risk Manag
year: '2010'
doi: 10.2147/vhrm.s10358
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heart rate control with adrenergic blockade: clinical outcomes in cardiovascular medicine.
**Authors:** Feldman D, Elton TS, Menachemi DM, Wexler RK
**Journal:** Vasc Health Risk Manag (2010)
**DOI:** [10.2147/vhrm.s10358](https://doi.org/10.2147/vhrm.s10358)

## Content

1. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2010 Jun 1;6:387-97. doi: 10.2147/vhrm.s10358.

Heart rate control with adrenergic blockade: clinical outcomes in cardiovascular 
medicine.

Feldman D(1), Elton TS, Menachemi DM, Wexler RK.

Author information:
(1)Heart Failure/Transplant and VAD Programs, Minneapolis Heart Institute, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55407, USA. dfeldman@mplsheart.com

The sympathetic nervous system is involved in regulating various cardiovascular 
parameters including heart rate (HR) and HR variability. Aberrant sympathetic 
nervous system expression may result in elevated HR or decreased HR variability, 
and both are independent risk factors for development of cardiovascular disease, 
including heart failure, myocardial infarction, and hypertension. Epidemiologic 
studies have established that impaired HR control is linked to increased 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. One successful way of decreasing HR and 
cardiovascular mortality has been by utilizing beta-blockers, because their 
ability to alter cell signaling at the receptor level has been shown to mitigate 
the pathogenic effects of sympathetic nervous system hyperactivation. Numerous 
clinical studies have demonstrated that beta-blocker-mediated HR control 
improvements are associated with decreased mortality in postinfarct and heart 
failure patients. Although improved HR control benefits have yet to be 
established in hypertension, both traditional and vasodilating beta-blockers 
exert positive HR control effects in this patient population. However, 
differences exist between traditional and vasodilating beta-blockers; the latter 
reduce peripheral vascular resistance and exert neutral or positive effects on 
important metabolic parameters. Clinical evidence suggests that attainment of HR 
control is an important treatment objective for patients with cardiovascular 
conditions, and vasodilating beta-blocker efficacy may aid in accomplishing 
improved outcomes.

DOI: 10.2147/vhrm.s10358
PMCID: PMC2882891
PMID: 20539841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]