---
reference_id: "PMID:19681132"
title: Molecular aspects of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
authors:
- Mikkola ML
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32855
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, pathology"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia, Hypohidrotic, Autosomal Recessive"
- "Ectodysplasins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Edar Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Edar-Associated Death Domain Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- "Hypohidrosis/genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- Mutation
- "NF-kappa B/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular aspects of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Mikkola ML
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.32855](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32855)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Sep;149A(9):2031-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32855.

Molecular aspects of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.

Mikkola ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Institute of Biotechnology, University of 
Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland. marja.mikkola@helsinki.fi

Hypohidrotic (anhidrotic) ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a congenital syndrome 
characterized by sparse hair, oligodontia, and reduced sweating. It is caused by 
mutations in any of the three Eda pathway genes: ectodysplasin (Eda), Edar, and 
Edaradd which encode a ligand, a receptor, and an intracellular signal mediator 
of a single linear pathway, respectively. In rare cases, HED is associated with 
immune deficiency caused by mutations in further downstream components of the 
Eda pathway that are necessary for the activation of the transcription factor 
NF-kappaB. Here I present a brief research update on the molecular aspects of 
this evolutionarily conserved pathway. The developmental role of Eda will be 
discussed in light of loss- and gain-of-function mouse models with emphasis on 
the past few years.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32855
PMID: 19681132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]