---
reference_id: "PMID:28676215"
title: Identification of a novel T1151K ALK mutation in a patient with ALK-rearranged NSCLC with prior exposure to crizotinib and ceritinib.
authors:
- Zhu VW
- Cui JJ
- Fernandez-Rocha M
- Schrock AB
- Ali SM
- Ou SI
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2017.05.018
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Crizotinib
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Conformation
- Mutation
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Pyrazoles/chemistry, therapeutic use"
- "Pyridines/chemistry, therapeutic use"
- "Pyrimidines/chemistry, therapeutic use"
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/chemistry, genetics"
- "Sulfones/chemistry, therapeutic use"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a novel T1151K ALK mutation in a patient with ALK-rearranged NSCLC with prior exposure to crizotinib and ceritinib.
**Authors:** Zhu VW, Cui JJ, Fernandez-Rocha M, Schrock AB, Ali SM, Ou SI
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2017.05.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2017.05.018)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2017 Aug;110:32-34. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2017.05.018. Epub 2017
 May 22.

Identification of a novel T1151K ALK mutation in a patient with ALK-rearranged 
NSCLC with prior exposure to crizotinib and ceritinib.

Zhu VW(1), Cui JJ(2), Fernandez-Rocha M(3), Schrock AB(4), Ali SM(4), Ou SI(4).

Author information:
(1)Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Hematology/Oncology, 
Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine School of Medicine, 
Orange, CA, USA; Hematology/Oncology Section, Veterans Affairs Long Beach 
Healthcare System, Long Beach, CA, USA. Electronic address: zhuvw@uci.edu.
(2)TP Therapeutics, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Hematology/Oncology, 
Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine School of Medicine, 
Orange, CA, USA.
(4)Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.

Patients with anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-rearranged non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) derive significant clinic benefit from treatment with ALK 
inhibitors. Crizotinib was the first approved tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) 
for this distinct molecular subset of NSCLC. Disease progression on TKI 
inevitably arises secondary to diverse resistance mechanisms among which 
emergence of secondary ALK mutations is one of many ways in which tumor cells 
have adapted to survive. Therefore there is a clinical imperative to identify 
acquired ALK mutations via repeat tissue biopsy if clinically feasible. If such 
is present, switching to a different TKI with known clinical activities against 
the emergent resistance mutation (s) may pose a viable treatment option. Here we 
report for the first time a novel ALK T1151K mutation in a patient with 
metastatic ALK-rearranged NSCLC who progressed on crizotinib and then ceritinib. 
The co-crystal structure of ceritinib/ALK demonstrates a strong interaction 
between ceritinib and the P-loop which is facilitated by T1151 on the β3 sheet, 
a feature not present in the alectinib/ALK or lorlatinib/ALK co-crystal 
structure. It is predicated that the T1151K mutation weakens these interactions 
leading to drug resistance, or causes conformational changes of the ALK 
catalytic domain resulting in higher affinity for ATP and therefore diminished 
inhibitor binding. We conclude that the T1151K ALK mutation confers resistance 
to ceritinib, which may be rescued by alectinib or lorlatinib as evidenced by 
this clinical narrative.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2017.05.018
PMID: 28676215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]