---
reference_id: "PMID:16188485"
title: "Spindle cells and their role in Kaposi's sarcoma."
authors:
- Gessain A
- Duprez R
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2005.01.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spindle cells and their role in Kaposi's sarcoma.
**Authors:** Gessain A, Duprez R
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2005.01.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2005.01.018)

## Content

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;37(12):2457-65. doi: 
10.1016/j.biocel.2005.01.018. Epub 2005 Aug 1.

Spindle cells and their role in Kaposi's sarcoma.

Gessain A(1), Duprez R.

Author information:
(1)Unité d'Epidémiologie et Physiopathologie des Virus Oncogènes, Département 
des Ecosytèmes et Epidémiologie des Maladies Infectieuses, Paris Cédex 15, 
France. agessain@pasteur.fr

Spindle cells represent the main cell type of the advanced final nodular stage 
of Kaposi's sarcoma lesions. Despite some clinical and epidemiological 
differences, the four Kaposi's sarcoma forms (classic, endemic, post-transplant 
and epidemic) display very similar histopathological features, with the 
proliferation of spindle cells (considered as the Kaposi's sarcoma tumor cells) 
associated with inflammation and neo-angiogenesis. Electron-microscopy and 
immuno-histochemistry studies have led to the consensus that the spindle cells 
originated from the endothelial lineage. However, only recently, studies that 
used specific lymphatic immunological markers (such as podoplanin) and molecular 
features (gene expression microarrays) strongly linked Kaposi's sarcoma spindle 
cells to the endothelium lymphatic cell lineage. Both hybridization and 
immuno-histochemistry techniques have demonstrated that human herpesvirus 8 also 
known as Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus was present in spindle cells at 
all stages of the disease (patch, plaque, nodule). Interestingly, while the 
human herpesvirus 8 latent genes are expressed in nearly all tumor spindle 
cells, only a small fraction of them expresses markers of viral lytic 
replication. Recent findings showing that nodular Kaposi's sarcoma lesions 
display all patterns of human herpesvirus 8 clonality support the model 
according to which this tumor begins as a polyclonal disease with a subsequent 
evolution to a mono/oligoclonal process involving infected spindle cells. 
Spindle cells appear to be the central masterpiece in KS tumorigenesis, however 
the exact respective role of each human herpesvirus 8 gene, in the initiation 
and the disease progression is still under investigation and the question of 
whether or not this tumor is a reactive process or a true malignant 
proliferation of spindle cells remains yet unclear.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2005.01.018
PMID: 16188485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]