---
reference_id: "PMID:38424297"
title: Loss-of-function of activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) by a splice-acceptor site mutation causes Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome.
authors:
- "D'Incal CP"
- Annear DJ
- Elinck E
- van der Smagt JJ
- Alders M
- Dingemans AJM
- Mateiu L
- de Vries BBA
- Vanden Berghe W
- Kooy RF
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01556-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Child, Preschool"
- RNA Splice Sites
- HEK293 Cells
- Loss of Function Mutation
- DNA Methylation
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, pathology"
- "Autistic Disorder/genetics, pathology"
- Autism Spectrum Disorder
- Heart Diseases
- Facies
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss-of-function of activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) by a splice-acceptor site mutation causes Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome.
**Authors:** D'Incal CP, Annear DJ, Elinck E, van der Smagt JJ, Alders M, Dingemans AJM, Mateiu L, de Vries BBA, Vanden Berghe W, Kooy RF
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-024-01556-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-024-01556-4)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2024 Jun;32(6):630-638. doi: 10.1038/s41431-024-01556-4. Epub
 2024 Feb 29.

Loss-of-function of activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) by a 
splice-acceptor site mutation causes Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome.

D'Incal CP(1)(2), Annear DJ(1), Elinck E(1), van der Smagt JJ(3), Alders M(4), 
Dingemans AJM(5)(6), Mateiu L(1), de Vries BBA(5), Vanden Berghe W(7), Kooy 
RF(8).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Genetics (CONGET), Centre for Medical Genetics (CMG), Department of 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium Department of 
Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Protein Chemistry, Proteomics and Epigenetic Signaling (PPES), Department of 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Division of Laboratories, Pharmacy and Biomedical Genetics, Section Clinical 
Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, the Netherlands and 
Rijksuniversiteit Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam Reproduction & Development Research 
Institute, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Artificial Intelligence, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Protein Chemistry, Proteomics and Epigenetic Signaling (PPES), Department of 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. 
wim.vandenberghe@uantwerpen.be.
(8)Cognitive Genetics (CONGET), Centre for Medical Genetics (CMG), Department of 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium Department of 
Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium. frank.kooy@uantwerpen.be.

Mutations in ADNP result in Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome. Here, we describe 
the first de novo intronic deletion, affecting the splice-acceptor site of the 
first coding ADNP exon in a five-year-old girl with developmental delay and 
autism. Whereas exome sequencing failed to detect the non-coding deletion, 
genome-wide CpG methylation analysis revealed an episignature suggestive of a 
Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome diagnosis. This diagnosis was further supported 
by PhenoScore, a novel facial recognition software package. Subsequent 
whole-genome sequencing resolved the three-base pair ADNP deletion 
c.[-5-1_-4del] with transcriptome sequencing showing this deletion leads to 
skipping of exon 4. An N-terminal truncated protein could not be detected in 
transfection experiments with a mutant expression vector in HEK293T cells, 
strongly suggesting this is a first confirmed diagnosis exclusively due to 
haploinsufficiency of the ADNP gene. Pathway analysis of the methylome indicated 
differentially methylated genes involved in brain development, the cytoskeleton, 
locomotion, behavior, and muscle development. Along the same line, transcriptome 
analysis identified most of the differentially expressed genes as upregulated, 
in line with the hypomethylated CpG episignature and confirmed the involvement 
of the cytoskeleton and muscle development pathways that are also affected in 
patient cell lines and animal models. In conclusion, this novel mutation for the 
first time demonstrates that Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome can be caused by a 
loss-of-function mutation. Moreover, our study elegantly illustrates the use of 
EpiSignatures, WGS and Phenoscore as novel complementary diagnostic tools in 
case a of negative WES result.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Human 
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-024-01556-4
PMCID: PMC11153555
PMID: 38424297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.