---
reference_id: "PMID:15917292"
title: Lowe syndrome protein OCRL1 interacts with clathrin and regulates protein trafficking between endosomes and the trans-Golgi network.
authors:
- Choudhury R
- Diao A
- Zhang F
- Eisenberg E
- Saint-Pol A
- Williams C
- Konstantakopoulos A
- Lucocq J
- Johannes L
- Rabouille C
- Greene LE
- Lowe M
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-02-0120
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Line
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Clathrin/metabolism
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- "Endosomes/drug effects, metabolism"
- Humans
- Membrane Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/genetics
- "Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Transport
- RNA Interference
- "Receptor, IGF Type 2/metabolism"
- Shiga Toxin/pharmacology
- "trans-Golgi Network/drug effects, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lowe syndrome protein OCRL1 interacts with clathrin and regulates protein trafficking between endosomes and the trans-Golgi network.
**Authors:** Choudhury R, Diao A, Zhang F, Eisenberg E, Saint-Pol A, Williams C, Konstantakopoulos A, Lucocq J, Johannes L, Rabouille C, Greene LE, Lowe M
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e05-02-0120](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e05-02-0120)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Aug;16(8):3467-79. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-02-0120. Epub 2005
 May 25.

Lowe syndrome protein OCRL1 interacts with clathrin and regulates protein
trafficking between endosomes and the trans-Golgi network.

Choudhury R(1), Diao A, Zhang F, Eisenberg E, Saint-Pol A, Williams C,
Konstantakopoulos A, Lucocq J, Johannes L, Rabouille C, Greene LE, Lowe M.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT,
United Kingdom.

Oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe is caused by mutation of OCRL1, a
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 5-phosphatase localized at the Golgi
apparatus. The cellular role of OCRL1 is unknown, and consequently the mechanism
by which loss of OCRL1 function leads to disease is ill defined. Here, we show
that OCRL1 is associated with clathrin-coated transport intermediates operating
between the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and endosomes. OCRL1 interacts directly
with clathrin heavy chain and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro. Interaction
with clathrin is not, however, required for membrane association of OCRL1.
Overexpression of OCRL1 results in redistribution of clathrin and the
cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR) to enlarged endosomal
structures that are defective in retrograde trafficking to the TGN. Depletion of
cellular OCRL1 also causes partial redistribution of a CI-MPR reporter to early
endosomes. These findings suggest a role for OCRL1 in clathrin-mediated
trafficking of proteins from endosomes to the TGN and that defects in this
pathway might contribute to the Lowe syndrome phenotype.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e05-02-0120
PMCID: PMC1182289
PMID: 15917292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
