---
reference_id: "PMID:39662091"
title: Skin immune-mesenchymal interplay within tertiary lymphoid structures promotes autoimmune pathogenesis in hidradenitis suppurativa.
authors:
- Yu WW
- Barrett JNP
- Tong J
- Lin MJ
- Marohn M
- Devlin JC
- Herrera A
- Remark J
- Levine J
- Liu PK
- Fang V
- Zellmer AM
- Oldridge DA
- Wherry EJ
- Lin JR
- Chen JY
- Sorger P
- Santagata S
- Krueger JG
- Ruggles KV
- Wang F
- Su C
- Koralov SB
- Wang J
- Chiu ES
- Lu CP
journal: Immunity
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2024.11.010
keywords:
- Hidradenitis Suppurativa/immunology
- Humans
- Tertiary Lymphoid Structures/immunology
- "Skin/immunology, pathology"
- Chemokine CXCL13/metabolism
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/metabolism
- "Fibroblasts/immunology, metabolism"
- Chemokine CCL19/metabolism
- "Keratinocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Autoimmunity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skin immune-mesenchymal interplay within tertiary lymphoid structures promotes autoimmune pathogenesis in hidradenitis suppurativa.
**Authors:** Yu WW, Barrett JNP, Tong J, Lin MJ, Marohn M, Devlin JC, Herrera A, Remark J, Levine J, Liu PK, Fang V, Zellmer AM, Oldridge DA, Wherry EJ, Lin JR, Chen JY, Sorger P, Santagata S, Krueger JG, Ruggles KV, Wang F, Su C, Koralov SB, Wang J, Chiu ES, Lu CP
**Journal:** Immunity (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.immuni.2024.11.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2024.11.010)

## Content

1. Immunity. 2024 Dec 10;57(12):2827-2842.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2024.11.010.

Skin immune-mesenchymal interplay within tertiary lymphoid structures promotes 
autoimmune pathogenesis in hidradenitis suppurativa.

Yu WW(1), Barrett JNP(1), Tong J(1), Lin MJ(1), Marohn M(1), Devlin JC(2), 
Herrera A(3), Remark J(4), Levine J(1), Liu PK(5), Fang V(6), Zellmer AM(7), 
Oldridge DA(8), Wherry EJ(9), Lin JR(10), Chen JY(10), Sorger P(10), Santagata 
S(11), Krueger JG(12), Ruggles KV(13), Wang F(14), Su C(14), Koralov SB(3), Wang 
J(15), Chiu ES(1), Lu CP(16).

Author information:
(1)The Hansjörg Wyss Department of Plastic Surgery, New York University Grossman 
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Institute of Systems Genetics, New York University Grossman School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Vilcek Institute of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, 
New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA.
(4)The Hansjörg Wyss Department of Plastic Surgery, New York University Grossman 
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Vilcek Institute of Graduate Biomedical 
Sciences, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(6)Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of 
Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Systems Pharmacology and 
Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; The Colton Center for Autoimmunity at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(7)Center for Computational and Genomic Medicine, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(8)Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Center for 
Computational and Genomic Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.
(9)Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Systems 
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; The Colton Center for 
Autoimmunity at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(10)Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Department of Systems Biology, Ludwig 
Center at Harvard, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Department of Systems Biology, Ludwig 
Center at Harvard, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Department of 
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Laboratory of Investigative Dermatology, The Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY, USA.
(13)Institute of Systems Genetics, New York University Grossman School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Division of Precision Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(14)Department of Population Health Sciences, Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell 
University, New York, NY, USA; Institute of Artificial Intelligence for Digital 
Health, Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell University, New York, NY, USA.
(15)Department of Pathology, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, 
New York, NY, USA; The Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York 
University Langone Health, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(16)The Hansjörg Wyss Department of Plastic Surgery, New York University 
Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Department of Cell Biology, New 
York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. Electronic 
address: pei-ju.lu@nyulangone.org.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2024 Dec 10;57(12):2712-2714. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2024.11.011.

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic, debilitating inflammatory skin 
disease characterized by keratinized epithelial tunnels that grow deeply into 
the dermis. Here, we examined the immune microenvironment within human HS 
lesions. Multi-omics profiling and multiplexed imaging identified tertiary 
lymphoid structures (TLSs) near HS tunnels. These TLSs were enriched with 
proliferative T cells, including follicular helper (Tfh), regulatory (Treg), and 
pathogenic T cells (IL17A+ and IFNG+), alongside extensive clonal expansion of 
plasma cells producing antibodies reactive to keratinocytes. HS fibroblasts 
express CXCL13 or CCL19 in response to immune cytokines. Using a microfluidic 
system to mimic TLS on a chip, we found that HS fibroblasts critically 
orchestrated lymphocyte aggregation via tumor necrosis factor alpha 
(TNF-α)-CXCL13 and TNF-α-CCL19 feedback loops with B and T cells, respectively; 
early TNF-α blockade suppressed aggregate initiation. Our findings provide 
insights into TLS formation in the skin, suggest therapeutic avenues for HS, and 
reveal mechanisms that may apply to other autoimmune settings, including Crohn's 
disease.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2024.11.010
PMCID: PMC12404358
PMID: 39662091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests A patent application 
derived from this work has been filed and is currently pending.