---
reference_id: "PMID:22200539"
title: Protein aggregates in Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Arrasate M
- Finkbeiner S
journal: Exp Neurol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.12.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein aggregates in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Arrasate M, Finkbeiner S
**Journal:** Exp Neurol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.12.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.12.013)

## Content

1. Exp Neurol. 2012 Nov;238(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.12.013. Epub 
2011 Dec 19.

Protein aggregates in Huntington's disease.

Arrasate M(1), Finkbeiner S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Center for Applied Medical Research (CIMA), 
University of Navarra, Pamplona, E-31008, Spain. marrasatei@unav.es

Huntington's disease (HD) is an incurable neurodegenerative disease 
characterized by abnormal motor movements, personality changes, and early death. 
HD is caused by a mutation in the IT-15 gene that expands abnormally the number 
of CAG nucleotide repeats. As a result, the translated protein huntingtin 
contains disease-causing expansions of glutamines (polyQ) that make it prone to 
misfold and aggregate. While the gene and mutations that cause HD are known, the 
mechanisms underlying HD pathogenesis are not. Here we will review the state of 
knowledge of HD, focusing especially on a hallmark pathological 
feature-intracellular aggregates of mutant Htt called inclusion bodies (IBs). We 
will describe the role of IBs in the disease. We speculate that IB formation 
could be just one component of a broader coping response triggered by misfolded 
Htt whose efficacy may depend on the extent to which it clears toxic forms of 
mutant Htt. We will describe how IB formation might be regulated and which 
factors could determine different coping responses in different subsets of 
neurons. A differential regulation of IB formation as a function of the cellular 
context could, eventually, explain part of the neuronal vulnerability observed 
in HD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.12.013
PMCID: PMC3909772
PMID: 22200539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]