---
reference_id: "PMID:31456587"
title: Prognostic value of midregional proadrenomedullin in critically ill patients.
authors:
- Kakareko K
- Rydzewska-Rosołowska A
- Rygasiewicz K
- Siemiątkowski A
- Koc-Żórawska E
- Zbroch E
- Hryszko T
journal: Pol Arch Intern Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.20452/pamw.14947
keywords:
- APACHE
- Acute Kidney Injury
- Adrenomedullin/analysis
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Critical Illness/mortality
- Female
- Hospital Mortality
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Organ Dysfunction Scores
- Prognosis
- Protein Precursors/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic value of midregional proadrenomedullin in critically ill patients.
**Authors:** Kakareko K, Rydzewska-Rosołowska A, Rygasiewicz K, Siemiątkowski A, Koc-Żórawska E, Zbroch E, Hryszko T
**Journal:** Pol Arch Intern Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.20452/pamw.14947](https://doi.org/10.20452/pamw.14947)

## Content

1. Pol Arch Intern Med. 2019 Oct 30;129(10):673-678. doi: 10.20452/pamw.14947.
Epub  2019 Aug 28.

Prognostic value of midregional proadrenomedullin in critically ill patients.

Kakareko K(1), Rydzewska-Rosołowska A(2), Rygasiewicz K(3), Siemiątkowski A(3),
Koc-Żórawska E(2), Zbroch E(2), Hryszko T(2).

Author information:
(1)2nd Department of Nephrology and Hypertension with Dialysis Unit, Medical
University of Bialystok, Białystok, Poland. katarzyna.kakareko@umb.edu.pl
(2)2nd Department of Nephrology and Hypertension with Dialysis Unit, Medical
University of Bialystok, Białystok, Poland
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Medical University of
Bialystok, Białystok, Poland

INTRODUCTION: Scoring systems can be used to predict the risk of mortality and
outcomes in critically ill patients. Acute kidney injury (AKI) is one of the
strongest factors negatively influencing patient outcomes. Midregional
proadrenomedullin (MR‑proADM) shows promising results as an outcome predictor in
patients with sepsis.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to evaluate the value of MR‑proADM in incident AKI and
mortality prognostication among patients admitted to the intensive care unit
(ICU) in comparison with commonly used scoring systems.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Our study included a single‑center cohort of 77 patients
admitted to the ICU. Plasma MR‑proADM levels were measured within 24 h of
admission. The Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) and
the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) scores were used as a reference.
The primary endpoints were incident AKI and in‑hospital mortality.
RESULTS: Patients who died during hospitalization period had a higher MR‑proADM
concentrations as compared with patients who survived (2592.5 pg/ml vs 995.3
pg/ml; P <0.001). The levels of MR‑proADM correlated positively with the APACHE
II or SOFA score (r = 0.3; P = 0.004 and r = 0.3; P = 0.008, respectively). In
the receiver operating characteristics analysis, MR‑proADM concentration was
superior to both scoring systems (P = 0.002 and P = 0.001, respectively). In
univariate logistic regression, MR‑proADM was associated with in‑hospital
mortality (odds ratio [OR], 1.22; 95% CI, 1.11-1.35 per 100 pg/ml increase of
MR‑proADM) and after adjusting for multiple variables remained an independent
predictor of death (OR, 1.35; 95% CI, 1.22-1.49 per 100 pg/ml increase of
MR‑proADM). MR‑proADM was not useful in predicting incident AKI.
CONCLUSIONS: MR‑proADM can be applied in clinical practice as a prognostic tool
for mortality but not incident AKI in the general ICU population with at least
similar accuracy as APACHE II and SOFA scores.

DOI: 10.20452/pamw.14947
PMID: 31456587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
