---
reference_id: "PMID:37692616"
title: "Lyme Disease Presenting With Interesting Neurological Features of Weakness and Hyporeflexia: A Case Report."
authors:
- Semy M
- Lee-Kwen P
- Semy S
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.43296
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lyme Disease Presenting With Interesting Neurological Features of Weakness and Hyporeflexia: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Semy M, Lee-Kwen P, Semy S
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.43296](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.43296)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Aug 10;15(8):e43296. doi: 10.7759/cureus.43296. eCollection 2023 
Aug.

Lyme Disease Presenting With Interesting Neurological Features of Weakness and 
Hyporeflexia: A Case Report.

Semy M(1), Lee-Kwen P(2), Semy S(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Dr. Dnyandeo Yashwantrao (DY) Patil School of Medicine, 
Mumbai, IND.
(2)Neurology, Mercy Hospital of Buffalo, Buffalo, USA.

Lyme disease is a tick-borne bacterial infection caused primarily by three 
pathogenic species of spirochete Borrelia (B. burgdorferi, B. afzelii, and B. 
garinii). It has a wide range of clinical manifestations ranging in severity. 
Although, it is generally divided into three phases: early localized, early 
disseminated, and late disease. Certain cases do not follow the same order 
described in standard books like Harrison's. Thus, it is vital to establish a 
chronological timeline when establishing the diagnosis. Here, we describe a 
25-year-old female with numbness and tingling that began in her torso and then 
spread to her entire body. Physical examination revealed diminished motor 
reflexes and power, but the diagnosis of neuroborreliosis with monoradiculitis 
was only established with positive laboratory antibody evaluation and lumbar 
puncture. The patient's symptoms resolved quickly with a four-day inpatient 
course of IV ceftriaxone followed by 10 days of oral doxycycline.

Copyright © 2023, Semy et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.43296
PMCID: PMC10492644
PMID: 37692616

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.