---
reference_id: "PMID:34846692"
title: "Get Your Molar Tooth Right: Joubert Syndrome Misdiagnosis Unmasked by Whole-Exome Sequencing."
authors:
- "D'Abrusco F"
- Arrigoni F
- Serpieri V
- Romaniello R
- Caputi C
- Manti F
- Jocic-Jakubi B
- Lucarelli E
- Panzeri E
- Bonaglia MC
- Chiapparini L
- Pichiecchio A
- Pinelli L
- Righini A
- Leuzzi V
- Borgatti R
- Valente EM
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-021-01350-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Get Your Molar Tooth Right: Joubert Syndrome Misdiagnosis Unmasked by Whole-Exome Sequencing.
**Authors:** D'Abrusco F, Arrigoni F, Serpieri V, Romaniello R, Caputi C, Manti F, Jocic-Jakubi B, Lucarelli E, Panzeri E, Bonaglia MC, Chiapparini L, Pichiecchio A, Pinelli L, Righini A, Leuzzi V, Borgatti R, Valente EM
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-021-01350-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-021-01350-8)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2022 Dec;21(6):1144-1150. doi: 10.1007/s12311-021-01350-8. Epub
2021  Nov 30.

Get Your Molar Tooth Right: Joubert Syndrome Misdiagnosis Unmasked by 
Whole-Exome Sequencing.

D'Abrusco F(1), Arrigoni F(2), Serpieri V(3), Romaniello R(4), Caputi C(5), 
Manti F(5), Jocic-Jakubi B(6)(7), Lucarelli E(8), Panzeri E(9), Bonaglia MC(10), 
Chiapparini L(11), Pichiecchio A(12)(13), Pinelli L(14), Righini A(15), Leuzzi 
V(5), Borgatti R(13)(16), Valente EM(17)(18).

Author information:
(1)Deparment of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, via Forlanini 14, 
27100, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Neuroimaging Lab, Scientific Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, 
Lecco, Italy.
(3)Neurogenetics Research Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit, Scientific Institute IRCCS 
Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(5)Unit of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Department of Human Neuroscience, 
Università Di Roma La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
(6)Child Health Department, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(7)Pediatric Clinic, Child Neurology Department, Clinical Center Nis, Nis, 
Serbia.
(8)Unit for Severe Disabilities in Developmental Age and Young Adults, 
Scientific Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Brindisi, Italy.
(9)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Scientific Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, 
Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(10)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Scientific Institute, IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio 
Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(11)Neuroradiology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, 
Milan, Italy.
(12)Neuroradiology Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(13)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(14)Neuroradiology Unit, Pediatric Neuroradiology Section, ASST Spedali Civili, 
Brescia, Italy.
(15)Paediatric Radiology and Neuroradiology Department, V. Buzzi Children's 
Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(16)Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(17)Deparment of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, via Forlanini 14, 
27100, Pavia, Italy. enzamaria.valente@unipv.it.
(18)Neurogenetics Research Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy. 
enzamaria.valente@unipv.it.

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a recessively inherited ciliopathy, characterized by a 
specific cerebellar and brainstem malformation recognizable on brain imaging as 
the "molar tooth sign" (MTS). Clinical signs include hypotonia, developmental 
delay, breathing abnormalities, and ocular motor apraxia. Older patients develop 
ataxia, intellectual impairment, and variable organ involvement. JS is 
genetically heterogeneous, with over 40 ciliary genes overall accounting for 
65-75% cases. Thus, in recent years, the genetic diagnosis of JS has been based 
on the analysis of next-generation sequencing targeted gene panels. Since 
clinical features are unspecific and undistinguishable from other 
neurodevelopmental syndromes, the recognition of the MTS is crucial to address 
the patient to the appropriate genetic testing. However, the MTS is not always 
properly diagnosed, resulting either in false negative diagnoses (patients with 
the MTS not addressed to JS genetic testing) or in false positive diagnoses 
(patients with a different brain malformation wrongly addressed to JS genetic 
testing). Here, we present six cases referred for JS genetic testing based on 
inappropriate recognition of MTS. While the analysis of JS-related genes was 
negative, whole-exome sequencing (WES) disclosed pathogenic variants in other 
genes causative of distinct brain malformative conditions with partial clinical 
and neuroradiological overlap with JS. Reassessment of brain MRIs from five 
patients by a panel of expert pediatric neuroradiologists blinded to the genetic 
diagnosis excluded the MTS in all cases but one, which raised conflicting 
interpretations. This study highlights that the diagnostic yield of NGS-based 
targeted panels is strictly related to the accuracy of the diagnostic referral 
based on clinical and imaging assessment and that WES has an advantage over 
targeted panel analysis when the diagnostic suspicion is not straightforward.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-021-01350-8
PMID: 34846692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]