---
reference_id: "PMID:25253946"
title: Potential mechanisms of hepatitis B virus induced liver injury.
authors:
- Suhail M
- Abdel-Hafiz H
- Ali A
- Fatima K
- Damanhouri GA
- Azhar E
- Chaudhary AG
- Qadri I
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i35.12462
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential mechanisms of hepatitis B virus induced liver injury.
**Authors:** Suhail M, Abdel-Hafiz H, Ali A, Fatima K, Damanhouri GA, Azhar E, Chaudhary AG, Qadri I
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v20.i35.12462](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i35.12462)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Sep 21;20(35):12462-72. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v20.i35.12462.

Potential mechanisms of hepatitis B virus induced liver injury.

Suhail M(1), Abdel-Hafiz H(1), Ali A(1), Fatima K(1), Damanhouri GA(1), Azhar 
E(1), Chaudhary AG(1), Qadri I(1).

Author information:
(1)Mohd Suhail, Ashraf Ali, Ghazi A Damanhouri, Adeel GA Chaudhary, Ishtiaq 
Qadri, King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdul Aziz University, Jeddah 
21589, Saudi Arabia.

Chronic active hepatitis (CAH) is acknowledged as an imperative risk factor for 
the development of liver injury and hepatocellular carcinoma. The histological 
end points of CAH are chronic inflammation, fibrosis and cirrhosis which are 
coupled with increased DNA synthesis in cirrhotic vs healthy normal livers. The 
potential mechanism involved in CAH includes a combination of processes leading 
to liver cell necrosis, inflammation and cytokine production and liver scaring 
(fibrosis). The severity of liver damage is regulated by Hepatitis B virus 
genotypes and viral components. The viral and cellular factors that contribute 
to liver injury are discussed in this article. Liver injury caused by the viral 
infection affects many cellular processes such as cell signaling, apoptosis, 
transcription, DNA repair which in turn induce radical effects on cell survival, 
growth, transformation and maintenance. The consequence of such perturbations is 
resulted in the alteration of bile secretion, gluconeogenesis, glycolysis, 
detoxification and metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins, fat and balance of 
nutrients. The identification and elucidation of the molecular pathways 
perturbed by the viral proteins are important in order to design effective 
strategy to minimize and/or restore the hepatocytes injury.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i35.12462
PMCID: PMC4168079
PMID: 25253946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]