---
reference_id: "PMID:11121474"
title: The 26S proteasome negatively regulates the level of overall genomic nucleotide excision repair.
authors:
- Lommel L
- Chen L
- Madura K
- Sweder K
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1093/nar/28.24.4839
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 26S proteasome negatively regulates the level of overall genomic nucleotide excision repair.
**Authors:** Lommel L, Chen L, Madura K, Sweder K
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/28.24.4839](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/28.24.4839)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Dec 15;28(24):4839-45. doi: 10.1093/nar/28.24.4839.

The 26S proteasome negatively regulates the level of overall genomic nucleotide 
excision repair.

Lommel L(1), Chen L, Madura K, Sweder K.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Cancer Research, College of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State 
University of New Jersey, 164 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854-8020, 
USA.

Regulation of protein expression can be achieved through destruction of proteins 
by the 26S: proteasome. Cellular processes that are regulated by proteolysis 
include cell cycle progression, stress responses and differentiation. Several 
nucleotide excision repair proteins in yeast and humans, such as Rad23, Rad4 and 
XPB, have been shown to co-purify with Cim3 and Cim5, AAA ATPases of the 19S: 
proteasome regulatory subunit. However, it has not been determined if nucleotide 
excision repair is regulated through protein destruction. We measured nucleotide 
excision repair in yeast mutants that are defective in proteasome function and 
found that the repair of the transcribed and non-transcribed strands of an RNA 
polymerase II-transcribed reporter gene was increased in the absence of 
proteasome function. Additionally, overexpression of the Rad4 repair protein, 
which is bound to the repair/proteolytic factor Rad23, conferred higher rates of 
nucleotide excision repair. Based on our data we suggest that a protein (or 
proteins) involved in nucleotide excision repair or in regulation of repair is 
degraded by the 26S proteasome. We propose that decreased proteasome function 
enables increased DNA repair, due to the transient accumulation of a specific 
repair factor, perhaps Rad4.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.24.4839
PMCID: PMC115242
PMID: 11121474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]