---
reference_id: "PMID:37176569"
title: "Clinical Update on Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia: Recommendations from a Multidisciplinary Adrenal Program."
authors:
- Uslar T
- Olmos R
- Martínez-Aguayo A
- Baudrand R
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12093128
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Update on Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia: Recommendations from a Multidisciplinary Adrenal Program.
**Authors:** Uslar T, Olmos R, Martínez-Aguayo A, Baudrand R
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12093128](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12093128)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Apr 26;12(9):3128. doi: 10.3390/jcm12093128.

Clinical Update on Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia: Recommendations from a 
Multidisciplinary Adrenal Program.

Uslar T(1)(2), Olmos R(1)(2), Martínez-Aguayo A(1)(3), Baudrand R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Program for Adrenal Disorders CETREN-UC, Pontificia Universidad Católica de 
Chile, Diagonal Paraguay 362, Santiago 8330077, Chile.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Pontificia Universidad 
Católica de Chile, Diagonal Paraguay 362, Santiago 8330077, Chile.
(3)Division of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica 
de Chile, Diagonal Paraguay 362, Santiago 8330077, Chile.

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a common genetic disorder in 
endocrinology, especially its milder clinical presentation, often caused by a 
partial or total deficiency of the 21-hydroxylase enzyme located in the adrenal 
cortex. CAH is characterized by the overproduction of androgen, along with 
variable degrees of cortisol and aldosterone deficiency. The age at diagnosis 
can provide some information about underlying mutations, with those diagnosed at 
birth/early infancy more likely to have severe enzymatic defects, which may 
include adrenal insufficiency, sexual development disorders, short stature in 
adulthood, hirsutism, and a higher risk for metabolic syndrome and infertility. 
Non-classic CAH, a milder form of CAH, is usually manifested later in life and 
is a common differential diagnosis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome and should be 
actively evaluated during initial studies of clinical or biochemical 
hyperandrogenism. The main goals of CAH treatment are hormone supplementation 
for severe cases, controlling adrenal androgen overproduction to minimize 
long-term side effects, managing fertility and genetic counseling, and 
optimizing patients' quality of life.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12093128
PMCID: PMC10179176
PMID: 37176569

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.