---
reference_id: "PMID:34237250"
title: "Cabozantinib for radioiodine-refractory differentiated thyroid cancer (COSMIC-311): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Brose MS
- Robinson B
- Sherman SI
- Krajewska J
- Lin CC
- Vaisman F
- Hoff AO
- Hitre E
- Bowles DW
- Hernando J
- Faoro L
- Banerjee K
- Oliver JW
- Keam B
- Capdevila J
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00332-6
keywords:
- Aged
- Anilides/therapeutic use
- Double-Blind Method
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Progression-Free Survival
- Pyridines/therapeutic use
- Thyroid Neoplasms/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cabozantinib for radioiodine-refractory differentiated thyroid cancer (COSMIC-311): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Brose MS, Robinson B, Sherman SI, Krajewska J, Lin CC, Vaisman F, Hoff AO, Hitre E, Bowles DW, Hernando J, Faoro L, Banerjee K, Oliver JW, Keam B, Capdevila J
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00332-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00332-6)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2021 Aug;22(8):1126-1138. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00332-6.
Epub  2021 Jul 5.

Cabozantinib for radioiodine-refractory differentiated thyroid cancer
(COSMIC-311): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.

Brose MS(1), Robinson B(2), Sherman SI(3), Krajewska J(4), Lin CC(5), Vaisman
F(6), Hoff AO(7), Hitre E(8), Bowles DW(9), Hernando J(10), Faoro L(11),
Banerjee K(11), Oliver JW(11), Keam B(12), Capdevila J(10).

Author information:
(1)Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Electronic address: marcia.brose@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(2)Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Endocrine Neoplasia and Hormonal Disorders, University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Endocrine Oncology, Maria Sklodowska Curie
National Research Institute of Oncology Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland.
(5)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Instituto do Câncer do Estado de São Paulo,
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology and Clinical Pharmacology "B", Országos
Onkológiai Intézet, Budapest, Hungary.
(9)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(10)Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Exelixis, Alameda, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Patients with radioiodine-refractory differentiated thyroid cancer
(DTC) previously treated with vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
(VEGFR)-targeted therapy have aggressive disease and no available standard of
care. The aim of this study was to evaluate the tyrosine kinase inhibitor
cabozantinib in this patient population.
METHODS: In this global, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3
trial, patients aged 16 years and older with radioiodine-refractory DTC
(papillary or follicular and their variants) and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group performance status of 0 or 1 were randomly assigned (2:1) to oral
cabozantinib (60 mg once daily) or matching placebo, stratified by previous
lenvatinib treatment and age. The randomisation scheme used stratified permuted
blocks of block size six and an interactive voice-web response system; both
patients and investigators were masked to study treatment. Patients must have
received previous lenvatinib or sorafenib and progressed during or after
treatment with up to two VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Patients receiving
placebo could cross over to open-label cabozantinib on disease progression
confirmed by blinded independent radiology committee (BIRC). The primary
endpoints were objective response rate (confirmed response per Response
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours [RECIST] version 1.1) in the first 100
randomly assigned patients (objective response rate intention-to-treat [OITT]
population) and progression-free survival (time to earlier of disease
progression per RECIST version 1.1 or death) in all patients (intention-to-treat
[ITT] population), both assessed by BIRC. This report presents the primary
objective response rate analysis and a concurrent preplanned interim
progression-free survival analysis. The study is registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03690388, and is no longer enrolling patients.
FINDINGS: Between Feb 27, 2019, and Aug 18, 2020, 227 patients were assessed for
eligibility, of whom 187 were enrolled from 164 clinics in 25 countries and
randomly assigned to cabozantinib (n=125) or placebo (n=62). At data cutoff (Aug
19, 2020) for the primary objective response rate and interim progression-free
survival analyses, median follow-up was 6·2 months (IQR 3·4-9·2) for the ITT
population and 8·9 months (7·1-10·5) for the OITT population. An objective
response in the OITT population was achieved in ten (15%; 99% CI 5·8-29·3) of 67
patients in the cabozantinib group versus 0 (0%; 0-14·8) of 33 in the placebo
(p=0·028) but did not meet the prespecified significance level (α=0·01). At
interim analysis, the primary endpoint of progression-free survival was met in
the ITT population; cabozantinib showed significant improvement in
progression-free survival over placebo: median not reached (96% CI 5·7-not
estimable [NE]) versus 1·9 months (1·8-3·6); hazard ratio 0·22 (96% CI
0·13-0·36; p<0·0001). Grade 3 or 4 adverse events occurred in 71 (57%) of 125
patients receiving cabozantinib and 16 (26%) of 62 receiving placebo, the most
frequent of which were palmar-plantar erythrodysaesthesia (13 [10%] vs 0),
hypertension (11 [9%] vs 2 [3%]), and fatigue (ten [8%] vs 0). Serious
treatment-related adverse events occurred in 20 (16%) of 125 patients in the
cabozantinib group and one (2%) of 62 in the placebo group. There were no
treatment-related deaths.
INTERPRETATION: Our results show that cabozantinib significantly prolongs
progression-free survival and might provide a new treatment option for patients
with radioiodine-refractory DTC who have no available standard of care.
FUNDING: Exelixis.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00332-6
PMID: 34237250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests MSB has an
institutional funding grant from Exelixis, and has received consulting fees from
Bayer, Lilly, LOXO, Eisai, Blueprint, and Kura outside of the submitted work.
SIS is a consultant with Exelixis. JK is a consultant with Exelixis, and reports
consulting with LOXO, Bayer Health Care, Sanofi-Genzyme, and Ipsen, and has
acted as a sub-investigator for Eisai, outside of the submitted work. C-CL has
received travel fees from BeiGene and Daiichi Sankyo, has had an advisory role
with Blueprint Medicines, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Daiichi
Sankyo, Novartis, and has received honorarium from Eli Lilly, Novartis, and
Roche, all outside of the submitted work. AOH is a consultant with Exelixis, and
reports consulting and lecture fees with Bayer and consulting with Eli Lilly,
outside of the submitted work. JH reports personal fees from Ipsen, Eisai,
Novartis, Angelini Pharma, AAA, Pfizer, and Roche, outside of the submitted
work. LF is an employee and stockholder of Exelixis. KB is an employee and
stockholder of Exelixis. JWO is an employee and stockholder of Exelixis. BK has
received grants from Ono Pharmaceutical, MSD Oncology, AstraZeneca and has
received personal fees from MSD Oncology, AstraZeneca, Genexin, Handok, and CBS
Bio, all outside of the submitted work. JC has received grants from Bayer,
Eisai, Ipsen, AstraZeneca, Roche, and Adacap, and personal fees from Lilly,
Bayer, Eisai, Exelixis, Pfizer, Ipsen, Novartis, Adacap, Merck, and Sanofi, all
during the conduct of this study; and grants from Bayer, Eisai, Roche, Ipsen,
and personal fees from Bayer, Eisai, Exelixis, Sanofi, Lilly, and Ipsen, outside
of the submitted work. BR, FV, EH, and DWB declare no competing interests.
