---
reference_id: "PMID:29910114"
title: "Isoniazid-Rifapentine for Latent Tuberculosis Infection: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Njie GJ
- Morris SB
- Woodruff RY
- Moro RN
- Vernon AA
- Borisov AS
journal: Am J Prev Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2018.04.030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isoniazid-Rifapentine for Latent Tuberculosis Infection: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Njie GJ, Morris SB, Woodruff RY, Moro RN, Vernon AA, Borisov AS
**Journal:** Am J Prev Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amepre.2018.04.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2018.04.030)

## Content

1. Am J Prev Med. 2018 Aug;55(2):244-252. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2018.04.030. Epub
 2018 Jun 14.

Isoniazid-Rifapentine for Latent Tuberculosis Infection: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-analysis.

Njie GJ(1), Morris SB(2), Woodruff RY(2), Moro RN(3), Vernon AA(2), Borisov 
AS(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral 
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, Georgia. Electronic address: gnjie@cdc.gov.
(2)Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral 
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, Georgia.
(3)Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral 
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, Georgia; CDC Foundation Research Collaboration, Atlanta, Georgia.

CONTEXT: Latent tuberculosis infection diagnosis and treatment is a strategic 
priority for eliminating tuberculosis in the U.S. The Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention has recommended the short-course regimen of 3-month 
isoniazid-rifapentine administered by directly observed therapy. However, 
longer-duration regimens remain the most widely prescribed latent tuberculosis 
infection treatments. Limitation on adoption of 3-month isoniazid-rifapentine in 
the U.S. might be because of patients' preference for self-administered therapy, 
providers' lack of familiarity with 3-month isoniazid-rifapentine, or lack of 
resources to support directly observed therapy. This review examines the most 
recent evidence regarding 3-month isoniazid-rifapentine's effectiveness, safety, 
and treatment completion when directly compared with other latent tuberculosis 
infection regimens primarily comprising 9-month isoniazid treatment.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: Using Community Guide methodology, reviewers identified, 
evaluated, and summarized available evidence published during January 2006-June 
2017. Analysis of the data was completed in 2017.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: The analysis included 15 unique studies. Three-month 
isoniazid-rifapentine was determined to be equal to other latent tuberculosis 
infection regimens in effectiveness (OR=0.89, 95% CI=0.46, 1.70), and has higher 
treatment completion (87.5%, 95% CI=83.2%, 91.3%) compared with other latent 
tuberculosis infection regimens (65.9%, 95% CI=53.5%, 77.3%). Three-month 
isoniazid-rifapentine was associated with similar risk to other latent 
tuberculosis infection regimens for adverse events (relative risk=0.59, 95% 
CI=0.23, 1.52); discontinuing treatment because of adverse events (relative 
risk=0.48, 95% CI=0.17, 1.34); and death (relative risk=0.79, 95% CI=0.56, 
1.11).
CONCLUSIONS: The 3-month isoniazid-rifapentine regimen is as safe and effective 
as other recommended latent tuberculosis infection regimens and achieves 
significantly higher treatment completion rates.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amepre.2018.04.030
PMCID: PMC6097523
PMID: 29910114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]