---
reference_id: "PMID:35961702"
title: Matricellular proteins in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
authors:
- Sirica AE
journal: Adv Cancer Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/bs.acr.2022.01.010
keywords:
- Bile Duct Neoplasms/pathology
- "Bile Ducts, Intrahepatic/metabolism, pathology"
- Cholangiocarcinoma/pathology
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
- Humans
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Matricellular proteins in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Sirica AE
**Journal:** Adv Cancer Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.acr.2022.01.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.acr.2022.01.010)

## Content

1. Adv Cancer Res. 2022;156:249-281. doi: 10.1016/bs.acr.2022.01.010. Epub 2022
Feb  18.

Matricellular proteins in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.

Sirica AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Emeritus Professor of Pathology, Virginia Commonwealth University School of 
Medicine, Richmond, VA, United States. Electronic address: 
alphonse.sirica@vcuhealth.org.

Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA) is typically characterized by a prominent 
desmoplastic stroma that is often the most dominant feature of the tumor. This 
tumor reactive stroma is comprised of a dense fibro-collagenous-enriched 
extracellular matrix (ECM) surrounding the cancer cells, together with other ECM 
proteins/peptides, specifically secreted matricellular glycoproteins and 
proteolytic enzymes, growth factors, and cytokines. Moreover, as enjoined by 
cholangiocarcinoma cells, this enriched tumor microenvironment is populated by 
various stromal cell types, most prominently, cancer-associated myofibroblasts 
(CAFs), along with variable numbers of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), 
inflammatory and vascular cell types. While it is now well appreciated that the 
interplay between cholangiocarcinoma cells, CAFs, and TAMs in particular play a 
critical role in promoting cholangiocarcinoma progression, therapeutic 
resistance, and immune evasion, it is also becoming increasingly evident that 
over-expression and secretion into the tumor microenvironment of functionally 
overlapping matricellular glycoproteins, including periostin, osteopontin, 
tenascin-C, thrombospondin-1, mesothelin and others have an important role to 
play in regulating or modulating a variety of pro-oncogenic cellular functions, 
including cholangiocarcinoma cell proliferation, invasion, and metastasis, 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, ECM remodeling, and immune evasion. 
Matricellular proteins have also shown promise as potential prognostic factors 
for iCCA and may provide unique therapeutic opportunities particularly in 
relation to targeting iCCA pre-metastatic and metastatic niches, tumor cell 
dormancy, and immune evasion. This review will highlight timely research and its 
translational implications for salient matricellular proteins in terms of their 
structure-function relationships, as modulators of intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma microenvironment and progression, and potential clinical 
value for iCCA prognosis and therapy.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.acr.2022.01.010
PMID: 35961702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement A.E.S. has no 
financial or personal disclosures relevant to the contents of this manuscript.