---
reference_id: "PMID:21127961"
title: "Defining a new candidate gene for amelogenesis imperfecta: from molecular genetics to biochemistry."
authors:
- Urzúa B
- Ortega-Pinto A
- Morales-Bozo I
- Rojas-Alcayaga G
- Cifuentes V
journal: Biochem Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s10528-010-9392-6
keywords:
- Ameloblasts/metabolism
- Amelogenesis/genetics
- "Amelogenesis Imperfecta/classification, genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Animals
- Bicarbonates/metabolism
- "Dental Enamel/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Humans
- Hydrogen-Ion Concentration
- Ion Transport/genetics
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- Rats
- "Sodium-Bicarbonate Symporters/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tooth/metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining a new candidate gene for amelogenesis imperfecta: from molecular genetics to biochemistry.
**Authors:** Urzúa B, Ortega-Pinto A, Morales-Bozo I, Rojas-Alcayaga G, Cifuentes V
**Journal:** Biochem Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10528-010-9392-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10528-010-9392-6)

## Content

1. Biochem Genet. 2011 Feb;49(1-2):104-21. doi: 10.1007/s10528-010-9392-6. Epub 
2010 Dec 3.

Defining a new candidate gene for amelogenesis imperfecta: from molecular 
genetics to biochemistry.

Urzúa B(1), Ortega-Pinto A, Morales-Bozo I, Rojas-Alcayaga G, Cifuentes V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical and Chemical Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, 
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. brurzua@gmail.com

Amelogenesis imperfecta is a group of genetic conditions that affect the 
structure and clinical appearance of tooth enamel. The types (hypoplastic, 
hypocalcified, and hypomature) are correlated with defects in different stages 
of the process of enamel synthesis. Autosomal dominant, recessive, and X-linked 
types have been previously described. These disorders are considered clinically 
and genetically heterogeneous in etiology, involving a variety of genes, such as 
AMELX, ENAM, DLX3, FAM83H, MMP-20, KLK4, and WDR72. The mutations identified 
within these causal genes explain less than half of all cases of amelogenesis 
imperfecta. Most of the candidate and causal genes currently identified encode 
proteins involved in enamel synthesis. We think it is necessary to refocus the 
search for candidate genes using biochemical processes. This review provides 
theoretical evidence that the human SLC4A4 gene (sodium bicarbonate 
cotransporter) may be a new candidate gene.

DOI: 10.1007/s10528-010-9392-6
PMID: 21127961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]