---
reference_id: "PMID:36245398"
title: "Magnetic Resonance Imaging Negative Spine Trauma Followed by a Delayed Intravertebral Vacuum Cleft-Kümmell's Disease: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Gou P
- Jing W
- Zhou J
- Wang R
- Wang Z
- Chang F
- Xue Y
journal: Orthop Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/os.13559
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Magnetic Resonance Imaging Negative Spine Trauma Followed by a Delayed Intravertebral Vacuum Cleft-Kümmell's Disease: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Gou P, Jing W, Zhou J, Wang R, Wang Z, Chang F, Xue Y
**Journal:** Orthop Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/os.13559](https://doi.org/10.1111/os.13559)

## Content

1. Orthop Surg. 2023 Jan;15(1):366-370. doi: 10.1111/os.13559. Epub 2022 Oct 17.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging Negative Spine Trauma Followed by a Delayed 
Intravertebral Vacuum Cleft-Kümmell's Disease: A Case Report and Literature 
Review.

Gou P(1)(2), Jing W(1)(3), Zhou J(1), Wang R(1), Wang Z(1), Chang F(2), Xue 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Tianjin Medical University General 
Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Fifth Hospital of Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Tianjin First Center Hospital, Tianjin, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Kümmell's disease (KD) is a rare clinical entity characterized by 
delayed post-traumatic vertebral body collapse, in which an intravertebral 
vacuum cleft (IVC) is formed. The patient sustained a minor spinal trauma, and 
their spine X-ray examinations were negative. However, after an asymptomatic 
period of months, they developed recurrent back pain because of the progressive 
vertebral collapse of the affected spine. However, no imaging examination could 
confirm the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-negative initial spinal trauma 
followed by delayed vertebral collapse with IVC.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of KD occurring in a 66-year-old 
postmenopausal patient whose lumbar MRI on sagittal planes were immediately 
performed following the initial trauma (a ground-level fall) and revealed that 
the vertebral integrity or connectivity was not interrupted and the marrow 
signal was even. After an asymptomatic period of 8 months, the back pain 
reappeared and progressively exacerbated. The wedge-shaped change in the T11 
vertebra with an IVC was confirmed by lumbar computed tomography and MRI. 
Finally, KD was diagnosed following extensive routine hematological and 
biochemical workups. Percutaneous kyphoplasty was performed to relieve her back 
pain by restoring her vertebral stability.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed that the OVF was not the first step in the KD 
sequence, and the IVC - KD - could from an initial MRI-negative spine trauma.

© 2022 The Authors. Orthopaedic Surgery published by Tianjin Hospital and John 
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/os.13559
PMCID: PMC9837236
PMID: 36245398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors declare no conflict of interest.