---
reference_id: "PMID:38607625"
title: "Incidence and Presenting Characteristics of Angiosarcoma in the US, 2001-2020."
authors:
- Wagner MJ
- Ravi V
- Schaub SK
- Kim EY
- Sharib J
- Mogal H
- Park M
- Tsai M
- Duarte-Bateman D
- Tufaro A
- Loggers ET
- Cranmer LD
- Chau B
- Hassett MJ
- Grilley-Olson J
- Paulson KG
journal: JAMA Netw Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.6235
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Aged
- Incidence
- Hemangiosarcoma/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- Breast Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and Presenting Characteristics of Angiosarcoma in the US, 2001-2020.
**Authors:** Wagner MJ, Ravi V, Schaub SK, Kim EY, Sharib J, Mogal H, Park M, Tsai M, Duarte-Bateman D, Tufaro A, Loggers ET, Cranmer LD, Chau B, Hassett MJ, Grilley-Olson J, Paulson KG
**Journal:** JAMA Netw Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.6235](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.6235)

## Content

1. JAMA Netw Open. 2024 Apr 1;7(4):e246235. doi:
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.6235.

Incidence and Presenting Characteristics of Angiosarcoma in the US, 2001-2020.

Wagner MJ(1)(2)(3), Ravi V(4), Schaub SK(5), Kim EY(5), Sharib J(6), Mogal H(6), 
Park M(7), Tsai M(7), Duarte-Bateman D(8), Tufaro A(8), Loggers ET(1)(2), 
Cranmer LD(1)(2), Chau B(2), Hassett MJ(3), Grilley-Olson J(9), Paulson KG(7).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, 
Washington.
(2)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Washington, Seattle.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
University, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
Texas.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington, Seattle.
(6)Department of Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Providence-Swedish Cancer Institute, Seattle, 
Washington.
(8)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(9)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina.

IMPORTANCE: Angiosarcoma is an aggressive vascular malignant neoplasm presenting 
either as a primary or secondary cancer, often arising after radiotherapy or in 
the context of preexisting lymphedema. Comprehensive data describing its 
incidence and presentation patterns are needed.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the incidence, presenting characteristics, and change 
over time of angiosarcoma in the US.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This retrospective cross-sectional study used 
data from the US Cancer Statistics (USCS) National Program of Cancer 
Registries-Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Combined Database, which 
captures more than 99% of newly diagnosed cancers in the US. The study included 
all 19 289 patients in the US with a new diagnosis of angiosarcoma between 2001 
and 2020 captured in the USCS database. Statistical analysis was performed from 
June to September 2023.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Incidence of angiosarcoma, demographics of patients 
with angiosarcoma, and extent of disease at presentation.
RESULTS: The study included 19 289 patients (median age, 71 years [IQR, 59-80 
years]; 10 506 women [54.5%]) with a new diagnosis of angiosarcoma. The US 
incidence of angiosarcoma doubled between 2001 (657 cases) and 2019 (1312 
cases), reflecting both an increase in the adjusted incidence rate of 1.6% per 
year (P = .001), to 3.3 cases per 1 000 000 person-years (95% CI, 3.1-3.5 cases 
per 1 000 000 person-years), and an increase in the population at risk. In 2020, 
the reported incidence rate (3.0 cases per 1 000 000 person-years) and cases of 
angiosarcoma (n = 1159) were modestly lower than in 2019. Overall, 72.3% of 
cases of angiosarcoma (n = 13 955) were cutaneous, subcutaneous, or breast 
angiosarcomas; 24.4% were visceral (n = 4701); and 3.3% were located in unknown 
or rare primary sites (n = 633). Secondary breast and chest wall angiosarcomas 
among women represented the largest contribution to increasing incidence. Among 
breast angiosarcomas, 99.2% (2684 of 2705) were in women and 71.9% (1944 of 
2705) were secondary. A total of 80.4% of chest wall or thorax cases among women 
(1861 of 2316) were secondary vs 26.5% among men (112 of 422), and 63.9% of 
upper extremity cases among women (205 of 321) were secondary vs 26.8% (56 of 
209) among men (P = .001). Rates of secondary angiosarcoma in the abdomen and 
lower extremities were similar between men and women. The incidence rate of 
visceral angiosarcoma was also found to be increasing (1.5% per year; P = .001).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This cross-sectional study describes angiosarcoma 
presentation patterns and incidence rates in the US over a 20-year period and 
shows that the number of cases in men and women increased, with the greatest 
increase among women with secondary angiosarcoma of the chest, breast, and upper 
extremity. These data increase awareness of a rare but highly morbid disease and 
highlight the need for improved early detection of angiosarcoma among patients 
at high risk, such as women with a history of breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.6235
PMCID: PMC11015348
PMID: 38607625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Wagner 
reported receiving personal fees from Adaptimmune, Deciphera, Epizyme, Aadi 
Bioscience, and PharmaEssentia outside the submitted work. Dr Cranmer reported 
receiving grants to institution from Merck, Exelixis, Eli Lilly, Avacta, AADi 
Biosciences, Philogen, InhibRX, Zentalis, Boehringer Ingelheim; and personal 
fees from AADi Biosciences and Boehringer Ingelheim outside the submitted work. 
No other disclosures were reported.