---
reference_id: "PMID:22173792"
title: Consensus treatment recommendations for late-onset Pompe disease.
authors:
- Cupler EJ
- Berger KI
- Leshner RT
- Wolfe GI
- Han JJ
- Barohn RJ
- Kissel JT
- AANEM Consensus Committee on Late-onset Pompe Disease
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/mus.22329
keywords:
- "Databases, Bibliographic/statistics & numerical data"
- Disease Progression
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/complications, diagnosis, history, therapy"
- Guidelines as Topic
- "History, 20th Century"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consensus treatment recommendations for late-onset Pompe disease.
**Authors:** Cupler EJ, Berger KI, Leshner RT, Wolfe GI, Han JJ, Barohn RJ, Kissel JT, AANEM Consensus Committee on Late-onset Pompe Disease
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.22329](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.22329)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2012 Mar;45(3):319-33. doi: 10.1002/mus.22329. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Consensus treatment recommendations for late-onset Pompe disease.

Cupler EJ(1), Berger KI, Leshner RT, Wolfe GI, Han JJ, Barohn RJ, Kissel JT; 
AANEM Consensus Committee on Late-onset Pompe Disease.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
Oregon, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Pompe disease is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder caused by 
deficiency of the glycogen-degrading lysosomal enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase. 
Late-onset Pompe disease is a multisystem condition, with a heterogeneous 
clinical presentation that mimics other neuromuscular disorders.
METHODS: Objective is to propose consensus-based treatment and management 
recommendations for late-onset Pompe disease.
METHODS: A systematic review of the literature by a panel of specialists with 
expertise in Pompe disease was undertaken.
CONCLUSIONS: A multidisciplinary team should be involved to properly treat the 
pulmonary, neuromuscular, orthopedic, and gastrointestinal elements of 
late-onset Pompe disease. Presymptomatic patients with subtle objective signs of 
Pompe disease (and patients symptomatic at diagnosis) should begin treatment 
with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) immediately; presymptomatic patients 
without symptoms or signs should be observed without use of ERT. After 1 year of 
ERT, patients' condition should be reevaluated to determine whether ERT should 
be continued.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.22329
PMCID: PMC3534745
PMID: 22173792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]