---
reference_id: "PMID:39127989"
title: Update on the Genetics of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
authors:
- Jovanovic M
- Marini JC
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-024-01266-5
keywords:
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Animals
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on the Genetics of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
**Authors:** Jovanovic M, Marini JC
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-024-01266-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-024-01266-5)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2024 Dec;115(6):891-914. doi: 10.1007/s00223-024-01266-5. 
Epub 2024 Aug 11.

Update on the Genetics of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.

Jovanovic M(1)(2), Marini JC(3).

Author information:
(1)Section on Heritable Disorders of Bone and Extracellular Matrix, Eunice 
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Section on Adolescent Bone and Body Composition, Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Section on Heritable Disorders of Bone and Extracellular Matrix, Eunice 
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. oidoc@helix.nih.gov.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous heritable skeletal dysplasia 
characterized by bone fragility and deformity, growth deficiency, and other 
secondary connective tissue defects. OI is now understood as a collagen-related 
disorder caused by defects of genes whose protein products interact with 
collagen for folding, post-translational modification, processing and 
trafficking, affecting bone mineralization and osteoblast differentiation. This 
review provides the latest updates on genetics of OI, including new developments 
in both dominant and rare OI forms, as well as the signaling pathways involved 
in OI pathophysiology. There is a special emphasis on discoveries of recessive 
mutations in TENT5A, MESD, KDELR2 and CCDC134 whose causality of OI types XIX, 
XX, XXI and XXI, respectively, is now established and expends the complexity of 
mechanisms underlying OI to overlap LRP5/6 and MAPK/ERK pathways. We also review 
in detail new discoveries connecting the known OI types to each other, which may 
underlie an eventual understanding of a final common pathway in OI cellular and 
bone biology.

© 2024. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-024-01266-5
PMCID: PMC11607015
PMID: 39127989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: None of the 
authors has any conflict of interest.