---
reference_id: "PMID:17192541"
title: Deficiency of cartilage-associated protein in recessive lethal osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Barnes AM
- Chang W
- Morello R
- Cabral WA
- Weis M
- Eyre DR
- Leikin S
- Makareeva E
- Kuznetsova N
- Uveges TE
- Ashok A
- Flor AW
- Mulvihill JJ
- Wilson PL
- Sundaram UT
- Lee B
- Marini JC
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa063804
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deficiency of cartilage-associated protein in recessive lethal osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Barnes AM, Chang W, Morello R, Cabral WA, Weis M, Eyre DR, Leikin S, Makareeva E, Kuznetsova N, Uveges TE, Ashok A, Flor AW, Mulvihill JJ, Wilson PL, Sundaram UT, Lee B, Marini JC
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa063804](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa063804)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2006 Dec 28;355(26):2757-64. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa063804.

Deficiency of cartilage-associated protein in recessive lethal osteogenesis 
imperfecta.

Barnes AM(1), Chang W, Morello R, Cabral WA, Weis M, Eyre DR, Leikin S, 
Makareeva E, Kuznetsova N, Uveges TE, Ashok A, Flor AW, Mulvihill JJ, Wilson PL, 
Sundaram UT, Lee B, Marini JC.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Classic osteogenesis imperfecta, an autosomal dominant disorder associated with 
osteoporosis and bone fragility, is caused by mutations in the genes for type I 
collagen. A recessive form of the disorder has long been suspected. Since the 
loss of cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP), which is required for 
post-translational prolyl 3-hydroxylation of collagen, causes severe 
osteoporosis in mice, we investigated whether CRTAP deficiency is associated 
with recessive osteogenesis imperfecta. Three of 10 children with lethal or 
severe osteogenesis imperfecta, who did not have a primary collagen defect yet 
had excess post-translational modification of collagen, were found to have a 
recessive condition resulting in CRTAP deficiency, suggesting that prolyl 
3-hydroxylation of type I collagen is important for bone formation.

Copyright 2006 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa063804
PMCID: PMC7509984
PMID: 17192541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.