---
reference_id: "PMID:38690727"
title: "Complement regulation in the eye: implications for age-related macular degeneration."
authors:
- Wilke GA
- Apte RS
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI178296
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complement regulation in the eye: implications for age-related macular degeneration.
**Authors:** Wilke GA, Apte RS
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI178296](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI178296)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 May 1;134(9):e178296. doi: 10.1172/JCI178296.

Complement regulation in the eye: implications for age-related macular 
degeneration.

Wilke GA(1), Apte RS(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)John F. Hardesty, MD, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences.
(2)Department of Medicine, and.
(3)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Careful regulation of the complement system is critical for enabling complement 
proteins to titrate immune defense while also preventing collateral tissue 
damage from poorly controlled inflammation. In the eye, this balance between 
complement activity and inhibition is crucial, as a low level of basal 
complement activity is necessary to support ocular immune privilege, a 
prerequisite for maintaining vision. Dysregulated complement activation 
contributes to parainflammation, a low level of inflammation triggered by 
cellular damage that functions to reestablish homeostasis, or outright 
inflammation that disrupts the visual axis. Complement dysregulation has been 
implicated in many ocular diseases, including glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, 
and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). In the last two decades, complement 
activity has been the focus of intense investigation in AMD pathogenesis, 
leading to the development of novel therapeutics for the treatment of atrophic 
AMD. This Review outlines recent advances and challenges, highlighting 
therapeutic approaches that have advanced to clinical trials, as well as 
providing a general overview of the complement system in the posterior segment 
of the eye and selected ocular diseases.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI178296
PMCID: PMC11060743
PMID: 38690727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: RSA is a cofounder of 
Metro Biotech and Mobius Scientific. RSA is an advisor to Delavie Sciences, 
which is a subsidiary of EdenRoc Sciences, Roche, New Amsterdam Pharma, and 
QBioMed. RSA’s employer Washington University has intellectual property filings 
and patents issued that have RSA listed as an inventor.