---
reference_id: "PMID:39075538"
title: Clinical outcomes of patients with mut-type methylmalonic acidemia identified through expanded newborn screening in China.
authors:
- Ling S
- Wu S
- Shuai R
- Yu Y
- Qiu W
- Wei H
- Yang C
- Xu P
- Zou H
- Feng J
- Niu T
- Hu H
- Zhang H
- Liang L
- Wang Y
- Chen T
- Xu F
- Gu X
- Han L
journal: Hum Genomics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40246-024-00646-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical outcomes of patients with mut-type methylmalonic acidemia identified through expanded newborn screening in China.
**Authors:** Ling S, Wu S, Shuai R, Yu Y, Qiu W, Wei H, Yang C, Xu P, Zou H, Feng J, Niu T, Hu H, Zhang H, Liang L, Wang Y, Chen T, Xu F, Gu X, Han L
**Journal:** Hum Genomics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40246-024-00646-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40246-024-00646-0)

## Content

1. Hum Genomics. 2024 Jul 29;18(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s40246-024-00646-0.

Clinical outcomes of patients with mut-type methylmalonic acidemia identified 
through expanded newborn screening in China.

Ling S(#)(1), Wu S(#)(2), Shuai R(1), Yu Y(1), Qiu W(1), Wei H(2), Yang C(3), Xu 
P(3), Zou H(4), Feng J(5), Niu T(6), Hu H(7), Zhang H(1), Liang L(1), Wang Y(1), 
Chen T(1), Xu F(1), Gu X(1), Han L(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology/Genetics, Shanghai Institute for 
Pediatric Research, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Henan Key Laboratory of 
Children's Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Henan Children's Hospital, 
Children's Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou Children's 
Hospital, Zhengzhou, 450018, China.
(3)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Jining Maternal and Child Health Care 
Hospital, Jining, China.
(4)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Jinan Maternal and Child Health Care 
Hospital, Jinan, China.
(5)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Shijiazhuang Maternal and Child Health 
Care Hospital, Shijiazhuang, China.
(6)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Shandong Maternal and Child Health Care 
Hospital, Jinan, China.
(7)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Hefei Maternal and Child Health Care 
Hospital, Hefei, China.
(8)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology/Genetics, Shanghai Institute for 
Pediatric Research, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai, China. hanlianshu@xinhuamed.com.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Isolated methylmalonic acidemia, an autosomal recessive disorder of 
propionate metabolism, is usually caused by mutations in the methylmalonyl-CoA 
mutase gene (mut-type). Because no universal consensus was made on whether 
mut-type methylmalonic acidemia should be included in newborn screening (NBS), 
we aimed to compare the outcome of this disorder detected by NBS with that 
detected clinically and investigate the influence of NBS on the disease course.
DESIGN & METHODS: In this study, 168 patients with mut-type methylmalonic 
acidemia diagnosed by NBS were compared to 210 patients diagnosed after disease 
onset while NBS was not performed. Clinical data of these patients from 7 
metabolic centers in China were analyzed retrospectively, including initial 
manifestations, biochemical metabolites, the responsiveness of vitamin B12 
therapy, and gene variation, to explore different factors on the long-term 
outcome.
RESULTS: By comparison of the clinically-diagnosed patients, NBS-detected 
patients showed younger age at diagnosis, less incidence of disease onset, 
better responsiveness of vitamin B12, younger age at start of treatment, lower 
levels of biochemical features before and after treatment, and better long-term 
prognosis (P < 0.01). Onset of disease, blood C3/C2 ratio and unresponsiveness 
of vitamin B12 were more positively associated with poor outcomes of patients 
whether identified by NBS. Moreover, the factors above as well as older age at 
start of treatment were positively associated with mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: This research highly demonstrated NBS could prevent major 
disease-related events and allow an earlier treatment initiation. As a key 
prognostic factor, NBS is beneficial for improving the overall survival of 
infants with mut-type methylmalonic acidemia.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40246-024-00646-0
PMCID: PMC11288086
PMID: 39075538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. The 
authors declare no competing interests.