---
reference_id: "PMID:2061407"
title: Genetic and family study of the Apert syndrome.
authors:
- Cohen MM Jr
- Kreiborg S
journal: J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol
year: '1991'
keywords:
- Acrocephalosyndactylia/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and family study of the Apert syndrome.
**Authors:** Cohen MM Jr, Kreiborg S
**Journal:** J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol (1991)

## Content

1. J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol. 1991 Jan-Mar;11(1):7-17.

Genetic and family study of the Apert syndrome.

Cohen MM Jr(1), Kreiborg S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.

Of 119 patients with the Apert syndrome, 94 pedigrees are available for study. 
Selected family histories and recorded events during pregnancy are also 
reported. The sex ratio is 1:1 (60 males, 59 females). All 94 pedigrees except 
one (an affected father and daughter) represent sporadic instances. Combining 
our cases with those available in the literature, only nine familial instances 
are known to date. The familial cases, the equal number of affected males and 
females, and the increased paternal age in sporadic cases strongly suggest 
autosomal dominant inheritance. The rarity of familial instances can be 
explained by reduced genetic fitness of affected individuals because severe 
malformations and the presence of mental deficiency, found in many cases, 
diminish desirability as mates. The variability of the syndrome has been defined 
mainly on the basis of sporadic cases. High resolution banding was normal in 
five recently studied cases.

PMID: 2061407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]