---
reference_id: "PMID:40102258"
title: "Hereditary Medullary Thyroid Cancer: Genotype-Phenotype Correlation."
authors:
- Frank-Raue K
- Raue F
journal: Recent Results Cancer Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-80396-3_7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine/genetics"
- Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2a/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Carcinoma, Medullary/genetics, congenital"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2b/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Medullary Thyroid Cancer: Genotype-Phenotype Correlation.
**Authors:** Frank-Raue K, Raue F
**Journal:** Recent Results Cancer Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-80396-3_7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-80396-3_7)

## Content

1. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2025;223:183-209. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-80396-3_7.

Hereditary Medullary Thyroid Cancer: Genotype-Phenotype Correlation.

Frank-Raue K(1)(2), Raue F(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Practice, Heidelberg, Germany.
karin.frank.raue@raue-endokrinologie.de.
(2)Medical Faculty, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
karin.frank.raue@raue-endokrinologie.de.
(3)Endocrine Practice, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Medical Faculty, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) is an autosomal dominant hereditary
cancer syndrome caused by germline variants in the REarranged during
Transfection (RET) proto-oncogene. MEN2 is caused by autosomal dominant
gain-of-function mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. There are two clinically
distinct types of MEN2 syndrome, termed MEN2A and MEN2B. MEN2A is associated
with medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and the less frequent occurrence of
pheochromocytoma, primary hyperparathyroidism, or both, rarely with cutaneous
lichen amyloidosis or Hirschsprung's disease. MEN2B is associated with MTC,
pheochromocytoma, and other noncancerous abnormalities, such as Marfanoid
habitus and ganglioneuromas of the intestines. Specific RET mutations suggest a
predilection toward a particular phenotype and clinical course with strong
genotype-phenotype correlation. Based upon these genotype-phenotype
correlations, RET mutations are stratified into three risk levels, i.e.,
highest, high, and moderate risk, based on the age of onset and the penetrance
of the MTC. Children in the highest risk category develop MTC within the first
year of life and should undergo thyroidectomy in their first year, perhaps even
in their first months of life. In children in the high-risk category, ultrasound
of the neck and calcitonin (Ctn) measurement should be performed prior to
thyroidectomy. Thyroidectomy should typically be performed at 5 years of age or
earlier, depending on the presence of elevated serum Ctn levels. However,
heterogeneity in disease expression and progression within these groups varies
considerably. To personalize disease management, the decision regarding the age
of prophylactic thyroidectomy is no longer based upon genotype alone but is
currently driven by additional clinical data, the most important being serum Ctn
levels. In the moderate-risk group, the timing of thyroidectomy is particularly
dependent on the Ctn level. Personalized management also includes decisions
about the best age to begin biochemical screening for pheochromocytoma and
primary hyperparathyroidism.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-80396-3_7
PMID: 40102258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
