---
reference_id: "PMID:11047757"
title: A novel X-linked disorder of immune deficiency and hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is allelic to incontinentia pigmenti and due to mutations in IKK-gamma (NEMO).
authors:
- Zonana J
- Elder ME
- Schneider LC
- Orlow SJ
- Moss C
- Golabi M
- Shapira SK
- Farndon PA
- Wara DW
- Emmal SA
- Ferguson BM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1086/316914
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alleles
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/complications, genetics"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- Humans
- I-kappa B Kinase
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/complications, genetics"
- Incontinentia Pigmenti/genetics
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- NF-kappa B/physiology
- Pedigree
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/chemistry, genetics"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- X Chromosome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel X-linked disorder of immune deficiency and hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is allelic to incontinentia pigmenti and due to mutations in IKK-gamma (NEMO).
**Authors:** Zonana J, Elder ME, Schneider LC, Orlow SJ, Moss C, Golabi M, Shapira SK, Farndon PA, Wara DW, Emmal SA, Ferguson BM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1086/316914](https://doi.org/10.1086/316914)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Dec;67(6):1555-62. doi: 10.1086/316914. Epub 2000 Oct 24.

A novel X-linked disorder of immune deficiency and hypohidrotic ectodermal 
dysplasia is allelic to incontinentia pigmenti and due to mutations in IKK-gamma 
(NEMO).

Zonana J(1), Elder ME, Schneider LC, Orlow SJ, Moss C, Golabi M, Shapira SK, 
Farndon PA, Wara DW, Emmal SA, Ferguson BM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health Sciences 
University, Portland, OR 97221, USA. zonanaj@ohsu.edu

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Sep;69(3):664-6. doi: 10.1086/323003.

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED), a congenital disorder of teeth, hair, 
and eccrine sweat glands, is usually inherited as an X-linked recessive trait, 
although rarer autosomal dominant and recessive forms exist. We have studied 
males from four families with HED and immunodeficiency (HED-ID), in which the 
disorder segregates as an X-linked recessive trait. Affected males manifest 
dysgammaglobulinemia and, despite therapy, have significant morbidity and 
mortality from recurrent infections. Recently, mutations in IKK-gamma (NEMO) 
have been shown to cause familial incontinentia pigmenti (IP). Unlike HED-ID, IP 
affects females and, with few exceptions, causes male prenatal lethality. 
IKK-gamma is required for the activation of the transcription factor known as 
"nuclear factor kappa B" and plays an important role in T and B cell function. 
We hypothesize that "milder" mutations at this locus may cause HED-ID. In all 
four families, sequence analysis reveals exon 10 mutations affecting the 
carboxy-terminal end of the IKK-gamma protein, a domain believed to connect the 
IKK signalsome complex to upstream activators. The findings define a new 
X-linked recessive immunodeficiency syndrome, distinct from other types of HED 
and immunodeficiency syndromes. The data provide further evidence that the 
development of ectodermal appendages is mediated through a tumor necrosis 
factor/tumor necrosis factor receptor-like signaling pathway, with the IKK 
signalsome complex playing a significant role.

DOI: 10.1086/316914
PMCID: PMC1287930
PMID: 11047757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]