---
reference_id: "PMID:7847369"
title: Achondroplasia is defined by recurrent G380R mutations of FGFR3.
authors:
- Bellus GA
- Hefferon TW
- Ortiz de Luna RI
- Hecht JT
- Horton WA
- Machado M
- Kaitila I
- McIntosh I
- Francomano CA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1995'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Achondroplasia is defined by recurrent G380R mutations of FGFR3.
**Authors:** Bellus GA, Hefferon TW, Ortiz de Luna RI, Hecht JT, Horton WA, Machado M, Kaitila I, McIntosh I, Francomano CA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1995)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1995 Feb;56(2):368-73.

Achondroplasia is defined by recurrent G380R mutations of FGFR3.

Bellus GA(1), Hefferon TW, Ortiz de Luna RI, Hecht JT, Horton WA, Machado M, 
Kaitila I, McIntosh I, Francomano CA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore.

Genomic DNA from 154 unrelated individuals with achondroplasia was evaluated for 
mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) transmembrane 
domain. All but one, an atypical case, were found to have a glycine-to-arginine 
substitution at codon 380. Of these, 150 had a G-to-A transition at nt 1138, and 
3 had a G-to-C transversion at this same position. On the basis of estimates of 
the prevalence of achondroplasia, the mutation rate at the FGFR3 1138 guanosine 
nucleotide is two to three orders of magnitude higher than that previously 
reported for tranversions and transitions in CpG dinucleotides. To date, this 
represents the most mutable single nucleotide reported in the human genome. The 
homogeneity of mutations in achondroplasia is unprecedented for an autosomal 
dominant disorder and may explain the relative lack of heterogeneity in the 
achondroplasia phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1801129
PMID: 7847369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]