---
reference_id: "PMID:27111231"
title: "Hyperactivation of JAK1 tyrosine kinase induces stepwise, progressive pruritic dermatitis."
authors:
- Yasuda T
- Fukada T
- Nishida K
- Nakayama M
- Matsuda M
- Miura I
- Dainichi T
- Fukuda S
- Kabashima K
- Nakaoka S
- Bin BH
- Kubo M
- Ohno H
- Hasegawa T
- Ohara O
- Koseki H
- Wakana S
- Yoshida H
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1172/JCI82887
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- "Dermatitis/enzymology, etiology, genetics"
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/enzymology, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Enzyme Activation/genetics
- Humans
- "Janus Kinase 1/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C3H"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Mutant Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Pruritus/enzymology, etiology, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- "Skin/enzymology, immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperactivation of JAK1 tyrosine kinase induces stepwise, progressive pruritic dermatitis.
**Authors:** Yasuda T, Fukada T, Nishida K, Nakayama M, Matsuda M, Miura I, Dainichi T, Fukuda S, Kabashima K, Nakaoka S, Bin BH, Kubo M, Ohno H, Hasegawa T, Ohara O, Koseki H, Wakana S, Yoshida H
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI82887](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI82887)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2016 Jun 1;126(6):2064-76. doi: 10.1172/JCI82887. Epub 2016 Apr
 25.

Hyperactivation of JAK1 tyrosine kinase induces stepwise, progressive pruritic 
dermatitis.

Yasuda T, Fukada T, Nishida K, Nakayama M, Matsuda M, Miura I, Dainichi T, 
Fukuda S, Kabashima K, Nakaoka S, Bin BH, Kubo M, Ohno H, Hasegawa T, Ohara O, 
Koseki H, Wakana S, Yoshida H.

Skin homeostasis is maintained by the continuous proliferation and 
differentiation of epidermal cells. The skin forms a strong but flexible barrier 
against microorganisms as well as physical and chemical insults; however, the 
physiological mechanisms that maintain this barrier are not fully understood. 
Here, we have described a mutant mouse that spontaneously develops pruritic 
dermatitis as the result of an initial defect in skin homeostasis that is 
followed by induction of a Th2-biased immune response. These mice harbor a 
mutation that results in a single aa substitution in the JAK1 tyrosine kinase 
that results in hyperactivation, thereby leading to skin serine protease 
overexpression and disruption of skin barrier function. Accordingly, treatment 
with an ointment to maintain normal skin barrier function protected mutant mice 
from dermatitis onset. Pharmacological inhibition of JAK1 also delayed disease 
onset. Together, these findings indicate that JAK1-mediated signaling cascades 
in skin regulate the expression of proteases associated with the maintenance of 
skin barrier function and demonstrate that perturbation of these pathways can 
lead to the development of spontaneous pruritic dermatitis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI82887
PMCID: PMC4887165
PMID: 27111231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]