---
reference_id: "PMID:35578548"
title: Clinicopathological alteration of symptoms with serotype among dengue infected pediatric patients.
authors:
- Verma P
- Banerjee S
- Baskey U
- Dutta S
- Bakshi S
- Das R
- Samanta S
- Dutta S
- Sadhukhan PC
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.27862
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathological alteration of symptoms with serotype among dengue infected pediatric patients.
**Authors:** Verma P, Banerjee S, Baskey U, Dutta S, Bakshi S, Das R, Samanta S, Dutta S, Sadhukhan PC
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.27862](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.27862)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2022 Sep;94(9):4348-4358. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27862. Epub 2022 May
26.

Clinicopathological alteration of symptoms with serotype among dengue infected 
pediatric patients.

Verma P(1), Banerjee S(2), Baskey U(1), Dutta S(1), Bakshi S(1), Das R(1), 
Samanta S(3), Dutta S(1), Sadhukhan PC(1).

Author information:
(1)Indian Council of Medical Research-National Institute of Cholera and Enteric 
Diseases, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(2)R. G. Kar Medical College and Hospital, Khudiram Bose Sarani, Kolkata, West 
Bengal, India.
(3)Dr. B. C. Roy Post-Graduate Institute of Pediatric Sciences, Kolkata, West 
Bengal, India.

Dengue fever is a self-limiting, acute febrile illness caused by an arbovirus. 
This infection may be asymptomatic or symptomatic with its potential 
life-threatening form as DHF/DSS. Severe dengue cases occur typically in 
children due to overproduction of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory 
cytokines (called cytokines storm) as well as increased microvascular 
permeability in them. This study aimed to find circulating dengue serotype and 
their clinicopathological association among pediatric patients admitted to 
tertiary care hospitals in Kolkata, India. Overall, 210 patients were 
approached, among them, 170 dengue suspected children admitted to three tertiary 
care hospitals were included in this study. Dengue samples were screened for the 
presence of dengue NS1 antigen and IgM antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay. Viral RNA was extracted from NS1 seropositive serum samples and subjected 
to molecular serotyping by semi-nested reverse-transcription polymerase chain 
reaction. All patients were followed up for clinical manifestations and 
biochemical parameters associated with dengue. Cocirculation of all four 
serotypes was observed and DENV2 was the major circulating strain. Physiological 
classification of associated clinical symptoms was done as per WHO guideline and 
represented as a percentage variable. A multivariate logistic regression 
approach was used for making a regression model including dengue-associated 
clinical symptoms with dengue positivity or negativity as dependent variables. 
Thrombocytopenia was observed in 69% of patients and the commonest bleeding 
manifestation was petechia. Liver function profiles of infected patients were 
observed during follow-up and represented using a box plot. A significant change 
in trends of dengue-associated clinical manifestations and differential 
expression of liver functional profile with different phases of transition of 
dengue fever was observed in this study population.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27862
PMID: 35578548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]