---
reference_id: "PMID:11748306"
title: Distinct phenotypes distinguish the molecular classes of Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Lossie AC
- Whitney MM
- Amidon D
- Dong HJ
- Chen P
- Theriaque D
- Hutson A
- Nicholls RD
- Zori RT
- Williams CA
- Driscoll DJ
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.38.12.834
keywords:
- Adult
- "Angelman Syndrome/classification, etiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Blotting, Southern"
- Body Height/genetics
- Body Mass Index
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- DNA Methylation
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genomic Imprinting/genetics
- Genotype
- "Growth Disorders/genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Language Development Disorders/genetics, physiopathology"
- Ligases/genetics
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic/genetics"
- Psychomotor Performance
- "Seizures/genetics, physiopathology"
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct phenotypes distinguish the molecular classes of Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Lossie AC, Whitney MM, Amidon D, Dong HJ, Chen P, Theriaque D, Hutson A, Nicholls RD, Zori RT, Williams CA, Driscoll DJ
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.38.12.834](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.38.12.834)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2001 Dec;38(12):834-45. doi: 10.1136/jmg.38.12.834.

Distinct phenotypes distinguish the molecular classes of Angelman syndrome.

Lossie AC(1), Whitney MM, Amidon D, Dong HJ, Chen P, Theriaque D, Hutson A,
Nicholls RD, Zori RT, Williams CA, Driscoll DJ.

Author information:
(1)R C Philips Unit and Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-0296, USA.

BACKGROUND: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a severe neurobehavioural disorder caused
by defects in the maternally derived imprinted domain located on 15q11-q13. Most
patients acquire AS by one of five mechanisms: (1) a large interstitial deletion
of 15q11-q13; (2) paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) of chromosome 15; (3) an
imprinting defect (ID); (4) a mutation in the E3 ubiquitin protein ligase gene
(UBE3A); or (5) unidentified mechanism(s). All classical patients from these
classes exhibit four cardinal features, including severe developmental delay
and/or mental retardation, profound speech impairment, a movement and balance
disorder, and AS specific behaviour typified by an easily excitable personality
with an inappropriately happy affect. In addition, patients can display other
characteristics, including microcephaly, hypopigmentation, and seizures.
METHODS: We restricted the present study to 104 patients (93 families) with a
classical AS phenotype. All of our patients were evaluated for 22 clinical
variables including growth parameters, acquisition of motor skills, and history
of seizures. In addition, molecular and cytogenetic analyses were used to assign
a molecular class (I-V) to each patient for genotype-phenotype correlations.
RESULTS: In our patient repository, 22% of our families had normal DNA
methylation analyses along 15q11-q13. Of these, 44% of sporadic patients had
mutations within UBE3A, the largest percentage found to date. Our data indicate
that the five molecular classes can be divided into four phenotypic groups:
deletions, UPD and ID patients, UBE3A mutation patients, and subjects with
unknown aetiology. Deletion patients are the most severely affected, while UPD
and ID patients are the least. Differences in body mass index, head
circumference, and seizure activity are the most pronounced among the classes.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinically, we were unable to distinguish between UPD and ID
patients, suggesting that 15q11-q13 contains the only significant maternally
expressed imprinted genes on chromosome 15.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.38.12.834
PMCID: PMC1734773
PMID: 11748306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
