---
reference_id: "PMID:38677816"
title: Management of Pilonidal Disease and Hidradenitis Suppurativa.
authors:
- Singh S
- Desai K
- Gillern S
journal: Surg Clin North Am
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.suc.2023.11.003
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/therapy, surgery, complications, diagnosis"
- "Pilonidal Sinus/surgery, therapy, diagnosis"
- Hair Removal/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Pilonidal Disease and Hidradenitis Suppurativa.
**Authors:** Singh S, Desai K, Gillern S
**Journal:** Surg Clin North Am (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.suc.2023.11.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.suc.2023.11.003)

## Content

1. Surg Clin North Am. 2024 Jun;104(3):503-515. doi: 10.1016/j.suc.2023.11.003. 
Epub 2023 Dec 13.

Management of Pilonidal Disease and Hidradenitis Suppurativa.

Singh S(1), Desai K(1), Gillern S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Tripler Army Medical Center, 1 Jarrett White Road, 
TAMC, Honolulu, HI 96859, USA.
(2)Colon & Rectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tripler Army Medical Center, 1 
Jarrett White Road, TAMC, Honolulu, HI 96859, USA. Electronic address: 
suegillern@me.com.

Pilonidal disease and hidradenitis suppurativa affect healthy young adults, 
causing discomfort and pain that leads to loss of work productivity and should 
be approached in a personalized manner. Patients with pilonidal disease should 
engage in hair removal to the sacrococcygeal region and surgical options 
considered. Hidradenitis suppurativa can be a morbid and challenging disease 
process. Medical management with topical agents, antibiotics, and biologics 
should be used initially but wide local excision should be considered in severe 
or refractory cases of the disease.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.suc.2023.11.003
PMID: 38677816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Authors have nothing to disclose.