---
reference_id: "PMID:12210337"
title: Further delineation of cardiac abnormalities in Costello syndrome.
authors:
- Lin AE
- Grossfeld PD
- Hamilton RM
- Smoot L
- Gripp KW
- Proud V
- Weksberg R
- Wheeler P
- Picker J
- Irons M
- Zackai E
- Marino B
- Scott CI Jr
- Nicholson L
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10558
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/pathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic/diagnosis"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnosis"
- Heart Murmurs/diagnosis
- Humans
- Infant
- Intellectual Disability/diagnosis
- Male
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Further delineation of cardiac abnormalities in Costello syndrome.
**Authors:** Lin AE, Grossfeld PD, Hamilton RM, Smoot L, Gripp KW, Proud V, Weksberg R, Wheeler P, Picker J, Irons M, Zackai E, Marino B, Scott CI Jr, Nicholson L
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.10558](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.10558)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Aug 1;111(2):115-29. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10558.

Further delineation of cardiac abnormalities in Costello syndrome.

Lin AE(1), Grossfeld PD, Hamilton RM, Smoot L, Gripp KW, Proud V, Weksberg R, 
Wheeler P, Picker J, Irons M, Zackai E, Marino B, Scott CI Jr, Nicholson L.

Author information:
(1)Teratology Unit, Pediatric Service, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA. ALIN@Partners.org

We review the cardiac abnormalities in 94 patients (27 new, 67 literature) with 
Costello syndrome, an increasingly recognized syndrome consisting of increased 
birth weight, postnatal growth retardation, and distinctive facial, skin, and 
musculoskeletal features (MIM 218040). A cardiac abnormality was found in 59 
(63%) patients, with each of three categories occurring in approximately 
one-third of patients. A cardiovascular malformation (CVM) was noted in 30%, 
typically pulmonic stenosis (46% of those with a CVM). Cardiac hypertrophy was 
reported in 34%, which involved the left ventricle in 50% and was usually 
consistent with classic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). A variety of rhythm 
disturbances were reported in 33%. Most (74%) were atrial tachycardia that was 
reported as supraventricular, chaotic, multifocal, or ectopic. Of 31 patients 
with a rhythm abnormality, 22 (68%) had an additional abnormality, i.e., CVM 
(4), cardiac hypertrophy (12), or both (6). Nine patients had isolated 
dysrhythmia, five (56%) of whom died. All of the 12 (13%) patients who died had 
a cardiac abnormality. One patient died of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, but in 
the remainder, a cardiac cause of death could not be disproved. All patients 
with Costello syndrome need a baseline cardiology evaluation with 
echocardiography and Holter monitoring. Additional prospective evaluations, even 
in patients without apparent cardiac abnormalities, would be prudent, although 
data are insufficient to propose a specific schedule.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.10558
PMID: 12210337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]