---
reference_id: "PMID:32021610"
title: Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome Phenotype in a Case with de novo KRAS Pathogenic Variant.
authors:
- Sanri A
- Gurkan H
- Demir S
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000504374
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome Phenotype in a Case with de novo KRAS Pathogenic Variant.
**Authors:** Sanri A, Gurkan H, Demir S
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000504374](https://doi.org/10.1159/000504374)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2020 Jan;10(6):344-347. doi: 10.1159/000504374. Epub 2019 Nov
26.

Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome Phenotype in a Case with de novo KRAS Pathogenic 
Variant.

Sanri A(1), Gurkan H(2), Demir S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Samsun Training and Research Hospital, 
Samsun, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Trakya University, 
Edirne, Turkey.

Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome is one of the developmental disorders caused 
by a dysregulation of the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. 
RASopathies share overlapping clinical features, making the diagnosis 
challenging, especially in the newborn period. The majority of CFC syndrome 
cases arise by a mutation in the BRAF, MAP2K1, MAP2K2, or (rarely) KRAS genes. 
Germline KRAS mutations are identified in a minority of CFC and Noonan syndrome 
cases. Here, we describe a patient with a KRAS mutation presenting with a CFC 
syndrome phenotype. The female patient was referred for genetic testing because 
of congenital exophthalmos. Her facial appearance is distinctive with a coarse 
face, exophthalmos, ptosis, downslanting palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, deep 
philtrum, downturned corners of the mouth, and a short neck. She suffered from 
feeding difficulties, poor weight gain, and developmental delay. The sequencing 
of the genes involved in the MAPK pathway (PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, KRAS, NRAS, 
MAP2K1, SHOC2, CBL, and SPRED1) identified a heterozygous de novo 
NM_004985.4:c.173C>T (p.Thr58Ile) in the KRAS gene. Germline KRAS mutations have 
been identified in approximately 2% of the reported NS cases and less than 5% of 
the reported CFC syndrome cases. Because CFC and Noonan syndrome share clinical 
overlapping features, the phenotype caused by KRAS mutations is often difficult 
to assign to one of the 2 entities. The mutation that we detected in our patient 
was previously reported in a patient with an Noonan syndrome phenotype. However, 
our patient predominantly exhibits CFC clinical features. In our case, coarse 
facial appearance and severe developmental delay help discriminate CFC from 
Noonan syndrome. Thus, patient follow-up, especially for delayed motor 
milestones suspected from RASopathies, is important for the discrimination of 
overlapping conditions as in the abovementioned syndromes.

Copyright © 2019 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000504374
PMCID: PMC6995951
PMID: 32021610

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.