---
reference_id: "PMID:36164924"
title: The standardisation of uveitis nomenclature (SUN) project.
authors:
- Jabs DA
- McCluskey P
- Palestine AG
- Thorne JE
- Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) Working Group
journal: Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ceo.14175
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The standardisation of uveitis nomenclature (SUN) project.
**Authors:** Jabs DA, McCluskey P, Palestine AG, Thorne JE, Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) Working Group
**Journal:** Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ceo.14175](https://doi.org/10.1111/ceo.14175)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2022 Sep 27:10.1111/ceo.14175. doi: 10.1111/ceo.14175. 
Online ahead of print.

The standardisation of uveitis nomenclature (SUN) project.

Jabs DA(1)(2), McCluskey P(3), Palestine AG(4), Thorne JE(1)(2); Standardization 
of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) Working Group.

Collaborators: Accorinti M, Acharya N, Amer R, Atmaca LS, Bar A, 
Barisani-Asenbauer T, Becker MD, Bélair ML, Belfort R Jr, Bhatt NP, Biswas J, 
Blodi B, Bodaghi B, Brézin AP, Butler NJ, Caspers L, Chee SP, Danis RP, Davis 
JL, de Smet MD, Denniston A, Deschênes J, Dick AD, Dodds EM, Dunn JP, Forrester 
JV, Foster CS, Galor A, Gangaputra S, Goldstein DA, Graham EM, Gritz DC, Gupta 
A, Gupta V, Habot-Wilner Z, Holland GN, Jabs DA, Jaffe GJ, Kaplan HJ, Kedhar S, 
Keino H, Kempen JH, Keorochana N, Kim SJ, Kitaichi N, Kramer M, Kuffova L, 
LeHoang P, Levinson R, Lightman S, Lim LL, Lobo AM, Lowder CY, Margolis T, 
McCluskey PJ, Mochizuki M, Muccioli C, Murray PI, Namba KI, Nascimento H, Neri 
P, Oden N, Ohno S, Okada AA, Pak JW, Palestine AG, Peterson JS, Pivetti-Pezzi P, 
Prabriputaloong-Stanzel T, Pulido JS, Rao NA, Read RW, Reed S, Rosenbaum JT, 
Rothova A, Saleem S, Samson CM, Sen HN, Sharief L, Shulman S, Smith JR, Smith 
WM, Srivastava S, Stanford M, Stawell R, Suhler EB, Sukavatcharin S, Thorne JE, 
Netzer OT, Toutain-Kidd C, Trusko BE, Van Gelder RN, Vitale A, Wakefield D, 
Watson S, Willermain F, Wittenberg SE, Yeh S, Zamir E, Zegans ME, Zierhut M, 
Jabs DA, McCluskey PJ, Oden N, Palestine AG, Peterson JS, Thorne JE, Trusko BE, 
Belfort R Jr, Dick AD, Jabs DA, McCluskey PJ, Oden N, Okada AA, Palestine AG, 
Peterson JS, Rosenbaum JT, Thorne JE, Trusko BE.

Author information:
(1)The Department of Epidemiology, Center for Clinical Trials and Evidence 
Synthesis, The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, The Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Save Sight Institute, Discipline of Ophthalmology, University of Sydney 
Faculty of Medicine and Health, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, Colorado, USA.

The uveitides are a collection of over 30 diseases characterised by intraocular 
inflammation. Previous work demonstrated that the agreement among uveitis 
experts on diagnosis was modest at best with some pairs of experts having chance 
alone agreement on selected diseases. The Standardisation of Uveitis 
Nomenclature (SUN) is a17-year collaboration among experts in uveitis, ocular 
image grading, informatics, and machine learning to improve clinical and 
translational uveitis research. The SUN "Developing Classification Criteria for 
the Uveitides" project used a rigorous, multi-phase approach to develop 
classification criteria for 25 of the most common uveitic diseases. The 
project's phases were: (1) informatics; (2) case collection; (3) case selection; 
(4) machine learning; and (5) consensus review and publication. The results were 
classification criteria with a high degree of accuracy (93.3%-99.3% depending on 
anatomic class of the uveitis), the goal of which is to form the basis for 
future uveitis research.

© 2022 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ceo.14175
PMCID: PMC10040472
PMID: 36164924

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None