---
reference_id: "PMID:38376469"
title: "Tirasemtiv enhances submaximal muscle tension in an Acta1:p.Asp286Gly mouse model of nemaline myopathy."
authors:
- Galli RA
- Borsboom TC
- Gineste C
- Brocca L
- Rossi M
- Hwee DT
- Malik FI
- Bottinelli R
- Gondin J
- Pellegrino MA
- de Winter JM
- Ottenheijm CAC
journal: J Gen Physiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1085/jgp.202313471
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tirasemtiv enhances submaximal muscle tension in an Acta1:p.Asp286Gly mouse model of nemaline myopathy.
**Authors:** Galli RA, Borsboom TC, Gineste C, Brocca L, Rossi M, Hwee DT, Malik FI, Bottinelli R, Gondin J, Pellegrino MA, de Winter JM, Ottenheijm CAC
**Journal:** J Gen Physiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1085/jgp.202313471](https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313471)

## Content

1. J Gen Physiol. 2024 Apr 1;156(4):e202313471. doi: 10.1085/jgp.202313471. Epub 
2024 Feb 20.

Tirasemtiv enhances submaximal muscle tension in an Acta1:p.Asp286Gly mouse 
model of nemaline myopathy.

Galli RA(1)(2), Borsboom TC(1), Gineste C(3), Brocca L(4), Rossi M(4), Hwee 
DT(5), Malik FI(5), Bottinelli R(4)(6), Gondin J(3)(7), Pellegrino MA(4), de 
Winter JM(1)(2)(8), Ottenheijm CAC(1)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Amsterdam UMC Location Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Physiology , Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam Movement Sciences, Musculoskeletal Health and Tissue Function and 
Regeneration, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Aix-Marseille University, CNRS, CRMBM , Marseille, France.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Research and Early Development, Cytokinetics Inc. , South San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(6)IRCCS Mondino Foundation , Pavia, Italy.
(7)Institut NeuroMyoGène, Unité Physiopathologie et Génétique du Neurone et du 
Muscle, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS UMR 5261, INSERM U1315, 
Université Lyon , Lyon, France.
(8)Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Heart Failure and Arrhythmias, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(9)Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Pulmonary Hypertension and 
Atherosclerosis, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ, USA.

Nemaline myopathies are the most common form of congenital myopathies. Variants 
in ACTA1 (NEM3) comprise 15-25% of all nemaline myopathy cases. Patients 
harboring variants in ACTA1 present with a heterogeneous disease course 
characterized by stable or progressive muscle weakness and, in severe cases, 
respiratory failure and death. To date, no specific treatments are available. 
Since NEM3 is an actin-based thin filament disease, we tested the ability of 
tirasemtiv, a fast skeletal muscle troponin activator, to improve skeletal 
muscle function in a mouse model of NEM3, harboring the patient-based 
p.Asp286Gly variant in Acta1. Acute and long-term tirasemtiv treatment 
significantly increased muscle contractile capacity at submaximal stimulation 
frequencies in both fast-twitch extensor digitorum longus and gastrocnemius 
muscle, and intermediate-twitch diaphragm muscle in vitro and in vivo. 
Additionally, long-term tirasemtiv treatment in NEM3 mice resulted in a 
decreased respiratory rate with preserved minute volume, suggesting more 
efficient respiration. Altogether, our data support the therapeutic potential of 
fast skeletal muscle troponin activators in alleviating skeletal muscle weakness 
in a mouse model of NEM3 caused by the Acta1:p.Asp286Gly variant.

© 2024 Galli et al.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.202313471
PMCID: PMC10876480
PMID: 38376469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: D.T. Hwee reported other from 
Cytokinetics during the conduct of the study and other from Cytokinetics outside 
the submitted work. In addition, D.T. Hwee had a patent to tirasemtiv use issued 
for Cytokinetics. F.I. Malik reported personal fees from Cytokinetics, Inc. 
during the conduct of the study and personal fees from Cytokinetics, Inc. 
outside the submitted work. F.I. Malik also had a patent to tirasemtiv patent 
licensed to Cytokinetics. No other disclosures were reported.