---
reference_id: "PMID:34996081"
title: "Anti-Nuclear Antibody Quantitation: Calibration and Harmonization Adjustment via Population Interrogation."
authors:
- Wener MH
- Fink SL
- Morishima C
- Chaudhary A
- Hutchinson K
journal: J Appl Lab Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/jalm/jfab142
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-Nuclear Antibody Quantitation: Calibration and Harmonization Adjustment via Population Interrogation.
**Authors:** Wener MH, Fink SL, Morishima C, Chaudhary A, Hutchinson K
**Journal:** J Appl Lab Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jalm/jfab142](https://doi.org/10.1093/jalm/jfab142)

## Content

1. J Appl Lab Med. 2022 Jan 5;7(1):46-56. doi: 10.1093/jalm/jfab142.

Anti-Nuclear Antibody Quantitation: Calibration and Harmonization Adjustment via 
Population Interrogation.

Wener MH(1)(2), Fink SL(1), Morishima C(1), Chaudhary A(1), Hutchinson K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA.
(2)Rheumatology Division, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA.

BACKGROUND: The 2019 classification criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) includes an initial criterion requiring the presence of an antinuclear 
antibody (ANA), positive at a titer of at least 1:80 on HEp-2 cells, or 
equivalent. However, results of ANA tests performed on HEp-2 cells vary when 
tested in different laboratories. Calibration of ANA assays by achieving a 
common specificity in healthy control populations offers the possibility of 
achieving harmonization via population interrogation, but the expected 
specificity in a healthy control population is not known.
METHODS: The studies used to determine the use of ANAs performed by 
immunofluorescence microscopy on HEp-2 cells as the entry criterion for 
classification of SLE were reanalyzed by a meta-analysis to determine the 
expected frequency of positive ANAs in healthy control populations at serum 
dilutions of 1:40 and 1:80.
RESULTS: Our meta-analysis demonstrated that the expected specificity in a 
healthy control population of ANA performed using serum diluted 1:80 is 91.3% 
(CI 86.1-94.7%). The expected specificity of ANA performed at 1:40 serum 
dilution is 79.2% (CI 72.3-84.8%).
CONCLUSION: One approach to achieving harmonization of ANA assays from different 
laboratories with each other and with expected performance would involve 
adjusting assays so that about 10% of a healthy control population has a 
positive ANA when tested at 1:80 dilution, and about 20% of the healthy control 
population has a positive ANA when tested at 1:40 dilution. This pragmatic 
approach to calibration and harmonization adjustment via population 
interrogation offers an opportunity for individual laboratories to be aligned 
with each other and with ANA performance expected for consistent categorization 
of patients with SLE.

© American Association for Clinical Chemistry 2021. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jalm/jfab142
PMID: 34996081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]