---
reference_id: "PMID:34724828"
title: Interferon-Lambda Intranasal Protection and Differential Sex Pathology in a Murine Model of SARS-CoV-2 Infection.
authors:
- Sohn SY
- Hearing J
- Mugavero J
- Kirillov V
- Gorbunova E
- Helminiak L
- Mishra S
- Mackow E
- Hearing P
- Reich NC
- Kim HK
journal: mBio
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1128/mBio.02756-21
keywords:
- "Administration, Intranasal"
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2/genetics
- Animals
- "Antiviral Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Bronchi/cytology
- "COVID-19/immunology, therapy"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Epithelial Cells/drug effects, immunology, virology"
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Interferons/classification, immunology, pharmacology"
- "Lung/drug effects, pathology, virology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Risk Factors
- "SARS-CoV-2/drug effects, immunology"
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interferon-Lambda Intranasal Protection and Differential Sex Pathology in a Murine Model of SARS-CoV-2 Infection.
**Authors:** Sohn SY, Hearing J, Mugavero J, Kirillov V, Gorbunova E, Helminiak L, Mishra S, Mackow E, Hearing P, Reich NC, Kim HK
**Journal:** mBio (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mBio.02756-21](https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02756-21)

## Content

1. mBio. 2021 Dec 21;12(6):e0275621. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02756-21. Epub 2021 Nov 2.

Interferon-Lambda Intranasal Protection and Differential Sex Pathology in a 
Murine Model of SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Sohn SY(1), Hearing J(1), Mugavero J(1), Kirillov V(1), Gorbunova E(1), 
Helminiak L(1), Mishra S(1), Mackow E(1), Hearing P(1), Reich NC(1), Kim HK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stony Brook 
Universitygrid.36425.36, Stony Brook, New York, USA.

Outbreaks of emerging viral pathogens like severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) are a major medical challenge. There is a pressing 
need for antivirals that can be rapidly deployed to curb infection and 
dissemination. We determined the efficacy of interferon lambda-1 (IFN-λ) as a 
broad-spectrum antiviral agent to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection and reduce 
pathology in a mouse model of disease. IFN-λ significantly limited SARS-CoV-2 
production in primary human bronchial epithelial cells in culture. Pretreatment 
of human lung cells with IFN-λ completely blocked infectious virus production, 
and treatment with IFN-λ at the time of infection inhibited virus production 
more than 10-fold. To interrogate the protective effects of IFN-λ in response to 
SARS-CoV-2 infection, transgenic mice expressing the human 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE-2) were tested. One dose of IFN-λ 
administered intranasally was found to reduce animal morbidity and mortality. 
Our study with SARS-CoV-2 also revealed a sex differential in disease outcome. 
Male mice had higher mortality, reflecting the more severe symptoms and 
mortality found in male patients infected with SARS-CoV-2. The results indicate 
that IFN-λ potentially can treat early stages of SARS-CoV-2 infection and 
decrease pathology, and this murine model can be used to investigate the sex 
differential documented in COVID-19. IMPORTANCE The COVID-19 pandemic has 
claimed millions of lives worldwide. In this report, we used a preclinical mouse 
model to investigate the prophylactic and therapeutic value of intranasal IFN-λ 
for this acute respiratory disease. Specific vaccines have been responsible for 
curbing the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in developed nations. However, vaccines 
require time to generate and keep pace with antigenic variants. There is a need 
for broad-spectrum prophylactic and therapeutic agents to combat new emerging 
viral pathogens. Our mouse model suggests IFN-λ has clinical utility, and it 
reflects the well-documented finding that male COVID-19 patients manifest more 
severe symptoms and mortality. Understanding this sex bias is critical for 
considering therapeutic approaches to COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02756-21
PMCID: PMC8561397
PMID: 34724828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]