---
reference_id: "PMID:36680115"
title: "Drug Repositioning for Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease."
authors:
- Yan R
- He J
- Liu G
- Zhong J
- Xu J
- Zheng K
- Ren Z
- He Z
- Zhu Q
journal: Viruses
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/v15010075
keywords:
- Child
- Infant
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Drug Repositioning
- Enterovirus
- Enterovirus Infections
- Disease Outbreaks
- China/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug Repositioning for Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease.
**Authors:** Yan R, He J, Liu G, Zhong J, Xu J, Zheng K, Ren Z, He Z, Zhu Q
**Journal:** Viruses (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v15010075](https://doi.org/10.3390/v15010075)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2022 Dec 27;15(1):75. doi: 10.3390/v15010075.

Drug Repositioning for Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease.

Yan R(1)(2), He J(1), Liu G(2), Zhong J(1), Xu J(2), Zheng K(1), Ren Z(3)(4), He 
Z(1), Zhu Q(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, 
China.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen 518118, China.
(3)Institute of Biomedicine, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan 
University, Guangzhou 510632, China.
(4)National Engineering Research Center of Genetic Medicine, Guangzhou 510632, 
China.

Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) is a highly contagious disease in children 
caused by a group of enteroviruses. HFMD currently presents a major threat to 
infants and young children because of a lack of antiviral drugs in clinical 
practice. Drug repositioning is an attractive drug discovery strategy aimed at 
identifying and developing new drugs for diseases. Notably, repositioning of 
well-characterized therapeutics, including either approved or investigational 
drugs, is becoming a potential strategy to identify new treatments for virus 
infections. Various types of drugs, including antibacterial, cardiovascular, and 
anticancer agents, have been studied in relation to their therapeutic potential 
to treat HFMD. In this review, we summarize the major outbreaks of HFMD and the 
progress in drug repositioning to treat this disease. We also discuss the 
structural features and mode of action of these repositioned drugs and highlight 
the opportunities and challenges of drug repositioning for HFMD.

DOI: 10.3390/v15010075
PMCID: PMC9861398
PMID: 36680115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.