---
reference_id: "PMID:22453014"
title: Therapeutic implications of KIT in melanoma.
authors:
- Postow MA
- Carvajal RD
journal: Cancer J
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/PPO.0b013e31824b2404
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Benzamides
- "Clinical Trials, Phase II as Topic"
- Humans
- Imatinib Mesylate
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Piperazines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Pyrimidines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic implications of KIT in melanoma.
**Authors:** Postow MA, Carvajal RD
**Journal:** Cancer J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PPO.0b013e31824b2404](https://doi.org/10.1097/PPO.0b013e31824b2404)

## Content

1. Cancer J. 2012 Mar-Apr;18(2):137-41. doi: 10.1097/PPO.0b013e31824b2404.

Therapeutic implications of KIT in melanoma.

Postow MA(1), Carvajal RD.

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Melanoma-Sarcoma Division, New York,
NY 10065, USA.

Melanoma is a heterogeneous disease representing distinct biologic and genetic
subsets. Activating mutations in KIT have been discovered in a significant
proportion of melanomas arising from acral, mucosal, and chronically sun-damaged
sites and represent an important melanoma genetic subset. Initially, KIT was
believed to function as a tumor suppressor, but additional research suggests
that, in certain contexts, KIT functions as an oncogene. Therapeutic strategies
targeting KIT with imatinib demonstrated remarkable efficacy in patients with
gastrointestinal stromal tumors, but initial trials in melanoma were
unsuccessful. Nevertheless, case reports continued to surface that demonstrated
the remarkable efficacy of imatinib for patients with specific KIT genetic
aberrations. Recently, trials of imatinib have selected patients with KIT
genetic aberrations and have shown promising results. Current efforts are
investigating additional agents that target KIT and testing KIT inhibitors in
combination with other agents to improve the outcome for patients with this
genetic subset of melanoma.

DOI: 10.1097/PPO.0b013e31824b2404
PMID: 22453014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
