---
reference_id: "PMID:21271994"
title: "Expanding the keratin mutation database: novel and recurrent mutations and genotype-phenotype correlations in 28 patients with epidermolytic ichthyosis."
authors:
- Arin MJ
- Oji V
- Emmert S
- Hausser I
- Traupe H
- Krieg T
- Grimberg G
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.10096.x
keywords:
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hyperkeratosis, Epidermolytic/genetics, pathology"
- Keratins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the keratin mutation database: novel and recurrent mutations and genotype-phenotype correlations in 28 patients with epidermolytic ichthyosis.
**Authors:** Arin MJ, Oji V, Emmert S, Hausser I, Traupe H, Krieg T, Grimberg G
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.10096.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.10096.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2011 Feb;164(2):442-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.10096.x.

Expanding the keratin mutation database: novel and recurrent mutations and
genotype-phenotype correlations in 28 patients with epidermolytic ichthyosis.

Arin MJ(1), Oji V, Emmert S, Hausser I, Traupe H, Krieg T, Grimberg G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Kerpener Strasse 62, 50931
Cologne, Germany. meral.arin@uk-koeln.de

BACKGROUND: Epidermolytic ichthyosis (EI) is a hereditary keratinization
disorder caused by mutations in the keratin 1 (KRT1) or keratin 10 (KRT10)
genes. In most cases of severe EI, heterozygous single point mutations are found
at the highly conserved helix boundary motifs of KRT1 and KRT10 that play a
critical role in filament formation. The presence of palmoplantar keratoderma
suggests KRT1 mutations, whereas KRT10 mutations in most instances give rise to
the nonpalmoplantar variants.
OBJECTIVES: To identify the underlying mutations in patients with EI and to
correlate genotype and phenotype.
METHODS: Mutation analysis was performed in 28 patients with EI by direct
sequencing of KRT1 and KRT10 genes.
RESULTS: We identified 14 different mutations, of which four have not been
published previously.
CONCLUSIONS: Identification of novel mutations and genotype-phenotype
correlations in EI allows improved understanding of disease pathogenesis as well
as better patient management.

© 2011 The Authors. BJD © 2011 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.10096.x
PMID: 21271994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
