---
reference_id: "PMID:38304433"
title: Complement activation and cellular inflammation in Fabry disease patients despite enzyme replacement therapy.
authors:
- Laffer B
- Lenders M
- Ehlers-Jeske E
- Heidenreich K
- Brand E
- Köhl J
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1307558
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complement activation and cellular inflammation in Fabry disease patients despite enzyme replacement therapy.
**Authors:** Laffer B, Lenders M, Ehlers-Jeske E, Heidenreich K, Brand E, Köhl J
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1307558](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1307558)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Jan 18;15:1307558. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1307558. 
eCollection 2024.

Complement activation and cellular inflammation in Fabry disease patients 
despite enzyme replacement therapy.

Laffer B(1), Lenders M(2), Ehlers-Jeske E(1), Heidenreich K(3), Brand E(2), Köhl 
J(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Systemic Inflammation Research, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine D, University Hospital Münster, Münster, 
Germany.
(3)Eleva GmbH, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Division of Immunobiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH, United States.

Defective α-galactosidase A (AGAL/GLA) due to missense or nonsense mutations in 
the GLA gene results in accumulation of the glycosphingolipids 
globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) and its deacylated derivate globotriaosylsphingosine 
(lyso-Gb3) in cells and body fluids. The aberrant glycosphingolipid metabolism 
leads to a progressive lysosomal storage disorder, i. e. Fabry disease (FD), 
characterized by chronic inflammation leading to multiorgan damage. Enzyme 
replacement therapy (ERT) with agalsidase-alfa or -beta is one of the main 
treatment options facilitating cellular Gb3 clearance. Proteome studies have 
shown changes in complement proteins during ERT. However, the direct activation 
of the complement system during FD has not been explored. Here, we demonstrate 
strong activation of the complement system in 17 classical male FD patients with 
either missense or nonsense mutations before and after ERT as evidenced by high 
C3a and C5a serum levels. In contrast to the strong reduction of lyso-Gb3 under 
ERT, C3a and C5a markedly increased in FD patients with nonsense mutations, most 
of whom developed anti-drug antibodies (ADA), whereas FD patients with missense 
mutations, which were ADA-negative, showed heterogenous C3a and C5a serum levels 
under treatment. In addition to the complement activation, we found increased 
IL-6, IL-10 and TGF-ß1 serum levels in FD patients. This increase was most 
prominent in patients with missense mutations under ERT, most of whom developed 
mild nephropathy with decreased estimated glomerular filtration rate. Together, 
our findings demonstrate strong complement activation in FD independent of ERT 
therapy, especially in males with nonsense mutations and the development of 
ADAs. In addition, our data suggest kidney cell-associated production of 
cytokines, which have a strong potential to drive renal damage. Thus, chronic 
inflammation as a driver of organ damage in FD seems to proceed despite ERT and 
may prove useful as a target to cope with progressive organ damage.

Copyright © 2024 Laffer, Lenders, Ehlers-Jeske, Heidenreich, Brand and Köhl.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1307558
PMCID: PMC10830671
PMID: 38304433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KH was employed by the company Eleva GmbH. JK 
received advisory fees from Eleva GmbH. ML received speaker honoraria, travel 
funding and research grants from Amicus Therapeutics, Sanofi Genzyme, Chiesi, 
and Shire/Takeda. EB received research grants and speaker honoraria from Sanofi 
Genzymem Shire/Takeda, Chiesi, Eleva GmbH and Amicus Therapeutics. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationship that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest. The authors declare that this study received funding from Eleva GmbH. 
The funder was involved in the study design, review and editing of the 
manuscript.