---
reference_id: "PMID:20093947"
title: Scimitar syndrome.
authors:
- Ielasi A
- Latib A
- Agricola E
- Montorfano M
- Colombo A
journal: J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown)
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2459/JCM.0b013e328332f3e2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scimitar syndrome.
**Authors:** Ielasi A, Latib A, Agricola E, Montorfano M, Colombo A
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2459/JCM.0b013e328332f3e2](https://doi.org/10.2459/JCM.0b013e328332f3e2)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2011 Mar;12(3):176-7. doi: 
10.2459/JCM.0b013e328332f3e2.

Scimitar syndrome.

Ielasi A(1), Latib A, Agricola E, Montorfano M, Colombo A.

Author information:
(1)Interventional Cardiology Unit, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, 
Italy.

A 38-year-old-female presented to our unit for investigation of an incidental 
diagnosis of right ventricular dilatation. Transthoracic colour Doppler 
echocardiography demonstrated an anomalous flow into the inferior vena cava. The 
suspicion of partial anomalous venous drainage was supported by the finding of a 
scimitar sign on chest X-ray. Left and right heart catheterization demonstrated 
a significant left-to-right shunt (Qp/Qs = 2.22) with a step-up in oxygen 
saturation from the inferior vena cava (IVC) to lower right atrium. Selective 
angiography confirmed drainage of an anomalous pulmonary vein to the IVC-atrial 
junction. Scimitar syndrome is a rare vascular anomaly that can manifest in 
childhood with signs of right heart failure and/or recurrent pneumonia. When 
asymptomatic, this anomaly can be accidentally discovered in adulthood and 
should be suspected in cases of left-to-right shunt without evidence of obvious 
cardiac structural defects.

DOI: 10.2459/JCM.0b013e328332f3e2
PMID: 20093947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]