---
reference_id: "PMID:40227884"
title: Pulmonary and Radiographic Findings in Pediatric Type 1 Laryngeal Cleft.
authors:
- Francisco S
- Muise E
- "D'Anna R"
- Dahlberg S
- Rajeev D
- Visner G
- Watters K
- Rosen R
- Rahbar R
- Simoneau T
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/lary.32194
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary and Radiographic Findings in Pediatric Type 1 Laryngeal Cleft.
**Authors:** Francisco S, Muise E, D'Anna R, Dahlberg S, Rajeev D, Visner G, Watters K, Rosen R, Rahbar R, Simoneau T
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.32194](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.32194)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2025 Sep;135(9):3404-3411. doi: 10.1002/lary.32194. Epub 2025
Apr  14.

Pulmonary and Radiographic Findings in Pediatric Type 1 Laryngeal Cleft.

Francisco S(1), Muise E(2)(3), D'Anna R(4), Dahlberg S(2)(4), Rajeev D(1), 
Visner G(2), Watters K(1), Rosen R(5), Rahbar R(1), Simoneau T(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Airway Disorders, Department of Otolaryngology and Communication 
Enhancement, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Pulmonary Medicine, Hassenfeld Children's Hospital, NYU 
Langone Health, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Biostatistics and Research Design Center, Institutional Centers for Clinical 
and Translational Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(5)Center for Motility and Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders, Division of 
Gastroenterology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Laryngeal clefts are congenital malformations that can result in 
chronic microaspiration and subsequent lung disease. Type 1 laryngeal clefts can 
result in subtle presentation and whether or not to repair them remains 
controversial. In this retrospective cohort study, we describe the pulmonary 
symptoms and radiographic findings in children before and after type 1 laryngeal 
cleft repair.
STUDY DESIGN: Twenty-year single institution retrospective cohort study.
METHODS: Retrospective chart review of pediatric patients who underwent type 1 
laryngeal cleft endoscopic CO2-laser repair between August 2003 and August 2022. 
Data collected included history of respiratory illness, pulmonary symptoms, 
medications pre-repair, and radiographic findings pre- and post-repair. Pre- and 
post-repair chest x-ray (CXR) findings were compared.
RESULTS: 325 pediatric patients (200 male and 125 female; median age at repair 
2.6 years) required surgical repair between 2003 and 2022. Nearly all (99%) 
patients presented with respiratory symptoms, nearly half (44%) had a history of 
pneumonia, and 71% were prescribed at least one pulmonary medication. Median age 
at laryngeal cleft repair was higher in patients with a history of pneumonia 
(3.0 years, range 0.5-16.4) compared to patients without pneumonia (2.3 years, 
range 0.3-16.5), p < 0.001. Abnormal CXR findings were common (80%), with 
atelectasis (56%) and bronchial wall thickening (59%) being most prevalent. 
Atelectasis and bronchial wall thickening were significantly less frequent in 
the post-repair CXRs.
CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary symptoms and abnormal CXR findings are common in patients 
with type 1 laryngeal cleft, and those who do not respond properly to medical 
management should be considered for endoscopic repair.

© 2025 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.32194
PMID: 40227884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]