---
reference_id: "PMID:28602671"
title: Atrial Fibrillation in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Vaidya K
- Semsarian C
- Chan KH
journal: Heart Lung Circ
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2017.05.116
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atrial Fibrillation in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Vaidya K, Semsarian C, Chan KH
**Journal:** Heart Lung Circ (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hlc.2017.05.116](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlc.2017.05.116)

## Content

1. Heart Lung Circ. 2017 Sep;26(9):975-982. doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2017.05.116. Epub 
2017 May 23.

Atrial Fibrillation in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.

Vaidya K(1), Semsarian C(2), Chan KH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia. Electronic address: kaivan.vaidya@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia; Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 
Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology, Centenary Institute, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia; Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
Electronic address: kimhoe_chan@yahoo.com.au.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an inherited cardiac disorder with a 
spectrum of clinical manifestations. Patients with HCM are predisposed to 
developing atrial fibrillation (AF) due primarily to advanced diastolic 
dysfunction and left atrial (LA) dilatation and remodelling. Atrial fibrillation 
causes a progressive symptomatic and functional decline, as well as increased 
thromboembolic risk and mortality, particularly in the setting of rapid 
ventricular rates and left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction. The 
mainstay of management of AF in HCM is a combination of non-pharmacological 
lifestyle and risk factor modification, long-term anticoagulation, and rhythm 
control with antiarrhythmic medications. There is a growing body of evidence 
indicating that an early and aggressive rhythm control strategy may result in 
more favourable outcomes.

Crown Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hlc.2017.05.116
PMID: 28602671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]