---
reference_id: "PMID:39825586"
title: Reciprocal and non-reciprocal effects of clinically relevant SETBP1 protein dosage changes.
authors:
- Antonyan L
- Zhang X
- Ni A
- Peng H
- Alsuwaidi S
- Fleming P
- Zhang Y
- Semenak A
- Macintosh J
- Wu H
- Hettige NC
- Jefri M
- Ernst C
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaf003
keywords:
- Humans
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Gene Dosage
- Male
- Female
- Signal Transduction
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- "Chromatin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reciprocal and non-reciprocal effects of clinically relevant SETBP1 protein dosage changes.
**Authors:** Antonyan L, Zhang X, Ni A, Peng H, Alsuwaidi S, Fleming P, Zhang Y, Semenak A, Macintosh J, Wu H, Hettige NC, Jefri M, Ernst C
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddaf003](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddaf003)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2025 Apr 6;34(8):651-667. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaf003.

Reciprocal and non-reciprocal effects of clinically relevant SETBP1 protein 
dosage changes.

Antonyan L(1)(2), Zhang X(2), Ni A(1)(2), Peng H(2), Alsuwaidi S(2)(3), Fleming 
P(2)(3), Zhang Y(2), Semenak A(2)(3), Macintosh J(2)(3), Wu H(2), Hettige 
NC(1)(2), Jefri M(2)(3), Ernst C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, 3666 McTavish Street, 
Montreal, QC H3A 1Y2, Canada.
(2)Rare Neurodevelopmental Disorders Laboratory, Montreal Neurological 
Institute, 3801 University Street, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, Canada.
(3)Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, 1033 Pine Ave. W., 
Montreal, QC H3A 1A1, Canada.

Many genes in the human genome encode proteins that are dosage sensitive, 
meaning they require protein levels within a narrow range to properly execute 
function. To investigate if clinically relevant variation in protein levels 
impacts the same downstream pathways in human disease, we generated cell models 
of two SETBP1 syndromes: Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome (SGS) and SETBP1 
haploinsufficiency disease (SHD), where SGS is caused by too much protein, and 
SHD is caused by not enough SETBP1. Using patient and sex-matched healthy 
first-degree relatives from both SGS and SHD SETBP1 cases, we assessed how 
SETBP1 protein dosage affects downstream pathways in human forebrain progenitor 
cells. We find that extremes of SETBP1 protein dose reciprocally influence 
important signalling molecules such as AKT, suggesting that the SETBP1 protein 
operates within a narrow dosage range and that extreme doses are detrimental. We 
identified SETBP1 nuclear bodies as interacting with the nuclear lamina and 
suggest that SETBP1 may organize higher order chromatin structure via links to 
the nuclear envelope. SETBP1 protein doses may exert significant influence on 
global gene expression patterns via these SETBP1 nuclear bodies. This work 
provides evidence for the importance of SETBP1 protein dose in human brain 
development, with implications for two neurodevelopmental disorders.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaf003
PMCID: PMC11973901
PMID: 39825586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]