---
reference_id: "PMID:25420144"
title: Mutations in the voltage-gated potassium channel gene KCNH1 cause Temple-Baraitser syndrome and epilepsy.
authors:
- Simons C
- Rash LD
- Crawford J
- Ma L
- Cristofori-Armstrong B
- Miller D
- Ru K
- Baillie GJ
- Alanay Y
- Jacquinet A
- Debray FG
- Verloes A
- Shen J
- Yesil G
- Guler S
- Yuksel A
- Cleary JG
- Grimmond SM
- McGaughran J
- King GF
- Gabbett MT
- Taft RJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ng.3153
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the voltage-gated potassium channel gene KCNH1 cause Temple-Baraitser syndrome and epilepsy.
**Authors:** Simons C, Rash LD, Crawford J, Ma L, Cristofori-Armstrong B, Miller D, Ru K, Baillie GJ, Alanay Y, Jacquinet A, Debray FG, Verloes A, Shen J, Yesil G, Guler S, Yuksel A, Cleary JG, Grimmond SM, McGaughran J, King GF, Gabbett MT, Taft RJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3153](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3153)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2015 Jan;47(1):73-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.3153. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Mutations in the voltage-gated potassium channel gene KCNH1 cause 
Temple-Baraitser syndrome and epilepsy.

Simons C(1), Rash LD(1), Crawford J(1), Ma L(1), Cristofori-Armstrong B(1), 
Miller D(2), Ru K(1), Baillie GJ(1), Alanay Y(3), Jacquinet A(4), Debray FG(4), 
Verloes A(5), Shen J(6), Yesil G(7), Guler S(7), Yuksel A(7), Cleary JG(8), 
Grimmond SM(9), McGaughran J(10), King GF(1), Gabbett MT(11), Taft RJ(12).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.
(2)1] Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. [2] Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics, 
Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Acibadem University School of 
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Center for Human Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire and University of 
Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(5)1] Department of Genetics, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), 
Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France. [2] INSERM UMR 1141, Robert Debré 
Hospital, Paris, France.
(6)Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital Central California, 
Madera, California, USA.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Bezmialem Vakif University School of 
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(8)Real Time Genomics, Ltd., Hamilton, New Zealand.
(9)1] Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. [2] Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, 
Institute for Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(10)1] Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia. [2] School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(11)1] Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia. [2] School of Medicine, Griffith University, Gold Coast, 
Queensland, Australia.
(12)1] Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. [2] Department of Integrated Systems Biology, 
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, George Washington University, 
Washington, DC, USA. [3] Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA. [4] Illumina, Inc., 
San Diego, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2015 Mar;47(3):304. doi: 10.1038/ng0315-304b.

Temple-Baraitser syndrome (TBS) is a multisystem developmental disorder 
characterized by intellectual disability, epilepsy, and hypoplasia or aplasia of 
the nails of the thumb and great toe. Here we report damaging de novo mutations 
in KCNH1 (encoding a protein called ether à go-go, EAG1 or KV10.1), a 
voltage-gated potassium channel that is predominantly expressed in the central 
nervous system (CNS), in six individuals with TBS. Characterization of the 
mutant channels in both Xenopus laevis oocytes and human HEK293T cells showed a 
decreased threshold of activation and delayed deactivation, demonstrating that 
TBS-associated KCNH1 mutations lead to deleterious gain of function. Consistent 
with this result, we find that two mothers of children with TBS, who have 
epilepsy but are otherwise healthy, are low-level (10% and 27%) mosaic carriers 
of pathogenic KCNH1 mutations. Consistent with recent reports, this finding 
demonstrates that the etiology of many unresolved CNS disorders, including 
epilepsies, might be explained by pathogenic mosaic mutations.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.3153
PMID: 25420144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]