---
reference_id: "PMID:37090048"
title: Detection of anti-ganglioside antibodies in Guillain-Barré syndrome.
authors:
- Zhu W
- Li K
- Cui T
- Yan Y
journal: Ann Transl Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.21037/atm-20-2285
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of anti-ganglioside antibodies in Guillain-Barré syndrome.
**Authors:** Zhu W, Li K, Cui T, Yan Y
**Journal:** Ann Transl Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.21037/atm-20-2285](https://doi.org/10.21037/atm-20-2285)

## Content

1. Ann Transl Med. 2023 Apr 15;11(7):289. doi: 10.21037/atm-20-2285. Epub 2021
Apr  21.

Detection of anti-ganglioside antibodies in Guillain-Barré syndrome.

Zhu W(1), Li K(1), Cui T(1), Yan Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Medicinal Resources and 
Natural Pharmaceutical Chemistry, National Engineering Laboratory for Resource 
Development of Endangered Crude Drugs in Northwest of China, College of Life 
Sciences, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, China.

Gangliosides are a class of glycosphingolipid molecules that are highly enriched 
in cellular membranes of the nervous system. The gangliosides associated with 
autoimmune diseases of the nervous system are mainly GM1, GD1a, GalNAc-GD1a, 
GM1b, GD3, CD1b, GT1a, and GQ1b. Multiple antibodies recognizing gangliosides 
are associated with some acute or chronic peripheral neuropathies, especially 
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) and its clinical variants. Antibodies binding to 
gangliosides can activate complement system and recruit macrophages on the 
axolemma at the nodes of Ranvier of motor fibers, which are found in the course 
of GBS, causing axonal degeneration and reversible conduction block or 
conduction failure. Testing of anti-gangliosides autoantibodies is helpful for 
diagnosis of autoimmune peripheral neuropathies or support the diagnosis of the 
subtypes. These anti-gangliosides antibodies are usually detected by several 
qualitative or quantitative methods, particularly enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA) and immunodot assays, which have been commercialized or 
established in-house worldwide. Herein, we introduce the methods and clinical 
applications of these assays in the diagnosis of autoimmune peripheral 
neuropathies. Anti-gangliosides antibodies are diagnostic markers of GBS 
subtypes. We use GBS as an example to explain the role of anti-gangliosides 
antibodies in the pathogenesis and diagnostic classification of neuropathies.

2023 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-20-2285
PMCID: PMC10116427
PMID: 37090048

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://atm.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/atm-20-2285/coif). The series 
“Laboratory Investigations in Neuroimmunological Diseases and Their Clinical 
Significance” was commissioned by the editorial office without any funding or 
sponsorship. All authors report grants from the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (No. 81571596), and grants from the Fundamental Research 
Funds for the Central Universities (No. GK201701009), during the conduct of the 
study. The authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.