---
reference_id: "PMID:11562478"
title: "Human disease-causing NOG missense mutations: effects on noggin secretion, dimer formation, and bone morphogenetic protein binding."
authors:
- Marcelino J
- Sciortino CM
- Romero MF
- Ulatowski LM
- Ballock RT
- Economides AN
- Eimon PM
- Harland RM
- Warman ML
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.201367598
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human disease-causing NOG missense mutations: effects on noggin secretion, dimer formation, and bone morphogenetic protein binding.
**Authors:** Marcelino J, Sciortino CM, Romero MF, Ulatowski LM, Ballock RT, Economides AN, Eimon PM, Harland RM, Warman ML
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.201367598](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.201367598)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Sep 25;98(20):11353-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.201367598. Epub 2001 Sep 18.

Human disease-causing NOG missense mutations: effects on noggin secretion, dimer 
formation, and bone morphogenetic protein binding.

Marcelino J(1), Sciortino CM, Romero MF, Ulatowski LM, Ballock RT, Economides 
AN, Eimon PM, Harland RM, Warman ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Center for Human Genetics, Case Western Reserve 
University and University Hospitals of Cleveland, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Secreted noggin protein regulates bone morphogenetic protein activity during 
development. In mice, a complete loss of noggin protein leads to multiple 
malformations including joint fusion, whereas mice heterozygous for Nog 
loss-of-function mutations are normal. In humans, heterozygous NOG missense 
mutations have been found in patients with two autosomal dominant disorders of 
joint development, multiple synostosis syndrome (SYNS1) and a milder disorder 
proximal symphalangism (SYM1). This study investigated the effect of one SYNS1 
and two SYM1 disease-causing missense mutations on the structure and function of 
noggin. The SYNS1 mutation abolished, and the SYM1 mutations reduced, the 
secretion of functional noggin dimers in transiently transfected COS-7 cells. 
Coexpression of mutant noggin with wild-type noggin, to resemble the 
heterozygous state, did not interfere with wild-type noggin secretion. These 
data indicate that the human disease-causing mutations are hypomorphic alleles 
that reduce secretion of functional dimeric noggin. Therefore, we conclude that 
noggin has both species-specific and joint-specific dosage-dependent roles 
during joint formation. Surprisingly, in contrast to the COS-7 cell studies, the 
SYNS1 mutant was able to form dimers in Xenopus laevis oocytes. This finding 
indicates that there also exist species-specific differences in the ability to 
process mutant noggin polypeptides.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.201367598
PMCID: PMC58733
PMID: 11562478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]