---
reference_id: "PMID:39882369"
title: Oral medications for the treatment of postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome; a systematic review of studies before and during the COVID-19 pandemic.
authors:
- Pierson BC
- Apilado K
- Franzos MA
- Allard R
- Mancuso JD
- Tribble D
- Saunders D
- Koehlmoos TP
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1515486
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral medications for the treatment of postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome; a systematic review of studies before and during the COVID-19 pandemic.
**Authors:** Pierson BC, Apilado K, Franzos MA, Allard R, Mancuso JD, Tribble D, Saunders D, Koehlmoos TP
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2024.1515486](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2024.1515486)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2025 Jan 15;15:1515486. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1515486. 
eCollection 2024.

Oral medications for the treatment of postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome; 
a systematic review of studies before and during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Pierson BC(1), Apilado K(2)(3), Franzos MA(3)(4), Allard R(5), Mancuso JD(1), 
Tribble D(1)(3), Saunders D(3), Koehlmoos TP(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Biostatistics, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(2)The Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, 
Inc., Bethesda, MD, United States.
(3)Center for Health Services Research, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(4)Department of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 
Bethesda, MD, United States.
(5)Military Cardiovascular Outcomes Research, Uniformed Services University of 
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, United States.

BACKGROUND: Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS) is a complex form 
of dysautonomia that presents with abnormal autonomic reflexes upon standing, 
leading to symptoms such as lightheadedness, tachycardia, fatigue, and cognitive 
impairment. The COVID-19 pandemic has brought renewed attention to POTS due to 
its overlap with post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC). Studies have found that 
a substantial percentage of COVID-19 survivors exhibit symptoms resembling POTS, 
elevating POTS diagnoses to previously unseen levels. We systematically reviewed 
the literature for existing high-quality evidence on potential interventions.
METHODS: A systematic review of the literature was performed to identify studies 
of oral medications for the management of POTS. We searched for published 
manuscripts on the medical management of POTS through 6 April 2024 which met 
pre-specified inclusion criteria. We conducted quality appraisal and assessed 
risk of bias before extracting the data and performing synthesis to determine 
the current state of the evidence; particularly in the context of PASC.
RESULTS: The study search and selection process identified 32 studies that met 
inclusion criteria, comprising randomized controlled trials, observational 
studies, and systematic reviews. Most included studies were judged to be of 
moderate to high quality, with largely low risk of bias. The most frequently 
studied medications were beta-blockers, ivabradine, and midodrine. Ivabradine 
and midodrine demonstrated the highest rate of symptomatic improvement, while 
beta-blockers showed the largest reduction in heart rate variability. Limited 
evidence was available for PASC-associated POTS, but findings suggest that 
treatments may have similar efficacy in both PASC and non-PASC cases.
CONCLUSION: Ivabradine, midodrine, and beta-blockers currently appear to be 
reasonable front-line choices in pharmacologic management of POTS (PASC 
associated and otherwise). Further RCTs that evaluate long term outcomes of 
medications are needed to further establish evidence based pharmacologic 
treatment approaches for POTS. Particular areas of inquiry include differential 
efficacy of recommended therapies based on POTS subtypes, and a need for 
treatments directly targeting the underlying autonomic nervous system 
dysfunction.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO, identifier CRD42024505967, 
https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?RecordID=505967.

Copyright © 2025 Pierson, Apilado, Franzos, Allard, Mancuso, Tribble, Saunders 
and Koehlmoos.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1515486
PMCID: PMC11775448
PMID: 39882369

Conflict of interest statement: KA was employed by The Henry M. Jackson 
Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Inc. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.