---
reference_id: "PMID:23499630"
title: "Prevalence, characteristics, and prognosis role of type 1 ST elevation in the peripheral ECG leads in patients with Brugada syndrome."
authors:
- Rollin A
- Sacher F
- Gourraud JB
- Pasquié JL
- Raczka F
- Duparc A
- Mondoly P
- Cardin C
- Delay M
- Chatel S
- Derval N
- Denis A
- Sadron M
- Davy JM
- Hocini M
- Jaïs P
- Jesel L
- Haïssaguerre M
- Probst V
- Maury P
journal: Heart Rhythm
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2013.03.001
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Brugada Syndrome/mortality, physiopathology"
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/epidemiology"
- Electrocardiography/instrumentation
- Electrodes
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- France/epidemiology
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate/trends
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence, characteristics, and prognosis role of type 1 ST elevation in the peripheral ECG leads in patients with Brugada syndrome.
**Authors:** Rollin A, Sacher F, Gourraud JB, Pasquié JL, Raczka F, Duparc A, Mondoly P, Cardin C, Delay M, Chatel S, Derval N, Denis A, Sadron M, Davy JM, Hocini M, Jaïs P, Jesel L, Haïssaguerre M, Probst V, Maury P
**Journal:** Heart Rhythm (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hrthm.2013.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2013.03.001)

## Content

1. Heart Rhythm. 2013 Jul;10(7):1012-8. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2013.03.001. Epub
2013  Mar 14.

Prevalence, characteristics, and prognosis role of type 1 ST elevation in the
peripheral ECG leads in patients with Brugada syndrome.

Rollin A(1), Sacher F, Gourraud JB, Pasquié JL, Raczka F, Duparc A, Mondoly P,
Cardin C, Delay M, Chatel S, Derval N, Denis A, Sadron M, Davy JM, Hocini M,
Jaïs P, Jesel L, Haïssaguerre M, Probst V, Maury P.

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Rangueil, Toulouse, France.

Comment in
    Heart Rhythm. 2013 Jul;10(7):1019-20. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2013.04.010.

BACKGROUND: Despite isolated reports of Brugada syndrome (BrS) in the inferior
or lateral leads, the prevalence and prognostic value of ST elevation in the
peripheral electrocardiographic (ECG) leads in patients with BrS remain poorly
known.
OBJECTIVE: To study the prevalence, characteristics, and prognostic value of
type 1 ST elevation and ST depression in the peripheral ECG leads in a large
cohort of patients with BrS.
METHODS: ECGs from 323 patients with BrS (age 47 ± 13 years; 257 men) with
spontaneous (n = 141) or drug-induced (n = 182) type 1 ECG were retrospectively
reviewed. Two hundred twenty-five (70%) patients were asymptomatic, 72 (22%)
patients presented with unexplained syncope, and 26 (8%) patients presented with
sudden death (12 patients) or appropriated implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator therapies (14 patients) at diagnosis or over a mean
follow-up of 48 ± 34 months.
RESULTS: Thirty (9%) patients presented with type 1 ST elevation in at least 1
peripheral lead (22 patients in the aVR leads, 2 in the inferior leads, 5 in
both aVR and inferior leads, and 1 in the aVR and VL leads). Patients with type
1 ST elevation in the peripheral leads more often had mutations in the SCN5A
gene, were more often inducible, had slower heart rate, and higher J-wave
amplitude in the right precordial leads. Twenty-seven percent (8 of 30) of the
patients with type 1 ST elevation in the peripheral leads experimented sudden
death/appropriate implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy, whereas it
occurred in only 6% (18 of 293) of other patients (P < .0001). In multivariate
analysis, type 1 ECG in the peripheral leads was independently associated with
malignant arrhythmic events (odds ratio 4.58; 95% confidence interval 1.7-12.32;
P = .0025).
CONCLUSIONS: Type 1 ST elevation in the peripheral ECG leads can be seen in 10%
of the patients with BrS and is an independent predictor for a malignant
arrhythmic event.

Copyright © 2013 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2013.03.001
PMID: 23499630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
