---
reference_id: "PMID:34209809"
title: Cellular Senescence in Lung Fibrosis.
authors:
- Hernandez-Gonzalez F
- Faner R
- Rojas M
- Agustí A
- Serrano M
- Sellarés J
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22137012
keywords:
- Cellular Senescence/physiology
- Disease Progression
- Fibrosis
- Humans
- "Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis/etiology, pathology"
- Lung/pathology
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/etiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular Senescence in Lung Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Hernandez-Gonzalez F, Faner R, Rojas M, Agustí A, Serrano M, Sellarés J
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22137012](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22137012)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jun 29;22(13):7012. doi: 10.3390/ijms22137012.

Cellular Senescence in Lung Fibrosis.

Hernandez-Gonzalez F(1)(2)(3), Faner R(3), Rojas M(4), Agustí A(1)(3)(5),
Serrano M(2)(6), Sellarés J(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, ICR, Hospital Clinic, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 08036
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA.
(5)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(6)Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), 08010
Barcelona, Spain.

Fibrosing interstitial lung diseases (ILDs) are chronic and ultimately fatal
age-related lung diseases characterized by the progressive and irreversible
accumulation of scar tissue in the lung parenchyma. Over the past years,
significant progress has been made in our incomplete understanding of the
pathobiology underlying fibrosing ILDs, in particular in relation to diverse
age-related processes and cell perturbations that seem to lead to maladaptation
to stress and susceptibility to lung fibrosis. Growing evidence suggests that a
specific biological phenomenon known as cellular senescence plays an important
role in the initiation and progression of pulmonary fibrosis. Cellular
senescence is defined as a cell fate decision caused by the accumulation of
unrepairable cellular damage and is characterized by an abundant
pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic secretome. The senescence response has been
widely recognized as a beneficial physiological mechanism during development and
in tumour suppression. However, recent evidence strengthens the idea that it
also drives degenerative processes such as lung fibrosis, most likely by
promoting molecular and cellular changes in chronic fibrosing processes. Here,
we review how cellular senescence may contribute to lung fibrosis pathobiology,
and we highlight current and emerging therapeutic approaches to treat fibrosing
ILDs by targeting cellular senescence.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22137012
PMCID: PMC8267738
PMID: 34209809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.S. is founder, shareholder and advisor of
Senolytic Therapeutics, Inc., Iduna Therapeutics, Inc., and RejuverSen, AG. The
funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to
publish, or preparation of the manuscript. F.H.-G., R.F., M.R., and J.S. declare
no conflict of interest.
