---
reference_id: "PMID:33841163"
title: "Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome and Lung Disease: Pathogenesis and Therapeutics."
authors:
- Velázquez-Díaz P
- Nakajima E
- Sorkhdini P
- Hernandez-Gutierrez A
- Eberle A
- Yang D
- Zhou Y
journal: Front Pharmacol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.644671
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome and Lung Disease: Pathogenesis and Therapeutics.
**Authors:** Velázquez-Díaz P, Nakajima E, Sorkhdini P, Hernandez-Gutierrez A, Eberle A, Yang D, Zhou Y
**Journal:** Front Pharmacol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphar.2021.644671](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2021.644671)

## Content

1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Mar 18;12:644671. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.644671. 
eCollection 2021.

Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome and Lung Disease: Pathogenesis and Therapeutics.

Velázquez-Díaz P(1), Nakajima E(2), Sorkhdini P(2), Hernandez-Gutierrez A(2), 
Eberle A(2), Yang D(2), Zhou Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico-Humacao, Humacao, Puerto 
Rico.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Brown University, 
Providence, RI, United States.

Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS) is a rare, genetic, multisystem disorder 
characterized by oculocutaneous albinism (OCA), bleeding diathesis, 
immunodeficiency, granulomatous colitis, and pulmonary fibrosis. HPS pulmonary 
fibrosis (HPS-PF) occurs in 100% of patients with subtype HPS-1 and has a 
similar presentation to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Upon onset, individuals 
with HPS-PF have approximately 3 years before experiencing signs of respiratory 
failure and eventual death. This review aims to summarize current research on 
HPS along with its associated pulmonary fibrosis and its implications for the 
development of novel treatments. We will discuss the genetic basis of the 
disease, its epidemiology, and current therapeutic and clinical management 
strategies. We continue to review the cellular processes leading to the 
development of HPS-PF in alveolar epithelial cells, lymphocytes, mast cells, and 
fibrocytes, along with the molecular mechanisms that contribute to its 
pathogenesis and may be targeted in the treatment of HPS-PF. Finally, we will 
discuss emerging new cellular and molecular approaches for studying HPS, 
including lentiviral-mediated gene transfer, induced pluripotent stem cells 
(iPSCs), organoid and 3D-modelling, and CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing 
approaches.

Copyright © 2021 Velázquez-Díaz, Nakajima, Sorkhdini, Hernandez-Gutierrez, 
Eberle, Yang and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.644671
PMCID: PMC8028140
PMID: 33841163

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.