---
reference_id: "PMID:31473020"
title: "Change in Albuminuria and GFR as End Points for Clinical Trials in Early Stages of CKD: A Scientific Workshop Sponsored by the National Kidney Foundation in Collaboration With the US Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines Agency."
authors:
- Levey AS
- Gansevoort RT
- Coresh J
- Inker LA
- Heerspink HL
- Grams ME
- Greene T
- Tighiouart H
- Matsushita K
- Ballew SH
- Sang Y
- Vonesh E
- Ying J
- Manley T
- de Zeeuw D
- Eckardt KU
- Levin A
- Perkovic V
- Zhang L
- Willis K
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2019.06.009
keywords:
- Albuminuria/metabolism
- Bayes Theorem
- Biomarkers
- Creatinine/urine
- Disease Progression
- Drug Approval
- Europe
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/metabolism"
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/metabolism"
- United States
- United States Food and Drug Administration
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Change in Albuminuria and GFR as End Points for Clinical Trials in Early Stages of CKD: A Scientific Workshop Sponsored by the National Kidney Foundation in Collaboration With the US Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines Agency.
**Authors:** Levey AS, Gansevoort RT, Coresh J, Inker LA, Heerspink HL, Grams ME, Greene T, Tighiouart H, Matsushita K, Ballew SH, Sang Y, Vonesh E, Ying J, Manley T, de Zeeuw D, Eckardt KU, Levin A, Perkovic V, Zhang L, Willis K
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2019.06.009](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2019.06.009)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2020 Jan;75(1):84-104. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2019.06.009. Epub 
2019 Aug 28.

Change in Albuminuria and GFR as End Points for Clinical Trials in Early Stages 
of CKD: A Scientific Workshop Sponsored by the National Kidney Foundation in 
Collaboration With the US Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines 
Agency.

Levey AS(1), Gansevoort RT(2), Coresh J(3), Inker LA(4), Heerspink HL(5), Grams 
ME(6), Greene T(7), Tighiouart H(8), Matsushita K(3), Ballew SH(3), Sang Y(3), 
Vonesh E(9), Ying J(7), Manley T(10), de Zeeuw D(5), Eckardt KU(11), Levin 
A(12), Perkovic V(13), Zhang L(14), Willis K(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA. Electronic address: 
alevey@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(2)Department of Nephrology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
(7)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(8)The Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy Studies, Tufts Medical 
Center, Boston, MA; Tufts Clinical and Translational Science Institute, Tufts 
University, Boston, MA.
(9)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL.
(10)National Kidney Foundation, New York, NY.
(11)Department of Nephrology and Medical Intensive Care, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(13)George Institute for Global Health, UNSW, Sydney, Australia.
(14)Peking University Institute of Nephrology, Beijing, China; Division of 
Nephrology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.

Comment in
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2020 Jan;75(1):6-8. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2019.07.019.
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2020 Jan;75(1):9-10. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2019.07.017.
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2020 Jan;75(1):4-5. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2019.08.007.

The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) 
are currently willing to consider a 30% to 40% glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 
decline as a surrogate end point for kidney failure for clinical trials of 
kidney disease progression under appropriate conditions. However, these end 
points may not be practical for early stages of kidney disease. In March 2018, 
the National Kidney Foundation sponsored a scientific workshop in collaboration 
with the FDA and EMA to evaluate changes in albuminuria or GFR as candidate 
surrogate end points. Three parallel efforts were presented: meta-analyses of 
observational studies (cohorts), meta-analyses of clinical trials, and 
simulations of trial design. In cohorts, after accounting for measurement error, 
relationships between change in urinary albumin-creatinine ratio (UACR) or 
estimated GFR (eGFR) slope and the clinical outcome of kidney disease 
progression were strong and consistent. In trials, the posterior median R2 of 
treatment effects on the candidate surrogates with the clinical outcome was 0.47 
(95% Bayesian credible interval [BCI], 0.02-0.96) for early change in UACR and 
0.72 (95% BCI, 0.05-0.99) when restricted to baseline UACR>30mg/g, and 0.97 (95% 
BCI, 0.78-1.00) for total eGFR slope at 3 years and 0.96 (95% BCI, 0.63-1.00) 
for chronic eGFR slope (ie, the slope excluding the first 3 months from 
baseline, when there might be acute changes in eGFR). The magnitude of the 
relationships of changes in the candidate surrogates with risk for clinical 
outcome was consistent across cohorts and trials: a UACR reduction of 30% or 
eGFR slope reduction by 0.5 to 1.0mL/min/1.73m2 per year were associated with an 
HR of ∼0.7 for the clinical outcome in cohorts and trials. In simulations, using 
GFR slope as an end point substantially reduced the required sample size and 
duration of follow-up compared with the clinical end point when baseline eGFR 
was high, treatment effects were uniform, and there was no acute effect of the 
treatment. We conclude that both early change in albuminuria and GFR slope 
fulfill criteria for surrogacy for use as end points in clinical trials for 
chronic kidney disease progression under certain conditions, with stronger 
support for change in GFR than albuminuria. Implementation requires 
understanding conditions under which each surrogate is likely to perform well 
and restricting its use to those settings.

Copyright © 2019 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2019.06.009
PMID: 31473020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]