---
reference_id: "PMID:33762894"
title: "The Prevalence of Clinical Features in Patients with Aarskog-Scott Syndrome and Assessment of Genotype-Phenotype Correlation: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Zanetti Drumond V
- Sousa Salgado L
- Sousa Salgado C
- Oliveira VAL
- de Assis EM
- Campos Ribeiro M
- Furtado Valadão A
- Orrico A
journal: Genet Res (Camb)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1155/2021/6652957
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Prevalence of Clinical Features in Patients with Aarskog-Scott Syndrome and Assessment of Genotype-Phenotype Correlation: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Zanetti Drumond V, Sousa Salgado L, Sousa Salgado C, Oliveira VAL, de Assis EM, Campos Ribeiro M, Furtado Valadão A, Orrico A
**Journal:** Genet Res (Camb) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2021/6652957](https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6652957)

## Content

1. Genet Res (Camb). 2021 Feb 2;2021:6652957. doi: 10.1155/2021/6652957. 
eCollection 2021.

The Prevalence of Clinical Features in Patients with Aarskog-Scott Syndrome and 
Assessment of Genotype-Phenotype Correlation: A Systematic Review.

Zanetti Drumond V(#)(1), Sousa Salgado L(#)(2), Sousa Salgado C(3), Oliveira 
VAL(4), de Assis EM(1), Campos Ribeiro M(5), Furtado Valadão A(2), Orrico 
A(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Dentistry School, Faculdade Pitágoras de Ipatinga, Ipatinga, Minas Gerais, 
Brazil.
(2)Medical School, União Educacional do Vale do Aço (UNIVAÇO), Ipatinga, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Hospital Unimed BH, Betim, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Faculdades Integradas do Norte de Minas-Ipatinga (FUNORTE), Ipatinga, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil.
(5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial, Hospital Márcio Cunha, Ipatinga, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil.
(6)Interdipartimental Program for Molecular Diagnosis and Characterization of 
Pathogenic Mechanisms of Rare Genetic Diseases, Azienda Ospedaliero 
Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.
(7)Clinical Genetics, ASL Toscana Sudest, Ospedale della Misericordia, Grosseto, 
Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Aarskog-Scott syndrome is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous rare 
condition caused by a pathogenic variant in the FGD1 gene. A systematic review 
was carried out to analyse the prevalence of clinical manifestations found in 
patients, as well as to evaluate the genotype-phenotype correlation. The results 
obtained show that clinical findings of the craniofacial, orthopaedic, and 
genitourinary tract correspond to the highest scores of prevalence. The authors 
reclassified the primary, secondary, and additional criteria based on their 
prevalence. Furthermore, it was possible to observe, in accordance with previous 
reports, that the reported phenotypes do not present a direct relation to the 
underlying genotypes.

Copyright © 2021 Victor Zanetti Drumond et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6652957
PMCID: PMC7953535
PMID: 33762894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.