---
reference_id: "PMID:25821090"
title: Differential diagnosis and diagnostic flow chart of joint hypermobility syndrome/ehlers-danlos syndrome hypermobility type compared to other heritable connective tissue disorders.
authors:
- Colombi M
- Dordoni C
- Chiarelli N
- Ritelli M
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31429
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Arteries/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- "Connective Tissue Diseases/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Joint Instability/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Loeys-Dietz Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Marfan Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Meningocele/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Skin Abnormalities/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- "Vascular Malformations/diagnosis, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential diagnosis and diagnostic flow chart of joint hypermobility syndrome/ehlers-danlos syndrome hypermobility type compared to other heritable connective tissue disorders.
**Authors:** Colombi M, Dordoni C, Chiarelli N, Ritelli M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31429](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31429)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2015 Mar;169C(1):6-22. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31429.

Differential diagnosis and diagnostic flow chart of joint hypermobility
syndrome/ehlers-danlos syndrome hypermobility type compared to other heritable
connective tissue disorders.

Colombi M, Dordoni C, Chiarelli N, Ritelli M.

Joint hypermobility syndrome/Ehlers-Danlos syndrome hypermobility type
(JHS/EDS-HT) is an evolving and protean disorder mostly recognized by
generalized joint hypermobility and without a defined molecular basis.
JHS/EDS-HT also presents with other connective tissue features affecting a
variety of structures and organs, such as skin, eye, bone, and internal organs.
However, most of these signs are present in variable combinations and severity
in many other heritable connective tissue disorders. Accordingly, JHS/EDS-HT is
an "exclusion" diagnosis which needs the absence of any consistent feature
indicative of other partially overlapping connective tissue disorders. While
both Villefranche and Brighton criteria include such an exclusion as a mandatory
item, a systematic approach for reaching a stringent clinical diagnosis of
JHS/EDS-HT is still lacking. The absence of a consensus on the diagnostic
approach to JHS/EDS-HT concerning its clinical boundaries with similar
conditions contribute to limit our actual understanding of the pathologic and
molecular bases of this disorder. In this review, we revise the differential
diagnosis of JHS/EDS-HT with those heritable connective tissue disorders which
show a significant overlap with the former and mostly include EDS classic,
vascular and kyphoscoliotic types, osteogenesis imperfecta, Marfan syndrome,
Loeys-Dietz syndrome, arterial tortuosity syndrome, and lateral meningocele
syndrome. A diagnostic flow chart is also offered with the attempt to support
the less experienced clinician in stringently recognizing JHS/EDS-HT and
stimulate the debate in the scientific community for both management and
research purposes.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31429
PMID: 25821090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
