---
reference_id: "PMID:10681539"
title: Molecular characterization of the non-biotin-containing subunit of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase.
authors:
- McKean AL
- Ke J
- Song J
- Che P
- Achenbach S
- Nikolau BJ
- Wurtele ES
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.8.5582
keywords:
- Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase/metabolism
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Arabidopsis/anatomy & histology, enzymology, genetics"
- Biotin/chemistry
- "Blotting, Southern"
- "Carbon-Carbon Ligases/chemistry, genetics, isolation & purification"
- "DNA, Complementary/metabolism"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- In Situ Hybridization
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/metabolism
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Glycine max/enzymology, genetics"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular characterization of the non-biotin-containing subunit of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase.
**Authors:** McKean AL, Ke J, Song J, Che P, Achenbach S, Nikolau BJ, Wurtele ES
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.8.5582](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.8.5582)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 25;275(8):5582-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.8.5582.

Molecular characterization of the non-biotin-containing subunit of
3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase.

McKean AL(1), Ke J, Song J, Che P, Achenbach S, Nikolau BJ, Wurtele ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA.

The biotin enzyme, 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCCase)
(3-methylcrotonyl-CoA:carbon-dioxide ligase (ADP-forming), EC 6.4.1. 4),
catalyzes a pivotal reaction required for both leucine catabolism and isoprenoid
metabolism. MCCase is a heteromeric enzyme composed of biotin-containing (MCC-A)
and non-biotin-containing (MCC-B) subunits. Although the sequence of the MCC-A
subunit was previously determined, the primary structure of the MCC-B subunit is
unknown. Based upon sequences of biotin enzymes that use substrates structurally
related to 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA, we isolated the MCC-B cDNA and gene of
Arabidopsis. Antibodies directed against the bacterially produced recombinant
protein encoded by the MCC-B cDNA react solely with the MCC-B subunit of the
purified MCCase and inhibit MCCase activity. The primary structure of the MCC-B
subunit shows the highest similarity to carboxyltransferase domains of biotin
enzymes that use methyl-branched thiol esters as substrate or products. The
single copy MCC-B gene of Arabidopsis is interrupted by nine introns. MCC-A and
MCC-B mRNAs accumulate in all cell types and organs, with the highest
accumulation occurring in rapidly growing and metabolically active tissues. In
addition, these two mRNAs accumulate coordinately in an approximately equal
molar ratio, and they each account for between 0.01 and 0.1 mol % of cellular
mRNA. The sequence of the Arabidopsis MCC-B gene has enabled the identification
of animal paralogous MCC-B cDNAs and genes, which may have an impact on the
molecular understanding of the lethal inherited metabolic disorder
methylcrotonylglyciuria.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.8.5582
PMID: 10681539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
