---
reference_id: "PMID:24038909"
title: RASA1 mutations and associated phenotypes in 68 families with capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation.
authors:
- Revencu N
- Boon LM
- Mendola A
- Cordisco MR
- Dubois J
- Clapuyt P
- Hammer F
- Amor DJ
- Irvine AD
- Baselga E
- Dompmartin A
- Syed S
- Martin-Santiago A
- Ades L
- Collins F
- Smith J
- Sandaradura S
- Barrio VR
- Burrows PE
- Blei F
- Cozzolino M
- Brunetti-Pierri N
- Vicente A
- Abramowicz M
- Désir J
- Vilain C
- Chung WK
- Wilson A
- Gardiner CA
- Dwight Y
- Lord DJ
- Fishman L
- Cytrynbaum C
- Chamlin S
- Ghali F
- Gilaberte Y
- Joss S
- Boente Mdel C
- Léauté-Labrèze C
- Delrue MA
- Bayliss S
- Martorell L
- González-Enseñat MA
- Mazereeuw-Hautier J
- "O'Donnell B"
- Bessis D
- Pyeritz RE
- Salhi A
- Tan OT
- Wargon O
- Mulliken JB
- Vikkula M
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22431
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Arteriovenous Malformations/diagnosis, genetics"
- Capillaries/abnormalities
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Gene Order
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Port-Wine Stain/diagnosis, genetics"
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- p120 GTPase Activating Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RASA1 mutations and associated phenotypes in 68 families with capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation.
**Authors:** Revencu N, Boon LM, Mendola A, Cordisco MR, Dubois J, Clapuyt P, Hammer F, Amor DJ, Irvine AD, Baselga E, Dompmartin A, Syed S, Martin-Santiago A, Ades L, Collins F, Smith J, Sandaradura S, Barrio VR, Burrows PE, Blei F, Cozzolino M, Brunetti-Pierri N, Vicente A, Abramowicz M, Désir J, Vilain C, Chung WK, Wilson A, Gardiner CA, Dwight Y, Lord DJ, Fishman L, Cytrynbaum C, Chamlin S, Ghali F, Gilaberte Y, Joss S, Boente Mdel C, Léauté-Labrèze C, Delrue MA, Bayliss S, Martorell L, González-Enseñat MA, Mazereeuw-Hautier J, O'Donnell B, Bessis D, Pyeritz RE, Salhi A, Tan OT, Wargon O, Mulliken JB, Vikkula M
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22431](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22431)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Dec;34(12):1632-41. doi: 10.1002/humu.22431. Epub 2013 Oct 10.

RASA1 mutations and associated phenotypes in 68 families with capillary 
malformation-arteriovenous malformation.

Revencu N(1), Boon LM, Mendola A, Cordisco MR, Dubois J, Clapuyt P, Hammer F, 
Amor DJ, Irvine AD, Baselga E, Dompmartin A, Syed S, Martin-Santiago A, Ades L, 
Collins F, Smith J, Sandaradura S, Barrio VR, Burrows PE, Blei F, Cozzolino M, 
Brunetti-Pierri N, Vicente A, Abramowicz M, Désir J, Vilain C, Chung WK, Wilson 
A, Gardiner CA, Dwight Y, Lord DJ, Fishman L, Cytrynbaum C, Chamlin S, Ghali F, 
Gilaberte Y, Joss S, Boente Mdel C, Léauté-Labrèze C, Delrue MA, Bayliss S, 
Martorell L, González-Enseñat MA, Mazereeuw-Hautier J, O'Donnell B, Bessis D, 
Pyeritz RE, Salhi A, Tan OT, Wargon O, Mulliken JB, Vikkula M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université 
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium; Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques 
universitaires St Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation (CM-AVM) is an 
autosomal-dominant disorder, caused by heterozygous RASA1 mutations, and 
manifesting multifocal CMs and high risk for fast-flow lesions. A limited number 
of patients have been reported, raising the question of the phenotypic borders. 
We identified new patients with a clinical diagnosis of CM-AVM, and patients 
with overlapping phenotypes. RASA1 was screened in 261 index patients with: 
CM-AVM (n = 100), common CM(s) (port-wine stain; n = 100), Sturge-Weber syndrome 
(n = 37), or isolated AVM(s) (n = 24). Fifty-eight distinct RASA1 mutations (43 
novel) were identified in 68 index patients with CM-AVM and none in patients 
with other phenotypes. A novel clinical feature was identified: cutaneous zones 
of numerous small white pale halos with a central red spot. An additional 
question addressed in this study was the "second-hit" hypothesis as a 
pathophysiological mechanism for CM-AVM. One tissue from a patient with a 
germline RASA1 mutation was available. The analysis of the tissue showed loss of 
the wild-type RASA1 allele. In conclusion, mutations in RASA1 underscore the 
specific CM-AVM phenotype and the clinical diagnosis is based on identifying the 
characteristic CMs. The high incidence of fast-flow lesions warrants careful 
clinical and radiologic examination, and regular follow-up.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22431
PMID: 24038909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]