---
reference_id: "PMID:35693884"
title: "Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation for Neurological Disorders: A Focus on Inborn Errors of Metabolism."
authors:
- de Vasconcelos P
- Lacerda JF
journal: Front Cell Neurosci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2022.895511
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation for Neurological Disorders: A Focus on Inborn Errors of Metabolism.
**Authors:** de Vasconcelos P, Lacerda JF
**Journal:** Front Cell Neurosci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fncel.2022.895511](https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2022.895511)

## Content

1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2022 May 26;16:895511. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2022.895511. 
eCollection 2022.

Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation for Neurological Disorders: A Focus on 
Inborn Errors of Metabolism.

de Vasconcelos P(1), Lacerda JF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Serviço de Hematologia e Transplantação de Medula, Hospital de Santa Maria, 
Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)JLacerda Lab, Hematology and Transplantation Immunology, Instituto de 
Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de 
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.

Hematopoietic stem cells have been investigated and applied for the treatment of 
certain neurological disorders for a long time. Currently, their therapeutic 
potential is harnessed in autologous and allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT). Autologous HSCT is helpful in immune-mediated 
neurological diseases such as Multiple Sclerosis. However, clinical benefits 
derive more from the immunosuppressive conditioning regimen than the interaction 
between stem cells and the nervous system. Mainly used for hematologic 
malignancies, allogeneic HSCT explores the therapeutic potential of 
donor-derived hematopoietic stem cells. In the neurological setting, it has 
proven to be most valuable in Inborn Errors of Metabolism, a large spectrum of 
multisystem disorders characterized by congenital deficiencies in enzymes 
involved in metabolic pathways. Inborn Errors of Metabolism such as X-linked 
Adrenoleukodystrophy present with brain accumulation of enzymatic substrates 
that result in progressive inflammatory demyelination. Allogeneic HSCT can halt 
ongoing inflammatory neural destruction by replacing hematopoietic-originated 
microglia with donor-derived myeloid precursors. Microglia, the only neural 
cells successfully transplanted thus far, are the most valuable source of 
central nervous system metabolic correction and play a significant role in the 
crosstalk between the brain and hematopoietic stem cells. After transplantation, 
engrafted donor-derived myeloid cells modulate the neural microenvironment by 
recapitulating microglial functions and enhancing repair mechanisms such as 
remyelination. In some disorders, additional benefits result from the donor 
hematopoietic stem cell secretome that cross-corrects neighboring neural cells 
via mannose-6-phosphatase paracrine pathways. The limitations of allogeneic HSCT 
in this setting relate to the slow turnover of microglia and complications such 
as graft-vs.-host disease. These restraints have accelerated the development of 
hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy, where autologous hematopoietic stem cells 
are collected, manipulated ex vivo to overexpress the missing enzyme, and 
infused back into the patient. With this cellular drug vehicle strategy, the 
brain is populated by improved cells and exposed to supraphysiological levels of 
the flawed protein, resulting in metabolic correction. This review focuses on 
the mechanisms of brain repair resulting from HSCT and gene therapy in Inborn 
Errors of Metabolism. A brief mention will also be made on immune-mediated 
nervous system diseases that are treated with this approach.

Copyright © 2022 de Vasconcelos and Lacerda.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2022.895511
PMCID: PMC9178264
PMID: 35693884

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.