---
reference_id: "PMID:37623209"
title: Characteristic of Endometrial Stromal Sarcoma by Algorithm of Potential Biomarkers for Uterine Mesenchymal Tumor.
authors:
- Hayashi T
- Sano K
- Yaegashi N
- Abiko K
- Konishi I
journal: Curr Issues Mol Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cimb45080390
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristic of Endometrial Stromal Sarcoma by Algorithm of Potential Biomarkers for Uterine Mesenchymal Tumor.
**Authors:** Hayashi T, Sano K, Yaegashi N, Abiko K, Konishi I
**Journal:** Curr Issues Mol Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cimb45080390](https://doi.org/10.3390/cimb45080390)

## Content

1. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 2023 Jul 25;45(8):6190-6201. doi: 10.3390/cimb45080390.

Characteristic of Endometrial Stromal Sarcoma by Algorithm of Potential 
Biomarkers for Uterine Mesenchymal Tumor.

Hayashi T(1)(2), Sano K(2)(3), Yaegashi N(2)(4), Abiko K(5), Konishi I(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Medicine, National Hospital Organization Kyoto Medical Centre, Kyoto 
612-8555, Japan.
(2)Department of Medical R&D Promotion Project, Japan Agency for Medical 
Research and Development (AMED), Tokyo 103-0022, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Shinshu University Hospital, Nagano 390-8621, Japan.
(4)Section of Assistant Director, Sendai Red Cross Hospital, Miyagi 982-8501, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Hospital Organization Kyoto 
Medical Centre, Kyoto 612-8555, Japan.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The benign tumor uterine leiomyoma (UL) develops from the smooth muscle tissue 
that constitutes the uterus, whereas malignant tumor uterine sarcoma develops 
from either the smooth muscle tissue or stroma and is different from UL and 
endometrial cancer. Uterine sarcoma is broadly classified into three types: 
uterine leiomyosarcoma, endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS), and carcinosarcoma. 
Although uterine leiomyosarcoma and ESS are both classified as uterine sarcoma, 
they significantly differ in terms of their sites of occurrence, symptoms, and 
treatment methods. Uterine leiomyosarcoma develops from the muscle tissue 
constituting the wall of the uterus and accounts for approximately 70% of all 
uterine sarcoma cases. In contrast, ESS develops from the stromal tissue beneath 
the endometrium and accounts for approximately 25% of all uterine sarcoma cases. 
ESS is classified as either low grade (LG) or high grade (HG). This case report 
aimed to highlight the importance of histopathologic examinations based on 
surgical specimens. Herein, we reported the case of a 45-year-old woman 
suspected of having submucosal leiomyoma of the uterus based on imaging results. 
Transvaginal ultrasonography and endometrial biopsy or partial dilation and 
curettage were performed. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
revealed a 32-mm mass projecting from the posterior wall of the uterus into the 
uterine cavity. T2-weighted imaging revealed a low signal within the mass; thus, 
submucosal UL was suspected. Histopathologic examination of surgical specimens 
obtained from a patient suspected of having submucosal UL after 
contrast-enhanced MRI indicated that the patient had ESS. Despite the remarkable 
advancements in medical imaging technology, the accuracy of contrast-enhanced 
MRI for detecting uterine mesenchymal tumors is limited. Therefore, 
histopathologic diagnosis based on surgical specimens should be performed when 
medical grounds for diagnosing a benign tumor on contrast-enhanced MRI are 
lacking.

DOI: 10.3390/cimb45080390
PMCID: PMC10453212
PMID: 37623209

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.