---
reference_id: "PMID:40613586"
title: "Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: A Longitudinal Assessment of Cardiovascular Features and Interventions From the Collaborative for Longitudinal Aortic Research in the Young (CLARITY)."
authors:
- Salamat B
- Stephens SB
- Britt JJ
- Beecroft-Dawson T
- Taylor A
- Mosquera LM
- Callewaert B
- Beyens A
- Channing A
- Dilorenzo MP
- Weigand J
- Jacob B
- Fontenot E
- Morris SA
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64159
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Vascular Malformations/genetics, pathology, diagnostic imaging, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Phenotype
- "Arteries/abnormalities, pathology, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Echocardiography
- "Aorta/pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- "Joint Instability/genetics, pathology, diagnostic imaging, diagnosis"
- Longitudinal Studies
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/genetics, pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- Infant
- Adolescent
- "Pulmonary Artery/diagnostic imaging, pathology, abnormalities"
- "Glucose Transport Proteins, Facilitative"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: A Longitudinal Assessment of Cardiovascular Features and Interventions From the Collaborative for Longitudinal Aortic Research in the Young (CLARITY).
**Authors:** Salamat B, Stephens SB, Britt JJ, Beecroft-Dawson T, Taylor A, Mosquera LM, Callewaert B, Beyens A, Channing A, Dilorenzo MP, Weigand J, Jacob B, Fontenot E, Morris SA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.64159](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.64159)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2025 Nov;197(11):e64159. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64159. Epub
2025  Jul 4.

Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: A Longitudinal Assessment of Cardiovascular
Features and Interventions From the Collaborative for Longitudinal Aortic
Research in the Young (CLARITY).

Salamat B(1), Stephens SB(1)(2), Britt JJ(1), Beecroft-Dawson T(1), Taylor A(3),
Mosquera LM(4), Callewaert B(4)(5), Beyens A(4)(5), Channing A(6), Dilorenzo
MP(6), Weigand J(1), Jacob B(1), Fontenot E(7), Morris SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's
Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and Environmental Sciences, School
of Public Health, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas,
USA.
(3)A Twist of Fate, Owasso, Oklahoma, USA.
(4)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Vagelos
College of Physicians and Surgeons and New York-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley
Children's Hospital, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.

Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is an ultra-rare arteriopathy with a
cardiovascular phenotype of vascular tortuosity, elongation, dilation, and
stenosis. In 14 patients with ATS, aortic and pulmonary artery longitudinal
growth, phenotypes, and interventions were evaluated. Medical records and images
of 14 patients with ATS (defined as biallelic SLC2A10 variants with consistent
phenotypes) were reviewed. Vascular measurements were collected from imaging
reports. Z-scores were calculated. Dilation and hypoplasia were defined as
z-scores ≥ +2.0 and ≤ -2.0, respectively. Slopes were calculated using mixed
linear regression. Our cohort consisted of 9 males (64%). Median diagnosis age
was 3.3 years; median follow up duration was 5.7 years. By echocardiography,
aortic root dilation was present in 71.4%; branch pulmonary artery (BPA)
dimensions were mixed between dilated and hypoplastic. By echocardiography and
cross-sectional imaging, aortic and BPA dimensions increased over time but had
stable z-scores. Three patients underwent repeated BPA interventions, one
patient had an aortopexy, and one patient had an aortic valve replacement. No
patients had arterial dissections. Six new variants are described. In
conclusion, aortic dilation is usual and persists in ATS with stable z-scores
similar to other aortopathies. BPA stenosis is a common complication in ATS
leading to invasive vascular procedures.

© 2025 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64159
PMID: 40613586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
