---
reference_id: "PMID:36916768"
title: "Rhabdomyosarcoma with isolated lung metastases: A report from the Soft Tissue Sarcoma Committee of the Children's Oncology Group."
authors:
- Vasquez JC
- Luo LY
- Hiniker SM
- Rhee DS
- Dasgupta R
- Chen S
- Weigel BJ
- Xue W
- Venkatramani R
- Arndt CA
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.30293
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Infant
- Rhabdomyosarcoma/therapy
- Lung Neoplasms/secondary
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Embryonal"
- Soft Tissue Neoplasms
- Progression-Free Survival
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhabdomyosarcoma with isolated lung metastases: A report from the Soft Tissue Sarcoma Committee of the Children's Oncology Group.
**Authors:** Vasquez JC, Luo LY, Hiniker SM, Rhee DS, Dasgupta R, Chen S, Weigel BJ, Xue W, Venkatramani R, Arndt CA
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.30293](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.30293)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2023 Jun;70(6):e30293. doi: 10.1002/pbc.30293. Epub 2023
 Mar 14.

Rhabdomyosarcoma with isolated lung metastases: A report from the Soft Tissue 
Sarcoma Committee of the Children's Oncology Group.

Vasquez JC(1), Luo LY(2), Hiniker SM(3), Rhee DS(4), Dasgupta R(5), Chen S(6), 
Weigel BJ(7), Xue W(8), Venkatramani R(9), Arndt CA(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, 
USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(5)Division of Pediatric General and Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Nationwide Children's 
Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health and Health Professions 
and College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, 
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

BACKGROUND: To determine outcomes of children with rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) with 
isolated lung metastases.
METHODS: Data were analyzed for 428 patients with metastatic RMS treated on COG 
protocols. Categorical variables were compared using Chi-square or Fisher's 
exact tests. Event-free survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS) were estimated 
using Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the log-rank test.
RESULTS: Compared with patients with other metastatic sites (n = 373), patients 
with lung-only metastases (n = 55) were more likely to be <10 years of age, have 
embryonal histology (embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma), have N0 disease, and less 
likely to have primary extremity tumors. Lung-only patients had significantly 
better survival outcomes than patients with all other sites of metastatic 
disease (p < .0001) with 5-year EFS of 48.1 versus 18.8% and 5-year OS of 64.1 
versus 26.9%. Patients with lung-only metastases, and those with a single 
extrapulmonary site of metastasis, had better survival compared with patients 
with two or more sites of metastatic disease (p < .0001). In patients with ERMS 
and lung-only metastases, there was no significant difference in survival 
between patients ≥10 years and 1-9 years (5-year EFS: 58.3 vs. 68.2%, 5-year OS: 
66.7 vs. 67.7%).
CONCLUSIONS: With aggressive treatment, patients with ERMS and lung-only 
metastatic disease have superior EFS and OS compared with patients with other 
sites of metastatic disease, even when older than 10 years of age. Consideration 
should be given to including patients ≥10 years with ERMS and lung-only 
metastases in the same group as those <10 years in future risk stratification 
algorithms.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.30293
PMCID: PMC10424503
PMID: 36916768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors have 
no conflicts of interest to disclose.