---
reference_id: "PMID:12231074"
title: Pathogenesis of skeletal muscle insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Petersen KF
- Shulman GI
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02554-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of skeletal muscle insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Petersen KF, Shulman GI
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02554-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02554-7)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 2002 Sep 5;90(5A):11G-18G. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02554-7.

Pathogenesis of skeletal muscle insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Petersen KF(1), Shulman GI.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale 
University School of Medicine, 295 Congress Avenue, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Insulin resistance is a principal feature of type 2 diabetes and precedes the 
clinical development of the disease by 10 to 20 years. Insulin resistance is 
caused by the decreased ability of peripheral target tissues (especially muscle) 
to respond properly to normal circulating concentrations of insulin. Defects in 
muscle glycogen synthesis play a significant role in insulin resistance, and 3 
potentially rate-controlling steps in muscle glucose metabolism have been 
implicated in its pathogenesis: glycogen synthase, hexokinase, and GLUT4 (the 
major insulin-stimulated glucose transporter). Results from recent studies using 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy implicate intracellular defects in 
glucose transport as the rate-controlling step for insulin-mediated glucose 
uptake in muscle. These alterations in glucose transport activity are likely the 
result of dysregulation of intramyocellular fatty acid metabolism, whereby fatty 
acids cause insulin resistance by activation of a serine kinase cascade, leading 
to decreased insulin-stimulated insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 tyrosine 
phosphorylation and decreased IRS-1-associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
activity, a required step in insulin-stimulated glucose transport into muscle. 
The thiazolidinedione class of antidiabetic agents directly targets insulin 
resistance in skeletal muscle by improving glucose transport activity and 
insulin-stimulated muscle glycogen synthesis. Although the precise mechanism of 
action is not known, recent NMR studies support the hypothesis that these agents 
improve insulin action in skeletal muscle and liver by promoting a 
redistribution of fat out of these tissues and into peripheral adipocytes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02554-7
PMID: 12231074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]