---
reference_id: "PMID:23074317"
title: Transmission of hepatitis B virus from an orthopedic surgeon with a high viral load.
authors:
- Enfield KB
- Sharapov U
- Hall KK
- Leiner J
- Berg CL
- Xia GL
- Thompson ND
- Ganova-Raeva L
- Sifri CD
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/cid/cis869
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transmission of hepatitis B virus from an orthopedic surgeon with a high viral load.
**Authors:** Enfield KB, Sharapov U, Hall KK, Leiner J, Berg CL, Xia GL, Thompson ND, Ganova-Raeva L, Sifri CD
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/cis869](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cis869)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2013 Jan;56(2):218-24. doi: 10.1093/cid/cis869. Epub 2012 Oct
 16.

Transmission of hepatitis B virus from an orthopedic surgeon with a high viral 
load.

Enfield KB(1), Sharapov U, Hall KK, Leiner J, Berg CL, Xia GL, Thompson ND, 
Ganova-Raeva L, Sifri CD.

Author information:
(1)Office of Hospital Epidemiology, University of Virginia Health System, 
Charlottesville, VA 22908-0473, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2013 Jan;56(2):225-7. doi: 10.1093/cid/cis876.

BACKGROUND: During the evaluation of a needle-stick injury, an orthopedic 
surgeon was found to be unknowingly infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV) (viral 
load >17.9 million IU/mL). He had previously completed two 3-dose series of 
hepatitis B vaccine without achieving a protective level of surface antibody. We 
investigated whether any surgical patients had acquired HBV infection while 
under his care.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study of all patients who underwent surgery by 
the surgeon was conducted. Patients were notified of their potential exposure 
and need for testing, and samples with positive HBV loads underwent DNA 
sequencing. Characteristics of the surgical procedures for the cohort were 
evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 232 (70.7%) of potentially exposed patients consented to 
testing; 2 were found to have acute infection and 6 had possible transmission 
(evidence of past exposure without risk factors). Genome sequence analysis of 
HBV DNA from the infected surgeon and patients with acute infection revealed 
genetically related virus (>99.9% nucleotide identity). Only age was found to be 
statistically different between those with confirmed or possible HBV 
transmission and those who remained susceptible to HBV.
CONCLUSIONS: We documented HBV transmission during orthopedic surgery to 2 
patients from a surgeon with HBV. This investigation highlights the importance 
of evaluating individuals who do not respond to 2 series of HBV vaccination, the 
increased risk of HBV transmission from providers with high viral loads, and the 
need to evaluate the clinical practice of providers with HBV and implement 
appropriate procedure-based practice restrictions.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/cis869
PMID: 23074317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]