---
reference_id: "PMID:40875208"
title: Established Cancer Predisposition Genes in Single and Multiple Cancer Diagnoses.
authors:
- Shevach JW
- Xu J
- Snyder N
- Wei J
- Shi Z
- Tran H
- Zheng SL
- Beebe-Dimmer JL
- Cooney KA
journal: JAMA Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2025.2879
keywords:
- Humans
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms/genetics, diagnosis"
- Male
- Female
- Aged
- Adult
- Exome Sequencing
- United Kingdom/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Established Cancer Predisposition Genes in Single and Multiple Cancer Diagnoses.
**Authors:** Shevach JW, Xu J, Snyder N, Wei J, Shi Z, Tran H, Zheng SL, Beebe-Dimmer JL, Cooney KA
**Journal:** JAMA Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaoncol.2025.2879](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2025.2879)

## Content

1. JAMA Oncol. 2025 Oct 1;11(10):1222-1230. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2025.2879.

Established Cancer Predisposition Genes in Single and Multiple Cancer Diagnoses.

Shevach JW(1), Xu J(2), Snyder N(1), Wei J(2), Shi Z(2), Tran H(2), Zheng SL(2),
Beebe-Dimmer JL(3)(4), Cooney KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and the Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University School
of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina.
(2)Program for Personalized Cancer Care, NorthShore University HealthSystem,
Evanston, Illinois.
(3)Department of Oncology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan.
(4)Population Studies and Disparities Research Program, Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, Michigan.

IMPORTANCE: Much of the understanding of cancer risk associated with rare
pathogenic variants (RPVs) is derived from family-based studies or clinically
ascertained samples, which may be limited by ascertainment and selection bias.
OBJECTIVE: To quantify associations between RPVs in previously implicated cancer
predisposition genes and single and multiple cancer diagnoses in a large
population-based study.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this genetic association study,
whole-exome sequencing data were used from the UK Biobank, a UK population-based
cohort that enrolled participants aged 40 to 69 years between 2006 and 2010.
Participants who were involved in the whole-exome sequencing release of 200 000
genomes in 2020 were included in this study. This analysis included White
participants only, as findings in other racial and ethnic groups had small
sample sizes. Participants were diagnosed before or after biobank enrollment
until March 2024.
EXPOSURES: The sequencing data of a set of 96 previously implicated cancer
predisposition genes were analyzed and compared using 2 methods. To determine
the statistical significance of an association, a robust optimal sequence kernel
association test was used, while odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs were obtained
through Firth logistic regression.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary study outcome was the diagnosis of 1 of
11 cancers (bladder, breast, central nervous system, colorectal, lung, melanoma,
ovary, pancreatic, prostate, renal, thyroid) defined by relevant diagnosis codes
in inpatient hospital diagnosis, cancer registry, and/or death registry data.
RESULTS: Data from 183 627 participants (101 414 [55.2%] female) were analyzed,
including 25 824 participants with at least 1 cancer diagnosis, of whom 23 704
(91.8%) had a single cancer diagnosis and 2130 (8.2%) had 2 or more cancer
diagnoses. A total of 157 793 controls had no cancer diagnosis. The median (IQR)
age was 62 (56-65) years in participants with at least 1 cancer diagnosis,
compared to 57 (50-63) years in those without a cancer diagnosis. Genetic
variation in 16 genes was significantly associated with at least 1 cancer of
interest (ATM, BARD1, BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CDKN2A, CHEK2, HOXB13, MITF, MLH1,
MSH2, MSH6, NF1, PALB2, RAD51C, and RAD51D). The presence of an RPV in 1 of
these 16 genes was associated with increased odds of at least 1 cancer (OR,
1.87; 95% CI, 1.76-1.98) and multiple primary cancers (OR, 2.56; 95% CI,
2.18-2.99). Carrier frequency was 6.28% and 8.36%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This genetic association study demonstrates several
established associations between cancer predisposition genes and cancer
diagnoses in an unselected population-based study. These results also
demonstrate that RPVs in cancer predisposition genes are associated with
multiple primary cancer diagnoses, suggesting that multigene panel testing may
be warranted in these individuals.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2025.2879
PMCID: PMC12395360
PMID: 40875208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial Disclosures: Dr. Shevach reports the
following potential conflicts of interest: research funding (AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals; Merck Sharpe & Dohme), stock ownership (Pfizer Inc.),
honorarium (Bayer); and other relationships and activities: travel funds
(AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals; Dava Oncology), and honorarium (MJH Life
Sciences). Dr. Xu reports the following potential conflicts of interest:
Scientific Advisory Board member (GoPath Lab; GenomicMD). Dr. Snyder reports no
disclosures. Dr. Wei reports no disclosures. Dr. Shi reports no disclosures. Mr.
Tran reports no disclosures. Professor Zheng reports no disclosures. Dr. Dimmer
reports no disclosures. Dr. Cooney reports the following potential conflicts of
interest: book royalties (Elsevier; Springer), honorarium (Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center Scientific Advisory Board); and other relationships and
activities: consulting (Stanford Department of Medicine, Cornell Department of
Medicine, University of Alabama-Birmingham, University of Virginia Dean’s
Office/Department of Medicine, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center), travel
(Prostate Cancer Foundation, AAIM); honorarium (Prostate Cancer Foundation).
