---
reference_id: "PMID:38801573"
title: "Biological Characteristics and Pathogenesis of Monkeypox Virus: An Overview."
authors:
- Kalaba MH
- El-Sherbiny GM
- Sharaf MH
- Farghal EE
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biological Characteristics and Pathogenesis of Monkeypox Virus: An Overview.
**Authors:** Kalaba MH, El-Sherbiny GM, Sharaf MH, Farghal EE
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_6](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_6)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2024;1451:91-109. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_6.

Biological Characteristics and Pathogenesis of Monkeypox Virus: An Overview.

Kalaba MH(1), El-Sherbiny GM(2), Sharaf MH(1), Farghal EE(3).

Author information:
(1)Botany and Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar University, 
Cairo, 11884, Egypt.
(2)Botany and Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar University, 
Cairo, 11884, Egypt. gamalelsherbiny1970@azhar.edu.eg.
(3)Clinical and Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, 
Tanta, Egypt.

Although the smallpox virus has been eradicated worldwide, the World Health 
Organization (WHO) has issued a warning about the virus's potential to propagate 
globally. The WHO labeled monkeypox a world public health emergency in July 
2022, requiring urgent prevention and treatment. The monkeypox virus is a part 
of the Poxviridae family, Orthopoxvirus genus, and is accountable for smallpox, 
which has killed over a million people in the past. Natural hosts of the virus 
include squirrels, Gambian rodents, chimpanzees, and other monkeys. The 
monkeypox virus has transmitted to humans through primary vectors (various 
animal species) and secondary vectors, including direct touch with lesions, 
breathing particles from body fluids, and infected bedding. The viral particles 
are ovoid or brick-shaped, 200-250 nm in diameter, contain a single 
double-stranded DNA molecule, and reproduce only in the cytoplasm of infected 
cells. Monkeypox causes fever, cold, muscle pains, headache, fatigue, and 
backache. The phylogenetic investigation distinguished between two genetic 
clades of monkeypox: the more pathogenic Congo Basin clade and the West Africa 
clade. In recent years, the geographical spread of the human monkeypox virus has 
accelerated despite a paucity of information regarding the disease's emergence, 
ecology, and epidemiology. Using lesion samples and polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR), the monkeypox virus was diagnosed. In the USA, the improved Ankara 
vaccine can now be used to protect people who are at a higher risk of getting 
monkeypox. Antivirals that we have now work well against smallpox and may stop 
the spread of monkeypox, but there is no particular therapy for monkeypox.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_6
PMID: 38801573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]