---
reference_id: "PMID:32347921"
title: "SF3B1-mutant MDS as a distinct disease subtype: a proposal from the International Working Group for the Prognosis of MDS."
authors:
- Malcovati L
- Stevenson K
- Papaemmanuil E
- Neuberg D
- Bejar R
- Boultwood J
- Bowen DT
- Campbell PJ
- Ebert BL
- Fenaux P
- Haferlach T
- Heuser M
- Jansen JH
- Komrokji RS
- Maciejewski JP
- Walter MJ
- Fontenay M
- Garcia-Manero G
- Graubert TA
- Karsan A
- Meggendorfer M
- Pellagatti A
- Sallman DA
- Savona MR
- Sekeres MA
- Steensma DP
- Tauro S
- Thol F
- Vyas P
- Van de Loosdrecht AA
- Haase D
- Tüchler H
- Greenberg PL
- Ogawa S
- Hellstrom-Lindberg E
- Cazzola M
journal: Blood
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2020004850
keywords:
- Bone Marrow/metabolism
- Erythropoiesis
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/classification, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Phosphoproteins/genetics
- Prognosis
- RNA Splicing Factors/genetics
- Risk Assessment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SF3B1-mutant MDS as a distinct disease subtype: a proposal from the International Working Group for the Prognosis of MDS.
**Authors:** Malcovati L, Stevenson K, Papaemmanuil E, Neuberg D, Bejar R, Boultwood J, Bowen DT, Campbell PJ, Ebert BL, Fenaux P, Haferlach T, Heuser M, Jansen JH, Komrokji RS, Maciejewski JP, Walter MJ, Fontenay M, Garcia-Manero G, Graubert TA, Karsan A, Meggendorfer M, Pellagatti A, Sallman DA, Savona MR, Sekeres MA, Steensma DP, Tauro S, Thol F, Vyas P, Van de Loosdrecht AA, Haase D, Tüchler H, Greenberg PL, Ogawa S, Hellstrom-Lindberg E, Cazzola M
**Journal:** Blood (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2020004850](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020004850)

## Content

1. Blood. 2020 Jul 9;136(2):157-170. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020004850.

SF3B1-mutant MDS as a distinct disease subtype: a proposal from the 
International Working Group for the Prognosis of MDS.

Malcovati L(1), Stevenson K(2), Papaemmanuil E(3), Neuberg D(2), Bejar R(4), 
Boultwood J(5), Bowen DT(6), Campbell PJ(7), Ebert BL(8), Fenaux P(9), Haferlach 
T(10), Heuser M(11), Jansen JH(12), Komrokji RS(13), Maciejewski JP(14), Walter 
MJ(15), Fontenay M(16), Garcia-Manero G(17), Graubert TA(18), Karsan A(19), 
Meggendorfer M(10), Pellagatti A(5), Sallman DA(13), Savona MR(20), Sekeres 
MA(14), Steensma DP(8), Tauro S(21), Thol F(11), Vyas P(22), Van de Loosdrecht 
AA(23), Haase D(24), Tüchler H(25), Greenberg PL(26), Ogawa S(27), 
Hellstrom-Lindberg E(28), Cazzola M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia & Fondazione IRCCS 
Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, MA.
(3)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(4)UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center, La Jolla, CA.
(5)Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(6)St. James's Institute of Oncology, Leeds Teaching Hospitals, Leeds, United 
Kingdom.
(7)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(8)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(9)Hôpital St Louis, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris and Paris Diderot 
University, Paris, France.
(10)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany.
(11)Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(12)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(13)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL.
(14)Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer Center, Cleveland, OH.
(15)Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO.
(16)Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital Cochin Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Paris, France.
(17)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(18)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, MA.
(19)BC Cancer Research Centre & Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(20)Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN.
(21)Dundee Cancer Centre, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, 
United Kingdom.
(22)MRC Molecular Hematology Unit, WIMM University of Oxford, Oxford Biomedical 
Research Centre, Department of Hematology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(23)Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(24)University Medical Center, Georg August University, Göttingen, Germany.
(25)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Leukemia Research, Vienna, Austria.
(26)Stanford University Cancer Institute, Stanford, CA.
(27)Department of Tumor Biology, University of Kyoto, Japan; and.
(28)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2021 May 27;137(21):3003. doi: 10.1182/blood.2021012067.

Comment in
    Blood. 2020 Jul 9;136(2):149-151. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020005719.
    Blood Adv. 2020 Nov 24;4(22):5716-5721. doi: 
10.1182/bloodadvances.2020003345.

The 2016 revision of the World Health Organization classification of tumors of 
hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues is characterized by a closer integration of 
morphology and molecular genetics. Notwithstanding, the myelodysplastic syndrome 
(MDS) with isolated del(5q) remains so far the only MDS subtype defined by a 
genetic abnormality. Approximately half of MDS patients carry somatic mutations 
in spliceosome genes, with SF3B1 being the most commonly mutated one. SF3B1 
mutation identifies a condition characterized by ring sideroblasts (RS), 
ineffective erythropoiesis, and indolent clinical course. A large body of 
evidence supports recognition of SF3B1-mutant MDS as a distinct nosologic 
entity. To further validate this notion, we interrogated the data set of the 
International Working Group for the Prognosis of MDS (IWG-PM). Based on the 
findings of our analyses, we propose the following diagnostic criteria for 
SF3B1-mutant MDS: (1) cytopenia as defined by standard hematologic values, (2) 
somatic SF3B1 mutation, (3) morphologic dysplasia (with or without RS), and (4) 
bone marrow blasts <5% and peripheral blood blasts <1%. Selected concomitant 
genetic lesions represent exclusion criteria for the proposed entity. In 
patients with clonal cytopenia of undetermined significance, SF3B1 mutation is 
almost invariably associated with subsequent development of overt MDS with RS, 
suggesting that this genetic lesion might provide presumptive evidence of MDS in 
the setting of persistent unexplained cytopenia. Diagnosis of SF3B1-mutant MDS 
has considerable clinical implications in terms of risk stratification and 
therapeutic decision making. In fact, this condition has a relatively good 
prognosis and may respond to luspatercept with abolishment of the transfusion 
requirement.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020004850
PMCID: PMC7362582
PMID: 32347921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: R.B. received 
consulting fees from AbbVie, Astex, Celgene, Daiichi-Sankyo, Forty Seven, and 
NeoGenomics; honoraria for serving on steering and data safety monitoring 
committees for Celgene; and research funding from Celgene and Takeda. B.L.E. 
received research funding from Celgene and Deerfield; plays a consulting role 
from GRAIL; plays an advisory role and holds equity in Skyhawk Therapeutics and 
Exo Therapeutics. M.H. received honoraria from Novartis, Pfizer, and PriME 
Oncology; plays a consulting or advisory role for AbbVie, Bayer Pharma AG, 
Daiichi Sankyo, Novartis, and Pfizer; and received research funding (to 
institution) from Astellas, Bayer Pharma AG, BergenBio, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Karyopharm, Novartis, Pfizer, and Roche. M.R.S received research funding from 
Astex, Takeda, TG Therapeutics; Equity–Karyopharm; consulting fees for AbbVie, 
BMS, Celgene, Incyte, Karyopharm, Ryvu, Sierra Oncology, Takeda, TG 
Therapeutics. D.P.S. received institutional research funding from H3 Biosciences 
and consulting fees for Celgene. The remaining authors declare no competing 
financial interests.