---
reference_id: "PMID:37933340"
title: "Myopathic Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II) Deficiency: A Rare Cause of Acute Kidney Injury and Cardiomyopathy."
authors:
- Castillo E
- Medina D
- Schoenmann N
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.46595
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myopathic Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II) Deficiency: A Rare Cause of Acute Kidney Injury and Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Castillo E, Medina D, Schoenmann N
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.46595](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.46595)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Oct 6;15(10):e46595. doi: 10.7759/cureus.46595. eCollection 2023 
Oct.

Myopathic Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II) Deficiency: A Rare Cause of 
Acute Kidney Injury and Cardiomyopathy.

Castillo E(1), Medina D(2), Schoenmann N(3).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Universidad Latina de Panamá, Panama City, PAN.
(2)General Medicine, Universidad Latina de Panamá, Panama City, PAN.
(3)Emergency Medicine, Augusta University Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, 
USA.

Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II) deficiency is a long-chain fatty acid 
(LCFA) oxidation disorder. There are three main types classified by symptoms and 
age of onset: the neonatal form, the infantile hepatocardiomuscular form, and 
the adult or myopathic form. The first two are early-onset severe disorders 
presenting with marked hypoketotic hypoglycemia, cardiomyopathy, and liver 
dysfunction. The latter is characterized by muscle pain and weakness and 
stiffness, typically triggered by exercise or febrile illnesses and occasionally 
associated with myoglobinuria. One of the most common complications is acute 
kidney injury (AKI) following massive rhabdomyolysis, which is managed with 
aggressive fluid therapy; crystalloid solutions are preferred. We report an 
otherwise healthy 38-year-old patient who presented with severe myalgia, cramps, 
fatigue, low-grade fever, and transient myoglobinuria, after intense physical 
training. Significant recurrent muscle pain was reported. Family history was 
unremarkable. Imaging studies showed no abnormalities. Echocardiogram showed a 
left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40%. Acetylcarnitine analysis with 
tandem mass spectrometry and molecular tests confirmed the diagnosis. Fluid 
resuscitation was started. Acute kidney injury was diagnosed and managed with 
plasmapheresis and five sessions of hemodialysis. The patient was discharged 
upon the improvement of renal function with lifestyle modification 
recommendations. In otherwise healthy young adults presenting with myalgia and 
rhabdomyolysis triggered by physical activity or infection, CPT II deficiency 
should be considered, and genetic testing should be initiated to provide an 
opportunity for patients to modify their daily lifestyle, preventing future 
attacks and the development of complications.

Copyright © 2023, Castillo et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.46595
PMCID: PMC10625795
PMID: 37933340

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.