---
reference_id: "PMID:31630043"
title: "ALK immunohistochemistry positive, FISH negative NSCLC is infrequent, but associated with impaired survival following treatment with crizotinib."
authors:
- Thunnissen E
- Lissenberg-Witte BI
- van den Heuvel MM
- Monkhorst K
- Skov BG
- Sørensen JB
- Mellemgaard A
- Dingemans AMC
- Speel EJM
- de Langen AJ
- Hashemi SMS
- Bahce I
- van der Drift MA
- Looijen-Salamon MG
- Gosney J
- Postmus PE
- Samii SMS
- Duplaquet F
- Weynand B
- Durando X
- Penault-Llorca F
- Finn S
- Grady AO
- Oz B
- Akyurek N
- Buettner R
- Wolf J
- Bubendorf L
- Duin S
- Marondel I
- Heukamp LC
- Timens W
- Schuuring EMD
- Pauwels P
- Smit EF
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2019.09.023
keywords:
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, metabolism, mortality, pathology"
- Crizotinib/therapeutic use
- Female
- Gene Rearrangement
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, metabolism, mortality, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALK immunohistochemistry positive, FISH negative NSCLC is infrequent, but associated with impaired survival following treatment with crizotinib.
**Authors:** Thunnissen E, Lissenberg-Witte BI, van den Heuvel MM, Monkhorst K, Skov BG, Sørensen JB, Mellemgaard A, Dingemans AMC, Speel EJM, de Langen AJ, Hashemi SMS, Bahce I, van der Drift MA, Looijen-Salamon MG, Gosney J, Postmus PE, Samii SMS, Duplaquet F, Weynand B, Durando X, Penault-Llorca F, Finn S, Grady AO, Oz B, Akyurek N, Buettner R, Wolf J, Bubendorf L, Duin S, Marondel I, Heukamp LC, Timens W, Schuuring EMD, Pauwels P, Smit EF
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2019.09.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2019.09.023)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2019 Dec;138:13-18. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2019.09.023. Epub 2019
 Oct 3.

ALK immunohistochemistry positive, FISH negative NSCLC is infrequent, but
associated with impaired survival following treatment with crizotinib.

Thunnissen E(1), Lissenberg-Witte BI(2), van den Heuvel MM(3), Monkhorst K(4),
Skov BG(5), Sørensen JB(6), Mellemgaard A(7), Dingemans AMC(8), Speel EJM(9), de
Langen AJ(10), Hashemi SMS(10), Bahce I(10), van der Drift MA(11),
Looijen-Salamon MG(12), Gosney J(13), Postmus PE(14), Samii SMS(15), Duplaquet
F(16), Weynand B(17), Durando X(18), Penault-Llorca F(19), Finn S(20), Grady
AO(21), Oz B(22), Akyurek N(23), Buettner R(24), Wolf J(25), Bubendorf L(26),
Duin S(27), Marondel I(28), Heukamp LC(29), Timens W(30), Schuuring EMD(30),
Pauwels P(31), Smit EF(32).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam UMC, Location VU University Medical
Center, the Netherlands. Electronic address: e.thunnissen@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Amsterdam UMC, Location VU University Medical
Center, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Thoracic Oncology Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Pathology, Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni van Leeuwenhoek, Amsterdam,
the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pathology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Oncology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(7)Department of Oncology, Herlev University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(9)Pathology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(10)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Amsterdam UMC, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(12)Pathology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(13)Department of Pathology, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool,
United Kingdom.
(14)Department of medical oncology, Clatterbridge Cancer Centre, Bebington,
Cheshire, United Kingdom.
(15)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Deventer Hospital, Deventer, the
Netherlands.
(16)Department of Pneumology, CHU Mont-Godinne, Catholic University of Louvain
(UCL), Yvoir, Belgium.
(17)Pathology, CHU Mont-Godinne, Catholic University of Louvain (UCL), Yvoir,
Belgium.
(18)Department of Medical Oncology, Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand,
France.
(19)Pathology, Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(20)Department of Pathology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(21)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Department of Pathology, Dublin,
Ireland.
(22)Istanbul University Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul,
Turkey.
(23)Department of Pathology, Gazi University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey.
(24)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital Cologne, Köln, Germany.
(25)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cologne, Center for
Integrated Oncology Köln Bonn, Germany.
(26)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(27)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam UMC, Location VU University Medical
Center, the Netherlands.
(28)Pfizer Innovative Health, Oncology - International Developed Markets,
Berlin, Germany.
(29)Institute of Haematopathology Hamburg, Hamburg, and Lung Cancer Network
NOWEL.org, Oldenburg, Germany.
(30)Pathology and Medical Biology, University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(31)Department of Pathology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
(32)Department of Thoracic Oncology Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Pulmonary Diseases,
Amsterdam UMC, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Metastasized non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with an anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangement is usually sensitive to a range of
ALK-tyrosine kinase inhibitors. ALK-positive NSCLC have been identified in
pivotal phase III trials with fluorescence in situ hybridization (ALK FISH+).
These tumors are also expressing the fusion product (ALK immunohistochemistry
(IHC)+). However, discrepant cases occur, including ALK IHC + FISH-. The aim of
this study was to collect ALK IHC + cases and compare within this group response
to crizotinib treatment of ALK FISH + cases with ALK FISH- cases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this European prospective multicenter research study
patients with Stage IV ALK IHC + NSCLC treated with crizotinib were enrolled.
Tumor slides were validated centrally for ALK IHC and ALK FISH.
RESULTS: Registration of 3523 ALK IHC tests revealed a prevalence of 2.7%
(n = 94) ALK IHC + cases. Local ALK FISH analysis resulted in 48 concordant (ALK
IHC+/FISH+) and 16 discordant (ALK IHC+/FISH-) cases. Central validation
revealed 37 concordant and 7 discordant cases, 5 of which had follow-up.
Validation was hampered by limited amount of tissue in biopsy samples. The PFS
at 1 year for ALK concordant and discordant was 58% and 20%, respectively
(HR = 2.4; 95% CI: 0.78-7.3; p = 0.11). Overall survival was significantly
better for concordant cases than discordant cases after central validation
(HR=4.5; 95% CI= 1.2-15.9; p=0.010.
CONCLUSION: ALK IHC + FISH- NSCLC is infrequent and associated with a worse
outcome on personalized treatment. A suitable predictive testing strategy may be
to screen first with IHC and then confirm with FISH instead of considering ALK
IHC equivalent to ALK FISH according to the current guidelines.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2019.09.023
PMID: 31630043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
