---
reference_id: "PMID:37086239"
title: Unmet needs and evidence gaps in hypereosinophilic syndrome and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
authors:
- Wechsler ME
- Hellmich B
- Cid MC
- Jayne D
- Tian X
- Baylis L
- Roufosse F
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2023.03.011
keywords:
- Humans
- "Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Churg-Strauss Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
- Evidence Gaps
- Biomarkers
- "Hypereosinophilic Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unmet needs and evidence gaps in hypereosinophilic syndrome and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
**Authors:** Wechsler ME, Hellmich B, Cid MC, Jayne D, Tian X, Baylis L, Roufosse F
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2023.03.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2023.03.011)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2023 Jun;151(6):1415-1428. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2023.03.011. Epub 2023 Apr 21.

Unmet needs and evidence gaps in hypereosinophilic syndrome and eosinophilic 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis.

Wechsler ME(1), Hellmich B(2), Cid MC(3), Jayne D(4), Tian X(5), Baylis L(6), 
Roufosse F(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo. Electronic 
address: wechslerm@NJHealth.org.
(2)Department of Medicine, Medius Kliniken, Academic Teaching Hospital, 
University of Tübingen, Kirchheim-Teck, Germany.
(3)Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, University of Barcelona, Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China.
(6)Global Medical Affairs, GSK, Durham, NC.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) and eosinophilic granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (EGPA) are rare systemic inflammatory disorders with overlapping 
symptoms, elevated eosinophil counts, and heterogenous clinical presentations. 
Although progress has been made in recent years, there are substantial gaps in 
our understanding of the pathologic mechanisms involved in these diseases, as 
well as numerous unmet needs relating to both diagnosis and patient management. 
For example, in most cases of HES, the underlying cause of hypereosinophilia is 
unknown, while in EGPA, although a polygenic genetic susceptibility has been 
found, understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms remains largely elusive. 
Delineating differences between certain disease variants may be challenging, and 
there are no reliable predictive markers of disease course. In addition, the 
current diagnostic criteria for HES and classification criteria for EGPA are not 
easy to implement in a nonspecialist setting, and specialist referral pathways 
need to be signposted more clearly. Furthermore, disease-specific activity 
scores need to be developed to aid the assessment of treatment effects, and 
improved biomarkers are needed to aid with treatment stratification. In this 
review, we outline the limitations of our current understanding of HES and EGPA 
and highlight areas for future work, which ultimately should help improve 
patient management and outcomes.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2023.03.011
PMID: 37086239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]