---
reference_id: "PMID:34568953"
title: "Clinical characteristics and treatment of pars planitis: an adalimumab experience."
authors:
- Ozdemir HB
- Ozdal PC
journal: Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00417-021-05398-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics and treatment of pars planitis: an adalimumab experience.
**Authors:** Ozdemir HB, Ozdal PC
**Journal:** Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00417-021-05398-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00417-021-05398-4)

## Content

1. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2022 Feb;260(2):561-569. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-021-05398-4. Epub 2021 Sep 27.

Clinical characteristics and treatment of pars planitis: an adalimumab 
experience.

Ozdemir HB(1), Ozdal PC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Gazi University School of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey. huseyinbaranozdemir@gazi.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Ulucanlar Eye Training and Research Hospital, 
University of Health Sciences, Ankara, Turkey.

Comment in
    Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2022 Jun;260(6):2065-2066. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-021-05527-z.
    Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2022 Jun;260(6):2067. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-021-05528-y.

PURPOSE: This study aims to investigate the clinical and demographic 
characteristics, treatment outcomes and complications of patients with pars 
planitis.
METHODS: This retrospective study included patients diagnosed with pars planitis 
between 1998 and 2019 and followed for at least 6 months. Demographics, 
best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), anterior segment and fundus examination 
findings, intraocular pressure (IOP) values at baseline and final examination, 
treatments used during the follow-up, surgeries and complications were noted 
from medical records of the patients. The percentage of patients given 
adalimumab (ADA), the reasons for treatment switch and response to ADA were 
investigated.
RESULTS: One hundred fifteen eyes of 59 patients were included in the study. 
Forty-seven percent of patients were female. The median age of the patients was 
10 (4-44) years. The median follow-up time was 33 (6-252) months. The median 
BCVA at admission was 0.20 (0.00-2.00) logMAR. The most common complications 
were cystoid macular oedema, cataract, epiretinal membrane and inferior 
peripheral retinoschisis. Prophylactic laser photocoagulation for peripheral 
retinoschisis was the most common surgical intervention, followed by cataract 
surgery and pars plana vitrectomy. Approximately 80% of patients received 
immunosuppressive and corticosteroid therapy for initial treatment. ADA was 
initiated in 23 patients (38.9%) due to refractory uveitis and adverse effects 
to the corticosteroid and helped control intraocular inflammation and decrease 
the use of systemic steroids/immunosuppressives in 22 of 23 (95%) of patients 
who received ADA. The median BCVA at final examination increased to 0.00 
(0.00-2.00) logMAR.
CONCLUSIONS: Pars planitis is a chronic, progressive and insidious disease with 
several ocular complications and requires early and aggressive treatment. ADA 
appeared to be effective especially in patients' refractory to conventional 
treatment.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-021-05398-4
PMID: 34568953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]