---
reference_id: "PMID:23970477"
title: Novel oncogenic PDGFRA mutations in pediatric high-grade gliomas.
authors:
- Paugh BS
- Zhu X
- Qu C
- Endersby R
- Diaz AK
- Zhang J
- Bax DA
- Carvalho D
- Reis RM
- Onar-Thomas A
- Broniscer A
- Wetmore C
- Zhang J
- Jones C
- Ellison DW
- Baker SJ
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1491
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- "Glioma/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor alpha/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel oncogenic PDGFRA mutations in pediatric high-grade gliomas.
**Authors:** Paugh BS, Zhu X, Qu C, Endersby R, Diaz AK, Zhang J, Bax DA, Carvalho D, Reis RM, Onar-Thomas A, Broniscer A, Wetmore C, Zhang J, Jones C, Ellison DW, Baker SJ
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1491](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1491)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2013 Oct 15;73(20):6219-29. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1491.
Epub  2013 Aug 22.

Novel oncogenic PDGFRA mutations in pediatric high-grade gliomas.

Paugh BS(1), Zhu X, Qu C, Endersby R, Diaz AK, Zhang J, Bax DA, Carvalho D, Reis
RM, Onar-Thomas A, Broniscer A, Wetmore C, Zhang J, Jones C, Ellison DW, Baker
SJ.

Author information:
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Developmental Neurobiology,
Computational Biology, Biostatistics, Oncology, and Pathology, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital; Interdisciplinary Biomedical Science Program,
University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center, Memphis, Tennessee; Telethon
Institute for Child Health Research, Centre for Child Health Research, The
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia; Divisions of Molecular
Pathology and Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, London,
United Kingdom; and Molecular Oncology Research Center, Barretos Cancer
Hospital, Barretos, São Paulo, Brazil.

The outcome for children with high-grade gliomas (HGG) remains dismal, with a
2-year survival rate of only 10% to 30%. Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG)
comprise a subset of HGG that arise in the brainstem almost exclusively in
children. Genome-wide analyses of copy number imbalances previously showed that
platelet-derived growth factor receptor α (PDGFRA) is the most frequent target
of focal amplification in pediatric HGGs, including DIPGs. To determine whether
PDGFRA is also targeted by more subtle mutations missed by copy number analysis,
we sequenced all PDGFRA coding exons from a cohort of pediatric HGGs.
Somatic-activating mutations were identified in 14.4% (13 of 90) of nonbrainstem
pediatric HGGs and 4.7% (2 of 43) of DIPGs, including missense mutations and
in-frame deletions and insertions not previously described. Forty percent of
tumors with mutation showed concurrent amplification, whereas 60% carried
heterozygous mutations. Six different mutations impacting different domains all
resulted in ligand-independent receptor activation that was blocked by small
molecule inhibitors of PDGFR. Expression of mutants in p53-null primary mouse
astrocytes conferred a proliferative advantage in vitro and generated HGGs in
vivo with complete penetrance when implanted into brain. The gene expression
signatures of these murine HGGs reflected the spectrum of human diffuse HGGs.
PDGFRA intragenic deletion of exons 8 and 9 were previously shown in adult HGG,
but were not detected in 83 nonbrainstem pediatric HGG and 57 DIPGs. Thus, a
distinct spectrum of mutations confers constitutive receptor activation and
oncogenic activity to PDGFRα in childhood HGG.

©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1491
PMCID: PMC3800209
PMID: 23970477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
