---
reference_id: "PMID:16435307"
title: Mutations in EDAR account for one-quarter of non-ED1-related hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
authors:
- Chassaing N
- Bourthoumieu S
- Cossee M
- Calvas P
- Vincent MC
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20295
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Edar Receptor
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Hypohidrosis/genetics
- Male
- Mice
- "Models, Biological"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Receptors, Ectodysplasin"
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor/genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in EDAR account for one-quarter of non-ED1-related hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Chassaing N, Bourthoumieu S, Cossee M, Calvas P, Vincent MC
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20295](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20295)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2006 Mar;27(3):255-9. doi: 10.1002/humu.20295.

Mutations in EDAR account for one-quarter of non-ED1-related hypohidrotic 
ectodermal dysplasia.

Chassaing N(1), Bourthoumieu S, Cossee M, Calvas P, Vincent MC.

Author information:
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France.

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is characterized by abnormal development 
of the eccrine sweat glands, hair, and teeth. The X-linked form of the disease, 
caused by mutations in the ED1 gene, represents the majority of HED cases. 
Autosomal-dominant and -recessive forms occur occasionally and result from 
mutations in at least two genes: EDAR and EDARADD. These different forms are 
phenotypically indistinguishable. To better assess the implication of the EDAR 
gene in HED, we screened for mutations in 37 unrelated HED families or sporadic 
cases with no detected mutations in the ED1 gene. We identified 11 different 
mutations, nine of which are novel variants, in two familial and seven sporadic 
cases. Seven of the 11 are recessive mutations (c.140G>A (p.Cys47Tyr), c.266G>A 
(p.Arg89His), c.329A>C (p.Asp110Ala), c.442T>C (p.Cys148Arg), c.1208C>T 
(p.Thr403Met), c.1302G>T (p.Trp434Cys) and c.528+1G>A), and the other four are 
probably dominant (c.1129C>T (p.Leu377Phe), c.1237A>C (p.Thr413Pro), c.1253T>C 
(p.Ile418Thr), and c.1259G>A (p.Arg420Gln)). Our study demonstrates that EDAR is 
implicated in about 25% of non-ED1 HED, and may account for both 
autosomal-dominant and -recessive forms. The correlation between the nature and 
location of EDAR mutations and their mode of inheritance is discussed. A 
genotype-phenotype relationship was evaluated, since such data could be helpful 
for genetic counseling.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20295
PMID: 16435307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]