---
reference_id: "PMID:20301718"
title: PLA2G6-Associated Neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Gregory A
- Kurian MA
- Soo AKS
- Wilson JL
- Hogarth P
- Hayflick SJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PLA2G6-Associated Neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Gregory A, Kurian MA, Soo AKS, Wilson JL, Hogarth P, Hayflick SJ

## Content

1. PLA2G6-Associated Neurodegeneration.

Gregory A(1), Kurian MA(2), Soo AKS(3), Wilson JL(4), Hogarth P(5), Hayflick
SJ(6).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2008 Jun 19 [updated 2026 Apr 14].

Author information:
(1)Molecular & Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
Oregon
(2)Molecular Neurosciences, Developmental Neurosciences, UCL-Great Ormond Street
Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom
(3)Paediatric Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children;, UCL-Great
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom
(4)Pediatric Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon
(5)Neurology and Molecular & Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon
(6)Molecular & Medical Genetics, Pediatrics, and Neurology, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, Oregon

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN) is an
age-related continuum from infancy to adulthood comprising three broad
age-related phenotypes: infantile PLAN, juvenile PLAN, and adult PLAN. Some
individuals have intermediate phenotypes, suggesting that PLAN is more of a
spectrum of disease rather than discrete phenotypes. Infantile PLAN usually
begins between ages six months and three years, presenting with truncal
hypotonia, psychomotor delay, and plateauing or loss of previously acquired
milestones. Most individuals have speech difficulties and do not achieve
independent ambulation and/or initially have gait disturbance. Over time,
affected persons develop both weakness and symmetric spastic tetraparesis that
can cause discomfort, interfere with bracing or positioning, and often lead to
contractures and scoliosis. Limb dystonia can also be present. Strabismus,
nystagmus, and optic atrophy are common. Disease progression is rapid; many
children do not survive beyond their first decade. Juvenile PLAN shows more
phenotypic variability than infantile PLAN. In general, onset is in early
childhood but can be as late as the end of the second decade. Presenting signs
may be gait instability, ataxia, or speech delay and autistic features, which
are sometimes the only evidence of disease for a year or more. Strabismus,
nystagmus, and optic atrophy are common. Neuropsychiatric disturbances including
impulsivity, poor attention span, hyperactivity, and emotional lability are
common. Although the disease course is fairly stable during early childhood,
resembling static encephalopathy, it is followed by neurologic deterioration
between ages seven and 12 years. Although life span is not known, it is expected
to be longer than that of infantile PLAN. Adult PLAN has a variable age of
onset, but most individuals present in early adulthood with gait disturbance or
neuropsychiatric changes. Affected individuals consistently develop dystonia and
parkinsonism (which may be accompanied by rapid cognitive decline) in their late
teens to early twenties. Dystonia is most common in the hands and feet but may
be more generalized. The most common features of parkinsonism in these
individuals are bradykinesia, resting tremor, rigidity, and postural
instability.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PLAN is established in a proband with
suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in PLA2G6 identified by
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Supportive care for individuals with
infantile PLAN and juvenile PLAN is best managed by a multidisciplinary care
team of educators for developmental delay and intellectual disability; an
experienced neurologist for anti-seizure medications and pharmacologic treatment
of dystonia and spasticity; treatment by a psychiatrist for those with
later-onset neuropsychiatric manifestations; fiber supplements and/or stool
softeners to treat constipation; control of secretions with transdermal
scopolamine patch as needed; feeding modifications as needed to prevent
aspiration pneumonia and achieve adequate nutrition. For individuals with adult
PLAN, consider treatment with dopaminergic agents; treatment of neuropsychiatric
manifestations by a psychiatrist; early care by a physical therapist and
orthopedist to manage postural instability and gait difficulties and to prevent
contractures as the disease progresses; occupational therapy to assist with
activities of daily living; feeding modifications as needed to prevent
aspiration pneumonia and achieve adequate nutrition. Surveillance: Periodic
assessments per treating clinicians to monitor abnormalities in tone and
movement, other musculoskeletal issues, cognitive issues, seizure control,
vision and hearing to determine level of sensory deficits, pulmonary needs
(especially later in the disease course), feeding and nutrition, and family need
for social support.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PLAN is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk family members
and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible if the pathogenic
variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301718
