---
reference_id: "PMID:32038532"
title: "The Uptake and Release of Amino Acids by Staphylococcus aureus at Mid-Exponential and Stationary Phases and Their Corresponding Responses to Changes in Temperature, pH and Osmolality."
authors:
- Alreshidi MM
- Dunstan RH
- Macdonald MM
- Gottfries J
- Roberts TK
journal: Front Microbiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.03059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Uptake and Release of Amino Acids by Staphylococcus aureus at Mid-Exponential and Stationary Phases and Their Corresponding Responses to Changes in Temperature, pH and Osmolality.
**Authors:** Alreshidi MM, Dunstan RH, Macdonald MM, Gottfries J, Roberts TK
**Journal:** Front Microbiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmicb.2019.03059](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.03059)

## Content

1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jan 23;10:3059. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.03059.
eCollection  2019.

The Uptake and Release of Amino Acids by Staphylococcus aureus at 
Mid-Exponential and Stationary Phases and Their Corresponding Responses to 
Changes in Temperature, pH and Osmolality.

Alreshidi MM(1), Dunstan RH(2), Macdonald MM(2), Gottfries J(3), Roberts TK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, College of Sciences, University of Ha'il, Ha'il, Saudi 
Arabia.
(2)Metabolic Research Group, Faculty of Science, School of Environmental and 
Life Sciences, University Drive, Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Staphylococcus aureus is an important pathogen that is associated with 
nosocomial infections, as well as food poisoning. This bacterium is resistant to 
antimicrobial agents and can survive in a wide range of environmental 
conditions. The aim of this study was to measure the uptake and release of amino 
acids by S. aureus at mid-exponential and stationary phases of growth following 
exposure to a combination of conditions including variations in temperature, pH 
and NaCl. Bacterial cells were grown up to mid-exponential and stationary phases 
in tryptic soy broth (TSB), where the supernatants were collected for analyses 
of amino acids to determine the uptake and release characteristics. The 
uptake/release of amino acids was estimated by subtracting the initial levels of 
the free amino acids in the media from those measured at mid-exponential and 
stationary phases of growth. When cells were grown at ideal conditions, the 
analyses revealed that significant uptake of amino acids had occurred by 
stationary phase compared with the mid-exponential phase. A substantial release 
of valine and tyrosine into the external media was observed by cells at 
stationary phase. At both phases, the uptake and release patterns were 
significantly different between cells grown under ideal control conditions, when 
compared with those grown under various combinations of sub-optimal 
environmental conditions. The analyses of the supernatants harvested from 
controls and treatment groups at exponential phase indicated that the total 
uptake of amino acids was reduced approximately five times by cells grown with 
addition of 2.5% NaCl or with pH6 at 35°C, and 2-fold by cells grown at pH8 at 
35°C. However, the final quantities of amino acids taken up by cells grown to 
stationary phase did not significantly alter between control and treated 
samples. Valine was found to be the most abundant amino acid that was 
significantly released into the media at stationary phase by both control and 
treated samples. It was evident that diverse environmental conditions resulted 
in differential patterns of amino acid uptake and release during adaptation to 
designated conditions.

Copyright © 2020 Alreshidi, Dunstan, Macdonald, Gottfries and Roberts.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.03059
PMCID: PMC6990410
PMID: 32038532