---
reference_id: PMID:35084634
title: "Clinical evaluation of efficacy of intralesional platelet-rich plasma injection versus 1064 nm long-pulsed Neodymium:YAG laser in the treatment of inflammatory acne vulgaris in adolescent and post-adolescent patients: a prospective randomized split-face comparative study."
authors:
- Moftah NH
- Mansour AM
- Ibrahim SMA
journal: Lasers Med Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10103-022-03510-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical evaluation of efficacy of intralesional platelet-rich plasma injection versus 1064 nm long-pulsed Neodymium:YAG laser in the treatment of inflammatory acne vulgaris in adolescent and post-adolescent patients: a prospective randomized split-face comparative study.
**Authors:** Moftah NH, Mansour AM, Ibrahim SMA
**Journal:** Lasers Med Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10103-022-03510-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10103-022-03510-6)

## Content

1. Lasers Med Sci. 2022 Jul;37(5):2471-2478. doi: 10.1007/s10103-022-03510-6.
Epub  2022 Jan 27.

Clinical evaluation of efficacy of intralesional platelet-rich plasma injection 
versus 1064 nm long-pulsed Neodymium:YAG laser in the treatment of inflammatory 
acne vulgaris in adolescent and post-adolescent patients: a prospective 
randomized split-face comparative study.

Moftah NH(1), Mansour AM(1)(2), Ibrahim SMA(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine for Girls, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt. drshadyaly@yahoo.com.

Large numbers of local and systemic therapies are available for acne treatment. 
Common oral or topical retinoids, antibiotics, or keratolytics are used but 
sometimes are inconvenient, and side effects caused by these conventional 
therapies prompted a search for effective and safe treatments. This study aimed 
to evaluate the efficacy of intralesional platelet-rich plasma injection versus 
1064 nm long-pulsed Nd:YAG laser in the treatment of moderate inflammatory acne 
vulgaris in both adolescents and post-adolescent patients. This split-face 
comparative study was carried out on thirty patients who suffered from moderate 
inflammatory and non-inflammatory acne vulgaris. The patients were classified 
into two groups: group I: adolescent (≤ 25 years) and group II: post-adolescent 
(< 25 years). Each group received four sessions of intralesional PRP injection 
on one side of the face and a long-pulsed Nd:YAG (1064 nm) laser on the other 
side with 2 weeks interval. Evaluation was done by blinded dermatologists using 
photographs and lesions counting and by patient satisfaction. Side effects were 
also noted. Both groups (adolescents and post-adolescent) showed a high 
statistically significant improvement of inflammatory as well as 
non-inflammatory lesions either in PRP or Nd:YAG laser-treated side with no 
significant difference between the two sides. The intralesional PRP injection 
and 1064 nm long-pulsed Nd:YAG laser are safe and effective methods for 
controlling inflammatory as well as non-inflammatory acne vulgaris in both 
adolescents and post-adolescent patients.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10103-022-03510-6
PMCID: PMC9232433
PMID: 35084634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.