---
reference_id: "PMID:41291750"
title: "Long-read sequencing identifies a novel de novo inversion in SMARCC2 in a pediatric patient with Coffin-siris syndrome 8: a case report."
authors:
- Ibrahim AA
- Aamer W
- Aliyev E
- Al-Maraghi A
- Elhag SF
- Abdi M
- Syed N
- Palaniswamy S
- Akil ASA
- Kamal M
- Fakhro KA
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-025-02269-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Child
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Micrognathism/genetics
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Neck/abnormalities
- Face/abnormalities
- Chromosome Inversion
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-read sequencing identifies a novel de novo inversion in SMARCC2 in a pediatric patient with Coffin-siris syndrome 8: a case report.
**Authors:** Ibrahim AA, Aamer W, Aliyev E, Al-Maraghi A, Elhag SF, Abdi M, Syed N, Palaniswamy S, Akil ASA, Kamal M, Fakhro KA
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-025-02269-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-025-02269-3)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2025 Nov 25;18(1):204. doi: 10.1186/s12920-025-02269-3.

Long-read sequencing identifies a novel de novo inversion in SMARCC2 in a 
pediatric patient with Coffin-siris syndrome 8: a case report.

Ibrahim AA(1)(2), Aamer W(3), Aliyev E(3), Al-Maraghi A(3), Elhag SF(3), Abdi 
M(3), Syed N(3), Palaniswamy S(3), Akil ASA(4), Kamal M(5), Fakhro KA(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)College of Health & Life Sciences, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Qatar 
Foundation, Doha, 5825, Qatar.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, QU Health, 
Qatar University, Doha, 2713, Qatar.
(3)Human Genetics Section, Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar.
(4)Precision Genomics and Translational Omics Lab, Metabolic and Mendelian 
Disorders Clinical Genomic Research Program, Sidra Medicine, Doha, 26999, Qatar.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Sidra Medicine, Doha, 26999, Qatar.
(6)College of Health & Life Sciences, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Qatar 
Foundation, Doha, 5825, Qatar. kfakhro@sidra.org.
(7)Human Genetics Section, Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar. kfakhro@sidra.org.
(8)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, Doha, 24144, Qatar. 
kfakhro@sidra.org.

BACKGROUND: Coffin-Siris Syndrome 8 (CSS8; MIM# 618362) is a rare 
neurodevelopmental disorder caused by heterozygous variants in the SMARCC2 gene. 
Patients with CSS8 present with variable phenotypic presentations, with speech 
abnormalities, behavioral issues, hypotonia, and dysmorphic features being the 
most common. Here, we report a novel de novo inversion involving SMARCC2, 
identified through long-read whole-genome sequencing, which highlights its added 
diagnostic value in uncovering complex structural variants.
CASE PRESENTATION: The patient is a 12-year-old male of Arab descent, born to 
healthy, non-consanguineous parents. He presented with speech difficulties and 
behavioral issues, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD). Long-read sequencing identified a 233 kb inversion on 
chromosome 12, with breakpoint 1 disrupting SMARCC2 between exons 16 and 17. 
This inversion was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Disruption of SMARCC2 is 
predicted to cause loss of function, resulting in haploinsufficiency.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of a structural variant in a patient with 
CSS8. This finding expands our genetic understanding of CSS8 and demonstrates 
the diagnostic utility of long-read sequencing in uncovering clinically relevant 
structural variants that may be missed by conventional methods.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-025-02269-3
PMCID: PMC12752245
PMID: 41291750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study adheres to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki 
and was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Sidra Medicine (IRB 
No. 1500767). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants, 
including the patient’s parents for themselves and as legal guardians on behalf 
of the patient, who is under the age of 16. Consent for publication: Written 
consent for publication was obtained from parents to publish medical and genomic 
data related to the patient and family members. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.