---
reference_id: "PMID:33064636"
title: "Is There a Role for Bismuth in Diarrhea Management?"
authors:
- Senderovich H
- Vierhout M
journal: Rambam Maimonides Med J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.5041/RMMJ.10422
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is There a Role for Bismuth in Diarrhea Management?
**Authors:** Senderovich H, Vierhout M
**Journal:** Rambam Maimonides Med J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.5041/RMMJ.10422](https://doi.org/10.5041/RMMJ.10422)

## Content

1. Rambam Maimonides Med J. 2021 Jan 19;12(1):e0002. doi: 10.5041/RMMJ.10422.

Is There a Role for Bismuth in Diarrhea Management?

Senderovich H(1)(2), Vierhout M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Geriatrics & Pain Medicine & Palliative Care Physician, Baycrest Health 
Sciences, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Assistant Professor at the Department of Family and Community Medicine, 
Division of Palliative Care, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)McMaster University, Faculty of Health Sciences, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Diarrhea, an illness of both the developed and developing world, involves the 
burdensome characteristics of frequent bowel movements, loose stools, and 
abdominal discomfort. Diarrhea is a long-standing challenge in palliative care 
and can have a myriad of causes, making symptomatic treatment pertinent when 
illness evaluation is ongoing, when there is no definitive treatment approach, 
or when effective treatment cannot be attained. Symptomatic therapy is a common 
approach in palliative care settings. Bismuth is a suitable agent for 
symptomatic therapy and can be effectively employed for management of chronic 
diarrhea. The objective of this narrative review is to examine the role of 
bismuth in management of diarrheal symptoms. To explore this, PubMed (including 
Medline) and Embase were used to search the existing literature on bismuth and 
diarrhea published from 1980 to 2019. It was found that bismuth has potential 
utility for diarrheal relief in multiple settings, including microscopic 
colitis, traveler's diarrhea, gastrointestinal infection, cancer, and 
chemotherapy. It also has great potential for use in palliative care patients, 
due to its minimal side effects. Overall, the antisecretory, anti-inflammatory, 
and antibacterial properties of bismuth make it a suitable therapy for 
symptomatic treatment of diarrhea. The limited range of adverse side effects 
makes it an appealing option for patients with numerous comorbidities. 
Healthcare providers can explore bismuth as an adjunct therapy for diarrhea 
management in an array of conditions, especially in the palliative care setting.

DOI: 10.5041/RMMJ.10422
PMCID: PMC7835118
PMID: 33064636

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.