---
reference_id: "PMID:29334918"
title: "Colorectal cancer liver metastases - a population-based study on incidence, management and survival."
authors:
- Engstrand J
- Nilsson H
- Strömberg C
- Jonas E
- Freedman J
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-017-3925-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Colorectal cancer liver metastases - a population-based study on incidence, management and survival.
**Authors:** Engstrand J, Nilsson H, Strömberg C, Jonas E, Freedman J
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-017-3925-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-017-3925-x)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2018 Jan 15;18(1):78. doi: 10.1186/s12885-017-3925-x.

Colorectal cancer liver metastases - a population-based study on incidence, 
management and survival.

Engstrand J(1), Nilsson H(2), Strömberg C(3), Jonas E(3)(4), Freedman J(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical Sciences, Karolinska Institutet 
at Danderyd Hospital, 182 88, Stockholm, Sweden. jennie.engstrand@ki.se.
(2)Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical Sciences, Karolinska Institutet 
at Danderyd Hospital, 182 88, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and 
Technology (CLINTEC), Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital, 
171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Surgical Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Surgery, Groote Schuur 
Hospital, University of Cape Town Health Sciences Faculty, Cape Town, 7925, 
South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of cancer-associated 
deaths with liver metastases developing in 25-30% of those affected. Previous 
data suggest a survival difference between right- and left-sided liver 
metastatic CRC, even though left-sided cancer has a higher incidence of liver 
metastases. The aim of the study was to describe the liver metastatic patterns 
and survival as a function of the characteristics of the primary tumour and 
different combinations of metastatic disease.
METHODS: A retrospective population-based study was performed on a cohort of 
patients diagnosed with CRC in the region of Stockholm, Sweden during 2008. 
Patients were identified through the Swedish National Quality Registry for 
Colorectal Cancer Treatment (SCRCR) and additional information on intra- and 
extra-hepatic metastatic pattern and treatment were retrieved from electronic 
patient records. Patients were followed for 5 years or until death. Factors 
influencing overall survival (OS) were investigated by means of Cox regression. 
OS was compared using Kaplan-Meier estimations and the log-rank test.
RESULTS: Liver metastases were diagnosed in 272/1026 (26.5%) patients within 
five years of diagnosis of the primary. Liver and lung metastases were more 
often diagnosed in left-sided colon cancer compared to right-sided cancer (28.4% 
versus 22.1%, p = 0.029 and 19.7% versus 13.2%, p = 0.010, respectively) but the 
extent of liver metastases were more extensive for right-sided cancer as 
compared to left-sided (p = 0.001). Liver metastatic left-sided cancer, 
including rectal cancer, was associated with a 44% decreased mortality risk 
compared to right-sided cancer (HR = 0.56, 95% CI: 0.39-0.79) with a 5-year OS 
of 16.6% versus 4.3% (p < 0.001). In liver metastatic CRC, the presence of lung 
metastases did not significantly influence OS as assessed by multivariate 
analysis (HR = 1.11, 95% CI: 0.80-1.53).
CONCLUSION: The worse survival in liver metastatic right-sided colon cancer 
could possibly be explained by the higher number of metastases, as well as more 
extensive segmental involvement compared with left-sided colon and rectal 
cancer, even though the latter had a higher incidence of liver metastases. 
Detailed population-based data on the metastatic pattern of CRC and survival 
could assist in more structured and individualized guidelines for follow-up of 
patients with CRC.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-017-3925-x
PMCID: PMC5769309
PMID: 29334918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the Regional Ethical Review 
Board in Stockholm. Because of the retrospective nature of the study, informed 
consent was waived. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.