---
reference_id: "PMID:24360809"
title: Dominant mutations in GRHL3 cause Van der Woude Syndrome and disrupt oral periderm development.
authors:
- Peyrard-Janvid M
- Leslie EJ
- Kousa YA
- Smith TL
- Dunnwald M
- Magnusson M
- Lentz BA
- Unneberg P
- Fransson I
- Koillinen HK
- Rautio J
- Pegelow M
- Karsten A
- Basel-Vanagaite L
- Gordon W
- Andersen B
- Svensson T
- Murray JC
- Cornell RA
- Kere J
- Schutte BC
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.11.009
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Alleles
- Animals
- "Cleft Lip/genetics, pathology"
- "Cleft Palate/genetics, pathology"
- "Cysts/genetics, pathology"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hybridization, Genetic"
- "Interferon Regulatory Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lip/abnormalities, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Zebrafish/embryology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dominant mutations in GRHL3 cause Van der Woude Syndrome and disrupt oral periderm development.
**Authors:** Peyrard-Janvid M, Leslie EJ, Kousa YA, Smith TL, Dunnwald M, Magnusson M, Lentz BA, Unneberg P, Fransson I, Koillinen HK, Rautio J, Pegelow M, Karsten A, Basel-Vanagaite L, Gordon W, Andersen B, Svensson T, Murray JC, Cornell RA, Kere J, Schutte BC
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.11.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.11.009)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Jan 2;94(1):23-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.11.009. Epub 
2013 Dec 19.

Dominant mutations in GRHL3 cause Van der Woude Syndrome and disrupt oral 
periderm development.

Peyrard-Janvid M(1), Leslie EJ(2), Kousa YA(3), Smith TL(4), Dunnwald M(2), 
Magnusson M(5), Lentz BA(2), Unneberg P(6), Fransson I(7), Koillinen HK(8), 
Rautio J(9), Pegelow M(10), Karsten A(10), Basel-Vanagaite L(11), Gordon W(12), 
Andersen B(12), Svensson T(5), Murray JC(2), Cornell RA(4), Kere J(13), Schutte 
BC(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, and Center 
for Biotechnology, 14183 Huddinge, Sweden. Electronic address: 
myriam.peyrard@ki.se.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Interdisciplinary Program in Genetics, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 
52242, USA.
(5)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Science for Life Laboratory, 
Karolinska Institutet, 17121 Solna, Sweden.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Science for Life Laboratory, 
Stockholm University, 17121 Solna, Sweden.
(7)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, and Center 
for Biotechnology, 14183 Huddinge, Sweden.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, 00029 
Helsinki, Finland.
(9)Cleft Palate and Craniofacial Center, Department of Plastic Surgery, Helsinki 
University Hospital, 00029 Helsinki, Finland.
(10)Department of Orthodontics, Stockholm Craniofacial Team, Institute of 
Odontology, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
(11)Pediatric Genetics Unit, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel and 
Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva 49100, 
Israel; Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, 
Israel; Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Petah Tikva 49100, Israel.
(12)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Irvine, Irvine, 
CA 92697, USA.
(13)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, and Center 
for Biotechnology, 14183 Huddinge, Sweden; Department of Biosciences and 
Nutrition, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, 17121 Solna, 
Sweden; Research Programs Unit, University of Helsinki, and Folkhälsan Institute 
of Genetics, 00014 Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: juha.kere@ki.se.
(14)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Mutations in interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) account for ∼70% of cases of 
Van der Woude syndrome (VWS), the most common syndromic form of cleft lip and 
palate. In 8 of 45 VWS-affected families lacking a mutation in IRF6, we found 
coding mutations in grainyhead-like 3 (GRHL3). According to a zebrafish-based 
assay, the disease-associated GRHL3 mutations abrogated periderm development and 
were consistent with a dominant-negative effect, in contrast to 
haploinsufficiency seen in most VWS cases caused by IRF6 mutations. In mouse, 
all embryos lacking Grhl3 exhibited abnormal oral periderm and 17% developed a 
cleft palate. Analysis of the oral phenotype of double heterozygote 
(Irf6(+/-);Grhl3(+/-)) murine embryos failed to detect epistasis between the two 
genes, suggesting that they function in separate but convergent pathways during 
palatogenesis. Taken together, our data demonstrated that mutations in two 
genes, IRF6 and GRHL3, can lead to nearly identical phenotypes of orofacial 
cleft. They supported the hypotheses that both genes are essential for the 
presence of a functional oral periderm and that failure of this process 
contributes to VWS.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.11.009
PMCID: PMC3882735
PMID: 24360809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]