---
reference_id: "PMID:31525261"
title: "In patients with a positive family history of familial adenomatous polyposis can the condition be diagnosed from the presence of congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium detected via an eye examination: A systematic review."
authors:
- Rehan S
- Aye K
journal: Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/ceo.13643
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In patients with a positive family history of familial adenomatous polyposis can the condition be diagnosed from the presence of congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium detected via an eye examination: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Rehan S, Aye K
**Journal:** Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ceo.13643](https://doi.org/10.1111/ceo.13643)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2020 Jan;48(1):98-116. doi: 10.1111/ceo.13643. Epub 2019 
Oct 10.

In patients with a positive family history of familial adenomatous polyposis can 
the condition be diagnosed from the presence of congenital hypertrophy of the 
retinal pigment epithelium detected via an eye examination: A systematic review.

Rehan S(1), Aye K(1).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Department, Royal Glamorgan Hospital, Wales, UK.

In classic familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) adenomas become malignant. 
Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) is a retinal 
pigmented lesion and is the earliest and most common potential extraintestinal 
manifestation of FAP. This review aims to summarize and analyse all of the 
published data on CHRPE in patients with classic FAP and then ascertain whether 
these patients should undergo a relatively cheap and non-invasive dilated fundus 
examination to screen for CHRPE. Adhering to Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta Analyses guidelines our database search identified 
102 relevant articles of which 13 were selected for further analysis. The 
percentage of FAP patients with CHRPE was found to be 80.00%, whereas the 
percentage of at-risk patients with CHRPE was 31.12%. Despite various 
statistically significant findings, CHRPE alone cannot be used as a surrogate 
for diagnosing FAP in those with a positive family history. The authors advocate 
a combined approach of eye examinations, colonoscopy and genetic testing.

© 2019 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ceo.13643
PMID: 31525261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]