---
reference_id: "PMID:36694235"
title: "Disparities in access to eating disorders treatment for publicly-insured youth and youth of color: a retrospective cohort study."
authors:
- Moreno R
- Buckelew SM
- Accurso EC
- Raymond-Flesch M
journal: J Eat Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s40337-022-00730-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disparities in access to eating disorders treatment for publicly-insured youth and youth of color: a retrospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Moreno R, Buckelew SM, Accurso EC, Raymond-Flesch M
**Journal:** J Eat Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40337-022-00730-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40337-022-00730-7)

## Content

1. J Eat Disord. 2023 Jan 24;11(1):10. doi: 10.1186/s40337-022-00730-7.

Disparities in access to eating disorders treatment for publicly-insured youth
and youth of color: a retrospective cohort study.

Moreno R(1), Buckelew SM(2), Accurso EC(#)(3), Raymond-Flesch M(#)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Adolescent & Young Adult Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, UCSF Weill Institute for
Neurosciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Adolescent & Young Adult Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. marissa.raymond-flesch@ucsf.edu.
(5)Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. marissa.raymond-flesch@ucsf.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Eating disorders are associated with substantial morbidity and
mortality that can be minimized by timely access to evidence-based treatment.
However, disparate access to eating disorders treatment may contribute to
significant health disparities amongst marginalized groups. This study examined
the association between insurance type (public vs. private) and receipt of
recommended mental health treatment in a sample of racially/ethnically diverse
youth who presented to an adolescent medicine clinic with malnutrition secondary
to disordered eating.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review was conducted for youth ages 11-25 years
(N = 1060) who presented to an urban adolescent medicine specialty program
between June 1, 2012 and December 31, 2019 for malnutrition secondary to
disordered eating. Bivariate and logistic regression analyses examined the
association between insurance type (public vs. private) and other
demographic/clinical factors on receipt of recommended treatment within six
months of the initial evaluation.
RESULTS: Patients with public insurance were one third as likely to receive
recommended treatment as patients with private insurance (AOR = 3.23; 95%
CI = 1.99, 4.52), after adjusting for demographic and clinical factors. Latinx
(AOR = 0.49; 95% CI = 0.31, 0.77) and Asian (AOR = 0.55; 95% CI = 0.32, 0.94)
patients were half as likely to receive recommended treatment as White patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Access to evidence-based mental health treatment is a necessary
first step towards health equity for individuals with eating disorders.
Additional work is needed to dismantle systemic inequities that contribute to
disparities in care for youth of color and those with public insurance.

Plain Language Summary: Early management of eating disorders, including mental
health and medical treatment, improves outcomes and reduces the likelihood of
significant complications including death. However, access to specialized mental
health treatment can be challenging, particularly for patients from marginalized
identities. This study examined how insurance type affects access to recommended
mental health treatment for patients with eating disorders. It included a sample
of 1060 youth of diverse racial/ethnic backgrounds who presented to an
adolescent medicine clinic with malnutrition secondary to disordered eating. In
our sample, youth with public insurance were one third as likely to receive
appropriate treatment as youth with private insurance. Additionally, Latinx and
Asian patients were half as likely to receive appropriate treatment as White
youth. These findings highlight the importance of not only improving access to
mental health care for patients with eating disorders, but also addressing the
systemic causes of disparities in care for youth of color and those with public
insurance.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40337-022-00730-7
PMCID: PMC9875472
PMID: 36694235

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
