---
reference_id: "PMID:10471441"
title: Mutations in the COL5A1 coding sequence are not common in patients with spontaneous cervical artery dissections.
authors:
- Grond-Ginsbach C
- Weber R
- Haas J
- Orberk E
- Kunz S
- Busse O
- Hausser I
- Brandt T
- Wildemann B
journal: Stroke
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1161/01.str.30.9.1887
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence/genetics
- Aortic Dissection/genetics
- Collagen/genetics
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Neck/blood supply
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the COL5A1 coding sequence are not common in patients with spontaneous cervical artery dissections.
**Authors:** Grond-Ginsbach C, Weber R, Haas J, Orberk E, Kunz S, Busse O, Hausser I, Brandt T, Wildemann B
**Journal:** Stroke (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.str.30.9.1887](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.str.30.9.1887)

## Content

1. Stroke. 1999 Sep;30(9):1887-90. doi: 10.1161/01.str.30.9.1887.

Mutations in the COL5A1 coding sequence are not common in patients with
spontaneous cervical artery dissections.

Grond-Ginsbach C(1), Weber R, Haas J, Orberk E, Kunz S, Busse O, Hausser I,
Brandt T, Wildemann B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The dermal connective tissue of most patients with
spontaneous cervical artery dissections (sCAD) contains abnormal collagen
fibers. This suggests a predisposing connective tissue defect. The
ultrastructural abnormalities in the skin of patients with sCAD have similarity
with the morphological alterations in patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type
II, a dominant hereditary disorder that has been correlated in some patients to
mutations within the genes encoding type V collagen. The aim of this study was
to assess the alpha 1 chain of type V collagen (COL5A1) as a candidate gene for
sCAD.
METHODS: We searched for mutations in the COL5A1 gene in cDNA from cultured
fibroblasts of 19 patients with sCAD using single-strand conformational
polymorphism analysis and nucleotide sequence analysis of polymerase chain
reaction-amplified fragments of the whole COL5A1 coding sequence.
RESULTS: We detected 1 missense mutation leading to a predicted amino acid
(192D/N) substitution within the N-terminal propeptide in 2 siblings. All other
patients showed regular COL5A1 sequences with some silent polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in the COL5A1 gene do not appear to be a major factor in
the etiology of sCAD.

DOI: 10.1161/01.str.30.9.1887
PMID: 10471441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
