---
reference_id: "PMID:36854488"
title: "Negotiating the polypharmacy paradox: a video-reflexive ethnography study of polypharmacy and its practices in primary care."
authors:
- Swinglehurst D
- Hogger L
- Fudge N
journal: BMJ Qual Saf
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bmjqs-2022-014963
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Negotiating the polypharmacy paradox: a video-reflexive ethnography study of polypharmacy and its practices in primary care.
**Authors:** Swinglehurst D, Hogger L, Fudge N
**Journal:** BMJ Qual Saf (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjqs-2022-014963](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjqs-2022-014963)

## Content

1. BMJ Qual Saf. 2023 Mar;32(3):150-159. doi: 10.1136/bmjqs-2022-014963. Epub
2022  Sep 2.

Negotiating the polypharmacy paradox: a video-reflexive ethnography study of 
polypharmacy and its practices in primary care.

Swinglehurst D(1)(2), Hogger L(3), Fudge N(3).

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Institute of Population Health, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK d.swinglehurst@qmul.ac.uk.
(2)QMUL.
(3)Wolfson Institute of Population Health, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK.

Comment in
    BMJ Qual Saf. 2023 Mar;32(3):121-124. doi: 10.1136/bmjqs-2022-015082.

BACKGROUND: Polypharmacy is an important safety concern. Medication reviews are 
recommended for patients affected by polypharmacy, but little is known about how 
they are conducted, nor how clinicians make sense of them. We used 
video-reflexive ethnography (VRE) to: illuminate how reviews are conducted; 
elicit professional dialogue and concerns about polypharmacy; invite new 
transferable understandings of polypharmacy and its management.
METHODS: We conducted 422 hours of fieldwork (participant observation), filmed 
18 consultations between clinicians and patients receiving 10 or more regular 
items of medication (so-called 'higher risk' polypharmacy) and played short 
clips of film footage to 34 participants (general practitioners, nurses, 
clinical pharmacists, practice managers) in seven audio-recorded reflexive 
workshops. Our analysis focused on 'moments of potentiation' and traced 
clinicians' shifting understandings of their practices.
RESULTS: Participants rarely referenced biomedical aspects of prescribing (eg, 
drug-drug interactions, 'Numbers Needed to Treat/Harm') focussing instead on 
polypharmacy as an emotional and relational challenge. Clinicians initially 
denigrated their medication review work as mundane. Through VRE they reframed 
their work as complex, identifying polypharmacy as a delicate matter to 
negotiate. In patients with multimorbidity and polypharmacy it was difficult to 
disentangle medication review from other aspects of patients' medical care. Such 
conditions of complexity presented clinicians with competing professional 
obligations which were difficult to reconcile. Medication review was identified 
as an ongoing process, rather than a discrete 'one-off' activity. Meaningful 
progress towards tackling polypharmacy was only possible through small, 
incremental, carefully supported changes in which both patient and clinician 
negotiated a sharing of responsibility, best supported by continuity of care.
CONCLUSIONS: Supporting acceptable, feasible and meaningful progress towards 
addressing problematic polypharmacy may require shifts in how medication reviews 
are conceptualised. Responsible decision-making under conditions of such 
complexity and uncertainty depends crucially on the affective or emotional 
quality of the clinician-patient relationship.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjqs-2022-014963
PMCID: PMC9985753
PMID: 36854488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.