---
reference_id: "PMID:36830643"
title: "Acid Ceramidase Deficiency: Bridging Gaps between Clinical Presentation, Mouse Models, and Future Therapeutic Interventions."
authors:
- Kleynerman A
- Rybova J
- Faber ML
- McKillop WM
- Levade T
- Medin JA
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biom13020274
keywords:
- Distal Myopathies
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/genetics"
- Mutation
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive/genetics"
- Myoclonus/congenital
- Mice
- Ceramides
- Animals
- Farber Lipogranulomatosis/genetics
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acid Ceramidase Deficiency: Bridging Gaps between Clinical Presentation, Mouse Models, and Future Therapeutic Interventions.
**Authors:** Kleynerman A, Rybova J, Faber ML, McKillop WM, Levade T, Medin JA
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom13020274](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13020274)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2023 Feb 1;13(2):274. doi: 10.3390/biom13020274.

Acid Ceramidase Deficiency: Bridging Gaps between Clinical Presentation, Mouse
Models, and Future Therapeutic Interventions.

Kleynerman A(1), Rybova J(1), Faber ML(1), McKillop WM(1), Levade T(2), Medin
JA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226,
USA.
(2)Laboratoire de Biochimie Métabolique, CHU Toulouse, and INSERM U1037, Centre
de Recherches en Cancérologie de Toulouse, Université Paul Sabatier, 31062
Toulouse, France.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI
53226, USA.

Farber disease (FD) and spinal muscular atrophy with progressive myoclonic
epilepsy (SMA-PME) are ultra-rare, autosomal-recessive, acid ceramidase (ACDase)
deficiency disorders caused by ASAH1 gene mutations. Currently, 73 different
mutations in the ASAH1 gene have been described in humans. These mutations lead
to reduced ACDase activity and ceramide (Cer) accumulation in many tissues.
Presenting as divergent clinical phenotypes, the symptoms of FD vary depending
on central nervous system (CNS) involvement and severity. Classic signs of FD
include, but are not limited to, a hoarse voice, distended joints, and
lipogranulomas found subcutaneously and in other tissues. Patients with SMA-PME
lack the most prominent clinical signs seen in FD. Instead, they demonstrate
muscle weakness, tremors, and myoclonic epilepsy. Several ACDase-deficient mouse
models have been developed to help elucidate the complex consequences of Cer
accumulation. In this review, we compare clinical reports on FD patients and
experimental descriptions of ACDase-deficient mouse models. We also discuss
clinical presentations, potential therapeutic strategies, and future directions
for the study of FD and SMA-PME.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13020274
PMCID: PMC9953133
PMID: 36830643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
