---
reference_id: "PMID:21778341"
title: Improved outcome with rituximab in patients with HIV-associated multicentric Castleman disease.
authors:
- Hoffmann C
- Schmid H
- Müller M
- Teutsch C
- van Lunzen J
- Esser S
- Wolf T
- Wyen C
- Sabranski M
- Horst HA
- Reuter S
- Vogel M
- Jäger H
- Bogner J
- Arasteh K
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-333633
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Improved outcome with rituximab in patients with HIV-associated multicentric Castleman disease.
**Authors:** Hoffmann C, Schmid H, Müller M, Teutsch C, van Lunzen J, Esser S, Wolf T, Wyen C, Sabranski M, Horst HA, Reuter S, Vogel M, Jäger H, Bogner J, Arasteh K
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2011-02-333633](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-02-333633)

## Content

1. Blood. 2011 Sep 29;118(13):3499-503. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-333633. Epub 
2011 Jul 21.

Improved outcome with rituximab in patients with HIV-associated multicentric 
Castleman disease.

Hoffmann C(1), Schmid H, Müller M, Teutsch C, van Lunzen J, Esser S, Wolf T, 
Wyen C, Sabranski M, Horst HA, Reuter S, Vogel M, Jäger H, Bogner J, Arasteh K.

Author information:
(1)Infektionsmedizinisches Centrum Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. 
hoffmann@ich-hamburg.de

Although HIV-associated multicentric Castleman disease (HIV-MCD) is not 
classified as an AIDS-defining illness, mortality is high and progression to 
lymphoma occurs frequently. At present, there is no widely accepted 
recommendation for the treatment of HIV-MCD. In this retrospective (1998-2010), 
multicentric analysis of 52 histologically proven cases, outcome was analyzed 
with respect to the use of different MCD therapies and potential prognostic 
factors. After a mean follow-up of 2.26 years, 19 of 52 patients died. Median 
estimated overall survival (OS) was 6.2 years. Potential risk factors, such as 
older age, previous AIDS, or lower CD4 T cells had no impact on OS. Treatment 
was heterogeneous, consisting of cytostatic and/or antiviral agents, rituximab, 
or combinations of these modalities. There were marked differences in the 
outcome when patients were grouped according to MCD treatment. Patients 
receiving rituximab-based regimens had higher complete remission rates than 
patients receiving chemotherapy only. The mean estimated OS in patients 
receiving rituximab alone or in combination with cytostatic agents was not 
reached, compared with 5.1 years (P = .03). Clinical outcome and overall 
survival of HIV-MCD have markedly improved with rituximab-based therapies, 
considering rituximab-based therapies (with or without cytostatic agents) to be 
among the preferred first-line options in patients with HIV-MCD.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-333633
PMID: 21778341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]