---
reference_id: "PMID:19474183"
title: "The working space of the hand in rheumatoid arthritis: its impact on disability."
authors:
- Dias JJ
- Smith M
- Singh HP
- Ullah AS
journal: J Hand Surg Eur Vol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1177/1753193409103244
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The working space of the hand in rheumatoid arthritis: its impact on disability.
**Authors:** Dias JJ, Smith M, Singh HP, Ullah AS
**Journal:** J Hand Surg Eur Vol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1753193409103244](https://doi.org/10.1177/1753193409103244)

## Content

1. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2009 Aug;34(4):465-70. doi: 10.1177/1753193409103244.
Epub  2009 May 27.

The working space of the hand in rheumatoid arthritis: its impact on disability.

Dias JJ(1), Smith M, Singh HP, Ullah AS.

Author information:
(1)University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Groby Road, Leicester, UK. 
joseph.dias@uhl-tr.nhs.uk

The volumes enclosed by each of 108 hands in 54 rheumatoid arthritis patients 
were calculated using individual joint measurements. The difference between the 
flexion and extension volumes is the 'working space' of the hand. Correlations 
between the working space and parameters of stiffness, pain, deformity, 
movement, grip and functional disability were performed. The average working 
space volume was 4921 cc in rheumatoid patients with no visible hand deformity 
and 1154 cc in the presence of combined finger deformities (P < 0.005). The loss 
in volume was due mainly to loss of extension. The Patient Evaluation Measure 
and the Functional Disability Score were significantly related to changes in the 
working space (P < 0.05). The concept of the working space of the hand may aid 
the assessment of the rheumatoid hand and help surgical decision-making.

DOI: 10.1177/1753193409103244
PMID: 19474183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]