---
reference_id: "PMID:31694955"
title: Modulation of Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Activity in Human Dorsal Root Ganglion Neurons by Herpesvirus Quiescent Infection.
authors:
- Zhang Q
- Martin-Caraballo M
- Hsia SV
journal: J Virol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01823-19
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modulation of Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Activity in Human Dorsal Root Ganglion Neurons by Herpesvirus Quiescent Infection.
**Authors:** Zhang Q, Martin-Caraballo M, Hsia SV
**Journal:** J Virol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01823-19](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01823-19)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2020 Jan 17;94(3):e01823-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01823-19. Print 2020
Jan  17.

Modulation of Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Activity in Human Dorsal Root 
Ganglion Neurons by Herpesvirus Quiescent Infection.

Zhang Q(1), Martin-Caraballo M(1), Hsia SV(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Health 
Professions, University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Health 
Professions, University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland, USA 
vhsia@umes.edu.

The molecular mechanisms of pain associated with alphaherpesvirus latency are 
not clear. We hypothesize that the voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSC) on the 
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons controlling electrical impulses may have 
abnormal activity during latent viral infection and reactivation. We used herpes 
simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) to infect the human DRG-derived neuronal cell line 
HD10.6 in order to study the establishment and maintenance of viral latency, 
viral reactivation, and changes in the functional expression of VGSCs. 
Differentiated cells exhibited robust tetrodotoxin (TTX)-sensitive sodium 
currents, and acute infection significantly reduced the functional expression of 
VGSCs within 24 h and completely abolished VGSC activity within 3 days. A 
quiescent state of infection mimicking latency can be achieved in the presence 
of acyclovir (ACV) for 7 days followed by 5 days of ACV washout, and then the 
viruses can remain dormant for another 3 weeks. It was noted that during the 
establishment of HSV-1 latency, the loss of VGSC activity caused by HSV-1 
infection could not be blocked by ACV treatment. However, neurons with continued 
ACV treatment for another 4 days showed a gradual recovery of VGSC functional 
expression. Furthermore, the latently infected neurons exhibited higher VGSC 
activity than controls. The overall regulation of VGSCs by HSV-1 during 
quiescent infection was proved by increased transcription and possible 
translation of Nav1.7. Together, these observations demonstrated a very complex 
pattern of electrophysiological changes during HSV infection of DRG neurons, 
which may have implications for understanding of the mechanisms of 
virus-mediated pain linked to latency and reactivation.IMPORTANCE The 
reactivation of herpesviruses, most commonly varicella-zoster virus (VZV) and 
pseudorabies virus (PRV), may cause cranial nerve disorder and unbearable pain. 
Clinical studies have also reported that HSV-1 causes postherpetic neuralgia and 
chronic occipital neuralgia in humans. The current work meticulously studies the 
functional expression profile changes of VGSCs during the processes of HSV-1 
latency establishment and reactivation using human dorsal root ganglion-derived 
neuronal HD10.6 cells as an in vitro model. Our results indicated that VGSC 
activity was eliminated upon infection but steadily recovered during latency 
establishment and that latent neurons exhibited even higher VGSC activity. This 
finding advances our knowledge of how ganglion neurons generate uncharacteristic 
electrical impulses due to abnormal VGSC functional expression influenced by the 
latent virus.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01823-19
PMCID: PMC7000965
PMID: 31694955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]