---
reference_id: "PMID:38051092"
title: Genetic and Pharmacological Modulation of Cellular Proteostasis Leads to Partial Functional Rescue of Homocystinuria-Causing Cystathionine-Beta Synthase Variants.
authors:
- Collard R
- Majtan T
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/10985549.2023.2284147
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and Pharmacological Modulation of Cellular Proteostasis Leads to Partial Functional Rescue of Homocystinuria-Causing Cystathionine-Beta Synthase Variants.
**Authors:** Collard R, Majtan T
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10985549.2023.2284147](https://doi.org/10.1080/10985549.2023.2284147)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2023;43(12):664-674. doi: 10.1080/10985549.2023.2284147. Epub 
2023 Dec 20.

Genetic and Pharmacological Modulation of Cellular Proteostasis Leads to Partial 
Functional Rescue of Homocystinuria-Causing Cystathionine-Beta Synthase 
Variants.

Collard R(1), Majtan T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Fribourg, Faculty of Science and 
Medicine, Fribourg, Switzerland.

Homocystinuria (HCU), an inherited metabolic disorder caused by lack of 
cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) activity, is chiefly caused by misfolding of 
single amino acid residue missense pathogenic variants. Previous studies showed 
that chemical, pharmacological chaperones or proteasome inhibitors could rescue 
function of multiple pathogenic CBS variants; however, the underlying mechanisms 
remain poorly understood. Using Chinese hamster DON fibroblasts devoid of CBS 
and stably overexpressing human WT or mutant CBS, we showed that expression of 
pathogenic CBS variant mostly dysregulates gene expression of small heat shock 
proteins HSPB3 and HSPB8 and members of HSP40 family. Endoplasmic reticulum 
stress sensor BiP was found upregulated with CBS I278T variant associated with 
proteasomes suggesting proteotoxic stress and degradation of misfolded CBS. 
Co-expression of the main effector HSP70 or master regulator HSF1 rescued 
steady-state levels of CBS I278T and R125Q variants with partial functional 
rescue of the latter. Pharmacological proteostasis modulators partially rescued 
expression and activity of CBS R125Q likely due to reduced proteotoxic stress as 
indicated by decreased BiP levels and promotion of refolding as indicated by 
induction of HSP70. In conclusion, targeted manipulation of cellular 
proteostasis may represent a viable therapeutic approach for the permissive 
pathogenic CBS variants causing HCU.

DOI: 10.1080/10985549.2023.2284147
PMCID: PMC10761163
PMID: 38051092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).