---
reference_id: "PMID:11228257"
title: "Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase deficiency: clinical course and description of causal mutations in two patients."
authors:
- Bouchard L
- Robert MF
- Vinarov D
- Stanley CA
- Thompson GN
- Morris A
- Leonard JV
- Quant P
- Hsu BY
- Boneh A
- Boukaftane Y
- Ashmarina L
- Wang S
- Miziorko H
- Mitchell GA
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1203/00006450-200103000-00005
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alleles
- Child
- Humans
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Hypoglycemia/etiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase deficiency: clinical course and description of causal mutations in two patients.
**Authors:** Bouchard L, Robert MF, Vinarov D, Stanley CA, Thompson GN, Morris A, Leonard JV, Quant P, Hsu BY, Boneh A, Boukaftane Y, Ashmarina L, Wang S, Miziorko H, Mitchell GA
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1203/00006450-200103000-00005](https://doi.org/10.1203/00006450-200103000-00005)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2001 Mar;49(3):326-31. doi: 10.1203/00006450-200103000-00005.

Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase deficiency: clinical
course and description of causal mutations in two patients.

Bouchard L(1), Robert MF, Vinarov D, Stanley CA, Thompson GN, Morris A, Leonard
JV, Quant P, Hsu BY, Boneh A, Boukaftane Y, Ashmarina L, Wang S, Miziorko H,
Mitchell GA.

Author information:
(1)Service de génétique médicale, Research Center, Ste-Justine Hospital, 3175
Côte Ste-Catherine, Montreal (Québec), Canada.

Hereditary deficiency of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase (mHS, OMIM 600234) is a
poorly defined, treatable, probably underdiagnosed condition that can cause
episodes of severe hypoketotic hypoglycemia. We present clinical follow-up and
molecular analysis of the two known mHS-deficient patients. The diagnosis of mHS
deficiency is challenging because the symptoms and metabolite pattern are not
specific. Moreover, enzyme analysis is technically difficult and requires
sampling of an expressing organ such as liver. The patients, now aged 16 and 6
y, have normal development and have had no further decompensations since
diagnosis. Patient 1 is homozygous for a phenylalanine-to-leucine substitution
at codon 174 (F174L). Interestingly, although the F174 residue is conserved in
vertebrate mHS and cytoplasmic HS isozymes, a Leu residue is predicted in the
corresponding position of HS-like sequences from Caenorhabditis elegans,
Arabidopsis thaliana, and Brassica juncea. Bacterial expression of human
F174L-mHS produces a low level of mHS polypeptide with no detectable activity.
Similarly, in purified cytoplasmic HS, which in contrast to purified human mHS
is stable and can be studied in detail, the corresponding F-->L substitution
causes a 10,000-fold decrease in V(max) and a 5-fold reduction in thermal
stability. Patient 2 is a genetic compound of a premature termination mutation,
R424X, and an as-yet uncharacterized mutant allele that is distinguishable by
intragenic single nucleotide polymorphisms that we describe. Molecular studies
of mHS are useful in patients with a suggestive clinical presentation.

DOI: 10.1203/00006450-200103000-00005
PMID: 11228257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
