---
reference_id: "PMID:22581230"
title: Mutations in IRX5 impair craniofacial development and germ cell migration via SDF1.
authors:
- Bonnard C
- Strobl AC
- Shboul M
- Lee H
- Merriman B
- Nelson SF
- Ababneh OH
- Uz E
- Güran T
- Kayserili H
- Hamamy H
- Reversade B
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2259
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Brain/abnormalities
- Branchial Region/cytology
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- GATA3 Transcription Factor
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Gonads
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Repressor Proteins
- Syndrome
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Xenopus Proteins
- Xenopus laevis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in IRX5 impair craniofacial development and germ cell migration via SDF1.
**Authors:** Bonnard C, Strobl AC, Shboul M, Lee H, Merriman B, Nelson SF, Ababneh OH, Uz E, Güran T, Kayserili H, Hamamy H, Reversade B
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2259](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2259)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2012 May 13;44(6):709-13. doi: 10.1038/ng.2259.

Mutations in IRX5 impair craniofacial development and germ cell migration via
SDF1.

Bonnard C(1), Strobl AC, Shboul M, Lee H, Merriman B, Nelson SF, Ababneh OH, Uz
E, Güran T, Kayserili H, Hamamy H, Reversade B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research
(A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore.

Using homozygosity mapping and locus resequencing, we found that alterations in
the homeodomain of the IRX5 transcription factor cause a recessive congenital
disorder affecting face, brain, blood, heart, bone and gonad development. We
found through in vivo modeling in Xenopus laevis embryos that Irx5 modulates the
migration of progenitor cell populations in branchial arches and gonads by
repressing Sdf1. We further found that transcriptional control by Irx5 is
modulated by direct protein-protein interaction with two GATA zinc-finger
proteins, GATA3 and TRPS1; disruptions of these proteins also cause craniofacial
dysmorphisms. Our findings suggest that IRX proteins integrate combinatorial
transcriptional inputs to regulate key signaling molecules involved in the
ontogeny of multiple organs during embryogenesis and homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2259
PMID: 22581230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
