---
reference_id: "PMID:26321357"
title: A Practical Approach to the Oncology Patient With Heart Failure.
authors:
- Carter LP
- Clarke BA
journal: Can J Cardiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2015.05.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Practical Approach to the Oncology Patient With Heart Failure.
**Authors:** Carter LP, Clarke BA
**Journal:** Can J Cardiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cjca.2015.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjca.2015.05.002)

## Content

1. Can J Cardiol. 2015 Dec;31(12):1489-92. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2015.05.002. Epub 
2015 May 8.

A Practical Approach to the Oncology Patient With Heart Failure.

Carter LP(1), Clarke BA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Dalhousie University and the 
QE II Health Science Center, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. Electronic address: 
lin.carter10@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Dalhousie University and the 
QE II Health Science Center, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Left ventricular systolic dysfunction is a significant cause of morbidity among 
cancer patients in whom this unfortunate complication develops. Investigation 
and management of chemotherapy- and radiation-induced cardiomyopathy in the 
emerging field of cardio-oncology involves a multidisciplinary approach between 
cardiology and oncology departments. The purpose of this article is to provide a 
practical approach to the cardiologist's assessment and management of cancer 
treatment-related cardiomyopathies.

Copyright © 2015 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cjca.2015.05.002
PMID: 26321357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]