---
reference_id: "PMID:32050881"
title: "[Evaluation of Histological Response in Chronic Hepatitis B Patients with Tenofovir or Entecavir Therapy]."
authors:
- Çerçioğlu D
- Kınıklı S
- Cesur S
- Ataman Hatipoğlu Ç
- Arslan K
- Gönültaş M
journal: Mikrobiyol Bul
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5578/mb.69122
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Evaluation of Histological Response in Chronic Hepatitis B Patients with Tenofovir or Entecavir Therapy].
**Authors:** Çerçioğlu D, Kınıklı S, Cesur S, Ataman Hatipoğlu Ç, Arslan K, Gönültaş M
**Journal:** Mikrobiyol Bul (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5578/mb.69122](https://doi.org/10.5578/mb.69122)

## Content

1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2020 Jan;54(1):95-109. doi: 10.5578/mb.69122.

[Evaluation of Histological Response in Chronic Hepatitis B Patients with 
Tenofovir or Entecavir Therapy].

[Article in Turkish]

Çerçioğlu D(1), Kınıklı S(1), Cesur S(1), Ataman Hatipoğlu Ç(1), Arslan K(1), 
Gönültaş M(2).

Author information:
(1)Ankara Training and Research Hospital, Clinic of Infectious Diseases and 
Clinical Microbiology, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Ankara Training and Research Hospital, Clinic of Medical Pathology, Ankara, 
Turkey.

Chronic hepatitis B (CHB) is an important public health problem in the world and 
Turkey. The aim of this study was to evaluate the histological, virological, 
serological and biochemical response rates in CHB patients receiving tenofovir 
or entecavir therapy. Control liver biopsies were performed on patients who 
received tenofovir or entecavir therapy for one year or longer. 
Histopathological grading was scored according to the modified Knodell system. 
Eighty-seven CHB patients were included in this study, 56 patients were 
receiving tenofovir and 31 patients were receiving entecavir therapy. Patients 
in two treatment groups were similar in terms of baseline parameters (p> 0.05). 
At the end of the treatment, there was a significant decrease in mean values of 
HBV DNA, alanine aminotransferase and necroinflammatory scores for both groups 
(p<0.001); however, no statistically significant change was observed in fibrosis 
scores (p> 0.05). Histological responses were obtained 66.1% from the tenofovir 
group and 54.8% from the entecavir group. Treatment with tenofovir and entecavir 
resulted with improvement in Ishak fibrosis scores in 12.5% and 12.9% of the 
patients, respectively. For 14.3% of the tenofovir-treated patients and for 
22.6% of the entecavir-treated patients, the Ishak fibrosis scores worsened. 
Baseline intermediate/ advanced fibrosis stage (Ishak fibrosis score: 3-6) was 
found as independent determinant factor on histological response and improvement 
of fibrosis score (OR= 3.99, p= 0.01; OR= 31.67, p= 0.002; respectively) and 
treatment duration longer than five years is an independent determinant for 
improvement of necroinflammatory score (OR= 5.79, p= 0.02). There was no 
significant difference in the virological, serological, biochemical and, 
histological responses and improvement of necroinflammatory and fibrosis scores 
between tenofovir and entecavir groups (p> 0.05). Similar histological, 
virological, serological and biochemical responses were obtained in patients 
with CHB receving tenofovir and entecavir treatments. Further studies involving 
a large number of patients receiving long-term therapy should be done to 
understand the effects of antiviral treatments on healing of liver histology.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.69122
PMID: 32050881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]