---
reference_id: "PMID:39283072"
title: Comparison of a dual antibody and antigen HCV immunoassay to standard of care algorithmic testing.
authors:
- Bui TI
- Brown AP
- Brown M
- Lawless S
- Roemmich B
- Anderson NW
- Farnsworth CW
journal: J Clin Microbiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/jcm.00832-24
keywords:
- Humans
- Hepatitis C Antibodies/blood
- "Immunoassay/methods, standards"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Hepatitis C/diagnosis
- Adult
- Algorithms
- Aged
- "Hepatitis C Antigens/blood, immunology"
- Standard of Care
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Hepacivirus/immunology, genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Nucleic Acid Amplification Techniques/methods, standards"
- Young Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of a dual antibody and antigen HCV immunoassay to standard of care algorithmic testing.
**Authors:** Bui TI, Brown AP, Brown M, Lawless S, Roemmich B, Anderson NW, Farnsworth CW
**Journal:** J Clin Microbiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jcm.00832-24](https://doi.org/10.1128/jcm.00832-24)

## Content

1. J Clin Microbiol. 2024 Oct 16;62(10):e0083224. doi: 10.1128/jcm.00832-24. Epub
 2024 Sep 16.

Comparison of a dual antibody and antigen HCV immunoassay to standard of care 
algorithmic testing.

Bui TI(1), Brown AP(1), Brown M(1), Lawless S(1), Roemmich B(1), Anderson NW(2), 
Farnsworth CW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine in St. Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Health System, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines for hepatitis C 
virus (HCV) testing, although effective, may miss crucial diagnostic 
opportunities. The goal of this study was to assess the utility of an antibody 
(Ab) and antigen (Ag) combination immunoassay as an alternative to traditional 
HCV screening. Remnant specimens from 1,341 patients with concurrent 
third-generation serologic (Roche anti-HCV-II) and nucleic acid amplification 
testing (NAAT) were assessed using the HCV Duo Ab/Ag immunoassay (Roche). 
Patient demographics, risk factors, and standard of care (SOC) laboratory 
results from the medical records were recorded. Overall, 99.0% (197/199) of the 
HCV Duo Ab+/Ag+specimens accurately identified active infections as confirmed by 
NAAT, and 99.9% (670/671) Ab-/Ag- samples corresponded to those without HCV 
infections. Individually, the HCV Duo Ab component demonstrated a 95.6% positive 
percent agreement (PPA) (95% CI = 93.8-96.9) and 99.1% negative percent 
agreement (NPA) (98.8-99.6) compared with SOC anti-HCV II Ab assay. The HCV Duo 
Ag had a 73.5% PPA (67.9-78.4) and 99.8% NPA (99.3-100) with NAAT. Among RNA+ 
specimens, 73.4% (197/267) were HCV Duo Ag+, and 265/267 (99.3%) were 
successfully detected on the HCV Duo Ab component. Notably, 5/7 (71.4%) Ab-/RNA 
+specimens were detected by HCV Duo, which would have been missed by traditional 
algorithmic testing. Fourth generation HCV Duo Ab/Ag assay demonstrated 
comparable performance to SOC testing and shortens the diagnostic window but 
does not eliminate the need for NAAT in all patients. Ab/Ag testing identified 
several Ab-/RNA+ cases, a subgroup often undiagnosed by current algorithmic 
testing, demonstrating promise for improved diagnostic efficiency and accuracy 
in HCV detection.IMPORTANCEThis study highlights the potential of a combined 
hepatitis C virus (HCV) Duo antibody (Ab) and antigen (Ag) immunoassay to 
improve early detection of HCV infections. Traditional Ab-only screening methods 
recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention may miss 
early-stage infections. The HCV Duo assay showed high accuracy, detecting nearly 
all active infections confirmed by nucleic acid amplification testing. Dual 
detection of HCV Ab and Ag shortens the diagnostic window, enabling intervention 
and treatment in a single visit, which is crucial for improving patient outcomes 
and reducing HCV transmission, especially in areas with limited access to 
confirmatory molecular testing.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.00832-24
PMCID: PMC11481485
PMID: 39283072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.I.B. has no conflict of interest. N.W.A. has 
served on scientific advisory boards for Roche Diagnostics and Diasorin 
Molecular. C.W.F. has served on scientific advisory boards for Werfen, Abbott 
Laboratories, Roche Diagnostics, and Cytovale and received research funding from 
Beckman Coulter, Abbott Laboratories, Roche Diagnostics, Cepheid, Siemens 
Healthineers, and Biomerieux.