---
reference_id: "PMID:29875421"
title: A cross-sectional quantitative analysis of the natural history of free sialic acid storage disease-an ultra-orphan multisystemic lysosomal storage disorder.
authors:
- Zielonka M
- Garbade SF
- Kölker S
- Hoffmann GF
- Ries M
journal: Genet Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-018-0051-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A cross-sectional quantitative analysis of the natural history of free sialic acid storage disease-an ultra-orphan multisystemic lysosomal storage disorder.
**Authors:** Zielonka M, Garbade SF, Kölker S, Hoffmann GF, Ries M
**Journal:** Genet Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-018-0051-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-018-0051-3)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2019 Feb;21(2):347-352. doi: 10.1038/s41436-018-0051-3. Epub 2018
Jun  6.

A cross-sectional quantitative analysis of the natural history of free sialic 
acid storage disease-an ultra-orphan multisystemic lysosomal storage disorder.

Zielonka M(1)(2)(3), Garbade SF(4)(5), Kölker S(4)(5), Hoffmann GF(4)(5), Ries 
M(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Center for Pediatric 
and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. 
matthias.zielonka@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Heidelberg Research Center for Molecular Medicine (HRCMM), Heidelberg, 
Germany. matthias.zielonka@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(3)Center for Rare Diseases, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany. matthias.zielonka@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(4)Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Center for Pediatric 
and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Center for Rare Diseases, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

PURPOSE: Quantitative definition of the natural history of free sialic acid 
storage disease (SASD, OMIM 604369), an orphan disorder due to the deficiency of 
the proton-driven carrier SLC17A5.
METHODS: Analysis of published cases with SASD (N = 116) respecting STROBE 
criteria.
MAIN OUTCOME PARAMETERS: survival and diagnostic delay. Phenotype, 
phenotype-biomarker associations, and geographical patient distribution were 
explored.
RESULTS: Median age at disease onset was 0.17 years. Median age at diagnosis was 
3 years with a median diagnostic delay of 2.5 years. Median survival was 11 
years. The biochemical phenotype clearly predicted the disease course: patients 
with a urinary free sialic acid excretion below 6.37-fold or an intracellular 
free sialic acid storage in fibroblasts below 7.37-fold of the mean of normal 
survived longer than patients with biochemical values above these thresholds. 
Cluster analysis of disease features suggested a continuous phenotypic spectrum. 
Patient distribution was panethnic.
CONCLUSION: Combination of neurologic symptoms, visceromegaly, and dysmorphic 
features and/or nonimmune hydrops fetalis should prompt specific tests for SASD, 
reducing diagnostic delay. The present quantitative data inform clinical studies 
and may stimulate and accelerate development of specific therapies. 
Biomarker-phenotype association is particularly important for both counseling 
parents and study design.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-018-0051-3
PMID: 29875421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]