---
reference_id: PMID:34204243
title: Investigation of Long COVID Prevalence and Its Relationship to Epstein-Barr Virus Reactivation.
authors:
- Gold JE
- Okyay RA
- Licht WE
- Hurley DJ
journal: Pathogens
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/pathogens10060763
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigation of Long COVID Prevalence and Its Relationship to Epstein-Barr Virus Reactivation.
**Authors:** Gold JE, Okyay RA, Licht WE, Hurley DJ
**Journal:** Pathogens (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pathogens10060763](https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens10060763)

## Content

1. Pathogens. 2021 Jun 17;10(6):763. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10060763.

Investigation of Long COVID Prevalence and Its Relationship to Epstein-Barr 
Virus Reactivation.

Gold JE(1), Okyay RA(2), Licht WE(3), Hurley DJ(4).

Author information:
(1)World Organization, Watkinsville, GA 30677, USA.
(2)Department of Public Health, Kahramanmaraş Sütçü İmam University, 
Kahramanmaraş 46040, Turkey.
(3)Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) patients sometimes experience long-term 
symptoms following resolution of acute disease, including fatigue, brain fog, 
and rashes. Collectively these have become known as long COVID. Our aim was to 
first determine long COVID prevalence in 185 randomly surveyed COVID-19 patients 
and, subsequently, to determine if there was an association between occurrence 
of long COVID symptoms and reactivation of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in 68 
COVID-19 patients recruited from those surveyed. We found the prevalence of long 
COVID symptoms to be 30.3% (56/185), which included 4 initially asymptomatic 
COVID-19 patients who later developed long COVID symptoms. Next, we found that 
66.7% (20/30) of long COVID subjects versus 10% (2/20) of control subjects in 
our primary study group were positive for EBV reactivation based on positive 
titers for EBV early antigen-diffuse (EA-D) IgG or EBV viral capsid antigen 
(VCA) IgM. The difference was significant (p < 0.001, Fisher's exact test). A 
similar ratio was observed in a secondary group of 18 subjects 21-90 days after 
testing positive for COVID-19, indicating reactivation may occur soon after or 
concurrently with COVID-19 infection. These findings suggest that many long 
COVID symptoms may not be a direct result of the SARS-CoV-2 virus but may be the 
result of COVID-19 inflammation-induced EBV reactivation.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10060763
PMCID: PMC8233978
PMID: 34204243

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.