---
reference_id: "PMID:37041418"
title: "The synaptic hypothesis of schizophrenia version III: a master mechanism."
authors:
- Howes OD
- Onwordi EC
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02043-w
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Humans
- Adult
- Schizophrenia/metabolism
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Psychotic Disorders/complications
- Gray Matter/metabolism
- Neuroglia/metabolism
- Synapses/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The synaptic hypothesis of schizophrenia version III: a master mechanism.
**Authors:** Howes OD, Onwordi EC
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-023-02043-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-02043-w)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2023 May;28(5):1843-1856. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02043-w.
Epub  2023 Apr 11.

The synaptic hypothesis of schizophrenia version III: a master mechanism.

Howes OD(1)(2)(3), Onwordi EC(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Sciences (ICS), Imperial College
London, London, W12 0NN, UK. oliver.howes@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Psychiatric Imaging Group, Medical Research Council, London Institute of
Medical Sciences, Hammersmith Hospital, London, W12 0NN, UK.
oliver.howes@kcl.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, SE5 8AF, UK.
oliver.howes@kcl.ac.uk.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Sciences (ICS), Imperial College
London, London, W12 0NN, UK. e.onwordi@lms.mrc.ac.uk.
(5)Psychiatric Imaging Group, Medical Research Council, London Institute of
Medical Sciences, Hammersmith Hospital, London, W12 0NN, UK.
e.onwordi@lms.mrc.ac.uk.
(6)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, SE5 8AF, UK.
e.onwordi@lms.mrc.ac.uk.
(7)Centre for Psychiatry and Mental Health, Wolfson Institute of Population
Health, Queen Mary University of London, London, E1 2AB, UK.
e.onwordi@lms.mrc.ac.uk.

The synaptic hypothesis of schizophrenia has been highly influential. However,
new approaches mean there has been a step-change in the evidence available, and
some tenets of earlier versions are not supported by recent findings. Here, we
review normal synaptic development and evidence from structural and functional
imaging and post-mortem studies that this is abnormal in people at risk and with
schizophrenia. We then consider the mechanism that could underlie synaptic
changes and update the hypothesis. Genome-wide association studies have
identified a number of schizophrenia risk variants converging on pathways
regulating synaptic elimination, formation and plasticity, including complement
factors and microglial-mediated synaptic pruning. Induced pluripotent stem cell
studies have demonstrated that patient-derived neurons show pre- and
post-synaptic deficits, synaptic signalling alterations, and elevated,
complement-dependent elimination of synaptic structures compared to
control-derived lines. Preclinical data show that environmental risk factors
linked to schizophrenia, such as stress and immune activation, can lead to
synapse loss. Longitudinal MRI studies in patients, including in the prodrome,
show divergent trajectories in grey matter volume and cortical thickness
compared to controls, and PET imaging shows in vivo evidence for lower synaptic
density in patients with schizophrenia. Based on this evidence, we propose
version III of the synaptic hypothesis. This is a multi-hit model, whereby
genetic and/or environmental risk factors render synapses vulnerable to
excessive glia-mediated elimination triggered by stress during later
neurodevelopment. We propose the loss of synapses disrupts pyramidal neuron
function in the cortex to contribute to negative and cognitive symptoms and
disinhibits projections to mesostriatal regions to contribute to dopamine
overactivity and psychosis. It accounts for the typical onset of schizophrenia
in adolescence/early adulthood, its major risk factors, and symptoms, and
identifies potential synaptic, microglial and immune targets for treatment.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-023-02043-w
PMCID: PMC10575788
PMID: 37041418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ODH has received investigator-initiated research
funding from and/or participated in advisory/speaker meetings organised by
Angelini, Autifony, Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Heptares, Global
Medical Education, Invicro, Janssen, Lundbeck, Neurocrine, Otsuka, Sunovion,
Recordati, Roche and Viatris/Mylan and was a part time employee of H Lundbeck
A/s. ODH has a patent for the use of dopaminergic imaging. No other conflicts of
interest were declared.
