---
reference_id: PMID:35295802
title: "A Review: The Manifestations, Mechanisms, and Treatments of Musculoskeletal Pain in Patients With COVID-19."
authors:
- Wang L
- Yang N
- Yang J
- Zhao S
- Su C
journal: Front Pain Res (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fpain.2022.826160
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Review: The Manifestations, Mechanisms, and Treatments of Musculoskeletal Pain in Patients With COVID-19.
**Authors:** Wang L, Yang N, Yang J, Zhao S, Su C
**Journal:** Front Pain Res (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fpain.2022.826160](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpain.2022.826160)

## Content

1. Front Pain Res (Lausanne). 2022 Mar 10;3:826160. doi:
10.3389/fpain.2022.826160.  eCollection 2022.

A Review: The Manifestations, Mechanisms, and Treatments of Musculoskeletal Pain 
in Patients With COVID-19.

Wang L(1)(2), Yang N(1), Yang J(1), Zhao S(1), Su C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Hunan Cancer Hospital/The Affiliated Cancer 
Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, 
China.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of South China, Hengyang, China.

The outbreak of COVID-19 poses a serious threat to global health. 
Musculoskeletal (MSK) pain is the most frequent symptom in patients with 
COVID-19 besides fever and cough. There are limited studies addressing MSK 
symptoms in patients with COVID-19. This review aims to provide an overview of 
current studies related to MSK pain in patients with COVID-19, summarize the 
possible mechanisms of myalgia, and describe the current management options. In 
addition to acute respiratory manifestations, COVID-19 might also affect 
neurological systems which include skeletal manifestations and muscular injury. 
A possible mechanism of MSK pain and myalgia in COVID-19 may be related to the 
distribution of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE-2) and the occurrence of 
cytokine storms. ACE-2 has been shown to be the receptor of Severe Acute 
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-COV2). Moreover, studies have shown 
that inflammatory cytokines could cause myalgia by inducing prostaglandin E2 
(PGE2) production. In addition, it was also found that the plasma levels of IL2, 
IL7, IL10, IL-6, TNFα, and e lymphopenia were higher in patients with COVID-19. 
In general, the treatment of MSK pain in patients with COVID-19 falls into 
pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions. Various treatments of 
each have its own merits. The role of vaccination is irreplaceable in the 
efforts to prevent COVID-19 and mitigates its subsequent symptoms.

Copyright © 2022 Wang, Yang, Yang, Zhao and Su.

DOI: 10.3389/fpain.2022.826160
PMCID: PMC8915767
PMID: 35295802

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.