---
reference_id: "PMID:34889934"
title: "Revisiting the grammar of Tau aggregation and pathology formation: how new insights from brain pathology are shaping how we study and target Tauopathies."
authors:
- Limorenko G
- Lashuel HA
journal: Chem Soc Rev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1039/d1cs00127b
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting the grammar of Tau aggregation and pathology formation: how new insights from brain pathology are shaping how we study and target Tauopathies.
**Authors:** Limorenko G, Lashuel HA
**Journal:** Chem Soc Rev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1039/d1cs00127b](https://doi.org/10.1039/d1cs00127b)

## Content

1. Chem Soc Rev. 2022 Jan 24;51(2):513-565. doi: 10.1039/d1cs00127b.

Revisiting the grammar of Tau aggregation and pathology formation: how new 
insights from brain pathology are shaping how we study and target Tauopathies.

Limorenko G(1), Lashuel HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Chemical Biology of Neurodegeneration, Brain Mind 
Institute, École Polytechnique Federal de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland. hilal.lashuel@epfl.ch.

Converging evidence continues to point towards Tau aggregation and pathology 
formation as central events in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease and other 
Tauopathies. Despite significant advances in understanding the morphological and 
structural properties of Tau fibrils, many fundamental questions remain about 
what causes Tau to aggregate in the first place. The exact roles of cofactors, 
Tau post-translational modifications, and Tau interactome in regulating Tau 
aggregation, pathology formation, and toxicity remain unknown. Recent studies 
have put the spotlight on the wide gap between the complexity of Tau structures, 
aggregation, and pathology formation in the brain and the simplicity of 
experimental approaches used for modeling these processes in research 
laboratories. Embracing and deconstructing this complexity is an essential first 
step to understanding the role of Tau in health and disease. To help deconstruct 
this complexity and understand its implication for the development of effective 
Tau targeting diagnostics and therapies, we firstly review how our understanding 
of Tau aggregation and pathology formation has evolved over the past few 
decades. Secondly, we present an analysis of new findings and insights from 
recent studies illustrating the biochemical, structural, and functional 
heterogeneity of Tau aggregates. Thirdly, we discuss the importance of adopting 
new experimental approaches that embrace the complexity of Tau aggregation and 
pathology as an important first step towards developing mechanism- and 
structure-based therapies that account for the pathological and clinical 
heterogeneity of Alzheimer's disease and Tauopathies. We believe that this is 
essential to develop effective diagnostics and therapies to treat these 
devastating diseases.

DOI: 10.1039/d1cs00127b
PMID: 34889934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]