---
reference_id: "PMID:32564019"
title: "Neutral Lipid Storage Disease Associated with the PNPLA2 Gene: Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Samukawa M
- Nakamura N
- Hirano M
- Morikawa M
- Sakata H
- Nishino I
- Izumi R
- Suzuki N
- Kuroda H
- Shiga K
- Saigoh K
- Aoki M
- Kusunoki S
journal: Eur Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000508346
keywords:
- Frameshift Mutation
- Humans
- Lipase/genetics
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Muscular Diseases/genetics
- Acyltransferases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutral Lipid Storage Disease Associated with the PNPLA2 Gene: Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Samukawa M, Nakamura N, Hirano M, Morikawa M, Sakata H, Nishino I, Izumi R, Suzuki N, Kuroda H, Shiga K, Saigoh K, Aoki M, Kusunoki S
**Journal:** Eur Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000508346](https://doi.org/10.1159/000508346)

## Content

1. Eur Neurol. 2020;83(3):317-322. doi: 10.1159/000508346. Epub 2020 Jun 19.

Neutral Lipid Storage Disease Associated with the PNPLA2 Gene: Case Report and 
Literature Review.

Samukawa M(1), Nakamura N(2), Hirano M(3), Morikawa M(1), Sakata H(1), Nishino 
I(4), Izumi R(2), Suzuki N(2), Kuroda H(2), Shiga K(5)(6), Saigoh K(1), Aoki 
M(2), Kusunoki S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kindai University, Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Kindai University, Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan, mahirano-neuro@umin.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, Matsushita Memorial Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

Mutations in the PNPLA2 gene cause neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy 
(NLSDM) or triglyceride deposit cardiomyovasculopathy. We report a detailed case 
study of a 53-year-old man with NLSDM. The PNPLA2 gene was analyzed according to 
the reported method. We summarized the clinical, laboratory, and genetic 
information of 56 patients, including our patient and 55 other reported patients 
with homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the PNPLA2 gene. We found 
a novel homozygous mutation (c.194delC) in the PNPLA2 gene that resulted in 
frameshift. The patient suffered from normal-tension glaucoma and pulmonary 
cysts, symptoms that are relatively common in the elderly but were not 
previously reported for this disease. Our summary confirmed that Jordan's 
anomaly, polymorphonuclear leukocytes with lipid accumulation, was the most 
consistent finding of this disease. Because this disease is potentially 
treatable, our results may help rapid and correct diagnosis.

© 2020 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000508346
PMCID: PMC7592920
PMID: 32564019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.