---
reference_id: "PMID:37432427"
title: "Cushing Syndrome: A Review."
authors:
- Reincke M
- Fleseriu M
journal: JAMA
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.11305
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cushing Syndrome: A Review.
**Authors:** Reincke M, Fleseriu M
**Journal:** JAMA (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2023.11305](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2023.11305)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2023 Jul 11;330(2):170-181. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.11305.

Cushing Syndrome: A Review.

Reincke M(1), Fleseriu M(2).

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Universität, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(2)Departments of Medicine and Neurological Surgery and Pituitary Center, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon.

IMPORTANCE: Cushing syndrome is defined as a prolonged increase in plasma 
cortisol levels that is not due to a physiological etiology. Although the most 
frequent cause of Cushing syndrome is exogenous steroid use, the estimated 
incidence of Cushing syndrome due to endogenous overproduction of cortisol 
ranges from 2 to 8 per million people annually. Cushing syndrome is associated 
with hyperglycemia, protein catabolism, immunosuppression, hypertension, weight 
gain, neurocognitive changes, and mood disorders.
OBSERVATIONS: Cushing syndrome characteristically presents with skin changes 
such as facial plethora, easy bruising, and purple striae and with metabolic 
manifestations such as hyperglycemia, hypertension, and excess fat deposition in 
the face, back of the neck, and visceral organs. Cushing disease, in which 
corticotropin excess is produced by a benign pituitary tumor, occurs in 
approximately 60% to 70% of patients with Cushing syndrome due to endogenous 
cortisol production. Evaluation of patients with possible Cushing syndrome 
begins with ruling out exogenous steroid use. Screening for elevated cortisol is 
performed with a 24-hour urinary free cortisol test or late-night salivary 
cortisol test or by evaluating whether cortisol is suppressed the morning after 
an evening dexamethasone dose. Plasma corticotropin levels can help distinguish 
between adrenal causes of hypercortisolism (suppressed corticotropin) and 
corticotropin-dependent forms of hypercortisolism (midnormal to elevated 
corticotropin levels). Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging, bilateral inferior 
petrosal sinus sampling, and adrenal or whole-body imaging can help identify 
tumor sources of hypercortisolism. Management of Cushing syndrome begins with 
surgery to remove the source of excess endogenous cortisol production followed 
by medication that includes adrenal steroidogenesis inhibitors, 
pituitary-targeted drugs, or glucocorticoid receptor blockers. For patients not 
responsive to surgery and medication, radiation therapy and bilateral 
adrenalectomy may be appropriate.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The incidence of Cushing syndrome due to endogenous 
overproduction of cortisol is 2 to 8 people per million annually. First-line 
therapy for Cushing syndrome due to endogenous overproduction of cortisol is 
surgery to remove the causative tumor. Many patients will require additional 
treatment with medications, radiation, or bilateral adrenalectomy.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2023.11305
PMID: 37432427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]