---
reference_id: "PMID:36646699"
title: "Cryo-EM structure of hnRNPDL-2 fibrils, a functional amyloid associated with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy D3."
authors:
- Garcia-Pardo J
- Bartolomé-Nafría A
- Chaves-Sanjuan A
- Gil-Garcia M
- Visentin C
- Bolognesi M
- Ricagno S
- Ventura S
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-35854-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Alternative Splicing
- Amyloid/metabolism
- Amyloidogenic Proteins/metabolism
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- "Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle/genetics"
- "Protein Isoforms/genetics, metabolism"
- Ribonucleoproteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cryo-EM structure of hnRNPDL-2 fibrils, a functional amyloid associated with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy D3.
**Authors:** Garcia-Pardo J, Bartolomé-Nafría A, Chaves-Sanjuan A, Gil-Garcia M, Visentin C, Bolognesi M, Ricagno S, Ventura S
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-35854-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35854-0)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Jan 16;14(1):239. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-35854-0.

Cryo-EM structure of hnRNPDL-2 fibrils, a functional amyloid associated with 
limb-girdle muscular dystrophy D3.

Garcia-Pardo J(1), Bartolomé-Nafría A(1), Chaves-Sanjuan A(2)(3), Gil-Garcia 
M(1), Visentin C(2)(4), Bolognesi M(2)(3), Ricagno S(2)(4), Ventura S(5).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biotecnologia i de Biomedicina (IBB) and Departament de 
Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193, 
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, 20133, Milano, 
Italy.
(3)CRC Fondazione Romeo e Enrica Invernizzi and NOLIMITS, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, 20133, Milano, Italy.
(4)Institute of Molecular and Translational Cardiology, I.R.C.C.S. Policlinico 
San Donato, piazza Malan, 2, 20097, San Donato Milanese, Italy.
(5)Institut de Biotecnologia i de Biomedicina (IBB) and Departament de 
Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193, 
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain. Salvador.Ventura@uab.cat.

hnRNPDL is a ribonucleoprotein (RNP) involved in transcription and 
RNA-processing that hosts missense mutations causing limb-girdle muscular 
dystrophy D3 (LGMD D3). Mammalian-specific alternative splicing (AS) renders 
three natural isoforms, hnRNPDL-2 being predominant in humans. We present the 
cryo-electron microscopy structure of full-length hnRNPDL-2 amyloid fibrils, 
which are stable, non-toxic, and bind nucleic acids. The high-resolution amyloid 
core consists of a single Gly/Tyr-rich and highly hydrophilic filament 
containing internal water channels. The RNA binding domains are located as a 
solenoidal coat around the core. The architecture and activity of hnRNPDL-2 
fibrils are reminiscent of functional amyloids, our results suggesting that 
LGMD D3 might be a loss-of-function disease associated with impaired 
fibrillation. Strikingly, the fibril core matches exon 6, absent in the soluble 
hnRNPDL-3 isoform. This provides structural evidence for AS controlling hnRNPDL 
assembly by precisely including/skipping an amyloid exon, a mechanism that holds 
the potential to generate functional diversity in RNPs.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-35854-0
PMCID: PMC9842712
PMID: 36646699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.