---
reference_id: "PMID:36534754"
title: Molecular Characterization of Multifocal Granular Cell Tumors.
authors:
- Dehner CA
- Schroeder MC
- Lyu Y
- Bell R
- Borcherding DC
- Moon T
- Hirbe A
- Chrisinger JSA
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000001992
keywords:
- Humans
- Granular Cell Tumor/genetics
- Mutation
- "Receptors, Cell Surface"
- "Vacuolar Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics, metabolism"
- Prorenin Receptor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Characterization of Multifocal Granular Cell Tumors.
**Authors:** Dehner CA, Schroeder MC, Lyu Y, Bell R, Borcherding DC, Moon T, Hirbe A, Chrisinger JSA
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0000000000001992](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0000000000001992)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2023 Mar 1;47(3):326-332. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000001992.
 Epub 2022 Nov 14.

Molecular Characterization of Multifocal Granular Cell Tumors.

Dehner CA(1), Schroeder MC(1), Lyu Y(2), Bell R(1), Borcherding DC(2), Moon 
T(3), Hirbe A(2), Chrisinger JSA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology.
(2)Internal Medicine, Division of Oncology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO.
(3)University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center Department of Orthopedic 
Surgery, Cleveland, OH.

Granular cell tumors (GrCT) were recently found to be driven by inactivating 
mutations in vacuolar H + -ATPase (V-ATPase) genes, most frequently ATP6AP1 and 
ATP6AP2 . Multifocal presentation is present in ~10% of cases; however, the 
relationship between multifocal tumors in a given patient has not been 
elucidated. We hypothesized that benign-appearing multifocal GrCT are 
molecularly distinct whereas paired primary and metastatic malignant GrCT share 
identical mutations. To test this, we conducted targeted next-generation 
sequencing of the V-ATPase genes in multifocal GrCT and whole exome and Sanger 
sequencing in paired primary and metastatic malignant GrCT. Thirteen patients 
with≥2 GrCT were identified (total of 43 tumors). Forty-two tumors were 
successfully sequenced. Tumors showed somatic mutations in 3 of the 10 targeted 
genes in 32 of 42 samples (76%). Twenty tumors showed mutations in ATP6AP1 
(48%), 10 tumors had mutations in ATP6AP2 (24%), and 2 tumors showed mutations 
in ATP6V0A4 (5%). Predicted loss-of-function mutations were found in ATP6AP1 in 
17 tumors (40%), in ATP6AP2 in 10 tumors (24%), and in ATP6V0A4 in 1 tumor (2%). 
In 8 patients, mutually exclusive mutations were detected in at least 2 tumors 
per patient. Two patients were identified with malignant GrCT with material 
available from both primary and metastatic sites. Identical frameshift 
insertions were found in ATP6AP1 in 1 case and the second case showed identical 
nonsense mutations in ATP6AP1 . In conclusion, multifocal GrCT within an 
individual patient are molecularly distinct, while paired primary and metastatic 
GrCT share identical mutations.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000001992
PMID: 36534754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest and Source of Funding: 
Supported by the Washington University Department of Pathology and Immunology. 
The authors have disclosed that they have no significant relationships with, or 
financial interest in, any commercial companies pertaining to this article.