---
reference_id: "PMID:12696021"
title: 2-Methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by mutations in the HADH2 gene.
authors:
- Ofman R
- Ruiter JP
- Feenstra M
- Duran M
- Poll-The BT
- Zschocke J
- Ensenauer R
- Lehnert W
- Sass JO
- Sperl W
- Wanders RJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1086/375116
keywords:
- "3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases/genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Alcohol Oxidoreductases/deficiency, genetics, isolation & purification"
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Cattle
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Liver/enzymology
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- X Chromosome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2-Methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by mutations in the HADH2 gene.
**Authors:** Ofman R, Ruiter JP, Feenstra M, Duran M, Poll-The BT, Zschocke J, Ensenauer R, Lehnert W, Sass JO, Sperl W, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1086/375116](https://doi.org/10.1086/375116)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 May;72(5):1300-7. doi: 10.1086/375116. Epub 2003 Apr 14.

2-Methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by mutations in 
the HADH2 gene.

Ofman R(1), Ruiter JP, Feenstra M, Duran M, Poll-The BT, Zschocke J, Ensenauer 
R, Lehnert W, Sass JO, Sperl W, Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Academic Medical Center, Emma Children's 
Hospital, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (MHBD) deficiency is a novel inborn 
error of isoleucine degradation. In this article, we report the elucidation of 
the molecular basis of MHBD deficiency. To this end, we purified the enzyme from 
bovine liver. MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry analysis revealed that the purified 
protein was identical to bovine 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase type II. The 
human homolog of this bovine enzyme is a short-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase, also known as the "endoplasmic reticulum-associated amyloid-beta 
binding protein" (ERAB). This led to the identification of the X-chromosomal 
gene involved, which previously had been denoted "HADH2." Sequence analysis of 
the HADH2 gene from patients with MHBD deficiency revealed the presence of two 
missense mutations (R130C and L122V). Heterologous expression of the mutant 
cDNAs in Escherichia coli showed that both mutations almost completely abolish 
enzyme activity. This confirms that MHBD deficiency is caused by mutations in 
the HADH2 gene.

DOI: 10.1086/375116
PMCID: PMC1180283
PMID: 12696021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]