---
reference_id: "PMID:16545751"
title: "Secondary progressive multiple sclerosis: current knowledge and future challenges."
authors:
- Rovaris M
- Confavreux C
- Furlan R
- Kappos L
- Comi G
- Filippi M
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70410-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secondary progressive multiple sclerosis: current knowledge and future challenges.
**Authors:** Rovaris M, Confavreux C, Furlan R, Kappos L, Comi G, Filippi M
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70410-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70410-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2006 Apr;5(4):343-54. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70410-0.

Secondary progressive multiple sclerosis: current knowledge and future 
challenges.

Rovaris M(1), Confavreux C, Furlan R, Kappos L, Comi G, Filippi M.

Author information:
(1)Neuroimaging Research Unit, Scientific Institute and University Ospedale San 
Raffaele, Milan, Italy.

The secondary progressive phase of multiple sclerosis (MS), which is 
characterised by a steady accrual of fixed disability after an initial relapsing 
remitting course, is not clearly understood. Although there is no consensus on 
the mechanisms underlying such a transition to the progressive phase, 
epidemiological and neuroimaging studies indicate that it is probably driven by 
the high prevalence of neurodegenerative compared with inflammatory pathological 
changes. This notion is lent support by the limited efficacy of available 
immunomodulating and immunosuppressive treatment strategies, which seems to be 
further decreased in the late stages of secondary progressive MS. No established 
clinical or paraclinical predictors of the transition from relapsing remitting 
to secondary progressive MS have been described. However, the use of 
quantitative MRI-derived measures is warranted to monitor natural history 
studies and therapeutic trials of secondary progressive MS with increased 
reliability. In view of the small effects of immunomodulating and 
immunosuppressive treatments in preventing the transition to secondary 
progression, the development of treatments promoting neuroaxonal repair remains 
an important goal in this disease.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70410-0
PMID: 16545751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]