---
reference_id: "PMID:12694228"
title: The natural history of sclerosteosis.
authors:
- Hamersma H
- Gardner J
- Beighton P
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2003.00036.x
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/genetics"
- Facial Nerve Diseases/genetics
- Female
- Fingers/abnormalities
- Genetic Markers/genetics
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Humans
- "Hyperostosis/epidemiology, genetics"
- Intracranial Pressure/genetics
- Jaw Abnormalities
- Male
- Nerve Compression Syndromes/genetics
- South Africa/epidemiology
- Syndactyly/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The natural history of sclerosteosis.
**Authors:** Hamersma H, Gardner J, Beighton P
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1034/j.1399-0004.2003.00036.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-0004.2003.00036.x)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2003 Mar;63(3):192-7. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2003.00036.x.

The natural history of sclerosteosis.

Hamersma H(1), Gardner J, Beighton P.

Author information:
(1)Flora Clinic, Florida Hills, Roodepoort, Gauteng, South Africa.

Erratum in
    Clin Genet. 2003 Aug;64(2):176.

Sclerosteosis (SCL) is a severe, progressive, autosomal-recessive craniotubular
hyperostosis (MIM 269500). The determinant gene (SOST) has been isolated, and
genotype-phenotype correlations, as well as the elucidation of pathogenetic
mechanisms, are dependent upon the documentation of the natural history of the
condition. For this reason, the course and complications in 63 affected
individuals in South Africa, seen over a 38-year period, have been analyzed.
Thirty-four of these persons died during the course of the survey, 24 from
complications related to elevation of intracranial pressure as a result of
calvarial overgrowth. The mean age of death in this group of individuals was 33
years, with an even gender distribution. Facial palsy and deafness, as a result
of cranial nerve entrapment, developed in childhood in 52 (82%) affected
persons. Mandibular overgrowth was present in 46 (73%) adults and syndactyly in
48 (76%). In South Africa in 2002, 29 affected persons were alive, 10 being < or
=20 years of age. It is evident that sclerosteosis is a severe disorder which
places a considerable burden upon affected individuals and their families.

Copyright Blackwell Munksgaard, 2003

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2003.00036.x
PMID: 12694228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
