---
reference_id: "PMID:27571159"
title: "Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: epidemiology, mechanisms, and prevention."
authors:
- Devinsky O
- Hesdorffer DC
- Thurman DJ
- Lhatoo S
- Richerson G
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30158-2
keywords:
- "Death, Sudden/epidemiology, etiology, prevention & control"
- Epilepsy/complications
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: epidemiology, mechanisms, and prevention.
**Authors:** Devinsky O, Hesdorffer DC, Thurman DJ, Lhatoo S, Richerson G
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30158-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30158-2)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2016 Sep;15(10):1075-88. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30158-2.
Epub  2016 Aug 8.

Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: epidemiology, mechanisms, and prevention.

Devinsky O(1), Hesdorffer DC(2), Thurman DJ(3), Lhatoo S(4), Richerson G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, NYU Langone Medical
Center, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: od4@nyu.edu.
(2)Gertrude H Sergievsky Center and Department of Epidemiology, Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Hospitals, Case Medical Center,
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa, Veteran's Affairs Medical
Center, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics,
University of Iowa, Veteran's Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, IA, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2016 Dec;15(13):1303-1304. doi:
10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30285-X.
    Lancet Neurol. 2016 Dec;15(13):1303. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30290-3.

Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) can affect individuals of any age,
but is most common in younger adults (aged 20-45 years). Generalised
tonic-clonic seizures are the greatest risk factor for SUDEP; most often, SUDEP
occurs after this type of seizure in bed during sleep hours and the person is
found in a prone position. SUDEP excludes other forms of seizure-related sudden
death that might be mechanistically related (eg, death after single febrile,
unprovoked seizures, or status epilepticus). Typically, postictal apnoea and
bradycardia progress to asystole and death. A crucial element of SUDEP is
brainstem dysfunction, for which postictal generalised EEG suppression might be
a biomarker. Dysfunction in serotonin and adenosine signalling systems, as well
as genetic disorders affecting cardiac conduction and neuronal excitability,
might also contribute. Because generalised tonic-clonic seizures precede most
cases of SUDEP, patients must be better educated about prevention. The value of
nocturnal monitoring to detect seizures and postictal stimulation is unproven
but warrants further study.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30158-2
PMID: 27571159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
