---
reference_id: "PMID:38627861"
title: "Unveiling the clinical spectrum of relapsing polychondritis: insights into its pathogenesis, novel monogenic causes, and therapeutic strategies."
authors:
- Bica BERG
- de Souza AWS
- Pereira IA
journal: Adv Rheumatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s42358-024-00365-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Polychondritis, Relapsing/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Inflammation/complications
- Bone Diseases/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unveiling the clinical spectrum of relapsing polychondritis: insights into its pathogenesis, novel monogenic causes, and therapeutic strategies.
**Authors:** Bica BERG, de Souza AWS, Pereira IA
**Journal:** Adv Rheumatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s42358-024-00365-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s42358-024-00365-z)

## Content

1. Adv Rheumatol. 2024 Apr 16;64(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s42358-024-00365-z.

Unveiling the clinical spectrum of relapsing polychondritis: insights into its 
pathogenesis, novel monogenic causes, and therapeutic strategies.

Bica BERG(1), de Souza AWS(2), Pereira IA(3).

Author information:
(1)Reumatology Division of Hospital Universitário Clementino Fraga Filho 
(HUCFF), Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rua Esteves Junior 62, CEP 
22231-160, Laranjeiras, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. rios.belena@gmail.com.
(2)Rheumatology Division, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de 
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Reumatologia da Universidade do Sul de Santa Catarina-UNISUL, Florian?polis, 
RJ, Brazil.

Relapsing polychondritis is a rare multisystem disease involving cartilaginous 
and proteoglycan-rich structures. The diagnosis of this disease is mainly 
suggested by the presence of flares of inflammation of the cartilage, 
particularly in the ears, nose or respiratory tract, and more rarely, in the 
presence of other manifestations. The spectrum of clinical presentations may 
vary from intermittent episodes of painful and often disfiguring auricular and 
nasal chondritis to an occasional organ or even life-threatening manifestations 
such as lower airway collapse. There is a lack of awareness about this disease 
is mainly due to its rarity. In 2020, VEXAS (vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-linked, 
autoinflammatory, somatic) syndrome, a novel autoinflammatory syndrome, was 
described. VEXAS syndrome is attributed to somatic mutations in methionine-41 of 
UBA1, the major E1 enzyme that initiates ubiquitylation. This new disease entity 
connects seemingly unrelated conditions: systemic inflammatory syndromes 
(relapsing chondritis, Sweet's syndrome, and neutrophilic dermatosis) and 
hematologic disorders (myelodysplastic syndrome or multiple myeloma). Therefore, 
this article reviews the current literature on both disease entities.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s42358-024-00365-z
PMID: 38627861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]