---
reference_id: "PMID:35605949"
title: "Cholera outbreaks in sub-Saharan Africa during 2010-2019: a descriptive analysis."
authors:
- Zheng Q
- Luquero FJ
- Ciglenecki I
- Wamala JF
- Abubakar A
- Welo P
- Hussen M
- Wossen M
- Yennan S
- Keita A
- Lessler J
- Azman AS
- Lee EC
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.05.039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera outbreaks in sub-Saharan Africa during 2010-2019: a descriptive analysis.
**Authors:** Zheng Q, Luquero FJ, Ciglenecki I, Wamala JF, Abubakar A, Welo P, Hussen M, Wossen M, Yennan S, Keita A, Lessler J, Azman AS, Lee EC
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2022.05.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2022.05.039)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2022 Sep;122:215-221. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.05.039. Epub 
2022 May 20.

Cholera outbreaks in sub-Saharan Africa during 2010-2019: a descriptive 
analysis.

Zheng Q(1), Luquero FJ(2), Ciglenecki I(3), Wamala JF(4), Abubakar A(5), Welo 
P(6), Hussen M(7), Wossen M(7), Yennan S(8), Keita A(9), Lessler J(10), Azman 
AS(1), Lee EC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, MD, USA; Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization 
(GAVI), Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Médecins Sans Frontières, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)World Health Organization, Juba, South Sudan.
(5)WHO, Regional Office for Eastern Mediterranean, Cairo, Egypt.
(6)PNECHOL-MD, Community IMCI, Ministry of Health, Democratic Republic of the 
Congo.
(7)Disease and Health Events Surveillance and Response Directorate, Ethiopia 
Public Health Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(8)Surveillance and Epidemiology, Nigeria Centre for Disease Control, Abuja, 
Nigeria.
(9)Regional Office for West & Central Africa, UNICEF, Dakar, Senegal.
(10)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public 
Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cholera remains a public health threat but is inequitably 
distributed across sub-Saharan Africa. Lack of standardized reporting and 
inconsistent outbreak definitions limit our understanding of cholera outbreak 
epidemiology.
METHODS: From a database of cholera incidence and mortality, we extracted data 
from sub-Saharan Africa and reconstructed outbreaks of suspected cholera 
starting in January 2010 to December 2019 based on location-specific average 
weekly incidence rate thresholds. We then described the distribution of key 
outbreak metrics.
RESULTS: We identified 999 suspected cholera outbreaks in 744 regions across 25 
sub-Saharan African countries. The outbreak periods accounted for 1.8 billion 
person-months (2% of the total during this period) from January 2010 to January 
2020. Among 692 outbreaks reported from second-level administrative units (e.g., 
districts), the median attack rate was 0.8 per 1000 people (interquartile range 
(IQR), 0.3-2.4 per 1000), the median epidemic duration was 13 weeks (IQR, 8-19), 
and the median early outbreak reproductive number was 1.8 (range, 1.1-3.5). 
Larger attack rates were associated with longer times to outbreak peak, longer 
epidemic durations, and lower case fatality risks.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a baseline from which the progress toward 
cholera control and essential statistics to inform outbreak management in 
sub-Saharan Africa can be monitored.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.05.039
PMCID: PMC9439956
PMID: 35605949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests to 
declare.