---
reference_id: "PMID:27658514"
title: "'Non-Criteria' Neurologic Manifestations of Antiphospholipid Syndrome: A Hidden Kingdom to be Discovered."
authors:
- Islam MA
- Alam F
- Kamal MA
- Wong KK
- Sasongko TH
- Gan SH
journal: CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets
year: '2016'
doi: 10.2174/1871527315666160920122750
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 'Non-Criteria' Neurologic Manifestations of Antiphospholipid Syndrome: A Hidden Kingdom to be Discovered.
**Authors:** Islam MA, Alam F, Kamal MA, Wong KK, Sasongko TH, Gan SH
**Journal:** CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets (2016)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1871527315666160920122750](https://doi.org/10.2174/1871527315666160920122750)

## Content

1. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2016;15(10):1253-1265. doi: 
10.2174/1871527315666160920122750.

'Non-Criteria' Neurologic Manifestations of Antiphospholipid Syndrome: A Hidden 
Kingdom to be Discovered.

Islam MA(1), Alam F, Kamal MA, Wong KK, Sasongko TH, Gan SH(2).

Author information:
(1)Human Genome Centre, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 
16150 Kubang Kerian, Kelantan, Malaysia. ayoncx70@yahoo.com.
(2)shgan@usm.my.

Neurological manifestations or disorders associated with the central nervous 
system are among the most common and important clinical characteristics of 
antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). Although in the most recently updated (2006) 
APS classification criteria, the neurological manifestations encompass only 
transient ischemic attack and stroke, diverse 'non-criteria' neurological 
disorders or manifestations (i.e., headache, migraine, bipolar disorder, 
transverse myelitis, dementia, chorea, epileptic seizures, multiple sclerosis, 
psychosis, cognitive impairment, Tourette's syndrome, parkinsonism, dystonia, 
transient global amnesia, obsessive compulsive disorder and leukoencephalopathy) 
have been observed in APS patients. To date, the underlying mechanisms 
responsible for these abnormal neurological manifestations in APS remain 
unclear. In vivo experiments and human observational studies indicate the 
involvement of thrombotic events and/or high titers of antiphospholipid 
antibodies in the neuro-pathogenic cascade of APS. Although different types of 
neurologic manifestations in APS patients have successfully been treated with 
therapies involving anti-thrombotic regimens (i.e., anticoagulants and/or 
platelet antiaggregants), antineuralgic drugs (i.e., antidepressants, 
antipsychotics and antiepileptics) and immunosuppressive drugs alone or in 
combination, evidence-based guidelines for the management of the neurologic 
manifestations of APS remain unavailable. Therefore, further experimental, 
clinical and retrospective studies with larger patient cohorts are warranted to 
elucidate the pathogenic linkage between APS and the central nervous system in 
addition to randomized controlled trials to facilitate the discovery of 
appropriate medications for the 'non-criteria' neurologic manifestations of APS.

DOI: 10.2174/1871527315666160920122750
PMID: 27658514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]