---
reference_id: "PMID:41264765"
title: Cystinuria.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Spasiano A
- Halbritter J
- Ferraro PM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystinuria.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Spasiano A, Halbritter J, Ferraro PM

## Content

1. Cystinuria.

Spasiano A(1), Halbritter J(2), Ferraro PM(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2025 Nov 20.

Author information:
(1)Section of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Università degli studi di
Verona, Verona, Italy
(2)Department of Nephrology and Medical Intensive Care, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Cystinuria is characterized by early-onset and
recurrent kidney stones composed of cystine. Individuals with cystinuria often
present with their first kidney stone in the first two decades of life.
Complications of cystinuria include recurrent urinary tract infections, chronic
kidney disease (CKD), and hypertension. Some individuals develop end-stage
kidney disease.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of cystinuria can be established in a proband
by identification of cystine urinary stones and elevated 24-hour urinary cystine
excretion or identification of biallelic, digenic, or heterozygous pathogenic
variants in SLC3A1 or SLC7A9 by molecular genetic testing in an individual with
suggestive features.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Potassium citrate or potassium bicarbonate to
alkalinize the urine; dietary treatment includes high fluid intake and
low-sodium and low-protein diet; cysteine binding medications including
tiopronin and D-penicillamine. Supportive care: Analgesics for renal colic;
surgical treatment or percutaneous nephrolithotomy with ultrasonic or laser
lithotripsy for kidney stones; antibiotic therapy for recurrent urinary tract
infection; management of CKD; antihypertensive therapy. Surveillance: Thorough
physical exam, 24-hour urine for pH, volume, cystine, sodium, calcium, citrate,
and creatinine excretion every three to six months until stable on treatment and
then every six to 12 months; assessment of urinary-soluble mixed-drug cysteine
disulfides and free cystine by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry as
needed to adjust therapy; kidney and urinary tract ultrasound every six to 12
months; abdominal CT as needed for symptomatic kidney stones; blood creatinine,
albumin-to-creatinine ratio, or 24-hour urine albumin concentration every three
to six months until stable on treatment and then every six to 12 months; daily
at home blood pressure assessment; ambulatory blood pressure assessment every
three to six months until stable on treatment and then every six to 12 months;
24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in those with hypertension; serum
bone markers and dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry scan in adults with frequency
based on bone health and presence of additional risk factors.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Foods containing methionine such as liver,
poultry and horse meat, sardines and tuna in oil, dried cod, and crayfish;
dietary and hair supplements with a high methionine concentration. Evaluation of
relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the status of apparently
asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual by
24-hour urine collection to assess cystine excretion and, in those with elevated
cystine excretion, molecular genetic testing for the familial pathogenic
variant(s) in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit
from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Cystinuria caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC3A1
or SLC7A9 is inherited in an autosomal recessive (AR) manner. Cystinuria caused
by pathogenic variants in both SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 is inherited in a digenic
manner. Cystinuria caused by a heterozygous pathogenic variant in SLC3A1 or
SLC7A9 is inherited in an autosomal dominant (AD) manner. AR inheritance: If
both parents are known to be heterozygous for an SLC3A1 or SLC7A9 pathogenic
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of
inheriting biallelic pathogenic variants and being affected, a 50% chance of
inheriting one pathogenic variant and being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of
inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Digenic inheritance: If
both parents are heterozygous for an SLC3A1 or SLC7A9 pathogenic variant (or if
one parent is heterozygous for pathogenic variants in both SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 and
the other parent has neither of the pathogenic variants), each sib has at
conception a 25% chance of inheriting both pathogenic variants and having
digenic cystinuria, a 50% chance of inheriting one pathogenic variant and being
heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the pathogenic variants.
AD inheritance: Each child of an individual with autosomal dominant cystinuria
has a 50% chance of inheriting an SLC3A1 or SLC7A9 pathogenic variant.
Penetrance in heterozygotes is reduced. Individuals who are heterozygous for an
SLC7A9 pathogenic variant or heterozygous for a specific tandem duplication of
SLC3A1 may have higher levels of urinary cystine excretion and are therefore at
risk of forming cystine stones over a lifetime. If the SLC3A1 and/or SLC7A9
pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member,
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible. Identification of
hyperechoic colon on prenatal ultrasound before 36 weeks' gestation has a high
positive predictive value of cystinuria.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 41264765
