---
reference_id: "PMID:28689740"
title: Clinical presentation and outcome in a series of 32 patients with 2-methylacetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase (MAT) deficiency.
authors:
- Grünert SC
- Schmitt RN
- Schlatter SM
- Gemperle-Britschgi C
- Balcı MC
- Berg V
- Çoker M
- Das AM
- Demirkol M
- Derks TGJ
- Gökçay G
- Uçar SK
- Konstantopoulou V
- Christoph Korenke G
- Lotz-Havla AS
- Schlune A
- Staufner C
- Tran C
- Visser G
- Schwab KO
- Fukao T
- Sass JO
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.06.012
keywords:
- Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/genetics
- "Acetyl-CoA C-Acyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Isoleucine/metabolism
- Ketone Bodies/metabolism
- Male
- Mutation
- Neonatal Screening
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical presentation and outcome in a series of 32 patients with 2-methylacetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase (MAT) deficiency.
**Authors:** Grünert SC, Schmitt RN, Schlatter SM, Gemperle-Britschgi C, Balcı MC, Berg V, Çoker M, Das AM, Demirkol M, Derks TGJ, Gökçay G, Uçar SK, Konstantopoulou V, Christoph Korenke G, Lotz-Havla AS, Schlune A, Staufner C, Tran C, Visser G, Schwab KO, Fukao T, Sass JO
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.06.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.06.012)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2017 Sep;122(1-2):67-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.06.012.
Epub  2017 Jun 27.

Clinical presentation and outcome in a series of 32 patients with
2-methylacetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase (MAT) deficiency.

Grünert SC(1), Schmitt RN(1), Schlatter SM(1), Gemperle-Britschgi C(2), Balcı
MC(3), Berg V(4), Çoker M(5), Das AM(6), Demirkol M(3), Derks TGJ(7), Gökçay
G(3), Uçar SK(5), Konstantopoulou V(8), Christoph Korenke G(9), Lotz-Havla
AS(10), Schlune A(11), Staufner C(12), Tran C(13), Visser G(14), Schwab KO(1),
Fukao T(15), Sass JO(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology,
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Clinical Chemistry & Biochemistry and Children's Research Center, University
Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Pediatric Nutrition and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics,
Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Elbe Kliniken, Stade, Germany.
(5)Metabolism Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Ege University Medical Faculty,
Izmir, Turkey.
(6)University Children's Hospital, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(7)Section of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(9)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Klinikum Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(10)Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(11)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology,
University Children's Hospital, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(12)Department of General Pediatrics, Division of Neuropediatrics and Pediatric
Metabolic Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(13)Center for Molecular Diseases, Divison of Genetic Medicine, Lausanne
University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(14)Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, and
Division of Clinical Genetics, Gifu University Hospital, Gifu, Japan.
(16)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology,
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany;
Clinical Chemistry & Biochemistry and Children's Research Center, University
Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland; Bioanalytics & Biochemistry,
Department of Natural Sciences, University of Applied Sciences, Rheinbach,
Germany. Electronic address: joern.oliver.sass@h-brs.de.

2-methylacetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase (MAT) deficiency, also known as
beta-ketothiolase deficiency, is an inborn error of ketone body utilization and
isoleucine catabolism. It is caused by mutations in the ACAT1 gene and may
present with metabolic ketoacidosis. In order to obtain a more comprehensive
view on this disease, we have collected clinical and biochemical data as well as
information on ACAT1 mutations of 32 patients from 12 metabolic centers in five
countries. Patients were between 23months and 27years old, more than half of
them were offspring of a consanguineous union. 63% of the study participants
presented with a metabolic decompensation while most others were identified via
newborn screening or family studies. In symptomatic patients, age at
manifestation ranged between 5months and 6.8years. Only 7% developed a major
mental disability while the vast majority was cognitively normal. More than one
third of the identified mutations in ACAT1 are intronic mutations which are
expected to disturb splicing. We identified several novel mutations but, in
agreement with previous reports, no clear genotype-phenotype correlation could
be found. Our study underlines that the prognosis in MAT deficiency is good and
MAT deficient individuals may remain asymptomatic, if diagnosed early and
preventive measures are applied.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2017.06.012
PMID: 28689740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
