---
reference_id: "PMID:35482253"
title: Calpains as novel players in the molecular pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxia type 17.
authors:
- Weber JJ
- Anger SC
- Pereira Sena P
- Incebacak Eltemur RD
- Huridou C
- Fath F
- Gross C
- Casadei N
- Riess O
- Nguyen HP
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-022-04274-6
keywords:
- Animals
- "Calpain/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Rats
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/metabolism
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calpains as novel players in the molecular pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxia type 17.
**Authors:** Weber JJ, Anger SC, Pereira Sena P, Incebacak Eltemur RD, Huridou C, Fath F, Gross C, Casadei N, Riess O, Nguyen HP
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-022-04274-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-022-04274-6)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2022 Apr 28;79(5):262. doi: 10.1007/s00018-022-04274-6.

Calpains as novel players in the molecular pathogenesis of spinocerebellar
ataxia type 17.

Weber JJ(#)(1)(2), Anger SC(#)(2), Pereira Sena P(2)(3), Incebacak Eltemur
RD(1)(2), Huridou C(1)(2), Fath F(1)(2), Gross C(2)(4), Casadei N(2)(4), Riess
O(2)(4), Nguyen HP(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150,
44801, Bochum, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen,
72076, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Graduate School of Cellular Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, 72074,
Tübingen, Germany.
(4)NGS Competence Center Tübingen, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150,
44801, Bochum, Germany. huu.nguyen-r7w@rub.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) is a neurodegenerative disease caused by
a polyglutamine-encoding trinucleotide repeat expansion in the gene of
transcription factor TATA box-binding protein (TBP). While its underlying
pathomechanism is elusive, polyglutamine-expanded TBP fragments of unknown
origin mediate the mutant protein's toxicity. Calcium-dependent calpain
proteases are protagonists in neurodegenerative disorders. Here, we demonstrate
that calpains cleave TBP, and emerging C-terminal fragments mislocalize to the
cytoplasm. SCA17 cell and rat models exhibited calpain overactivation, leading
to excessive fragmentation and depletion of neuronal proteins in vivo.
Transcriptome analysis of SCA17 cells revealed synaptogenesis and calcium
signaling perturbations, indicating the potential cause of elevated calpain
activity. Pharmacological or genetic calpain inhibition reduced TBP cleavage and
aggregation, consequently improving cell viability. Our work underlines the
general significance of calpains and their activating pathways in
neurodegenerative disorders and presents these proteases as novel players in the
molecular pathogenesis of SCA17.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-022-04274-6
PMCID: PMC9050766
PMID: 35482253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
