---
reference_id: "PMID:21300747"
title: Altered electroretinograms in patients with KCNJ10 mutations and EAST syndrome.
authors:
- Thompson DA
- Feather S
- Stanescu HC
- Freudenthal B
- Zdebik AA
- Warth R
- Ognjanovic M
- Hulton SA
- Wassmer E
- "van't Hoff W"
- Russell-Eggitt I
- Dobbie A
- Sheridan E
- Kleta R
- Bockenhauer D
journal: J Physiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.198531
keywords:
- "Adaptation, Ocular/physiology"
- Adolescent
- Ataxia/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- Dark Adaptation/physiology
- Electroretinography
- Epilepsy/genetics
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Humans
- Kidney Diseases/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- "Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying/genetics"
- Retina/physiopathology
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
- Kcnj10 Channel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered electroretinograms in patients with KCNJ10 mutations and EAST syndrome.
**Authors:** Thompson DA, Feather S, Stanescu HC, Freudenthal B, Zdebik AA, Warth R, Ognjanovic M, Hulton SA, Wassmer E, van't Hoff W, Russell-Eggitt I, Dobbie A, Sheridan E, Kleta R, Bockenhauer D
**Journal:** J Physiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1113/jphysiol.2010.198531](https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.198531)

## Content

1. J Physiol. 2011 Apr 1;589(Pt 7):1681-9. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.198531.
Epub  2011 Feb 7.

Altered electroretinograms in patients with KCNJ10 mutations and EAST syndrome.

Thompson DA(1), Feather S, Stanescu HC, Freudenthal B, Zdebik AA, Warth R, 
Ognjanovic M, Hulton SA, Wassmer E, van't Hoff W, Russell-Eggitt I, Dobbie A, 
Sheridan E, Kleta R, Bockenhauer D.

Author information:
(1)The Tony Kriss Visual Electrophysiology Unit, Clinical and Academic 
Department of Ophthalmology, Great Ormond Street Hospital/University College 
London, London WC1 N3JH, UK. thomp1@gosh.nhs.uk

The K+ channel expressed by the KCNJ10 gene (Kir4.1) has previously demonstrated 
importance in retinal function in animal experiments. Recently, mutations in 
KCNJ10 were recognised as pathogenic in man, causing a constellation of 
symptoms, including epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness and a renal 
tubulopathy designated as EAST syndrome. We have studied the impact of KCNJ10 
mutations on the human electroretinogram (ERG) in four unrelated patients with 
EAST syndrome. Corneal ganzfeld ERGs were elicited in response to flash stimuli 
of strengths of 0.001–10 phot cd s/m2 presented scotopically, and 0.3–10 phot cd 
s/m2 presented photopically. ERG waveforms from light-adapted retinae of all 
patients showed reduced amplitudes of the photopic negative response (PhNR) (P < 
0.001). The photopic ERGs showed a delay in b-wave time to peak, but the 
photopic hill, i.e. the relative variation of time to peak and amplitude with 
luminance flash strength, was preserved. Scotopic ERGs to flash strengths 0.01 
to 0.1 phot cd s/m2 showed a delay of up to 20 ms before the onset of the b-wave 
in two patients compared to controls. Stimulus–response functions were fitted by 
Michaelis–Menten equations and showed significantly lower retinal sensitivity in 
two patients than in controls (P < 0.001). Our study for the first time in the 
human ERG shows changes in association with KCNJ10 mutations affecting a Muller 
cell K+ channel. These data illustrate the role of KCNJ10 function in the 
physiology of proximal and possibly also the distal human retina.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.198531
PMCID: PMC3099023
PMID: 21300747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]