---
reference_id: "PMID:23307876"
title: "Genetics and outcome of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome: a nationwide French series comparing children and adults."
authors:
- Fremeaux-Bacchi V
- Fakhouri F
- Garnier A
- Bienaimé F
- Dragon-Durey MA
- Ngo S
- Moulin B
- Servais A
- Provot F
- Rostaing L
- Burtey S
- Niaudet P
- Deschênes G
- Lebranchu Y
- Zuber J
- Loirat C
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.04760512
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Complement System Proteins/genetics
- Female
- France/epidemiology
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Genetic Predisposition to Disease/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Genetic Testing/statistics & numerical data"
- "Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome/genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- Prognosis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics and outcome of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome: a nationwide French series comparing children and adults.
**Authors:** Fremeaux-Bacchi V, Fakhouri F, Garnier A, Bienaimé F, Dragon-Durey MA, Ngo S, Moulin B, Servais A, Provot F, Rostaing L, Burtey S, Niaudet P, Deschênes G, Lebranchu Y, Zuber J, Loirat C
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.04760512](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.04760512)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 Apr;8(4):554-62. doi: 10.2215/CJN.04760512. Epub 
2013 Jan 10.

Genetics and outcome of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome: a nationwide French 
series comparing children and adults.

Fremeaux-Bacchi V(1), Fakhouri F, Garnier A, Bienaimé F, Dragon-Durey MA, Ngo S, 
Moulin B, Servais A, Provot F, Rostaing L, Burtey S, Niaudet P, Deschênes G, 
Lebranchu Y, Zuber J, Loirat C.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Immunologie Biologique, Hôpital Europeén Georges Pompidou, 20-40 
rue Leblanc, Paris cedex 15, France. veronique.fremeaux-bacchi@egp.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare 
complement-mediated kidney disease that was first recognized in children but 
also affects adults. This study assessed the disease presentation and outcome in 
a nationwide cohort of patients with aHUS according to the age at onset and the 
underlying complement abnormalities.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: A total of 214 patients with aHUS 
were enrolled between 2000 and 2008 and screened for mutations in the six 
susceptibility factors for aHUS and for anti-factor H antibodies.
RESULTS: Onset of aHUS occurred as frequently during adulthood (58.4%) as during 
childhood (41.6%). The percentages of patients who developed the disease were 
23%, 40%, 70%, and 98% by age 2, 18, 40, and 60 years, respectively. Mortality 
was higher in children than in adults (6.7% versus 0.8% at 1 year) (P=0.02), but 
progression to ESRD after the first aHUS episode was more frequent in adults 
(46% versus 16%; P<0.001). Sixty-one percent of patients had mutations in their 
complement genes. The renal outcome was not significantly different in adults 
regardless of genetic background. Only membrane cofactor protein (MCP) and 
undetermined aHUS were less severe in children than adults. The frequency of 
relapse after 1 year was 92% in children with MCP-associated HUS and 
approximately 30% in all other subgroups.
CONCLUSION: Mortality rate was higher in children than adults with aHUS, but 
renal prognosis was worse in adults than children. In children, the prognosis 
strongly depends on the genetic background.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.04760512
PMCID: PMC3613948
PMID: 23307876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]