---
reference_id: "PMID:2314964"
title: "Screening for biotinidase deficiency in newborns: worldwide experience."
authors:
- Wolf B
- Heard GS
journal: Pediatrics
year: '1990'
keywords:
- Amidohydrolases/deficiency
- Biotinidase
- Canada
- Europe
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn/blood"
- Japan
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/prevention & control"
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- "Phenylketonurias/prevention & control"
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening for biotinidase deficiency in newborns: worldwide experience.
**Authors:** Wolf B, Heard GS
**Journal:** Pediatrics (1990)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 1990 Apr;85(4):512-7.

Screening for biotinidase deficiency in newborns: worldwide experience.

Wolf B(1), Heard GS.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Human Genetics, Medical College of Virginia, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond 23298-0033.

Between January 24, 1984, and December 31, 1988, 29 screening programs for 
biotinidase deficiency in newborns were established in 12 countries, and 
4,396,834 newborns were screened. The worldwide incidence is based on screening 
programs in Australia, Austria, Canada, Italy, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, 
Scotland, Spain, Switzerland, The United States, and West Germany. Biotinidase 
deficiency was detected in 72 newborns; 32 had profound biotinidase deficiency 
(less than 10% of mean normal activity level) and 40 had partial deficiency (10% 
to 30% of mean normal activity level). The combined incidence of profound and 
partial deficiency was 1 case per 61,067 live births (1:49 500 to 1:79 544; 95% 
confidence interval), the estimated frequency of the recessive allele was 
0.0040, and the frequency of heterozygosity was estimated to be 1:123. Profound 
deficiency occurred in 1 per 137,401 live births (1:109,300 to 1:211,200), and 
partial deficiency in 1 per 109,921 live births (1:86,600 to 1:159,700). Most 
available parents of children with profound and partial deficiency had 
biotinidase activity levels intermediate between zero and mean normal activity 
levels. Six children with profound deficiency were symptomatic at, or soon 
after, the time of diagnosis; no infant with partial deficiency has become 
symptomatic, but little is known about the natural history of infants with 
partial deficiency. Most children whose biotinidase deficiency was detected by 
newborn screening were white, one was black, and one Hispanic; biotinidase 
deficiency has not been detected in Oriental children. Although 8 pilot programs 
have terminated, 21 will continue either indefinitely or until predetermined 
targets are reached, and 3 new programs were scheduled to begin in January 
1989.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2314964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]