---
reference_id: "PMID:36285978"
title: "Nasal Nitric Oxide Levels: Improving the Diagnosis of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia in Puerto Rico."
authors:
- De Jesús-Rojas W
- Alvarado-Huerta F
- Meléndez-Montañez JM
- Muñiz-Hernández J
- Santos-López A
- Mosquera RA
journal: Adv Respir Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/arm90050050
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nasal Nitric Oxide Levels: Improving the Diagnosis of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia in Puerto Rico.
**Authors:** De Jesús-Rojas W, Alvarado-Huerta F, Meléndez-Montañez JM, Muñiz-Hernández J, Santos-López A, Mosquera RA
**Journal:** Adv Respir Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/arm90050050](https://doi.org/10.3390/arm90050050)

## Content

1. Adv Respir Med. 2022 Sep 26;90(5):399-406. doi: 10.3390/arm90050050.

Nasal Nitric Oxide Levels: Improving the Diagnosis of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia 
in Puerto Rico.

De Jesús-Rojas W(1)(2), Alvarado-Huerta F(1), Meléndez-Montañez JM(2), 
Muñiz-Hernández J(3), Santos-López A(2), Mosquera RA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics-Anatomy and Neuroanatomy, University of Puerto Rico, 
Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR 00921, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Basic Science, Ponce Health Science University, 
Ponce, PR 00716, USA.
(3)Department of Natural Science, University of Puerto Rico, Cayey Campus, 
Cayey, PR 00736, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, McGovern Medical School, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare genetic disease characterized by 
motile cilia dysfunction with a prevalence of 1 in 16,309 individuals in 
Hispanic populations. In Puerto Rico, the prevalence of PCD is unknown. 
Diagnosis of PCD in Puerto Rico is challenging due to the lack of diagnostic 
technology. Algorithms for PCD diagnosis include clinical history, genetic 
testing, ciliary biopsy, and nasal Nitric Oxide (nNO) levels. For the first 
time, this study successfully implemented and measured the nNO levels in 
subjects with the RSPH4A (c.921+3_921+6del (intronic)) as a diagnostic tool to 
complement the current algorithm for PCD diagnosis on the island. The nNO level 
differentiated homozygous subjects with PCD due to the RSPH4A (c.921+3_921+6del 
(intronic)) founder mutation compared to healthy gender-age matched controls and 
subjects with VUS or negative genetic testing for PCD. The acquisition of 
state-of-the-art diagnostic tools such as nNO positively impacted and expanded 
our current PCD diagnostic capabilities in Puerto Rico for our founder genetic 
mutation. The addition of nNO technology promotes earlier disease screening and 
recognition for patients with PCD on the island. The access to nNO helped us to 
properly characterize the PCD diagnosis for patients with the RSPH4A 
(c.921+3_921+6del (intronic)). As a result, our findings will allow us to be 
part of the national PCD foundation registry and represent Puerto Rican 
Hispanics in future PCD multicentric clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3390/arm90050050
PMCID: PMC9717333
PMID: 36285978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.