---
reference_id: "PMID:22301032"
title: "Pediatric systemic lupus erythematosus: more than a positive antinuclear antibody."
authors:
- Weiss JE
journal: Pediatr Rev
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1542/pir.33-2-62
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric systemic lupus erythematosus: more than a positive antinuclear antibody.
**Authors:** Weiss JE
**Journal:** Pediatr Rev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1542/pir.33-2-62](https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.33-2-62)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rev. 2012 Feb;33(2):62-73; quiz 74. doi: 10.1542/pir.33-2-62.

Pediatric systemic lupus erythematosus: more than a positive antinuclear 
antibody.

Weiss JE(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New Jersey Medical 
School, Newark, NJ, USA.

Based on strong research evidence and consensus, the most common disease 
manifestations at diagnosis of pSLE are constitutional symptoms, arthritis, and 
malar rash. Based on some research evidence and consensus, patients with pSLE 
tend to have major organ system involvement (renal/central nervous system) and a 
greater disease burden compared with adults. Despite these findings, mortality 
is low. Based on some research evidence and consensus, the diagnosis of pSLE is 
unlikely if the ANA is negative, and most patients with SLE have a positive ANA 
at a titer ≥1:160. Based on strong research evidence, both MMF and 
cyclophosphamide can be used for induction therapy in class III and IV lupus 
nephritis. Based on strong research evidence, patients with SLE and 
anticardiolipin antibodies or LA have a two and six times greater risk of venous 
thrombosis, respectively, compared with patients with SLE without 
antiphospholipid antibodies. Based on strong research evidence, patients with 
pSLE have a higher risk for subclinical atherosclerosis when there is 
weight-adjusted prednisone use, azathioprine use, increasing age, male gender, 
high BMI, abnormal creatinine clearance, and elevated lipoprotein(a) levels.

DOI: 10.1542/pir.33-2-62
PMID: 22301032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]