---
reference_id: "PMID:26583316"
title: Deep clinical and neuropathological phenotyping of Pick disease.
authors:
- Irwin DJ
- Brettschneider J
- McMillan CT
- Cooper F
- Olm C
- Arnold SE
- Van Deerlin VM
- Seeley WW
- Miller BL
- Lee EB
- Lee VM
- Grossman M
- Trojanowski JQ
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ana.24559
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep clinical and neuropathological phenotyping of Pick disease.
**Authors:** Irwin DJ, Brettschneider J, McMillan CT, Cooper F, Olm C, Arnold SE, Van Deerlin VM, Seeley WW, Miller BL, Lee EB, Lee VM, Grossman M, Trojanowski JQ
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.24559](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.24559)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2016 Feb;79(2):272-87. doi: 10.1002/ana.24559. Epub 2015 Dec 25.

Deep clinical and neuropathological phenotyping of Pick disease.

Irwin DJ(1)(2), Brettschneider J(3), McMillan CT(1), Cooper F(1)(2), Olm C(1), 
Arnold SE(4), Van Deerlin VM(2), Seeley WW(5), Miller BL(5), Lee EB(2)(6), Lee 
VM(2), Grossman M(1), Trojanowski JQ(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Pennsylvania Frontotemporal Degeneration Center, Department of 
Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Herford Hospital, Herford, Germany.
(4)Brain-Behavior Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(5)Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(6)Translational Neuropathology Research Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize sequential patterns of regional neuropathology and 
clinical symptoms in a well-characterized cohort of 21 patients with 
autopsy-confirmed Pick disease.
METHODS: Detailed neuropathological examination using 70μm and traditional 6μm 
sections was performed using thioflavin-S staining and immunohistochemistry for 
phosphorylated tau, 3R and 4R tau isoforms, ubiquitin, and C-terminally 
truncated tau. Patterns of regional tau deposition were correlated with clinical 
data. In a subset of cases (n = 5), converging evidence was obtained using 
antemortem neuroimaging measures of gray and white matter integrity.
RESULTS: Four sequential patterns of pathological tau deposition were identified 
starting in frontotemporal limbic/paralimbic and neocortical regions (phase I). 
Sequential involvement was seen in subcortical structures, including basal 
ganglia, locus coeruleus, and raphe nuclei (phase II), followed by primary motor 
cortex and precerebellar nuclei (phase III) and finally visual cortex in the 
most severe (phase IV) cases. Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia was the 
predominant clinical phenotype (18 of 21), but all patients eventually developed 
a social comportment disorder. Pathological tau phases reflected the evolution 
of clinical symptoms and degeneration on serial antemortem neuroimaging, 
directly correlated with disease duration and inversely correlated with brain 
weight at autopsy. The majority of neuronal and glial tau inclusions were 3R 
tau-positive and 4R tau-negative in sporadic cases. There was a relative 
abundance of mature tau pathology markers in frontotemporal limbic/paralimbic 
regions compared to neocortical regions.
INTERPRETATION: Pick disease tau neuropathology may originate in 
limbic/paralimbic cortices. The patterns of tau pathology observed here provide 
novel insights into the natural history and biology of tau-mediated 
neurodegeneration.

© 2015 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.24559
PMCID: PMC4755803
PMID: 26583316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Conflicts of Interest The authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.