---
reference_id: "PMID:24672032"
title: Reduction of microRNA 122 expression in IFNL3 CT/TT carriers and during progression of fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C.
authors:
- Estrabaud E
- Lapalus M
- Broët P
- Appourchaux K
- De Muynck S
- Lada O
- Martinot-Peignoux M
- Bièche I
- Valla D
- Bedossa P
- Marcellin P
- Vidaud M
- Asselah T
journal: J Virol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.00016-14
keywords:
- Alanine Transaminase/blood
- Aspartate Aminotransferases/blood
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Genotype
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/complications, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Interferon alpha-2
- Interferon-alpha/therapeutic use
- Interferons
- Interleukins/genetics
- Linear Models
- "Liver Cirrhosis/etiology, metabolism"
- MicroRNAs/metabolism
- Polyethylene Glycols/therapeutic use
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Recombinant Proteins/therapeutic use
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Ribavirin/therapeutic use
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
- Viral Load
- Interferon Lambda
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduction of microRNA 122 expression in IFNL3 CT/TT carriers and during progression of fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C.
**Authors:** Estrabaud E, Lapalus M, Broët P, Appourchaux K, De Muynck S, Lada O, Martinot-Peignoux M, Bièche I, Valla D, Bedossa P, Marcellin P, Vidaud M, Asselah T
**Journal:** J Virol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.00016-14](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00016-14)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(11):6394-402. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00016-14. Epub 2014 Mar
26.

Reduction of microRNA 122 expression in IFNL3 CT/TT carriers and during
progression of fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C.

Estrabaud E(1), Lapalus M, Broët P, Appourchaux K, De Muynck S, Lada O,
Martinot-Peignoux M, Bièche I, Valla D, Bedossa P, Marcellin P, Vidaud M,
Asselah T.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, UMR1149, Team Physiopathology and Treatment of Viral Hepatitis,
Centre de Recherche sur l'Inflammation, BP 416, Paris, France.

The microRNA miR-122 is highly expressed in the liver and stimulates hepatitis C
virus (HCV) replication in vitro. IFNL3 (lambda-3 interferon gene) polymorphisms
and the expression of miR-122 have been associated with sustained virological
response (SVR) to treatment with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin in patients
with chronic hepatitis C (CHC). We investigated, in vivo, the relationship
between miR-122 expression, IFNL3 polymorphism, fibrosis, and response to
PEG-IFN plus ribavirin. Pretreatment liver biopsy specimens and serum samples
from 133 patients with CHC were included. Sixty-six patients achieved SVR, and
64 failed to respond to the treatment (43 nonresponders [NR] and 21 relapsers
[RR]). All stages of fibrosis were represented, with 39, 50, 23, and 19
patients, respectively, having Metavir scores of F1, F2, F3, and F4. miR-122
expression was assessed by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and IFNL3
rs12979860 by direct sequencing. Hepatic miR-122 expression was higher in
patients with the IFNL3 CC genotype than in those with the IFNL3 CT or TT
genotype, in all patients (P = 0.025), and in NRs plus RRs (P = 0.013).
Increased hepatic miR-122 was more strongly associated with complete early
virological response (cEVR) (P = 0.003) than with SVR (P = 0.016). In
multivariate analysis, increased hepatic miR-122 was only associated with the
IFNL3 CC genotype. miR-122 was decreased in patients with advanced fibrosis
(Metavir scores of F3 and F4) compared to its levels in patients with mild and
moderate fibrosis (F1 and F2) (P = 0.01). Serum and hepatic expression of
miR-122 were not associated. The association between miR-122 and IFNL3 was
stronger than the association between miR-122 and response to treatment. miR-122
may play a role in the early viral decline that is dependent on IFNL3 and the
innate immune response.
IMPORTANCE: miR-122 plays a crucial role during HCV infection. Moreover, it was
reported that miR-122 binding within the HCV genome stimulates its replication.
Moreover, miR-122 is highly expressed within hepatocytes, where it regulates
many cellular pathways. A reduction of miR-122 expression has been suggested to
be associated with responsiveness to IFN-based therapy in patients with chronic
hepatitis C. Several independent genome-wide association studies reported a
strong association between IFNL3 polymorphism and responsiveness to IFN-based
therapy. We report here a strong association between the expression of miR-122
and IFNL3 polymorphism that is independent of the response to the treatment. Our
data suggest that modification of miR-122 expression may play an important role
in the molecular mechanism associated with IFNL3 polymorphism. Moreover, we
report a reduction of miR-122 at more advanced stages of fibrosis in patients
with chronic hepatitis C.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00016-14
PMCID: PMC4093870
PMID: 24672032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
