---
reference_id: "PMID:20887963"
title: Human male infertility associated with mutations in NR5A1 encoding steroidogenic factor 1.
authors:
- Bashamboo A
- Ferraz-de-Souza B
- Lourenço D
- Lin L
- Sebire NJ
- Montjean D
- Bignon-Topalovic J
- Mandelbaum J
- Siffroi JP
- Christin-Maitre S
- Radhakrishna U
- Rouba H
- Ravel C
- Seeler J
- Achermann JC
- McElreavey K
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.09.009
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- France
- Humans
- "Infertility, Male/genetics"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Spermatogenesis/genetics
- Steroidogenic Factor 1/genetics
- Transcriptional Activation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human male infertility associated with mutations in NR5A1 encoding steroidogenic factor 1.
**Authors:** Bashamboo A, Ferraz-de-Souza B, Lourenço D, Lin L, Sebire NJ, Montjean D, Bignon-Topalovic J, Mandelbaum J, Siffroi JP, Christin-Maitre S, Radhakrishna U, Rouba H, Ravel C, Seeler J, Achermann JC, McElreavey K
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.09.009)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Oct 8;87(4):505-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.09.009.

Human male infertility associated with mutations in NR5A1 encoding steroidogenic 
factor 1.

Bashamboo A(1), Ferraz-de-Souza B, Lourenço D, Lin L, Sebire NJ, Montjean D, 
Bignon-Topalovic J, Mandelbaum J, Siffroi JP, Christin-Maitre S, Radhakrishna U, 
Rouba H, Ravel C, Seeler J, Achermann JC, McElreavey K.

Author information:
(1)Human Developmental Genetics, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris, France. 
anu.bashamboo@pasteur.fr

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov 12;87(5):736.

One in seven couples worldwide are infertile, and male factor infertility 
accounts for approximately 30%-50% of these cases. Although many genes are known 
to be essential for gametogenesis, there are surprisingly few monogenic 
mutations that have been conclusively demonstrated to cause human spermatogenic 
failure. A nuclear receptor, NR5A1 (also called steroidogenic factor 1), is a 
key transcriptional regulator of genes involved in the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-steroidogenic axis, and it is expressed in the 
steroidogenic tissue of the developing and adult human gonad. Mutations of NR5A1 
have been reported in 46,XY disorders of sex development and in 46,XX primary 
ovarian insufficiency. To test the hypothesis that mutations in NR5A1 cause male 
infertility, we sequenced NR5A1 in 315 men with idiopathic spermatogenic 
failure. We identified seven men with severe spermatogenic failure who carried 
missense mutations in NR5A1. Functional studies indicated that these mutations 
impaired NR5A1 transactivational activity. We did not observe these mutations in 
more than 4000 control alleles, including the entire coding sequence of 359 
normospermic men and 370 fertile male controls. NR5A1 mutations are found in 
approximately 4% of men with otherwise unexplained severe spermatogenic failure.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.09.009
PMCID: PMC2948805
PMID: 20887963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]