---
reference_id: "PMID:29867948"
title: "\"Immune TOR-opathies,\" a Novel Disease Entity in Clinical Immunology."
authors:
- Jung S
- Gámez-Díaz L
- Proietti M
- Grimbacher B
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00966
content_type: abstract_only
---

# "Immune TOR-opathies," a Novel Disease Entity in Clinical Immunology.
**Authors:** Jung S, Gámez-Díaz L, Proietti M, Grimbacher B
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2018.00966](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.00966)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2018 May 9;9:966. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00966. eCollection 
2018.

"Immune TOR-opathies," a Novel Disease Entity in Clinical Immunology.

Jung S(1)(2)(3), Gámez-Díaz L(3), Proietti M(3), Grimbacher B(3).

Author information:
(1)CNRS, UPR 3572 (I2CT), Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IBMC), 
Strasbourg, France.
(2)Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Pôle de Médecine et de Chirurgie 
Bucco-Dentaires, Strasbourg - Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Chirurgie 
Dentaire, Strasbourg, France.
(3)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency (CCI), Medical Center - Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) represent a group of mostly monogenic 
disorders caused by loss- or gain-of-function mutations in over 340 known genes 
that lead to abnormalities in the development and/or the function of the immune 
system. However, mutations in different genes can affect the same cell-signaling 
pathway and result in overlapping clinical phenotypes. In particular, mutations 
in the genes encoding for members of the phosphoinositide3-kinase 
(PI3K)/AKT/mTOR/S6 kinase (S6K) signaling cascade or for molecules interacting 
with this pathway have been associated with different PIDs that are often 
characterized by the coexistence of both immune deficiency and autoimmunity. The 
serine/threonine kinase mechanistic/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), which 
acts downstream of PI3K and AKT, is emerging as a key regulator of immune 
responses. It integrates a variety of signals from the microenvironment to 
control cell growth, proliferation, and metabolism. mTOR plays therefore a 
central role in the regulation of immune cells' differentiation and functions. 
Here, we review the different PIDs that share an impairment of the 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR/S6K pathway and we propose to name them "immune TOR-opathies" by 
analogy with a group of neurological disorders that has been originally defined 
by PB Crino and that are due to aberrant mTOR signaling (1). A better 
understanding of the role played by this complex intracellular cascade in the 
pathophysiology of "immune TOR-opathies" is crucial to develop targeted 
therapies.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00966
PMCID: PMC5954032
PMID: 29867948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]