---
reference_id: "PMID:25724524"
title: Contribution of Beta-HPV Infection and UV Damage to Rapid-Onset Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma during BRAF-Inhibition Therapy.
authors:
- Cohen DN
- Lawson SK
- Shaver AC
- Du L
- Nguyen HP
- He Q
- Johnson DB
- Lumbang WA
- Moody BR
- Prescott JL
- Chandra PK
- Boyd AS
- Zwerner JP
- Robbins JB
- Tyring SK
- Rady PL
- Chappell JD
- Shyr Y
- Infante JR
- Sosman JA
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2667
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Carcinogenesis/genetics, radiation effects"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/complications, genetics, physiopathology, virology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Indoles/administration & dosage"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Papillomaviridae/genetics, pathogenicity"
- "Papillomavirus Infections/complications, genetics, physiopathology, virology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Skin Neoplasms/complications, genetics, physiopathology, virology"
- "Sulfonamides/administration & dosage"
- Ultraviolet Rays
- Vemurafenib
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of Beta-HPV Infection and UV Damage to Rapid-Onset Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma during BRAF-Inhibition Therapy.
**Authors:** Cohen DN, Lawson SK, Shaver AC, Du L, Nguyen HP, He Q, Johnson DB, Lumbang WA, Moody BR, Prescott JL, Chandra PK, Boyd AS, Zwerner JP, Robbins JB, Tyring SK, Rady PL, Chappell JD, Shyr Y, Infante JR, Sosman JA
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2667](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2667)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 1;21(11):2624-34. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2667.  Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Contribution of Beta-HPV Infection and UV Damage to Rapid-Onset Cutaneous
Squamous Cell Carcinoma during BRAF-Inhibition Therapy.

Cohen DN(1), Lawson SK(2), Shaver AC(2), Du L(3), Nguyen HP(4), He Q(4), Johnson
DB(3), Lumbang WA(5), Moody BR(6), Prescott JL(7), Chandra PK(7), Boyd AS(8),
Zwerner JP(9), Robbins JB(10), Tyring SK(4), Rady PL(4), Chappell JD(2), Shyr
Y(3), Infante JR(11), Sosman JA(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee. cohen.daniel@mayo.edu.
(2)Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center and Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville,
Tennessee.
(4)University of Texas, Department of Dermatology, Houston, Texas.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Dermatology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(6)Heritage Medical Associates, Nashville, Tennessee.
(7)PathGroup, Nashville, Tennessee.
(8)Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee. Department of Medicine, Division of
Dermatology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
Pathology Consultants of America, Columbia, Tennessee.
(9)Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee. Department of Medicine, Division of
Dermatology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(10)Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee. Department of Medicine, Division of
Dermatology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
Pathology Associates of St. Thomas, Nashville, Tennessee.
(11)Sarah Cannon Research Institute, Nashville, Tennessee.

PURPOSE: BRAF-inhibition (BRAFi) therapy for advanced melanoma carries a high
rate of secondary cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) and risk of other
cancers. UV radiation and α-genus human papillomavirus (HPV) are highly
associated with SCC, but a novel role for β-genus HPV is suspected in
BRAFi-cSCC. Cutaneous β-HPV may act in concert with host and environmental
factors in BRAFi-cSCC.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Primary BRAFi-cSCC tissue DNA isolated from patients
receiving vemurafenib or dabrafenib from two cancer centers was analyzed for the
presence of cutaneous oncogenic viruses and host genetic mutations. Diagnostic
specimens underwent consensus dermatopathology review. Clinical parameters for
UV exposure and disease course were statistically analyzed in conjunction with
histopathology.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine patients contributed 69 BRAFi-cSCC lesions. BRAFi-cSCC had
wart-like features (BRAFi-cSCC-WF) in 22% of specimens. During vemurafenib
therapy, BRAFi-cSCC-WF arose 11.6 weeks more rapidly than conventional cSCC when
controlled for gender and UV exposure (P value = 0.03). Among all BRAFi-cSCC,
β-genus HPV-17, HPV-38, HPV-111 were most frequently isolated, and novel β-HPV
genotypes were discovered (CTR, CRT-11, CRT-22). Sequencing revealed 63% of
evaluated BRAFi-cSCCs harbored RAS mutations with PIK3CA, CKIT, ALK, and EGFR
mutations also detected.
CONCLUSIONS: We examined clinical, histopathologic, viral, and genetic
parameters in BRAFi-cSCC demonstrating rapid onset; wart-like histomorphology;
β-HPV-17, HPV-38, and HPV-111 infection; UV damage; and novel ALK and CKIT
mutations. Discovered β-HPV genotypes expand the spectrum of tumor-associated
viruses. These findings enhance our understanding of factors cooperating with
BRAF inhibition that accelerate keratinocyte oncogenesis as well as broaden the
knowledge base of multifactorial mediators of cancer in general.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2667
PMCID: PMC4452444
PMID: 25724524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
