---
reference_id: "PMID:30269306"
title: Chinese clinical practice guidelines for acute infectious diarrhea in children.
authors:
- Chen J
- Wan CM
- Gong ST
- Fang F
- Sun M
- Qian Y
- Huang Y
- Wang BX
- Xu CD
- Ye LY
- Dong M
- Jin Y
- Huang ZH
- Wu QB
- Zhu CM
- Fang YH
- Zhu QR
- Dong YS
journal: World J Pediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12519-018-0190-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chinese clinical practice guidelines for acute infectious diarrhea in children.
**Authors:** Chen J, Wan CM, Gong ST, Fang F, Sun M, Qian Y, Huang Y, Wang BX, Xu CD, Ye LY, Dong M, Jin Y, Huang ZH, Wu QB, Zhu CM, Fang YH, Zhu QR, Dong YS
**Journal:** World J Pediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12519-018-0190-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12519-018-0190-2)

## Content

1. World J Pediatr. 2018 Oct;14(5):429-436. doi: 10.1007/s12519-018-0190-2. Epub 
2018 Sep 29.

Chinese clinical practice guidelines for acute infectious diarrhea in children.

Chen J(1), Wan CM(2), Gong ST(3), Fang F(4), Sun M(5), Qian Y(6), Huang Y(7), 
Wang BX(8), Xu CD(9), Ye LY(10), Dong M(11), Jin Y(12), Huang ZH(4), Wu QB(13), 
Zhu CM(14), Fang YH(15), Zhu QR(16), Dong YS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310051, China. hzcjie@zju.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, 610041, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical 
Center, Guangzhou, 510623, China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital Affiliated to Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, 110004, China.
(6)Laboratory of Virology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Etiology of Viral Diseases 
in Children, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, 100020, China.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
Shanghai 201102, China.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, 710038, China.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai, 350025, China.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Fuzhou East Hospital, Fuzhou, 350025, China.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, 
100730, China.
(12)Department of Gastroenterology, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210008, China.
(13)Department of Gastroenterology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, 
Suzhou, 215003, China.
(14)Department of Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400014, China.
(15)Department of Gastroenterology, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310051, China.
(16)Department of Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
Shanghai, 201102, China.

BACKGROUND: The guidelines addressed the evidence-based indications for the 
management of children with acute infectious diarrhea in Chinese pediatric 
population.
DATA SOURCES: The experts group of evidence development put forward clinical 
problems, collects evidence, forms preliminary recommendations, and then uses 
open-ended discussions to form recommendations. The literature review was done 
for developing this guideline in databases including PubMed, Cochrane, EMBASE, 
China Biomedical Database, and Chinese Journal Full-text Database up to June 
2013. Search the topic "acute diarrhea" or "enteritis" and "adolescent" or 
"child" or "Pediatric patient" or "Baby" or "Infant".
RESULTS: For the treatment of mild, moderate dehydration, hypotonic oral 
rehydration solutions (ORS) are strongly recommended. Intravenous (IV) 
rehydration is recommended for severe dehydration, with a mixture of 
alkali-containing dextrose sodium solution. Nasogastric feeding tube rehydration 
is used for children with severe dehydration without IV infusion conditions with 
ORS solution. Regular feeding should resume as soon as possible after oral 
rehydration or IV rehydration. The lactose-free diet can shorten the diarrhea 
duration. Zinc supplements are recommended in children with acute infectious 
diarrhea. Saccharomyces boulardii and Lactobacillus Rhamnus are recommended to 
be used in acute watery diarrhea. Saccharomyces boulardii is recommended in 
children with antibiotic-associated diarrhea as well. Montmorillonite and 
Racecadotril (acetorphan) can improve the symptoms of diarrhea or shorten the 
course of acute watery diarrhea. Antibiotics are recommended with 
dysenteric-like diarrhea, suspected cholera with severe dehydration, 
immunodeficiency, and premature delivery children with chronic underlying 
disease; otherwise, antibiotics are not recommended.
CONCLUSION: The principles of the most controversial treatments with of acute 
infectious disease are reaching to a consensus in China.

DOI: 10.1007/s12519-018-0190-2
PMID: 30269306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]