---
reference_id: "PMID:38672561"
title: "Bevacizumab Treatment for Patients with NF2-Related Schwannomatosis: A Single Center Experience."
authors:
- Douwes JPJ
- Hensen EF
- Jansen JC
- Gelderblom H
- Schopman JE
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16081479
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bevacizumab Treatment for Patients with NF2-Related Schwannomatosis: A Single Center Experience.
**Authors:** Douwes JPJ, Hensen EF, Jansen JC, Gelderblom H, Schopman JE
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16081479](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16081479)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Apr 12;16(8):1479. doi: 10.3390/cancers16081479.

Bevacizumab Treatment for Patients with NF2-Related Schwannomatosis: A Single 
Center Experience.

Douwes JPJ(1), Hensen EF(1), Jansen JC(1), Gelderblom H(2), Schopman JE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Leiden University 
Medical Center, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA 
Leiden, The Netherlands.

(1) Background: NF2-related schwannomatosis, characterized by the development of 
bilateral vestibular schwannomas, often necessitates varied treatment 
approaches. Bevacizumab, though widely utilized, demonstrates variable 
effectiveness on hearing and tumor growth. At the same time, (serious) adverse 
events have been frequently reported. (2) Methods: A single center retrospective 
study was conducted, on NF2-related schwannomatosis patients treated with 
bevacizumab from 2013 to 2023, with the aim to assess treatment-related and 
clinical outcomes. Outcomes of interest comprised hearing, radiologic response, 
symptoms, and adverse events. (3) Results: Seventeen patients received 7.5 mg/kg 
bevacizumab for 7.1 months. Following treatment, 40% of the patients experienced 
hearing improvement, 53%, stable hearing, and 7%, hearing loss. Vestibular 
schwannoma regression occurred in 31%, and 69% remained stable. Further 
symptomatic improvement was reported by 41%, stable symptoms by 47%, and 
worsened symptoms by 12%. Treatment discontinuation due to adverse events was 
observed in 29% of cases. Hypertension (82%) and fatigue (29%) were most 
frequently reported, with no occurrences of grade 4/5 toxicities. (4) 
Conclusion: Supporting previous studies, bevacizumab demonstrated positive 
effects on hearing, tumor control, and symptoms in NF2-related schwannomatosis, 
albeit with common adverse events. Therefore, careful consideration of an 
appropriate management strategy is warranted.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16081479
PMCID: PMC11047890
PMID: 38672561

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.