---
reference_id: "PMID:11524702"
title: Mutations in a novel gene with transmembrane domains underlie Usher syndrome type 3.
authors:
- Joensuu T
- Hämäläinen R
- Yuan B
- Johnson C
- Tegelberg S
- Gasparini P
- Zelante L
- Pirvola U
- Pakarinen L
- Lehesjoki AE
- de la Chapelle A
- Sankila EM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/323610
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3/genetics"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Contig Mapping
- Deafness/genetics
- Expressed Sequence Tags
- Female
- Finland
- Founder Effect
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- Haplotypes/genetics
- Humans
- Linkage Disequilibrium/genetics
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis, genetics"
- Retina/metabolism
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in a novel gene with transmembrane domains underlie Usher syndrome type 3.
**Authors:** Joensuu T, Hämäläinen R, Yuan B, Johnson C, Tegelberg S, Gasparini P, Zelante L, Pirvola U, Pakarinen L, Lehesjoki AE, de la Chapelle A, Sankila EM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/323610](https://doi.org/10.1086/323610)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Oct;69(4):673-84. doi: 10.1086/323610. Epub 2001 Aug 27.

Mutations in a novel gene with transmembrane domains underlie Usher syndrome 
type 3.

Joensuu T(1), Hämäläinen R, Yuan B, Johnson C, Tegelberg S, Gasparini P, Zelante 
L, Pirvola U, Pakarinen L, Lehesjoki AE, de la Chapelle A, Sankila EM.

Author information:
(1)The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet 2001 Nov;69(5):1160.

Usher syndrome type 3 (USH3) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by 
progressive hearing loss, severe retinal degeneration, and variably present 
vestibular dysfunction, assigned to 3q21-q25. Here, we report on the positional 
cloning of the USH3 gene. By haplotype and linkage-disequilibrium analyses in 
Finnish carriers of a putative founder mutation, the critical region was 
narrowed to 250 kb, of which we sequenced, assembled, and annotated 207 kb. Two 
novel genes-NOPAR and UCRP-and one previously identified gene-H963-were excluded 
as USH3, on the basis of mutational analysis. USH3, the candidate gene that we 
identified, encodes a 120-amino-acid protein. Fifty-two Finnish patients were 
homozygous for a termination mutation, Y100X; patients in two Finnish families 
were compound heterozygous for Y100X and for a missense mutation, M44K, whereas 
patients in an Italian family were homozygous for a 3-bp deletion leading to an 
amino acid deletion and substitution. USH3 has two predicted transmembrane 
domains, and it shows no homology to known genes. As revealed by northern 
blotting and reverse-transcriptase PCR, it is expressed in many tissues, 
including the retina.

DOI: 10.1086/323610
PMCID: PMC1226054
PMID: 11524702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]