---
reference_id: "PMID:41264763"
title: 3-Hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA Hydrolase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Abdenur J
- Barrick R
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 3-Hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA Hydrolase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Abdenur J, Barrick R

## Content

1. 3-Hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA Hydrolase Deficiency.

Abdenur J(1), Barrick R(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2025 Nov 20 [updated 2026 Feb 12].

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Orange County, Orange, CA

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: 3-Hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase (HIBCH) deficiency 
can be categorized into three subtypes based on age of presentation. Neonatal 
onset, the least frequent phenotype, is characterized by hypotonia, seizures, 
and feeding difficulties at birth. There is a high risk of death in childhood, 
and individuals that survive typically have developmental delay, seizures, poor 
weight gain, and growth deficiency and develop a movement disorder. Infantile 
onset is the most common phenotype, presenting in the first two years of life 
with feeding difficulties, vomiting, developmental delay with regression, 
hypotonia, seizures, movement disorder, microcephaly, vision impairment, and 
episodes of neurologic deterioration. Late onset is the second most common 
phenotype, presenting in childhood as a slowly progressive disease with 
significant movement disorder with or without paroxysmal dystonia, variable 
cognitive impairment, and high survivability.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of HIBCH deficiency is established in a proband 
with characteristic clinical, laboratory, and brain imaging findings and 
biallelic pathogenic variants in HIBCH identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Valine-restricted diet. As seen in other metabolic 
disorders, treatment using special formulas (medical food) can be implemented 
successfully via oral route in individuals diagnosed within the first few months 
of life. Later on, if palatability or feeding intolerance becomes a problem, 
formula can be given by gastrostomy tube. A restriction in total protein intake 
without quantitation of valine may be necessary in individuals on an oral diet 
with poor adherence to medical food or formula. Supportive care: Developmental 
and educational support; feeding therapy with gastrostomy tube as needed; 
standard treatments for spasticity and epilepsy; treatment of movement disorder 
per movement disorder specialist; management of ocular issues per 
ophthalmologist with low vision services as needed; early intervention for 
cerebral visual impairment; hearing aids per otolaryngologist and community 
hearing services as needed; transitional care support; social work and family 
support. Surveillance: Evaluation with a metabolic specialist and metabolic 
dietitian including assessment of total protein and valine intake, fasting 
plasma amino acids, blood total and free carnitine and acylcarnitine profile, 
lactic acid in blood, and urine organic acids with frequency per metabolic 
specialist; measurement of growth parameters, evaluation of nutrition and oral 
intake, and assessment of developmental progress and educational needs at each 
visit; assessment for changes in tone, seizures, movement disorders, mobility, 
self-help skills, evidence of aspiration, respiratory insufficiency, and sleep 
apnea at each visit; ophthalmology evaluation at least annually; audiology 
evaluation as needed. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Due to secondary 
mitochondrial abnormalities it may be beneficial to avoid sodium valproate if 
possible; consider anesthesia use carefully; avoid prolonged propofol use; 
prevent catabolism; avoid neuromuscular blocking agents in those with muscle 
disease; avoid lactate-containing agents, including dialysate containing 
lactate; ketogenic / modified Atkins diets should be avoided due to potential 
side effects; triheptanoin is contraindicated due to the potential increase in 
propionyl-CoA; dichloroacetate, as there is no published evidence to support its 
use in HIBCH deficiency. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to 
evaluate at-risk newborns and older sibs of an affected individual to identify 
as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of targeted 
therapy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: HIBCH deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an HIBCH pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance 
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the HIBCH pathogenic variants have 
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 41264763