---
reference_id: PMID:33644619
title: First Somatic PRKAR1A Defect Associated With Mosaicism for Another PRKAR1A Mutation in a Patient With Cushing Syndrome.
authors:
- Kamilaris CDC
- Faucz FR
- Andriessen VC
- Nilubol N
- Lee CR
- Ahlman MA
- Hannah-Shmouni F
- Stratakis CA
journal: J Endocr Soc
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvab007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First Somatic PRKAR1A Defect Associated With Mosaicism for Another PRKAR1A Mutation in a Patient With Cushing Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kamilaris CDC, Faucz FR, Andriessen VC, Nilubol N, Lee CR, Ahlman MA, Hannah-Shmouni F, Stratakis CA
**Journal:** J Endocr Soc (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jendso/bvab007](https://doi.org/10.1210/jendso/bvab007)

## Content

1. J Endocr Soc. 2021 Jan 25;5(4):bvab007. doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvab007.
eCollection  2021 Apr 1.

First Somatic PRKAR1A Defect Associated With Mosaicism for Another PRKAR1A 
Mutation in a Patient With Cushing Syndrome.

Kamilaris CDC(1), Faucz FR(1), Andriessen VC(1), Nilubol N(2), Lee CR(3), Ahlman 
MA(4), Hannah-Shmouni F(1), Stratakis CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics (SEGEN), Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Endocrine Surgery Section, Surgical Oncology Program, National Cancer 
Institute (NCI), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Institutes 
of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Clinical Center, National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.

CONTEXT: Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD) is a rare 
cause of ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome (CS) associated mostly with Carney 
complex (CNC), a rare autosomal dominant multiple neoplasia syndrome. More than 
two-thirds of familial cases and approximately one-third of sporadic cases of 
CNC harbor germline inactivating PRKAR1A defects. Increasingly sensitive 
technologies for the detection of genetic defects such as next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) have further highlighted the importance of mosaicism in human 
disease.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 33-year-old woman was diagnosed with ACTH-independent CS 
with abdominal computed tomography showing bilateral micronodular adrenal 
hyperplasia with a left adrenal adenoma. She underwent left adrenalectomy with 
pathology demonstrating PPNAD with a 1.5-cm pigmented adenoma. DNA analysis by 
Sanger sequencing revealed 2 different PRKAR1A variants in the adenoma that were 
absent from DNA extracted from blood and saliva: c.682C > T and c.974-2A > G. 
"Deep" NGS revealed that 0.31% of DNA copies extracted from blood and saliva did 
in fact carry the c.682C > T variant, suggesting low-level mosaicism for this 
defect.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a case of PPNAD due to low-level mosaicism for a PRKAR1A 
defect which led to the formation of an adenoma due to a second, 
adrenal-specific, somatic PRKAR1A mutation. The identification of mosaicism for 
PRKAR1A, depending on the number and distribution of cells affected has 
implications for genetic counseling and tumor surveillance. This is the first 
recorded case of a patient with PRKAR1A mosaicism, PPNAD, and an adenoma forming 
due to complete inactivation of PRKAR1A in adrenal tissue from a second, 
somatic-only, PRKAR1A coding sequence mutation.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Endocrine Society 2021.

DOI: 10.1210/jendso/bvab007
PMCID: PMC7885549
PMID: 33644619