---
reference_id: "PMID:24951723"
title: Aspergillus pragensis sp. nov. discovered during molecular reidentification of clinical isolates belonging to Aspergillus section Candidi.
authors:
- Hubka V
- Lyskova P
- Frisvad JC
- Peterson SW
- Skorepova M
- Kolarik M
journal: Med Mycol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/mmy/myu022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspergillus pragensis sp. nov. discovered during molecular reidentification of clinical isolates belonging to Aspergillus section Candidi.
**Authors:** Hubka V, Lyskova P, Frisvad JC, Peterson SW, Skorepova M, Kolarik M
**Journal:** Med Mycol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/mmy/myu022](https://doi.org/10.1093/mmy/myu022)

## Content

1. Med Mycol. 2014 Aug;52(6):565-76. doi: 10.1093/mmy/myu022. Epub 2014 Jun 20.

Aspergillus pragensis sp. nov. discovered during molecular reidentification of 
clinical isolates belonging to Aspergillus section Candidi.

Hubka V(1), Lyskova P(2), Frisvad JC(3), Peterson SW(4), Skorepova M(5), Kolarik 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague, 
Benátská 2, 128 01 Praha 2, Czech Republic Laboratory of Fungal Genetics and 
Metabolism, Institute of Microbiology of the AS CR, v.v.i., Vídeňská 1083, 142 
20 Praha 4, Czech Republic hubka@biomed.cas.cz.
(2)Laboratory of Medical Mycology, Department of Parasitology, Mycology and 
Mycobacteriology Prague, Public Health Institute in Ústí nad Labem, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Department for Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, Soltofts 
Plads, Building 221, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark.
(4)Bacterial Foodborne Pathogens and Mycology Research Unit, National Center for 
Agricultural Utilization Research, Peoria, IL, USA.
(5)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague, 
Benátská 2, 128 01 Praha 2, Czech Republic Laboratory of Fungal Genetics and 
Metabolism, Institute of Microbiology of the AS CR, v.v.i., Vídeňská 1083, 142 
20 Praha 4, Czech Republic.

The identity of nine clinical isolates recovered from Czech patients and 
presumptively identified as Aspergillus sp. section Candidi based on colony 
morphology was revised using sequences of β-tubulin, calmodulin gene sequence, 
and internal transcribed spacer rDNA. Six isolates were from suspected and 
proven onychomycosis, one from otitis externa, and two associated with probable 
invasive aspergillosis. The results showed that one Aspergillus candidus isolate 
was the cause of otitis externa, and both isolates obtained from sputa of 
patients with probable invasive aspergillosis were reidentified as A. carneus 
(sect. Terrei) and A. flavus (sect. Flavi). Three isolates from nail scrapings 
were identified as A. tritici, a verified agent of nondermatophyte 
onychomycosis. One isolate from toenail was determined to be A. candidus and the 
two isolates belonged to a hitherto undescribed species, Aspergillus pragensis 
sp. nov. This species is well supported by phylogenetic analysis based on 
β-tubulin and calmodulin gene and is distinguishable from other members of sect. 
Candidi by red-brown reverse on malt extract agar, slow growth on Czapek-Dox 
agar and inability to grow at 37°C. A secondary metabolite analysis was also 
provided with comparison of metabolite spectrum to other species. Section 
Candidi now encompasses five species for which a dichotomous key based on colony 
characteristics is provided. All clinical isolates were tested for 
susceptibilities to selected antifungal agents using the Etest and disc 
diffusion method. Overall sect. Candidi members are highly susceptible to common 
antifungals.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
International Society for Human and Animal Mycology. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/mmy/myu022
PMID: 24951723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]