---
reference_id: "PMID:22653791"
title: PET and MRI reveal early evidence of neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 17.
authors:
- Brockmann K
- Reimold M
- Globas C
- Hauser TK
- Walter U
- Machulla HJ
- Rolfs A
- Schöls L
journal: J Nucl Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2967/jnumed.111.101543
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Dopamine Agents
- Dopamine Antagonists
- Dopaminergic Neurons/diagnostic imaging
- Female
- Fluorodeoxyglucose F18
- Glucose/metabolism
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Image Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Methylphenidate/analogs & derivatives"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/diagnostic imaging, etiology, pathology"
- Neuropsychological Tests
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- Raclopride
- Radiopharmaceuticals
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PET and MRI reveal early evidence of neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 17.
**Authors:** Brockmann K, Reimold M, Globas C, Hauser TK, Walter U, Machulla HJ, Rolfs A, Schöls L
**Journal:** J Nucl Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2967/jnumed.111.101543](https://doi.org/10.2967/jnumed.111.101543)

## Content

1. J Nucl Med. 2012 Jul;53(7):1074-80. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.111.101543. Epub 2012
May 31.

PET and MRI reveal early evidence of neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia
type 17.

Brockmann K(1), Reimold M, Globas C, Hauser TK, Walter U, Machulla HJ, Rolfs A,
Schöls L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases and Hertie Institute for Clinical
Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) is a rare autosomal dominantly inherited
neurodegenerative disorder presenting with a variable phenotype including
ataxia, dystonia, chorea, and parkinsonism, as well as cognitive impairment. We
evaluated morphologic and functional imaging characteristics to elucidate
evidence of neurodegeneration in SCA17, even in the presymptomatic stage of the
disease.
METHODS: Nine individuals of 3 large SCA17 pedigrees, including 4 presymptomatic
mutation carriers, underwent cranial 3-dimensional MRI volumetry, as well as
multitracer PET with (18)F-FDG, (11)C-d-threo-methylphenidate, and
(11)C-raclopride. Healthy subjects showing no signs of a neurologic or
psychiatric disease served as controls.
RESULTS: MRI volumetry revealed atrophy of the cerebellum and caudate nucleus in
manifesting patients (P = 0.04 and 0.05, respectively) and in presymptomatic
mutation carriers (P = 0.04 and 0.01, respectively). PET demonstrated decreased
glucose metabolism in the striatum, as well as in the cuneus, cingulum, and
parietal lobe, in all SCA17 patients and presymptomatic mutation carriers. In
addition, PET was closely correlated with motor performance as assessed by the
Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Ataxia (P = 0.037) and Unified Parkinson
Disease Rating Scale (P = 0.05) and with cognitive function as assessed by the
Mini-Mental Status Examination (P = 0.037). Furthermore, (11)C-raclopride PET
showed impairment of the postsynaptic dopaminergic compartment of the putamen
and caudate nucleus not only in manifest SCA17 patients (P = 0.04 and 0.008,
respectively) but also in yet-unaffected mutation carriers (P = 0.05 and 0.05,
respectively). The degree of postsynaptic dopaminergic dysfunction was
associated with impairment of motor performance. In contrast, significant
presynaptic dopaminergic deficits assessed with (11)C-d-threo-methylphenidate
PET were not detected.
CONCLUSION: MRI volumetry, as well as (11)C-raclopride and (18)F-FDG PET, reveal
neuronal dysfunction and neurodegeneration even in the presymptomatic stage and
may serve as markers for disease activity in upcoming interventional trials on
SCA17.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.111.101543
PMID: 22653791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
