---
reference_id: "PMID:37496356"
title: "Familial Mediterranean Fever-Related Amyloidosis in Turkey: A Need for a Familial Mediterranean Fever Registry."
authors:
- Helvaci O
- Yasar E
journal: Exp Clin Transplant
year: '2023'
doi: 10.6002/ect.IAHNCongress.24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean Fever-Related Amyloidosis in Turkey: A Need for a Familial Mediterranean Fever Registry.
**Authors:** Helvaci O, Yasar E
**Journal:** Exp Clin Transplant (2023)
**DOI:** [10.6002/ect.IAHNCongress.24](https://doi.org/10.6002/ect.IAHNCongress.24)

## Content

1. Exp Clin Transplant. 2023 Jun;21(Suppl 2):101-104. doi: 
10.6002/ect.IAHNCongress.24.

Familial Mediterranean Fever-Related Amyloidosis in Turkey: A Need for a 
Familial Mediterranean Fever Registry.

Helvaci O(1), Yasar E.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Nephrology, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey.

Amyloidosis has been well known since Rudolph Virchow named the condition in the 
19th century. Most physicians were aware of the association between amyloidosis 
to chronic suppurative conditions and multiple myeloma. However, familial 
Mediterranean fever, although probably as ancient as the Galenic era, was 
appropriately identified only in the 21st century. The nomenclature was variable 
throughout history, but the name "FMF" has been universally adopted since the 
report from Heller and colleagues in 1958. In 1967, Sokmen and Ozdemir of Ankara 
University published a report on 194 patients, of whom 64 had amyloidosis. 
Familial Mediterranean fever constituted the cause in half of the cases. 
Goldfinger and Ozkan demonstrated efficacy of colchicine for treatment of 
familial Mediterranean fever in 1972, and further studies revealed that 
colchicine is also efficient for prevention of amyloidosis. However, since then, 
several single-center and multicenter amyloid A amyloidosis studies from Turkey 
have been published. Almost invariably, familial Mediterranean fever is the most 
common cause of systemic amyloidosis. No downward trends in percentages have 
been observed. Recent studies have shown that cases of amyloidosis in patients 
with familial Mediterranean fever are decreasing. Also, cases of amyloidosis in 
conjunction with suppurative conditions are on the decrease worldwide. However, 
according to registry data from the Turkish Society of Nephrology, the 
percentage of incident hemodialysis patients with amyloidosis is not decreasing. 
The question arises: Why is a complication that is 98% preventable still causing 
end-stage renal disease? We believe the lack of a stable and comprehensive 
registry for familial Mediterranean fever, including associated cases of 
amyloidosis, is the reason we cannot properly answer this question. In this 
work, we use a historical approach to present why a familial Mediterranean fever 
registry is direly needed.

DOI: 10.6002/ect.IAHNCongress.24
PMID: 37496356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]