---
reference_id: "PMID:10796537"
title: "Anthelmintic drugs for treating worms in children: effects on growth and cognitive performance."
authors:
- Dickson R
- Awasthi S
- Demellweek C
- Williamson P
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000371
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anthelmintic drugs for treating worms in children: effects on growth and cognitive performance.
**Authors:** Dickson R, Awasthi S, Demellweek C, Williamson P
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD000371](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000371)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;(2):CD000371. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000371.

Anthelmintic drugs for treating worms in children: effects on growth and 
cognitive performance.

Dickson R(1), Awasthi S, Demellweek C, Williamson P.

Author information:
(1)Research and Development Support Unit, School of Health Science, University 
of Liverpool, Liverpool, Merseyside, UK, L69 3BX. rdickson@liv.ac.uk

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jul 18;(2):CD000371. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD000371.pub2.

BACKGROUND: Helminth (worm) infections are widespread and are thought to 
contribute to poor nutritional status, anaemia, and impaired growth and learning 
in children.
OBJECTIVES: To summarise the effects of anthelmintic drug treatment in children 
in relation to their growth and cognitive performance.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Infectious Diseases Group trials 
register, the Cochrane Controlled Trials Register, Medline, Embase and the 
reference lists of articles. We also contacted experts in the field.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised and quasi-randomised trials of drug treatment 
compared with placebo or no drug treatment for intestinal helminths in children.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Trial quality was assessed and data were extracted 
independently by two reviewers. Study authors were contacted for additional 
information.
MAIN RESULTS: Thirty trials involving more than 1500 children were included. 
There was potential for bias from inadequate concealment of allocation. Studies 
varied in relation to target groups, drugs administered and treatment regimens. 
Compared to placebo or no drug treatment, drug treatment for helminths was 
associated with some positive effects on change in weight, height and skinfold 
thickness. However there was significant heterogeneity between the results of 
the trials. There were some positive effects on mean weight change in the trials 
reporting this outcome; after a single dose (any anthelminth) the pooled 
estimate was 0.24 kg, (95% CI 0.15 to 0.32; fixed effects model assumed); and 
0.38 kg (95% CI 0.00 to 0.77; random effects model assumed). Results from trials 
giving multiple doses showed mean weight change under one year of follow up of 
0.10 kg (95% CI 0.04 to 0.17; fixed effects assumed); or 0.15 (95% CI 0.00 to 
0.30; random effects assumed). At more than one year of follow up, mean weight 
change was 0.12 kg (95% CI -0.02 to 0.26; fixed effects assumed) and 0.43 (95% 
CI -0.61 to 1.47; random effects model assumed). Results from studies of 
cognitive performance were mixed and inconclusive.
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: There is some limited evidence that routine treatment of 
children in areas where helminths are common has small effects on weight gain, 
but this is not consistent between trials. There is insufficient evidence to 
know whether this intervention improves cognitive performance. Our 
interpretation of these results is that the current public health programme 
investments in this intervention, based on the expectation that there will be an 
improvement in growth and learning, are not based on consistent or reliable 
evidence.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD000371
PMID: 10796537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]