---
reference_id: "PMID:24464188"
title: "ADHD prevalence estimates across three decades: an updated systematic review and meta-regression analysis."
authors:
- Polanczyk GV
- Willcutt EG
- Salum GA
- Kieling C
- Rohde LA
journal: Int J Epidemiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/ije/dyt261
keywords:
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology
- Epidemiologic Methods
- "Global Health/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADHD prevalence estimates across three decades: an updated systematic review and meta-regression analysis.
**Authors:** Polanczyk GV, Willcutt EG, Salum GA, Kieling C, Rohde LA
**Journal:** Int J Epidemiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ije/dyt261](https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyt261)

## Content

1. Int J Epidemiol. 2014 Apr;43(2):434-42. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyt261. Epub 2014 Jan
 24.

ADHD prevalence estimates across three decades: an updated systematic review and
meta-regression analysis.

Polanczyk GV(1), Willcutt EG, Salum GA, Kieling C, Rohde LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo,
Brazil, Research Support Center on Neurodevelopment and Mental Health,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, National Institute of Developmental
Psychiatry for Children and Adolescents (INCT-CNPq), São Paulo, Brazil,
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado at Boulder,
Boulder, CO, USA and ADHD Outpatient Program at the Child and Adolescent
Psychiatric Division, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Federal University
of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have identified significant variability in
attention-deficit / hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) prevalence estimates
worldwide, largely explained by methodological procedures. However, increasing
rates of ADHD diagnosis and treatment throughout the past few decades have
fuelled concerns about whether the true prevalence of the disorder has increased
over time.
METHODS: We updated the two most comprehensive systematic reviews on ADHD
prevalence available in the literature. Meta-regression analyses were conducted
to test the effect of year of study in the context of both methodological
variables that determined variability in ADHD prevalence (diagnostic criteria,
impairment criterion and source of information), and the geographical location
of studies.
RESULTS: We identified 154 original studies and included 135 in the multivariate
analysis. Methodological procedures investigated were significantly associated
with heterogeneity of studies. Geographical location and year of study were not
associated with variability in ADHD prevalence estimates.
CONCLUSIONS: Confirming previous findings, variability in ADHD prevalence
estimates is mostly explained by methodological characteristics of the studies.
In the past three decades, there has been no evidence to suggest an increase in
the number of children in the community who meet criteria for ADHD when
standardized diagnostic procedures are followed.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/dyt261
PMCID: PMC4817588
PMID: 24464188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
