---
reference_id: "PMID:40546217"
title: Disease Characteristics and Treatments Associated with Outcome in Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous System-A Multicenter Cohort Study in 163 Patients.
authors:
- Fisse AL
- Bonberg N
- Beuker C
- Pfeuffer C
- Heidenreich A
- Krüger C
- Deb-Chatterji M
- Becker J
- Gerner ST
- Küpper C
- Nitsch L
- Kestner RI
- Krause LU
- Herm J
- Katalinic A
- Karch A
- Gold R
- Wiendl H
- Schäbitz WR
- Petzold GC
- Pfeilschifter W
- Ringelstein M
- Doeppner TR
- Kellert L
- Huttner HB
- Kraemer M
- Magnus T
- Haeusler KG
- Minnerup H
- Minnerup J
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ana.27295
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/drug therapy, diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Cohort Studies
- Germany/epidemiology
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease Characteristics and Treatments Associated with Outcome in Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous System-A Multicenter Cohort Study in 163 Patients.
**Authors:** Fisse AL, Bonberg N, Beuker C, Pfeuffer C, Heidenreich A, Krüger C, Deb-Chatterji M, Becker J, Gerner ST, Küpper C, Nitsch L, Kestner RI, Krause LU, Herm J, Katalinic A, Karch A, Gold R, Wiendl H, Schäbitz WR, Petzold GC, Pfeilschifter W, Ringelstein M, Doeppner TR, Kellert L, Huttner HB, Kraemer M, Magnus T, Haeusler KG, Minnerup H, Minnerup J
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.27295](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.27295)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2025 Oct;98(4):883-893. doi: 10.1002/ana.27295. Epub 2025 Jun 23.

Disease Characteristics and Treatments Associated with Outcome in Primary 
Angiitis of the Central Nervous System-A Multicenter Cohort Study in 163 
Patients.

Fisse AL(1), Bonberg N(2), Beuker C(3), Pfeuffer C(3), Heidenreich A(4), Krüger 
C(5), Deb-Chatterji M(6), Becker J(7), Gerner ST(8), Küpper C(9), Nitsch L(10), 
Kestner RI(11)(12), Krause LU(13), Herm J(14), Katalinic A(4), Karch A(2), Gold 
R(1), Wiendl H(15), Schäbitz WR(16), Petzold GC(10), Pfeilschifter W(11)(17), 
Ringelstein M(18)(19), Doeppner TR(20)(21)(22), Kellert L(23), Huttner 
HB(20)(24), Kraemer M(7)(18), Magnus T(5), Haeusler KG(25)(26), Minnerup H(2), 
Minnerup J(3)(27).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Ruhr University Bochum, St. Josef Hospital, Bochum, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Epidemiology and Social Medicine, University of Muenster, 
Muenster, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Muenster, Münster, Germany.
(4)Institute of Social Medicine and Epidemiology, University of Luebeck, 
Luebeck, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, 
Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Alfried Krupp Hospital, Essen, Germany.
(8)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(9)Department of Neurology, kbo-Isar-Amper-Hospital Munich East, Munich, 
Germany.
(10)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(11)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany.
(12)Department of General Pharmacology and Toxicology, Goethe University, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(13)Department of Neurology, Klinikum Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany.
(14)Department of Neurology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(15)Department of Neurology and Neurophysiology, Medical Center, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(16)Department of Neurology, Evangelisches Klinikum Bethel, University Hospital 
OWL of the University Bielefeld, Campus Bielefeld-Bethel, Bielefeld, Germany.
(17)Department of Neurology, Klinikum Lüneburg, Lüneburg, Germany.
(18)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty and University Hospital Düsseldorf, 
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(19)Department of Neurology, Centre for Neurology and Neuropsychiatry, 
LVR-Klinikum, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(20)Department of Neurology, Justus Liebig University, University Hospital 
Giessen and Marburg, Giessen, Germany.
(21)Center for Mind, Brain and Behavior (CMBB), Philipps University Marburg, 
University Hospital Giessen and Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(22)Department of Neurology, University of Goettingen Medical School, 
Goettingen, Germany.
(23)Department of Neurology, LMU University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, 
Germany.
(24)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische 
Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(25)Department of Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Würzburg (UKW), Würzburg, 
Germany.
(26)Department of Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(27)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Schleswig Holstein, Campus 
Lübeck, and University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to determine patient, disease, and treatment 
characteristics associated with outcome in patients with primary angiitis of the 
central nervous system (PACNS) in a large multicenter German cohort.
METHODS: In a retrospective, observational cohort study, we analyzed 163 adult 
patients who met the diagnostic criteria for PACNS. Data were collected from 
January 2004 to December 2018 in 13 tertiary care centers in Germany. Survival, 
recurrence-free survival and long-term global disability were assessed.
RESULTS: Of 163 patients with PACNS (median [interquartile range (IQR)] age 48 
[39-59.5] years; 73 [45%] women), 29 (18%) died, 84 (52%) had a poor outcome 
(modified Rankin scale [mRS] 3-6 at last follow-up), and 82 (50%) patients 
relapsed. Poorer survival was associated with patient age (hazard ratio [HR], 
1.96 [95% confidence interval (CI), 1.41-2.74] per 10 years), longer time 
between initial manifestation and diagnosis (HR, 1.01 [95% CI, 1.00-1.01] per 
month), and necrotizing subtype (HR, 10.2 [95% CI, 2.18-48.2]). Long-term 
disability was associated with older age (odds ratio [OR], 1.40 [95% CI, 
1.07-1.86] per 10 years), and worse mRS score at diagnosis (OR, 4.43 [95% CI, 
1.97-10.4]). Patients treated with cyclophosphamide alone or in combination with 
steroids had a lower incidence of relapse than untreated patients (HR, 0.44 [95% 
CI, 0.22-0.86]; HR, 0.47 [95% CI, 0.24-0.92]).
INTERPRETATION: In patients with PACNS, the long-term outcome depends on several 
patient and disease characteristics. Our results favor treatment with 
cyclophosphamide alone or in combination with steroids, because this was 
associated with a reduction in the relapse rate. ANN NEUROL 2025;98:883-893.

© 2025 The Author(s). Annals of Neurology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.27295
PMCID: PMC12542311
PMID: 40546217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.B.: has received speaking fees from Chugai 
Pharma, a subsidiary of Roche involved in the development of biologics used in 
the study. H.W.: receives honoraria for acting as a member of Scientific 
Advisory Boards Novartis, a company producing immunosuppressive agents used in 
the study and has received speaker honoraria and travel support from Roche and 
acts as a paid consultant for Roche. His research is funded by F. Hoffmann‐La 
Roche and Roche Pharma, all of which are manufacturers of immunotherapeutic 
agents that are used in the study. Board fees were received from AstraZeneca, 
which manufactures immunomodulatory drugs used in the study. M.K.: has received 
honoraria for teaching activities from Roche Pharma, Chugai Pharma and Novartis, 
all of which are involved in the development or manufacture of immunotherapeutic 
agents used in the study. J.M.: has received speaking fees from Chugai Pharma, a 
subsidiary of Roche involved in the development of biologics used in the study. 
The remaining authors have nothing to report.