---
reference_id: "PMID:15241677"
title: Altered gating properties of functional Cx26 mutants associated with recessive non-syndromic hearing loss.
authors:
- Meşe G
- Londin E
- Mui R
- Brink PR
- White TW
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-004-1142-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered gating properties of functional Cx26 mutants associated with recessive non-syndromic hearing loss.
**Authors:** Meşe G, Londin E, Mui R, Brink PR, White TW
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-004-1142-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-004-1142-6)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2004 Aug;115(3):191-9. doi: 10.1007/s00439-004-1142-6. Epub 2004
Jul  7.

Altered gating properties of functional Cx26 mutants associated with recessive 
non-syndromic hearing loss.

Meşe G(1), Londin E, Mui R, Brink PR, White TW.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics, State University of New York, BST 5-147, NY 
11794-8661, Stony Brook, USA.

Connexins (Cx) form gap junctions that allow the exchange of small metabolites 
and ions. In the inner ear, Cx26 is the major gap junction protein and mutations 
in the Cx26-encoding gene, GJB2, are the most frequent cause of autosomal 
recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (DFNB1). We have functionally analyzed five 
Cx26 mutations associated with DFNB1, comprising the following single amino-acid 
substitutions: T8M, R143W, V153I, N206S and L214P. Coupling of cells expressing 
wild-type or mutant Cx26 was measured in the paired Xenopus oocyte assay. We 
found that the R143W, V153I and L214P mutations were unable to form functional 
channels. In contrast, the T8M and N206S mutants did electrically couple cells, 
though their voltage gating properties were different from wild-type Cx26 
channels. The electrical coupling of oocytes expressing the T8M and N206S 
mutants suggest that these channels may retain high permeability to potassium 
ions. Therefore, deafness associated with Cx26 mutations may not only depend on 
reduced potassium re-circulation in the inner ear. Instead, abnormalities in the 
exchange of other metabolites through the cochlear gap junction network may also 
produce deafness.

Copyright 2004 Springer-Verlag

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-004-1142-6
PMID: 15241677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]