---
reference_id: "PMID:23201091"
title: Lipopolysaccharide causes an increase in intestinal tight junction permeability in vitro and in vivo by inducing enterocyte membrane expression and localization of TLR-4 and CD14.
authors:
- Guo S
- Al-Sadi R
- Said HM
- Ma TY
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.10.014
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- Caco-2 Cells
- "Cell Membrane/drug effects, metabolism"
- Cell Membrane Permeability/drug effects
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Enterocytes/cytology
- Gene Silencing/drug effects
- Humans
- Lipopolysaccharide Receptors/metabolism
- Lipopolysaccharides/pharmacology
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Protein Transport/drug effects
- "RNA, Small Interfering/metabolism"
- "Tight Junctions/drug effects, metabolism"
- Time Factors
- "Toll-Like Receptor 4/blood, metabolism"
- Up-Regulation/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lipopolysaccharide causes an increase in intestinal tight junction permeability in vitro and in vivo by inducing enterocyte membrane expression and localization of TLR-4 and CD14.
**Authors:** Guo S, Al-Sadi R, Said HM, Ma TY
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.10.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.10.014)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2013 Feb;182(2):375-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.10.014. Epub 
2012 Nov 29.

Lipopolysaccharide causes an increase in intestinal tight junction permeability 
in vitro and in vivo by inducing enterocyte membrane expression and localization 
of TLR-4 and CD14.

Guo S(1), Al-Sadi R, Said HM, Ma TY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.

Bacterial-derived lipopolysaccharides (LPS) play an essential role in the 
inflammatory process of inflammatory bowel disease. A defective intestinal tight 
junction (TJ) barrier is an important pathogenic factor of inflammatory bowel 
disease and other inflammatory conditions of the gut. Despite its importance in 
mediating intestinal inflammation, the physiological effects of LPS on the 
intestinal epithelial barrier remain unclear. The major aims of this study were 
to determine the effects of physiologically relevant concentrations of LPS (0 to 
1 ng/mL) on intestinal barrier function using an in vitro (filter-grown Caco-2 
monolayers) and an in vivo (mouse intestinal perfusion) intestinal epithelial 
model system. LPS, at physiologically relevant concentrations (0 to 1 ng/mL), in 
the basolateral compartment produced a time-dependent increase in Caco-2 TJ 
permeability without inducing cell death. Intraperitoneal injection of LPS (0.1 
mg/kg), leading to clinically relevant plasma concentrations, also caused a 
time-dependent increase in intestinal permeability in vivo. The LPS-induced 
increase in intestinal TJ permeability was mediated by an increase in enterocyte 
membrane TLR-4 expression and a TLR-4-dependent increase in membrane 
colocalization of membrane-associated protein CD14. In conclusion, these studies 
show for the first time that LPS causes an increase in intestinal permeability 
via an intracellular mechanism involving TLR-4-dependent up-regulation of CD14 
membrane expression.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.10.014
PMCID: PMC3562736
PMID: 23201091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]