---
reference_id: "PMID:39763998"
title: "Knock-in Kcnh2 Rabbit Model of Long QT Syndrome Type-2, Epilepsy, and Sudden Death."
authors:
- Singh V
- Wagner KT
- Williams LG
- Ryan JM
- Keller KR
- Mohnkern JD
- Gardner RS
- Dang LT
- Ziobro JM
- Wojcikiewicz RJH
- Tucker NR
- Auerbach DS
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1101/2024.12.11.627988
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Knock-in Kcnh2 Rabbit Model of Long QT Syndrome Type-2, Epilepsy, and Sudden Death.
**Authors:** Singh V, Wagner KT, Williams LG, Ryan JM, Keller KR, Mohnkern JD, Gardner RS, Dang LT, Ziobro JM, Wojcikiewicz RJH, Tucker NR, Auerbach DS
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2024.12.11.627988](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627988)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Dec 16:2024.12.11.627988. doi: 
10.1101/2024.12.11.627988.

Knock-in Kcnh2 Rabbit Model of Long QT Syndrome Type-2, Epilepsy, and Sudden 
Death.

Singh V, Wagner KT, Williams LG, Ryan JM, Keller KR, Mohnkern JD, Gardner RS, 
Dang LT, Ziobro JM, Wojcikiewicz RJH, Tucker NR, Auerbach DS.

Update in
    J Transl Med. 2025 Apr 15;23(1):446. doi: 10.1186/s12967-025-06382-w.

BACKGROUND: Long QT Syndrome Type-2 (LQT2) is due to loss-of-function KCNH2 
variants. KCNH2 encodes K v 11.1 that forms a delayed-rectifier potassium 
channel in the brain and heart. LQT2 is associated with arrhythmias, seizures, 
sudden cardiac death, and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). The goal 
of the study is to develop a translational model that reproduces the 
neuro-cardiac electrical abnormalities and sudden death seen in people with 
LQT2.
METHODS: We generated the first knock-in rabbit model of LQT2 ( Kcnh2 
(+/7bp-del) ), due to a 7 base-pair (7bp) deletion in the pore domain of the 
endogenous rabbit Kcnh2 gene.
RESULTS: Mutant Kcnh2 is expressed in the heart and brain and constitutes 11% of 
total Kcnh2 in Kcnh2 (+/7bp-del) rabbits. Total Kcnh2 , WT Kcnh2 , and WT K v 
11.1 expression is lower in Kcnh2 (+/7bp-del) vs. WT rabbits. Kcnh2 (+/7bp-del) 
rabbits exhibit prolonged cardiac ventricular repolarization (QT c , JT ec , JT 
pc ). There is an increased prevalence of spontaneous epileptiform activity and 
clinical seizures in Kcnh2 (+/7bp-del) (7 of 37 rabbits) vs. WT rabbits (1:68 
rabbits, p <0.003). 18.9% of Kcnh2 (+/7bp-del) vs. 1.5% of WT rabbits died 
suddenly and spontaneously ( p <0.003). We recorded 2 spontaneous lethal events 
in Kcnh2 (+/7bp-del) rabbits: (1) sudden cardiac death and (2) seizure-mediated 
sudden death due to generalized tonic-clonic seizures, post-ictal generalized 
EEG suppression, bradycardia, ECG-T-wave inversion, focal cardiac activity, and 
asystole/death.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed the first genetic rabbit model of LQT2 that reproduces 
the cardiac and epileptic phenotypes seen in people with LQT2. Kcnh2 (+/7bp-del) 
rabbits provide a valuable tool for future mechanistic studies, development of 
neurotherapeutics, and cardiac-safety testing.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.12.11.627988
PMCID: PMC11702556
PMID: 39763998