---
reference_id: PMID:37407698
title: Molecular mechanism of ensitrelvir inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 main protease and its variants.
authors:
- Lin M
- Zeng X
- Duan Y
- Yang Z
- Ma Y
- Yang H
- Yang X
- Liu X
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-023-05071-y
keywords:
- Humans
- SARS-CoV-2
- COVID-19
- Pandemics
- Coronavirus 3C Proteases
- Indazoles
- Triazines
- Triazoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mechanism of ensitrelvir inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 main protease and its variants.
**Authors:** Lin M, Zeng X, Duan Y, Yang Z, Ma Y, Yang H, Yang X, Liu X
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-023-05071-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-023-05071-y)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2023 Jul 5;6(1):694. doi: 10.1038/s42003-023-05071-y.

Molecular mechanism of ensitrelvir inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 main protease and its 
variants.

Lin M(1)(2)(3), Zeng X(3), Duan Y(3), Yang Z(3), Ma Y(3), Yang H(3), Yang X(4), 
Liu X(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, 
Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
(2)Institute of Life Sciences, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Shanghai Institute for Advanced Immunochemical Studies and School of Life 
Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Shanghai Institute for Advanced Immunochemical Studies and School of Life 
Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China. 
yangxn@shanghaitech.edu.cn.
(5)College of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, 
Nankai University, Tianjin, China. liux@nankai.edu.cn.

SARS-CoV-2 poses an unprecedented threat to the world as the causative agent of 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Among a handful of therapeutics developed for the 
prevention and treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection, ensitrelvir is the first 
noncovalent and nonpeptide oral inhibitor targeting the main protease (Mpro) of 
SARS-CoV-2, which recently received emergency regulatory approval in Japan. Here 
we determined a 1.8-Å structure of Mpro in complex with ensitrelvir, which 
revealed that ensitrelvir targets the substrate-binding pocket of Mpro, 
specifically recognizing its S1, S2, and S1' subsites. Further, our 
comprehensive biochemical and structural data have demonstrated that even though 
ensitrelvir and nirmatrelvir (an FDA-approved drug) belong to different types of 
Mpro inhibitors, both of them remain to be effective against Mpros from all five 
SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern, suggesting Mpro is a bona fide broad-spectrum 
target. The molecular mechanisms uncovered in this study provide basis for 
future inhibitor design.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-023-05071-y
PMCID: PMC10322880
PMID: 37407698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.