---
reference_id: "PMID:19441978"
title: Neurologic manifestations associated with parvovirus B19 infection.
authors:
- Douvoyiannis M
- Litman N
- Goldman DL
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1086/599042
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurologic manifestations associated with parvovirus B19 infection.
**Authors:** Douvoyiannis M, Litman N, Goldman DL
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1086/599042](https://doi.org/10.1086/599042)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Jun 15;48(12):1713-23. doi: 10.1086/599042.

Neurologic manifestations associated with parvovirus B19 infection.

Douvoyiannis M(1), Litman N, Goldman DL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 
Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 3415 
Bainbridge Ave., Rosenthal 4th Fl., Bronx, New York 10467, USA. 
mdouvoyi@montefiore.org

Eighty-one cases of neurologic disease, including encephalitis, meningitis, 
stroke, and peripheral neuropathy, that were associated with parvovirus B19 
infection were reviewed. Most patients were children, and two-thirds had central 
nervous system manifestations. One-third had altered immunity. Viral symptoms 
(odds ratio [OR], 5.7; P= .002), rash (OR, 11.5; P< .001), and peripheral 
nervous system involvement (OR, 12.1; P= .004) were more frequent in 
immunocompetent patients. Brain magnetic resonance imaging abnormalities were 
more frequent in patients with altered immunity (OR, 10; P= .04). In central 
nervous system disease, parvovirus B19 DNA was commonly detected in 
cerebrospinal fluid (81% of samples) and serum (85%), whereas specific 
antibodies were found in 33% of cerebrospinal fluid samples. Neurologic sequelae 
occurred in 22% of 77 patients with a known outcome, and some improvement 
occurred in 16%. No differences in the prevalence of sequealae were noted 
between immunocompetent patients (21% of whom experienced sequealae) and 
patients with altered immunity (25%) or between patients with central nervous 
system manifestations who received intravenous immunoglobulin with or without 
steroids and those patients with central nervous system manifestations who did 
not. Five patients died.

DOI: 10.1086/599042
PMID: 19441978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]