---
reference_id: "PMID:26370659"
title: Prevalence of contact allergy in the general population in different European regions.
authors:
- Diepgen TL
- Ofenloch RF
- Bruze M
- Bertuccio P
- Cazzaniga S
- Coenraads PJ
- Elsner P
- Goncalo M
- Svensson Å
- Naldi L
journal: The British journal of dermatology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.14167
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of contact allergy in the general population in different European regions.
**Authors:** Diepgen TL, Ofenloch RF, Bruze M, Bertuccio P, Cazzaniga S, Coenraads PJ, Elsner P, Goncalo M, Svensson Å, Naldi L
**Journal:** The British journal of dermatology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.14167](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.14167)

## Content

BACKGROUND: Population-based studies about contact allergy are scarce.
OBJECTIVES: To obtain reliable estimates of the prevalence of contact allergy in
the general population in Europe. METHODS: A cross-sectional study of a random
sample from the general population, aged 18-74 years, in five different European
countries (Sweden, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy and Portugal). In total, 12
377 subjects were interviewed and a random sample (n = 3119) patch tested to TRUE
Test panels 1-3 and Fragrance Mix (FM) II, hydroxyisohexyl 3-cyclohexene
carboxaldehyde (HICC) and sesquiterpene lactone mix. A positive patch test
reaction is considered as contact allergy. RESULTS: In total, 27·0% [95%
confidence interval (CI) 25·5-28·5] had at least one positive reaction to an
allergen of the European baseline series, with a significantly higher prevalence
in women than in men. The highest age-standardized prevalences (≥ 1%) were found
for nickel (14·5%, 95% CI 13·2-15·8), thiomersal (5·0%, 95% CI 4·2-5·8), cobalt
(2·2%, 95% CI 1·7-2·7), FM II (1·9%, 95% CI 1·5-2·5), FM I (1·8%, 95% CI
1·4-2·3), HICC (1·4%, 95% CI 1·0-1·9), p-tert-butylphenol formaldehyde resin
(1·3%, 95% CI 0·9-1·7) and para-phenylenediamine (1·0%, 95% CI 0·6-1·3). Only
nickel and thiomersal showed a statistically significantly different prevalence
for contact allergy among the different European populations. Subjects reporting
contact dermatitis in their lifetime (age-standardized prevalence 15·1%, 95% CI
13·8-16·3) had an increased risk for contact allergy (odds ratio 1·9, 95% CI
1·5-2·5). The risk of having a contact allergy was not increased in those with
atopic dermatitis (prevalence 7·6%, 95% CI 6·7-8·6; odds ratio 1·0, 95% CI
0·7-1·4). CONCLUSIONS: Contact allergy to at least one allergen of the European
baseline series was diagnosed in more than one-quarter of the general European
population. Therefore measures to improve the primary prevention of contact
allergy have to be enforced.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.14167
PMID: 26370659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
