---
reference_id: "PMID:39147820"
title: Entinostat as a combinatorial therapeutic for rhabdomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Chauhan S
- Lian E
- Habib I
- Liu Q
- Anders NM
- Bugg MM
- Federman NC
- Reid JM
- Stewart CF
- Cates T
- Michalek JE
- Keller C
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-66545-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pyridines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Animals
- "Benzamides/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Mice
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Entinostat as a combinatorial therapeutic for rhabdomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Chauhan S, Lian E, Habib I, Liu Q, Anders NM, Bugg MM, Federman NC, Reid JM, Stewart CF, Cates T, Michalek JE, Keller C
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-66545-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-66545-5)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Aug 15;14(1):18936. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-66545-5.

Entinostat as a combinatorial therapeutic for rhabdomyosarcoma.

Chauhan S(#)(1), Lian E(#)(1), Habib I(2), Liu Q(3), Anders NM(4)(5)(6), Bugg
MM(1), Federman NC(7)(8), Reid JM(9), Stewart CF(10), Cates T(2), Michalek
JE(3), Keller C(11).

Author information:
(1)Children's Cancer Therapy Development Institute, 9025 NE Von Neumann Drive
Ste 110, Hillsboro, OR, 97006, USA.
(2)Champions Oncology, Rockville, MD, 20850, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Texas Health
Science Center San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 78229, USA.
(4)Department of Oncology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA.
(5)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA.
(6)Takeda Pharmaceutical Company, San Diego, CA, 92121, USA.
(7)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California Los Ángeles,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA, USA.
(9)Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(10)Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN, 38105, USA.
(11)Children's Cancer Therapy Development Institute, 9025 NE Von Neumann Drive
Ste 110, Hillsboro, OR, 97006, USA. charles@cc-tdi.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common childhood soft tissue sarcoma. For the
alveolar subtype (ARMS), the presence of the PAX3::FOXO1 fusion gene and/or
metastases are strong predictors of poor outcome. Metastatic PAX3::FOXO1+ ARMS
often responds to chemotherapies initially, only to subsequently relapse and
become resistant with most patients failing to survive beyond 8 years
post-diagnosis. No curative intent phase II or phase III clinical trial has been
available for patients in the past 10 years (ARST0921). Thus, metastatic ARMS
represents a significantly unmet clinical need. Chemotherapy resistance in ARMS
has previously been attributed to PAX3::FOXO1-mediated cell cycle checkpoint
adaptation, which is mediated by an HDAC3-SMARCA4-miR-27a-PAX3::FOXO1 circuit
that can be disrupted by HDAC3 inhibition. In this study, we investigated the
therapeutic efficacy of combining the epigenetic regulator entinostat, a Class I
Histone Deacetylase (HDAC1-3) inhibitor, with RMS-specific chemotherapies in
patient derived xenograft (PDX) models of RMS. We identified single agent,
additive or synergistic relationships between relapse-specific chemotherapies
and clinically relevant drug exposures of entinostat in three PAX3::FOXO1+ ARMS
mouse models. This preclinical data provides further rationale for clinical
investigation of entinostat, already known to be well tolerated in a pediatric
phase I clinical trial (ADVL1513).

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-66545-5
PMCID: PMC11327338
PMID: 39147820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CK has sponsored research agreements or
collaborations with Roche-Genentech, Nurix Therapeutics and Novartis and is
co-founder of Tio Companies and Teo Therapeutics. Artisan Biopharma is a wholly
owned subsidiary of cc-TDI. CK previously received a $75,000 unrestricted
research grant from Syndax Pharmaceuticals. Dr. Peter Ordentlich of Syndax
Pharmaceuticals is a scientific advisory board member of cc-TDI. The other
authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
