---
reference_id: "PMID:27775230"
title: Clinical and genetic heterogeneity in Slovenian patients with BEST disease.
authors:
- Glavač D
- Jarc-Vidmar M
- Vrabec K
- Ravnik-Glavač M
- Fakin A
- Hawlina M
journal: Acta Ophthalmol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/aos.13202
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Bestrophins
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electrooculography
- Exons/genetics
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Optical Imaging
- Pedigree
- Slovenia
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic heterogeneity in Slovenian patients with BEST disease.
**Authors:** Glavač D, Jarc-Vidmar M, Vrabec K, Ravnik-Glavač M, Fakin A, Hawlina M
**Journal:** Acta Ophthalmol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aos.13202](https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.13202)

## Content

1. Acta Ophthalmol. 2016 Dec;94(8):e786-e794. doi: 10.1111/aos.13202. Epub 2016
Oct  24.

Clinical and genetic heterogeneity in Slovenian patients with BEST disease.

Glavač D(1), Jarc-Vidmar M(2), Vrabec K(1), Ravnik-Glavač M(1), Fakin A(2),
Hawlina M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Eye Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

PURPOSE: To determine the spectrum of BEST1 mutations and to study the phenotype
in Slovenian families with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) to identify
genotype-phenotype correlations.
METHODS: Twenty patients from five families underwent the ophthalmological
examination including electrooculogram (EOG; N = 17), fundus autofluorescence
imaging (N = 16) and optical coherence tomography (N = 14). Mutational screening
was performed by direct DNA sequencing of the BEST1 gene.
RESULTS: Mutation c.43G>C (p.Gly15Arg) was detected in three patients from
family M presenting with different clinical stages of Best disease. Mutation
c.313G>C (p.Arg105Gly) was found in families K, ST, S, B and was associated with
incomplete clinical penetrance and variable retinal changes, including
extramacular and multifocal lesions. In three patients from family K, an
atypical form of BVMD was observed; there were additional peripheral lesions
outside of the vascular arcades in addition to the typical macular lesions.
Multiple alterations between the vitelliruptive and pseudohypopyon stages over a
period of 11 years were seen in one patient.
CONCLUSION: Two previously unreported disease-associated variants in the BEST1
gene (p.Gly15Arg and p.Arg105Gly) were found in Slovenian patients with Best
disease. Our data expand the mutation spectrum of the BEST1 gene and further
support the broad phenotypic variability observed clinically and with optical
coherence tomography (OCT) and AF imaging.

© 2016 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation. Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/aos.13202
PMID: 27775230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
