---
reference_id: "PMID:24480483"
title: "X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy in women: a cross-sectional cohort study."
authors:
- Engelen M
- Barbier M
- Dijkstra IM
- Schür R
- de Bie RM
- Verhamme C
- Dijkgraaf MG
- Aubourg PA
- Wanders RJ
- van Geel BM
- de Visser M
- Poll-The BT
- Kemp S
journal: Brain
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt361
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily D, Member 1"
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/blood, complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Evoked Potentials/physiology
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/etiology, physiopathology"
- Prospective Studies
- "Spinal Cord Diseases/etiology, physiopathology"
- X Chromosome Inactivation/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy in women: a cross-sectional cohort study.
**Authors:** Engelen M, Barbier M, Dijkstra IM, Schür R, de Bie RM, Verhamme C, Dijkgraaf MG, Aubourg PA, Wanders RJ, van Geel BM, de Visser M, Poll-The BT, Kemp S
**Journal:** Brain (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt361](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt361)

## Content

1. Brain. 2014 Mar;137(Pt 3):693-706. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt361. Epub 2014 Jan
29.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy in women: a cross-sectional cohort study.

Engelen M(1), Barbier M, Dijkstra IM, Schür R, de Bie RM, Verhamme C, Dijkgraaf
MG, Aubourg PA, Wanders RJ, van Geel BM, de Visser M, Poll-The BT, Kemp S.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Brain. 2015 Feb;138(Pt 2):e325. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu232.
    Brain. 2015 Feb;138(Pt 2):e326. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu233.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is the most common peroxisomal disorder. The
disease is caused by mutations in the ABCD1 gene that encodes the peroxisomal
transporter of very long-chain fatty acids. A defect in the ABCD1 protein
results in elevated levels of very long-chain fatty acids in plasma and tissues.
The clinical spectrum in males with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy has been well
described and ranges from isolated adrenocortical insufficiency and slowly
progressive myelopathy to devastating cerebral demyelination. As in many
X-linked diseases, it was assumed that female carriers remain asymptomatic and
only a few studies addressed the phenotype of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy
carriers. These studies, however, provided no information on the prevalence of
neurological symptoms in the entire population of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy
carriers, since data were acquired in small groups and may be biased towards
women with symptoms. Our primary goal was to investigate the symptoms and their
frequency in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy carriers. The secondary goal was to
determine if the X-inactivation pattern of the ABCD1 gene was associated with
symptomatic status. We included 46 X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy carriers in a
prospective cross-sectional cohort study. Our data show that X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy carriers develop signs and symptoms of myelopathy (29/46,
63%) and/or peripheral neuropathy (26/46, 57%). Especially striking was the
occurrence of faecal incontinence (13/46, 28%). The frequency of symptomatic
women increased sharply with age (from 18% in women <40 years to 88% in women
>60 years of age). Virtually all (44/45, 98%) X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy
carriers had increased very long-chain fatty acids in plasma and/or fibroblasts,
and/or decreased very long-chain fatty acids beta-oxidation in fibroblasts. We
did not find an association between the X-inactivation pattern and symptomatic
status. We conclude that X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy carriers develop an
adrenomyeloneuropathy-like phenotype and there is a strong association between
symptomatic status and age. X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy should be considered
in the differential diagnosis in women with chronic myelopathy and/or peripheral
neuropathy (especially with early faecal incontinence). ABCD1 mutation analysis
deserves a place in diagnostic protocols for chronic non-compressive myelopathy.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt361
PMID: 24480483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
