---
reference_id: "PMID:23166506"
title: "Disruption of mouse Cenpj, a regulator of centriole biogenesis, phenocopies Seckel syndrome."
authors:
- McIntyre RE
- Lakshminarasimhan Chavali P
- Ismail O
- Carragher DM
- Sanchez-Andrade G
- Forment JV
- Fu B
- Del Castillo Velasco-Herrera M
- Edwards A
- van der Weyden L
- Yang F
- Sanger Mouse Genetics Project
- Ramirez-Solis R
- Estabel J
- Gallagher FA
- Logan DW
- Arends MJ
- Tsang SH
- Mahajan VB
- Scudamore CL
- White JK
- Jackson SP
- Gergely F
- Adams DJ
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003022
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- "Centrioles/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Damage
- "Dwarfism/genetics, physiopathology"
- Embryonic Development/genetics
- Facies
- Genomic Instability
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microcephaly/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Mitosis/genetics
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Spindle Apparatus/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of mouse Cenpj, a regulator of centriole biogenesis, phenocopies Seckel syndrome.
**Authors:** McIntyre RE, Lakshminarasimhan Chavali P, Ismail O, Carragher DM, Sanchez-Andrade G, Forment JV, Fu B, Del Castillo Velasco-Herrera M, Edwards A, van der Weyden L, Yang F, Sanger Mouse Genetics Project, Ramirez-Solis R, Estabel J, Gallagher FA, Logan DW, Arends MJ, Tsang SH, Mahajan VB, Scudamore CL, White JK, Jackson SP, Gergely F, Adams DJ
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1003022](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1003022)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(11):e1003022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003022. Epub 2012 
Nov 15.

Disruption of mouse Cenpj, a regulator of centriole biogenesis, phenocopies 
Seckel syndrome.

McIntyre RE(1), Lakshminarasimhan Chavali P, Ismail O, Carragher DM, 
Sanchez-Andrade G, Forment JV, Fu B, Del Castillo Velasco-Herrera M, Edwards A, 
van der Weyden L, Yang F; Sanger Mouse Genetics Project; Ramirez-Solis R, 
Estabel J, Gallagher FA, Logan DW, Arends MJ, Tsang SH, Mahajan VB, Scudamore 
CL, White JK, Jackson SP, Gergely F, Adams DJ.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Cancer Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, 
United Kingdom.

Disruption of the centromere protein J gene, CENPJ (CPAP, MCPH6, SCKL4), which 
is a highly conserved and ubiquitiously expressed centrosomal protein, has been 
associated with primary microcephaly and the microcephalic primordial dwarfism 
disorder Seckel syndrome. The mechanism by which disruption of CENPJ causes the 
proportionate, primordial growth failure that is characteristic of Seckel 
syndrome is unknown. By generating a hypomorphic allele of Cenpj, we have 
developed a mouse (Cenpj(tm/tm)) that recapitulates many of the clinical 
features of Seckel syndrome, including intrauterine dwarfism, microcephaly with 
memory impairment, ossification defects, and ocular and skeletal abnormalities, 
thus providing clear confirmation that specific mutations of CENPJ can cause 
Seckel syndrome. Immunohistochemistry revealed increased levels of DNA damage 
and apoptosis throughout Cenpj(tm/tm) embryos and adult mice showed an elevated 
frequency of micronucleus induction, suggesting that Cenpj-deficiency results in 
genomic instability. Notably, however, genomic instability was not the result of 
defective ATR-dependent DNA damage signaling, as is the case for the majority of 
genes associated with Seckel syndrome. Instead, Cenpj(tm/tm) embryonic 
fibroblasts exhibited irregular centriole and centrosome numbers and mono- and 
multipolar spindles, and many were near-tetraploid with numerical and structural 
chromosomal abnormalities when compared to passage-matched wild-type cells. 
Increased cell death due to mitotic failure during embryonic development is 
likely to contribute to the proportionate dwarfism that is associated with 
CENPJ-Seckel syndrome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003022
PMCID: PMC3499256
PMID: 23166506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.