---
reference_id: "PMID:11781319"
title: "The ankyrin-B C-terminal domain determines activity of ankyrin-B/G chimeras in rescue of abnormal inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate and ryanodine receptor distribution in ankyrin-B (-/-) neonatal cardiomyocytes."
authors:
- Mohler PJ
- Gramolini AO
- Bennett V
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110958200
keywords:
- Actinin/chemistry
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Ankyrins/chemistry
- Binding Sites
- Cell Line
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- "Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate/pharmacology"
- Luminescent Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Myocardium/cytology, metabolism"
- Plasmids/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- Protein Isoforms
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/metabolism
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/metabolism
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ankyrin-B C-terminal domain determines activity of ankyrin-B/G chimeras in rescue of abnormal inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate and ryanodine receptor distribution in ankyrin-B (-/-) neonatal cardiomyocytes.
**Authors:** Mohler PJ, Gramolini AO, Bennett V
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110958200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110958200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10599-607. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110958200. Epub
2002 Jan 7.

The ankyrin-B C-terminal domain determines activity of ankyrin-B/G chimeras in
rescue of abnormal inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate and ryanodine receptor
distribution in ankyrin-B (-/-) neonatal cardiomyocytes.

Mohler PJ(1), Gramolini AO, Bennett V.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.
p.mohler@cellbio.duke.edu

Ankyrins are a closely related family of membrane adaptor proteins that are
believed to participate in targeting diverse membrane proteins to specialized
domains in the plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum. This study addresses
the question of how individual ankyrin isoforms achieve functional specificity
when co-expressed in the same cell. Cardiomyocytes from ankyrin-B (-/-) mice
display mis-localization of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors and ryanodine
receptors along with reduced contraction rates that can be rescued by expression
of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-ankyrin-B but not GFP-ankyrin-G. We developed
chimeric GFP expression constructs containing all combinations of the three
major domains of ankyrin-B and ankyrin-G to determine which domain(s) of
ankyrin-B are required for ankyrin-B-specific functions. The death/C-terminal
domain of ankyrin-B determined activity of ankyrin-B/G chimeras in localization
in a striated pattern in cardiomyocytes and in restoration of a normal striated
distribution of both ryanodine and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors as
well as normal beat frequency of contracting cardiomyocytes. Further deletions
within the death/C-terminal domain demonstrated that the C-terminal domain
determines ankyrin-B activity, whereas deletion of the death domain had no
effect. C-terminal domains are the most divergent between ankyrin isoforms and
are candidates to encode the signal(s) that enable ankyrins to selectively
target proteins to diverse cellular sites.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110958200
PMID: 11781319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
