---
reference_id: "PMID:35197085"
title: "Wilson disease in Northern Portugal: a long-term follow-up study."
authors:
- Garrido I
- Marques M
- Liberal R
- Cardoso H
- Lopes S
- Macedo G
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02245-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilson disease in Northern Portugal: a long-term follow-up study.
**Authors:** Garrido I, Marques M, Liberal R, Cardoso H, Lopes S, Macedo G
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02245-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02245-5)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Feb 23;17(1):82. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02245-5.

Wilson disease in Northern Portugal: a long-term follow-up study.

Garrido I(1)(2), Marques M(3)(4), Liberal R(3)(4), Cardoso H(3)(4), Lopes 
S(3)(4), Macedo G(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology and Hepatology Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário 
de São João, Alameda Prof. Hernâni Monteiro, 4200-319, Porto, Portugal. 
isabelmng@hotmail.com.
(2)World Gastroenterology Organization (WGO) Porto Training Center, Porto, 
Portugal. isabelmng@hotmail.com.
(3)Gastroenterology and Hepatology Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário 
de São João, Alameda Prof. Hernâni Monteiro, 4200-319, Porto, Portugal.
(4)World Gastroenterology Organization (WGO) Porto Training Center, Porto, 
Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disease of liver copper 
metabolism with predominant hepatic and neurological manifestations. Long-term 
data on the clinical follow-up and treatment efficacy are limited due to the low 
frequency of the disease. We evaluated a large cohort of Wilson disease patients 
from Northern Portugal during a 20-year follow-up period.
METHODS: Twenty-four patients, diagnosed from 1975 to 2020 in a tertiary care 
center in Portugal, were retrospectively evaluated according to their clinical 
presentation, therapies and outcomes.
RESULTS: Most of the patients were males (54%), with a median age at diagnosis 
of 19 years old (interquartile range 15-25). The main manifestations of Wilson 
disease were hepatic (71%) and neurological (25%). Family history was positive 
in 5 (21%) patients. Four patients (17%) presented with acute liver failure and 
fifteen (63%) individuals had cirrhosis at diagnosis. Penicillamine therapy was 
used by 11 (46%) patients, while trientine and zinc were given to 8 (33%) and 1 
(4%) patient, respectively. Ten (42%) individuals underwent liver 
transplantation. The majority of patients (83%) had stable disease or improved 
outcomes during follow-up.
CONCLUSION: This is the largest cohort of adult patients with Wilson disease 
reported in Northern Portugal. We show that Wilson disease has favorable 
outcomes with long overall survival, assuming adherence to therapy and lack of 
other insults to their liver.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02245-5
PMCID: PMC8867740
PMID: 35197085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.