---
reference_id: "PMID:33572801"
title: ALK2 Receptor Kinase Association with FKBP12.6 Is Structurally Conserved with the ALK2-FKBP12 Complex.
authors:
- Williams E
- Riesebos E
- Kerr G
- Bullock AN
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9020129
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALK2 Receptor Kinase Association with FKBP12.6 Is Structurally Conserved with the ALK2-FKBP12 Complex.
**Authors:** Williams E, Riesebos E, Kerr G, Bullock AN
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines9020129](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9020129)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2021 Jan 29;9(2):129. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9020129.

ALK2 Receptor Kinase Association with FKBP12.6 Is Structurally Conserved with 
the ALK2-FKBP12 Complex.

Williams E(1), Riesebos E(1)(2), Kerr G(1), Bullock AN(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Medicines Discovery, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus 
Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The immunophilin FKBP12 is a known inhibitor of type I BMP and TGF-β receptors 
that competes for binding with their substrate SMADs. FKBP12 and the close 
paralog FKBP12.6 additionally assemble with ryanodine receptors to control Ca2+ 
release. Binding of FKBP12.6 to BMP/TGF-β receptors has yet to be investigated, 
but appears plausible given its high sequence similarity to FKBP12. Here, we 
found that FKBP12.6 can assemble with BMP and TGF-β-family type I receptors, but 
not with type II receptors. Cellular immunoprecipitation confirmed similar 
binding of FKBP12 and FKBP12.6 to the BMP receptor ALK2 (ACVR1), a known target 
of mutations in the congenital syndrome fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva 
(FOP), as well as the pediatric brain tumor diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma 
(DIPG). SEC-MALS analyses using purified proteins indicated a direct 1:1 
interaction between FKBP12.6 and the receptor's cytoplasmic domains. The 2.17 Å 
structure of this ALK2-FKBP12.6 complex bound to the inhibitor dorsomorphin 
showed FKBP12.6 binding to the GS domain of ALK2 in a manner equivalent to the 
FKBP12 complex, with ALK2 residues Phe198 and Leu199 extending into the 
FK506-binding pocket of FKBP12.6. These findings suggest a level of redundancy 
in FKBP-family regulation of BMP and TGF-β signaling.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9020129
PMCID: PMC7911104
PMID: 33572801

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of this study.