---
reference_id: "PMID:39928094"
title: "Differential antibiosis predisposes mice to Campylobacter jejuni infection: Deeper insights into the impact of the gut microbiota composition in colonization resistance."
authors:
- Shayya NW
- Mousavi S
- Stingl K
- Bereswill S
- Heimesaat MM
journal: Eur J Microbiol Immunol (Bp)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1556/1886.2024.00140
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential antibiosis predisposes mice to Campylobacter jejuni infection: Deeper insights into the impact of the gut microbiota composition in colonization resistance.
**Authors:** Shayya NW, Mousavi S, Stingl K, Bereswill S, Heimesaat MM
**Journal:** Eur J Microbiol Immunol (Bp) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1556/1886.2024.00140](https://doi.org/10.1556/1886.2024.00140)

## Content

1. Eur J Microbiol Immunol (Bp). 2025 Feb 10;15(1):42-56. doi: 
10.1556/1886.2024.00140. Print 2025 Mar 19.

Differential antibiosis predisposes mice to Campylobacter jejuni infection: 
Deeper insights into the impact of the gut microbiota composition in 
colonization resistance.

Shayya NW(1), Mousavi S(1), Stingl K(2), Bereswill S(1), Heimesaat MM(1).

Author information:
(1)1Gastrointestinal Microbiology Research Group, Institute of Microbiology, 
Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
and Berlin Institute of Health, 12203 Berlin, Germany.
(2)2National Reference Laboratory for Campylobacter, Department of Biological 
Safety, German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR), 12277 Berlin, 
Germany.

Conventional laboratory mice are protected from oral Campylobacter jejuni 
infection due to colonization resistance (CR) mediated by their host-specific 
gut microbiota. Here, we used differential effects of distinct antibiotics on 
gut microbiota composition to identify microbial groups associated with CR 
against C. jejuni. Therefore, specific pathogen-free (SPF) mice were subjected 
to ampicillin plus sulbactam (A/S), ciprofloxacin (CIP), or vancomycin (VAN) via 
the drinking water for 28 days or left untreated before peroral C. jejuni 
challenge. Cultural analyses revealed that CR displayed by untreated mice was 
abrogated by A/S treatment, but only reduced in mice treated with CIP or VAN. 
Notably, differential analysis of antibiotic-induced microbiota changes and C. 
jejuni colonization dynamics identified lactobacilli and Clostridium leptum as 
key microbial groups that were associated with CR. Notably, the complete 
eradication of intestinal bacteria in A/S treated mice supported high intestinal 
C. jejuni colonization levels which triggered apoptosis and inflammatory 
responses accompanied by enhanced expression of matrix-degrading gelatinases in 
the colon. In conclusion, A/S treated mice represent a valuable infection model 
for the study of campylobacteriosis and the treatment of mice with specific 
antibiotics support the investigation of molecular mechanisms involved in CR 
against enteropathogens.

DOI: 10.1556/1886.2024.00140
PMCID: PMC11925189
PMID: 39928094

Conflict of interest statement: Ethics statement: All animal experiments were 
carried out according to the European animal welfare guidelines (2010/63/EU) 
following approval by the commission for animal experiments (“Landesamt für 
Gesundheit und Soziales”, LaGeSo, Berlin). The clinical conditions of mice were 
monitored daily. Conflict of interest: SB and MMH are members of the Editorial 
Board of the journal, therefore they did not take part in the review process in 
any capacity and the submission was handled by a different member of the 
editorial board. The submission was subject to the same process as any other 
manuscript and editorial board membership had no influence on editorial 
consideration and the final decision.