---
reference_id: "PMID:39719154"
title: "Dieulafoy's Lesion: A Rare Cause of Gastrointestinal Bleeding after Interrupted Aortic Arch Repair in an Adult."
authors:
- Tennyson C
- Adigun A
- Ghosh J
- Kadir I
- Dimarakis I
journal: Aorta (Stamford)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/s-0044-1801294
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dieulafoy's Lesion: A Rare Cause of Gastrointestinal Bleeding after Interrupted Aortic Arch Repair in an Adult.
**Authors:** Tennyson C, Adigun A, Ghosh J, Kadir I, Dimarakis I
**Journal:** Aorta (Stamford) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0044-1801294](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0044-1801294)

## Content

1. Aorta (Stamford). 2024 Apr;12(2):41-43. doi: 10.1055/s-0044-1801294. Epub 2024
 Dec 24.

Dieulafoy's Lesion: A Rare Cause of Gastrointestinal Bleeding after Interrupted 
Aortic Arch Repair in an Adult.

Tennyson C(1), Adigun A(1), Ghosh J(2), Kadir I(1), Dimarakis I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Vascular Surgery, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, 
United Kingdom.

Survival into adulthood in patients with an interrupted aortic arch (IAA) is 
exceedingly rare. A recent literature review found 25 reported cases of IAA in 
adults. We describe the first case of prolonged, occult, postoperative 
gastrointestinal bleeding as a major complication following IAA surgery. We 
discuss the management of a 51-year-old man who underwent repair of an IAA, 
aortic valve replacement, and replacement of the ascending aorta for a known 
aortic aneurysm.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial License, 
permitting copying and reproduction so long as the original work is given 
appropriate credit. Contents may not be used for commercial purposes, or 
adapted, remixed, transformed or built upon. 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0044-1801294
PMCID: PMC11688146
PMID: 39719154

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.