---
reference_id: "PMID:36472296"
title: A CASE OF KAWASAKI DISEASE IN AN EIGHT-YEAR-OLD BOY.
authors:
- Kopiyka GK
- Kravchenko TY
- Artomova OM
- Soboleva KB
journal: Wiad Lek
year: '2022'
doi: 10.36740/WLek202210143
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A CASE OF KAWASAKI DISEASE IN AN EIGHT-YEAR-OLD BOY.
**Authors:** Kopiyka GK, Kravchenko TY, Artomova OM, Soboleva KB
**Journal:** Wiad Lek (2022)
**DOI:** [10.36740/WLek202210143](https://doi.org/10.36740/WLek202210143)

## Content

1. Wiad Lek. 2022;75(10):2544-2548. doi: 10.36740/WLek202210143.

A CASE OF KAWASAKI DISEASE IN AN EIGHT-YEAR-OLD BOY.

Kopiyka GK(1), Kravchenko TY(1), Artomova OM(2), Soboleva KB(1).

Author information:
(1)ODESA NATIONAL MEDICAL UNIVERSITY, ODESA, UKRAINE.
(2)COMMUNAL NON-PROFIT ENTERPRISE «CHILDREN'S CITY CLINICAL HOSPITAL №3» OF THE 
ODESA CITY COUNCIL, ODESA, UKRAINE.

Kawasaki disease is an acute systemic disease characterized by the predominant 
lesions of middle and small arteries, alongside destructive and proliferative 
vasculitis development. The aetiology is currently being discussed. Infectious 
factors are mostly preferred, in addition, autoimmune mechanisms and genetic 
heredity are considered. The diagnosis of Kawasaki disease is established by 
clinical signs; laboratory changes are usually taken into account as are 
ancillary criteria. The article discusses the clinical case of Kawasaki disease 
in an 8-year-old boy. Given the variety and inconsistency of the clinical 
symptoms (the child had four of the five mandatory criteria together with 
prolonged fever), there was a late diagnosis, namely on day 10 of the disease. 
Due to the high risk of cardiovascular complications in the differential 
diagnosis of children with fever lasting more than 3 days should be considered 
Kawasaki disease, followed by mandatory heart echocardiography during the first 
10 days of the disease, especially if the fever is accompanied by the increase 
of acute phase reactants. When treating children with chronic fever without a 
specific source, the doctor should be wary of Kawasaki disease, as it can 
clinically simulate acute respiratory viral disease, the onset of diffuse 
connective tissue disease, and infectious endocarditis, and can have common 
features and require differential diagnostics with coronavirus associated 
multisystem inflammatory syndrome.

DOI: 10.36740/WLek202210143
PMID: 36472296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]