---
reference_id: "PMID:36054293"
title: "Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome caused by pathogenic variants in FKBP14: Further insights into the phenotypic spectrum and pathogenic mechanisms."
authors:
- Colman M
- Vroman R
- Dhooge T
- Malfait Z
- Symoens S
- Burnyté B
- Nampoothiri S
- Kariminejad A
- Malfait F
- Syx D
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24456
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome caused by pathogenic variants in FKBP14: Further insights into the phenotypic spectrum and pathogenic mechanisms.
**Authors:** Colman M, Vroman R, Dhooge T, Malfait Z, Symoens S, Burnyté B, Nampoothiri S, Kariminejad A, Malfait F, Syx D
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24456](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24456)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2022 Dec;43(12):1994-2009. doi: 10.1002/humu.24456. Epub 2022 Sep
12.

Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome caused by pathogenic variants in FKBP14: 
Further insights into the phenotypic spectrum and pathogenic mechanisms.

Colman M(1), Vroman R(1), Dhooge T(1), Malfait Z(1), Symoens S(1), Burnyté B(2), 
Nampoothiri S(3), Kariminejad A(4), Malfait F(1), Syx D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Center for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu 
Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(3)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & 
Research Centre, Kerala, India.
(4)Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran.

The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a heterogeneous group of heritable 
connective tissue diseases. The autosomal recessive kyphoscoliotic EDS results 
from deficiency of either lysyl hydroxylase 1 (encoded by PLOD1), crucial for 
collagen cross-linking; or the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase family 
FK506-binding protein 22 kDa (FKBP22 encoded by FKBP14), a molecular chaperone 
of types III, IV, VI, and X collagen. This study reports the clinical 
manifestations of three probands with homozygous pathogenic FKBP14 variants, 
including the previously reported c.362dupC; p.(Glu122Argfs*7) variant, a novel 
missense variant (c.587A>G; p.(Asp196Gly)) and a start codon variant (c.2T>G; 
p.?). Consistent clinical features in the hitherto reported individuals (n = 40) 
are kyphoscoliosis, generalized joint hypermobility and congenital muscle 
hypotonia. Severe vascular complications have been observed in 12.5%. A 
previously unreported feature is microcornea observed in two probands reported 
here. Both the c.587A>G and the c.362dupC variant cause complete loss of FKBP22. 
With immunocytochemistry on dermal fibroblasts, we provide the first evidence 
for intracellular retention of types III and VI collagen in EDS-FKBP14. Scratch 
wound assays were largely normal. Western blot of proteins involved in the 
unfolded protein response and autophagy did not reveal significant upregulation 
in dermal fibroblasts.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24456
PMID: 36054293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]