---
reference_id: "PMID:28809650"
title: "Supporting Adults With Alzheimer's Disease and Related Major Neurocognitive Disorders and Their Caregivers: Effective Occupational Therapy Interventions."
authors:
- Smallfield S
journal: Am J Occup Ther
year: '2017'
doi: 10.5014/ajot.2017.715002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Supporting Adults With Alzheimer's Disease and Related Major Neurocognitive Disorders and Their Caregivers: Effective Occupational Therapy Interventions.
**Authors:** Smallfield S
**Journal:** Am J Occup Ther (2017)
**DOI:** [10.5014/ajot.2017.715002](https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2017.715002)

## Content

1. Am J Occup Ther. 2017 Sep/Oct;71(5):7105170010p1-7105170010p4. doi: 
10.5014/ajot.2017.715002.

Supporting Adults With Alzheimer's Disease and Related Major Neurocognitive 
Disorders and Their Caregivers: Effective Occupational Therapy Interventions.

Smallfield S(1).

Author information:
(1)Stacy Smallfield, DrOT, OTR/L, BCG, FAOTA, is Assistant Director, Entry-Level 
Doctoral Program, and Associate Professor of Occupational Therapy and Medicine, 
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO; stacy.smallfield@wustl.edu.

Occupational therapy practitioners play a significant role in supporting adults 
with Alzheimer's disease and related major neurocognitive disorders, as well as 
their caregivers, through all phases of the disease process. This editorial 
highlights the systematic reviews completed in collaboration with the American 
Occupational Therapy Association's Evidence-Based Practice Project that 
summarize the evidence for the effectiveness of interventions within the scope 
of occupational therapy practice for this population. Readers are encouraged to 
translate and integrate this updated knowledge into everyday practice.

Copyright © 2017 by the American Occupational Therapy Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.5014/ajot.2017.715002
PMID: 28809650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]