---
reference_id: "PMID:38021884"
title: Glioblastoma Multiforme in a Patient With Alpha-1-Antitrypsin Deficiency.
authors:
- Ober C
- Esmail R
- Casadesus D
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.47371
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glioblastoma Multiforme in a Patient With Alpha-1-Antitrypsin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Ober C, Esmail R, Casadesus D
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.47371](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.47371)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Oct 20;15(10):e47371. doi: 10.7759/cureus.47371. eCollection 2023
 Oct.

Glioblastoma Multiforme in a Patient With Alpha-1-Antitrypsin Deficiency.

Ober C(1), Esmail R(2), Casadesus D(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Ross University School of Medicine, St. Michael, BRB.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin (A1AT) is a common genetic disease caused by a mutation in 
the SERPINA1 gene, predisposing patients to severe premature lung and liver 
disease. Higher expression of SERPINA1 has been associated with a poor prognosis 
in patients with high-grade glioblastoma. We present a woman in her 70s with a 
history of A1AT deficiency treated with weekly plasma-purified A1AT infusions, 
who presented with metabolic encephalopathy. A CT scan of the brain obtained 
during admission revealed a left frontal lobe mass measuring 1.1 cm. A 
craniotomy and resection of the lesion were performed, and the pathology studies 
revealed a glioblastoma multiforme, WHO grade IV. She is currently healing and 
awaiting treatment with temozolomide with concomitant radiation and tolerating 
treatment well.

Copyright © 2023, Ober et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.47371
PMCID: PMC10657158
PMID: 38021884

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.