---
reference_id: "PMID:28613580"
title: Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease.
authors:
- Masab M
- Surmachevska N
- Farooq H
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease.
**Authors:** Masab M, Surmachevska N, Farooq H

## Content

1. Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease.

Masab M(1), Surmachevska N(2), Farooq H(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2023 Oct 29.

Author information:
(1)Albert Einstein Medical Center
(2)University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center
(3)Waterdury Hospital

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease, alternatively referred to as histiocytic necrotizing 
lymphadenitis or Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease, is a rare yet self-limiting 
inflammatory condition initially documented by Japanese pathologists Kikuchi and 
Fujimoto in Japan in 1972. Although the disease primarily affects young and 
pediatric patients of Asian descent, cases have been documented in individuals 
of diverse ages and ethnic backgrounds. The typical presentation is acute to 
subacute, characterized by painful, tender, mobile cervical lymphadenopathy 
associated with systemic symptoms, including fevers, malaise, weight loss, 
arthralgias, and various skin manifestations. An excisional lymph node biopsy is 
imperative for confirming a definitive diagnosis, revealing a deficiency of 
neutrophils and eosinophils. Immunohistochemistry will demonstrate histiocytes 
positive for myeloperoxidase and CD68, T cells positive for CD8, and a minimal 
presence of B cells. Fine-needle aspiration is typically inadequate for 
confirming the diagnosis due to the limited tissue sample acquired. 
Distinguishing Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease from lymphomas and infectious etiologies 
is critical, and additional support for the histologic diagnosis can be obtained 
through cultures and serological testing. Although the histology in systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE) lymphadenitis may bear a resemblance to 
Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease, the presence of hematoxylin bodies in SLE 
lymphadenitis aids in its distinction from Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease. SLE is the 
most prevalent autoimmune condition associated with Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease. 
However, unlike SLE, Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease typically follows a self-limiting 
course lasting several months, with a low recurrence rate of approximately 3% to 
4%. The management of Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease primarily involves supportive 
care for patients, with the use of corticosteroids and immunosuppression 
reserved for cases of severe or recurrent disease. The prognosis is excellent, 
with rare complications such as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). 
Diagnostic challenges arise from the rarity of the disease, potentially leading 
to patients receiving inappropriate treatment for alternative etiologies. 
Therefore, raising awareness among clinicians and pathologists about this rare 
condition can significantly improve patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 28613580

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Muhammad Masab declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Natalya 
Surmachevska declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible 
companies. Disclosure: Hafsa Farooq declares no relevant financial relationships 
with ineligible companies.