---
reference_id: "PMID:38456909"
title: "Baricitinib for anti-melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 antibody-positive dermatomyositis-associated interstitial lung disease: a case series and literature review on Janus kinase inhibitors for the disease."
authors:
- Harada H
- Shoda H
- Tsuchiya H
- Misaki M
- Sawada T
- Fujio K
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-024-05551-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Baricitinib for anti-melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 antibody-positive dermatomyositis-associated interstitial lung disease: a case series and literature review on Janus kinase inhibitors for the disease.
**Authors:** Harada H, Shoda H, Tsuchiya H, Misaki M, Sawada T, Fujio K
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-024-05551-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-024-05551-2)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2024 May;44(5):961-971. doi: 10.1007/s00296-024-05551-2. Epub 
2024 Mar 8.

Baricitinib for anti-melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 
antibody-positive dermatomyositis-associated interstitial lung disease: a case 
series and literature review on Janus kinase inhibitors for the disease.

Harada H(1), Shoda H(2), Tsuchiya H(2), Misaki M(2), Sawada T(2), Fujio K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, 
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. 
haradamd@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, 
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

Anti-melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 antibody-positive 
dermatomyositis (anti-MDA5-DM) is frequently complicated by progressive 
interstitial lung disease (ILD), the prognosis of which is poor, and management 
is a major challenge. We treated three patients with anti-MDA5-DM-associated ILD 
(anti-MDA5-DM-ILD) using the Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor, baricitinib, which 
improved lung opacities and saved two patients. We reviewed 6 patients with 
anti-MDA5-DM-ILD who had been treated with tofacitinib at our institution. Five 
of the patients survived, although discontinuation of tofacitinib due to 
complications was frequently observed. In addition, a literature search of 
patients with anti-MDA5-DM-ILD who were treated with JAK inhibitors yielded 21 
articles involving 79 cases. All patients except one were treated with 
tofacitinib, and the survival rate was 75.9%. Although not statistically 
confirmed, the deceased patients tended to be older and had higher ferritin 
levels. A total of 92 complications were observed, 11 of which resulted in JAK 
inhibitor discontinuation. Cytomegalovirus reactivation comprised a substantial 
percentage of all complications and of those patients who required JAK inhibitor 
discontinuation. Five cases with fatal infective complications were also 
observed. While tofacitinib has been proposed to be a therapeutic option for 
anti-MDA5-DM-ILD, other JAK inhibitors, including baricitinib, are a treatment 
option. Further investigation is warranted to optimize treatment of 
anti-MDA5-DM-ILD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-024-05551-2
PMCID: PMC10980644
PMID: 38456909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KF receives speaking fees and research support 
from Eli Lilly and Company; HT receives speaking fees from Eli Lilly and 
Company; and the other authors have no conflict of interest to declare.