---
reference_id: "PMID:37367586"
title: "Coccidioidomycosis Granulomas Informed by Other Diseases: Advancements, Gaps, and Challenges."
authors:
- Miranda N
- Hoyer KK
journal: J Fungi (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jof9060650
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coccidioidomycosis Granulomas Informed by Other Diseases: Advancements, Gaps, and Challenges.
**Authors:** Miranda N, Hoyer KK
**Journal:** J Fungi (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jof9060650](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof9060650)

## Content

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2023 Jun 9;9(6):650. doi: 10.3390/jof9060650.

Coccidioidomycosis Granulomas Informed by Other Diseases: Advancements, Gaps, 
and Challenges.

Miranda N(1), Hoyer KK(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Quantitative Systems Biology Graduate Program, University of California 
Merced, Merced, CA 95343, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, School of Natural Sciences, 
University of California Merced, Merced, CA 95343, USA.
(3)Health Sciences Research Institute, University of California Merced, Merced, 
CA 95343, USA.

Valley fever is a respiratory disease caused by a soil fungus, Coccidioides, 
that is inhaled upon soil disruption. One mechanism by which the host immune 
system attempts to control and eliminate Coccidioides is through granuloma 
formation. However, very little is known about granulomas during Coccidioides 
infection. Granulomas were first identified in tuberculosis (TB) lungs as early 
as 1679, and yet many gaps in our understanding of granuloma formation, 
maintenance, and regulation remain. Granulomas are best defined in TB, providing 
clues that may be leveraged to understand Coccidioides infections. Granulomas 
also form during several other infectious and spontaneous diseases including 
sarcoidosis, chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), and others. This review 
explores our current understanding of granulomas, as well as potential 
mechanisms, and applies this knowledge to unraveling coccidioidomycosis 
granulomas.

DOI: 10.3390/jof9060650
PMCID: PMC10301931
PMID: 37367586

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict to declare.