---
reference_id: "PMID:34750192"
title: "New locus underlying auriculocondylar syndrome (ARCND): 430 kb duplication involving TWIST1 regulatory elements."
authors:
- Romanelli Tavares VL
- Guimarães-Ramos SL
- Zhou Y
- Masotti C
- Ezquina S
- Moreira DP
- Buermans H
- Freitas RS
- Den Dunnen JT
- Twigg SRF
- Passos-Bueno MR
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-107825
keywords:
- "Ear/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Ear Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Osteogenesis
- "Regulatory Sequences, Nucleic Acid"
- Twist-Related Protein 1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New locus underlying auriculocondylar syndrome (ARCND): 430 kb duplication involving TWIST1 regulatory elements.
**Authors:** Romanelli Tavares VL, Guimarães-Ramos SL, Zhou Y, Masotti C, Ezquina S, Moreira DP, Buermans H, Freitas RS, Den Dunnen JT, Twigg SRF, Passos-Bueno MR
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-107825](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-107825)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2022 Sep;59(9):895-905. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-107825. Epub 
2021 Nov 8.

New locus underlying auriculocondylar syndrome (ARCND): 430 kb duplication 
involving TWIST1 regulatory elements.

Romanelli Tavares VL(#)(1), Guimarães-Ramos SL(#)(1), Zhou Y(2), Masotti 
C(1)(3), Ezquina S(1)(4), Moreira DP(1), Buermans H(5), Freitas RS(6), Den 
Dunnen JT(5), Twigg SRF(7), Passos-Bueno MR(8).

Author information:
(1)Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Universidade de São Paulo Instituto de 
Biociências, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Clinical Genetics Group, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Molecular Oncology Center, Hospital Sírio-Libanês, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.
(5)Leiden Genome Technology Center, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Centro de Atendimento Integral ao Fissurado Lábio Palatal, Curitiba, Brazil.
(7)Clinical Genetics Group, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK passos@ib.usp.br 
stephen.twigg@imm.ox.ac.uk.
(8)Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Universidade de São Paulo Instituto de 
Biociências, Sao Paulo, Brazil passos@ib.usp.br stephen.twigg@imm.ox.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Auriculocondylar syndrome (ARCND) is a rare genetic disease that 
affects structures derived from the first and second pharyngeal arches, mainly 
resulting in micrognathia and auricular malformations. To date, pathogenic 
variants have been identified in three genes involved in the EDN1-DLX5/6 pathway 
(PLCB4, GNAI3 and EDN1) and some cases remain unsolved. Here we studied a large 
unsolved four-generation family.
METHODS: We performed linkage analysis, resequencing and Capture-C to 
investigate the causative variant of this family. To test the pathogenicity of 
the CNV found, we modelled the disease in patient craniofacial progenitor cells, 
including induced pluripotent cell (iPSC)-derived neural crest and mesenchymal 
cells.
RESULTS: This study highlights a fourth locus causative of ARCND, represented by 
a tandem duplication of 430 kb in a candidate region on chromosome 7 defined by 
linkage analysis. This duplication segregates with the disease in the family 
(LOD score=2.88) and includes HDAC9, which is located over 200 kb telomeric to 
the top candidate gene TWIST1. Notably, Capture-C analysis revealed multiple cis 
interactions between the TWIST1 promoter and possible regulatory elements within 
the duplicated region. Modelling of the disease revealed an increased expression 
of HDAC9 and its neighbouring gene, TWIST1, in neural crest cells. We also 
identified decreased migration of iPSC-derived neural crest cells together with 
dysregulation of osteogenic differentiation in iPSC-affected mesenchymal stem 
cells.
CONCLUSION: Our findings support the hypothesis that the 430 kb duplication is 
causative of the ARCND phenotype in this family and that deregulation of TWIST1 
expression during craniofacial development can contribute to the phenotype.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-107825
PMCID: PMC9411924
PMID: 34750192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.