---
reference_id: "PMID:39241757"
title: Implementation of a dyadic nomenclature for monogenic diseases.
authors:
- Thaxton C
- Biesecker LG
- DiStefano M
- Haendel M
- Hamosh A
- Owens E
- Plon SE
- Rehm HL
- Berg JS
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.07.019
keywords:
- Humans
- Terminology as Topic
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/genetics"
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Implementation of a dyadic nomenclature for monogenic diseases.
**Authors:** Thaxton C, Biesecker LG, DiStefano M, Haendel M, Hamosh A, Owens E, Plon SE, Rehm HL, Berg JS
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.07.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.07.019)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2024 Sep 5;111(9):1810-1818. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.07.019.

Implementation of a dyadic nomenclature for monogenic diseases.

Thaxton C(1), Biesecker LG(2), DiStefano M(3), Haendel M(4), Hamosh A(5), Owens
E(4), Plon SE(6), Rehm HL(7), Berg JS(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA. Electronic address: courtney_thaxton@med.unc.edu.
(2)Center for Precision Health Research, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA.
(5)McKusick-Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics/Hematology-Oncology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(7)Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(8)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA. Electronic address: jonathan_berg@med.unc.edu.

A core task when establishing the strength of evidence for a gene's role in a
monogenic disorder is determining the appropriate disease entity to curate.
Establishing this concept determines which evidence can be applied and
quantified toward the final gene-disease validity, variant pathogenicity, or
actionability classification. Genes with implications in more than one phenotype
can necessitate a process of lumping and splitting, disease reorganization, and
updates to disease nomenclature. Reappraisal of the names that are used as
labels for disease entities is therefore a necessary and perpetual process. The
Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen), in collaboration with representatives from
Monarch Disease Ontology (Mondo) and Online Inheritance in Man (OMIM), formed
the Disease Naming Advisory Committee (DNAC) to develop guidance for groups
faced with the need to establish the "curated disease entity" for gene-phenotype
validity and variant pathogenicity and to update disease names for clinical use
when necessary. The objective of this group was to harmonize guidance for
disease naming across these nosologic entities and among ClinGen curation groups
in collaboration with other disease-related professional groups. Here, we
present the initial guidance developed by the DNAC with representative examples
provided by the ClinGen expert panels and working groups that warranted
nomenclature updates. We also discuss the broader implications of these efforts
and their benefits for harmonization of gene-disease validity curation. Overall,
this work sheds light on current inconsistencies and/or discrepancies and is
designed to engage the broader community on how ClinGen defines monogenic
disorders using a consistent approach for disease naming.

Copyright © 2024 American Society of Human Genetics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.07.019
PMCID: PMC11393707
PMID: 39241757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests M.H. is a co-founder of
Alamya Health, a genomic diagnostics company. L.G.B. is a member of the Illumina
Medical ethics committee and receives royalties from Wolters-Kluwer and research
funding from Merck Inc.
