---
reference_id: "PMID:34740257"
title: Molecular alterations due to Col5a1 haploinsufficiency in a mouse model of classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Machol K
- Polak U
- Weisz-Hubshman M
- Song IW
- Chen S
- Jiang MM
- Chen-Evenson Y
- Weis MAE
- Keene DR
- Eyre DR
- Lee BH
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab323
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular alterations due to Col5a1 haploinsufficiency in a mouse model of classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Machol K, Polak U, Weisz-Hubshman M, Song IW, Chen S, Jiang MM, Chen-Evenson Y, Weis MAE, Keene DR, Eyre DR, Lee BH
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddab323](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddab323)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2022 Apr 22;31(8):1325-1335. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab323.

Molecular alterations due to Col5a1 haploinsufficiency in a mouse model of 
classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Machol K(1), Polak U(1), Weisz-Hubshman M(1), Song IW(1), Chen S(1), Jiang 
MM(1), Chen-Evenson Y(1), Weis MAE(2), Keene DR(3), Eyre DR(2), Lee BH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor college of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(3)Micro-Imaging Center, Shriners Hospital for Children, Portland, OR 97239, 
USA.

Type V collagen is a regulatory fibrillar collagen essential for type I collagen 
fibril nucleation and organization and its deficiency leads to structurally 
abnormal extracellular matrix (ECM). Haploinsufficiency of the Col5a1 gene 
encoding α(1) chain of type V collagen is the primary cause of classic 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS). The mechanisms by which this initial insult leads 
to the spectrum of clinical presentation are not fully understood. Using 
transcriptome analysis of skin and Achilles tendons from Col5a1 
haploinsufficient (Col5a1+/-) mice, we recognized molecular alterations 
associated with the tissue phenotypes. We identified dysregulation of ECM 
components including thrombospondin-1, lysyl oxidase, and lumican in the skin of 
Col5a1+/- mice when compared with control. We also identified upregulation of 
transforming growth factor β1 (Tgf-β) in serum and increased expression of 
pSmad2 in skin from Col5a1+/- mice, suggesting Tgf-β dysregulation is a 
contributor to abnormal wound healing and atrophic scarring seen in classic EDS. 
Together, these findings support altered matrix to cell signaling as a component 
of the pathogenesis of the tissue phenotype in classic EDS and point out 
potential downstream signaling pathways that may be targeted for the treatment 
of this disease.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddab323
PMCID: PMC9029232
PMID: 34740257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]