---
reference_id: "PMID:31196221"
title: "Recommendations for the management of MPS IVA: systematic evidence- and consensus-based guidance."
authors:
- Akyol MU
- Alden TD
- Amartino H
- Ashworth J
- Belani K
- Berger KI
- Borgo A
- Braunlin E
- Eto Y
- Gold JI
- Jester A
- Jones SA
- Karsli C
- Mackenzie W
- Marinho DR
- McFadyen A
- McGill J
- Mitchell JJ
- Muenzer J
- Okuyama T
- Orchard PJ
- Stevens B
- Thomas S
- Walker R
- Wynn R
- Giugliani R
- Harmatz P
- Hendriksz C
- Scarpa M
- MPS Consensus Programme Steering Committee
- MPS Consensus Programme Co-Chairs
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1074-9
keywords:
- "Chondroitinsulfatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypercapnia/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mucopolysaccharidosis IV/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recommendations for the management of MPS IVA: systematic evidence- and consensus-based guidance.
**Authors:** Akyol MU, Alden TD, Amartino H, Ashworth J, Belani K, Berger KI, Borgo A, Braunlin E, Eto Y, Gold JI, Jester A, Jones SA, Karsli C, Mackenzie W, Marinho DR, McFadyen A, McGill J, Mitchell JJ, Muenzer J, Okuyama T, Orchard PJ, Stevens B, Thomas S, Walker R, Wynn R, Giugliani R, Harmatz P, Hendriksz C, Scarpa M, MPS Consensus Programme Steering Committee, MPS Consensus Programme Co-Chairs
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1074-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1074-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Jun 13;14(1):137. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1074-9.

Recommendations for the management of MPS IVA: systematic evidence- and 
consensus-based guidance.

Akyol MU(1), Alden TD(2), Amartino H(3), Ashworth J(4), Belani K(5), Berger 
KI(6), Borgo A(7), Braunlin E(8), Eto Y(9), Gold JI(10), Jester A(11), Jones 
SA(12), Karsli C(13), Mackenzie W(14), Marinho DR(15), McFadyen A(16), McGill 
J(17), Mitchell JJ(18), Muenzer J(19), Okuyama T(20), Orchard PJ(21), Stevens 
B(22), Thomas S(22), Walker R(23), Wynn R(24), Giugliani R(25), Harmatz P(26), 
Hendriksz C(27), Scarpa M(28); MPS Consensus Programme Steering Committee; MPS 
Consensus Programme Co-Chairs.

Collaborators: Akyol MU, Alden TD, Amartino H, Ashworth J, Belani K, Berger KI, 
Borgo A, Braunlin E, Eto Y, Gold JI, Jester A, Jones SA, Karsli C, Mackenzie W, 
Marinho DR, McFadyen A, McGill J, Mitchell JJ, Muenzer J, Okuyama T, Orchard PJ, 
Stevens B, Thomas S, Walker R, Wynn R, Giugliani R, Harmatz P, Hendriksz C, 
Scarpa M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of 
Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Child Neurology Department, Hospital Universitario Austral, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(4)Department of Paediatric Ophthalmology, Manchester Royal Eye Hospital, 
Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(6)Departments of Medicine and Neuroscience and Physiology, New York University 
School of Medicine, André Cournand Pulmonary Physiology Laboratory, Bellevue 
Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Orthopaedics Clinic, Padova University Hospital, Padova, Italy.
(8)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 
USA.
(9)Advanced Clinical Research Centre, Institute of Neurological Disorders, 
Kanagawa, Japan and Department of Paediatrics/Gene Therapy, Tokyo Jikei 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Keck School of Medicine, Departments of Anesthesiology, Pediatrics, and 
Psychiatry & Behavioural Sciences, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Department 
of Anesthesiology Critical Care Medicine, 4650 Sunset Boulevard, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(11)Hand and Upper Limb Service, Department of Plastic Surgery, Birmingham 
Women's and Children's Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(12)Willink Biochemical Genetic Unit, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St 
Mary's Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(13)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Canada.
(14)Department of Orthopedics, Nemours/Alfred I, Dupont Hospital for Children, 
Wilmington, DE, USA.
(15)Department of Ophthalmology, UFRGS, and Ophthalmology Service, HCPA, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.
(16)The Isaac Foundation, Campbellford, Ontario, Canada.
(17)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Queensland Children's Hospital, Brisbane, 
Australia.
(18)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Montreal Children's Hospital, Montreal, 
QC, Canada.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(20)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, National Centre for Child Health 
and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(21)Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(22)MPS Society, Amersham, Buckinghamshire, UK.
(23)Department of Paediatric Anaesthesia, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester, UK.
(24)Department of Paediatric Haematology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester, UK.
(25)Department of Genetics, UFRGS, and Medical Genetics Service, HCPA, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.
(26)UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland, Oakland, CA, USA.
(27)Steve Biko Academic Hospital, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South 
Africa. chris@fymcamedical.co.uk.
(28)Center for Rare Diseases at Host Schmidt Kliniken, Wiesbaden, Germany and 
Department of Paediatrics University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) IVA or Morquio A syndrome is an 
autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) caused by deficiency of the 
N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase (GALNS) enzyme, which impairs lysosomal 
degradation of keratan sulphate and chondroitin-6-sulphate. The multiple 
clinical manifestations of MPS IVA present numerous challenges for management 
and necessitate the need for individualised treatment. Although treatment 
guidelines are available, the methodology used to develop this guidance has come 
under increased scrutiny. This programme was conducted to provide 
evidence-based, expert-agreed recommendations to optimise management of MPS IVA.
METHODS: Twenty six international healthcare professionals across multiple 
disciplines, with expertise in managing MPS IVA, and three patient advocates 
formed the Steering Committee (SC) and contributed to the development of this 
guidance. Representatives from six Patient Advocacy Groups (PAGs) were 
interviewed to gain insights on patient perspectives. A modified-Delphi 
methodology was used to demonstrate consensus among a wider group of healthcare 
professionals with experience managing patients with MPS IVA and the manuscript 
was evaluated against the validated Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and 
Evaluation (AGREE II) instrument by three independent reviewers.
RESULTS: A total of 87 guidance statements were developed covering five domains: 
(1) general management principles; (2) recommended routine monitoring and 
assessments; (3) disease-modifying interventions (enzyme replacement therapy 
[ERT] and haematopoietic stem cell transplantation [HSCT]); (4) interventions to 
support respiratory and sleep disorders; (5) anaesthetics and surgical 
interventions (including spinal, limb, ophthalmic, cardio-thoracic and 
ear-nose-throat [ENT] surgeries). Consensus was reached on all statements after 
two rounds of voting. The overall guideline AGREE II assessment score obtained 
for the development of the guidance was 5.3/7 (where 1 represents the lowest 
quality and 7 represents the highest quality of guidance).
CONCLUSION: This manuscript provides evidence- and consensus-based 
recommendations for the management of patients with MPS IVA and is for use by 
healthcare professionals that manage the holistic care of patients with the 
intention to improve clinical- and patient-reported outcomes and enhance patient 
quality of life. It is recognised that the guidance provided represents a point 
in time and further research is required to address current knowledge and 
evidence gaps.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1074-9
PMCID: PMC6567385
PMID: 31196221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C Hendriksz; is Owner and Director of FYMCA 
Medical Ltd.; has conducted consultancy work for Actelion, Amicus, Alexion, 
Audentes, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Chiesi, Evidera, Inventiva, GSK, SOBI, 
Health Care at Home, Sanofi Genzyme, Shire. P Harmatz has conducted consultancy 
work and/or has received grant support from Alexion, Armagen, BioMarin 
Pharmaceutical Inc., Chiesi, Denali, Genzyme, Enzyvant, Inventiva, JCR 
Pharmaceuticals, Orphazyme, Pfizer, PTC Therapeutics, RegenXbio, Sangamo, Shire, 
SOBI and Ultragenyx. R Giugliani has received consultancy fees, and/or 
investigator fees, and/or speaker honoraria and/or travel grants to attend 
scientific meetings from Actelion, Amicus, Armagen, BioMarin, Chiesi, GC Pharma, 
Inventiva, JCR Pharmaceuticals, Lysogene, RegenxBio, Sanofi Genzyme, Shire, 
Sobi, and Ultragenyx. M Scarpa has received honoraria, research and travel 
grants from Alexion, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Chiesi, Sanofi Genzyme, 
Shire, Ultragenix and Sangamo. MU Akyol has received speaker honoraria and 
travel grants from Shire. J Ashworth has received honoraria, travel expenses and 
a research grant from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. and has received consultancy 
fees from AbbVie and Inventiva. T Alden has received consultant and honoraria 
payments from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. and Shire. K Belani was a 
co-investigator on several studies funded by grants from Lysogene and Shire and 
has received a travel grant from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. for attendance at 
an advisory meeting. H Amartino has conducted investigator, speaker and 
consultant work for Amicus, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Bluebird Bio, Sanofi 
Genzyme and Shire. K Berger has received consultancy and honoraria payments from 
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. and Sanofi Genzyme. Andrea Borgo has received 
travel grants and honoraria from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., and honoraria 
from Brains for Brains and Shire. E Braunlin has received speaker and travel 
grants from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. and Sanofi Genzyme, a research funding 
from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. and Bluebird Bio and has conducted consultancy 
work for Ultragenyx. Y Eto has received research grants and honoraria from 
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Alexion Pharmaceutical Inc., Sanofi Genzym and 
Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd., and honoraria from Dainippon Sumitomo Inc., Japan 
Chemical Research and Shire Japan. JI Gold has received honoraria and travel 
grants from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. A Jester has received honoraria, travel 
grants, and research funding from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. and funding from 
Shire for equipment to conduct outcomes assessment. S Jones has conducted 
investigator, speaker and consultancy work for Alexion, BioMarin Pharmaceutical 
Inc., Orchard therapeutics, Sanofi Genzyme, Shire and Ultragenyx. C Karsli has 
nothing to disclose. W MacKenzie has received travel grants and honoraria from 
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. and has conducted consultancy work for Johnson & 
Johnson. A McFadyen has received unrestricted educational grants from Alexion, 
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Sanofi Genzyme, Shire, and Johnson and Johnson. J 
McGill has conducted speaker, consultancy, board member work and received travel 
grants from Actelion, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Sanofi Genzyme and Shire. He 
has been an investigator for BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. J Mitchell has 
received research support, advisory board fees, and travel grants from BioMarin 
Pharmaceutical Inc. and has been involved in the conduct of BioMarin clinical 
trials. He has also received research funding from Sanofi Genzyme and Shire. He 
has received consultancy fees from Ultragenyx, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., 
Sanofi Genzyme and Shire. J Muenzer has conducted consultancy work and/or has 
received grant support from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Denali, Green Cross, 
Eloxx, PTC Therapeutics, RegenXbio, Sangamo, Sanofi Genzyme, Shire and Sobi. T 
Okuyama has received research grants from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Green 
Cross, Sanofi Genzyme, Shire, Orchard Therapeutics, and JCR, and has attended 
advisory boards for Sanofi Genzyme. He is Principal Investigator for ERT 
clinical trials for MPS II sponsored by Green Cross and JCR. P Orchard has 
received honoraria, travel and research support from Sanofi Genzyme, and has 
received research support from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Bluebird Bio and 
Horizon Pharma. B Stevens has received grants for the MPS Society from Sanofi 
Genzyme, Shire, Sangamo, Regenxbio, BioMarin Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Ultragenyx 
for direct advocacy, expert meetings, literature and travel. S Thomas has 
received grants for the MPS Society from Sanofi Genzyme, Shire, Sangamo, 
Regenxbio, BioMarin Pharmaceuticals Inc., Chiesi and Ultragenyx for direct 
advocacy, expert meetings, honoraria, literature and travel. DR Marinho has 
received honoraria and travel grants from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. R Walker 
has received travel grants, honorarium and payments for consulting work from 
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Sanofi Genzyme and Shire. R Wynn has conducted 
consultancy work for Chimerix, Bluebird Bio and Orchard Therapeutics.