---
reference_id: "PMID:19953625"
title: Tumor spectrum in children with Noonan syndrome and SOS1 or RAF1 mutations.
authors:
- Denayer E
- Devriendt K
- de Ravel T
- Van Buggenhout G
- Smeets E
- Francois I
- Sznajer Y
- Craen M
- Leventopoulos G
- Mutesa L
- Vandecasseye W
- Massa G
- Kayserili H
- Sciot R
- Fryns JP
- Legius E
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.20735
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Exons
- Gene Duplication
- Humans
- Leukocytes/physiology
- MAP Kinase Kinase 1/genetics
- MAP Kinase Kinase 2/genetics
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Noonan Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-raf/genetics
- SOS1 Protein/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tumor spectrum in children with Noonan syndrome and SOS1 or RAF1 mutations.
**Authors:** Denayer E, Devriendt K, de Ravel T, Van Buggenhout G, Smeets E, Francois I, Sznajer Y, Craen M, Leventopoulos G, Mutesa L, Vandecasseye W, Massa G, Kayserili H, Sciot R, Fryns JP, Legius E
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.20735](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.20735)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Mar;49(3):242-52. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20735.

Tumor spectrum in children with Noonan syndrome and SOS1 or RAF1 mutations.

Denayer E(1), Devriendt K, de Ravel T, Van Buggenhout G, Smeets E, Francois I,
Sznajer Y, Craen M, Leventopoulos G, Mutesa L, Vandecasseye W, Massa G,
Kayserili H, Sciot R, Fryns JP, Legius E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in
PTPN11, KRAS, SOS1, and RAF1. We performed SOS1, RAF1, BRAF, MEK1, and MEK2
mutation analysis in a cohort of 102 PTPN11- and KRAS-negative NS patients and
found pathogenic SOS1 mutations in 10, RAF1 mutations in 4, and BRAF mutations
in 2 patients. Three novel SOS1 mutations were found. One was classified as a
rare benign variant and the other remains unclassified. We confirm a high
prevalence of pulmonic stenosis and ectodermal abnormalities in SOS1-positive
patients. Three patients with SOS1 mutations presented with tumors (embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma, Sertoli cell testis tumor, and granular cell tumors of the
skin). One patient with a RAF1 mutation had a lesion suggestive for a giant cell
tumor. This is the first report describing different tumor types in NS patients
with germ line SOS1 mutations.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.20735
PMID: 19953625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
