---
reference_id: "PMID:39741906"
title: Prenatal diagnosis of a silver-russell syndrome caused by 11p15 duplication and pedigree analysis.
authors:
- Hong S
- Wei H
- Zhuang X
- Huang W
- Zhang Y
journal: Front Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1465521
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal diagnosis of a silver-russell syndrome caused by 11p15 duplication and pedigree analysis.
**Authors:** Hong S, Wei H, Zhuang X, Huang W, Zhang Y
**Journal:** Front Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2024.1465521](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2024.1465521)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2024 Dec 13;15:1465521. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1465521. 
eCollection 2024.

Prenatal diagnosis of a silver-russell syndrome caused by 11p15 duplication and 
pedigree analysis.

Hong S(#)(1), Wei H(#)(1), Zhuang X(2), Huang W(1), Zhang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetic Center, Zhangzhou Municipal Hospital 
Affiliated to Fujian Medical University, Zhangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Zhangzhou Municipal Hospital Affiliated to Fujian 
Medical University, Zhangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is an imprinting disorder 
characterized by intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation. The pathogenic 
alterations and phenotypes are heterogeneous.
METHODS: Here, we present a rare pedigree of duplications with different 
methylation patterns in 11p15.5, which caused SRS or a normal phenotype across 
three generations.
RESULTS: Duplications of maternal IC2 (copy number of 3) with enhanced 
methylation (methylation index of 0.62) resulted in typical SRS.
CONCLUSION: The result added to the complexity of the molecular genetics of SRS.

Copyright © 2024 Hong, Wei, Zhuang, Huang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1465521
PMCID: PMC11686225
PMID: 39741906

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.