---
reference_id: "PMID:15772074"
title: "Mitochondrial myopathy and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA): missense mutation in the pseudouridine synthase 1 (PUS1) gene is associated with the loss of tRNA pseudouridylation."
authors:
- Patton JR
- Bykhovskaya Y
- Mengesha E
- Bertolotto C
- Fischel-Ghodsian N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M500216200
keywords:
- "Anemia, Sideroblastic/complications, enzymology, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Hydro-Lyases/genetics
- "Mitochondrial Myopathies/complications, enzymology, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nucleic Acid Conformation
- Pseudouridine/chemistry
- "RNA, Transfer/chemistry, genetics"
- "RNA, Transfer, Lys/chemistry, genetics"
- "RNA, Transfer, Ser/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial myopathy and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA): missense mutation in the pseudouridine synthase 1 (PUS1) gene is associated with the loss of tRNA pseudouridylation.
**Authors:** Patton JR, Bykhovskaya Y, Mengesha E, Bertolotto C, Fischel-Ghodsian N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M500216200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M500216200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 20;280(20):19823-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M500216200. Epub
2005  Mar 16.

Mitochondrial myopathy and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA): missense mutation in
the pseudouridine synthase 1 (PUS1) gene is associated with the loss of tRNA
pseudouridylation.

Patton JR(1), Bykhovskaya Y, Mengesha E, Bertolotto C, Fischel-Ghodsian N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of South Carolina School
of Medicine, Columbia, USA.

A missense mutation in the PUS1 gene affecting a highly conserved amino acid has
been associated with mitochondrial myopathy and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA), a
rare autosomal recessive oxidative phosphorylation disorder. The PUS1 gene
encodes the enzyme pseudouridine synthase 1 (Pus1p) that is known to
pseudouridylate tRNAs in other species. Total RNA was isolated from
lymphoblastoid cell lines established from patients, parents, unaffected
siblings, and unrelated controls, and the tRNAs were assayed for the presence of
pseudouridine (Psi) at the expected positions. Mitochondrial and cytoplasmic
tRNAs from MLASA patients are lacking modification at sites normally modified by
Pus1p, whereas tRNAs from controls, unaffected siblings, or parents all have Psi
at these positions. In addition, there was no Pus1p activity in an extract made
from a cell line derived from a patient with MLASA. Immunohistochemical staining
of Pus1p in cell lines showed nuclear, cytoplasmic, and mitochondrial
distribution of the protein, and there is no difference in staining between
patients and unaffected family members. MLASA is thus associated with absent or
greatly reduced tRNA pseudouridylation at specific sites, implicating this
pathway in its molecular pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M500216200
PMID: 15772074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
