---
reference_id: "PMID:17761684"
title: Nesprin-1 and -2 are involved in the pathogenesis of Emery Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and are critical for nuclear envelope integrity.
authors:
- Zhang Q
- Bethmann C
- Worth NF
- Davies JD
- Wasner C
- Feuer A
- Ragnauth CD
- Yi Q
- Mellad JA
- Warren DT
- Wheeler MA
- Ellis JA
- Skepper JN
- Vorgerd M
- Schlotter-Weigel B
- Weissberg PL
- Roberts RG
- Wehnert M
- Shanahan CM
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm238
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Lamins/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Microfilament Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Nuclear Envelope/metabolism
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nesprin-1 and -2 are involved in the pathogenesis of Emery Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and are critical for nuclear envelope integrity.
**Authors:** Zhang Q, Bethmann C, Worth NF, Davies JD, Wasner C, Feuer A, Ragnauth CD, Yi Q, Mellad JA, Warren DT, Wheeler MA, Ellis JA, Skepper JN, Vorgerd M, Schlotter-Weigel B, Weissberg PL, Roberts RG, Wehnert M, Shanahan CM
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddm238](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddm238)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Dec 1;16(23):2816-33. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm238. Epub 2007
Aug  29.

Nesprin-1 and -2 are involved in the pathogenesis of Emery Dreifuss muscular 
dystrophy and are critical for nuclear envelope integrity.

Zhang Q(1), Bethmann C, Worth NF, Davies JD, Wasner C, Feuer A, Ragnauth CD, Yi 
Q, Mellad JA, Warren DT, Wheeler MA, Ellis JA, Skepper JN, Vorgerd M, 
Schlotter-Weigel B, Weissberg PL, Roberts RG, Wehnert M, Shanahan CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a heterogeneous late-onset disease 
involving skeletal muscle wasting and heart defects caused, in a minority of 
cases, by mutations in either of two genes encoding the inner nuclear membrane 
(INM) proteins, emerin and lamins A/C. Nesprin-1 and -2 are multi-isomeric, 
spectrin-repeat proteins that bind both emerin and lamins A/C and form a network 
in muscle linking the nucleoskeleton to the INM, the outer nuclear membrane, 
membraneous organelles, the sarcomere and the actin cytoskeleton. Thus, 
disruptions in nesprin/lamin/emerin interactions might play a role in the 
muscle-specific pathogenesis of EDMD. Screening for DNA variations in the genes 
encoding nesprin-1 (SYNE1) and nesprin-2 (SYNE2) in 190 probands with EDMD or 
EDMD-like phenotypes identified four heterozygous missense mutations. 
Fibroblasts from these patients exhibited nuclear morphology defects and 
specific patterns of emerin and SUN2 mislocalization. In addition, diminished 
nuclear envelope localization of nesprins and impaired nesprin/emerin/lamin 
binding interactions were common features of all EDMD patient fibroblasts. siRNA 
knockdown of nesprin-1 or -2 in normal fibroblasts reproduced the nuclear 
morphological changes and mislocalization of emerin and SUN2 observed in patient 
fibroblasts. Taken together, these data suggest that EDMD may be caused, in 
part, by uncoupling of the nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton because of perturbed 
nesprin/emerin/lamin interactions.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm238
PMID: 17761684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]