---
reference_id: "PMID:37535397"
title: Contemporary enterovirus-D68 isolates infect human spinal cord organoids.
authors:
- Aguglia G
- Coyne CB
- Dermody TS
- Williams JV
- Freeman MC
journal: mBio
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1128/mbio.01058-23
keywords:
- Myelitis
- Enterovirus Infections
- "Enterovirus D, Human"
- Motor Neurons
- Child
- Paralysis/complications
- Humans
- Central Nervous System Viral Diseases
- Mice
- Animals
- Spinal Cord/pathology
- Neuromuscular Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contemporary enterovirus-D68 isolates infect human spinal cord organoids.
**Authors:** Aguglia G, Coyne CB, Dermody TS, Williams JV, Freeman MC
**Journal:** mBio (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mbio.01058-23](https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.01058-23)

## Content

1. mBio. 2023 Aug 31;14(4):e0105823. doi: 10.1128/mbio.01058-23. Epub 2023 Aug 3.

Contemporary enterovirus-D68 isolates infect human spinal cord organoids.

Aguglia G(1), Coyne CB(2), Dermody TS(1)(3)(4), Williams JV(1)(3)(4), Freeman
MC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University School of
Medicine , Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Institute for Infection, Inflammation, and Immunity (i4Kids), UPMC Children's
Hospital of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) is a nonpolio enterovirus associated with severe
respiratory illness and acute flaccid myelitis (AFM), a polio-like illness
causing paralysis in children. AFM outbreaks have been associated with increased
circulation and genetic diversity of EV-D68 since 2014, although the virus was
discovered in the 1960s. The mechanisms by which EV-D68 targets the central
nervous system are unknown. Since enteroviruses are human pathogens that do not
routinely infect other animal species, establishment of a human model of the
central nervous system is essential for understanding pathogenesis. Here, we
describe two human spinal cord organoid (hSCO)-based models for EV-D68 infection
derived from induced, pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines. One hSCO model
consists primarily of spinal motor neurons, while the another model comprises
multiple neuronal cell lineages, including motor neurons, interneurons, and
glial cells. These hSCOs can be productively infected with contemporary strains,
but not a historic strain, of EV-D68 and produce extracellular virus for at
least 2 weeks without appreciable cytopathic effect. By comparison, infection
with hSCO with another enterovirus, echovirus 11, causes significant structural
destruction and apoptosis. Together, these findings suggest that EV-D68
infection is not the sole mediator of neuronal cell death in the spinal cord in
those with AFM and that secondary injury from the immune response likely
contributes to pathogenesis. IMPORTANCE AFM is a rare condition that causes
significant morbidity in affected children, often contributing to life-long
sequelae. It is unknown how EV-D68 causes paralysis in children, and effective
therapeutic and preventative strategies are not available. Mice are not native
hosts for EV-D68, and thus, existing mouse models use immunosuppressed or
neonatal mice, mouse-adapted viruses, or intracranial inoculations. To
complement existing models, we report two hSCO models for EV-D68 infection.
These three-dimensional, multicellular models comprised human cells and include
multiple neural lineages, including motor neurons, interneurons, and glial
cells. These new hSCO models for EV-D68 infection will contribute to
understanding how EV-D68 damages the human spinal cord, which could lead to new
therapeutic and prophylactic strategies for this virus.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.01058-23
PMCID: PMC10470749
PMID: 37535397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.V.W serves on advisory committees for
GlaxoSmithKline and Quidel, which did not impact the work contained in this
paper. Other authors are without conflicts.
