---
reference_id: "PMID:15251839"
title: Addisonian crisis and tuberculous epididymo-orchitis.
authors:
- Kon YC
- Sokoloff M
- Straus FH 2nd
- Weiss RE
journal: Endocr Pract
year: '2002'
doi: 10.4158/EP.8.5.365
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Addisonian crisis and tuberculous epididymo-orchitis.
**Authors:** Kon YC, Sokoloff M, Straus FH 2nd, Weiss RE
**Journal:** Endocr Pract (2002)
**DOI:** [10.4158/EP.8.5.365](https://doi.org/10.4158/EP.8.5.365)

## Content

1. Endocr Pract. 2002 Sep-Oct;8(5):365-9. doi: 10.4158/EP.8.5.365.

Addisonian crisis and tuberculous epididymo-orchitis.

Kon YC(1), Sokoloff M, Straus FH 2nd, Weiss RE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To describe a case of acute primary adrenal insufficiency in which 
tuberculosis was subsequently detected as the etiologic factor when the patient 
presented with tuberculous epididymo-orchitis.
METHODS: A case of acute primary adrenal insufficiency associated with 
bilaterally enlarged adrenal glands is reported, along with the subsequent 
finding of a scrotal mass diagnosed as tuberculous epididymo-orchitis. 
Diagnosis, adrenal function, and results of imaging studies after institution of 
antituberculous treatment are discussed.
RESULTS: A 41-year-old Egyptian man, who had immigrated to the United States 5 
years previously, had acute psychosis and addisonian crisis. A substantially 
increased early morning level of plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone and a low 
level of serum cortisol confirmed the diagnosis of primary adrenal 
insufficiency. Both adrenal glands were enlarged but without calcification on 
computed tomography. A previous bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccination complicated 
the interpretation of a positive tuberculin skin test result. Both lungs were 
clear on chest radiography and computed tomography. Seven months later, the 
patient had a left scrotal mass and underwent radical orchiectomy. Examination 
of the pathology specimen showed caseous granulomatous inflammation and 
necrosis, and acid-fast bacilli were identified. Culture was positive for 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
CONCLUSION: In a patient from a country where tuberculosis is endemic, 
tuberculosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis when primary 
adrenal insufficiency is detected, especially in association with enlarged or 
calcified adrenal glands. Extra-adrenal tuberculous involvement should be 
actively sought because it may provide indirect microbiologic or histologic 
clues. Other than the lungs, special attention should be paid to the 
genitourinary system.

DOI: 10.4158/EP.8.5.365
PMID: 15251839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]