---
reference_id: "PMID:23236390"
title: Upregulated expression of integrin α1 in mesangial cells and integrin α3 and vimentin in podocytes of Col4a3-null (Alport) mice.
authors:
- Steenhard BM
- Vanacore R
- Friedman D
- Zelenchuk A
- Stroganova L
- Isom K
- St John PL
- Hudson BG
- Abrahamson DR
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050745
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autoantigens/genetics, metabolism"
- "Collagen Type IV/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Glomerular Basement Membrane/metabolism, pathology"
- "Integrin alpha1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Integrin alpha3/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mesangial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, metabolism"
- "Podocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Up-Regulation
- "Vimentin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Upregulated expression of integrin α1 in mesangial cells and integrin α3 and vimentin in podocytes of Col4a3-null (Alport) mice.
**Authors:** Steenhard BM, Vanacore R, Friedman D, Zelenchuk A, Stroganova L, Isom K, St John PL, Hudson BG, Abrahamson DR
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0050745](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0050745)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e50745. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050745. Epub 2012 Dec
7.

Upregulated expression of integrin α1 in mesangial cells and integrin α3 and
vimentin in podocytes of Col4a3-null (Alport) mice.

Steenhard BM(1), Vanacore R, Friedman D, Zelenchuk A, Stroganova L, Isom K, St
John PL, Hudson BG, Abrahamson DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, Kansas, USA.

Alport disease in humans, which usually results in proteinuria and kidney
failure, is caused by mutations to the COL4A3, COL4A4, or COL4A5 genes, and
absence of collagen α3α4α5(IV) networks found in mature kidney glomerular
basement membrane (GBM). The Alport mouse harbors a deletion of the Col4a3 gene,
which also results in the lack of GBM collagen α3α4α5(IV). This animal model
shares many features with human Alport patients, including the retention of
collagen α1α2α1(IV) in GBMs, effacement of podocyte foot processes, gradual loss
of glomerular barrier properties, and progression to renal failure. To learn
more about the pathogenesis of Alport disease, we undertook a discovery
proteomics approach to identify proteins that were differentially expressed in
glomeruli purified from Alport and wild-type mouse kidneys. Pairs of cy3- and
cy5-labeled extracts from 5-week old Alport and wild-type glomeruli,
respectively, underwent 2-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis.
Differentially expressed proteins were digested with trypsin and prepared for
mass spectrometry, peptide ion mapping/fingerprinting, and protein
identification through database searching. The intermediate filament protein,
vimentin, was upregulated ∼2.5 fold in Alport glomeruli compared to wild-type.
Upregulation was confirmed by quantitative real time RT-PCR of isolated Alport
glomeruli (5.4 fold over wild-type), and quantitative confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy localized over-expressed vimentin specifically to
Alport podocytes. We next hypothesized that increases in vimentin abundance
might affect the basement membrane protein receptors, integrins, and screened
Alport and wild-type glomeruli for expression of integrins likely to be the main
receptors for GBM type IV collagen and laminin. Quantitative immunofluorescence
showed an increase in integrin α1 expression in Alport mesangial cells and an
increase in integrin α3 in Alport podocytes. We conclude that overexpression of
mesangial integrin α1 and podocyte vimentin and integrin α3 may be important
features of glomerular Alport disease, possibly affecting cell-signaling, cell
shape and cellular adhesion to the GBM.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050745
PMCID: PMC3517557
PMID: 23236390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
