---
reference_id: "PMID:31376890"
title: Thoracic Manifestations of Rheumatoid Arthritis.
authors:
- Esposito AJ
- Chu SG
- Madan R
- Doyle TJ
- Dellaripa PF
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2019.05.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thoracic Manifestations of Rheumatoid Arthritis.
**Authors:** Esposito AJ, Chu SG, Madan R, Doyle TJ, Dellaripa PF
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccm.2019.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccm.2019.05.003)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2019 Sep;40(3):545-560. doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2019.05.003. Epub 
2019 Jul 6.

Thoracic Manifestations of Rheumatoid Arthritis.

Esposito AJ(1), Chu SG(1), Madan R(2), Doyle TJ(1), Dellaripa PF(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 60 Fenwood Road, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
Electronic address: pdellaripa@bwh.harvard.edu.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is commonly associated with pulmonary disease that can 
affect any anatomic compartment of the thorax. The most common intrathoracic 
manifestations of RA include interstitial lung disease, airway disease, pleural 
disease, rheumatoid nodules, and drug-induced toxicity. Patients with RA with 
thoracic involvement often present with nonspecific respiratory symptoms, 
although many are asymptomatic. Therefore, clinicians should routinely consider 
pulmonary disease when evaluating any patient with RA, particularly one with 
known risk factors. The optimal screening, diagnostic, and treatment strategies 
for RA-associated pulmonary disease remain uncertain and are the focus of 
ongoing investigation.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccm.2019.05.003
PMCID: PMC6994971
PMID: 31376890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]