---
reference_id: "PMID:22025593"
title: Natural history of infantile G(M2) gangliosidosis.
authors:
- Bley AE
- Giannikopoulos OA
- Hayden D
- Kubilus K
- Tifft CJ
- Eichler FS
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2011-0078
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of infantile G(M2) gangliosidosis.
**Authors:** Bley AE, Giannikopoulos OA, Hayden D, Kubilus K, Tifft CJ, Eichler FS
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2011-0078](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2011-0078)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2011 Nov;128(5):e1233-41. doi: 10.1542/peds.2011-0078. Epub 2011
Oct  24.

Natural history of infantile G(M2) gangliosidosis.

Bley AE(1), Giannikopoulos OA, Hayden D, Kubilus K, Tifft CJ, Eichler FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: G(M2) gangliosidoses are caused by an inherited deficiency of 
lysosomal β-hexosaminidase and result in ganglioside accumulation in the brain. 
Onset during infancy leads to rapid neurodegeneration and death before 4 years 
of age. We set out to quantify the rate of functional decline in infantile G(M2) 
gangliosidosis on the basis of patient surveys and a comprehensive review of 
existing literature.
METHODS: Patients with infantile G(M2) gangliosidosis (N = 237) were surveyed 
via questionnaire by the National Tay Sachs & Allied Diseases Association 
(NTSAD). These data were supplemented by survival data from the NTSAD database 
and a literature survey. Detailed retrospective surveys from 97 patients were 
available. Five patients who had received hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation were evaluated separately. The mortality rate of the remaining 
92 patients was comparable to that of the 103 patients from the NTSAD database 
and 121 patients reported in the literature.
RESULTS: Common symptoms at onset were developmental arrest (83%), startling 
(65%), and hypotonia (60%). All 55 patients who had learned to sit without 
support lost that ability within 1 year. Individual functional measures 
correlated with each other but not with survival. Gastric tube placement was 
associated with prolonged survival. Tay Sachs and Sandhoff variants did not 
differ. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation was not associated with 
prolonged survival.
CONCLUSIONS: We studied the timing of regression in 97 cases of infantile G(M2) 
gangliosidosis and conclude that clinical disease progression does not correlate 
with survival, likely because of the impact of improved supportive care over 
time. However, functional measures are quantifiable and can inform power 
calculations and study design of future interventions.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2011-0078
PMCID: PMC3208966
PMID: 22025593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]