---
reference_id: "PMID:10868701"
title: Reviewing asthma and anxiety.
authors:
- ten Thoren C
- Petermann F
journal: Respir Med
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1053/rmed.1999.0757
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reviewing asthma and anxiety.
**Authors:** ten Thoren C, Petermann F
**Journal:** Respir Med (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1053/rmed.1999.0757](https://doi.org/10.1053/rmed.1999.0757)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2000 May;94(5):409-15. doi: 10.1053/rmed.1999.0757.

Reviewing asthma and anxiety.

ten Thoren C(1), Petermann F.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Rehabilitation Research, University of Bremen, Germany.

The main characteristic of asthma is sudden and unexpected attacks of impaired 
breathing. Both the attacks themselves and the prospect of attacks generate much 
anxiety amongst patients. Several different forms of anxiety can be identified 
which vary in intensity and the situations in which they appear. Anxiety 
disorders are more common in asthmatics and have a considerable influence on 
asthma management because they influence symptom perception. Excessive anxiety 
about asthma symptoms can affect the patient's response to an asthma attack; 
anxiety related to asthma triggers can reduce the patient's quality of life and 
anxiety related to medical treatment can influence compliance. The extent of 
this influence depends upon an individual's ability to cope. Behavioural 
therapeutic programmes for patient education offer an opportunity to reduce 
anxiety and to improve asthma self-management. Physicians should look carefully 
for anxiety when taking the patient's history, and should support the patient's 
participation in asthma education programs.

DOI: 10.1053/rmed.1999.0757
PMID: 10868701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]