---
reference_id: "PMID:29270309"
title: "Randomized, Placebo-controlled Crossover Study of Dalfampridine Extended-release in Transverse Myelitis."
authors:
- Schwartz K
- Wymbs NF
- Huang H
- Mealy MA
- Pardo CA
- Zackowski K
- Levy M
journal: Mult Scler J Exp Transl Clin
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1177/2055217317740145
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized, Placebo-controlled Crossover Study of Dalfampridine Extended-release in Transverse Myelitis.
**Authors:** Schwartz K, Wymbs NF, Huang H, Mealy MA, Pardo CA, Zackowski K, Levy M
**Journal:** Mult Scler J Exp Transl Clin (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1177/2055217317740145](https://doi.org/10.1177/2055217317740145)

## Content

1. Mult Scler J Exp Transl Clin. 2017 Nov 8;3(4):2055217317740145. doi: 
10.1177/2055217317740145. eCollection 2017 Oct-Dec.

Randomized, Placebo-controlled Crossover Study of Dalfampridine Extended-release 
in Transverse Myelitis.

Schwartz K(1), Wymbs NF(1), Huang H(1), Mealy MA(1), Pardo CA(1), Zackowski 
K(1), Levy M(1).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins University, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dalfampridine has the potential to be effective in patients with 
transverse myelitis (TM) as this rare disorder shares some clinical and 
pathogenic similarities with multiple sclerosis.
METHODS: This is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover study 
of dalfampridine extended-release (D-ER, Ampyra®). Sixteen adult study 
participants with monophasic TM confirmed by MRI were enrolled if their baseline 
timed 25-foot walking speed was between 5 and 60 seconds. Participants were 
randomized to receive 10 mg twice-daily doses of either D-ER or placebo control 
for eight weeks, then crossed over to the second arm of placebo or dalfampridine 
for eight weeks. The primary outcome measure was the timed 25-foot walk.
RESULTS: Of 16 enrolled participants, three withdrew and 13 completed the trial. 
Among the 13 completers, nine individuals showed an average timed walk that was 
faster in the D-ER arm compared to the placebo arm, but only four participants 
met the stricter statistical threshold to be classified as a responder. Analyses 
of secondary clinical outcome measures including strength, balance assessments, 
spasticity, and Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score showed trends 
toward improvement with D-ER.
CONCLUSIONS: D-ER may be beneficial in TM to improve walking speed and other 
neurological functions.

DOI: 10.1177/2055217317740145
PMCID: PMC5731631
PMID: 29270309