---
reference_id: "PMID:31673695"
title: "Fibrous Dysplasia/McCune-Albright Syndrome: A Rare, Mosaic Disease of Gα s Activation."
authors:
- Boyce AM
- Collins MT
journal: Endocr Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1210/endrev/bnz011
keywords:
- "Fibrous Dysplasia, Polyostotic/diagnosis, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits
- Humans
- Mosaicism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibrous Dysplasia/McCune-Albright Syndrome: A Rare, Mosaic Disease of Gα s Activation.
**Authors:** Boyce AM, Collins MT
**Journal:** Endocr Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1210/endrev/bnz011](https://doi.org/10.1210/endrev/bnz011)

## Content

1. Endocr Rev. 2020 Apr 1;41(2):345-70. doi: 10.1210/endrev/bnz011.

Fibrous Dysplasia/McCune-Albright Syndrome: A Rare, Mosaic Disease of Gα s
Activation.

Boyce AM(1), Collins MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Skeletal Disorders and Mineral Homeostasis Section, National Institute of
Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland.

Fibrous dysplasia/McCune-Albright syndrome (FD/MAS) is a rare disorder of
striking complexity. It arises from somatic, gain-of-function mutations in GNAS,
leading to mosaic Gα s activation and inappropriate production of intracellular
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). The clinical phenotype is largely
determined by the location and extent of affected tissues, and the
pathophysiological effects of Gα s activation within these tissues. In bone,
Gα s activation results in impaired differentiation of skeletal stem cells,
leading to discrete skeletal lesions prone to fracture, deformity, and pain.
Extraskeletal manifestations include a variable combination of hyperpigmented
macules and hyperfunctioning endocrinopathies. Distinctive age-related changes
in disease development has key effects on histologic, radiographic, and clinical
features. FD/MAS thus presents along a uniquely broad clinical spectrum, and the
resulting challenges in diagnosis and management can be difficult for
clinicians. This review presents FD/MAS in the context of a mosaic disorder of
Gα s activation, providing an intellectual framework within which to understand,
evaluate, and treat this interesting disease. It includes a comprehensive
summary of current understanding of FD/MAS pathogenesis, and a detailed
discussion of clinical presentation and management. Critical areas of unmet need
are highlighted, including discussion of key challenges and potential solutions
to advance research and clinical care in FD/MAS.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Endocrine Society 2019.

DOI: 10.1210/endrev/bnz011
PMCID: PMC7127130
PMID: 31673695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
