---
reference_id: "PMID:17682975"
title: Inborn errors of bile acid metabolism.
authors:
- Heubi JE
- Setchell KD
- Bove KE
journal: Semin Liver Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1055/s-2007-985073
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn errors of bile acid metabolism.
**Authors:** Heubi JE, Setchell KD, Bove KE
**Journal:** Semin Liver Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2007-985073](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2007-985073)

## Content

1. Semin Liver Dis. 2007 Aug;27(3):282-94. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-985073.

Inborn errors of bile acid metabolism.

Heubi JE(1), Setchell KD, Bove KE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Bile acids are synthesized by the liver from cholesterol through a complex 
series of reactions involving at least 14 enzymatic steps. A failure to perform 
any of these reactions will block bile acid production with failure to produce 
"normal bile acids" and, instead, result in the accumulation of unusual bile 
acids and intermediary metabolites. Failure to synthesize bile acids leads to 
reduced bile flow and decreased intraluminal solubilization of fat and 
fat-soluble vitamins. In some circumstances, the intermediates created because 
of blockade in the bile acid biosynthetic pathway may be toxic to hepatocytes. 
Nine recognized inborn errors of bile acid metabolism have been identified that 
lead to enzyme deficiencies and impaired bile acid synthesis in infants, 
children, and adults. Patients may present with neonatal cholestasis, neurologic 
disease, or fat and fat-soluble vitamin malabsorption. If untreated, progressive 
liver disease may develop or reduced intestinal bile acid concentrations may 
lead to serious morbidity or mortality. This review focuses on a description of 
the disorders of bile acid synthesis that are directly related to single defects 
in the metabolic pathway, their proposed pathogenesis, treatment, and prognosis.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-985073
PMID: 17682975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]