---
reference_id: "PMID:38411210"
title: Updates on interstitial lung disease and other selected extra-articular manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Myasoedova E
- Matteson EL
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000001007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updates on interstitial lung disease and other selected extra-articular manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Myasoedova E, Matteson EL
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000001007](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000001007)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2024 May 1;36(3):203-208. doi: 
10.1097/BOR.0000000000001007. Epub 2024 Feb 23.

Updates on interstitial lung disease and other selected extra-articular 
manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis.

Myasoedova E(1), Matteson EL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science, 
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To discuss changes in epidemiology, recent advances in 
understanding of the pathogenesis and management of selected extraarticular 
manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis (ExRA).
RECENT FINDINGS: The incidence of ExRA overall and subcutaneous rheumatoid 
nodules in particular is declining after 2000. These trends reflect improved RA 
disease activity with early effective immunosuppressive treatments; changing 
environmental risk factors can be contributing. ExRA continues to carry a 
two-fold increased mortality risk. RA-associated interstitial lung disease 
(RA-ILD) is a major contributor to mortality, with no decline in incidence and 
scant therapeutic options. Individualized risk stratification for RA-ILD based 
on patient-level risk factors and biomarker profile is evolving with MUC5B as a 
major genetic risk factor. Clinical trials are underway to evaluate the benefits 
of novel antifibrotic therapies and targeted therapies for RA-ILD. The risk of 
cardiovascular disease in RA is generally amendable to treatment with 
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, although cardiovascular risk associated 
with JAK inhibition is not fully understood.
SUMMARY: Despite reduction in incidence of ExRA overall, the incidence of RA-ILD 
shows no significant decline and remains a major therapeutic challenge. The use 
of novel antifibrotics and immunosuppressive drugs shows promise in slowing the 
progression of RA-ILD.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000001007
PMID: 38411210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]