---
reference_id: "PMID:37218706"
title: CKD therapy to improve outcomes of immune-mediated glomerular diseases.
authors:
- Anders HJ
- Fernandez-Juarez GM
- Vaglio A
- Romagnani P
- Floege J
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfad069
keywords:
- Humans
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/etiology, therapy"
- Kidney
- "Glomerulonephritis/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/drug therapy"
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CKD therapy to improve outcomes of immune-mediated glomerular diseases.
**Authors:** Anders HJ, Fernandez-Juarez GM, Vaglio A, Romagnani P, Floege J
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfad069](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfad069)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2023 Nov 8;38(Suppl 2):ii50-ii57. doi:
10.1093/ndt/gfad069.

CKD therapy to improve outcomes of immune-mediated glomerular diseases.

Anders HJ(1), Fernandez-Juarez GM(2), Vaglio A(3), Romagnani P(3)(4), Floege
J(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine IV, Hospital of the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPaz, Madrid,
Spain.
(3)Nephrology Unit, Anna Meyer Children's Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio",
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(5)Division of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, RWTH Aachen University
Hospital, Aachen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2025 Feb 28;40(3):605. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfae072.

The management of immunoglobulin A nephropathy, membranous nephropathy, lupus
nephritis, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitis, C3
glomerulonephritis, autoimmune podocytopathies and other immune-mediated
glomerular disorders is focused on two major treatment goals, preventing overall
mortality and the loss of kidney function. Since minimizing irreversible kidney
damage best serves both goals, the management of immune-mediated kidney
disorders must focus on the two central pathomechanisms of kidney function
decline, i.e., controlling the underlying immune disease process (e.g. with
immunotherapies) and controlling the non-immune mechanisms of chronic kidney
disease (CKD) progression. Here we review the pathophysiology of these
non-immune mechanisms of CKD progression and discuss non-drug and drug
interventions to attenuate CKD progression in immune-mediated kidney disorders.
Non-pharmacological interventions include reducing salt intake, normalizing body
weight, avoiding superimposed kidney injuries, smoking cessation and regular
physical activity. Approved drug interventions include inhibitors of the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and sodium-glucose cotransporter-2.
Numerous additional drugs to improve CKD care are currently being tested in
clinical trials. Here we discuss how and when to use these drugs in the
different clinical scenarios of immune-mediated kidney diseases.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfad069
PMID: 37218706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
