---
reference_id: "PMID:36976476"
title: "Neuro-COVID-19 With or Without the Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome (MIS-C): A Single-Center Study : COVID-19: Neurologic Manifestations in Children."
authors:
- Bentes AA
- Dos Santos Junior WR
- Pessoa NL
- Costa TA
- Oliveira GFG
- Diniz LMO
- Torres BR
- Teixeira DC
- Mendes RB
- Avelar ABA
- Campos MA
- Kroon EG
- Drumond BP
journal: J Mol Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12031-023-02109-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuro-COVID-19 With or Without the Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome (MIS-C): A Single-Center Study : COVID-19: Neurologic Manifestations in Children.
**Authors:** Bentes AA, Dos Santos Junior WR, Pessoa NL, Costa TA, Oliveira GFG, Diniz LMO, Torres BR, Teixeira DC, Mendes RB, Avelar ABA, Campos MA, Kroon EG, Drumond BP
**Journal:** J Mol Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12031-023-02109-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12031-023-02109-y)

## Content

1. J Mol Neurosci. 2023 May;73(4-5):250-258. doi: 10.1007/s12031-023-02109-y.
Epub  2023 Mar 28.

Neuro-COVID-19 With or Without the Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome (MIS-C): A 
Single-Center Study : COVID-19: Neurologic Manifestations in Children.

Bentes AA(1)(2), Dos Santos Junior WR(3), Pessoa NL(3)(4), Costa TA(3), Oliveira 
GFG(3), Diniz LMO(5)(6), Torres BR(6), Teixeira DC(6), Mendes RB(6), Avelar 
ABA(6), Campos MA(4), Kroon EG(3), Drumond BP(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Pediatria, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Prof. 
Alfredo Balena, 190 - Santa Efigênia, 30130-100, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil. 
alinebentes2000@gmail.com.
(2)Hospital Infantil João Paulo II, FHEMIG, Minas Gerais, Brazil. 
alinebentes2000@gmail.com.
(3)Laboratório de Vírus, Departamento de Microbiologia, Universidade Federal de 
Minas Gerais, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Imunologia de Doenças Virais, Instituto René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, 
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Pediatria, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Prof. 
Alfredo Balena, 190 - Santa Efigênia, 30130-100, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(6)Hospital Infantil João Paulo II, FHEMIG, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

This study evaluates the range of neurological manifestation in children with 
COVID-19 (neuro-COVID-19) both with and without the multisystem inflammatory 
syndrome (MIS-C) and the persistence of symptoms after hospital discharge. The 
study was conducted as a prospective study of children and adolescents under 
18 years of age who were admitted to a children's hospital for infectious 
diseases from January 2021 to January 2022. The children had no previous 
neurological or psychiatric disorders. Out of the 3021 patients evaluated, 232 
were confirmed to have COVID-19 and 21 of these patients (9%) showed 
neurological manifestations associated with the virus. Of these 21 patients, 14 
developed MIS-C, and 7 had neurological manifestations unrelated to MIS-C. There 
was no statistical difference regarding the neurological manifestations during 
hospitalization and outcomes between patients with neuro-COVID-19 who had or did 
not have MIS-C, except for seizures that occurred more frequently in patients 
with neuro-COVID-19 without MIS-C (p-value = 0.0263). One patient died, and 5 
patients still had neurological or psychiatric manifestations at discharge, 
which persisted for up to 7 months. The study highlights that SARS-CoV-2 
infection can affect the central and peripheral nervous system, particularly in 
children and adolescents with MIS-C, and that it is crucial to be vigilant for 
long-term adverse outcomes, as the neurological and psychiatric effects of 
COVID-19 in children are emerging during an important stage of brain 
development.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-023-02109-y
PMCID: PMC10044054
PMID: 36976476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose.