---
reference_id: "PMID:38296975"
title: GWAS for systemic sclerosis identifies six novel susceptibility loci including one in the Fcγ receptor region.
authors:
- Ishikawa Y
- Tanaka N
- Asano Y
- Kodera M
- Shirai Y
- Akahoshi M
- Hasegawa M
- Matsushita T
- Saito K
- Motegi SI
- Yoshifuji H
- Yoshizaki A
- Kohmoto T
- Takagi K
- Oka A
- Kanda M
- Tanaka Y
- Ito Y
- Nakano K
- Kasamatsu H
- Utsunomiya A
- Sekiguchi A
- Niiro H
- Jinnin M
- Makino K
- Makino T
- Ihn H
- Yamamoto M
- Suzuki C
- Takahashi H
- Nishida E
- Morita A
- Yamamoto T
- Fujimoto M
- Kondo Y
- Goto D
- Sumida T
- Ayuzawa N
- Yanagida H
- Horita T
- Atsumi T
- Endo H
- Shima Y
- Kumanogoh A
- Hirata J
- Otomo N
- Suetsugu H
- Koike Y
- Tomizuka K
- Yoshino S
- Liu X
- Ito S
- Hikino K
- Suzuki A
- Momozawa Y
- Ikegawa S
- Tanaka Y
- Ishikawa O
- Takehara K
- Torii T
- Sato S
- Okada Y
- Mimori T
- Matsuda F
- Matsuda K
- Amariuta T
- Imoto I
- Matsuo K
- Kuwana M
- Kawaguchi Y
- Ohmura K
- Terao C
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-44541-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GWAS for systemic sclerosis identifies six novel susceptibility loci including one in the Fcγ receptor region.
**Authors:** Ishikawa Y, Tanaka N, Asano Y, Kodera M, Shirai Y, Akahoshi M, Hasegawa M, Matsushita T, Saito K, Motegi SI, Yoshifuji H, Yoshizaki A, Kohmoto T, Takagi K, Oka A, Kanda M, Tanaka Y, Ito Y, Nakano K, Kasamatsu H, Utsunomiya A, Sekiguchi A, Niiro H, Jinnin M, Makino K, Makino T, Ihn H, Yamamoto M, Suzuki C, Takahashi H, Nishida E, Morita A, Yamamoto T, Fujimoto M, Kondo Y, Goto D, Sumida T, Ayuzawa N, Yanagida H, Horita T, Atsumi T, Endo H, Shima Y, Kumanogoh A, Hirata J, Otomo N, Suetsugu H, Koike Y, Tomizuka K, Yoshino S, Liu X, Ito S, Hikino K, Suzuki A, Momozawa Y, Ikegawa S, Tanaka Y, Ishikawa O, Takehara K, Torii T, Sato S, Okada Y, Mimori T, Matsuda F, Matsuda K, Amariuta T, Imoto I, Matsuo K, Kuwana M, Kawaguchi Y, Ohmura K, Terao C
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-44541-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44541-z)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Jan 31;15(1):319. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-44541-z.

GWAS for systemic sclerosis identifies six novel susceptibility loci including 
one in the Fcγ receptor region.

Ishikawa Y(1), Tanaka N(1)(2), Asano Y(3)(4), Kodera M(5), Shirai Y(6), Akahoshi 
M(7)(8), Hasegawa M(9), Matsushita T(10), Saito K(11), Motegi SI(12), Yoshifuji 
H(13), Yoshizaki A(4), Kohmoto T(14), Takagi K(15), Oka A(16), Kanda M(5), 
Tanaka Y(5), Ito Y(5), Nakano K(11), Kasamatsu H(9), Utsunomiya A(9), Sekiguchi 
A(12), Niiro H(7), Jinnin M(17), Makino K(18), Makino T(18), Ihn H(18), Yamamoto 
M(19), Suzuki C(20), Takahashi H(20), Nishida E(21)(22), Morita A(21), Yamamoto 
T(23), Fujimoto M(24), Kondo Y(25), Goto D(25), Sumida T(25), Ayuzawa N(26), 
Yanagida H(26), Horita T(27), Atsumi T(27), Endo H(28), Shima Y(29), Kumanogoh 
A(29), Hirata J(30), Otomo N(1), Suetsugu H(1), Koike Y(1), Tomizuka K(1), 
Yoshino S(1), Liu X(1), Ito S(1), Hikino K(31), Suzuki A(32), Momozawa Y(33), 
Ikegawa S(34), Tanaka Y(11), Ishikawa O(12), Takehara K(10), Torii T(35), Sato 
S(4), Okada Y(30), Mimori T(13)(36), Matsuda F(37), Matsuda K(38)(39), Amariuta 
T(40)(41)(42)(43)(44), Imoto I(45), Matsuo K(46), Kuwana M(6), Kawaguchi Y(47), 
Ohmura K(13), Terao C(48)(49)(50).

Author information:
(1)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, The Laboratory for Statistical 
and Translational Genetics, Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Chukyo Hospital, Japan Community Health Care 
Organization, Nagoya, Japan.
(6)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Nippon Medical School Graduate School 
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Kyushu University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, Saga University Hospital, Saga, Japan.
(9)Faculty of Medical Sciences, Department of Dermatology, University of Fukui, 
Fukui, Japan.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Medical, 
Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(11)The First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and 
Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(12)Department of Dermatology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Maebashi, Japan.
(13)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(14)Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Division of Molecular Genetics, 
Nagoya, Japan.
(15)Tokyo Women's Medical University, Adachi Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(16)Department of Molecular Life Sciences, Division of Basic Medical Science and 
Molecular Medicine, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.
(17)Department of Dermatology, Wakayama Medical University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Wakayama, Japan.
(18)Department of Dermatology and Plastic Surgery, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(19)Department of Rheumatology and Allergy, IMSUT Hospital, The Institute of 
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(20)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Sapporo Medical 
University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(21)Department of Geriatric and Environmental Dermatology, Nagoya City 
University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.
(22)Department of Dermatology, Okazaki City Hospital, Okazaki, Japan.
(23)Department of Dermatology, Fukushima Medical University, School of Medicine, 
Fukushima, Japan.
(24)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, 
Osaka, Japan.
(25)Department of Rheumatology, Institute of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Japan.
(26)Department of Clinical Immunology, National Hospital Organization, Utano 
National Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
(27)Faculty of Medicine and Graduate School of Medicine, Department of 
Rheumatology, Endocrinology and Nephrology, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(28)Omori Medical Center, Toho University, Rheumatic Disease Center, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(29)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Osaka University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(30)Immunology Frontier Center, Osaka University, Statistical Immunology, Osaka, 
Japan.
(31)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, The Laboratory for 
Pharmacogenomics, Yokohama, Japan.
(32)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, The Laboratory for Autoimmune 
Diseases, Yokohama, Japan.
(33)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, The Laboratory for Genotyping 
Development, Yokohama, Japan.
(34)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, The Laboratory for Bone and 
Joint Diseases, Yokohama, Japan.
(35)Torii Clinic, Maizuru, Japan.
(36)Ijinkai Takeada General Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
(37)Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Center for Genomic Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(38)Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Laboratory of Genome 
Technology, Human Genome Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(39)Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences, Laboratory of 
Clinical Genome Sequencing, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(40)Center for Data Sciences, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(41)Divisions of Genetics and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(42)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(43)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(44)Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(45)Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Nagoya, Japan.
(46)Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and 
Prevention, Nagoya, Japan.
(47)Tokyo Women's Medical University, Division of Rheumatology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(48)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, The Laboratory for 
Statistical and Translational Genetics, Yokohama, Japan. 
chikashi.terao@riken.jp.
(49)Shizuoka General Hospital, The Clinical Research Center, Shizuoka, Japan. 
chikashi.terao@riken.jp.
(50)The Department of Applied Genetics, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan. chikashi.terao@riken.jp.

Here we report the largest Asian genome-wide association study (GWAS) for 
systemic sclerosis performed to date, based on data from Japanese subjects and 
comprising of 1428 cases and 112,599 controls. The lead SNP is in the FCGR/FCRL 
region, which shows a penetrating association in the Asian population, while a 
complete linkage disequilibrium SNP, rs10917688, is found in a cis-regulatory 
element for IRF8. IRF8 is also a significant locus in European GWAS for systemic 
sclerosis, but rs10917688 only shows an association in the presence of the risk 
allele of IRF8 in the Japanese population. Further analysis shows that 
rs10917688 is marked with H3K4me1 in primary B cells. A meta-analysis with a 
European GWAS detects 30 additional significant loci. Polygenic risk scores 
constructed with the effect sizes of the meta-analysis suggest the potential 
portability of genetic associations beyond populations. Prioritizing the top 5% 
of SNPs of IRF8 binding sites in B cells improves the fitting of the polygenic 
risk scores, underscoring the roles of B cells and IRF8 in the development of 
systemic sclerosis. The results also suggest that systemic sclerosis shares a 
common genetic architecture across populations.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-44541-z
PMCID: PMC10830486
PMID: 38296975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.