---
reference_id: "PMID:32766183"
title: "A Heterozygous Novel Mutation in TFAP2A Gene Causes Atypical Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome With Isolated Coloboma of Choroid: A Case Report."
authors:
- Min J
- Mao B
- Wang Y
- He X
- Gao S
- Wang H
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2020.00380
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Heterozygous Novel Mutation in TFAP2A Gene Causes Atypical Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome With Isolated Coloboma of Choroid: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Min J, Mao B, Wang Y, He X, Gao S, Wang H
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2020.00380](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2020.00380)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2020 Jul 17;8:380. doi: 10.3389/fped.2020.00380. eCollection 
2020.

A Heterozygous Novel Mutation in TFAP2A Gene Causes Atypical 
Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome With Isolated Coloboma of Choroid: A Case Report.

Min J(1), Mao B(2), Wang Y(3), He X(4), Gao S(5), Wang H(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wuhan Union Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Wuhan Aier Eye Hospital, Aier School of Ophthalmology, Central South 
University, Wuhan, China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wuhan Medical and Health Center for 
Women and Children, Wuhan, China.
(5)BGI Genomics, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(6)BGI-Wuhan Clinical Laboratories, BGI-Shenzhen, Wuhan, China.

Background: Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is a rare congenital 
developmental disorder with highly variable clinical phenotypes in autosomal 
dominant inheritance. The aim of this study is to identify disease-causing 
mutations in a Chinese family with predominant coloboma of choroid. Case report: 
We described a family (a mother and her daughter) with unclear clinical 
diagnosis. The mother (proband) presented with bilateral coloboma of choroid, 
whereas her daughter had a relatively severe phenotype and presented with larger 
bilateral choroid coloboma and high-vaulted arch. We applied the next generation 
sequencing (NGS) panel and analyzed 776 genes related to inherited ocular 
disorders on the proband. Four candidate heterozygous variants in four genes, 
respectively, were detected in the proband. Validation of these variants were 
subsequently performed in the family using Sanger sequencing. Among these 
variants, a novel nonsense mutation c.912C>A, p.(Cys304*) (NM_001042425.2) which 
in exon 6 of the conserved helix-span-helix domain in TFAP2A results in a 
premature termination codon. It may trigger nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). 
Both the affected mother and daughter had this variant, whereas it was absent in 
the asymptomatic father. Together with the silicon tools and clinical features, 
we concluded that the variant c.912C>A, p.(Cys304*), was the second reported 
nonsense mutation in TFAP2A gene, which was the disease-causing mutation of the 
family. Conclusion: There are many hereditary diseases accompanied by ocular 
anomalies. For instance, BOFS, patients with atypical features are always at 
risk of being under-diagnosed. NGS is a powerful method to identify the genetic 
cause and improve genetic counseling for less clarified hereditary ocular 
diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Min, Mao, Wang, He, Gao and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2020.00380
PMCID: PMC7379893
PMID: 32766183