---
reference_id: "PMID:29204699"
title: Therapeutic reduction of cell-mediated immunosuppression in mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome.
authors:
- Geskin LJ
- Akilov OE
- Kwon S
- Schowalter M
- Watkins S
- Whiteside TL
- Butterfield LH
- Falo LD Jr
journal: Cancer Immunol Immunother
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00262-017-2090-z
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Diphtheria Toxin/pharmacology
- Drug Combinations
- Female
- Humans
- "Immune Tolerance/drug effects, immunology"
- Immunosuppression Therapy
- Interferon alpha-2
- Interferon-alpha/pharmacology
- Interleukin-2/pharmacology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mycosis Fungoides/drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/pharmacology
- "Sezary Syndrome/drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- "T-Lymphocytes/drug effects, immunology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/drug effects, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic reduction of cell-mediated immunosuppression in mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome.
**Authors:** Geskin LJ, Akilov OE, Kwon S, Schowalter M, Watkins S, Whiteside TL, Butterfield LH, Falo LD Jr
**Journal:** Cancer Immunol Immunother (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00262-017-2090-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00262-017-2090-z)

## Content

1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2018 Mar;67(3):423-434. doi:
10.1007/s00262-017-2090-z. Epub 2017 Dec 4.

Therapeutic reduction of cell-mediated immunosuppression in mycosis fungoides
and Sézary syndrome.

Geskin LJ(1)(2)(3), Akilov OE(1), Kwon S(1), Schowalter M(1), Watkins S(4)(5),
Whiteside TL(6)(2), Butterfield LH(4)(7)(2), Falo LD Jr(8)(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, Suite 500.68 Medical
Arts Building, 3708 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA.
(2)UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Center for Biological Imaging, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(8)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, Suite 500.68 Medical
Arts Building, 3708 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. lof2@pitt.edu.
(9)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
lof2@pitt.edu.
(10)UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. lof2@pitt.edu.
(11)Clinical and Translational Science Institute, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. lof2@pitt.edu.
(12)McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. lof2@pitt.edu.

Tumor progression is associated with progressive immunosuppression mediated in
part by T regulatory cell(s) (Treg) and/or myeloid-derived suppressor cell(s)
(MDSC). Development of strategies to reduce populations of immune cells with
suppressive function in cancer patients may enable the induction or recovery of
immunity against tumor cells, which may limit or reverse disease progression.
With a goal of developing Treg and MDSC neutralizing strategies to treat mycosis
fungoides (MF) and Sézary syndrome (SzS), we determined the association between
disease stage and suppressor cell populations in patients with MF/SzS, including
those responding to therapy. We found elevations in Treg populations, across
Treg subtypes, in patients with SzS, and these Treg markedly suppressed
proliferation of autologous CD4+CD25- responder T cells. Interestingly, while
MDSC numbers were not increased in MF/SzS patients, MDSC from patients with
stage IB and above produced significantly more reactive oxygen species than
those from stage IA MF patients and control cohorts. Therapy with the
CD25-targeting agent denileukin diftitox or IFN-α2b was associated with a
reduction in Treg numbers or MDSC function, respectively. These studies identify
potential mechanisms of action for these therapies and support the development
of coordinated strategies targeting both Treg and MDSC activities in patients
with MF/SzS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-017-2090-z
PMCID: PMC8274400
PMID: 29204699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
