---
reference_id: "PMID:21478865"
title: Common architecture of nuclear receptor heterodimers on DNA direct repeat elements with different spacings.
authors:
- Rochel N
- Ciesielski F
- Godet J
- Moman E
- Roessle M
- Peluso-Iltis C
- Moulin M
- Haertlein M
- Callow P
- Mély Y
- Svergun DI
- Moras D
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2054
keywords:
- Binding Sites
- Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Ligands
- "Models, Molecular"
- PPAR gamma/chemistry
- Protein Multimerization
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Receptors, Calcitriol/chemistry"
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/chemistry"
- "Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid"
- Retinoid X Receptor alpha/chemistry
- "Scattering, Small Angle"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Common architecture of nuclear receptor heterodimers on DNA direct repeat elements with different spacings.
**Authors:** Rochel N, Ciesielski F, Godet J, Moman E, Roessle M, Peluso-Iltis C, Moulin M, Haertlein M, Callow P, Mély Y, Svergun DI, Moras D
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2054](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2054)

## Content

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 May;18(5):564-70. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2054. Epub 2011
Apr 10.

Common architecture of nuclear receptor heterodimers on DNA direct repeat
elements with different spacings.

Rochel N(1), Ciesielski F, Godet J, Moman E, Roessle M, Peluso-Iltis C, Moulin
M, Haertlein M, Callow P, Mély Y, Svergun DI, Moras D.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France. rochel@igbmc.fr

Nuclear hormone receptors (NHRs) control numerous physiological processes
through the regulation of gene expression. The present study provides a
structural basis for understanding the role of DNA in the spatial organization
of NHR heterodimers in complexes with coactivators such as Med1 and SRC-1. We
have used SAXS, SANS and FRET to determine the solution structures of three
heterodimer NHR complexes (RXR-RAR, PPAR-RXR and RXR-VDR) coupled with the NHR
interacting domains of coactivators bound to their cognate direct repeat
elements. The structures show an extended asymmetric shape and point to the
important role played by the hinge domains in establishing and maintaining the
integrity of the structures. The results reveal two additional features: the
conserved position of the ligand-binding domains at the 5' ends of the target
DNAs and the binding of only one coactivator molecule per heterodimer, to RXR's
partner.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2054
PMID: 21478865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
