---
reference_id: "PMID:20562706"
title: "Cholera in Bangladesh: climatic components of seasonal variation."
authors:
- Hashizume M
- Faruque AS
- Wagatsuma Y
- Hayashi T
- Armstrong B
journal: Epidemiology
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e3181e5b053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera in Bangladesh: climatic components of seasonal variation.
**Authors:** Hashizume M, Faruque AS, Wagatsuma Y, Hayashi T, Armstrong B
**Journal:** Epidemiology (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/EDE.0b013e3181e5b053](https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0b013e3181e5b053)

## Content

1. Epidemiology. 2010 Sep;21(5):706-10. doi: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e3181e5b053.

Cholera in Bangladesh: climatic components of seasonal variation.

Hashizume M(1), Faruque AS, Wagatsuma Y, Hayashi T, Armstrong B.

Author information:
(1)Department of International Health, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), 
The Global Center of Excellence program, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan. 
hashizum@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms underlying the seasonality of cholera are still not 
fully understood, despite long-standing recognition of clear bimodal seasonality 
in Bangladesh. We aimed to quantify the contribution of climatic factors to 
seasonal variations in cholera incidence.
METHODS: We investigated the association of seasonal and weather factors with 
the weekly number of cholera patients in Dhaka, Bangladesh, using Poisson 
regression models. The contribution of each weather factor (temperature and high 
and low rainfall) to seasonal variation was estimated as the mean over the study 
period (1983-2008) for each week of the year of each weather term. Fractions of 
the number of cholera patients attributed to each weather factor, assuming all 
values were constant at their minimum risk levels throughout the year, were 
estimated for spring and monsoon seasons separately.
RESULTS: Lower temperature predicted a lower incidence of cholera in the first 
15 weeks of the year. Low rainfall predicted a peak in spring, and high rainfall 
predicted a peak at the end of the monsoon. The risk predicted from all the 
weather factors combined showed a broadly bi-modal pattern, as observed in the 
raw data. Low rainfall explained 18% of the spring peak, and high rainfall 
explained 25% of the peak at the end of the monsoon.
CONCLUSIONS: Seasonal variation in temperature and rainfall contribute to 
cholera incidence in complex ways, presumably in interaction with unmeasured 
environmental or behavioral factors.

DOI: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e3181e5b053
PMID: 20562706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]