---
reference_id: "PMID:28659150"
title: Early diagnosis and care is achieved but should be improved in infants with Prader-Willi syndrome.
authors:
- Bar C
- Diene G
- Molinas C
- Bieth E
- Casper C
- Tauber M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0673-6
keywords:
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Early Diagnosis
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early diagnosis and care is achieved but should be improved in infants with Prader-Willi syndrome.
**Authors:** Bar C, Diene G, Molinas C, Bieth E, Casper C, Tauber M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-017-0673-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-017-0673-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017 Jun 28;12(1):118. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0673-6.

Early diagnosis and care is achieved but should be improved in infants with
Prader-Willi syndrome.

Bar C(1), Diene G(1)(2), Molinas C(1)(2)(3), Bieth E(4)(5), Casper C(6), Tauber
M(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology, Obesity, Bone Diseases, Genetics and Gynecology Unit,
Children's Hospital, University Hospital Center of Toulouse, 330, avenue de
Grande-Bretagne, TSA 40031 - 31059, Toulouse cedex 9, France.
(2)National Reference Center of Prader-Willi Syndrome, Children's Hospital,
University Hospital Center of Toulouse, 330, avenue de Grande-Bretagne, TSA
40031 - 31059, Toulouse cedex 9, France.
(3)Centre de Physiopathologie de Toulouse-Purpan, Université de Toulouse, CNRS
UMR 5282, INSERM UMR 1043, Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, France.
(4)Genetics Unit, University Hospital Center of Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(5)Genetics Unit, Institut Fédératif de Biologie (IFB), 330, avenue de
Grande-Bretagne, TSA 40031 - 31059, Toulouse cedex 9, France.
(6)Neonatology Unit, Children's Hospital, University Hospital Center of
Toulouse, 330, avenue de Grande-Bretagne, TSA 40031 - 31059, Toulouse cedex 9,
France.
(7)Endocrinology, Obesity, Bone Diseases, Genetics and Gynecology Unit,
Children's Hospital, University Hospital Center of Toulouse, 330, avenue de
Grande-Bretagne, TSA 40031 - 31059, Toulouse cedex 9, France.
tauber.mt@chu-toulouse.fr.
(8)National Reference Center of Prader-Willi Syndrome, Children's Hospital,
University Hospital Center of Toulouse, 330, avenue de Grande-Bretagne, TSA
40031 - 31059, Toulouse cedex 9, France. tauber.mt@chu-toulouse.fr.
(9)Centre de Physiopathologie de Toulouse-Purpan, Université de Toulouse, CNRS
UMR 5282, INSERM UMR 1043, Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, France.
tauber.mt@chu-toulouse.fr.

BACKGROUND: PWS is a severe neurodevelopmental genetic disorder now usually
diagnosed in the neonatal period from hypotonia and feeding difficulties. Our
study analyzed the birth incidence and care of infants with early diagnosis.
METHODS: Data were collected on 61 infants with a molecular diagnosis of PWS
born in 2012 and 2013 in France.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight infants with PWS were born in 2013. The median age at
diagnosis was 18 days. Birth incidence calculated for 2013 was 1/21,000 births.
No case was diagnosed prenatally, despite 9 amniocenteses, including 4 for
polyhydramnios. Five infants had delayed diagnosis, after 3 months of life. For
2 of them, the diagnosis was not suspected at birth and for 3, FISH analysis in
the neonatal period was normal, with no further molecular studies. Ninety-three
percent of the neonates were hospitalized, and 84% needed nasogastric tube
feeding for a median of 38 days. Swallowing assessment was performed for 45%, at
a median age of 10 days. Physiotherapy was started for 76% during
hospitalization. Eighty percent of those diagnosed within the first 3 months
were seen by a pediatric endocrinologist within the first week of life.
CONCLUSION: Our study is the first to assess the birth incidence of PWS in
France, at 1/21,000 births. Some prenatal or neonatal cases remain undiagnosed
because of unrecognized clinical signs and the inappropriate choice of the
initial molecular test. We also underscore the need to optimize neonatal care of
infants with PWS.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-017-0673-6
PMCID: PMC5490212
PMID: 28659150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
