---
reference_id: "PMID:30082492"
title: "Outcome of First-Line Systemic Treatment for Unresectable Conventional, Dedifferentiated, Mesenchymal, and Clear Cell Chondrosarcoma."
authors:
- van Maldegem A
- Conley AP
- Rutkowski P
- Patel SR
- Lugowska I
- Desar IME
- Bovée JVMG
- Gelderblom H
journal: Oncologist
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2017-0574
keywords:
- "Chondrosarcoma, Clear Cell/drug therapy, mortality"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Progression-Free Survival
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcome of First-Line Systemic Treatment for Unresectable Conventional, Dedifferentiated, Mesenchymal, and Clear Cell Chondrosarcoma.
**Authors:** van Maldegem A, Conley AP, Rutkowski P, Patel SR, Lugowska I, Desar IME, Bovée JVMG, Gelderblom H
**Journal:** Oncologist (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1634/theoncologist.2017-0574](https://doi.org/10.1634/theoncologist.2017-0574)

## Content

1. Oncologist. 2019 Jan;24(1):110-116. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2017-0574. Epub
 2018 Aug 6.

Outcome of First-Line Systemic Treatment for Unresectable Conventional,
Dedifferentiated, Mesenchymal, and Clear Cell Chondrosarcoma.

van Maldegem A(1), Conley AP(2), Rutkowski P(3), Patel SR(2), Lugowska I(3),
Desar IME(4), Bovée JVMG(5), Gelderblom H(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Soft Tissue/Bone Sarcoma and Melanoma, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Institute - Oncology Center, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands a.j.gelderblom@lumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Chondrosarcoma is a heterogeneous group of primary bone sarcoma with
an excellent overall survival after local therapy. However, the small percentage
of patients who have no surgical treatment options have a very poor prognosis.
We retrospectively collected data from these patients in four sarcoma centers
and compared the progression-free survival (PFS) for the different treatment
regimens used for the four chondrosarcoma subtypes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients diagnosed with unresectable chondrosarcoma in
all four major sarcoma centers were included, and data on first-line systemic
therapy were retrospectively collected for analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 112 patients were enrolled in this retrospective analysis:
50 conventional, 25 mesenchymal, 34 dedifferentiated, and 3 clear cell
chondrosarcoma patients. In conventional chondrosarcoma patients, the longest
mean PFS (6.7 months) was found in the group treated with antihormonal therapy.
Patients diagnosed with mesenchymal chondrosarcoma were all treated with
multidrug chemotherapy, and the mean PFS was 6.7 months. Doxorubicin monotherapy
seems to have an unexplained better PFS than doxorubicin-based combination
therapy in patients with dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma (5.5 vs. 2.8 months,
respectively; p = .275).
CONCLUSION: Prospective studies need to be conducted based on preclinical work
to develop a uniform regimen to treat advanced chondrosarcoma patients according
to the diagnosed subtype and improve survival.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Currently, there are no uniform treatment lines for
advanced chondrosarcoma patients, which results in a very diverse group of
treatment regimens being used. In this study, the data of 112 patients was
collected. It was concluded that some treatment regimens seem to have a better
progression-free survival compared with others, and that these results also
differ between the chondrosarcoma subtypes. Prospective studies need to be
conducted based on preclinical work to develop a uniform regimen to treat
advanced chondrosarcoma patients according to the diagnosed histological subtype
to improve their survival.

© AlphaMed Press 2018.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2017-0574
PMCID: PMC6324625
PMID: 30082492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures of potential conflicts of interest
may be found at the end of this article.
