---
reference_id: "PMID:623097"
title: "Pontiac fever. An epidemic of unknown etiology in a health department: I. Clinical and epidemiologic aspects."
authors:
- Glick TH
- Gregg MB
- Berman B
- Mallison G
- Rhodes WW Jr
- Kassanoff I
journal: Am J Epidemiol
year: '1978'
doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112517
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Air Conditioning
- Bacterial Infections
- Disease Outbreaks
- "Fever of Unknown Origin/diagnosis, etiology"
- Government Agencies
- "Legionnaires' Disease"
- Michigan
- Syndrome
- Water Microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pontiac fever. An epidemic of unknown etiology in a health department: I. Clinical and epidemiologic aspects.
**Authors:** Glick TH, Gregg MB, Berman B, Mallison G, Rhodes WW Jr, Kassanoff I
**Journal:** Am J Epidemiol (1978)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112517](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112517)

## Content

1. Am J Epidemiol. 1978 Feb;107(2):149-60. doi:
10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112517.

Pontiac fever. An epidemic of unknown etiology in a health department: I. 
Clinical and epidemiologic aspects.

Glick TH, Gregg MB, Berman B, Mallison G, Rhodes WW Jr, Kassanoff I.

In July 1968, an explosive epidemic of acute febrile illness occurred at a 
county health department facility in Pontiac, Michigan. Illness characterized 
principally by fever, headache, myalgia, and malaise affected at least 144 
persons, including 95 of 100 persons employed in the health department building. 
The mean incubation period was approximately 36 hours. Illness was self-limited, 
generally lasting from two to five days. Secondary cases did not occur in family 
contacts and second attacks did not consistently follow re-exposure in the 
building. A defective air-conditioning system was implicated as the source and 
mechanism of spread of the causative factor. However, extensive laboratory and 
environmental investigations failed to identify the etiologic agent. Since these 
investigations a bacterium similar to or identical with the agent responsible 
for Legionnaires' Disease has been isolated from guinea pigs exposed to the 
Pontiac health department building in 1968 as well as from guinea pigs exposed 
to water from the evaporative condenser. Paired sera from 32 cases of Pontiac 
Fever showed seroconversion or diagnostic rises in antibody titers to this 
bacterium.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112517
PMID: 623097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]