---
reference_id: "PMID:17376944"
title: Marfan's syndrome and the heart.
authors:
- Stuart AG
- Williams A
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/adc.2006.097469
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Marfan's syndrome and the heart.
**Authors:** Stuart AG, Williams A
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/adc.2006.097469](https://doi.org/10.1136/adc.2006.097469)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2007 Apr;92(4):351-6. doi: 10.1136/adc.2006.097469.

Marfan's syndrome and the heart.

Stuart AG(1), Williams A.

Author information:
(1)Congenital Heart Centre, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, Upper Maudlin 
Street, Bristol, UK. agstuart@blueyonder.co.uk

In recent years, there have been many advances in the treatment of cardiac 
disease in children with Marfan's syndrome. Early diagnosis, meticulous 
echocardiographic follow-up and multidisciplinary assessment are essential. 
Medical treatment with beta-blockers is probably helpful in most children with 
aortic root dilatation. Research on TGFbeta signalling and the potential 
treatment role of TGFbeta antagonists may lead to exciting new treatments, but 
the results of clinical trials are awaited. In managing the cardiovascular 
complications of Marfan's syndrome, the paediatrician has to walk a difficult 
path. On the one hand, restrictive lifestyle advice and drugs may need to be 
prescribed, often in the context of a family history of major surgery or even 
sudden death. On the other hand, it is essential to encourage the often 
asymptomatic child to develop and mature as normally as possible.

DOI: 10.1136/adc.2006.097469
PMCID: PMC2083669
PMID: 17376944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AGS is a Medical Advisor to 
the Marfan Association UK.