---
reference_id: "PMID:35620261"
title: A new variant of MYCN gene as a cause of Feingold syndrome.
authors:
- Zeka N
- Bejiqi R
- Gerguri A
- Zogaj L
- Jashari H
journal: Clin Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ccr3.5886
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new variant of MYCN gene as a cause of Feingold syndrome.
**Authors:** Zeka N, Bejiqi R, Gerguri A, Zogaj L, Jashari H
**Journal:** Clin Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ccr3.5886](https://doi.org/10.1002/ccr3.5886)

## Content

1. Clin Case Rep. 2022 May 23;10(5):e05886. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.5886. eCollection 
2022 May.

A new variant of MYCN gene as a cause of Feingold syndrome.

Zeka N(1), Bejiqi R(2)(3), Gerguri A(1), Zogaj L(1), Jashari H(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Clinic Department of Neurology University Clinical Center of Kosovo 
Pristina Kosovo.
(2)Pediatric Clinic Department of Cardiology University Clinical Center of 
Kosovo Pristina Kosovo.
(3)Faculty of Medicine University of Gjakova Pristina Kosovo.
(4)Pediatric Clinic University Children's Hospital Skopje Republic of North 
Macedonia.

Feingold syndrome 1 (FS1) is a rare disorder that is inherited in autosomal 
dominant manner with full penetrance but with variable expressivity. The most 
common phenotypical features described are finger and toe anomalies, 
microcephaly, short stature, and intestinal atresia. Dysmorphic features, 
intellectual disability and other organ anomalies are less frequently described. 
Here, we present a 7-year-old boy with severe intellectual disability who is 
diagnosed with FS1 syndrome caused by a new heterozygous variant of MYCN gene.

© 2022 The Authors. Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.5886
PMCID: PMC9125397
PMID: 35620261

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.