---
reference_id: "PMID:30037331"
title: "Dengue virus non-structural protein 1: a pathogenic factor, therapeutic target, and vaccine candidate."
authors:
- Chen HR
- Lai YC
- Yeh TM
journal: J Biomed Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12929-018-0462-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue virus non-structural protein 1: a pathogenic factor, therapeutic target, and vaccine candidate.
**Authors:** Chen HR, Lai YC, Yeh TM
**Journal:** J Biomed Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12929-018-0462-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12929-018-0462-0)

## Content

1. J Biomed Sci. 2018 Jul 24;25(1):58. doi: 10.1186/s12929-018-0462-0.

Dengue virus non-structural protein 1: a pathogenic factor, therapeutic target, 
and vaccine candidate.

Chen HR(1), Lai YC(1), Yeh TM(2).

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng 
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. 
today@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Dengue virus (DENV) infection is the most common mosquito-transmitted viral 
infection. DENV infection can cause mild dengue fever or severe dengue 
hemorrhagic fever (DHF)/dengue shock syndrome (DSS). Hemorrhage and vascular 
leakage are two characteristic symptoms of DHF/DSS. However, due to the limited 
understanding of dengue pathogenesis, no satisfactory therapies to treat nor 
vaccine to prevent dengue infection are available, and the mortality of DHF/DSS 
is still high. DENV nonstructural protein 1 (NS1), which can be secreted in 
patients' sera, has been used as an early diagnostic marker for dengue infection 
for many years. However, the roles of NS1 in dengue-induced vascular leakage 
were described only recently. In this article, the pathogenic roles of DENV NS1 
in hemorrhage and vascular leakage are reviewed, and the possibility of using 
NS1 as a therapeutic target and vaccine candidate is discussed.

DOI: 10.1186/s12929-018-0462-0
PMCID: PMC6057007
PMID: 30037331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.