---
reference_id: "PMID:23963300"
title: "Deletions involving genes WHSC1 and LETM1 may be necessary, but are not sufficient to cause Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome."
authors:
- Andersen EF
- Carey JC
- Earl DL
- Corzo D
- Suttie M
- Hammond P
- South ST
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.192
keywords:
- Calcium-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 4/genetics"
- Female
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/genetics
- Humans
- "Image Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Sequence Deletion
- "Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletions involving genes WHSC1 and LETM1 may be necessary, but are not sufficient to cause Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome.
**Authors:** Andersen EF, Carey JC, Earl DL, Corzo D, Suttie M, Hammond P, South ST
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2013.192](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2013.192)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Apr;22(4):464-70. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.192. Epub 2013
Aug 21.

Deletions involving genes WHSC1 and LETM1 may be necessary, but are not
sufficient to cause Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome.

Andersen EF(1), Carey JC(2), Earl DL(3), Corzo D(4), Suttie M(5), Hammond P(5),
South ST(6).

Author information:
(1)1] Cytogenetics Department, ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT, USA [2]
Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(3)Department of Genetic Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, Seattle
Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Division of Clinical Genetics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Molecular Medicine Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(6)1] Cytogenetics Department, ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT, USA [2]
Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA [3]
Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a complex genetic disorder caused by the loss
of genomic material from the short arm of chromosome 4. Genotype-phenotype
correlation studies indicated that the loss of genes within 4p16.3 is necessary
for expression of the core features of the phenotype. Within this region,
haploinsufficiency of the genes WHSC1 and LETM1 is thought to be a major
contributor to the pathogenesis of WHS. We present clinical findings for three
patients with relatively small (<400 kb) de novo interstitial deletions that
overlap WHSC1 and LETM1. 3D facial analysis was performed for two of these
patients. Based on our findings, we propose that hemizygosity of WHSC1 and LETM1
is associated with a clinical phenotype characterized by growth deficiency,
feeding difficulties, and motor and speech delays. The deletion of additional
genes nearby WHSC1 and LETM1 does not result in a marked increase in the
severity of clinical features, arguing against their haploinsufficiency. The
absence of seizures and typical WHS craniofacial findings in our cohort suggest
that deletion of distinct or additional 4p16.3 genes is necessary for expression
of these features. Altogether, these results show that although loss-of-function
for WHSC1 and/or LETM1 contributes to some of the features of WHS, deletion of
additional genes is required for the full expression of the phenotype, providing
further support that WHS is a contiguous gene deletion disorder.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.192
PMCID: PMC3953918
PMID: 23963300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
