---
reference_id: "PMID:31527255"
title: Genetic ablation of acid ceramidase in Krabbe disease confirms the psychosine hypothesis and identifies a new therapeutic target.
authors:
- Li Y
- Xu Y
- Benitez BA
- Nagree MS
- Dearborn JT
- Jiang X
- Guzman MA
- Woloszynek JC
- Giaramita A
- Yip BK
- Elsbernd J
- Babcock MC
- Lo M
- Fowler SC
- Wozniak DF
- Vogler CA
- Medin JA
- Crawford BE
- Sands MS
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1912108116
keywords:
- Acid Ceramidase/genetics
- Animals
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cytokines/metabolism
- DNA Methylation
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Psychosine/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic ablation of acid ceramidase in Krabbe disease confirms the psychosine hypothesis and identifies a new therapeutic target.
**Authors:** Li Y, Xu Y, Benitez BA, Nagree MS, Dearborn JT, Jiang X, Guzman MA, Woloszynek JC, Giaramita A, Yip BK, Elsbernd J, Babcock MC, Lo M, Fowler SC, Wozniak DF, Vogler CA, Medin JA, Crawford BE, Sands MS
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1912108116](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1912108116)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Oct 1;116(40):20097-20103. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1912108116. Epub 2019 Sep 16.

Genetic ablation of acid ceramidase in Krabbe disease confirms the psychosine 
hypothesis and identifies a new therapeutic target.

Li Y(1), Xu Y(2), Benitez BA(1), Nagree MS(3), Dearborn JT(1), Jiang X(1), 
Guzman MA(4), Woloszynek JC(2), Giaramita A(2), Yip BK(2), Elsbernd J(2), 
Babcock MC(2), Lo M(2), Fowler SC(5), Wozniak DF(6), Vogler CA(4), Medin 
JA(3)(7), Crawford BE(2), Sands MS(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110.
(2)Department of Research, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA 94949.
(3)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology, St. Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63104.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 
66045.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110.
(7)Pediatrics and Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 
53226.
(8)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110; mssands@wustl.edu.
(9)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110.

Infantile globoid cell leukodystrophy (GLD, Krabbe disease) is a fatal 
demyelinating disorder caused by a deficiency in the lysosomal enzyme 
galactosylceramidase (GALC). GALC deficiency leads to the accumulation of the 
cytotoxic glycolipid, galactosylsphingosine (psychosine). Complementary evidence 
suggested that psychosine is synthesized via an anabolic pathway. Here, we show 
instead that psychosine is generated catabolically through the deacylation of 
galactosylceramide by acid ceramidase (ACDase). This reaction uncouples GALC 
deficiency from psychosine accumulation, allowing us to test the long-standing 
"psychosine hypothesis." We demonstrate that genetic loss of ACDase activity 
(Farber disease) in the GALC-deficient mouse model of human GLD (twitcher) 
eliminates psychosine accumulation and cures GLD. These data suggest that ACDase 
could be a target for substrate reduction therapy (SRT) in Krabbe patients. We 
show that pharmacological inhibition of ACDase activity with carmofur 
significantly decreases psychosine accumulation in cells from a Krabbe patient 
and prolongs the life span of the twitcher (Twi) mouse. Previous SRT experiments 
in the Twi mouse utilized l-cycloserine, which inhibits an enzyme several steps 
upstream of psychosine synthesis, thus altering the balance of other important 
lipids. Drugs that directly inhibit ACDase may have a more acceptable safety 
profile due to their mechanistic proximity to psychosine biogenesis. In total, 
these data clarify our understanding of psychosine synthesis, confirm the 
long-held psychosine hypothesis, and provide the impetus to discover safe and 
effective inhibitors of ACDase to treat Krabbe disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1912108116
PMCID: PMC6778236
PMID: 31527255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: Y.X., J.C.W., 
A.G., B.K.Y., J.E., M.C.B., M.L., and B.E.C. are employees of BioMarin 
Pharmaceutical. The remaining authors declare no conflict of interest.