---
reference_id: "PMID:31542320"
title: "Azole resistance mechanisms in Aspergillus: update and recent advances."
authors:
- Pérez-Cantero A
- López-Fernández L
- Guarro J
- Capilla J
journal: Int J Antimicrob Agents
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2019.09.011
keywords:
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, metabolism"
- Antifungal Agents/pharmacology
- "Aspergillus/drug effects, genetics"
- "Aspergillus fumigatus/drug effects, genetics"
- Azoles/pharmacology
- "Cytochrome P450 Family 51/genetics, metabolism"
- "Drug Resistance, Fungal"
- "Fungal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Voriconazole/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Azole resistance mechanisms in Aspergillus: update and recent advances.
**Authors:** Pérez-Cantero A, López-Fernández L, Guarro J, Capilla J
**Journal:** Int J Antimicrob Agents (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2019.09.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2019.09.011)

## Content

1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2020 Jan;55(1):105807. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2019.09.011. Epub 2019 Sep 19.

Azole resistance mechanisms in Aspergillus: update and recent advances.

Pérez-Cantero A(1), López-Fernández L(1), Guarro J(1), Capilla J(2).

Author information:
(1)Unitat de Microbiologia, Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut, 
Universitat Rovira i Virgili and Institut d'Investigació Sanitària Pere Virgili 
(IISPV), Reus, Tarragona, Spain.
(2)Unitat de Microbiologia, Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut, 
Universitat Rovira i Virgili and Institut d'Investigació Sanitària Pere Virgili 
(IISPV), Reus, Tarragona, Spain. Electronic address: javier.capilla@urv.cat.

Aspergillus fumigatus is the main causal agent of invasive aspergillosis (IA), 
however other species of the genus can also cause IA, such as Aspergillus 
flavus, Aspergillus terreus, Aspergillus niger and related cryptic species. This 
infectious disease mainly affects immunosuppressed patients and is linked to 
elevated mortality rates. As voriconazole is the treatment of choice for this 
condition, the relevant increase in the number of azole-resistant isolates in 
recent years has gathered alarming attention, as it also translates into an 
increase in clinical failures. In this review, we summarise and discuss the 
azole resistance molecular data described to date in the most clinically 
prevalent sections of Aspergillus, including mechanisms involving the target 
proteins Cyp51 and ATP-binding cassette (ABC) or major facilitator superfamily 
(MFS) efflux pumps. Other resistance mechanisms proposed but not yet fully 
characterised are also discussed.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. and International Society of Chemotherapy. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2019.09.011
PMID: 31542320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]