---
reference_id: "PMID:38309629"
title: Patient and Community Health Global Burden in a World With More Celiac Disease.
authors:
- Gatti S
- Rubio-Tapia A
- Makharia G
- Catassi C
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2024.01.035
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient and Community Health Global Burden in a World With More Celiac Disease.
**Authors:** Gatti S, Rubio-Tapia A, Makharia G, Catassi C
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2024.01.035](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2024.01.035)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2024 Jun;167(1):23-33. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2024.01.035.
Epub  2024 Feb 1.

Patient and Community Health Global Burden in a World With More Celiac Disease.

Gatti S(1), Rubio-Tapia A(2), Makharia G(3), Catassi C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy.
(2)Celiac Disease Program, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and 
Nutrition, Digestive Disease Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Human Nutrition, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy. 
Electronic address: c.catassi@univpm.it.

Celiac disease is one of the most common life-long disorders worldwide, with a 
prevalence mostly ranging between 0.7% and 2.9% in the general population and a 
higher frequency in females and well-defined at-risk groups, such as relatives 
of affected individuals and patients with autoimmune comorbidities. Increasing 
clinical detection is facilitated by improving awareness, implementation of a 
case-finding approach, and serology availability for screening at-risk patients, 
among other factors. Nevertheless, due to huge clinical variability, many celiac 
disease cases still escape diagnosis in most countries, unless actively searched 
by proactive policies. The burden of celiac disease is increasing, as is the 
need for better longitudinal care. Pediatric screening of the general population 
could represent the road ahead for an efficient intervention of secondary 
prevention aimed to reduce the social and health burden of celiac disease. This 
review analyses the epidemiology of celiac disease continent by continent, 
discusses current strategies to improve the detection of celiac disease, and 
highlights challenges related to the burden of celiac disease globally.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2024.01.035
PMID: 38309629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]