---
reference_id: "PMID:25656619"
title: "Defective Proteolytic Processing of Fibrillar Procollagens and Prodecorin Due to Biallelic BMP1 Mutations Results in a Severe, Progressive Form of Osteogenesis Imperfecta."
authors:
- Syx D
- Guillemyn B
- Symoens S
- Sousa AB
- Medeira A
- Whiteford M
- Hermanns-Lê T
- Coucke PJ
- De Paepe A
- Malfait F
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2473
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Collagen Type I/genetics, metabolism"
- "Collagen Type V/genetics, metabolism"
- "Decorin/genetics, metabolism"
- "Extracellular Matrix/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Procollagen/genetics, metabolism"
- Proteolysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defective Proteolytic Processing of Fibrillar Procollagens and Prodecorin Due to Biallelic BMP1 Mutations Results in a Severe, Progressive Form of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
**Authors:** Syx D, Guillemyn B, Symoens S, Sousa AB, Medeira A, Whiteford M, Hermanns-Lê T, Coucke PJ, De Paepe A, Malfait F
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.2473](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2473)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2015 Aug;30(8):1445-56. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2473. Epub 2015
May  21.

Defective Proteolytic Processing of Fibrillar Procollagens and Prodecorin Due to 
Biallelic BMP1 Mutations Results in a Severe, Progressive Form of Osteogenesis 
Imperfecta.

Syx D(1), Guillemyn B(1), Symoens S(1), Sousa AB(2), Medeira A(2), Whiteford 
M(3), Hermanns-Lê T(4), Coucke PJ(1), De Paepe A(1), Malfait F(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Genetics, Hospital de Santa Maria de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Department of Dermatopathology, Liège University Hospital, Liège, Belgium.

Whereas the vast majority of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is caused by autosomal 
dominant defects in the genes encoding type I procollagen, mutations in a myriad 
of genes affecting type I procollagen biosynthesis or bone formation and 
homeostasis have now been associated with rare autosomal recessive OI forms. 
Recently, homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in BMP1, encoding the 
metalloproteases bone morphogenetic protein-1 (BMP1) and its longer isoform 
mammalian Tolloid (mTLD), were identified in 5 children with a severe autosomal 
recessive form of OI and in 4 individuals with mild to moderate bone fragility. 
BMP1/mTLD functions as the procollagen carboxy-(C)-proteinase for types I to III 
procollagen but was also suggested to participate in amino-(N)-propeptide 
cleavage of types V and XI procollagens and in proteolytic trimming of other 
extracellular matrix (ECM) substrates. We report the phenotypic characteristics 
and natural history of 4 adults with severe, progressive OI characterized by 
numerous fractures, short stature with rhizomelic shortening, and deformity of 
the limbs and variable kyphoscoliosis, in whom we identified novel biallelic 
missense and frameshift mutations in BMP1. We show that BMP1/mTLD-deficiency in 
humans not only results in delayed cleavage of the type I procollagen 
C-propeptide but also hampers the processing of the small leucine-rich 
proteoglycan prodecorin, a regulator of collagen fibrillogenesis. 
Immunofluorescent staining of types I and V collagen and transmission electron 
microscopy of the dermis show impaired assembly of heterotypic type I/V collagen 
fibrils in the ECM. Our study thus highlights the severe and progressive nature 
of BMP1-associated OI in adults and broadens insights into the functional 
consequences of BMP1/mTLD-deficiency on ECM organization.

© 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2473
PMID: 25656619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]