---
reference_id: "PMID:31678770"
title: "The correlation between immune subtypes and consensus molecular subtypes in colorectal cancer identifies novel tumour microenvironment profiles, with prognostic and therapeutic implications."
authors:
- Soldevilla B
- Carretero-Puche C
- Gomez-Lopez G
- Al-Shahrour F
- Riesco MC
- Gil-Calderon B
- Alvarez-Vallina L
- Espinosa-Olarte P
- Gomez-Esteves G
- Rubio-Cuesta B
- Sarmentero J
- La Salvia A
- Garcia-Carbonero R
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2019.09.008
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/classification, genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- "Adenocarcinoma, Mucinous/classification, genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Aged
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
- Cell Proliferation/genetics
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/classification, genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, MHC Class I/genetics"
- Humans
- Inflammation/immunology
- Interferon-gamma/immunology
- "Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Macrophages/immunology
- Male
- Microsatellite Instability
- "Monocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic"
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-myc/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- Th1 Cells/immunology
- Th17 Cells/immunology
- Th2 Cells/immunology
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/immunology
- "Tumor Microenvironment/genetics, immunology"
- Wnt Signaling Pathway/genetics
- "Wound Healing/genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The correlation between immune subtypes and consensus molecular subtypes in colorectal cancer identifies novel tumour microenvironment profiles, with prognostic and therapeutic implications.
**Authors:** Soldevilla B, Carretero-Puche C, Gomez-Lopez G, Al-Shahrour F, Riesco MC, Gil-Calderon B, Alvarez-Vallina L, Espinosa-Olarte P, Gomez-Esteves G, Rubio-Cuesta B, Sarmentero J, La Salvia A, Garcia-Carbonero R
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2019.09.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2019.09.008)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2019 Dec;123:118-129. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2019.09.008. Epub 2019
 Nov 1.

The correlation between immune subtypes and consensus molecular subtypes in
colorectal cancer identifies novel tumour microenvironment profiles, with
prognostic and therapeutic implications.

Soldevilla B(1), Carretero-Puche C(1), Gomez-Lopez G(2), Al-Shahrour F(2),
Riesco MC(3), Gil-Calderon B(1), Alvarez-Vallina L(4), Espinosa-Olarte P(3),
Gomez-Esteves G(1), Rubio-Cuesta B(1), Sarmentero J(1), La Salvia A(3),
Garcia-Carbonero R(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Oncología Clínico-Traslacional, Unidad de Investigación en
Tumores Digestivos, Instituto de Investigación I+12, Hospital 12 de Octubre,
28041, Madrid, Spain; Centro Nacional de Investigación Oncológica (CNIO), 28029,
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Bioinformatics Unit, Centro Nacional de Investigación Oncológica (CNIO),
28029, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Laboratorio de Oncología Clínico-Traslacional, Unidad de Investigación en
Tumores Digestivos, Instituto de Investigación I+12, Hospital 12 de Octubre,
28041, Madrid, Spain; Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario Doce de
Octubre, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (imas12),
UCM, CNIO, CIBERONC, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Cancer Immunotherapy Unit (UNICA), Department of Immunology, Hospital
Universitario 12 de Octubre, 28041, Madrid, Spain; Immuno-Oncology and
Immunotherapy Group, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 12 de Octubre (i+12),
28041, Madrid, Spain; Immunotherapy and Cell Engineering Laboratory, Department
of Engineering, Aarhus University, 8000, C Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Laboratorio de Oncología Clínico-Traslacional, Unidad de Investigación en
Tumores Digestivos, Instituto de Investigación I+12, Hospital 12 de Octubre,
28041, Madrid, Spain; Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario Doce de
Octubre, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (imas12),
UCM, CNIO, CIBERONC, Madrid, Spain; Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid,
Spain. Electronic address: rgcarbonero@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Solid tumour growth is the consequence of a complex interplay
between cancer cells and their microenvironment. Recently, a new global
transcriptomic immune classification of solid tumours has identified six immune
subtypes (ISs) (C1-C6). Our aim was to specifically characterise ISs in
colorectal cancer (CRC) and assess their interplay with the consensus molecular
subtypes (CMSs).
METHODS: Clinical and molecular information, including CMSs and ISs, were
obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (N = 625). Immune cell populations,
differential gene expression and gene set enrichment analysis were performed to
characterise ISs in the global CRC population by using CMSs.
RESULTS: Only 5 ISs were identified in CRC, predominantly C1 wound healing (77%)
and C2 IFN-γ dominant (17%). CMS1 showed the highest proportion of C2 (53%),
whereas C1 was particularly dominant in CMS2 (91%). CMS3 had the highest
representation of C3 inflammatory (7%) and C4 lymphocyte depleted ISs (4%),
whereas all C6 TGF-β dominant cases belonged to CMS4 (2.3%). Prognostic
relevance of ISs in CRC substantially differed from that reported for the global
TCGA, and ISs had a greater ability to stratify the prognosis of CRC patients
than CMS classification. C2 had higher densities of CD8, CD4 activated,
follicular helper T cells, regulatory T cells and neutrophils and the highest
M1/M2 polarisation. C2 had a heightened activation of pathways related to the
immune system, apoptosis and DNA repair, mTOR signalling and oxidative
phosphorylation, whereas C1 was more dependent of metabolic pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: The correlation of IS and CMS allows a more precise categorisation
of patients with relevant clinical and biological implications, which may be
valuable tools to improve tailored therapeutic interventions in CRC patients.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2019.09.008
PMID: 31678770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
