---
reference_id: "PMID:11886709"
title: Human lymphocyte antigen DR7 protects against proliferative retinopathy with type II diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Quiroz-Mercado H
- Suárez-Licona A
- Fromow-Guerra J
- López-Carasa G
- Cárdenas-Hernández R
- Ruiz-Morales JA
- Portal-Celhay C
- Granados J
journal: Arch Med Res
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0188-4409(01)00378-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human lymphocyte antigen DR7 protects against proliferative retinopathy with type II diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Quiroz-Mercado H, Suárez-Licona A, Fromow-Guerra J, López-Carasa G, Cárdenas-Hernández R, Ruiz-Morales JA, Portal-Celhay C, Granados J
**Journal:** Arch Med Res (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0188-4409(01)00378-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0188-4409(01)00378-2)

## Content

1. Arch Med Res. 2002 Mar-Apr;33(2):123-7. doi: 10.1016/s0188-4409(01)00378-2.

Human lymphocyte antigen DR7 protects against proliferative retinopathy with 
type II diabetes mellitus.

Quiroz-Mercado H(1), Suárez-Licona A, Fromow-Guerra J, López-Carasa G, 
Cárdenas-Hernández R, Ruiz-Morales JA, Portal-Celhay C, Granados J.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Retina, Hospital Luis Sánchez Bulnes, Asociación para Evitar la 
Ceguera en México (AECM), Calle Vicente García Torres #46, Col. San Lucas 
Coyoacán, 04030 Mexico City, D.F., Mexico. retinamex@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: This study was undertaken in order to analyze the genetic incidence 
of human lymphocyte antigen diabetic retinopathy (HLA-DR) and its influence in 
proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR).
METHODS: We designed a case-control study in which 127 mestizo Mexican patients 
with DM II and diabetic retinopathy were studied. DNA was extracted and HLA-DR 
regions were amplified using PCR. Alleles were determined by DNA hybridization. 
Diagnosis was assessed clinically and by fluorescein angiography. Incidence of 
HLA-DR alleles in patients was compared with an ethnically matched control group 
of healthy subjects (n = 98). Statistical significance was established with 
non-parametric tests.
RESULTS: Patients with diabetic retinopathy showed less frequency of HLA-D11 
compared with the control group (p = 0.043). NPDR patients with 10 or more years 
of DM II showed an increase of HLA-DR7 (p = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the presence of HLA-DR7 protects against 
the development of proliferative disease in the diabetic Mexican population.

DOI: 10.1016/s0188-4409(01)00378-2
PMID: 11886709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]