---
reference_id: "PMID:35033484"
title: "Distinctively lower DISC1 mRNA levels in patients with schizophrenia, especially in those with higher positive, negative, and depressive symptoms."
authors:
- Chen YM
- Lin CH
- Lane HY
journal: Pharmacol Biochem Behav
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2022.173335
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinctively lower DISC1 mRNA levels in patients with schizophrenia, especially in those with higher positive, negative, and depressive symptoms.
**Authors:** Chen YM, Lin CH, Lane HY
**Journal:** Pharmacol Biochem Behav (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pbb.2022.173335](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbb.2022.173335)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2022 Feb;213:173335. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2022.173335. 
Epub 2022 Jan 13.

Distinctively lower DISC1 mRNA levels in patients with schizophrenia, especially 
in those with higher positive, negative, and depressive symptoms.

Chen YM(1), Lin CH(2), Lane HY(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung 
University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung 
University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; School of Medicine, Chang 
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
cyndi36@gmail.com.
(3)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Psychiatry & Brain Disease Research Center, 
China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Psychology, 
College of Medical and Health Sciences, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan. 
Electronic address: hylane@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The issue of genetic influence on schizophrenia has received 
considerable attention. The DISC1 gene has been shown in several studies to play 
a role in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. However, the relationship 
between DISC1 mRNA expression vs. schizophrenia and its clinical symptoms is 
uncertain.
METHODS: Fifty-six subjects (32 patients with schizophrenia and 24 healthy 
controls) were enrolled. Peripheral blood was obtained from all subjects to exam 
the DISC1 mRNA expression. Schizophrenia patients were evaluated with Hamilton 
Rating Scale for Depression (HAMD), Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale 
(PANSS), Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) and Scale for the Assessment of 
Negative Symptoms (SANS) scales. Healthy subjects were assessed with HAMD scale.
RESULTS: Patients with schizophrenia had significantly lower levels of the DISC1 
mRNA expression than the healthy control (P = 0.002). We also found that lower 
DISC1 mRNA levels in schizophrenia patients were associated with higher degree 
of depression in HAMD (P = 0.037), severer positive symptoms in PANSS 
(P = 0.032) and more negative symptoms in SANS (P = 0.038).
CONCLUSION: The results showed that schizophrenia patients had lower levels of 
DISC1 mRNA than healthy individuals, and that the schizophrenia patients with 
lower DISC1 mRNA levels were more likely to manifest more marked symptoms, 
including positive, negative, and depressive symptoms. The findings suggest that 
lower DISC1 expression may be related with the pathogenesis and phenotypes of 
schizophrenia. Future studies are needed to replicate the results and to further 
establish its potential role in clinical application of early diagnosis and 
outcome follow-up.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2022.173335
PMID: 35033484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]