---
reference_id: "PMID:38740919"
title: Significance of atherosclerotic plaque location in recanalizing non-acute long-segment occlusion of the internal carotid artery.
authors:
- Zhao TY
- Xu GQ
- Xue JY
- Bai WX
- Cai DY
- Yang BW
- Shi WY
- Li TX
- Gao BL
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-61938-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Aged
- "Plaque, Atherosclerotic/surgery, pathology, complications"
- "Carotid Artery, Internal/surgery, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- "Carotid Stenosis/surgery, pathology, complications"
- "Endarterectomy, Carotid/methods"
- Treatment Outcome
- Endovascular Procedures/methods
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Significance of atherosclerotic plaque location in recanalizing non-acute long-segment occlusion of the internal carotid artery.
**Authors:** Zhao TY, Xu GQ, Xue JY, Bai WX, Cai DY, Yang BW, Shi WY, Li TX, Gao BL
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-61938-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-61938-y)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 May 13;14(1):10945. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-61938-y.

Significance of atherosclerotic plaque location in recanalizing non-acute 
long-segment occlusion of the internal carotid artery.

Zhao TY(1), Xu GQ(1), Xue JY(1), Bai WX(1), Cai DY(1), Yang BW(1), Shi WY(1), Li 
TX(2), Gao BL(3).

Author information:
(1)Stroke Center, Cerebrovascular Disease Hospital, Henan Provincial People's 
Hospital, 7 Weiwu Road, Zhengzhou, 450003, Henan Province, China.
(2)Stroke Center, Cerebrovascular Disease Hospital, Henan Provincial People's 
Hospital, 7 Weiwu Road, Zhengzhou, 450003, Henan Province, China. 
litianxiaod@163.com.
(3)Stroke Center, Cerebrovascular Disease Hospital, Henan Provincial People's 
Hospital, 7 Weiwu Road, Zhengzhou, 450003, Henan Province, China. 
browngao@163.com.

To investigate the significance of atherosclerotic plaque location in hybrid 
surgery comprising both endovascular recanalization approaches and carotid 
endarterectomy for symptomatic atherosclerotic non-acute long-segment occlusion 
of the internal carotid artery (ICA), 162 patients were enrolled, including 120 
(74.1%) patients in the proximal plaque group and 42 (25.9%) in the distal 
plaque group. Surgical recanalization was performed in all patients, with 
successful recanalization in 119 (99.2%) patients in the proximal and 39 (92.9%) 
in the distal plaque group. The total successful recanalization rate was 97.5% 
(158/162) with a failure rate of 2.5% (4/162). Periprocedural complications 
occurred in 5 (4.2% or 5/120) patients in the proximal plaque group, including 
neck infection in two (1.7%), recurrent nerve injury in 1 (0.8%), and laryngeal 
edema in 2 (1.7%), and 2 (4.8%) in the distal plaque group, including femoral 
puncture infection in 2 (4.8%). No severe complications occurred in either 
group. Univariate analysis showed plaque location was a significant (P = 0.018) 
risk factor for successful recanalization, and multivariate analysis indicated 
that the plaque location remained a significant independent risk factor for 
recanalization success (P = 0.017). In follow-up 6-48 months after the 
recanalization surgery, reocclusion occurred in two (2.8%) patients in the 
proximal plaque group and 4 (13.3%) in the distal plaque group. In conclusion, 
although hybrid surgery achieves similar outcomes in patients with ICA occlusion 
caused by either proximal or distal atherosclerotic plaques, plaque location may 
be a significant risk factor for successful recanalization of symptomatic 
non-acute long-segment ICA occlusion.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-61938-y
PMCID: PMC11091165
PMID: 38740919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.