---
reference_id: "PMID:29064028"
title: "Mother-to-infant transmission of hepatitis B virus: challenges and perspectives."
authors:
- Shih YF
- Liu CJ
journal: Hepatol Int
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s12072-017-9831-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mother-to-infant transmission of hepatitis B virus: challenges and perspectives.
**Authors:** Shih YF, Liu CJ
**Journal:** Hepatol Int (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12072-017-9831-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12072-017-9831-0)

## Content

1. Hepatol Int. 2017 Nov;11(6):481-484. doi: 10.1007/s12072-017-9831-0. Epub 2017
 Oct 24.

Mother-to-infant transmission of hepatitis B virus: challenges and perspectives.

Shih YF(1), Liu CJ(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy and Assistive Technology, National Yang-Ming 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, 1 Chang-Te St, Taipei, 100, 
Taiwan. cjliu@ntu.edu.tw.
(3)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University College 
of Medicine and Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. cjliu@ntu.edu.tw.
(4)Hepatitis Research Center, National Taiwan University College of Medicine and 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. cjliu@ntu.edu.tw.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection due to perinatal mother-to-infant 
transmission (MTIT) remains a serious global health problem. Despite 
passive-active immunoprophylaxis using hepatitis B vaccination with or without 
hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIg), up to 8-10% of newborns still acquire HBV 
infection. Understanding the mechanisms of MTIT is essential for the 
interruption of HBV transmission. There are three possible routes of 
transmission: intrauterine transmission, transmission during delivery 
(intrapartum) and postnatal transmission through close contact or breast milk 
(postpartum). Overall, positivity for hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and the high 
viral load of the mothers are the two most important risk factors related to 
MTIT of HBV. This article briefly reviews the viral factors related to MTIT of 
HBV and discusses the issues that warrant further investigation.

DOI: 10.1007/s12072-017-9831-0
PMID: 29064028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]