---
reference_id: "PMID:29903037"
title: "Cyclical cholera outbreaks in Ghana: filth, not myth."
authors:
- Mireku-Gyimah N
- Apanga PA
- Awoonor-Williams JK
journal: Infect Dis Poverty
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s40249-018-0436-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cyclical cholera outbreaks in Ghana: filth, not myth.
**Authors:** Mireku-Gyimah N, Apanga PA, Awoonor-Williams JK
**Journal:** Infect Dis Poverty (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40249-018-0436-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40249-018-0436-1)

## Content

1. Infect Dis Poverty. 2018 Jun 15;7(1):51. doi: 10.1186/s40249-018-0436-1.

Cyclical cholera outbreaks in Ghana: filth, not myth.

Mireku-Gyimah N(1), Apanga PA(2), Awoonor-Williams JK(3).

Author information:
(1)Dansoman Polyclinic, Ghana Health Service, Greater Accra Region, Ghana. 
nmirekugyimah@gmail.com.
(2)Talensi District Hospital, Ghana Health Service, Tongo, Upper East Region, 
Ghana.
(3)Policy, Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Division, Ghana Health Service, 
Greater Accra Region, Ghana.

BACKGROUND: Ranked among the world's dirtiest countries, Ghana has poor 
environmental sanitation and hygiene, and a lack of potable water, all of which 
combined have been largely blamed as the underscoring reasons for cholera 
outbreaks. The country has concomitantly suffered seasonal cholera outbreaks 
that have impacted negatively on the population's health, as well as on the 
nation's economy. To prevent cyclical cholera outbreaks in Ghana, this 
commentary discusses the associated problems and makes recommendations to solve 
them.
MAIN BODY: This commentary aims to throw light on the menace of cholera in Ghana 
and the need to curb the recurrence of outbreaks and bouts of this epidemic. 
Response measures, challenges, and lessons learnt from the most recent cholera 
outbreak are critically assessed to determine how best this public health issue 
could be resolved. General and specific policy recommendations are identified in 
this regard.
CONCLUSION: To resolve this problem, there is a need for an oral cholera vaccine 
to be introduced. There is also a need to develop strategies and interventions 
relating to water, sanitation, and hygiene, to be initiated by the Ministry of 
Health, with component activities that are culturally tailored to Ghanaian 
communities. Policy change towards the prevention of outbreaks in Ghana is 
identified as another requisite.

DOI: 10.1186/s40249-018-0436-1
PMCID: PMC6003169
PMID: 29903037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.