---
reference_id: "PMID:17372169"
title: Clinical and genetic characterization of families with arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy provides novel insights into patterns of disease expression.
authors:
- Sen-Chowdhry S
- Syrris P
- Ward D
- Asimaki A
- Sevdalis E
- McKenna WJ
journal: Circulation
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.660241
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia/epidemiology, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Desmocollins/genetics
- Desmoglein 2/genetics
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- Desmosomes/pathology
- Disease Progression
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genotype
- Heart Function Tests
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Myocardium/pathology
- Phenotype
- Physical Endurance
- Plakophilins/genetics
- Sports
- gamma Catenin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic characterization of families with arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy provides novel insights into patterns of disease expression.
**Authors:** Sen-Chowdhry S, Syrris P, Ward D, Asimaki A, Sevdalis E, McKenna WJ
**Journal:** Circulation (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.660241](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.660241)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2007 Apr 3;115(13):1710-20. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.660241.  Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Clinical and genetic characterization of families with arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy provides novel insights into patterns of 
disease expression.

Sen-Chowdhry S(1), Syrris P, Ward D, Asimaki A, Sevdalis E, McKenna WJ.

Author information:
(1)The Heart Hospital, University College London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: According to clinical-pathological correlation studies, the natural 
history of arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy is 
purported to progress from localized to global right ventricular dysfunction, 
followed by left ventricular (LV) involvement and biventricular pump failure. 
The inevitable focus on sudden death victims and transplant recipients may, 
however, have created a skewed perspective of a genetic disease. We hypothesized 
that unbiased representation of the spectrum of disease expression in 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy would require in vivo 
assessment of families in a genetically heterogeneous population.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A cohort of 200 probands and relatives satisfying task 
force or modified diagnostic criteria for arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
dysplasia/cardiomyopathy underwent comprehensive clinical evaluation. Desmosomal 
mutations were identified in 39 individuals from 20 different families. Indices 
of structural severity correlated with advancing age and were increased in 
long-term endurance athletes. Fulfillment of modified criteria indicated 
phenotypically mild disease, whereas asymptomatic status did not. In >80%, ECG, 
rhythm monitoring, and/or gadolinium-enhanced cardiovascular magnetic resonance 
were suggestive of LV involvement, the extent of which often was marked among 
individuals with chain-termination mutations and/or desmoplakin disease. Three 
patterns of disease expression were identified: (1) classic, with isolated right 
ventricular disease or LV involvement in association with significant right 
ventricular impairment; (2) left dominant, with early and prominent LV 
manifestations and relatively mild right-sided disease; and (3) biventricular, 
characterized by parallel involvement of both ventricles.
CONCLUSIONS: LV involvement in arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
dysplasia/cardiomyopathy may precede the onset of significant right ventricular 
dysfunction. Recognition of disease variants with early and/or predominant LV 
involvement supports adoption of the broader term arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.660241
PMID: 17372169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]