---
reference_id: "PMID:25473167"
title: Calcium signaling of pancreatic acinar cells in the pathogenesis of pancreatitis.
authors:
- Li J
- Zhou R
- Zhang J
- Li ZF
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i43.16146
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Calcium Channel Blockers/therapeutic use
- "Calcium Channels/drug effects, metabolism"
- Calcium Signaling/drug effects
- Drug Design
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- "Pancreas, Exocrine/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Pancreatitis/diagnosis, drug therapy, metabolism"
- Sarcoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- "Sarcoplasmic Reticulum Calcium-Transporting ATPases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calcium signaling of pancreatic acinar cells in the pathogenesis of pancreatitis.
**Authors:** Li J, Zhou R, Zhang J, Li ZF
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v20.i43.16146](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i43.16146)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Nov 21;20(43):16146-52. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v20.i43.16146.

Calcium signaling of pancreatic acinar cells in the pathogenesis of 
pancreatitis.

Li J(1), Zhou R(1), Zhang J(1), Li ZF(1).

Author information:
(1)Jun Li, National Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Biodiagnostics 
and Biotherapy, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University 
College of Medicine, Xi'an 710004, Shaanxi Province, China.

Pancreatitis is an increasingly common and sometimes severe disease that lacks a 
specific therapy. The pathogenesis of pancreatitis is still not well understood. 
Calcium (Ca(2+)) is a versatile carrier of signals regulating many aspects of 
cellular activity and plays a central role in controlling digestive enzyme 
secretion in pancreatic acinar cells. Ca(2+) overload is a key early event and 
is crucial in the pathogenesis of many diseases. In pancreatic acinar cells, 
pathological Ca(2+) signaling (stimulated by bile, alcohol metabolites and other 
causes) is a key contributor to the initiation of cell injury due to prolonged 
and global Ca(2+) elevation that results in trypsin activation, vacuolization 
and necrosis, all of which are crucial in the development of pancreatitis. 
Increased release of Ca(2+) from stores in the intracellular endoplasmic 
reticulum and/or increased Ca(2+) entry through the plasma membrane are causes 
of such cell damage. Failed mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
production reduces re-uptake and extrusion of Ca(2+) by the sarco/endoplasmic 
reticulum Ca(2+)-activated ATPase and plasma membrane Ca(2+)-ATPase pumps, which 
contribute to Ca(2+) overload. Current findings have provided further insight 
into the roles and mechanisms of abnormal pancreatic acinar Ca(2+) signals in 
pancreatitis. The lack of available specific treatments is therefore an 
objective of ongoing research. Research is currently underway to establish the 
mechanisms and interactions of Ca(2+) signals in the pathogenesis of 
pancreatitis.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i43.16146
PMCID: PMC4239501
PMID: 25473167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]