---
reference_id: "PMID:26222080"
title: "The Biology of Brain Metastasis: Challenges for Therapy."
authors:
- Fidler IJ
journal: Cancer J
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000126
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Biology of Brain Metastasis: Challenges for Therapy.
**Authors:** Fidler IJ
**Journal:** Cancer J (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PPO.0000000000000126](https://doi.org/10.1097/PPO.0000000000000126)

## Content

1. Cancer J. 2015 Jul-Aug;21(4):284-93. doi: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000126.

The Biology of Brain Metastasis: Challenges for Therapy.

Fidler IJ(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Cancer Metastasis Lab, Department of Cancer Biology, The University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

Many patients with lung cancer, breast cancer, and melanoma develop brain 
metastases that are resistant to conventional therapy. The median survival for 
untreated patients is 1 to 2 months, which may be extended to 6 months with 
surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. The outcome of metastasis depends on 
multiple interactions of unique metastatic cells with host homeostatic 
mechanisms which the tumor cells exploit for their survival and proliferation. 
The blood-brain barrier is leaky in metastases that are larger than 0.5-mm 
diameter because of production of vascular endothelial growth factor by 
metastatic cells. Brain metastases are surrounded and infiltrated by microglia 
and activated astrocytes. The interaction with astrocytes leads to up-regulation 
of multiple genes in the metastatic cells, including several survival genes that 
are responsible for the increased resistance of tumor cells to cytotoxic drugs. 
These findings substantiate the importance of the "seed and soil" hypothesis and 
that successful treatment of brain metastases must include targeting of the 
organ microenvironment.

DOI: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000126
PMID: 26222080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]