---
reference_id: "PMID:39397675"
title: Cumulative stressor exposure predicts menstrual cycle affective changes in a transdiagnostic outpatient sample with past-month suicidal ideation.
authors:
- Nagpal A
- Barone JC
- Tauseef H
- Ross J
- Gray ZJ
- Schmalenberger KM
- Shields G
- Slavich GM
- Eisenlohr-Moul T
journal: Psychol Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1017/S0033291724001661
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cumulative stressor exposure predicts menstrual cycle affective changes in a transdiagnostic outpatient sample with past-month suicidal ideation.
**Authors:** Nagpal A, Barone JC, Tauseef H, Ross J, Gray ZJ, Schmalenberger KM, Shields G, Slavich GM, Eisenlohr-Moul T
**Journal:** Psychol Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0033291724001661](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291724001661)

## Content

1. Psychol Med. 2024 Oct;54(13):3624-3635. doi: 10.1017/S0033291724001661. Epub 
2024 Oct 14.

Cumulative stressor exposure predicts menstrual cycle affective changes in a 
transdiagnostic outpatient sample with past-month suicidal ideation.

Nagpal A(1), Barone JC(1), Tauseef H(1), Ross J(1), Gray ZJ(2), Schmalenberger 
KM(1), Shields G(2), Slavich GM(3), Eisenlohr-Moul T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois Chicago, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological Science, University of Arkansas, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of 
California, Los Angeles, USA.

BACKGROUND: Affective responses to the menstrual cycle vary widely. Some 
individuals experience severe symptoms like those with premenstrual dysphoric 
disorder, while others have minimal changes. The reasons for these differences 
are unclear, but prior studies suggest stressor exposure may play a role. 
However, research in at-risk psychiatric samples is lacking.
METHODS: In a large clinical sample, we conducted a prospective study of how 
lifetime stressors relate to degree of affective change across the cycle. 114 
outpatients with past-month suicidal ideation (SI) provided daily ratings (n = 
6187) of negative affect and SI across 1-3 menstrual cycles. Participants 
completed the Stress and Adversity Inventory (STRAIN), which measures different 
stressor exposures (i.e. interpersonal loss, physical danger) throughout the 
life course, including before and after menarche. Multilevel polynomial growth 
models tested the relationship between menstrual cycle time and symptoms, 
moderated by stressor exposure.
RESULTS: Greater lifetime stressor exposure predicted a more pronounced 
perimenstrual increase in active SI, along with marginally significant similar 
patterns for negative affect and passive SI. Additionally, pre-menarche 
stressors significantly increased the cyclicity of active SI compared to 
post-menarche stressors. Exposure to more interpersonal loss stressors predicted 
greater perimenstrual symptom change of negative affect, passive SI and active 
SI. Exploratory item-level analyses showed that lifetime stressors moderated a 
more severe perimenstrual symptom trajectory for mood swings, 
anger/irritability, rejection sensitivity, and interpersonal conflict.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that greater lifetime stressor exposure may 
lead to heightened emotional reactivity to ovarian hormone fluctuations, 
elevating the risk of psychopathology.

DOI: 10.1017/S0033291724001661
PMCID: PMC11536118
PMID: 39397675

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.