---
reference_id: PMID:38977672
title: Ube3a unsilencer for the potential treatment of Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Vihma H
- Li K
- Welton-Arndt A
- Smith AL
- Bettadapur KR
- Gilmore RB
- Gao E
- Cotney JL
- Huang HC
- Collins JL
- Chamberlain SJ
- Lee HM
- Aubé J
- Philpot BD
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-49788-8
keywords:
- Angelman Syndrome/genetics
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Mice
- Neurons/metabolism
- Humans
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Male
- Female
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism, genetics"
- Brain/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ube3a unsilencer for the potential treatment of Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Vihma H, Li K, Welton-Arndt A, Smith AL, Bettadapur KR, Gilmore RB, Gao E, Cotney JL, Huang HC, Collins JL, Chamberlain SJ, Lee HM, Aubé J, Philpot BD
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-49788-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49788-8)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Jul 8;15(1):5558. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-49788-8.

Ube3a unsilencer for the potential treatment of Angelman syndrome.

Vihma H(1), Li K(#)(2), Welton-Arndt A(#)(3), Smith AL(1), Bettadapur KR(1), 
Gilmore RB(4), Gao E(1), Cotney JL(4), Huang HC(5), Collins JL(6), Chamberlain 
SJ(4), Lee HM(7)(8), Aubé J(9)(10), Philpot BD(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Neuroscience Center, and Carolina 
Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Division of Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, UNC Eshelman School of 
Pharmacy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, University of Connecticut School 
of Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.
(5)Deerfield Discovery and Development, Deerfield Management, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(7)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Neuroscience Center, and Carolina 
Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. dr.hmlee@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hollings Cancer Center, 
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA. dr.hmlee@gmail.com.
(9)Division of Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, UNC Eshelman School of 
Pharmacy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 
jaube@email.unc.edu.
(10)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA. jaube@email.unc.edu.
(11)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Neuroscience Center, and Carolina 
Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. bphilpot@med.unc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Deletion of the maternal UBE3A allele causes Angelman syndrome (AS); because 
paternal UBE3A is epigenetically silenced by a long non-coding antisense 
(UBE3A-ATS) in neurons, this nearly eliminates UBE3A protein in the brain. 
Reactivating paternal UBE3A holds promise for treating AS. We previously showed 
topoisomerase inhibitors can reactivate paternal UBE3A, but their therapeutic 
challenges prompted our search for small molecule unsilencers with a different 
mechanism of action. Here, we found that (S)-PHA533533 acts through a novel 
mechanism to significantly increase paternal Ube3a mRNA and UBE3A protein levels 
while downregulating Ube3a-ATS in primary neurons derived from AS model mice. 
Furthermore, peripheral delivery of (S)-PHA533533 in AS model mice induces 
widespread neuronal UBE3A expression. Finally, we show that (S)-PHA533533 
unsilences paternal UBE3A in AS patient-derived neurons, highlighting its 
translational potential. Our findings provide a lead for developing a small 
molecule treatment for AS that could be safe, non-invasively delivered, and 
capable of brain-wide unsilencing of paternal UBE3A.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-49788-8
PMCID: PMC11231141
PMID: 38977672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors performed the initial drug screen, 
shown in Fig. 1b, as part of a sponsored research agreement with Pfizer that (1) 
provided the chemogenetic library, (2) partially supported H.-M.L.’s salary, and 
(3) provided research funds to perform the initial screen in the laboratory of 
B.D.P. No other parts of the project were supported by Pfizer. Pfizer reviewed 
and approved the manuscript submission, but did not contribute to the 
conceptualization, design, data collection, data analysis, or preparation of the 
manuscript. The authors do not have any other competing interests.