---
reference_id: "PMID:20301296"
title: CHD7 Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM
- Hefner M
- Blake K
- Martin DM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHD7 Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM, Hefner M, Blake K, Martin DM

## Content

1. CHD7 Disorder.

van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM(1), Hefner M(2), Blake K(3), Martin DM(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2006 Oct 2 [updated 2025 Aug 14].

Author information:
(1)University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands
(2)Saint Louis University, St Louis, Missouri
(3)Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
(4)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: CHD7 disorder encompasses the entire phenotypic 
spectrum of heterozygous CHD7 pathogenic variants that includes CHARGE syndrome 
as well as subsets of features that comprise the CHARGE syndrome phenotype. The 
mnemonic CHARGE syndrome, introduced in the premolecular era, stands for 
coloboma, heart defect, choanal atresia, retarded growth and development, 
genital hypoplasia, ear anomalies (including deafness). Following the 
identification of the genetic cause of CHD7 disorder, the phenotypic spectrum 
expanded to include cranial nerve anomalies, vestibular defects, cleft lip 
and/or palate, hypothyroidism, tracheoesophageal anomalies, brain anomalies, 
seizures, and renal anomalies. Life expectancy highly depends on the severity of 
manifestations; mortality can be high in the first few years when severe birth 
defects (particularly complex heart defects) are present and often complicated 
by airway and feeding issues. In childhood, adolescence, and adulthood, 
decreased life expectancy is likely related to a combination of residual heart 
defects, infections, aspiration or choking, respiratory issues including 
obstructive and central apnea, and possibly seizures. Despite these 
complications, the life expectancy for many individuals can be normal.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CHD7 disorder is established in a proband 
with suggestive clinical and imaging findings and a heterozygous pathogenic 
variant in or deletion of CHD7 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management of the manifestations of 
CHD7 disorder can be complex and require a multidisciplinary approach involving 
clinicians, therapists, and educators. Surveillance: Requires routine follow up 
of manifestations identified in infancy/childhood, as well as ongoing monitoring 
of growth, development, educational progress, behavior, and possible endocrine 
issues. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Because of the increased risk of 
post-anesthesia airway complications, procedures requiring anesthesia should be 
minimized and combined whenever possible.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CHD7 disorder is an autosomal dominant disorder typically 
caused by a de novo pathogenic variant. In rare instances, an individual with 
CHD7 disorder inherits a pathogenic variant from a heterozygous parent. The risk 
to the sibs of the proband depends on the genetic status of the proband's 
parents: (1) If a parent of the proband has a CHD7 pathogenic variant, the risk 
to the sibs of inheriting the pathogenic variant is 50%; (2) If the CHD7 
pathogenic variant identified in the proband cannot be detected in the leukocyte 
DNA of either parent, the empiric recurrence risk to sibs of a proband is 
approximately 1%-2% because of the possibility of parental germline mosaicism. 
Although many individuals with CHD7 disorder are not able to reproduce, each 
child of an individual with CHD7 disorder has a 50% chance of inheriting the 
pathogenic variant. Once the CHD7 pathogenic variant has been identified in an 
affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are 
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301296