---
reference_id: "PMID:35661568"
title: "Optimal retreatment schedule of rituximab for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder: A systematic review."
authors:
- Abbadessa G
- Miele G
- Maida E
- Minervini G
- Lavorgna L
- Bonavita S
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2022.103926
keywords:
- Aquaporin 4
- Biomarkers
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/therapeutic use
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear"
- Neuromyelitis Optica
- Recurrence
- Retreatment
- Rituximab/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optimal retreatment schedule of rituximab for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Abbadessa G, Miele G, Maida E, Minervini G, Lavorgna L, Bonavita S
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2022.103926](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2022.103926)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2022 Jul;63:103926. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2022.103926.
 Epub 2022 May 29.

Optimal retreatment schedule of rituximab for neuromyelitis optica spectrum
disorder: A systematic review.

Abbadessa G(1), Miele G(2), Maida E(2), Minervini G(3), Lavorgna L(2), Bonavita
S(2).

Author information:
(1)Second Division of Neurology, Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical
Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Itay. Electronic
address: Gianmarcoabbadessa@live.com.
(2)Second Division of Neurology, Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical
Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Itay.
(3)Multidisciplinary Department of Medical-Surgical and Dental Specialties,
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Via Luigi De Crecchio 6, 80138,
Naples, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Several studies have shown the efficacy of rituximab (RTX) in
preventing relapses in patients suffering from Neuromyelitis Optica spectrum
disorder (NMSOD) and have explored different therapeutic schemes. Given the
extreme inter-individual variability of the disease course, there is the need to
identify biomarkers to tailor the retreatment schedule and dosage. This review
aimed to identify the most useful biomarker to guide reinfusion and, in turn,
the optimal retreatment schedule of RTX for NMSOD.
METHODS: The literature search was conducted in the Web of Science, Scopus and
Pubmed electronic databases. We limited document type to articles written in
English and published up to 28 February 2022. Inclusion criteria were: (i)
Patients affected by NMSOD and treated with RTX, (ii) followed up for at least
one year and for whom Annualized Relapse rate (ARR) was collected over a period
of at least 12 months before and after therapy initiation and (iii) induction
protocols consisting of 375 mg / m2 / week for four weeks or 1000 mg infused
once or twice two weeks apart. Collected information was: first authors' name,
publication year, study design, sample size, sex, age, percentage of patients
positive for antibodies to aquaporin 4 (AQP4-IgG), maintenance regimen, primary
outcome, mean ARR pre-therapy and mean ARR post-therapy initiation, percentage
of relapse-free patients. The primary outcome that we considered was the ARR
reduction. Further, we considered the number of relapses that occurred when B
cells and memory B cells were under the chosen threshold and the percentage of
relapse-free patients when available.
RESULTS: Among 31 potentially eligible studies, 9 fulfilled the inclusion
criteria. ARR reduction was not comparable between studies. The studies that
monitored CD19+ and CD27+ cell kinetics showed a higher number of relapses when
CD19+ lymphocyte count was below the threshold compared to the number of
relapses that occurred when CD27+ cell count was below the threshold. Further, a
higher percentage of patients achieved the relapse-free condition with a
reinfusion schedule when CD27+ reached 0, 05% of peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) compared to the reinfusion when CD19+ reached 0, 1% of PBMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: To date, the optimal retreatment schedule for RTX in NMOSD has not
yet been determined. However, the presented findings suggest that CD27+ B cells
might be a reliable biomarker to guide retreatment in AQP4-IgG positive
patients, at least in the first six months from the infusion. Further effort is
needed to identify those factors influencing anti-CD20 therapy effectiveness to
tailor dosage and treatment schedule to achieve the most favourable risk/benefit
ratio.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2022.103926
PMID: 35661568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
