---
reference_id: "PMID:34118198"
title: "Pralsetinib for patients with advanced or metastatic RET-altered thyroid cancer (ARROW): a multi-cohort, open-label, registrational, phase 1/2 study."
authors:
- Subbiah V
- Hu MI
- Wirth LJ
- Schuler M
- Mansfield AS
- Curigliano G
- Brose MS
- Zhu VW
- Leboulleux S
- Bowles DW
- Baik CS
- Adkins D
- Keam B
- Matos I
- Garralda E
- Gainor JF
- Lopes G
- Lin CC
- Godbert Y
- Sarker D
- Miller SG
- Clifford C
- Zhang H
- Turner CD
- Taylor MH
journal: Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-8587(21)00120-0
keywords:
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Pyridines/therapeutic use
- Pyrimidines/therapeutic use
- Survival Rate
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pralsetinib for patients with advanced or metastatic RET-altered thyroid cancer (ARROW): a multi-cohort, open-label, registrational, phase 1/2 study.
**Authors:** Subbiah V, Hu MI, Wirth LJ, Schuler M, Mansfield AS, Curigliano G, Brose MS, Zhu VW, Leboulleux S, Bowles DW, Baik CS, Adkins D, Keam B, Matos I, Garralda E, Gainor JF, Lopes G, Lin CC, Godbert Y, Sarker D, Miller SG, Clifford C, Zhang H, Turner CD, Taylor MH
**Journal:** Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-8587(21)00120-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(21)00120-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2021 Aug;9(8):491-501. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(21)00120-0. Epub 2021 Jun 9.

Pralsetinib for patients with advanced or metastatic RET-altered thyroid cancer
(ARROW): a multi-cohort, open-label, registrational, phase 1/2 study.

Subbiah V(1), Hu MI(2), Wirth LJ(3), Schuler M(4), Mansfield AS(5), Curigliano
G(6), Brose MS(7), Zhu VW(8), Leboulleux S(9), Bowles DW(10), Baik CS(11),
Adkins D(12), Keam B(13), Matos I(14), Garralda E(14), Gainor JF(15), Lopes
G(16), Lin CC(17), Godbert Y(18), Sarker D(19), Miller SG(20), Clifford C(20),
Zhang H(20), Turner CD(20), Taylor MH(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, Division of Cancer
Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
Electronic address: vsubbiah@mdanderson.org.
(2)Department of Endocrine Neoplasia and Hormonal Disorders, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)West German Cancer Center Essen, Department of Medical Oncology, University
Hospital Essen and German Cancer Consortium, Partner site University Hospital
Essen, Essen, Germany.
(5)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)European Institute of Oncology, IRCCS and University of Milano, Milano,
Italy.
(7)Abramson Cancer Center at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of California Irvine School of Medicine,
Orange, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Endocrine Oncology, Gustav Roussy and
University Paris Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(10)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(11)University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.
(12)Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(14)Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain.
(15)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(16)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center at the University of Miami, Miami, FL,
USA.
(17)National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(18)Bergonié Institute Cancer Center, Bordeaux, France.
(19)Guy's Hospital, King's College London, London, UK.
(20)Blueprint Medicines, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(21)Earle A Chiles Research Institute, Providence Portland Medical Center,
Portland, OR, USA.

Erratum in
    Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2021 Oct;9(10):e4. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(21)00247-3.

Comment in
    Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2021 Aug;9(8):473-474. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(21)00152-2.

BACKGROUND: Oncogenic alterations in RET represent important therapeutic targets
in thyroid cancer. We aimed to assess the safety and antitumour activity of
pralsetinib, a highly potent, selective RET inhibitor, in patients with
RET-altered thyroid cancers.
METHODS: ARROW, a phase 1/2, open-label study done in 13 countries across 71
sites in community and hospital settings, enrolled patients 18 years or older
with RET-altered locally advanced or metastatic solid tumours, including
RET-mutant medullary thyroid and RET fusion-positive thyroid cancers, and an
Eastern Co-operative Oncology Group performance status of 0-2 (later limited to
0-1 in a protocol amendment). Phase 2 primary endpoints assessed for patients
who received 400 mg once-daily oral pralsetinib until disease progression,
intolerance, withdrawal of consent, or investigator decision, were overall
response rate (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours version 1.1; masked
independent central review) and safety. Tumour response was assessed for
patients with RET-mutant medullary thyroid cancer who had received previous
cabozantinib or vandetanib, or both, or were ineligible for standard therapy and
patients with previously treated RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer; safety was
assessed for all patients with RET-altered thyroid cancer. This ongoing study is
registered with clinicaltrials.gov, NCT03037385, and enrolment of patients with
RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer was ongoing at the time of this interim
analysis.
FINDINGS: Between Mar 17, 2017, and May 22, 2020, 122 patients with RET-mutant
medullary and 20 with RET fusion-positive thyroid cancers were enrolled. Among
patients with baseline measurable disease who received pralsetinib by July 11,
2019 (enrolment cutoff for efficacy analysis), overall response rates were 15
(71%) of 21 (95% CI 48-89) in patients with treatment-naive RET-mutant medullary
thyroid cancer and 33 (60%) of 55 (95% CI 46-73) in patients who had previously
received cabozantinib or vandetanib, or both, and eight (89%) of nine (95% CI
52-100) in patients with RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer (all responses
confirmed for each group). Common (≥10%) grade 3 and above treatment-related
adverse events among patients with RET-altered thyroid cancer enrolled by May
22, 2020, were hypertension (24 patients [17%] of 142), neutropenia (19 [13%]),
lymphopenia (17 [12%]), and anaemia (14 [10%]). Serious treatment-related
adverse events were reported in 21 patients (15%), the most frequent (≥2%) of
which was pneumonitis (five patients [4%]). Five patients [4%] discontinued
owing to treatment-related events. One (1%) patient died owing to a
treatment-related adverse event.
INTERPRETATION: Pralsetinib is a new, well-tolerated, potent once-daily oral
treatment option for patients with RET-altered thyroid cancer.
FUNDING: Blueprint Medicines.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-8587(21)00120-0
PMID: 34118198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests VS reports grants from
Blueprint Medicines and LOXO Oncology–Eli Lilly; research funding or grant
support from Roche–Genentech, Novartis, Bayer, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK),
Nanocarrier, Vegenics, Northwest Biotherapeutics, Berg Heath, Incyte, Fujifilm,
PharmaMar, D3, Pfizer, MultiVir, Amgen, AbbVie, Alfasigma, Agensys, Boston
Biomedical, Idera Pharma, Inhibrx, Exelixis, Medimmune, Altum, Dragonfly
Therapeutics, Takeda, Immunogen, National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN),
NCI-CTEP and UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Turning Point Therapeutics, and
Boston Pharmaceuticals, travel support from Novartis, PharmaMar, ASCO, ESMO,
Helsinn, and Incyte, and consultancy or advisory board participation for
Helsinn, LOXO Oncology–Eli Lilly, R-Pharma US, Incyte, QED Pharma, Medimmune,
and Novartis, and another relationship with Medscape. MIH reports advisory board
roles for Eli Lilly, LOXO Oncology, and Blueprint Medicines, and research
funding from Eli Lilly. LJW reports personal fees and other support from
Blueprint Medicines; personal fees from Bayer, Blueprint Medicines, Exelixis,
Genentech, Eli Lilly, and Merck, and non-financial support from Eli Lilly and
Merck. MS reports grants from AstraZeneca and Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS), and
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, GSK, Janssen,
MorphoSys, Novartis, Roche, Takeda, Amgen, and MSD. ASM reports consulting or
advisory board roles (with honoraria to his institution) for Janssen, Genentech,
BMS, AbbVie, AstraZeneca, travel or accommodation or expenses from AbbVie and
Roche, and research funding from Novartis, NIH, Mark Foundation, and is a
non-remunerated board member of the Mesothelioma Applied Research Foundation. GC
reports personal fees from Roche, Pfizer, Novartis, Eli Lilly, Foundation
Medicine, BMS, Samsung, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK,
and Seagen, non-financial support from Roche and Pfizer, grants from Merck, and
other support from Ellipses Pharma. MSB has nothing to disclose. VWZ reports
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Blueprint Medicines, Roche-Foundation Medicine,
Roche–Genentech, Takeda, Turning Point Therapeutics, and Xcovery. SL reports
personal fees from Eisai and Eli Lilly. DWB reports personal fees from Blueprint
Medicines. CSB reports grants from Blueprint Medicines, Daiichi Sankyo, Celgene,
Pfizer, Lilly Oncology, AbbVie, Rain Therapeutics, Spectrum Pharmaceuticals, and
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Turning Point Therapeutics, NCCN, and Takeda. DA
reports grants and personal fees from Blueprint Medicines; grants from Exelixis,
Kura Oncology, Merck, Cue, Aduro, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, Celgene–BMS, Novartis,
AstraZeneca, Atara Bio, Cellex, Innate, Sensei, Matrix Biomed, Hookipa,
CoFactor, Medimmune, and ISA, and personal fees from Exelixis, Merck, Cue,
twoXAR, Vaccinex, Zilio, and TargImmune. BK has nothing to disclose. IM reports
grants from an ESMO Research Fellowship sponsored by Roche, and personal fees
for speaker bureau participation from MSD. EG reports personal fees from
Genentech, Hoffman–LaRoche, Ellipses Pharma, Neomed Therapeutics, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Janssen, Seattle Genetics, TFS, Alkermes, ThermoFisher, BMS, and MSD,
grants from Menarini and Glycotope, and other support from Novartis, Roche, and
ThermoFisher. JFG reports personal fees from BMS, Roche–Genentech, Merck,
Takeda, LOXO Oncology–Lilly, Blueprint Medicines, Oncorus, Regeneron, Gilead,
AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Novartis, and Moderna, grants from Takeda and Novartis, and
institutional research support from BMS, LOXO Oncology–Lilly, Blueprint
Medicines, Novartis, Moderna, Alexo, Tesaro, Jounce, Adaptimmune Therapeutics,
and an immediate family member who is an employee of and holds equity in
Ironwood Pharmaceuticals. GL reports other support from Bayer, Blueprint
Medicines, Cue Biopharma, Eisai, Exelixis, Genentech, Eli Lilly, LOXO Oncology,
Merck, and Rakuten Medical. C-CL reports personal fees from BeiGene, Blueprint
Medicines, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Novartis,
Takeda, and Roche. YG has nothing to disclose. DS reports grants from Blueprint
Medicines, personal fees from MSD, Eisai, Ipsen, Bayer, AstraZeneca, Surface
Oncology, and non-financial support from Eisai, Ipsen, and Monia Therapeutics.
SGM, CC, and HZ are employees of and hold equity interest in Blueprint
Medicines. CDT is a former employee of and holds equity interest in Blueprint
Medicines. MHT reports other support from Bayer, Blueprint Medicines, Novartis,
Sanofi–Genzyme, ArQule, BMS, Eisai, Merck, Array BioPharma, LOXO Oncology,
Abreos Biosciences, and Arch Oncology.
