---
reference_id: "PMID:31593953"
title: "Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus and Celiac Disease: Distinct Autoimmune Disorders That Share Common Pathogenic Mechanisms."
authors:
- Goodwin G
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1159/000503142
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus and Celiac Disease: Distinct Autoimmune Disorders That Share Common Pathogenic Mechanisms.
**Authors:** Goodwin G
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000503142](https://doi.org/10.1159/000503142)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2019;92(5):285-292. doi: 10.1159/000503142. Epub 2019 Oct
8.

Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus and Celiac Disease: Distinct Autoimmune Disorders That 
Share Common Pathogenic Mechanisms.

Goodwin G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 
gregory.goodwin@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: The relatively common co-occurrence of type 1 diabetes (T1D) and 
celiac disease (CD) suggests these disorders share common pathogenic etiologies.
SUMMARY: T1D and CD are strongly linked to closely related high-risk human 
lymphocyte antigens (HLA-DR-DQ). High-risk HLA molecules bind specific fragments 
of gluten or the islet self-antigen(s) and present these antigens to 
antigen-responsive T cells. In an appropriate proinflammatory environment, the 
autoimmune response results in destruction of the intestinal enterocyte and/or 
the pancreatic beta cell. Environmental factors have been implicated in the 
etiology of T1D and CD because (1) identical twins are only partially concordant 
for these disorders and (2) incidence rates of T1D and CD have been steadily 
rising for decades. Prospective studies in infants genetically predisposed to 
T1D and CD showed that antibody positivity to both disorders begins in the first 
1-3 years of life. Viral infections and early exposure to gluten or cow's milk 
in the infant diet have been implicated in disease pathogenesis. However, 
delaying introduction of gluten in the infant diet until 12 months of age had no 
impact on the development of islet or celiac autoimmunity. Weaning nursing 
infants to hydrolyzed infant formula had no impact on the development of T1D. 
Viral infections have been suspected of playing a role in T1D pathogenesis for 
decades. A large international prospective study (TEDDY) has shown increased 
risk of T1D autoimmunity particularly when >5 respiratory infections or febrile 
infections have occurred in the 9 months preceding the appearance of islet 
antibodies. Provocative data in animal models of T1D suggest the microbiome may 
play an important role in the pathogenesis of T1D. Breastfeeding, diet, 
infections, antibiotics, and method of birth alter the composition of the 
microbiome. Human data indicate subtle differences in the microbiome of children 
with T1D autoimmunity, while intestinal dysbiosis has been clearly demonstrated 
in CD. Alterations of the integrity of the intestinal mucosa plays an important 
role in the pathogenesis of CD, and the NOD mouse model suggests an important 
role of a leaky intestinal epithelium in T1D as well. Key Message: 
Immunogenetics and the environment are closely interrelated in the pathogenesis 
of T1D and CD. Large well-designed prospective studies in at-risk populations 
informed by scientifically rigorous studies in animal models are likely to have 
the greatest impact on our understanding of the complex pathogenesis of these 
detrimental autoimmune disorders.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000503142
PMID: 31593953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]