---
reference_id: "PMID:28972588"
title: "The impact of bulimia nervosa on oral health: A review of the literature."
authors:
- Rosten A
- Newton T
journal: Br Dent J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/sj.bdj.2017.837
keywords:
- Bulimia Nervosa/complications
- Dental Caries/etiology
- Humans
- Oral Health
- Prevalence
- Tooth Erosion/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The impact of bulimia nervosa on oral health: A review of the literature.
**Authors:** Rosten A, Newton T
**Journal:** Br Dent J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.bdj.2017.837](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bdj.2017.837)

## Content

1. Br Dent J. 2017 Nov;223(7):533-539. doi: 10.1038/sj.bdj.2017.837. Epub 2017
Oct  3.

The impact of bulimia nervosa on oral health: A review of the literature.

Rosten A(1), Newton T(1).

Author information:
(1)King's College London Dental Institute, Floor 18, Tower Wing, Guy's Hospital, 
London, SE1 9RT.

Eating disorders are a potentially life-threatening group of mental disorders, 
which affect a patient's relationship with food and their body. This manifests 
itself through chaotic and disordered eating habits. One such eating disorder is 
bulimia nervosa, which has a lifetime prevalence of 1%. While there is consensus 
that bulimic behaviour directly causes dental erosion due to vomiting and acidic 
food choices, there is less clear evidence for a direct link between bulimia 
nervosa and dental caries, although there does still appear to be an 
association. Reduced salivary flow rate is a common feature among bulimics, but 
this is often due to anti-depressant medication rather than dietary habits or 
vomiting, and the effects are largely limited to unstimulated whole salivary 
flow rate and don't affect stimulated whole salivary flow rate. Parotid 
enlargement is present in a number of cases but this tends to be a minority. 
Further research is required given the limitations of current studies, 
especially gender imbalances among the populations studied and a lack of clear 
focus on bulimia nervosa.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bdj.2017.837
PMID: 28972588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]