---
reference_id: "PMID:40215177"
title: Dissecting FAP+ Cell Diversity in Pancreatic Cancer Uncovers an Interferon-Response Subtype of Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts with Tumor-Restraining Properties.
authors:
- Cumming J
- Maneshi P
- Dongre M
- Alsaed T
- Dehghan-Nayeri MJ
- Ling A
- Pietras K
- Patthey C
- Öhlund D
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-3252
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts/metabolism, pathology, immunology"
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/pathology, metabolism, genetics, immunology"
- "Carcinoma, Pancreatic Ductal/pathology, metabolism, genetics, immunology"
- Animals
- Mice
- "Serine Endopeptidases/metabolism, genetics"
- "Membrane Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Endopeptidases/metabolism
- "Gelatinases/metabolism, genetics"
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Interferons/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Pancreatic Stellate Cells/metabolism
- Fibroblast Activation Protein Alpha
- STING Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dissecting FAP+ Cell Diversity in Pancreatic Cancer Uncovers an Interferon-Response Subtype of Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts with Tumor-Restraining Properties.
**Authors:** Cumming J, Maneshi P, Dongre M, Alsaed T, Dehghan-Nayeri MJ, Ling A, Pietras K, Patthey C, Öhlund D
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-3252](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-3252)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2025 Jul 2;85(13):2388-2411. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-3252.

Dissecting FAP+ Cell Diversity in Pancreatic Cancer Uncovers an
Interferon-Response Subtype of Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts with
Tumor-Restraining Properties.

Cumming J(1)(2), Maneshi P(1)(2), Dongre M(1)(2), Alsaed T(1)(2), Dehghan-Nayeri
MJ(1)(2), Ling A(3), Pietras K(4), Patthey C(#)(1)(2), Öhlund D(#)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostics and Intervention, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Wallenberg Centre of Molecular Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Biosciences, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Division of Translational Cancer Research, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(#)Contributed equally

Within the stroma of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), mesenchymal cells
differentiate into cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) subtypes that
differentially mediate disease progression. Defining the regulatory mechanism
and diversity of CAF subtypes could identify potential therapeutic strategies to
harness the tumor-suppressive activities of CAFs. To address this, we utilized
single-cell RNA sequencing to profile fibroblast activation protein-α
(FAP)-expressing mesenchymal cells in human PDAC. The mesenchymal subpopulations
in PDAC reflected mesenchymal cell heterogeneity found in the normal developing
pancreas. In addition to characterizing inflammatory CAF and myofibroblastic CAF
subpopulations in detail, the analysis uncovered a previously undescribed
interferon-response CAF (ifCAF) subtype. Tumor-derived signals induced specific
CAF subtypes from pancreatic stellate cells in an organoid-based coculture
model, and time-course experiments revealed regulatory mechanisms that govern
subtype formation. STING agonists promoted an ifCAF phenotype in vivo and in
vitro. Importantly, induction of an ifCAF phenotype suppressed tumor cell
invasiveness and induced an antitumor phenotype in tumor-associated neutrophils.
Together, this study resolves FAP+ stromal cell heterogeneity in PDAC and
identifies an ifCAF subtype that can be induced to suppress protumorigenic
features of PDAC.
SIGNIFICANCE: Characterization of FAP+ mesenchymal cell heterogeneity in
pancreatic cancer identifies a tumor-suppressive interferon-response
cancer-associated fibroblast subtype that can be induced by stimulating type I
interferon signaling using STING agonists.

©2025 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-3252
PMCID: PMC12214878
PMID: 40215177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K. Pietras reports a patent for WO2017081171A1
issued and is a minority shareholder in Paracrine Therapeutics. D. Öhlund
reports grants from the Swedish Foundation for International Cooperation in
Research and Higher Education, the Cancer Research Foundation in Northern
Sweden, the Swedish Research Council, the Kempe Foundations, the County Council
of Västerbotten, the Sjöberg Foundation, the Knut and Alice Wallenberg
Foundation, the Marianne and Marcus Wallenberg Foundation, and the Swedish
Cancer Society during the conduct of the study. No disclosures were reported by
the other authors.
