---
reference_id: "PMID:36038239"
title: Fluorescence-polarization immunoassays within glass fiber micro-chambers enable tobramycin quantification in whole blood for therapeutic drug monitoring at the point of care.
authors:
- Bojescu ED
- Prim D
- Pfeifer ME
- Segura JM
journal: Anal Chim Acta
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2022.340240
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fluorescence-polarization immunoassays within glass fiber micro-chambers enable tobramycin quantification in whole blood for therapeutic drug monitoring at the point of care.
**Authors:** Bojescu ED, Prim D, Pfeifer ME, Segura JM
**Journal:** Anal Chim Acta (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.aca.2022.340240](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2022.340240)

## Content

1. Anal Chim Acta. 2022 Sep 8;1225:340240. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2022.340240. Epub 
2022 Aug 8.

Fluorescence-polarization immunoassays within glass fiber micro-chambers enable 
tobramycin quantification in whole blood for therapeutic drug monitoring at the 
point of care.

Bojescu ED(1), Prim D(2), Pfeifer ME(3), Segura JM(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Life Technologies - School of Engineering, HES-SO // University 
of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland, Sion, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
diana.bojescu@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Life Technologies - School of Engineering, HES-SO // University 
of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland, Sion, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
denis.prim@hevs.ch.
(3)Institute of Life Technologies - School of Engineering, HES-SO // University 
of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland, Sion, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
marc.pfeifer@hevs.ch.
(4)Institute of Life Technologies - School of Engineering, HES-SO // University 
of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland, Sion, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
jmanuel.segura@hevs.ch.

Many therapeutic drugs require monitoring of their concentration in blood 
followed by dose adjustments in order to ensure efficacy while minimizing 
adverse effects. It would be highly desirable to perform such measurements 
rapidly and with reduced sample volumes to support point-of-care testing. Here, 
we demonstrate that the concentration of small therapeutics can be determined in 
whole blood within paper-like membranes using Fluorescence Polarization 
Immunoassay (FPIA). Different types of paper-like materials such as glass 
microfibers, cellulose and filter paper were investigated for artefacts such as 
scattering or autofluorescence. Accurate determination of the fluorescence 
polarization of red-emitting fluorophores at sub-nanomolar concentrations was 
feasible within glass fiber membranes. This enabled the development of a 
competitive immunoassay for the quantification of the antibiotic tobramycin 
using only 1 μL of plasma in glass fiber micro-chambers. Furthermore, the same 
membrane was used for transversal separation of blood cells followed by accurate 
FPIA read-out at the bottom part of the micro-chamber. For quantification of 
tobramycin, 1 μL of whole blood was incubated with the immunoassay reagents 
during only 3 min before deposition in the micro-chamber and analysis. Within 
the therapeutic window, coefficients of variation were around 20% and recoveries 
between 80 and 105%. Owing to the simplified procedure requiring no 
centrifugation, the reduced blood sample volume and the rapid analysis time, we 
envision that this novel method supports the performance of therapeutic drug 
monitoring directly at the point of care.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aca.2022.340240
PMID: 36038239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]