---
reference_id: "PMID:21932012"
title: Efficacy and safety of 2-year etidronate treatment in a child with generalized arterial calcification of infancy.
authors:
- Edouard T
- Chabot G
- Miro J
- Buhas DC
- Nitschke Y
- Lapierre C
- Rutsch F
- Alos N
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-011-1572-9
keywords:
- "Absorptiometry, Photon"
- Angiography
- "Bone Density Conservation Agents/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- DNA/genetics
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Etidronic Acid/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Vascular Calcification/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of 2-year etidronate treatment in a child with generalized arterial calcification of infancy.
**Authors:** Edouard T, Chabot G, Miro J, Buhas DC, Nitschke Y, Lapierre C, Rutsch F, Alos N
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-011-1572-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-011-1572-9)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2011 Dec;170(12):1585-90. doi: 10.1007/s00431-011-1572-9. Epub
2011 Sep 20.

Efficacy and safety of 2-year etidronate treatment in a child with generalized
arterial calcification of infancy.

Edouard T(1), Chabot G, Miro J, Buhas DC, Nitschke Y, Lapierre C, Rutsch F, Alos
N.

Author information:
(1)Bone Metabolism Clinic, Department of Pediatrics, Sainte-Justine University
Hospital, 3175 Chemin de la Côte Sainte-Catherine, Montreal, QC, H3T1C5, Canada.
edouard.t@chu-toulouse.fr

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI, MIM#208000) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by extensive calcifications in the
media of large- and medium-sized muscular arteries. Most affected children die
in early infancy because of cardiac failure. GACI is linked to mutations in the
ENPP1 gene, which encodes for an enzyme that generates inorganic pyrophosphate
(PP(i)), a potent inhibitor of hydroxyapatite crystal formation. Treatment with
bisphosphonates, which are synthetic PP(i) analogues, has been proposed as a
means of reducing arterial calcifications in GACI patients, but no formalized
treatment approach exists. We report on the long-term survival of a severe case
of GACI linked to a novel homozygous missense mutation c.583T/C in the ENPP1
gene, diagnosed prenatally, and treated with bisphosphonates. Intravenous
disodium pamidronate (three infusions at days 8, 15, and 18 of 0.25, 0.50, and
0.50 mg/kg, respectively) was changed to oral disodium etidronate (starting dose
of 20 mg/kg daily, 50 mg die) at 3 weeks of age. Although the etidronate dose
was maintained at 50 mg daily in our patient (corresponding to a progressive
decrease from 20 to 5 mg/kg daily), the progressive resolution of arterial
calcifications seen by 3 months of age was maintained until 2 years of age.
Throughout the 2-year follow-up, our patient developed mild hypophosphatemia,
due to renal phosphate wasting, without clinical, biochemical, or radiological
sign of rickets.
CONCLUSION: High-dose bisphosphonate therapy may not be necessary for an
extended period of time in children with GACI.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-011-1572-9
PMID: 21932012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
