---
reference_id: "PMID:31903434"
title: Rare genetic variants in patients with cervical artery dissection.
authors:
- Traenka C
- Kloss M
- Strom T
- Lyrer P
- Brandt T
- Bonati LH
- Grond-Ginsbach C
- Engelter S
journal: Eur Stroke J
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/2396987319861869
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare genetic variants in patients with cervical artery dissection.
**Authors:** Traenka C, Kloss M, Strom T, Lyrer P, Brandt T, Bonati LH, Grond-Ginsbach C, Engelter S
**Journal:** Eur Stroke J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/2396987319861869](https://doi.org/10.1177/2396987319861869)

## Content

1. Eur Stroke J. 2019 Dec;4(4):355-362. doi: 10.1177/2396987319861869. Epub 2019
Jul 12.

Rare genetic variants in patients with cervical artery dissection.

Traenka C(1)(2), Kloss M(3), Strom T(4)(5), Lyrer P(1), Brandt T(6), Bonati
LH(1), Grond-Ginsbach C(3)(7), Engelter S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, University Hospital and University
of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Neurorehabilitation Unit, University of Basel and University Center for
Medicine of Aging, Felix Platter Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.
(6)Suva/Swiss National Accident Insurance Fund, Lucerne, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: The potential role of genetic alterations in cervical artery
dissection (CeAD) pathogenesis is poorly understood. We aimed to identify
pathogenic genetic variants associated with cervical artery dissection by using
whole exome sequencing.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: CeAD-patients with either a family history of cervical
artery dissection (f-CeAD) or recurrent cervical artery dissection (r-CeAD) from
the CeAD-databases of two experienced stroke centres were analysed by whole
exome sequencing.Variants with allele frequency <0.05 and classified as
pathogenic by predicting algorithms (SIFT or Polyphen-2) or the ClinVar database
were explored. First, we analysed a panel of 30 candidate genes associated with
arterial dissection (any site) or aneurysm according to the OMIM (online
Mendelian Inheritance of Men) database. Second, we performed a genome-wide
search for pathogenic variants causing other vascular phenotypes possibly
related to cervical artery dissection.Findings were classified as CeAD-causing
(pathogenic variants in genes from the arterial dissection or aneurysm panel) or
suggestive (pathogenic variants in genes associated with other vascular
phenotypes and variants of unknown significance in genes from the arterial
dissection or aneurysm panel). All other variants were classified as
benign/uncertain.
RESULTS: Among 43 CeAD-patients, 28 patients (17 pedigrees) had f-CeAD and 15
had r-CeAD. No CeAD-causing variants were identified in r-CeAD patients. Among
f-CeAD-patients, 5/17 pedigrees carried CeAD-causing variants in COL3A1, COL4A1,
COL4A3, COL4A4, COL5A1, COL5A2 and FBN1. Suggestive variants in ABCC6, COL3A1,
COL5A2, MEF2A, and RNF213 were detected in three pedigrees with f-CeAD and six
patients with r-CeAD.Discussion and conclusion: CeAD-causing variants were rare
and exclusively found in f-CeAD-patients, suggesting differences between the
genetic architectures of f-CeAD and r-CeAD. The identified variants indicate a
high genetic heterogeneity of the study sample.

© European Stroke Organisation 2019.

DOI: 10.1177/2396987319861869
PMCID: PMC6921947
PMID: 31903434
