---
reference_id: "PMID:36541021"
title: "Type I and Ir pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB): A report from the International PPB/DICER1 Registry."
authors:
- Nelson AT
- Harris AK
- Watson D
- Miniati D
- Finch M
- Kamihara J
- Mitchell SG
- Wilson DB
- Gettinger K
- Rangaswami AA
- Campos JM
- Lederman S
- Feltis BA
- Vasta LM
- Harney LA
- Stewart DR
- Dehner LP
- Messinger YH
- Hill DA
- Schultz KAP
journal: Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.34593
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Pulmonary Blastoma/drug therapy
- Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Registries
- Ribonuclease III
- Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions
- DEAD-box RNA Helicases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type I and Ir pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB): A report from the International PPB/DICER1 Registry.
**Authors:** Nelson AT, Harris AK, Watson D, Miniati D, Finch M, Kamihara J, Mitchell SG, Wilson DB, Gettinger K, Rangaswami AA, Campos JM, Lederman S, Feltis BA, Vasta LM, Harney LA, Stewart DR, Dehner LP, Messinger YH, Hill DA, Schultz KAP
**Journal:** Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.34593](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.34593)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2023 Feb 15;129(4):600-613. doi: 10.1002/cncr.34593. Epub 2022 Dec 20.

Type I and Ir pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB): A report from the International
PPB/DICER1 Registry.

Nelson AT(1)(2)(3)(4), Harris AK(1)(2)(3), Watson D(5), Miniati D(6), Finch
M(5), Kamihara J(7), Mitchell SG(8), Wilson DB(9), Gettinger K(9), Rangaswami
AA(10), Campos JM(11), Lederman S(1)(2)(3)(4), Feltis BA(12), Vasta LM(13),
Harney LA(14), Stewart DR(13), Dehner LP(15), Messinger YH(1)(2)(3), Hill
DA(16)(17), Schultz KAP(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)International Pleuropulmonary Blastoma/DICER1 Registry, Children's Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(2)International Ovarian and Testicular Stromal Tumor Registry, Children's
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
USA.
(4)University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(5)Research and Sponsored Programs, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, USA.
(6)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Kaiser Permanente Northern California,
Roseville, California, USA.
(7)Pediatric Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital/Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis
Children's Hospital, St Louis, MO, USA.
(10)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(11)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Sotero del Rio, Santiago, Chile.
(12)Division of Pediatric Surgery, East Tennessee State University, Johnson
City, Tennessee, USA.
(13)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(14)Westat, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(15)Lauren V. Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Department of Pathology
and Immunology, Washington University Medical Center, St Louis, Missouri, USA.
(16)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's National Medical
Center, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.
(17)ResourcePath LLC, Sterling, Virginia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) is the most common lung cancer of
infancy and early childhood. Type I PPB is a purely cystic lesion that has a
microscopic population of primitive small cells with or without rhabdomyoblastic
features and may progress to type II or III PPB, whereas type Ir lacks primitive
small cells.
METHODS: Children with suspected PPB were enrolled in the International
PPB/DICER1 Registry. Pathology was centrally reviewed, and follow-up was
ascertained annually.
RESULTS: Between 2006 and 2022, 205 children had centrally reviewed type I or Ir
PPB; 39% of children with type I and 5% of children with type Ir PPB received
chemotherapy. Outcomes were favorable, although 11 children (nine with type I
and two with type Ir PPB) experienced progression to type II/III (n = 8) or
regrowth of type I PPB at the surgical site (n = 3), none of whom received
chemotherapy before progression. Age and cyst size in combination were more
suitable than either factor alone in predicting whether a particular lesion was
type I or Ir PPB.
CONCLUSIONS: For young children with type I PPB, outcomes are favorable, but
complete resection is indicated because of the risk for progression.
Chemotherapy may be useful in a subset of children at increased risk for
recurrence/progression. Efforts to risk stratify children with type I PPB to
optimize outcomes while reducing treatment-related side effects are underway.

© 2022 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.34593
PMCID: PMC10316522
PMID: 36541021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Stewart provides telegenetics services for
Genome Medical, Inc, in accordance with relevant National Cancer Institute
policies. Dr. Hill is owner of ResourcePath LLC, a company which does research
and development of laboratory tests including for DICER1 cancers. That work is
unrelated to the information presented in this article. Dr. Kamihara has the
following financial disclosures all via her spouse: Owner/founder: Rome
Therapeutics; PanTher Therapeutics; TellBio, Inc.; Consultant: Tekla Capital;
Ikena Oncology; Rome Therapeutics Research funding: ACD-Biotechne. The remaining
authors have no conflicts to disclose.
