---
reference_id: "PMID:37303351"
title: "Carotid Artery Stenosis: A Look Into the Diagnostic and Management Strategies, and Related Complications."
authors:
- Ismail A
- Ravipati S
- Gonzalez-Hernandez D
- Mahmood H
- Imran A
- Munoz EJ
- Naeem S
- Abdin ZU
- Siddiqui HF
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.38794
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carotid Artery Stenosis: A Look Into the Diagnostic and Management Strategies, and Related Complications.
**Authors:** Ismail A, Ravipati S, Gonzalez-Hernandez D, Mahmood H, Imran A, Munoz EJ, Naeem S, Abdin ZU, Siddiqui HF
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.38794](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.38794)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 May 9;15(5):e38794. doi: 10.7759/cureus.38794. eCollection 2023 
May.

Carotid Artery Stenosis: A Look Into the Diagnostic and Management Strategies, 
and Related Complications.

Ismail A(1), Ravipati S(2), Gonzalez-Hernandez D(3), Mahmood H(4), Imran A(5), 
Munoz EJ(6), Naeem S(7)(8), Abdin ZU(9), Siddiqui HF(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, United Medical and Dental College, Karachi, PAK.
(2)Department of Medicine, Dr. Pinnamaneni Siddhartha Institute of Medical 
Sciences and Research Foundation, Vijayawada, IND.
(3)Department of Medicine, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), 
Mexico City, MEX.
(4)Department of Medicine, University College of Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of Lahore, Lahore, PAK.
(5)Department of Surgery, Windsor University School of Medicine, Chicago, USA.
(6)Department of General Medicine, Montemorelos University, Montemorelos, MEX.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Faisalabad Medical University, Faisalabad, 
PAK.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Punjab Social Security Hospital, Faisalabad, 
PAK.
(9)Department of Medicine, District Head Quarters Hospital, Faisalabad, PAK.
(10)Department of Medicine, Jinnah Sindh Medical University, Karachi, PAK.

Carotid stenosis (CS) is a buildup of atherosclerotic plaque within the artery 
leading to a wide range of symptoms, from mild symptoms, including blurred 
vision and confusion, to much more life-threatening presentations, including 
paralysis due to stroke. The presentation is insidious, with symptoms exhibiting 
predominantly at severe stenosis; hence the emphasis is placed on the importance 
of early diagnosis, treatment, and lifestyle modifications. CS is seen 
undergoing almost the same pathogenesis of any atherosclerotic plaque formation, 
from endothelial damage of the artery lumen to the formation of a fibrous cap 
with a foam cell, lipid-filled core. The findings of our review article were 
consistent with the recent literature, depicting that comorbid hypertension, 
diabetes, and chronic kidney disease (CKD), and lifestyle aspects, including 
smoking and diet, played the most salient role in plaque development. Among 
several imaging modalities, duplex ultrasound (DUS) imaging is the widely 
preferred method in clinical practice. Carotid endarterectomy (CEA) and carotid 
stenting are the primarily advocated procedures for symptomatic severe stenosis, 
with similar long-term outcomes. Although, earlier clinical trials showed 
promising results in mitigating the risk of stroke among asymptomatic severe CS 
with surgical intervention. However, recent advancements have shifted the focus 
to medical management alone due to comparable results among the asymptomatic 
population. Both surgical and medical regimens are beneficial in treating 
patients, but it is still an ongoing debate as to which is predominantly 
superior. The currently advancing trials and research will help elucidate 
definitive guidelines. However, the massive impact of lifestyle modifications 
advocates some degree of individualized multidisciplinary management strategies.

Copyright © 2023, Ismail et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.38794
PMCID: PMC10250083
PMID: 37303351

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.