---
reference_id: "PMID:25482846"
title: "Liver transplantation in transthyretin amyloidosis: issues and challenges."
authors:
- Carvalho A
- Rocha A
- Lobato L
journal: Liver Transpl
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/lt.24058
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver transplantation in transthyretin amyloidosis: issues and challenges.
**Authors:** Carvalho A, Rocha A, Lobato L
**Journal:** Liver Transpl (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lt.24058](https://doi.org/10.1002/lt.24058)

## Content

1. Liver Transpl. 2015 Mar;21(3):282-92. doi: 10.1002/lt.24058. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Liver transplantation in transthyretin amyloidosis: issues and challenges.

Carvalho A(1), Rocha A, Lobato L.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR) is a rare worldwide autosomal 
dominant disease caused by the systemic deposition of an amyloidogenic variant 
of transthyretin (TTR), which is usually derived from a single amino acid 
substitution in the TTR gene. More than 100 mutations have been described, with 
V30M being the most prevalent. Each variant has a different involvement, 
although peripheral neuropathy and cardiomyopathy are the most common. 
Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) was implemented as the inaugural 
disease-modifying therapy because the liver produces the circulating unstable 
TTR. In this review, we focus on the results and long-term outcomes of OLT for 
ATTR after more than 2063 procedures and 23 years of experience. After 
successful OLT, neuropathy and organ impairment are not usually reversed, and in 
some cases, the disease progresses. The overall 5-year survival rate is 
approximately 100% for V30M patients and 59% for non-ATTR V30M patients. 
Cardiac-related death and septicemia are the main causes of mortality. Lower 
survival is related to malnutrition, a longer duration of disease, 
cardiomyopathy, and a later onset (particularly for males). Deposits, which are 
composed of a mixture of truncated and full-length TTR (type A) fibrils, have 
been associated with posttransplant myocardial dysfunction. A higher incidence 
of early hepatic artery thrombosis of the graft has also been documented for 
these patients. Liver-kidney/heart transplantation is an alternative for 
patients with advanced renal disease or heart failure. The sequential procedure, 
in which ATTR livers are reused in patients with liver disease, reveals that 
neuropathy in the recipient may appear as soon as 6 years after OLT, and ATTR 
deposits may appear even earlier. Long-term results of trials with amyloid 
protein stabilizers or disrupters, silencing RNA, and antisense oligonucleotides 
will highlight the value and limitations of liver transplantation.

© 2015 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/lt.24058
PMID: 25482846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]