---
reference_id: "PMID:20461390"
title: "Evidence for tangential migration disturbances in human lissencephaly resulting from a defect in LIS1, DCX and ARX genes."
authors:
- Marcorelles P
- Laquerrière A
- Adde-Michel C
- Marret S
- Saugier-Veber P
- Beldjord C
- Friocourt G
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0692-z
keywords:
- 1-Alkyl-2-acetylglycerophosphocholine Esterase/deficiency
- Autopsy
- "Brain/embryology, growth & development, metabolism, pathology"
- Calbindin 2
- Calbindins
- Case-Control Studies
- Cell Movement/genetics
- "Classical Lissencephalies and Subcortical Band Heterotopias/etiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Doublecortin Domain Proteins
- Doublecortin Protein
- Fetus
- Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/metabolism
- Homeodomain Proteins
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/deficiency
- "Neurons/pathology, physiology"
- Neuropeptides/deficiency
- Parvalbumins/metabolism
- S100 Calcium Binding Protein G/metabolism
- Transcription Factors/deficiency
- Vimentin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence for tangential migration disturbances in human lissencephaly resulting from a defect in LIS1, DCX and ARX genes.
**Authors:** Marcorelles P, Laquerrière A, Adde-Michel C, Marret S, Saugier-Veber P, Beldjord C, Friocourt G
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-010-0692-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-010-0692-z)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2010 Oct;120(4):503-15. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0692-z. Epub
 2010 May 12.

Evidence for tangential migration disturbances in human lissencephaly resulting
from a defect in LIS1, DCX and ARX genes.

Marcorelles P(1), Laquerrière A, Adde-Michel C, Marret S, Saugier-Veber P,
Beldjord C, Friocourt G.

Author information:
(1)Pathology Laboratory, Pole Pathologie-Biologie, Brest University Hospital,
Brest, France. pascale.marcorelles@chu-brest.fr

During corticogenesis, neurons adopt different migration pathways to reach their
final position. The precursors of pyramidal neurons migrate radially, whereas
most of the GABA-containing interneurons are generated in the ventral
telencephalon and migrate tangentially into the neocortex. Then, they use a
radial migration mode to establish themselves in an inside-out manner in the
neocortex, similarly to pyramidal neurons. In humans, the most severe defects in
radial migration result in lissencephaly. Lately, a few studies suggested that
lissencephaly was also associated with tangential neuronal migration deficits.
In the present report, we investigated potential anomalies of this migration
mode in three agyric/pachygyric syndromes due to defects in the LIS1, DCX and
ARX genes. Immunohistochemistry was performed on paraffin-embedded supra- and
infratentorial structures using calretinin, calbindin and parvalbumin antisera.
The results were compared with age-matched control brain tissue. In the
Miller-Dieker syndrome, GABAergic neurons were found both in upper layers of the
cortex and in heterotopic positions in the intermediate zone and in ganglionic
eminences. In the DCX mutant brain, few interneurons were dispersed in the
cortical plate, with a massive accumulation in the intermediate zone and
subventricular zone as well as in the ganglionic eminences. In the ARX-mutated
brain, the cortical plate contained almost exclusively pyramidal cells and was
devoid of interneurons. The ganglionic eminences and basal ganglia were poorly
cellular, suggesting an interneuron production and/or differentiation defect.
These data argue for different mechanisms of telencephalic tangential migration
impairment in these three agyric/pachygyric syndromes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-010-0692-z
PMID: 20461390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
