---
reference_id: "PMID:31104487"
title: "Efficacy of Capsaicin for the Treatment of Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- McConachie SM
- Caputo RA
- Wilhelm SM
- Kale-Pradhan PB
journal: Ann Pharmacother
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/1060028019852601
keywords:
- Cannabinoids/adverse effects
- "Capsaicin/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Evidence-Based Medicine/methods
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Syndrome
- Vomiting/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of Capsaicin for the Treatment of Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** McConachie SM, Caputo RA, Wilhelm SM, Kale-Pradhan PB
**Journal:** Ann Pharmacother (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1060028019852601](https://doi.org/10.1177/1060028019852601)

## Content

1. Ann Pharmacother. 2019 Nov;53(11):1145-1152. doi: 10.1177/1060028019852601.
Epub  2019 May 18.

Efficacy of Capsaicin for the Treatment of Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: A
Systematic Review.

McConachie SM(1)(2), Caputo RA(1), Wilhelm SM(1), Kale-Pradhan PB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Beaumont Hospital, Dearborn, MI, USA.
(3)Ascension St John's Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.

Objective: Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) is characterized by cyclic
vomiting, abdominal pain, and alleviation of symptoms via hot showers in chronic
cannabinoid users. Capsaicin is recommended as a reasonable first-line treatment
approach for CHS despite limited clinical evidence regarding its use. The
objective of this study is to systematically review the efficacy data for
capsaicin in CHS. Data Sources: A literature search using keywords related to
cannabinoids, emesis, and capsaicin was performed in MEDLINE, CINAHL, and EMBASE
from inception through March 31, 2019. Study Selection and Data Extraction:
Studies and published abstracts in which capsaicin was used for CHS and clinical
outcomes were reported were eligible for inclusion. Data Synthesis: A total of
241 articles were screened, of which 5 full-text articles and 6 conference
abstracts were included. Full-text case reports (n = 3) and case series (n = 2)
found capsaicin to be effective in a total of 18 patients. Published abstracts
were in the form of case reports (n = 1), case series (n = 3), and retrospective
cohort studies (n = 2). Relevance to Patient Care and Clinical Practice:
Capsaicin use was described as beneficial in all case series and case reports;
however, both retrospective cohort studies were unable to find a significant
benefit for capsaicin on primary outcomes (emergency department length of stay).
Conclusion: Current data for capsaicin efficacy in CHS is of low methodological
quality. However, the limited data on alternative antiemetic therapies and
capsaicin's favorable risk-benefit profile make it a reasonable adjunctive
treatment option.

DOI: 10.1177/1060028019852601
PMID: 31104487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
