---
reference_id: "PMID:30155738"
title: Correlation of phenotype with genotype and protein structure in RYR1-related disorders.
authors:
- Todd JJ
- Sagar V
- Lawal TA
- Allen C
- Razaqyar MS
- Shelton MS
- Chrismer IC
- Zhang X
- Cosgrove MM
- Kuo A
- Vasavada R
- Jain MS
- Waite M
- Rajapakse D
- Witherspoon JW
- Wistow G
- Meilleur KG
journal: J Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-018-9033-2
keywords:
- Acetylcysteine/therapeutic use
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Male
- Neuromuscular Agents/therapeutic use
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Prospective Studies
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correlation of phenotype with genotype and protein structure in RYR1-related disorders.
**Authors:** Todd JJ, Sagar V, Lawal TA, Allen C, Razaqyar MS, Shelton MS, Chrismer IC, Zhang X, Cosgrove MM, Kuo A, Vasavada R, Jain MS, Waite M, Rajapakse D, Witherspoon JW, Wistow G, Meilleur KG
**Journal:** J Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-018-9033-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-018-9033-2)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2018 Nov;265(11):2506-2524. doi: 10.1007/s00415-018-9033-2. Epub
2018  Aug 28.

Correlation of phenotype with genotype and protein structure in RYR1-related
disorders.

Todd JJ(1), Sagar V(2), Lawal TA(3), Allen C(3), Razaqyar MS(3), Shelton MS(3),
Chrismer IC(3), Zhang X(3), Cosgrove MM(3), Kuo A(3), Vasavada R(4), Jain MS(4),
Waite M(4), Rajapakse D(2), Witherspoon JW(3), Wistow G(2), Meilleur KG(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Symptoms Unit, Tissue Injury Branch, National Institute of
Nursing Research, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, Room 2A07,
Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. joshua.todd@nih.gov.
(2)Section on Molecular Structure and Functional Genomics, National Eye
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Neuromuscular Symptoms Unit, Tissue Injury Branch, National Institute of
Nursing Research, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, Room 2A07,
Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(4)Mark O. Hatfield Clinical Research Center, Rehabilitation Medicine
Department, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Variants in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor 1 gene (RYR1) result in a
spectrum of RYR1-related disorders. Presentation during infancy is typical and
ranges from delayed motor milestones and proximal muscle weakness to severe
respiratory impairment and ophthalmoplegia. We aimed to elucidate correlations
between genotype, protein structure and clinical phenotype in this rare disease
population. Genetic and clinical data from 47 affected individuals were analyzed
and variants mapped to the cryo-EM RyR1 structure. Comparisons of clinical
severity, motor and respiratory function and symptomatology were made according
to the mode of inheritance and affected RyR1 structural domain(s). Overall, 49
RYR1 variants were identified in 47 cases (dominant/de novo, n = 35; recessive,
n = 12). Three variants were previously unreported. In recessive cases, facial
weakness, neonatal hypotonia, ophthalmoplegia/paresis, ptosis, and scapular
winging were more frequently observed than in dominant/de novo cases (all,
p < 0.05). Both dominant/de novo and recessive cases exhibited core myopathy
histopathology. Clinically severe cases were typically recessive or had variants
localized to the RyR1 cytosolic shell domain. Motor deficits were most apparent
in the MFM-32 standing and transfers dimension, [median (IQR) 85.4 (18.8)% of
maximum score] and recessive cases exhibited significantly greater overall motor
function impairment compared to dominant/de novo cases [79.7 (18.8)% vs. 87.5
(17.7)% of maximum score, p = 0.03]. Variant mapping revealed patterns of
clinical severity across RyR1 domains, including a structural plane of interest
within the RyR1 cytosolic shell, in which 84% of variants affected the bridging
solenoid. We have corroborated genotype-phenotype correlations and identified
RyR1 regions that may be especially sensitive to structural modification.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-018-9033-2
PMCID: PMC6182665
PMID: 30155738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: On behalf of all authors,
the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest. ETHICAL
APPROVAL: Study procedures were approved by a National Institutes of Health
(NIH) Institutional Review Board, and all participants provided informed consent
or assent, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
