---
reference_id: "PMID:27927236"
title: "Chronic Infantile Neurological Cutaneous and Articular (CINCA) syndrome: a review."
authors:
- Finetti M
- Omenetti A
- Federici S
- Caorsi R
- Gattorno M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-016-0542-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Infantile Neurological Cutaneous and Articular (CINCA) syndrome: a review.
**Authors:** Finetti M, Omenetti A, Federici S, Caorsi R, Gattorno M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-016-0542-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-016-0542-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2016 Dec 7;11(1):167. doi: 10.1186/s13023-016-0542-8.

Chronic Infantile Neurological Cutaneous and Articular (CINCA) syndrome: a 
review.

Finetti M(1), Omenetti A(2), Federici S(3), Caorsi R(3), Gattorno M(3).

Author information:
(1)UO Pediaria II, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy. martina81@tiscali.it.
(2)DINOMGI, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(3)UO Pediaria II, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The Chronic Infantile Neurological Cutaneous and Articular (CINCA, 
or Neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease NOMID) is a rare 
autoinflammatory disease identified in 1987 by Prieur et al., typically 
characterized by the triad of skin rash, arthropathy and central nervous system 
manifestations. It represents the most severe phenotype of the 
cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS).
CLINICAL DESCRIPTION AND ETIOLOGY: The syndrome is due to autosomal dominant 
gain of function mutations in NLRP3, which encodes a key component of the innate 
immunity that regulates the activation and secretion of interleukin (IL)-1β. 
From the first days of life, patients display an urticarial rash in association 
with chronic inflammation with a typical facies featured by frontal bossing and 
saddle back nose. The CNS manifestations include chronic aseptic meningitis 
leading to brain atrophy, mental delay and sensorineural hearing loss. Chronic 
polyarthritis and alteration of the growth cartilage also may be present. 
CINCA/NOMID diagnosis is made clinically, based on the presence of 
characteristic features. The detection of NLRP3 mutations is diagnostic in 
65-70% of cases. Indeed, up to 40% of affected patients are negative for 
germline NLRP3 mutations and several subjects are carriers of somatic mosaicism. 
Due to the pivotal role of Cryopyrin in the control of Caspase-1 activation and 
the massive secretion of active IL-1β observed in cryopyrin-mutated individuals, 
anti-IL1 treatment represents the standard therapy.
CONCLUSION: Prognosis of CINCA/NOMID syndrome has been changed by the 
availability of anti-IL1 drugs. Nowadays, the use of anti-IL-1 drugs has 
sensibly reduced the risk of developing main complications such as severe 
intellectual disability, hearing-loss and amyloidosis, if treatment is started 
early on.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-016-0542-8
PMCID: PMC5142346
PMID: 27927236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]