---
reference_id: PMID:27538940
title: "Memantine, a Low-Affinity NMDA Receptor Antagonist, Protects against Methylmercury-Induced Cytotoxicity of Rat Primary Cultured Cortical Neurons, Involvement of Ca(2+) Dyshomeostasis Antagonism, and Indirect Antioxidation Effects."
authors:
- Liu W
- Xu Z
- Yang T
- Xu B
- Deng Y
- Feng S
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-016-0020-2
keywords:
- Animals
- Antioxidants/pharmacology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Female
- Homeostasis/drug effects
- Male
- Memantine/pharmacology
- Methylmercury Compounds/pharmacology
- "Neurons/drug effects, metabolism"
- Neuroprotective Agents/pharmacology
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
- "Rats, Wistar"
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/drug effects, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Memantine, a Low-Affinity NMDA Receptor Antagonist, Protects against Methylmercury-Induced Cytotoxicity of Rat Primary Cultured Cortical Neurons, Involvement of Ca(2+) Dyshomeostasis Antagonism, and Indirect Antioxidation Effects.
**Authors:** Liu W, Xu Z, Yang T, Xu B, Deng Y, Feng S
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-016-0020-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-016-0020-2)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2017 Sep;54(7):5034-5050. doi: 10.1007/s12035-016-0020-2. Epub 
2016 Aug 18.

Memantine, a Low-Affinity NMDA Receptor Antagonist, Protects against 
Methylmercury-Induced Cytotoxicity of Rat Primary Cultured Cortical Neurons, 
Involvement of Ca(2+) Dyshomeostasis Antagonism, and Indirect Antioxidation 
Effects.

Liu W(1), Xu Z(2), Yang T(1), Xu B(1), Deng Y(1), Feng S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of environmental health, school of public health, China Medical 
University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of environmental health, school of public health, China Medical 
University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China. zfxu@mail.cmu.edu.cn.

Methylmercury (MeHg) is an extremely dangerous environmental pollutant that 
induces severe toxic effects in the central nervous system. Neuronal damage 
plays critical roles mediating MeHg-induced loss of brain function and 
neurotoxicity. The molecular mechanisms of MeHg neurotoxicity are incompletely 
understood. The objective of the study is to explore mechanisms that contribute 
to MeHg-induced neurocyte injuries focusing on neuronal Ca2+ dyshomeostasis and 
alteration of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) expression, as well as 
oxidative stress in primary cultured cortical neurons. In addition, the 
neuroprotective effects of memantine against MeHg cytotoxicity were also 
investigated. The cortical neurons were exposed to 0, 0.01, 0.1, 1, or 2 μM 
methylmercury chloride (MeHgCl) for 0.5-12 h, or pre-treated with 2.5, 5, 10, or 
20 μM memantine for 0.5-6 h, respectively; cell viability and LDH release were 
then quantified. For further experiments, 2.5, 5, and 10 μM of memantine 
pre-treatment for 3 h followed by 1 μM MeHgCl for 6 h were performed for 
evaluation of neuronal injuries, specifically addressing apoptosis; 
intracellular free Ca2+ concentrations; ATPase activities; calpain activities; 
expressions of NMDAR subunits (NR1, NR2A, NR2B); NPSH levels; and ROS formation. 
Exposure of MeHgCl resulted in toxicity of cortical neurons, which were shown as 
a loss of cell viability, high levels of LDH release, morphological changes, and 
cell apoptosis. Moreover, intracellular Ca2+ dyshomeostasis, ATPase activities 
inhibition, calpain activities, and NMDARs expression alteration were observed 
with 1 μM MeHgCl administration. Last but not least, NPSH depletion and reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) overproduction showed an obvious oxidative stress in 
neurons. However, memantine pre-treatment dose-dependently antagonized 
MeHg-induced neuronal toxic effects, apoptosis, Ca2+ dyshomeostasis, NMDARs 
expression alteration, and oxidative stress. In conclusion, the cytoprotective 
effects of memantine against MeHg appeared to be mediated not only via its NMDAR 
binding properties and Ca2+ homeostasis maintenance but also by indirect 
antioxidation effects.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-016-0020-2
PMID: 27538940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]