---
reference_id: "PMID:38770403"
title: Partial suppression of BCAA catabolism as a potential therapy for BCKDK deficiency.
authors:
- Ohl L
- Kuhs A
- Pluck R
- Durham E
- Noji M
- Philip ND
- Arany Z
- Ahrens-Nicklas RC
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101091
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Partial suppression of BCAA catabolism as a potential therapy for BCKDK deficiency.
**Authors:** Ohl L, Kuhs A, Pluck R, Durham E, Noji M, Philip ND, Arany Z, Ahrens-Nicklas RC
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101091](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101091)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2024 May 10;39:101091. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101091. 
eCollection 2024 Jun.

Partial suppression of BCAA catabolism as a potential therapy for BCKDK 
deficiency.

Ohl L(1)(2), Kuhs A(1), Pluck R(1), Durham E(1), Noji M(2)(3), Philip ND(1), 
Arany Z(3), Ahrens-Nicklas RC(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)College of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.
(3)Cardiovascular Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Oct 12:2023.10.12.560929. doi: 10.1101/2023.10.12.560929.

Branched chain ketoacid dehydrogenase kinase (BCKDK) deficiency is a recently 
described inherited neurometabolic disorder of branched chain amino acid (BCAA) 
metabolism implying increased BCAA catabolism. It has been hypothesized that a 
severe reduction in systemic BCAA levels underlies the disease pathophysiology, 
and that BCAA supplementation may ameliorate disease phenotypes. To test this 
hypothesis, we characterized a recent mouse model of BCKDK deficiency and 
evaluated the efficacy of enteral BCAA supplementation in this model. 
Surprisingly, BCAA supplementation exacerbated neurodevelopmental deficits and 
did not correct biochemical abnormalities despite increasing systemic BCAA 
levels. These data suggest that aberrant flux through the BCAA catabolic 
pathway, not just BCAA insufficiency, may contribute to disease pathology. In 
support of this conclusion, genetic re-regulation of BCAA catabolism, through 
Dbt haploinsufficiency, partially rescued biochemical and behavioral phenotypes 
in BCKDK deficient mice. Collectively, these data raise into question 
assumptions widely made about the pathophysiology of BCKDK insufficiency and 
suggest a novel approach to develop potential therapies for this disease.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101091
PMCID: PMC11103483
PMID: 38770403

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. R.A. 
is a scientific advisor for LatusBio.