---
reference_id: "PMID:38540392"
title: "The Genetics of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex and Related mTORopathies: Current Understanding and Future Directions."
authors:
- Man A
- Di Scipio M
- Grewal S
- Suk Y
- Trinari E
- Ejaz R
- Whitney R
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15030332
keywords:
- Humans
- "Tuberous Sclerosis/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 2 Protein/genetics
- Mutation
- Genetic Testing
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Genetics of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex and Related mTORopathies: Current Understanding and Future Directions.
**Authors:** Man A, Di Scipio M, Grewal S, Suk Y, Trinari E, Ejaz R, Whitney R
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15030332](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15030332)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Mar 4;15(3):332. doi: 10.3390/genes15030332.

The Genetics of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex and Related mTORopathies: Current
Understanding and Future Directions.

Man A(1), Di Scipio M(1), Grewal S(1), Suk Y(1), Trinari E(2), Ejaz R(3),
Whitney R(4).

Author information:
(1)Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S
4L8, Canada.
(2)Division of Developmental Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, McMaster
Children's Hospital, Hamilton, ON L8N 3Z5, Canada.
(3)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.
(4)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.

The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway serves as a master regulator
of cell growth, proliferation, and survival. Upregulation of the mTOR pathway
has been shown to cause malformations of cortical development, medically
refractory epilepsies, and neurodevelopmental disorders, collectively described
as mTORopathies. Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) serves as the prototypical
mTORopathy. Characterized by the development of benign tumors in multiple
organs, pathogenic variants in TSC1 or TSC2 disrupt the TSC protein complex, a
negative regulator of the mTOR pathway. Variants in critical domains of the TSC
complex, especially in the catalytic TSC2 subunit, correlate with increased
disease severity. Variants in less crucial exons and non-coding regions, as well
as those undetectable with conventional testing, may lead to milder phenotypes.
Despite the assumption of complete penetrance, expressivity varies within
families, and certain variants delay disease onset with milder neurological
effects. Understanding these genotype-phenotype correlations is crucial for
effective clinical management. Notably, 15% of patients have no mutation
identified by conventional genetic testing, with the majority of cases
postulated to be caused by somatic TSC1/TSC2 variants which present complex
diagnostic challenges. Advancements in genetic testing, prenatal screening, and
precision medicine hold promise for changing the diagnostic and treatment
paradigm for TSC and related mTORopathies. Herein, we explore the genetic and
molecular mechanisms of TSC and other mTORopathies, emphasizing contemporary
genetic methods in understanding and diagnosing the condition.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15030332
PMCID: PMC10970281
PMID: 38540392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
