---
reference_id: "PMID:39599865"
title: Identification of the Emerging C1-like Lineage of Enterovirus A71 in Two Uruguayan Children with Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease and Neurological Complications.
authors:
- Lizasoain A
- Martínez N
- de Mora C
- Rodríguez E
- Ledezma N
- Colina R
journal: Viruses
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/v16111752
keywords:
- Humans
- "Enterovirus A, Human/genetics, classification, isolation & purification"
- Feces/virology
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/virology, epidemiology"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- "Nervous System Diseases/virology, epidemiology"
- Phylogeny
- "RNA, Viral/genetics"
- Uruguay/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of the Emerging C1-like Lineage of Enterovirus A71 in Two Uruguayan Children with Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease and Neurological Complications.
**Authors:** Lizasoain A, Martínez N, de Mora C, Rodríguez E, Ledezma N, Colina R
**Journal:** Viruses (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v16111752](https://doi.org/10.3390/v16111752)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2024 Nov 8;16(11):1752. doi: 10.3390/v16111752.

Identification of the Emerging C1-like Lineage of Enterovirus A71 in Two 
Uruguayan Children with Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease and Neurological 
Complications.

Lizasoain A(1), Martínez N(2), de Mora C(1), Rodríguez E(2), Ledezma N(2), 
Colina R(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Virology Lab, Department of Biological Sciences, Centro 
Universitario Regional Litoral Norte, Universidad de la República, Salto 50000, 
Salto, Uruguay.
(2)Centro de Asistencia Médica de Young, CAMY-IAMPP, Young 65100, Río Negro, 
Uruguay.

Enterovirus A71 (EV-A71) is a major cause of hand-foot-and-mouth disease (HFMD), 
particularly in cases that involve complications affecting the nervous system or 
cardiopulmonary function. In South America, EV-A71 has primarily been identified 
through studies of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) and other neurological 
disorders. In September 2022, two children from a small city in Uruguay were 
hospitalized with presumptive rhombencephalitis, exhibiting symptoms of HFMD. 
EV-A71 was identified through RT-PCR and next-generation sequencing of stool and 
skin lesion samples. A maximum-likelihood phylogenetic analysis of the P1 coding 
region classified the Uruguayan strains as part of an emerging lineage, 
primarily reported in Europe over the past decade, known as the C1-like lineage. 
The findings presented here represent the first detection of the EV-A71 C1-like 
lineage in cases of HFMD and encephalitis reported from South America, 
underscoring the urgent need to enhance surveillance for HFMD, aseptic 
meningitis, encephalitis, and AFP, in countries facing challenges in 
establishing effective surveillance programs related to enteroviruses and 
associated diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/v16111752
PMCID: PMC11598842
PMID: 39599865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.