---
reference_id: "PMID:33125945"
title: A combined clinical and biological risk classification improves prediction of outcome in hepatoblastoma patients.
authors:
- Cairo S
- Armengol C
- Maibach R
- Häberle B
- Becker K
- Carrillo-Reixach J
- Guettier C
- Vokuhl C
- Schmid I
- Buendia MA
- Branchereau S
- von Schweinitz D
- Kappler R
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.09.026
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- "Hepatoblastoma/classification, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Liver Neoplasms/classification, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A combined clinical and biological risk classification improves prediction of outcome in hepatoblastoma patients.
**Authors:** Cairo S, Armengol C, Maibach R, Häberle B, Becker K, Carrillo-Reixach J, Guettier C, Vokuhl C, Schmid I, Buendia MA, Branchereau S, von Schweinitz D, Kappler R
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2020.09.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2020.09.026)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2020 Dec;141:30-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.09.026. Epub 2020
Oct  27.

A combined clinical and biological risk classification improves prediction of 
outcome in hepatoblastoma patients.

Cairo S(1), Armengol C(2), Maibach R(3), Häberle B(4), Becker K(5), 
Carrillo-Reixach J(6), Guettier C(7), Vokuhl C(8), Schmid I(9), Buendia MA(10), 
Branchereau S(11), von Schweinitz D(12), Kappler R(13).

Author information:
(1)XenTech, 4 Rue Pierre Fontaine, Evry, France; Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica 
(IRP), Padova, Italy. Electronic address: Stefano.Cairo@xentech.eu.
(2)Childhood Liver Oncology Group, Germans Trias I Pujol Research Institute 
(IGTP), Program of Predictive and Personalized Medicine of Cancer (PMPCC), 
Badalona, Spain; Network for Biomedical Research in Hepatic and Digestive 
Diseases (CIBERehd), Spain. Electronic address: carmengol@igtp.cat.
(3)International Breast Cancer Study Group Coordinating Center, Bern, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: rudolf.maibach@ibcsg.org.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany. Electronic address: 
Beate.Haeberle@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(5)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany. Electronic address: 
Kristina.Becker@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(6)Childhood Liver Oncology Group, Germans Trias I Pujol Research Institute 
(IGTP), Program of Predictive and Personalized Medicine of Cancer (PMPCC), 
Badalona, Spain. Electronic address: jcarrillo@igtp.cat.
(7)Department of Anatomic Pathology and Cytopathology, Bicêtre Hospital, Paris 
Sud University, Le Kremlin Bicetre, France. Electronic address: 
catherine.guettier@bct.aphp.fr.
(8)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Germany. Electronic 
address: Christian.Vokuhl@ukbonn.de.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Oncology, Dr. von Hauner 
Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany. Electronic 
address: Irene.Schmid@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(10)INSERM U1193, Paul-Brousse Hospital, Hepatobiliary Centre, Villejuif, 
France. Electronic address: marie-annick.buendia@inserm.fr.
(11)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Bicêtre Hospital, Paris Sud University, Le 
Kremlin Bicetre, France. Electronic address: sophie.branchereau@aphp.fr.
(12)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany. Electronic address: 
Dietrich.Schweinitz@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(13)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany. Electronic address: 
roland.kappler@med.uni-muenchen.de.

AIM: Stratification of hepatoblastoma (HB) patients is based on clinical and 
imaging characteristics obtained at the time of diagnosis. We aim to integrate 
biomarkers into a tool that accurately predicts survival of HB patients.
METHODS: We retrospectively analysed 174 HB patients for the presence of four 
biomarkers and explored their prognostic potential by correlating with overall 
survival (OS) and event-free survival (EFS).
RESULTS: Mutations of CTNNB1, NFE2L2 and TERT were found in 135 (78%), 10 
(6%) and 10 (6%) patients, respectively, and the adverse C2 subtype of the 
16-gene signature in 63 (36%) patients. C2-patients had more frequent metastatic 
disease, higher alpha-fetoprotein levels, non-fetal histology and significantly 
worse 3-year OS (68% versus 95%) and EFS (63% versus 87%) than C1-patients. 
Patients carrying a NFE2L2 mutation had a significantly worse 3-year OS (57% 
versus 88%) than NFE2L2 wild-type patients and were more likely to have vessel 
invasive growth and non-fetal histology. TERT mutations were almost exclusively 
found in older patients, whereas CTNNB1 mutations showed no association with any 
clinical feature or outcome. In a multivariable analysis, the C2 subtype 
remained a significant predictor of poor outcome with hazard ratios of 6.202 and 
3.611 for OS and EFS, respectively. When added to the Children's Hepatic tumors 
International Collaboration risk stratification, the presence of the C2 subtype 
identified a group of high-risk patients with a very poor outcome.
CONCLUSION: We propose a new stratification system based on the combination of 
clinical factors and the 16-gene signature, which may facilitate a risk-adapted 
management of HB patients.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.09.026
PMID: 33125945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement None declared.