---
reference_id: "PMID:34781289"
title: "Establishing a Molecular Genetic Diagnosis in Children with Differences of Sex Development: A Clinical Approach."
authors:
- "O'Connell MA"
- Atlas G
- Ayers K
- Sinclair A
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000520926
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Disorders of Sex Development/diagnosis, genetics"
- Prospective Studies
- Genetic Testing
- Phenotype
- Molecular Biology
- Sexual Development/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishing a Molecular Genetic Diagnosis in Children with Differences of Sex Development: A Clinical Approach.
**Authors:** O'Connell MA, Atlas G, Ayers K, Sinclair A
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000520926](https://doi.org/10.1159/000520926)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2023;96(2):128-143. doi: 10.1159/000520926. Epub 2021 Nov
15.

Establishing a Molecular Genetic Diagnosis in Children with Differences of Sex 
Development: A Clinical Approach.

O'Connell MA(1)(2)(3), Atlas G(1)(2)(3), Ayers K(2)(3), Sinclair A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, The Royal Children's Hospital 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Reproductive Development, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Despite distinct underlying aetiologies, the clinical phenotypes and 
hormonal profiles of children with various differences of sex development (DSD) 
are often similar, which presents challenges to ascertaining an accurate 
diagnosis on clinical grounds alone. Associated features and important clinical 
outcomes can, however, vary significantly in different DSD, thus establishing an 
accurate molecular diagnosis may have important implications for decision-making 
and management planning in a given individual.
SUMMARY: The wider availability of next-generation sequencing techniques in 
recent years has led to recommendations for earlier integration of genetic 
testing in the diagnostic pathway of children with DSD. This review provides a 
practical overview of the clinical applications, advantages, and limitations of 
the more commonly available diagnostic genetic tests and outlines a suggested 
approach to testing. The potential clinical implications of a confirmed genetic 
diagnosis, subsequent management pathways for individuals with DSD, and 
challenges that remain to be addressed are also outlined.
KEY MESSAGES: Despite significant improvements in our understanding of the 
complex genetic pathways that underlie DSD, an accurate diagnosis still eludes 
many affected individuals. Establishing a molecular diagnosis provides 
aetiological certainty, enabling improved information for families and 
individualized clinical management, including monitoring or prophylactic 
intervention where additional health risks exist. A stepwise approach to genomic 
testing is recommended to afford highest diagnostic yield from available 
resources. Looking forward, collaborative multicentre prospective studies will 
be required to assess the true impact of a genetic diagnosis on improving 
clinical care pathways and health, well-being and patient-reported outcomes for 
individuals with DSD.

© 2021 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000520926
PMID: 34781289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]