---
reference_id: "PMID:29667114"
title: "Efficacy of Endoscopic Ultrasonography for Determining Clinical T Category for Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma: Data From 1434 Surgical Cases."
authors:
- Yang J
- Luo GY
- Liang RB
- Zeng TS
- Long H
- Fu JH
- Xu GL
- Yang MZ
- Li S
- Zhang LJ
- Lin P
- Wang X
- Hou X
- Yang HX
journal: Ann Surg Oncol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1245/s10434-018-6406-9
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/diagnostic imaging, pathology, surgery"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnostic imaging, pathology, surgery"
- Endosonography/methods
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, pathology, surgery"
- Esophagectomy/mortality
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of Endoscopic Ultrasonography for Determining Clinical T Category for Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma: Data From 1434 Surgical Cases.
**Authors:** Yang J, Luo GY, Liang RB, Zeng TS, Long H, Fu JH, Xu GL, Yang MZ, Li S, Zhang LJ, Lin P, Wang X, Hou X, Yang HX
**Journal:** Ann Surg Oncol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1245/s10434-018-6406-9](https://doi.org/10.1245/s10434-018-6406-9)

## Content

1. Ann Surg Oncol. 2018 Jul;25(7):2075-2082. doi: 10.1245/s10434-018-6406-9. Epub
 2018 Apr 17.

Efficacy of Endoscopic Ultrasonography for Determining Clinical T Category for 
Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma: Data From 1434 Surgical Cases.

Yang J(1)(2)(3), Luo GY(2)(3)(4), Liang RB(1)(2)(3), Zeng TS(5), Long 
H(1)(2)(3), Fu JH(1)(2)(3), Xu GL(2)(3)(4), Yang MZ(1)(2)(3), Li S(1)(2)(3), 
Zhang LJ(1)(2)(3), Lin P(1)(2)(3), Wang X(1)(2)(3), Hou X(6)(7)(8), Yang 
HX(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China.
(4)Department of Endoscopy, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong, China.
(5)School of Mathematical Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. 
houxue@sysucc.org.cn.
(7)Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China. houxue@sysucc.org.cn.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. houxue@sysucc.org.cn.
(9)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. yanghx@sysucc.org.cn.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China. yanghx@sysucc.org.cn.
(11)Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China. yanghx@sysucc.org.cn.

Comment in
    Ann Surg Oncol. 2018 Dec;25(Suppl 3):956-957. doi: 
10.1245/s10434-018-6914-7.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy of endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) for determining T 
category is variable for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). We aimed to 
assess the efficacy of EUS in accurately identifying T category for ESCC based 
on the 8th AJCC Cancer Staging Manual.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted using a prospectively collected 
ESCC database from January 2003 to December 2015, in which all patients 
underwent EUS examination followed by esophagectomy. The efficacy of EUS was 
evaluated by sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy compared with pathological T 
category as gold standard. Overall survival of different EUS-T (uT) categories 
was assessed.
RESULTS: In total, 1434 patients were included, of whom 58.2% were correctly 
classified by EUS, with 17.9% being overstaged and 23.9% being understaged. The 
sensitivity and accuracy of EUS for Tis, T1a, T1b, T2, T3, and T4a categories 
were 15.8 and 98.8%, 16.3 and 95.7%, 33.1 and 89.3%, 56.8 and 65.0%, 65.8 and 
70.0%, and 27.3 and 97.5%, respectively. The survival difference between uT1a 
and uT1b was not statistically significant (p = 0.90), nor was that between uT4a 
and uT4b (p = 0.34). However, when uT category was integrated as uTis, uT1, uT2, 
uT3, and uT4, overall survival was clearly distinguished between the categories 
(p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: EUS is in general feasible for classifying clinical T category for 
ESCC. However, EUS should be used with caution for discriminating between Tis, 
T1a, and T1b disease, as well as T4 disease.

DOI: 10.1245/s10434-018-6406-9
PMID: 29667114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]