---
reference_id: "PMID:32027542"
title: Effects of heated water-based versus land-based exercise training on vascular function in individuals with peripheral artery disease.
authors:
- Park SY
- Wong A
- Son WM
- Pekas EJ
journal: J Appl Physiol (1985)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00744.2019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of heated water-based versus land-based exercise training on vascular function in individuals with peripheral artery disease.
**Authors:** Park SY, Wong A, Son WM, Pekas EJ
**Journal:** J Appl Physiol (1985) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1152/japplphysiol.00744.2019](https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00744.2019)

## Content

1. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2020 Mar 1;128(3):565-575. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.00744.2019. Epub 2020 Feb 6.

Effects of heated water-based versus land-based exercise training on vascular 
function in individuals with peripheral artery disease.

Park SY(1), Wong A(2), Son WM(1), Pekas EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Health and Kinesiology, University of Nebraska-Omaha, Omaha, 
Nebraska.
(2)Department of Health and Human Performance, Marymount University, Arlington, 
Virginia.

Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is an atherosclerotic disease that is associated 
with poor vascular function, walking impairment, and reduced quality of life. 
Land-based exercise therapy (LBET) is frequently recommended to improve walking 
and reduce symptoms. Recently, evidence has suggested that heated-water exercise 
therapy (HWET) is an effective intervention for PAD. However, the efficacy of 
LBET versus HWET in PAD patients had not been elucidated. Therefore, we sought 
to compare effects of LBET with HWET on cardiovascular function, exercise 
tolerance, physical function, and body composition in PAD patients. PAD patients 
(n = 53) were recruited and randomly assigned to a LBET group (n = 25) or HWET 
group (n = 28). The LBET group performed treadmill walking, whereas the HWET 
group performed walking in heated water for 12 wk. Leg (legPWV) and 
brachial-to-ankle arterial stiffness (baPWV), blood pressure (BP), 
ankle-brachial index (ABI), 6-min walking distance (6MWD), claudication onset 
time (COT), physical function, and body composition were assessed before and 
after 12 wk. There were significant group-by-time interactions (P < 0.05) for 
legPWV, BP, 6MWD, COT, body composition, and resting metabolic rate (RMR). Both 
groups significantly reduced (P < 0.05) legPWV, BP, and body fat percentage, and 
HWET measures were significantly lower than LBET measures. Both groups 
significantly increased 6MWD, COT, and RMR, and HWET group measures were 
significantly greater than LBET measures. A time effect was noted for baPWV 
reduction in both groups (P < 0.05). These results suggest that both LBET and 
HWET improve cardiovascular function, exercise tolerance, and body composition, 
and HWET showed considerably greater improvements compared with LBET in patients 
with PAD.NEW & NOTEWORTHY The results of this study reveal for the first time 
that although land-based exercise therapy is effective for reducing arterial 
stiffness and blood pressure in patients with peripheral artery disease (PAD), 
heated-water exercise therapy demonstrates greater benefits on vascular 
function. The greater improvements in muscular strength, time to onset of 
claudication, and exercise tolerance after heated-water exercise therapy may 
have clinical implications for improving quality of life in patients with PAD. 
The heated-water exercise therapy intervention demonstrated relatively higher 
exercise training adherence (∼88%) compared with the land-based exercise 
intervention (∼81%).

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00744.2019
PMID: 32027542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]