---
reference_id: "PMID:39530163"
title: 4-Phenylbutyric acid mitigates ER stress-induced neurodegeneration in the spinal cords of a GM2 gangliosidosis mouse model.
authors:
- Weaver FE
- White E
- Peek AM
- Nurse CA
- Austin RC
- Igdoura SA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae153
keywords:
- Animals
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/drug effects
- Phenylbutyrates/pharmacology
- Mice
- "Spinal Cord/drug effects, pathology, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- "Motor Neurons/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Sandhoff Disease/drug therapy, pathology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Gangliosidoses, GM2/drug therapy, pathology, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 4-Phenylbutyric acid mitigates ER stress-induced neurodegeneration in the spinal cords of a GM2 gangliosidosis mouse model.
**Authors:** Weaver FE, White E, Peek AM, Nurse CA, Austin RC, Igdoura SA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddae153](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddae153)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2025 Jan 23;34(1):32-46. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae153.

4-Phenylbutyric acid mitigates ER stress-induced neurodegeneration in the spinal
cords of a GM2 gangliosidosis mouse model.

Weaver FE(1), White E(1), Peek AM(1), Nurse CA(1), Austin RC(2)(3), Igdoura
SA(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, 1280 Main St. W., Hamilton, ON
L8S 4K1, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, McMaster University, 1280
Main Street W., Hamilton, ON, L8S 4L8, Canada.
(3)The Research Institute of St. Joe's Hamilton and The Hamilton Center for
Kidney Research, 50 Charlton Avenue E., Hamilton, ON, L8N 4A6, Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, 1200
Main Street W., Hamilton, ON, L8S 4K1, Canada.

Sandhoff disease (SD), a fatal and rare lysosomal storage disorder (LSD), is
caused by a deficiency of the enzyme β-hexosaminidase B and leads to severe
accumulation of GM2 gangliosides in lysosomes, primarily within the central
nervous system (CNS). This accumulation results in severe neurological
impairment, lower motor neuron disease, and death. Currently, there are no
effective therapies available for SD. Here, we explored the role of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress in the spinal cord during disease progression in an
established mouse model of SD and revealed the beneficial outcome of off-label
treatment with the FDA-approved drug, 4-phenylbutyric acid (4-PBA). We analyzed
the expression and localization of ER stress and cellular apoptosis markers,
which revealed significant upregulation of these factors within motor neurons.
Additionally, we observed a > 50% reduction in neuronal numbers throughout all
spinal cord regions. Our studies also tested the impact of the chemical
chaperone 4-PBA on ER stress in mice, and following administration, we observed
significant improvements in motor neuromuscular function and life span
throughout disease progression. 4-PBA treatment significantly reduced apoptosis
in spinal cord neurons and increased the number of choline acetyltransferase
(ChAT)-positive neurons, with little effect on astrogliosis or sensory
interneurons. Overall, this study provides strong evidence for the role of
chronic ER stress in the pathophysiology of SD and highlights 4-PBA as a
promising therapeutic treatment for SD and potentially other related LSDs.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddae153
PMCID: PMC11756275
PMID: 39530163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing
interests: FEW, CAN, RCA, and SAI have filed an institution-owned patent,
entitled: ‘Methods for the treatment of lysosomal storage diseases’ (US patent
number 12042476 B2) that relates to the use of 4-PBA for the treatment of
Sandhoff disease.
