---
reference_id: "PMID:22832822"
title: "Neonatal lupus: advances in understanding pathogenesis and identifying treatments of cardiac disease."
authors:
- Izmirly PM
- Buyon JP
- Saxena A
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e328356226b
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal lupus: advances in understanding pathogenesis and identifying treatments of cardiac disease.
**Authors:** Izmirly PM, Buyon JP, Saxena A
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0b013e328356226b](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0b013e328356226b)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2012 Sep;24(5):466-72. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e328356226b.

Neonatal lupus: advances in understanding pathogenesis and identifying 
treatments of cardiac disease.

Izmirly PM(1), Buyon JP, Saxena A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, New York University School 
of Medicine, New York, New York, USA. peter.izmirly@nyumc.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cardiac manifestations of neonatal lupus include 
anti-SSA/Ro-SSB/La-mediated conduction system disease and endocardial/myocardial 
damage resulting in cardiomyopathy. This review will focus on recent data 
regarding updates on the proposed pathogenesis of disease, morbidity and 
mortality, and preventive and treatment therapies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Evidence from animal models suggests that reactivity to the 
p200 region of the Ro52 protein, as well as antibody targeting of L-type calcium 
channels may be important in the development of cardiac neonatal lupus. In-vitro 
studies support a protective role of β-2 glycoprotein 1 (prevents anti-Ro 
binding to apoptotic cells) and pathologic roles of the urokinase-plasminogen 
activator/receptor system (leads to activation of TGF-β), and endothelin-1 
secretion by macrophages in mediating tissue injury. Genetic studies highlight 
the fetal major histocompatibility complex in the development of disease, and a 
multigenerational study demonstrates that mothers of neonatal lupus children 
accumulate genetic risk factors preferentially from the neonatal lupus child's 
grandparents. Retrospective studies identify demographic and echocardiographic 
risk factors for morbidity and mortality and address the role of fluorinated 
steroids, intravenous immunoglobulin and hydroxychloroquine for prevention and 
treatment of disease.
SUMMARY: Animal studies, in-vitro experiments, genetic analysis and 
clinical-translational research in cardiac neonatal lupus reveal novel insights 
and targets for therapy in this often devastating disease.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e328356226b
PMCID: PMC3749830
PMID: 22832822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]