---
reference_id: "PMID:37456363"
title: "Effect of bilirubin and Gilbert syndrome on health: cohort analysis of observational, genetic, and Mendelian randomisation associations."
authors:
- Hamilton FW
- Abeysekera K
- Hamilton W
- Timpson NJ
journal: BMJ Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bmjmed-2022-000467
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of bilirubin and Gilbert syndrome on health: cohort analysis of observational, genetic, and Mendelian randomisation associations.
**Authors:** Hamilton FW, Abeysekera K, Hamilton W, Timpson NJ
**Journal:** BMJ Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjmed-2022-000467](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjmed-2022-000467)

## Content

1. BMJ Med. 2023 Jul 12;2(1):e000467. doi: 10.1136/bmjmed-2022-000467.
eCollection  2023.

Effect of bilirubin and Gilbert syndrome on health: cohort analysis of 
observational, genetic, and Mendelian randomisation associations.

Hamilton FW(1)(2), Abeysekera K(1)(3), Hamilton W(4), Timpson NJ(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, Bristol, UK.
(2)Infection Science, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK.
(3)Department of Liver Medicine, Bristol Royal Infirmary, Bristol, UK.
(4)Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To compare associations between the Gilbert syndrome genotype in 
European populations, measured bilirubin concentrations, genetically predicted 
bilirubin using this genotype, and a wide range of health outcomes in a large 
cohort.
DESIGN: Cohort study including observational, genetic, and Mendelian 
randomisation analyses.
SETTING: 22 centres across England, Scotland, and Wales in UK Biobank (2006-10), 
with replication in a national Finnish cohort (FinnGen).
PARTICIPANTS: 463 060 participants in the UK Biobank were successfully genotyped 
for a genetic variant (rs887829) that is strongly associated with Gilbert 
syndrome and 438 056 participants had measured bilirubin concentrations with 
linked electronic health record data coded using the tenth edition of the 
International Classification of Diseases. Replication analyses were performed in 
FinnGen (n=429 209) with linked electronic health record data.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Odds ratios for the association between serum bilirubin 
concentrations, rs887829-T homozygosity (the risk genotype for Gilbert 
syndrome), genetically predicted bilirubin using rs887829-T allele carriage 
alone, and a wide range of health outcomes recorded in primary and secondary 
care.
RESULTS: 46 189 participants in UK Biobank (about 10%) were homozygous for 
rs887829-T defining them as having the genotype characterising Gilbert syndrome. 
However, only 1701 (3%) of this group had a coded diagnosis of Gilbert syndrome. 
Variation at this locus explained 37.1% of all variation in measured serum 
bilirubin. In the observational analyses, higher bilirubin concentrations had 
strong inverse associations with a wide range of outcomes including overall 
health status, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, myocardial infarction, and 
cholesterol measures. These associations were not identified in people with the 
Gilbert genotype. We identified associations with genetically predicted 
bilirubin concentrations and biliary and liver pathology (eg, odds ratio for 
cholelithiasis 1.16 (95% confidence interval 1.12 to 1.20); P=5.7×10-16) and a 
novel association with pityriasis rosea (1.47 (1.27 to 1.69), P=1.28×10-7).
CONCLUSIONS: Only 3% of participants who are homozygous for rs887829-T have a 
recorded diagnosis of Gilbert syndrome. Carriers of this genotype have modest 
increases in the odds of developing biliary pathology and pityriasis rosea. 
Evidence from the analyses of genetic data suggests that bilirubin has no likely 
causal role in protection from cardiovascular disease, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, or other key healthcare outcomes and therefore represents a 
poor target for therapeutic intervention for these outcomes.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjmed-2022-000467
PMCID: PMC10347488
PMID: 37456363

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/disclosure-of-interest/ and 
declare: no support from any organisation for the submitted work; no financial 
relationships with any organisations that might have an interest in the 
submitted work in the previous three years; no other relationships or activities 
that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.