---
reference_id: "PMID:38727244"
title: Preservation of conjugated primary bile acids by oxygenation of the small intestinal microbiota in vitro.
authors:
- Firrman J
- Friedman ES
- Hecht A
- Strange WC
- Narrowe AB
- Mahalak K
- Wu GD
- Liu L
journal: mBio
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/mbio.00943-24
keywords:
- Bile Acids and Salts/metabolism
- Humans
- "Intestine, Small/microbiology, metabolism"
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Oxygen/metabolism
- "Bacteria/metabolism, genetics, classification"
- Amidohydrolases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preservation of conjugated primary bile acids by oxygenation of the small intestinal microbiota in vitro.
**Authors:** Firrman J, Friedman ES, Hecht A, Strange WC, Narrowe AB, Mahalak K, Wu GD, Liu L
**Journal:** mBio (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mbio.00943-24](https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.00943-24)

## Content

1. mBio. 2024 Jun 12;15(6):e0094324. doi: 10.1128/mbio.00943-24. Epub 2024 May
10.

Preservation of conjugated primary bile acids by oxygenation of the small 
intestinal microbiota in vitro.

Firrman J(#)(1), Friedman ES(#)(2), Hecht A(2), Strange WC(2), Narrowe AB(1), 
Mahalak K(1), Wu GD(2), Liu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Dairy and Functional Foods Research Unit, Eastern Regional Research Center, 
Agricultural Research Service, US Department of Agriculture, Wyndmoor, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Bile acids play a critical role in the emulsification of dietary lipids, a 
critical step in the primary function of the small intestine, which is the 
digestion and absorption of food. Primary bile acids delivered into the small 
intestine are conjugated to enhance functionality, in part, by increasing 
aqueous solubility and preventing passive diffusion of bile acids out of the gut 
lumen. Bile acid function can be disrupted by the gut microbiota via the 
deconjugation of primary bile acids by bile salt hydrolases (BSHs), leading to 
their conversion into secondary bile acids through the expression of bacterial 
bile acid-inducible genes, a process often observed in malabsorption due to 
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. By modeling the small intestinal 
microbiota in vitro using human small intestinal ileostomy effluent as the 
inocula, we show here that the infusion of physiologically relevant levels of 
oxygen, normally found in the proximal small intestine, reduced deconjugation of 
primary bile acids, in part, through the expansion of bacterial taxa known to 
have a low abundance of BSHs. Further recapitulating the small intestinal bile 
acid composition of the small intestine, limited conversion of primary into 
secondary bile acids was observed. Remarkably, these effects were preserved 
among four separate communities, each inoculated with a different small 
intestinal microbiota, despite a high degree of taxonomic variability under both 
anoxic and aerobic conditions. In total, these results provide evidence for a 
previously unrecognized role that the oxygenated environment of the small 
intestine plays in the maintenance of normal digestive physiology.
IMPORTANCE: Conjugated primary bile acids are produced by the liver and exist at 
high concentrations in the proximal small intestine, where they are critical for 
proper digestion. Deconjugation of these bile acids with subsequent 
transformation via dehydroxylation into secondary bile acids is regulated by the 
colonic gut microbiota and reduces their digestive function. Using an in vitro 
platform modeling the small intestinal microbiota, we analyzed the ability of 
this community to transform primary bile acids and studied the effect of 
physiological levels of oxygen normally found in the proximal small intestine 
(5%) on this metabolic process. We found that oxygenation of the small 
intestinal microbiota inhibited the deconjugation of primary bile acids in 
vitro. These findings suggest that luminal oxygen levels normally found in the 
small intestine may maintain the optimal role of bile acids in the digestive 
process by regulating bile acid conversion by the gut microbiota.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.00943-24
PMCID: PMC11237543
PMID: 38727244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.