---
reference_id: "PMID:12369018"
title: Mutations in the O-mannosyltransferase gene POMT1 give rise to the severe neuronal migration disorder Walker-Warburg syndrome.
authors:
- Beltrán-Valero de Bernabé D
- Currier S
- Steinbrecher A
- Celli J
- van Beusekom E
- van der Zwaag B
- Kayserili H
- Merlini L
- Chitayat D
- Dobyns WB
- Cormand B
- Lehesjoki AE
- Cruces J
- Voit T
- Walsh CA
- van Bokhoven H
- Brunner HG
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1086/342975
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/embryology, enzymology, genetics"
- "Brain/abnormalities, embryology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Mapping
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/metabolism
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Dystroglycans
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- Female
- Fetal Death
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Infant
- Male
- Mannosyltransferases/genetics
- Membrane Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the O-mannosyltransferase gene POMT1 give rise to the severe neuronal migration disorder Walker-Warburg syndrome.
**Authors:** Beltrán-Valero de Bernabé D, Currier S, Steinbrecher A, Celli J, van Beusekom E, van der Zwaag B, Kayserili H, Merlini L, Chitayat D, Dobyns WB, Cormand B, Lehesjoki AE, Cruces J, Voit T, Walsh CA, van Bokhoven H, Brunner HG
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1086/342975](https://doi.org/10.1086/342975)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Nov;71(5):1033-43. doi: 10.1086/342975. Epub 2002 Oct 4.

Mutations in the O-mannosyltransferase gene POMT1 give rise to the severe
neuronal migration disorder Walker-Warburg syndrome.

Beltrán-Valero de Bernabé D(1), Currier S, Steinbrecher A, Celli J, van Beusekom
E, van der Zwaag B, Kayserili H, Merlini L, Chitayat D, Dobyns WB, Cormand B,
Lehesjoki AE, Cruces J, Voit T, Walsh CA, van Bokhoven H, Brunner HG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS) is an autosomal recessive developmental disorder
characterized by congenital muscular dystrophy and complex brain and eye
abnormalities. A similar combination of symptoms is presented by two other human
diseases, muscle-eye-brain disease (MEB) and Fukuyama congenital muscular
dystrophy (FCMD). Although the genes underlying FCMD (Fukutin) and MEB (POMGnT1)
have been cloned, loci for WWS have remained elusive. The protein products of
POMGnT1 and Fukutin have both been implicated in protein glycosylation. To
unravel the genetic basis of WWS, we first performed a genomewide linkage
analysis in 10 consanguineous families with WWS. The results indicated the
existence of at least three WWS loci. Subsequently, we adopted a candidate-gene
approach in combination with homozygosity mapping in 15 consanguineous families
with WWS. Candidate genes were selected on the basis of the role of the FCMD and
MEB genes. Since POMGnT1 encodes an O-mannoside N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase,
we analyzed the possible implication of O-mannosyl glycan synthesis in WWS.
Analysis of the locus for O-mannosyltransferase 1 (POMT1) revealed homozygosity
in 5 of 15 families. Sequencing of the POMT1 gene revealed mutations in 6 of the
30 unrelated patients with WWS. Of the five mutations identified, two are
nonsense mutations, two are frameshift mutations, and one is a missense
mutation. Immunohistochemical analysis of muscle from patients with POMT1
mutations corroborated the O-mannosylation defect, as judged by the absence of
glycosylation of alpha-dystroglycan. The implication of O-mannosylation in MEB
and WWS suggests new lines of study in understanding the molecular basis of
neuronal migration.

DOI: 10.1086/342975
PMCID: PMC419999
PMID: 12369018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
