---
reference_id: "PMID:3540517"
title: Lead intoxication.
authors:
- Ibels LS
- Pollock CA
journal: Med Toxicol
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1007/BF03259851
keywords:
- Chelating Agents/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Lead/metabolism
- Lead Poisoning/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lead intoxication.
**Authors:** Ibels LS, Pollock CA
**Journal:** Med Toxicol (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF03259851](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03259851)

## Content

1. Med Toxicol. 1986 Nov-Dec;1(6):387-410. doi: 10.1007/BF03259851.

Lead intoxication.

Ibels LS, Pollock CA.

Lead intoxication was recognised as early as 2000 BC and the widespread use of 
lead has been a cause of endemic chronic plumbism in several societies 
throughout history. In the twentieth century, lead intoxication is still a 
common problem. In children it is largely due to ingestion of pica and 
environmental exposure, whereas adult groups at greatest risk are the 
industrially exposed: thus, screening of these workers should be undertaken at 
regular intervals. The clinical features of lead intoxication are nonspecific 
and often go unrecognised. The early manifestations are largely 
neuropsychiatric, followed by more significant disturbances of the central and 
peripheral nervous systems, symptomatic gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, 
haematological and endocrine abnormalities. The association of lead poisoning 
with renal disease is well documented and must be considered, particularly if 
there is associated hypertension and/or gout. Blood lead concentrations are an 
unreliable predictor of body lead stores as they are indicative only of recent 
exposure. Haematological parameters have been used to assess those at risk of 
toxicity, but although more reliable than blood concentrations, they also fail 
to predict those patients at risk of toxicity. The recommended assessment for 
patients with suspected lead intoxication is a calcium disodium edetate 
chelation test, which is a sensitive marker for assessing body stores and 
subsequent intoxication. In children the dosage should be 50 mg/kg up to 1000 
mg, and in adults 1000 mg administered intravenously or 2000 mg intramuscularly 
in divided doses 12 hours apart with subsequent 72 hour urinary lead 
estimations. Lead excretion levels greater than 350 micrograms/72 hours should 
be considered as suggestive of intoxication, particularly if supported by 
historical, clinical or biochemical evidence of lead exposure. Treatment of 
patients with positive chelation tests involves symptomatic treatment and a 
course of chelation therapy utilising calcium disodium edetate in doses similar 
to those used for testing, and in the more severely intoxicated patient, the 
addition of dimercaprol in doses of 75 mg/m2 every 4 hours to a total of 300 
mg/m2/day. The safety of these treatment regimens is well documented.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03259851
PMID: 3540517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]