---
reference_id: "PMID:39484718"
title: "Hidradenitis suppurativa: key insights into treatment success and failure."
authors:
- van Straalen KR
- Piguet V
- Gudjonsson JE
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI186744
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hidradenitis suppurativa: key insights into treatment success and failure.
**Authors:** van Straalen KR, Piguet V, Gudjonsson JE
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI186744](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186744)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 Nov 1;134(21):e186744. doi: 10.1172/JCI186744.

Hidradenitis suppurativa: key insights into treatment success and failure.

van Straalen KR(1), Piguet V(2)(3), Gudjonsson JE(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Experimental Immunodermatology, Department of Dermatology, 
Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Division of Dermatology, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(3)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Women's College Hospital, 
Toronto, Canada.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(6)Taubman Medical Research Institute, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI186744
PMCID: PMC11527436
PMID: 39484718

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: KRVS has received 
honoraria or fees for consulting and/or speaking from Novartis, UCB, and 
Boehringer-Ingelheim. VP has received honoraria or fees for consulting and/or 
speaking for AbbVie, Almirall, Celgene, Janssen, Novartis, and Pfizer. JEG has 
received research support from AbbVie, Janssen, Almirall, Prometheus 
Biosciences/Merck, BMS/Celgene, Boehringer Ingelheim, Galderma, and Eli Lilly, 
and has served as advisor to Sanofi, Eli Lilly, Galderma, BMS, and Boehringer 
Ingelheim.