---
reference_id: "PMID:18509043"
title: GPR56 regulates pial basement membrane integrity and cortical lamination.
authors:
- Li S
- Jin Z
- Koirala S
- Bu L
- Xu L
- Hynes RO
- Walsh CA
- Corfas G
- Piao X
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0853-08.2008
keywords:
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Bacterial Outer Membrane Proteins
- Basement Membrane/metabolism
- Bromodeoxyuridine/metabolism
- Cell Movement/genetics
- "Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities, cytology"
- "Embryo, Mammalian"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/physiology"
- Lamins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation/physiology
- Neuroglia/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- Pia Mater/cytology
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/deficiency, physiology"
- Stem Cells/metabolism
- Tubulin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GPR56 regulates pial basement membrane integrity and cortical lamination.
**Authors:** Li S, Jin Z, Koirala S, Bu L, Xu L, Hynes RO, Walsh CA, Corfas G, Piao X
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0853-08.2008](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0853-08.2008)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2008 May 28;28(22):5817-26. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0853-08.2008.

GPR56 regulates pial basement membrane integrity and cortical lamination.

Li S(1), Jin Z, Koirala S, Bu L, Xu L, Hynes RO, Walsh CA, Corfas G, Piao X.

Author information:
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Medicine, Children's Hospital
Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

GPR56 is a member of the family of adhesion G-protein-coupled receptors that
have a large extracellular region containing a GPS (G-protein proteolytic site)
domain. Loss-of-function mutations in the GPR56 gene cause a specific human
brain malformation called bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria (BFPP). BFPP
is a radiological diagnosis and its histopathology remains unclear. This study
demonstrates that loss of the mouse Gpr56 gene leads to neuronal ectopia in the
cerebral cortex, a cobblestone-like cortical malformation. There are four
crucial events in the development of cobblestone cortex, namely defective pial
basement membrane (BM), abnormal anchorage of radial glial endfeet, mislocalized
Cajal-Retzius cells, and neuronal overmigration. By detailed time course
analysis, we reveal that the leading causal events are likely the breaches in
the pial BM. We show further that GPR56 is present in abundance in radial glial
endfeet. Furthermore, a putative ligand of GPR56 is localized in the marginal
zone or overlying extracellular matrix. These observations provide compelling
evidence that GPR56 functions in regulating pial BM integrity during cortical
development.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0853-08.2008
PMCID: PMC2504715
PMID: 18509043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
