---
reference_id: "PMID:29240241"
title: "Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome: Eight additional cases with implications on phenotype and genotype expansion."
authors:
- Chiu ATG
- Pei SLC
- Mak CCY
- Leung GKC
- Yu MHC
- Lee SL
- Vreeburg M
- Pfundt R
- van der Burgt I
- Kleefstra T
- Frederic TM
- Nambot S
- Faivre L
- Bruel AL
- Rossi M
- Isidor B
- Küry S
- Cogne B
- Besnard T
- Willems M
- Reijnders MRF
- Chung BHY
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13196
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Casein Kinase II/chemistry, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, physiopathology"
- Face/physiopathology
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Musculoskeletal Abnormalities/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Folding
- Exome Sequencing/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome: Eight additional cases with implications on phenotype and genotype expansion.
**Authors:** Chiu ATG, Pei SLC, Mak CCY, Leung GKC, Yu MHC, Lee SL, Vreeburg M, Pfundt R, van der Burgt I, Kleefstra T, Frederic TM, Nambot S, Faivre L, Bruel AL, Rossi M, Isidor B, Küry S, Cogne B, Besnard T, Willems M, Reijnders MRF, Chung BHY
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13196](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13196)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2018 Apr;93(4):880-890. doi: 10.1111/cge.13196. Epub 2018 Feb 13.

Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental syndrome: Eight additional cases with implications
on phenotype and genotype expansion.

Chiu ATG(1)(2), Pei SLC(1), Mak CCY(1), Leung GKC(1), Yu MHC(1), Lee SL(1)(2),
Vreeburg M(3), Pfundt R(4), van der Burgt I(4), Kleefstra T(4)(5), Frederic
TM(6)(7)(8), Nambot S(6)(7), Faivre L(6), Bruel AL(8), Rossi M(9)(10), Isidor
B(11)(12), Küry S(11), Cogne B(11), Besnard T(11), Willems M(13), Reijnders
MRF(4)(5), Chung BHY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital,
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Duchess of Kent Children's Hospital, Hong Kong,
Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics and School for Oncology & Developmental
Biology (GROW), Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands.
(5)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.
(6)Centre de Génétique et Centre de référence, Anomalies du Développement et
Syndromes Malformatifs, Hôpital d'Enfants, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Dijon, Dijon, France.
(7)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Plateau Technique de Biologie, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France.
(8)INSERM UMR 1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Dijon, France.
(9)Service de Génétique, Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement,
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(10)GENDEV Team, Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, INSERM U1028,
CNRS UMR5292, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France.
(11)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France.
(12)INSERM, UMR-S 957, Nantes, France.
(13)Département de Génétique Médicale, Maladies Rares et Médecine Personnalisée,
Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs,
Plateforme Recherche de Microremaniements Chromosomiques, Hôpital Arnaud de
Villeneuve, CHU de Montpellier, Faculté de Médecine Montpellier-Nîmes,
Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Okur-Chung syndrome is a neurodevelopmental condition attributed to germline
CSNK2A1 pathogenic missense variants. We present 8 unreported subjects with the
above syndrome, who have recognizable dysmorphism, varying degrees of
developmental delay and multisystem involvement. Together with 6 previously
reported cases, we present a case series of 7 female and 7 male subjects,
highlighting the recognizable facial features of the syndrome (microcephaly,
hypertelorism, epicanthic fold, ptosis, arched eyebrows, low set ears, ear fold
abnormality, broad nasal bridge and round face) as well as frequently occurring
clinical features including neurodevelopmental delay (93%), gastrointestinal
(57%), musculoskeletal (57%) and immunological (43%) abnormalities. The variants
reported in this study are evolutionary conserved and absent in the normal
population. We observed that the CSNK2A1 gene is relatively intolerant to
missense genetic changes, and most variants are within the protein kinase
domain. All except 1 variant reported in this cohort are spatially located on
the binding pocket of the holoenzyme. We further provide key recommendations on
the management of Okur-Chung syndrome. To conclude, this is the second case
series on Okur-Chung syndrome, and an in-depth review of the phenotypic features
and genomic findings of the condition with suggestions on clinical management.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13196
PMID: 29240241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
