---
reference_id: "PMID:28164884"
title: "Association of protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 +1858C→T polymorphism and susceptibility to vitiligo: Systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Agarwal S
- Changotra H
journal: Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.4103/0378-6323.199422
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 +1858C→T polymorphism and susceptibility to vitiligo: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Agarwal S, Changotra H
**Journal:** Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0378-6323.199422](https://doi.org/10.4103/0378-6323.199422)

## Content

1. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2017 Mar-Apr;83(2):183-189. doi: 
10.4103/0378-6323.199422.

Association of protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 +1858C→T 
polymorphism and susceptibility to vitiligo: Systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Agarwal S(1), Changotra H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Jaypee University of 
Information Technology, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: Protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 gene, which 
translates to lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase, is considered to be a 
susceptibility gene marker associated with several autoimmune diseases. Several 
studies have demonstrated the association of protein tyrosine phosphatase, 
non-receptor type 22 +1858C→T polymorphism with vitiligo. However, these studies 
showed conflicting results. Meta-analysis of the same was conducted earlier that 
included fewer number of publications in their study.
AIM: We performed a meta-analysis of a total of seven studies consisting of 2094 
cases and 3613 controls to evaluate the possible association of protein tyrosine 
phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 +1858C>T polymorphism with vitiligo 
susceptibility.
METHODS: We conducted a literature search in PubMed, Google Scholar and Dogpile 
for all published paper on protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 
+1858C→T polymorphism and vitiligo risk till June 2016. Data analysis was 
performed by RevMan 5.3 and comprehensive meta-analysis v3.0 software.
RESULTS: Meta-analysis showed an overall significant association of protein 
tyrosine phosphatase, non- receptor type 22 +1858C→T polymorphism with vitiligo 
in all models (allelic model [T vs. C]: odds ratio = 1.50, 95% confidence 
interval [1.32-1.71], P< 0.001; dominant model [TT + CT vs. CC]: odds ratio = 
1.61, 95% confidence interval [1.16-2.24], P = 0.004; recessive model [TT vs. CT 
+ CC]: odds ratio = 4.82, 95% confidence interval [1.11-20.92], P = 0.04; 
homozygous model [TT vs. CC]: odds ratio = 5.34, 95% confidence interval 
[1.23-23.24], P = 0.03; co-dominant model [CT vs. CC]: odds ratio = 1.52, 95% 
confidence interval [1.09-2.13], P = 0.01). No publication bias was detected in 
the funnel plot study.
LIMITATIONS: Limited ethnic-based studies, unable to satisfy data by gender or 
vitiligo-type are some limitations of the present meta-analysis.
CONCLUSION: Stratifying data by ethnicity showed an association of protein 
tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 +1858C→T with vitiligo in European 
population (odds ratio = 1.53, 95% confidence interval [1.34-1.75], P< 0.001) 
but not in Asian population (odds ratio = 0.59, 95% confidence interval 
[0.26-1.32], P = 0.2). In conclusion, protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor 
type 22 +1858 T allele predisposes European individuals to vitiligo.

DOI: 10.4103/0378-6323.199422
PMID: 28164884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]