---
reference_id: "PMID:28540636"
title: GM2 Activator Deficiency Caused by a Homozygous Exon 2 Deletion in GM2A.
authors:
- Hall PL
- Laine R
- Alexander JJ
- Ankala A
- Teot LA
- Lidov HGW
- Anselm I
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2017_31
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GM2 Activator Deficiency Caused by a Homozygous Exon 2 Deletion in GM2A.
**Authors:** Hall PL, Laine R, Alexander JJ, Ankala A, Teot LA, Lidov HGW, Anselm I
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2017_31](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2017_31)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2018;38:61-65. doi: 10.1007/8904_2017_31. Epub 2017 May 25.

GM2 Activator Deficiency Caused by a Homozygous Exon 2 Deletion in GM2A.

Hall PL(1)(2), Laine R(3), Alexander JJ(4)(5), Ankala A(4)(5), Teot LA(6), Lidov 
HGW(7)(8), Anselm I(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA. 
patricia.l.hall@emory.edu.
(2)EGL Genetics, Tucker, GA, 30084, USA. patricia.l.hall@emory.edu.
(3)Department of Neurology, Mitochondrial Program, Neuromuscular Program, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
(5)EGL Genetics, Tucker, GA, 30084, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Neuropathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, 02115, USA.
(8)Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Mitochondrial Program, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(10)Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

GM2 activator (GM2A) deficiency (OMIM 613109) is a rare lysosomal storage 
disorder, with onset typically in infancy or early childhood. Clinically, it is 
almost indistinguishable from Tay-Sachs disease (OMIM 272800) or Sandhoff 
disease (OMIM 268800); however, traditionally available biochemical screening 
tests will most likely reveal normal results. We report a 2-year-old male with 
initially normal development until the age of 9 months, when he presented with 
developmental delay and regression. Workup at that time was unrevealing; at 15 
months, he had abnormal brain MRI findings and a cherry red spot on 
ophthalmological examination. Family history and all laboratory studies were 
uninformative. The combination of a cherry red spot and developmental regression 
was strongly suggestive of a lysosomal storage disorder. Sequence analysis of 
GM2A did not reveal any pathogenic variants; however, exon 2 of GM2A could not 
be amplified by PCR, raising suspicion for a large, homozygous deletion. 
Subsequent copy number analysis confirmed a homozygous deletion of exon 2 in 
GM2A. This is the first reported case of GM2A deficiency being caused by a whole 
exon deletion. We describe previously unreported electron microscopy findings in 
this disease, thus expanding the clinical and variant spectrum for GM2 activator 
deficiency. These findings demonstrate the increased degree of suspicion 
required for diagnosis of this rare disorder. Brief Summary: This case of GM2 
activator deficiency was caused by a homozygous deletion in GM2A, demonstrating 
the need to include exon level copy number analysis in any workup to fully 
exclude this disorder.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2017_31
PMCID: PMC5874204
PMID: 28540636

Conflict of interest statement: Patricia Hall is employed by Emory University 
and is a laboratory director at EGL Genetic Diagnostics, LLC, a clinical 
genetics laboratory which performs testing described in this paper. John 
Alexander is employed by Emory University and is a laboratory director at EGL 
Genetic Diagnostics, LLC, a clinical genetics laboratory which performs testing 
described in this paper. Arun Ankala is employed by Emory University and is a 
laboratory director at EGL Genetic Diagnostics, LLC, a clinical genetics 
laboratory which performs testing described in this paper. Regina Laine, Hart 
Lidov, Lisa Teot, and Irina Anselm declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.