---
reference_id: "PMID:31035843"
title: The variation of superior semicircular canal bone thickness in relation to age and gender.
authors:
- Mahulu EN
- Fan X
- Ding S
- Jasmine Ouaye P
- Mohamedi Mambo A
- Machunde Mafuru M
- Xu A
journal: Acta Otolaryngol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/00016489.2019.1595721
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- Bone Density/physiology
- "Bone Resorption/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- China
- Cone-Beam Computed Tomography/methods
- Female
- "Hospitals, University"
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Labyrinth Diseases/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- "Semicircular Canals/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The variation of superior semicircular canal bone thickness in relation to age and gender.
**Authors:** Mahulu EN, Fan X, Ding S, Jasmine Ouaye P, Mohamedi Mambo A, Machunde Mafuru M, Xu A
**Journal:** Acta Otolaryngol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00016489.2019.1595721](https://doi.org/10.1080/00016489.2019.1595721)

## Content

1. Acta Otolaryngol. 2019 Jun;139(6):473-478. doi: 10.1080/00016489.2019.1595721.
 Epub 2019 Apr 29.

The variation of superior semicircular canal bone thickness in relation to age 
and gender.

Mahulu EN(1)(2), Fan X(1), Ding S(3), Jasmine Ouaye P(1)(2), Mohamedi Mambo 
A(4), Machunde Mafuru M(5), Xu A(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Otorhinolaryngology & Head and Neck Department , The Second 
Hospital of Shandong University , Jinan , Shandong , China.
(2)b Qilu College of Medicine , Shandong University , Jinan , Shandong , China.
(3)c Department of Biomedical Statistics , The Second Hospital of Shandong 
University , Jinan , Shandong , China.
(4)d Internal Medicine Department , Union Hospital of Tongji Medical College of 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology , Wuhan , Hubei , China.
(5)e Pharmacy Department , Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical College of Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology , Wuhan , Hubei , China.

BACKGROUND: Superior semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome (SSCD) is a current 
diagnosis that is due to a loss of bone covering the superior semicircular canal 
(SSC). This results in pressure-/sound- induced vertigo and oscillopsia.
OBJECTIVE: To find the variation of the thickness of the bone that covers the 
Superior Semicircular Canal with relation to age and gender among the Chinese 
descents.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three hundred and eleven temporal bone Cone Beam Computed 
Tomography (CBCT) images of patients who attended Otology clinic at Second 
Hospital of Shandong University from January, 2017 to April, 2018 were 
retrospectively studied. The images were reconstructed in the line of Poschl and 
the thinnest area of the bone covering the SSC was taken.
RESULTS: We included 172 (55.31%) females and 139 (44.69%) males. Mean age was 
41 years. Overall mean difference in thickness was found to be -0.0210. There 
was no significant difference between the female and male bone thickness 
(p = .7113). With age the mean difference was 0.0801 (p = .1557) which was not 
statistically significant.
CONCLUSION AND SIGNIFICANCE: There was no significant change in bone thickness 
with advancing age. CBCT is the best method of assessing SSCD.

DOI: 10.1080/00016489.2019.1595721
PMID: 31035843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]