---
reference_id: "PMID:28148286"
title: Fifteen-year follow-up of Italian families affected by arginine glycine amidinotransferase deficiency.
authors:
- Battini R
- Alessandrì MG
- Casalini C
- Casarano M
- Tosetti M
- Cioni G
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0577-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amidinotransferases/deficiency
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/drug therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Creatine/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Developmental Disabilities/drug therapy
- Dietary Supplements
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Family
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intellectual Disability/drug therapy
- Italy
- Male
- Speech Disorders/drug therapy
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fifteen-year follow-up of Italian families affected by arginine glycine amidinotransferase deficiency.
**Authors:** Battini R, Alessandrì MG, Casalini C, Casarano M, Tosetti M, Cioni G
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-017-0577-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-017-0577-5)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017 Feb 2;12(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0577-5.

Fifteen-year follow-up of Italian families affected by arginine glycine
amidinotransferase deficiency.

Battini R(1), Alessandrì MG(2), Casalini C(2), Casarano M(2), Tosetti M(3),
Cioni G(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris,
Viale del Tirreno 331, Calambrone, 56128, Pisa, Italy. rbattini@fsm.unipi.it.
(2)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris,
Viale del Tirreno 331, Calambrone, 56128, Pisa, Italy.
(3)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, MRI Laboratory, IRCCS Fondazione
Stella Maris, Calambrone, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Arginine:glycine amidinotransferase deficiency (AGAT-d) is a very
rare inborn error of creatine synthesis mainly characterized by absence of brain
Creatine (Cr) peak, intellectual disability, severe language impairment and
behavioural disorder and susceptible to supplementary Cr treatment per os.
Serial examinations by magnetic resonance spectroscopy are required to evaluate
Cr recovery in brain during treatment of high doses of Cr per os, which have
been proved beneficial and effective in treating main clinical symptoms. A long
term study with detailed reports on clinical, neurochemical and
neuropsychological outcomes of the first Italian patients affected by AGAT-d
here reported can represent a landmark in management of this disorder thus
enhancing medical knowledge and clinical practice.
RESULTS: We have evaluated the long term effects of Cr supplementation
management in four Italian patients affected by AGAT-d, correlating specific
treatments with serial clinical, biochemical and magnetic resonance spectroscopy
examinations as well as the neuropsychological outcome by standardized
developmental scales. Consecutive MRS examinations have confirmed that Cr
depletion in AGAT-d patients is reversible under Cr supplementation. Cr
treatment is considered safe and well tolerated but side effects, including
weight gain and kidney stones, have been reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Early treatment prevents adverse developmental outcome, while
patients diagnosed and treated at an older age showed partial but significant
cognitive recovery with clear improvements in adaptive functioning.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-017-0577-5
PMCID: PMC5289057
PMID: 28148286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
