---
reference_id: "PMID:16786509"
title: Mutation analysis of COL1A1 and COL1A2 in patients diagnosed with osteogenesis imperfecta type I-IV.
authors:
- Pollitt R
- McMahon R
- Nunn J
- Bamford R
- Afifi A
- Bishop N
- Dalton A
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/humu.9430
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Cohort Studies
- "Collagen/chemistry, genetics"
- "Collagen Type I/chemistry, genetics"
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Point Mutation
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation analysis of COL1A1 and COL1A2 in patients diagnosed with osteogenesis imperfecta type I-IV.
**Authors:** Pollitt R, McMahon R, Nunn J, Bamford R, Afifi A, Bishop N, Dalton A
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.9430](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.9430)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2006 Jul;27(7):716. doi: 10.1002/humu.9430.

Mutation analysis of COL1A1 and COL1A2 in patients diagnosed with osteogenesis 
imperfecta type I-IV.

Pollitt R(1), McMahon R, Nunn J, Bamford R, Afifi A, Bishop N, Dalton A.

Author information:
(1)Sheffield Molecular Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Trust, 
Sheffield, United Kingdom. rebecca.pollitt@sch.nhs.uk

Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous group of inherited disorders 
characterized by increased bone fragility, with clinical severity ranging from 
mild to lethal. To date, seven types of OI have been described, based on 
clinical phenotype and histological findings. Most patients with a clinical 
diagnosis of OI type I-IV have a mutation in the COL1A1 or COL1A2 genes which 
encode the two alpha chains of type I collagen, the major component of the bone 
matrix. Analysis of COL1A1 and COL1A2 in a cohort of 83 unrelated patients with 
OI type I-IV identified a total of 62 mutations. Thirty-eight appear novel, 26 
in COL1A1, and 12 in COL1A2, and these are described here. The largest group 
consists of point mutations affecting glycine residues in the triple helical 
domain of the two alpha chains, predicted to disrupt protein folding and 
structure. This is in accordance with previously published data. A doublet GC 
deletion, an unusual 398 base deletion predicted to completely remove exon 20 of 
COL1A2, and a point mutation resulting in substitution of a conserved cysteine 
in the C-terminal propeptide are described. In addition rare mutations at the 
cleavage sites of the C-propeptide and the N-terminal signal peptide are 
described.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.9430
PMID: 16786509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]