---
reference_id: "PMID:30144040"
title: The potential role for infections in the pathogenesis of autoimmune Addison's disease.
authors:
- Hellesen A
- Bratland E
journal: Clin Exp Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/cei.13207
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The potential role for infections in the pathogenesis of autoimmune Addison's disease.
**Authors:** Hellesen A, Bratland E
**Journal:** Clin Exp Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cei.13207](https://doi.org/10.1111/cei.13207)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2019 Jan;195(1):52-63. doi: 10.1111/cei.13207. Epub 2018 Sep
 30.

The potential role for infections in the pathogenesis of autoimmune Addison's 
disease.

Hellesen A(1)(2), Bratland E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)K.G. Jebsen Senter for Autoimmune Sykdommer, University of Bergen, Bergen, 
Norway.

Autoimmune Addison's disease (AAD), or primary adrenocortical insufficiency, is 
a classical organ-specific autoimmune disease with 160 years of history. AAD is 
remarkably homogeneous with one major dominant self-antigen, the cytochrome P450 
21-hydroxylase enzyme, which is targeted by both autoantibodies and autoreactive 
T cells. Like most autoimmune diseases, AAD is thought to be caused by an 
unfortunate combination of genetic and environmental factors. While the number 
of genetic associations with AAD is increasing, almost nothing is known about 
environmental factors. A major environmental factor commonly proposed for 
autoimmune diseases, based partly on experimental and clinical data and partly 
on shared pathways between anti-viral immunity and autoimmunity, is viral 
infections. However, there are few reports associating viral infections to AAD, 
and it has proved difficult to establish which immunological processes that 
could link any viral infection with the initiation or progression of AAD. In 
this review, we will summarize the current knowledge on the underlying 
mechanisms of AAD and take a closer look on the potential involvement of 
viruses.

© 2018 British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.13207
PMCID: PMC6300649
PMID: 30144040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]