---
reference_id: "PMID:37084150"
title: Autonomic nervous system disorders in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Koutsouraki E
- Theodoros K
- Eleni G
- Marianna K
- Areti N
- Ariadni K
- Dimitrios M
journal: J Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-023-11725-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autonomic nervous system disorders in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Koutsouraki E, Theodoros K, Eleni G, Marianna K, Areti N, Ariadni K, Dimitrios M
**Journal:** J Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-023-11725-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-023-11725-y)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2023 Aug;270(8):3703-3713. doi: 10.1007/s00415-023-11725-y. Epub
2023  Apr 21.

Autonomic nervous system disorders in multiple sclerosis.

Koutsouraki E(1), Theodoros K(2), Eleni G(2), Marianna K(2), Areti N(2), Ariadni 
K(3), Dimitrios M(2).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Neurology, AHEPA University Hospital, Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. efrosink@gmail.com.
(2)Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Nursing School, International University of Greece, Sindos, Thessaloniki, 
Greece.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic progressive demyelinating disease of the 
central nervous system (CNS), which also affects the autonomic nervous system 
(ANS). Manifestations of MS in the ANS include urological, sexual, 
gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and thermoregulatory disorders as well as 
increased fatigue. These problems are common yet are often underestimated due to 
the non-specificity of the symptoms and the limited evaluation of the ANS in the 
usual clinical practice. Most of these symptoms seem to be related to localized 
lesions in the CNS. However, the mechanisms by which these disorders are caused 
in MS have not been fully investigated, thus preventing any focused etiological 
treatment. The most common disorders of the ANS in MS represent a challenge for 
clinicians due to the variability of the clinical picture and our minimal data 
on their diagnosis and treatment. Early diagnosis and initiation of 
individualized treatment regimens, often in need of multiple approaches, seem to 
yield the best results in managing ANS dysfunction in MS patients.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-023-11725-y
PMID: 37084150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]