---
reference_id: "PMID:36730654"
title: "The Influence of Coexisting Familial Mediterranean Fever on Crohn's Disease: Data From an FMF Endemic Area."
authors:
- Kilincalp S
- Yuksel I
journal: J Clin Gastroenterol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MCG.0000000000001798
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Influence of Coexisting Familial Mediterranean Fever on Crohn's Disease: Data From an FMF Endemic Area.
**Authors:** Kilincalp S, Yuksel I
**Journal:** J Clin Gastroenterol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCG.0000000000001798](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCG.0000000000001798)

## Content

1. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2024 Jan 1;58(1):71-75. doi:
10.1097/MCG.0000000000001798.

The Influence of Coexisting Familial Mediterranean Fever on Crohn's Disease: 
Data From an FMF Endemic Area.

Kilincalp S(1), Yuksel I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Gothenburg University, Ostra Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Yildirim Beyazit University School of 
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

GOAL: The goal of this study was to evaluate the impact of coexisting familial 
Mediterranean fever (FMF) on Crohn's disease (CD) patients' phenotype and 
disease course in an endemic region for FMF.
BACKGROUND: CD and FMF are inflammatory diseases characterized by recurrent 
abdominal pain and fever attacks. The impact of coexisting FMF on CD patients' 
phenotype and disease course is currently unknown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We reviewed the medical records of 210 adult CD patients 
who were regularly followed up at a tertiary gastroenterology clinic between 
November 2006 and April 2018. The patients were divided into FMF positive 
(CD-FMF) and FMF negative (CD-control) groups. The severity of CD was assessed 
by the rate of hospitalization because of CD, the need for biological therapy, 
and whether surgery was performed for CD.
RESULTS: Eight (3.8%) of 210 CD patients have concomitant FMF, which is 35 to 40 
times higher than expected in an endemic region for FMF. Baseline demographic 
parameters, location/behavior of the CD, and initial therapeutic regimens were 
similar between the 2 groups. The prevalence of peripheral arthritis was 
significantly higher in CD-FMF group (37.5% vs. 10.4%, respectively, P =0.04). A 
significantly greater proportion of the CD-FMF patients had received biological 
therapy (50% vs. 11.9%; P =0.012). Steroid dependence and CD-related 
hospitalization rates in the CD-FMF group were relatively higher but were not 
statistically significant (37.5% vs. 15.3 and 62.5% vs. 41.1%).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that the disease course of CD tends to be 
more severe in patients with coexisting FMF.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MCG.0000000000001798
PMID: 36730654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]