---
reference_id: PMID:31982565
title: Macrophages regulate the progression of osteoarthritis.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Cai D
- Bai X
journal: Osteoarthritis Cartilage
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2020.01.007
keywords:
- "Chondrocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Inflammation/immunology
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/metabolism
- Macrophage Activation/immunology
- Macrophages/immunology
- Matrix Metalloproteinases/metabolism
- "Osteoarthritis/immunology, physiopathology"
- Paracrine Communication
- Phenotype
- Synovial Membrane/immunology
- Synovitis/immunology
- Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Macrophages regulate the progression of osteoarthritis.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Cai D, Bai X
**Journal:** Osteoarthritis Cartilage (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.joca.2020.01.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2020.01.007)

## Content

1. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2020 May;28(5):555-561. doi: 
10.1016/j.joca.2020.01.007. Epub 2020 Jan 23.

Macrophages regulate the progression of osteoarthritis.

Zhang H(1), Cai D(2), Bai X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Orthopedic Hospital of Guangdong Province, Academy 
of Orthopedics·Guangdong Province, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Bone 
and Joint Degenerative Diseases, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, 510280, China. Electronic address: 
zhhy0704@126.com.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Orthopedic Hospital of Guangdong Province, Academy 
of Orthopedics·Guangdong Province, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Bone 
and Joint Degenerative Diseases, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, 510280, China. Electronic address: 
cdz@smu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, Orthopedic Hospital of Guangdong Province, Academy 
of Orthopedics·Guangdong Province, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Bone 
and Joint Degenerative Diseases, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, 510280, China; Key Laboratory of Mental Health of 
the Ministry of Education, Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515, Guangdong, China; 
Guangzhou Regenerative Medicine and Health Guangdong Laboratory, 510005, 
Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: baixc15@smu.edu.cn.

OA is now well accepted as a low-grade inflammatory disease affecting the whole 
joint. In addition to mechanical loading, inflammation (particularly synovitis), 
contributes significantly to OA. Synovial macrophages act as immune cells and 
are of critical importance in the symptomology and structural progression of OA. 
Activated macrophages are regulated by mTOR, NF-κB, JNK, PI3K/Akt and other 
signaling pathways, and are polarized into either M1 or M2 subtypes in OA 
synovial tissues, synovial fluid, and peripheral blood. The activation state and 
the M1/M2 ratio is highly associated with OA severity. Aside from autocrine 
interactions, paracrine interactions between macrophages and chondrocytes play a 
vital role in the initiation and development of OA by secreting inflammatory 
cytokines, growth factors, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitor 
of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), which lead to subsequent cartilage degradation 
and destruction. Treatments targeting synovial macrophages relieve pain, and 
protect from synovitis, cartilage damage, and osteophyte formation during OA 
development. Macrophage reprogramming of transformation from the M1 to M2 
subtype, more than a decrease in the quantity of activated macrophages, appears 
to be an effective treatment option for OA. This review provides a broad 
understanding of the contributions of polarized macrophages to joint health and 
disease. Multifunctional agents with immunomodulatory effects on macrophage 
reprogramming can skew the inflammatory microenvironment towards a 
pro-chondrogenic atmosphere, and are thus, potential therapeutic options for the 
treatment of OA and other immune diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joca.2020.01.007
PMID: 31982565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]