---
reference_id: "PMID:11941370"
title: "Mutation of ALMS1, a large gene with a tandem repeat encoding 47 amino acids, causes Alström syndrome."
authors:
- Hearn T
- Renforth GL
- Spalluto C
- Hanley NA
- Piper K
- Brickwood S
- White C
- Connolly V
- Taylor JF
- Russell-Eggitt I
- Bonneau D
- Walker M
- Wilson DI
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/ng874
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cardiomyopathies/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2/genetics"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/genetics"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Syndrome
- Tandem Repeat Sequences
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of ALMS1, a large gene with a tandem repeat encoding 47 amino acids, causes Alström syndrome.
**Authors:** Hearn T, Renforth GL, Spalluto C, Hanley NA, Piper K, Brickwood S, White C, Connolly V, Taylor JF, Russell-Eggitt I, Bonneau D, Walker M, Wilson DI
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng874](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng874)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2002 May;31(1):79-83. doi: 10.1038/ng874. Epub 2002 Apr 8.

Mutation of ALMS1, a large gene with a tandem repeat encoding 47 amino acids,
causes Alström syndrome.

Hearn T(1), Renforth GL, Spalluto C, Hanley NA, Piper K, Brickwood S, White C,
Connolly V, Taylor JF, Russell-Eggitt I, Bonneau D, Walker M, Wilson DI.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Southampton University, The Duthie Building,
Southampton General Hospital, Tremona Road, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.

Alström syndrome (OMIM 203800) is an autosomal recessive disease, characterized
by cone-rod retinal dystrophy, cardiomyopathy and type 2 diabetes mellitus, that
has been mapped to chromosome 2p13 (refs 1-5). We have studied an individual
with Alström syndrome carrying a familial balanced reciprocal chromosome
translocation (46, XY,t(2;11)(p13;q21)mat) involving the previously implicated
critical region. We postulated that this individual was a compound heterozygote,
carrying one copy of a gene disrupted by the translocation and the other copy
disrupted by an intragenic mutation. We mapped the 2p13 breakpoint on the
maternal allele to a genomic fragment of 1.7 kb which contains exon 4 and the
start of exon 5 of a newly discovered gene (ALMS1); we detected a frameshift
mutation in the paternal copy of the gene. The 12.9-kb transcript of ALMS1
encodes a protein of 4,169 amino acids whose function is unknown. The protein
contains a large tandem-repeat domain comprising 34 imperfect repetitions of 47
amino acids. We have detected six different mutations (two nonsense and four
frameshift mutations causing premature stop codons) in seven families,
confirming that ALMS1 is the gene underlying Alström syndrome. We believe that
ALMS1 is the first human disease gene characterized by autosomal recessive
inheritance to be identified as a result of a balanced reciprocal translocation.

DOI: 10.1038/ng874
PMID: 11941370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
