---
reference_id: "PMID:20301487"
title: Smith-Magenis Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Smith ACM
- Berens J
- Boyd KE
- Brennan C
- Gropman A
- Haas-Givler B
- Vlangos C
- Foster R
- Franciskovich R
- Girirajan S
- Raitano Lee N
- Taylor C
- Turnacioglu SO
- Elsea SH
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smith-Magenis Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Smith ACM, Berens J, Boyd KE, Brennan C, Gropman A, Haas-Givler B, Vlangos C, Foster R, Franciskovich R, Girirajan S, Raitano Lee N, Taylor C, Turnacioglu SO, Elsea SH

## Content

1. Smith-Magenis Syndrome.

Smith ACM(1)(2), Berens J(3), Boyd KE(4), Brennan C(5), Gropman A(6), 
Haas-Givler B(7), Vlangos C(8), Foster R(9), Franciskovich R(10), Girirajan 
S(11), Raitano Lee N(12), Taylor C(13), Turnacioglu SO(14), Elsea SH(10).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Oct 22 [updated 2026 Apr 2].

Author information:
(1)Chair Emeritus, PRISMS Professional Advisory Board
(2)Head, SMS Research Team, Office of the Clinical Director, National Human 
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(3)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
(4)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Neurosciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
(5)Speech, Language, & Hearing Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
Colorado
(6)Center for Experimental Neurotherapeutics, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee
(7)Autism & Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger Lewisburg, Lewisburg, 
Pennsylvania
(8)Tempus AI, Chicago, Illinois
(9)Department of Psychology, St Louis Children's Hospital, St Louis, Missouri
(10)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas
(11)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, Pennsylvania
(12)Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(13)Geisinger Lewisburg, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania
(14)Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is characterized by 
distinctive physical features (particularly coarse facial features that progress 
with age), developmental delay, cognitive impairment, behavioral abnormalities, 
sleep disturbances, and childhood-onset abdominal obesity. Infants have feeding 
difficulties, failure to thrive, hypotonia, hyporeflexia, prolonged napping or 
need to be awakened for feeds, and generalized lethargy. Most individuals 
function in the mild-to-moderate range of intellectual disability. Behavioral 
manifestations, including significant sleep disturbances, stereotypies, and 
maladaptive and self-injurious behaviors, are generally not recognized until age 
18 months or older and continue to change until adulthood. Sensory issues are 
frequently noted, including avoidant behavior and repetitive seeking of specific 
textures, sounds, and experiences. Significant anxiety is common as are problems 
with executive function, including inattention, distractibility, hyperactivity, 
and impulsivity. Maladaptive behaviors include frequent outbursts / temper 
tantrums, attention-seeking behaviors, opposition, aggression, and 
self-injurious behaviors including self-hitting, self-biting, skin picking, 
inserting foreign objects into body orifices (polyembolokoilamania), and yanking 
fingernails and/or toenails (onychotillomania). Among the stereotypic behaviors 
described, the spasmodic upper body squeeze or "self-hug" seems to be highly 
associated with SMS. An underlying developmental asynchrony, specifically 
emotional maturity delayed beyond intellectual functioning, may also contribute 
to maladaptive behaviors in people with SMS.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SMS is established in a proband with 
suggestive clinical findings and either a heterozygous deletion of chromosome 
17p11.2 that includes RAI1 or a heterozygous intragenic RAI1 pathogenic variant 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Early childhood intervention programs; 
individualized special education for school-age children; speech-language, 
physical, occupational, and behavioral therapy and vocational training support 
later in life. Affected individuals may also benefit from monitored trials of 
psychotropic medication to increase attention and/or decrease hyperactivity, and 
therapeutic management of sleep disorders. Consider treating sleep disorders 
using acebutolol, melatonin, tasimelteon, and beta-1-adrenergic antagonists. 
Standard treatment for epilepsy, obesity, gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
constipation, hypercholesterolemia, palate anomalies, scoliosis, ophthalmologic 
issues, recurrent otitis media, hearing loss, cardiac anomalies, renal 
anomalies, immunodeficiency, hypothyroidism, and growth hormone deficiency. 
Individuals with a 17p11.2 deletion that includes FLCN may require management of 
features of Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHDS). Respite care and psychosocial 
support for family members are recommended. Surveillance: Annual 
multidisciplinary evaluations for general health and well-being and to plan for 
educational and vocational or other individualized interventions. In particular, 
periodic neurodevelopmental assessments and/or consultation with a developmental 
pediatrician to monitor progress and refer for additional services, evaluations, 
or support. School-age children should have periodic comprehensive evaluation to 
give input to the individualized education program. Annual otolaryngology, 
audiology, and ophthalmology evaluations. Measurement of growth parameters and 
nutritional status at each visit. Monitor for the development and/or progression 
of seizures and scoliosis. Annual fasting lipid profile, screening urinalysis 
for occult urinary tract infections, and thyroid function tests. Annual family 
psychosocial assessments are also recommended to assess support for caregivers 
and sibs. Repeat quantitative immunoglobulins / vaccine titers as clinically 
indicated. Surveillance in adulthood for complications of BHDS in those with a 
17p11.2 deletion that includes FLCN. Agents/circumstances to avoid: When 
starting a new medication, care should be taken to track sleep and behavior 
changes over several days or weeks to monitor for potential side effects (e.g., 
increased appetite, weight gain) and adverse reactions and/or to determine 
potential efficacy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SMS is an autosomal dominant disorder typically caused by a 
de novo deletion of chromosome 17p11.2 that includes RAI1 or an intragenic RAI1 
pathogenic variant. Almost all individuals reported to date with SMS whose 
biological parents have undergone genetic testing have the disorder as a result 
of a de novo genetic alteration. Rarely, individuals diagnosed with SMS have the 
disorder as the result of a 17p11.2 deletion or intragenic RAI1 pathogenic 
variant inherited from an unaffected or mildly affected mosaic parent; a 17p11.2 
deletion resulting from a structural chromosome rearrangement in a parent; or an 
intragenic RAI1 pathogenic variant inherited from a heterozygous affected 
parent. If neither parent is found to have the genetic alteration identified in 
the proband and parental chromosome analysis is normal, the recurrence risk to 
sibs is likely less than 1%. Once the SMS-related genetic alteration has been 
identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301487