---
reference_id: "PMID:6680124"
title: A rapid test for the identification of Vibrio cholerae in stools.
authors:
- Lam SY
journal: J Diarrhoeal Dis Res
year: '1983'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rapid test for the identification of Vibrio cholerae in stools.
**Authors:** Lam SY
**Journal:** J Diarrhoeal Dis Res (1983)

## Content

1. J Diarrhoeal Dis Res. 1983 Jun;1(2):87-9.

A rapid test for the identification of Vibrio cholerae in stools.

Lam SY.

PIP: A rapid test to identify Vibrio cholerae in stools has been developed. The 
test depends on the ability of the vibrios to multiply in a specially designed 
medium in the presence of other intestinal bacteria and to agglutinate against 
specific antisera directly. The culture medium consisted of 2 parts: agar and 
broth. Aseptic condition was not required. A 0.5 ml amount of a diluted stool 
suspension was added to an equal volume of molten agar in freeze drying glass 
ampules and left to set while 0.3 ml of broth was allowed to run down the ampule 
slowly to cover the agar surface. The ampule was incubated at 37 degrees C 
without shaking for 2 to 4 hours or until a slight turbidity of bacterial growth 
became visible. A drop of V. cholerae antiserum was then added and left to react 
at room temperature. In a cholera stool, agglutination appeared as a suspension 
of fine particles within 1 hour. In view of the simple technique, low cost, and 
easy preparation, the test can be performed in a laboratory with minimal 
facilities. Results obtained for the cholera and halophilic vibrios indicate a 
close correlation between the present method and the slide agglutination test.

PMID: 6680124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]