---
reference_id: "PMID:37449771"
title: Treatment response to pulmonary exacerbation in primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- Gatt D
- Shaw M
- Waters V
- Kritzinger F
- Solomon M
- Dell S
- Ratjen F
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.26599
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Retrospective Studies
- "Cystic Fibrosis/complications, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- Disease Progression
- Lung
- Forced Expiratory Volume
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Ciliary Motility Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment response to pulmonary exacerbation in primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Gatt D, Shaw M, Waters V, Kritzinger F, Solomon M, Dell S, Ratjen F
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.26599](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.26599)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2023 Oct;58(10):2857-2864. doi: 10.1002/ppul.26599. Epub
2023  Jul 14.

Treatment response to pulmonary exacerbation in primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Gatt D(1), Shaw M(2), Waters V(3), Kritzinger F(1), Solomon M(1), Dell S(4), 
Ratjen F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Translational Medicine, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Pulmonary exacerbation (Pex) are common in pediatric primary 
ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), however changes in forced expiratory volume in 1 s 
precent predicted (FEV1pp) during Pex are not well described.
AIM: To assess the evolution of FEV1pp during Pex and to define factors 
associated with failure to return to baseline lung function.
METHOD: This was a retrospective study of patients with PCD between 2010 and 
2022. Pex were defined as the presence of increased respiratory symptoms treated 
with intravenous (IV) antibiotics. The main outcomes were the changes in FEV1 
during therapy and the proportion of patients (responders) achieving ≥90% of 
baseline FEV1pp values at the end of admission.
RESULTS: The study included 52 Pex events in 28 children with PCD. The rate of 
responders was 32/41 (78%) at the end of admission. Nonresponse was associated 
with lower median body mass index (BMI) Z-score (-2.4 vs. -0.4, p < .01) and 
with a history of IV treated Pex in the previous year (p = .06). For the 22 Pex 
with available FEV1pp measurements at mid admission, the median relative and 
absolute improvement from admission to Day 7 was 9.1% and 6.2%, respectively (p- 
.001), and from Days 7 to 14 was 4.4% and 2.8%, respectively (p = .08).
CONCLUSION: In children with PCD treated with IV antibiotics, the majority of 
lung function recovery happens during the first week of IV therapy. Lower BMI 
was associated with nonresponse to therapy.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.26599
PMID: 37449771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]