---
reference_id: "PMID:37809096"
title: "The genetic and clinical characteristics and effects of Canakinumab on cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome: a large pediatric cohort study from China."
authors:
- Shu Z
- Zhang Y
- Han T
- Li Y
- Piao Y
- Sun F
- Ma J
- Mo W
- Sun J
- Chan KW
- Yang W
- Lau YL
- Mao H
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1267933
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetic and clinical characteristics and effects of Canakinumab on cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome: a large pediatric cohort study from China.
**Authors:** Shu Z, Zhang Y, Han T, Li Y, Piao Y, Sun F, Ma J, Mo W, Sun J, Chan KW, Yang W, Lau YL, Mao H
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1267933](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1267933)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Sep 21;14:1267933. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1267933. 
eCollection 2023.

The genetic and clinical characteristics and effects of Canakinumab on 
cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome: a large pediatric cohort study from 
China.

Shu Z(1), Zhang Y(1), Han T(1), Li Y(1), Piao Y(1), Sun F(1), Ma J(1), Mo W(1), 
Sun J(1), Chan KW(2), Yang W(2), Lau YL(2), Mao H(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Major 
Diseases in Children, Beijing Children's Hospital, National Center for 
Children's Health, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of 
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(3)Beijing Key Laboratory for Genetics of Birth Defects, Beijing, China.

Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS) comprises a group of disorders 
characterized by recurrent bouts of systemic inflammation related to 
overactivation of inflammasome. So far, neither large cases of the correlation 
between genotype and phenotype nor treatment strategies have been clearly stated 
in China. Here, we studied the clinical and genetic characteristics and their 
correlation from 30 CAPS patients in China. We identified the pathogenesis for 
novel mutations by activating NLRP3 inflammasome for peripheral cells with ATP 
plus LPS, compared characteristics with other case series, and analyzed 
treatment outcomes of these patients. The patients harbored 19 substitutions in 
NLRP3, and 8 of them were novel mutations. Among these novel mutations, 
percentages of severe musculoskeletal, ophthalmologic, and neurological symptoms 
were higher compared with other case serials. The correlation of phenotypes and 
their variants seemed different in our cases, such as T350M, S333G/I/R, and 
F311V (somatic mosaicism). Ten patients received Canakinumab treatment, which 
proved effective at alleviating musculoskeletal, neurological, auditory, visual 
manifestations, fever, and rash for 10-20 months follow-up. Patients treated 
with prednisolone or prednisolone plus thalidomide or methotrexate, tocilizumab, 
TNF inhibiting agents, and sirolimus achieved only partial remission. 
Importantly, we firstly identified somatic mosaicism mutation of F311V, which 
was severe. Our study extended the spectrum of genotype and phenotype and 
characteristics of their correlations and provided detailed responses to 
different treatment strategies. These data provide guidance for future diagnosis 
and management for CAPS.

Copyright © 2023 Shu, Zhang, Han, Li, Piao, Sun, Ma, Mo, Sun, Chan, Yang, Lau 
and Mao.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1267933
PMCID: PMC10551459
PMID: 37809096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.