---
reference_id: "PMID:40057613"
title: Identification of novel COL4A5 variants and prenatal diagnosis in three large families.
authors:
- Zeng B
- Yu Y
- Liu C
- Li X
- Lu Q
- Chen Z
- Chen J
- Zou J
- Yang B
- Liu Y
- Zou Y
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-92649-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Female
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, diagnosis"
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Male
- Pedigree
- Mutation
- Adult
- Pregnancy
- Genetic Testing
- Phenotype
- Genetic Association Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of novel COL4A5 variants and prenatal diagnosis in three large families.
**Authors:** Zeng B, Yu Y, Liu C, Li X, Lu Q, Chen Z, Chen J, Zou J, Yang B, Liu Y, Zou Y
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-025-92649-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-92649-7)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2025 Mar 8;15(1):8135. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-92649-7.

Identification of novel COL4A5 variants and prenatal diagnosis in three large
families.

Zeng B(#)(1), Yu Y(#)(2), Liu C(3), Li X(4), Lu Q(1), Chen Z(1), Chen J(5), Zou
J(1), Yang B(6), Liu Y(7), Zou Y(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Jiangxi Maternal and Child Health Hospital,
Nanchang, China.
(2)GongQing Institute of Science and Technology, Gongqing, China.
(3)Reproductive Medicine Cener, Tianjin Central Hospital of Gyngcology
Obstetrics, Tianjin, China.
(4)Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
(5)Reproductive Medicine Center, Jiangxi Maternal and Child Health Hospital,
Nanchang, China.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Jiangxi Maternal and Child Health Hospital,
Nanchang, China. yangbc1985@126.com.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Jiangxi Maternal and Child Health Hospital,
Nanchang, China. lyq0914@126.com.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, Jiangxi Maternal and Child Health Hospital,
Nanchang, China. zouyongyi@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Alport syndrome (AS) is the second-most frequent monogenic kidney disease and
85% of cases are caused by mutations in the genes of the α5 chains of collagen
type IV (COL4A5). The early diagnosis and treatment are essential for the
prognosis of AS. The clinical phenotypes of AS are very variable, which is
challenging to diagnose. Genetic diagnosis is sensitive and accurate, which can
recognize the affected individuals with mild phenotype for early diagnosis and
predict the age at renal failure for early treatment. In addition, genetic
testing will offer the available reproductive options, including prenatal
diagnosis and preimplantation genetic testing (PGT). In this study, three novel
COL4A5 variants (c.1834G > T, c.865G > A and c.1032 + 5G > A) were found. These
variants co-segregated with the disease in multiple affected family members. In
vitro splicing assay indicated that the c.1032 + 5G > A variant resulted in
aberrant splicing involving exon 18 skipping. The healthy babies without these
novel COL4A5 variants were born by PGT or prenatal diagnosis, respectively.
Three novel variants in COL4A5 gene can provide insights into further genetic
counseling or genotype-phenotype correlations.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-92649-7
PMCID: PMC11890855
PMID: 40057613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors
declare no competing interests. Ethical approval: The whole study was supervised
and approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committees of Jiangxi Maternal and
Child health Hospital, Nanchang, China. Consent to participate: After careful
perusal, written informed consent was signed by all individual participants
included in the study. Consent for publication: The parents of the patients
participating in this research provided written informed consent.
