---
reference_id: "PMID:20087360"
title: Abnormal neural oscillations and synchrony in schizophrenia.
authors:
- Uhlhaas PJ
- Singer W
journal: Nat Rev Neurosci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/nrn2774
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal neural oscillations and synchrony in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Uhlhaas PJ, Singer W
**Journal:** Nat Rev Neurosci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrn2774](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2774)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010 Feb;11(2):100-13. doi: 10.1038/nrn2774.

Abnormal neural oscillations and synchrony in schizophrenia.

Uhlhaas PJ(1), Singer W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, Max-Planck Institute for Brain Research, 
Frankfurt am Main, 60528, Germany. uhlhaas@mpihfrankfurt.mpg.de

Converging evidence from electrophysiological, physiological and anatomical 
studies suggests that abnormalities in the synchronized oscillatory activity of 
neurons may have a central role in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Neural 
oscillations are a fundamental mechanism for the establishment of precise 
temporal relationships between neuronal responses that are in turn relevant for 
memory, perception and consciousness. In patients with schizophrenia, the 
synchronization of beta- and gamma-band activity is abnormal, suggesting a 
crucial role for dysfunctional oscillations in the generation of the cognitive 
deficits and other symptoms of the disorder. Dysfunctional oscillations may 
arise owing to anomalies in the brain's rhythm-generating networks of GABA 
(gamma-aminobutyric acid) interneurons and in cortico-cortical connections.

DOI: 10.1038/nrn2774
PMID: 20087360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]