---
reference_id: "PMID:28275682"
title: "Celiac Disease: Role of the Epithelial Barrier."
authors:
- Schumann M
- Siegmund B
- Schulzke JD
- Fromm M
journal: Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2016.12.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Celiac Disease: Role of the Epithelial Barrier.
**Authors:** Schumann M, Siegmund B, Schulzke JD, Fromm M
**Journal:** Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcmgh.2016.12.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2016.12.006)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Jan 14;3(2):150-162. doi:
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2016.12.006. eCollection 2017 Mar.

Celiac Disease: Role of the Epithelial Barrier.

Schumann M(1), Siegmund B(2), Schulzke JD(3), Fromm M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Berlin
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany; Berlin-Brandenburg School for Regenerative
Therapies, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute of Clinical Physiology, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

In celiac disease (CD) a T-cell-mediated response to gluten is mounted in
genetically predisposed individuals, resulting in a malabsorptive enteropathy
histologically highlighted by villous atrophy and crypt hyperplasia. Recent data
point to the epithelial layer as an under-rated hot spot in celiac
pathophysiology to date. This overview summarizes current functional and genetic
evidence on the role of the epithelial barrier in CD, consisting of the cell
membranes and the apical junctional complex comprising sealing as well as ion
and water channel-forming tight junction proteins and the adherens junction.
Moreover, the underlying mechanisms are discussed, including apoptosis of
intestinal epithelial cells, biology of intestinal stem cells, alterations in
the apical junctional complex, transcytotic uptake of gluten peptides, and
possible implications of a defective epithelial polarity. Current research is
directed toward new treatment options for CD that are alternatives or
complementary therapeutics to a gluten-free diet. Thus, strategies to target an
altered epithelial barrier therapeutically also are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2016.12.006
PMCID: PMC5331784
PMID: 28275682
