---
reference_id: "PMID:34667088"
title: "SOX10: 20 years of phenotypic plurality and current understanding of its developmental function."
authors:
- Pingault V
- Zerad L
- Bertani-Torres W
- Bondurand N
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108105
keywords:
- Animals
- "Embryonic Development/genetics, physiology"
- Enteric Nervous System/physiology
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Hirschsprung Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Kallmann Syndrome/genetics
- Melanocytes/physiology
- Mutation
- Neoplasms/genetics
- "Neural Crest/embryology, physiology"
- Phenotype
- "SOXE Transcription Factors/genetics, physiology"
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SOX10: 20 years of phenotypic plurality and current understanding of its developmental function.
**Authors:** Pingault V, Zerad L, Bertani-Torres W, Bondurand N
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108105](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108105)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2022 Feb;59(2):105-114. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108105. Epub
2021 Oct 19.

SOX10: 20 years of phenotypic plurality and current understanding of its
developmental function.

Pingault V(1)(2), Zerad L(3), Bertani-Torres W(3), Bondurand N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Embryology and Genetics of Malformations, INSERM UMR 1163,
Université de Paris and Institut Imagine, Paris, France
veronique.pingault@inserm.fr nadege.bondurand@inserm.fr.
(2)Service de Génétique des Maladies Rares, AP-HP, Hopital Necker-Enfants
Malades, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Embryology and Genetics of Malformations, INSERM UMR 1163,
Université de Paris and Institut Imagine, Paris, France.

SOX10 belongs to a family of 20 SRY (sex-determining region Y)-related high
mobility group box-containing (SOX) proteins, most of which contribute to cell
type specification and differentiation of various lineages. The first clue that
SOX10 is essential for development, especially in the neural crest, came with
the discovery that heterozygous mutations occurring within and around SOX10
cause Waardenburg syndrome type 4. Since then, heterozygous mutations have been
reported in Waardenburg syndrome type 2 (Waardenburg syndrome type without
Hirschsprung disease), PCWH or PCW (peripheral demyelinating neuropathy, central
dysmyelination, Waardenburg syndrome, with or without Hirschsprung disease),
intestinal manifestations beyond Hirschsprung (ie, chronic intestinal
pseudo-obstruction), Kallmann syndrome and cancer. All of these diseases are
consistent with the regulatory role of SOX10 in various neural crest derivatives
(melanocytes, the enteric nervous system, Schwann cells and olfactory
ensheathing cells) and extraneural crest tissues (inner ear, oligodendrocytes).
The recent evolution of medical practice in constitutional genetics has led to
the identification of SOX10 variants in atypical contexts, such as isolated
hearing loss or neurodevelopmental disorders, making them more difficult to
classify in the absence of both a typical phenotype and specific expertise.
Here, we report novel mutations and review those that have already been
published and their functional consequences, along with current understanding of
SOX10 function in the affected cell types identified through in vivo and in
vitro models. We also discuss research options to increase our understanding of
the origin of the observed phenotypic variability and improve the diagnosis and
medical care of affected patients.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108105
PMCID: PMC8788258
PMID: 34667088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
