---
reference_id: "PMID:17339853"
title: "Drug insight: aminosalicylates for the treatment of IBD."
authors:
- Nielsen OH
- Munck LK
journal: Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/ncpgasthep0696
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug insight: aminosalicylates for the treatment of IBD.
**Authors:** Nielsen OH, Munck LK
**Journal:** Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncpgasthep0696](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncpgasthep0696)

## Content

1. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007 Mar;4(3):160-70. doi: 
10.1038/ncpgasthep0696.

Drug insight: aminosalicylates for the treatment of IBD.

Nielsen OH(1), Munck LK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology C112, Herlev Hospital, 75 Herlev Ringvej, 
DK-2730 Herlev, Denmark. ohn@dadlnet.dk

Sulfasalazine and mesalazine (also known as mesalamine; 5-aminosalicylic acid) 
preparations have for many years been used for the treatment of IBD (i.e. 
ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease), for both active disease and the control 
of remission. It has also been suggested that mesalazine is a chemoprophylactic 
agent that protects against the development of colorectal cancer. This Review 
focuses on the latest clinical evidence for the use of these aminosalicylates 
for the treatment of IBD, and concludes that sulfasalazine and mesalazine are 
useful for the treatment of both active and quiescent ulcerative colitis, 
whereas they have no clinical effect on either active or inactive Crohn's 
disease. Furthermore, evidence is lacking that mesalazine per se is a 
chemoprophylactic agent.

DOI: 10.1038/ncpgasthep0696
PMID: 17339853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]