---
reference_id: "PMID:29949392"
title: Rodent models of AKI-CKD transition.
authors:
- Fu Y
- Tang C
- Cai J
- Chen G
- Zhang D
- Dong Z
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00199.2018
keywords:
- Acute Kidney Injury/pathology
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Kidney/pathology
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/pathology"
- Reperfusion Injury/pathology
- Rodentia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rodent models of AKI-CKD transition.
**Authors:** Fu Y, Tang C, Cai J, Chen G, Zhang D, Dong Z
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.00199.2018](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00199.2018)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2018 Oct 1;315(4):F1098-F1106. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00199.2018. Epub 2018 Jun 27.

Rodent models of AKI-CKD transition.

Fu Y(1), Tang C(1), Cai J(1), Chen G(1), Zhang D(2), Dong Z(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, The Second Xiangya Hospital at Central South 
University , Changsha, Hunan , China.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, The Second Xiangya Hospital at Central 
South University , Changsha, Hunan , China.
(3)Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia at 
Augusta University and Charlie Norwood Veterans Affairs Medical Center , 
Augusta, Georgia.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a contributing factor in the development and 
progression of chronic kidney disease (CKD). Despite rapid progresses, the 
mechanism underlying AKI-CKD transition remains largely unclear. Animal models 
recapitulating this process are crucial to the research of the pathophysiology 
of AKI-CKD transition and the development of effective therapeutics. In this 
review, we present the commonly used rodent models of AKI-CKD transition, 
including bilateral ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI), unilateral IRI, 
unilateral IRI with contralateral nephrectomy, multiple episodes of IRI, and 
repeated treatment of low-dose cisplatin, diphtheria toxin, aristolochic acid, 
or folic acid. The main merits and pitfalls of these models are also discussed. 
This review provides helpful information for establishing reliable and 
clinically relevant models for studying post-AKI development of chronic renal 
pathologies and the progression to CKD.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00199.2018
PMCID: PMC6230729
PMID: 29949392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]