---
reference_id: "PMID:32105509"
title: "Efficacy of High-Dose Chemotherapy and Three-Dimensional Conformal Radiation for Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor: A Report From the Children's Oncology Group Trial ACNS0333."
authors:
- Reddy AT
- Strother DR
- Judkins AR
- Burger PC
- Pollack IF
- Krailo MD
- Buxton AB
- Williams-Hughes C
- Fouladi M
- Mahajan A
- Merchant TE
- Ho B
- Mazewski CM
- Lewis VA
- Gajjar A
- Vezina LG
- Booth TN
- Parsons KW
- Poss VL
- Zhou T
- Biegel JA
- Huang A
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.19.01776
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Prognosis
- "Radiotherapy, Conformal/methods"
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/genetics, mortality, therapy"
- SMARCB1 Protein/genetics
- "Teratoma/genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of High-Dose Chemotherapy and Three-Dimensional Conformal Radiation for Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor: A Report From the Children's Oncology Group Trial ACNS0333.
**Authors:** Reddy AT, Strother DR, Judkins AR, Burger PC, Pollack IF, Krailo MD, Buxton AB, Williams-Hughes C, Fouladi M, Mahajan A, Merchant TE, Ho B, Mazewski CM, Lewis VA, Gajjar A, Vezina LG, Booth TN, Parsons KW, Poss VL, Zhou T, Biegel JA, Huang A
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.19.01776](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.19.01776)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2020 Apr 10;38(11):1175-1185. doi: 10.1200/JCO.19.01776. Epub
2020  Feb 27.

Efficacy of High-Dose Chemotherapy and Three-Dimensional Conformal Radiation for
Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor: A Report From the Children's Oncology Group
Trial ACNS0333.

Reddy AT(1), Strother DR(2), Judkins AR(3), Burger PC(4), Pollack IF(5), Krailo
MD(6), Buxton AB(7), Williams-Hughes C(7), Fouladi M(8), Mahajan A(9), Merchant
TE(10), Ho B(11), Mazewski CM(12), Lewis VA(2), Gajjar A(13), Vezina LG(14),
Booth TN(15), Parsons KW(16), Poss VL(17), Zhou T(18), Biegel JA(3), Huang
A(19).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(2)Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles; Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
(5)Department Neurosurgery, UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.
(6)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA.
(7)Children's Oncology Group, Monrovia, CA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH.
(9)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(10)Department of Radiation Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN.
(11)Department of Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(12)Aflac Cancer & Blood Disorders Center, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta;
Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.
(13)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.
(14)Department of Radiology, The George Washington University School Medicine
and Health Sciences, Washington, DC.
(15)Department of Radiology, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX.
(16)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, UK.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL.
(18)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, California State University at
Long Beach, Long Beach, CA.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for Sick Children, Arthur and Sonia
Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2020 Oct 1;38(28):3353-3354. doi: 10.1200/JCO.20.01573.
    J Clin Oncol. 2020 Oct 1;38(28):3352. doi: 10.1200/JCO.20.00725.

PURPOSE: Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is an aggressive,
early-childhood brain tumor without standard effective treatment. To our
knowledge, we conducted the first AT/RT-specific cooperative group trial,
ACNS0333, to examine the efficacy and safety of intensive postoperative
chemotherapy and focal radiation to treat AT/RT.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients from birth to 22 years of age with AT/RT were
eligible. After surgery, they received 2 courses of multiagent chemotherapy,
followed by 3 courses of high-dose chemotherapy with peripheral blood stem cell
rescue and involved-field radiation therapy. Timing of radiation was based on
patient age and disease location and extent. Central testing of tumor and blood
for SMARCB1 status was mandated. Tumor molecular subclassification was performed
retrospectively. The primary analysis was event-free survival (EFS) for patients
< 36 months of age compared with a cooperative groups' historical cohort.
Although accrual was based on the therapeutic question, potential prognostic
factors, including age, tumor location, M stage, surgical resection, order of
therapy, germline status, and molecular subtype, were explored.
RESULTS: Of 65 evaluable patients, 54 were < 36 months of age. ACNS0333 therapy
significantly reduced the risk of EFS events in patients < 36 months of age
compared with the historical cohort (P < .0005; hazard rate, 0.43; 95% CI, 0.28
to 0.66). Four-year EFS and overall survival for the entire cohort were 37% (95%
CI, 25% to 49%) and 43% (95% CI, 31% to 55%), respectively. Timing of radiation
did not affect survival, and 91% of relapses occurred by 2 years from
enrollment. Treatment-related deaths occurred in 4 patients.
CONCLUSION: The ACNS0333 regimen dramatically improved survival compared with
historical therapies for patients with AT/RT. Clinical characteristics and
molecular subgrouping suggest prognostic differences. ACNS0333 results lay a
foundation on which to build future studies and incorporate testing of new
therapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.19.01776
PMCID: PMC7145589
PMID: 32105509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
