---
reference_id: "PMID:13129589"
title: "The floppy infant: contribution of genetic and metabolic disorders."
authors:
- Prasad AN
- Prasad C
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0387-7604(03)00066-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The floppy infant: contribution of genetic and metabolic disorders.
**Authors:** Prasad AN, Prasad C
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0387-7604(03)00066-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0387-7604(03)00066-4)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2003 Oct;25(7):457-76. doi: 10.1016/s0387-7604(03)00066-4.

The floppy infant: contribution of genetic and metabolic disorders.

Prasad AN(1), Prasad C.

Author information:
(1)Section of Pediatric Neurosciences, Department of Pediatrics and Child 
Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Manitoba, Canada. 
aprasad@hsc.mb.ca

The floppy infant syndrome is a well-recognized entity for pediatricians and 
neonatologists. The condition refers to an infant with generalized hypotonia 
presenting at birth or in early life. The diagnostic work up in many instances 
is often complex, and requires multidisciplinary assessment. Advances in 
genetics and neurosciences have lead to recognition of newer diagnostic entities 
(several congenital myopathies), and rapid molecular diagnosis is now possible 
for several conditions such as spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), congenital 
muscular dystrophies (CMD), several forms of congenital myopathies and 
congenital myotonic dystrophy. The focus of the present review is to describe 
the advances in our understanding in the genetic, metabolic basis of 
neurological disorders, as well as the investigative work up of the floppy 
infant. An algorithm for the systematic evaluation of infants with hypotonia is 
suggested for the practicing pediatrician/neonatologist.

DOI: 10.1016/s0387-7604(03)00066-4
PMID: 13129589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]