---
reference_id: "PMID:26948711"
title: "TRPV4 related scapuloperoneal spinal muscular atrophy: Report of an Italian family and review of the literature."
authors:
- Biasini F
- Portaro S
- Mazzeo A
- Vita G
- Fabrizi GM
- Taioli F
- Toscano A
- Rodolico C
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2016.02.010
keywords:
- Aged
- Early Diagnosis
- Family
- Humans
- Italy
- Male
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Point Mutation
- Skeleton/abnormalities
- TRPV Cation Channels/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRPV4 related scapuloperoneal spinal muscular atrophy: Report of an Italian family and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Biasini F, Portaro S, Mazzeo A, Vita G, Fabrizi GM, Taioli F, Toscano A, Rodolico C
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2016.02.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2016.02.010)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2016 Apr-May;26(4-5):312-5. doi:
10.1016/j.nmd.2016.02.010.  Epub 2016 Feb 23.

TRPV4 related scapuloperoneal spinal muscular atrophy: Report of an Italian 
family and review of the literature.

Biasini F(1), Portaro S(2), Mazzeo A(1), Vita G(1), Fabrizi GM(3), Taioli F(3), 
Toscano A(1), Rodolico C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(2)IRCCS Centro Neurolesi "Bonino Pulejo", Messina, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurological, Biomedical and Movement Sciences, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy; Department of Neurosciences, AOUI, Verona, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurosciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy. 
Electronic address: crodolico@unime.it.

Scapuloperoneal spinal muscular atrophy (SPSMA) is a rare autosomal dominant 
disorder caused by heterozygous mutations in the transient receptor potential 
cation channel (TRPV4) gene, characterized by progressive scapuloperoneal 
atrophy and weakness. Additional features, such as vocal cord paralysis, 
scoliosis and/or arthrogryposis, are likely to occur. We report the first 
Italian family with SPSMA, harboring the c.806G>A mutation in TRPV4 gene (p. 
R269H). The pattern of expression was variable: the father showed a mild 
muscular involvement, while the son presented at birth skeletal dysplasia and a 
progressive course. We reinforce the concept that the disease can be more severe 
in the following generations. The disorder should be considered in 
scapuloperoneal syndromes with autosomal dominant inheritance and a neurogenic 
pattern. The presence of skeletal deformities strongly supports this suspicion. 
An early diagnosis of SPSMA may be crucial in order to prevent the more severe 
congenital form.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2016.02.010
PMID: 26948711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]