---
reference_id: "PMID:37265597"
title: Establishing a natural history of X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.
authors:
- Acuna P
- Supnet-Wells ML
- Spencer NA
- de Guzman JK
- Russo M
- Hunt A
- Stephen C
- Go C
- Carr S
- Ganza NG
- Lagarde JB
- Begalan S
- Multhaupt-Buell T
- Aldykiewicz G
- Paul L
- Ozelius L
- Bragg DC
- Perry B
- Green JR
- Miller JW
- Sharma N
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcad106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishing a natural history of X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Acuna P, Supnet-Wells ML, Spencer NA, de Guzman JK, Russo M, Hunt A, Stephen C, Go C, Carr S, Ganza NG, Lagarde JB, Begalan S, Multhaupt-Buell T, Aldykiewicz G, Paul L, Ozelius L, Bragg DC, Perry B, Green JR, Miller JW, Sharma N
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcad106](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcad106)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2023 Apr 4;5(3):fcad106. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcad106. 
eCollection 2023.

Establishing a natural history of X-linked dystonia parkinsonism.

Acuna P(1)(2)(3), Supnet-Wells ML(1)(2), Spencer NA(4), de Guzman JK(5)(3), 
Russo M(6), Hunt A(1), Stephen C(1), Go C(5), Carr S(1), Ganza NG(3), Lagarde 
JB(3), Begalan S(3), Multhaupt-Buell T(1)(2), Aldykiewicz G(1)(2), Paul L(1), 
Ozelius L(1)(2), Bragg DC(1)(2), Perry B(7), Green JR(7), Miller JW(8), Sharma 
N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(2)The Collaborative Center for X-linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.
(3)Sunshine Care Foundation, The Health Centrum, Roxas City, Capiz 
5800Philippines.
(4)Department of Statistics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Jose Reyes Memorial Medical Center, Manila, Metro 
Manila, 1012Philippines.
(6)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(7)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, MGH Institute of Health 
Professions, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcad125.

X-linked dystonia parkinsonism is a neurodegenerative movement disorder that 
affects men whose mothers originate from the island of Panay, Philippines. 
Current evidence indicates that the most likely cause is an expansion in the 
TAF1 gene that may be amenable to treatment. To prepare for clinical trials of 
therapeutic candidates for X-linked dystonia parkinsonism, we focused on the 
identification of quantitative phenotypic measures that are most strongly 
associated with disease progression. Our main objective is to establish a 
comprehensive, quantitative assessment of movement dysfunction and bulbar motor 
impairments that are sensitive and specific to disease progression in persons 
with X-linked dystonia parkinsonism. These measures will set the stage for 
future treatment trials. We enrolled patients with X-linked dystonia 
parkinsonism and performed a comprehensive oromotor, speech and neurological 
assessment. Measurements included patient-reported questionnaires regarding 
daily living activities and both neurologist-rated movement scales and objective 
quantitative measures of bulbar function and nutritional status. Patients were 
followed for 18 months from the date of enrollment and evaluated every 6 months 
during that period. We analysed a total of 87 men: 29 were gene-positive and had 
symptoms at enrollment, seven were gene-positive and had no symptoms at 
enrollment and 51 were gene-negative. We identified measures that displayed a 
significant change over the study. We used principal variables analysis to 
identify a minimal battery of 21 measures that explains 67.3% of the variance 
over the course of the study. These measures included patient-reported, 
clinician-rated and objective quantitative outcomes that may serve as endpoints 
in future clinical trials.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcad106
PMCID: PMC10231801
PMID: 37265597

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.