---
reference_id: "PMID:39539104"
title: Multi-institutional Validation of the Interarytenoid Assessment Protocol for Pediatric Laryngeal Cleft.
authors:
- Siu JM
- Amin S
- Propst EJ
- Wolter NE
- Prager J
- Wyatt M
- Lawlor C
- Sidell D
- Mehta D
- Padia R
- Smith N
- Hartnick C
- Hart CK
- Wang X
- Johnson K
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/lary.31866
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multi-institutional Validation of the Interarytenoid Assessment Protocol for Pediatric Laryngeal Cleft.
**Authors:** Siu JM, Amin S, Propst EJ, Wolter NE, Prager J, Wyatt M, Lawlor C, Sidell D, Mehta D, Padia R, Smith N, Hartnick C, Hart CK, Wang X, Johnson K
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.31866](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.31866)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2025 Apr;135(4):1499-1505. doi: 10.1002/lary.31866. Epub 2024
Nov  13.

Multi-institutional Validation of the Interarytenoid Assessment Protocol for 
Pediatric Laryngeal Cleft.

Siu JM(1)(2), Amin S(2)(3), Propst EJ(1), Wolter NE(1), Prager J(4), Wyatt M(5), 
Lawlor C(6), Sidell D(7), Mehta D(8), Padia R(9), Smith N(10), Hartnick C(11), 
Hart CK(12), Wang X(1)(3), Johnson K(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, U.S.A.
(2)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Seattle 
Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, U.S.A.
(4)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Children's 
Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, U.S.A.
(5)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Great Ormond 
Street Hospital, London, UK.
(6)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Children's 
National Health Center, Washington, DC, U.S.A.
(7)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Stanford 
Pediatric Aerodigestive Center, Palo Alto, California, U.S.A.
(8)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, Texas, U.S.A.
(9)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, U.S.A.
(10)Division of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Children's of Alabama, 
Birmingham, Alabama, U.S.A.
(11)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, 
Massachusetts, U.S.A.
(12)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.

BACKGROUND: Current assessment techniques for determining whether a patient has 
normal interarytenoid anatomy, a deep interarytenoid notch, or a minor laryngeal 
cleft are highly variable. However, differentiating between these three entities 
is important, given it may distinguish whether a patient should be considered 
for surgical intervention. The Interarytenoid Assessment Protocol (IAAP) was 
developed to provide standardization of interarytenoid anatomy evaluations. We 
aimed to assess the reliability of the IAAP for assessment of interaytenoid 
mucosal height (IAMH) through a multi-institutional validation study.
METHODS: Reliability of the IAAP was assessed by 10 pediatric otolaryngologists 
all from different academic centers. 30 de-identified endoscopic videos of 
interarytenoid assessments were rated at two separate time points, 2 months 
apart. Intra-class correlation (ICC) coefficients with two-way models were used 
to evaluate inter- and intra-rater reliability.
RESULTS: Thirty endoscopic videos were collected for patients with a median 
(IQR) age of 4.9 years (59 months; range: 1 month to 20 years). On the first 
video assessment, inter-rater reliability was 0.74 (95% CI 0.63-0.84), and on 
the second video assessment, inter-rater reliability was 0.75 (95% CI 0.63-0.85) 
indicating strong inter-rater reliability. Overall intra-rater test-retest 
reliability was 0.75 (95% CI 0.69-0.79) indicating strong agreement. In almost 
half, 14 (46.6%) raters chose IAAP classification levels within 1 level of each 
other.
CONCLUSIONS: Multi-institutional validation of the IAAP demonstrates strong 
inter- and intra-rater reliability for assessment of IAMH when evaluated through 
pictorial analysis. Standardization of anatomical evaluations may improve our 
ability to perform more reliable outcomes studies of pediatric pharyngeal 
dysphagia in the future.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: NA Laryngoscope, 135:1499-1505, 2025.

© 2024 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.31866
PMID: 39539104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]