---
reference_id: "PMID:27504266"
title: Diagnosis of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency by metabolomic profiling in plasma reveals a phenotypic spectrum.
authors:
- Donti TR
- Cappuccio G
- Hubert L
- Neira J
- Atwal PS
- Miller MJ
- Cardon AL
- Sutton VR
- Porter BE
- Baumer FM
- Wangler MF
- Sun Q
- Emrick LT
- Elsea SH
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.07.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency by metabolomic profiling in plasma reveals a phenotypic spectrum.
**Authors:** Donti TR, Cappuccio G, Hubert L, Neira J, Atwal PS, Miller MJ, Cardon AL, Sutton VR, Porter BE, Baumer FM, Wangler MF, Sun Q, Emrick LT, Elsea SH
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.07.007)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2016 Jul 27;8:61-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.07.007.
eCollection 2016 Sep.

Diagnosis of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency by metabolomic profiling in
plasma reveals a phenotypic spectrum.

Donti TR(1), Cappuccio G(2), Hubert L(1), Neira J(1), Atwal PS(1), Miller MJ(1),
Cardon AL(3), Sutton VR(1), Porter BE(4), Baumer FM(4), Wangler MF(1), Sun Q(1),
Emrick LT(5), Elsea SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, United States; Department of Translational Medical Sciences,
Section of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(3)Section of Pediatric Neurology and Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, United States.
(4)Stanford Medical School, Stanford, CA, United States.
(5)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, United States; Section of Pediatric Neurology and Neuroscience,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive
neurometabolic disorder that presents with a broad-spectrum of neurological and
physiological symptoms. The ADSL gene produces an enzyme with binary molecular
roles in de novo purine synthesis and purine nucleotide recycling. The
biochemical phenotype of ADSL deficiency, accumulation of SAICAr and
succinyladenosine (S-Ado) in biofluids of affected individuals, serves as the
traditional target for diagnosis with targeted quantitative urine purine
analysis employed as the predominate method of detection. In this study, we
report the diagnosis of ADSL deficiency using an alternative method, untargeted
metabolomic profiling, an analytical scheme capable of generating
semi-quantitative z-score values for over 1000 unique compounds in a single
analysis of a specimen. Using this method to analyze plasma, we diagnosed ADSL
deficiency in four patients and confirmed these findings with targeted
quantitative biochemical analysis and molecular genetic testing. ADSL deficiency
is part of a large a group of neurometabolic disorders, with a wide range of
severity and sharing a broad differential diagnosis. This phenotypic similarity
among these many inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) has classically stood as a
hurdle in their initial diagnosis and subsequent treatment. The findings
presented here demonstrate the clinical utility of metabolomic profiling in the
diagnosis of ADSL deficiency and highlights the potential of this technology in
the diagnostic evaluation of individuals with neurologic phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.07.007
PMCID: PMC4969260
PMID: 27504266
