---
reference_id: "PMID:38982038"
title: Involvement of Kindlin-1 in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Carrasco G
- Stavrou I
- Treanor-Taylor M
- Beetham H
- Lee M
- Masalmeh R
- Carreras-Soldevila A
- Hardman D
- Bernabeu MO
- von Kriegsheim A
- Inman GJ
- Byron A
- Brunton VG
journal: Oncogenesis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41389-024-00526-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Involvement of Kindlin-1 in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Carrasco G, Stavrou I, Treanor-Taylor M, Beetham H, Lee M, Masalmeh R, Carreras-Soldevila A, Hardman D, Bernabeu MO, von Kriegsheim A, Inman GJ, Byron A, Brunton VG
**Journal:** Oncogenesis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41389-024-00526-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41389-024-00526-1)

## Content

1. Oncogenesis. 2024 Jul 9;13(1):24. doi: 10.1038/s41389-024-00526-1.

Involvement of Kindlin-1 in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.

Carrasco G(1), Stavrou I(2), Treanor-Taylor M(3), Beetham H(2), Lee M(2),
Masalmeh R(2), Carreras-Soldevila A(4), Hardman D(4), Bernabeu MO(4)(5), von
Kriegsheim A(2), Inman GJ(3)(6), Byron A(2)(7), Brunton VG(2).

Author information:
(1)Edinburgh Cancer Research, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH4 2XR, UK. giovana.carrasco@ed.ac.uk.
(2)Edinburgh Cancer Research, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH4 2XR, UK.
(3)CRUK Scotland Institute, Glasgow, G61 1BD, UK.
(4)Centre for Medical Informatics, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, EH16 4UX, UK.
(5)The Bayes Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH8 9BT, UK.
(6)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G61 1QH, UK.
(7)Division of Molecular and Cellular Function, School of Biological Sciences,
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.

Kindler syndrome (KS) is a rare genodermatosis resulting from loss-of-function
mutations in FERMT1, the gene that encodes Kindlin-1. KS patients have a high
propensity to develop aggressive and metastatic cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma (cSCC). Here we show in non-KS-associated patients that elevation of
FERMT1 expression is increased in actinic keratoses compared to normal skin,
with a further increase in cSCC supporting a pro-tumorigenic role in this
population. In contrast, we show that loss of Kindlin-1 leads to increased SCC
tumor growth in vivo and in 3D spheroids, which was associated with the
development of a hypoxic tumor environment and increased glycolysis. The
metalloproteinase Mmp13 was upregulated in Kindlin-1-depleted tumors, and
increased expression of MMP13 was responsible for driving increased invasion of
the Kindlin-1-depleted SCC cells. These results provide evidence that Kindlin-1
loss in SCC can promote invasion through the upregulation of MMP13, and offer
novel insights into how Kindlin-1 loss leads to the development of a hypoxic
environment that is permissive for tumor growth.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41389-024-00526-1
PMCID: PMC11233684
PMID: 38982038

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
