---
reference_id: "PMID:41334298"
title: "Unveiling the Hidden Threat: Late-Onset Retinoblastoma Mimicking Pars Planitis."
authors:
- Sedaghat A
- Naseripour M
- Mazloumi M
- Nowroozzadeh MH
- Mirshahi R
- Khamesi S
journal: J Curr Ophthalmol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4103/joco.joco_275_24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unveiling the Hidden Threat: Late-Onset Retinoblastoma Mimicking Pars Planitis.
**Authors:** Sedaghat A, Naseripour M, Mazloumi M, Nowroozzadeh MH, Mirshahi R, Khamesi S
**Journal:** J Curr Ophthalmol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4103/joco.joco_275_24](https://doi.org/10.4103/joco.joco_275_24)

## Content

1. J Curr Ophthalmol. 2025 Nov 14;37(1):137-140. doi: 10.4103/joco.joco_275_24. 
eCollection 2025 Jan-Mar.

Unveiling the Hidden Threat: Late-Onset Retinoblastoma Mimicking Pars Planitis.

Sedaghat A(1), Naseripour M(1)(2), Mazloumi M(1), Nowroozzadeh MH(3), Mirshahi 
R(1), Khamesi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Eye Research Center, The Five Senses Health Institute, Moheb Kowsar Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Research Center, Iran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Poostchi Clinic, Shiraz, Iran.

PURPOSE: To report the case of late-onset retinoblastoma (Rb) in a 13-year-old 
male masquerading as pars planitis.
METHODS: Case report.
RESULTS: The patient presented with an 8-month history of progressive visual 
loss in his right eye and a nonremarkable history of blunt trauma. He had been 
diagnosed with the impression of pars planitis versus organized vitreous 
hemorrhage in another center and was referred to us 6 months later. Fundus 
examination with indirect ophthalmoscopy at our center revealed a fundus mass 
with diffuse vitreous seeding. Hence, the diagnosis of late-onset Rb was made, 
and complete regression of the tumor was achieved using intra-arterial and 
intravitreal chemotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, Rb as a "masquerading syndrome" should be considered 
in the differential diagnosis of patients with atypical presentation of 
inflammatory diseases. Although these cases usually result in enucleation, with 
the help of new targeted treatment modalities, favorable outcome might be 
achievable despite the initial delay in diagnosis.

Copyright: © 2025 Journal of Current Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.4103/joco.joco_275_24
PMCID: PMC12668656
PMID: 41334298

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.