---
reference_id: "PMID:22791502"
title: TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias.
authors:
- Nishimura G
- Lausch E
- Savarirayan R
- Shiba M
- Spranger J
- Zabel B
- Ikegawa S
- Superti-Furga A
- Unger S
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31335
keywords:
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "TRPV Cation Channels/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias.
**Authors:** Nishimura G, Lausch E, Savarirayan R, Shiba M, Spranger J, Zabel B, Ikegawa S, Superti-Furga A, Unger S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31335](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31335)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2012 Aug 15;160C(3):190-204. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31335. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

TRPV4-associated skeletal dysplasias.

Nishimura G(1), Lausch E, Savarirayan R, Shiba M, Spranger J, Zabel B, Ikegawa 
S, Superti-Furga A, Unger S.

Author information:
(1)Génétique Médicale, CHUV, Av. Decker 2, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Dominant mutations in the TRPV4 gene result in a bone dysplasia family and form 
a continuous phenotypic spectrum that includes, in decreasing severity, lethal, 
and nonlethal metatropic dysplasia (MD), spondylometaphyseal dysplasia Kozlowski 
type (SMDK), and autosomal dominant brachyolmia. Several rare variant phenotypes 
that have some overlap but deviate in some ways from the general pattern have 
also been described. The known variant phenotypes are spondyloepiphyseal 
dysplasia Maroteaux type (Pseudo-Morquio type 2), parastremmatic dysplasia, and 
familial digital arthropathy with brachydactyly. Interestingly, different TRPV4 
mutations have been associated with dominantly inherited neurologic disorders 
such as congenital spinal muscular atrophy and hereditary motor and sensory 
neuropathy. Finally, a small number of patients have been identified in whom a 
TRPV4 mutation results in a phenotype combining skeletal dysplasia with 
peripheral neuropathy. The TRPV4 gene encodes a regulated calcium channel 
implicated in multiple and diverse cellular processes. Over 50 different TRPV4 
mutations have been reported, with two codons appearing to be mutational hot 
spots: P799 in exon 15, mostly associated with MD, and R594 in exon 11, 
associated with SMDK. While most pathogenic mutations tested so far result in 
activation of the calcium channel in vitro, the mechanisms through which TRPV4 
activation results in skeletal dysplasia and/or peripheral neuropathy remain 
unclear and the genotype-phenotype correlations in this group of disorders 
remains somewhat mysterious. Since the phenotypic expression of most mutations 
seems to be relatively constant, careful clinical and radiographic assessment is 
useful in directing molecular analysis.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31335
PMID: 22791502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]