---
reference_id: "PMID:39343472"
title: Clinical presentation and burden of ENPP1 deficiency in adults.
authors:
- Seefried L
journal: Arch Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00155-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pyrophosphatases/genetics, deficiency"
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Adult
- "Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Vascular Calcification/genetics, diagnosis"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical presentation and burden of ENPP1 deficiency in adults.
**Authors:** Seefried L
**Journal:** Arch Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00155-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00155-6)

## Content

1. Arch Pediatr. 2024 Sep;31(4S1):4S33-4S36. doi: 10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00155-6.

Clinical presentation and burden of ENPP1 deficiency in adults.

Seefried L(1).

Author information:
(1)Musculoskeletal Center Würzburg, University Hospital Würzburg, Brettreichstr.
11, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. Electronic address:
lothar.seefried@uni-wuerzburg.de.

While the clinical consequences of severe ENPP1 deficiency leading to the rare
disorders generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) and autosomal
recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 (ARHR2) are well defined and
understood, much less is known about how this evolves into adulthood and how
moderate ENPP1 deficiency can first manifest in adulthood. Moreover, growing
evidence substantiates an association of genetic variants in the ENPP1 gene with
a wide range of further clinical manifestations including early-onset
osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, and different forms of spinal ligament
calcifications, i.e., diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) and
ossification of the posterior/anterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL/OALL).
Furthermore, conditions with primarily extraskeletal signs and symptoms such as
Cole disease, coagulopathies, and metabolic syndrome can seemingly result from
ENPP1 variants. The causality and the pathophysiology behind these different
clinical presentations appear complex and require further research, especially
since the coincidence of these different phenotypes is rarely described and
available evidence suggests that part of the aforementioned manifestations may
result from ENPP1 effects beyond the catalytic activity of processing ATP to AMP
and inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi). Growing awareness of the additional
ENPP1-related manifestations across the lifespan will advance our understanding
of this complex condition and help to standardize diagnostic approaches and
develop individually tailored treatment concepts.

Copyright © 2024 French Society of Pediatrics. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.
All rights reserved. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00155-6
PMID: 39343472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest L. Seefried
declares competing interest for lectures and advice from Amgen, AM-Pharma,
Alexion, Biomarin, Chiesi, GedeonRichter, GSK/Haleon, Inozyme, Ipsen,
KyowaKirin, Mereo, Novartis, Stadapharm, Theramex, and Ultragenyx and research
grants to the Institution (University of Würzburg) from Alexion, Chiesi, and
Kyowa Kirin. This article is part of a supplement entitled Mineral metabolism
disorders: what if it was ENPP1 deficiency? published with institutional support
from Inozyme.
