---
reference_id: "PMID:39984714"
title: Single-cell multiomics reveals a gene regulatory circuit driving leukemia cell differentiation.
authors:
- Tian X
- Zhang L
- Xiang G
- Tang Y
- Zhu P
- Yu S
- Jiang F
- Wang S
- Wang J
- Dai Y
- Zheng D
- Wang J
- Weng X
- Wang S
- Tan Y
- Liu F
journal: Oncogene
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41388-025-03309-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cell Differentiation/genetics, drug effects"
- Single-Cell Analysis/methods
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- Tretinoin/pharmacology
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/genetics, pathology"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic/drug effects"
- HL-60 Cells
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- K562 Cells
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- CCAAT-Enhancer-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Multiomics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins
- Trans-Activators
- Proto-Oncogene Protein Spi-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell multiomics reveals a gene regulatory circuit driving leukemia cell differentiation.
**Authors:** Tian X, Zhang L, Xiang G, Tang Y, Zhu P, Yu S, Jiang F, Wang S, Wang J, Dai Y, Zheng D, Wang J, Weng X, Wang S, Tan Y, Liu F
**Journal:** Oncogene (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41388-025-03309-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41388-025-03309-z)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2025 May;44(19):1350-1360. doi: 10.1038/s41388-025-03309-z. Epub
2025  Feb 22.

Single-cell multiomics reveals a gene regulatory circuit driving leukemia cell
differentiation.

Tian X(#)(1), Zhang L(#)(1)(2), Xiang G(#)(1), Tang Y(1), Zhu P(1), Yu S(1),
Jiang F(1), Wang S(1), Wang J(1), Dai Y(1), Zheng D(3), Wang J(4), Weng X(1),
Wang S(1), Tan Y(1), Liu F(5).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics,
National Research Center for Translational Medicine (Shanghai), Ruijin Hospital
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China.
(3)School of Computer Science, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu, China.
(4)Clinical Laboratory, Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics,
National Research Center for Translational Medicine (Shanghai), Ruijin Hospital
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
lf12034@rjh.com.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Cancer differentiation therapy aims to induce the maturation of neoplastic
cells, but the mechanisms regulating cell fate decisions in oncogenic contexts
remain unclear. In this study, we integrated single-cell chromatin accessibility
and single-cell transcriptome analyses to explore the regulatory trajectories of
a classical PML/RARα+ acute promyeloid leukemia (APL) cell line (NB4) post
treatment by all-trans-retinoid acid (ATRA). Our findings indicated that ATRA
activated specific PML/RARα-target enhancers to trigger a regulatory circuit
composed of a positive feedforward gene regulatory circuit involving two
transcription factors, SPI1 and CEBPE. This regulatory circuit was both
necessary and sufficient to drive NB4 cells through an intermediate cell fate
decision point to initiate terminal granulopoiesis. Moreover, ectopic expression
of SPI1 and CEBPE promoted granulocytic differentiation in non-APL leukemia cell
lines HL60 and K562. Our study sheds mechanistic insights into the
differentiation trajectories induced by ATRA and illustrates a gene regulatory
circuit that could be widely applied to promote differentiation of leukemia
cells.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-025-03309-z
PMID: 39984714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests. Ethics approval and consent to participate: Patient samples
were obtained according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Informed consent was
obtained from all participants according to the procedures approved by the
Institutional Review Board of Ruijin Hospital, which is affiliated with Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (No. 2023-LLDS-355).
