---
reference_id: "PMID:24404629"
title: Familial Hypercholesterolemia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Ison HE
- Clarke SL
- Knowles JW
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Hypercholesterolemia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Ison HE, Clarke SL, Knowles JW

## Content

1. Familial Hypercholesterolemia.

Ison HE(1), Clarke SL(2), Knowles JW(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2014 Jan 2 [updated 2025 Jan 30].

Author information:
(1)Stanford Center for Inherited Cardiovascular Disease, Stanford, California
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine;, Department of 
Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is characterized by 
significantly elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) that leads to 
atherosclerotic plaque deposition in the coronary arteries and proximal aorta at 
an early age and increases the risk of premature cardiovascular events such as 
angina and myocardial infarction; stroke occurs more rarely. Xanthomas 
(cholesterol deposits in tendons) may be visible in the Achilles tendons or 
tendons of the hands and worsen with age as a result of extremely high 
cholesterol levels. Xanthelasmas (yellowish, waxy deposits) can occur around the 
eyelids. Individuals with FH may develop corneal arcus (white, gray, or blue 
opaque ring in the corneal margin as a result of cholesterol deposition) at a 
younger age than those without FH. Individuals with a more severe phenotype, 
often as a result of biallelic variants, can present with very significant 
elevations in LDL-C (>500 mg/dL), early-onset coronary artery disease (CAD; 
presenting as early as childhood in some), and calcific aortic valve disease.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: A clinical diagnosis of FH can be established in a proband 
with characteristic clinical features and significantly elevated LDL-C levels 
(typically >190 mg/dL in adults and >160 mg/dL in children). Three formal 
diagnostic criteria are used in Western countries. The molecular diagnosis of FH 
can be established by identification of heterozygous or biallelic pathogenic 
variants in APOB (variants that impair binding of LDL-C to the LDL receptor), 
LDLR, or PCSK9 (gain of function); or rarely, identification of biallelic 
pathogenic variants in LDLRAP1.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Adults: pharmacotherapy (statins with 
additional medications as needed) to reduce lipid levels; referral to a lipid 
specialist if necessary to reduce LDL-C levels; reduce CAD risk factors 
including cessation of smoking, regular physical activity, healthy diet, and 
weight control; treatment of hypertension; low-dose aspirin in high-risk 
individuals. Children: referral to a lipid specialist; diet and lifestyle 
modifications; statins can be used in children starting around age eight years. 
Prevention of primary manifestations: Heart-healthy diet (including reduced 
intake of saturated fat and increased intake of soluble fiber to 10-20 g/day); 
increased physical activity; no smoking. Surveillance: Monitor lipid levels from 
age two years; consider noninvasive imaging modalities in adults; identify 
modifiable risk factors (e.g., smoking, sedentary behavior, hypertension, 
diabetes, obesity). Individuals with severe FH (i.e., due to homozygous or 
compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in APOB, LDLR, or PCSK9) or autosomal 
recessive FH (due to homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in 
LDLRAP1) should be monitored with various imaging modalities (including 
echocardiogram, CT angiogram, and cardiac catheterization) as recommended. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Smoking, high intake of saturated and trans 
unsaturated fat, sedentary lifestyle, obesity, hypertension, and diabetes 
mellitus. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Early diagnosis and treatment of 
first-degree and second-degree relatives at risk for FH can reduce morbidity and 
mortality. The genetic status of at-risk family members can be clarified by 
either: (1) molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) has been 
identified in an affected family member; or (2) measurement of LDL-C 
concentration. Genetic testing is the preferred method for clarifying the 
diagnosis in at-risk family members, when possible. Pregnancy management: 
Pregnant women should incorporate all the recommended lifestyle changes, 
including low saturated fat intake, no smoking, and high dietary soluble fiber. 
Statins are contraindicated in pregnancy because of concerns for teratogenicity 
and should be discontinued prior to conception. Bile acid-binding resins (e.g., 
colesevelam) are generally considered safe (Class B for pregnancy), and LDL 
apheresis is also used occasionally if there is evidence of established CAD. Use 
of PCSK9 inhibitors, ezetimibe, lomitapide, and bempedoic acid during pregnancy 
has not been well studied.
GENETIC COUNSELING: APOB-, LDLR-, and PCSK9-related FH are inherited in an 
autosomal dominant manner. If an individual has biallelic (homozygous or 
compound heterozygous) pathogenic variants in one of these three genes – a 
condition referred to as homozygous FH (HoFH) – the presentation becomes more 
severe with earlier onset of features. Some individuals with FH are heterozygous 
for pathogenic variants in two different FH-related genes, which may have an 
additive effect on the severity of FH. Each child of an individual with a 
heterozygous pathogenic variant in APOB, LDLR, or PCSK9 has a 50% chance of 
inheriting the pathogenic variant and having FH. All children of an individual 
with homozygous FH will inherit a pathogenic variant and have FH. If the 
reproductive partner of a proband is heterozygous for an FH-related pathogenic 
variant in the same gene as the proband or a different FH-related gene, 
offspring are at risk of inheriting two pathogenic variants and having severe 
FH. LDLRAP1-related FH is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants and is 
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The parents of an individual with 
LDLRAP1-related FH are presumed to be heterozygous for one pathogenic variant. 
If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an LDLRAP1 pathogenic variant, 
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being a carrier, and a 25% chance of inheriting 
neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives requires prior identification of the LDLRAP1 pathogenic variants in 
the family. Once the FH-causing pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an 
affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are 
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 24404629