---
reference_id: "PMID:38011564"
title: Epigenetic switch reshapes epithelial progenitor cell signatures and drives inflammatory pathogenesis in hidradenitis suppurativa.
authors:
- Jin L
- Chen Y
- Muzaffar S
- Li C
- Mier-Aguilar CA
- Khan J
- Kashyap MP
- Liu S
- Srivastava R
- Deshane JS
- Townes TM
- Elewski BE
- Elmets CA
- Crossman DK
- Raman C
- Athar M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2315096120
keywords:
- Humans
- Hidradenitis Suppurativa/genetics
- Skin/metabolism
- Epigenomics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Stem Cells/metabolism
- Chromatin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic switch reshapes epithelial progenitor cell signatures and drives inflammatory pathogenesis in hidradenitis suppurativa.
**Authors:** Jin L, Chen Y, Muzaffar S, Li C, Mier-Aguilar CA, Khan J, Kashyap MP, Liu S, Srivastava R, Deshane JS, Townes TM, Elewski BE, Elmets CA, Crossman DK, Raman C, Athar M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2315096120](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2315096120)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Dec 5;120(49):e2315096120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2315096120. Epub 2023 Nov 27.

Epigenetic switch reshapes epithelial progenitor cell signatures and drives 
inflammatory pathogenesis in hidradenitis suppurativa.

Jin L(1)(2)(3), Chen Y(4), Muzaffar S(2)(3), Li C(5), Mier-Aguilar CA(2), Khan 
J(2)(3), Kashyap MP(2)(3), Liu S(6), Srivastava R(2)(3), Deshane JS(7), Townes 
TM(5), Elewski BE(2), Elmets CA(2), Crossman DK(4), Raman C(2), Athar 
M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Epigenomics and Translational Research in Inflammatory Skin 
Diseases, Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL 35294.
(2)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294.
(3)Research Center of Excellence in Arsenicals, Department of Dermatology, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 
35294.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294.
(6)Institutional Research Core Program, Flow Cytometry and Singe Cell Core, 
Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 
35294.
(7)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2024 Jan 2;121(1):e2319797121. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2319797121.

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a complex inflammatory skin disease with 
undefined mechanistic underpinnings. Here, we investigated HS epithelial cells 
and demonstrated that HS basal progenitors modulate their lineage restriction 
and give rise to pathogenic keratinocyte clones, resulting in epidermal 
hyperproliferation and dysregulated inflammation in HS. When comparing to 
healthy epithelial stem/progenitor cells, in HS, we identified changes in gene 
signatures that revolve around the mitotic cell cycle, DNA damage response and 
repair, as well as cell-cell adhesion and chromatin remodeling. By 
reconstructing cell differentiation trajectory and CellChat modeling, we 
identified a keratinocyte population specific to HS. This population is marked 
by S100A7/8/9 and KRT6 family members, triggering IL1, IL10, and complement 
inflammatory cascades. These signals, along with HS-specific proinflammatory 
cytokines and chemokines, contribute to the recruitment of certain immune cells 
during the disease progression. Furthermore, we revealed a previously 
uncharacterized role of S100A8 in regulating the local chromatin environment of 
target loci in HS keratinocytes. Through the integration of genomic and 
epigenomic datasets, we identified genome-wide chromatin rewiring alongside the 
switch of transcription factors (TFs), which mediated HS transcriptional 
profiles. Importantly, we identified numerous clinically relevant inflammatory 
enhancers and their coordinated TFs in HS basal CD49fhigh cells. The disruption 
of the S100A enhancer using the CRISPR/Cas9-mediated approach or the 
pharmacological inhibition of the interferon regulatory transcription factor 3 
(IRF3) efficiently reduced the production of HS-associated inflammatory 
regulators. Our study not only uncovers the plasticity of epidermal progenitor 
cells in HS but also elucidates the epigenetic mechanisms underlying HS 
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2315096120
PMCID: PMC10710069
PMID: 38011564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:The authors 
declare no competing interest.