---
reference_id: "PMID:31285321"
title: ANK2 autism mutation targeting giant ankyrin-B promotes axon branching and ectopic connectivity.
authors:
- Yang R
- Walder-Christensen KK
- Kim N
- Wu D
- Lorenzo DN
- Badea A
- Jiang YH
- Yin HH
- Wetsel WC
- Bennett V
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1904348116
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing
- Animals
- "Ankyrins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Behavior, Animal"
- "Cell Membrane/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Connectome
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Executive Function/physiology
- Gene Expression
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microtubules/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Mutation
- "Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule L1/genetics, metabolism"
- Neuronal Outgrowth
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Primary Cell Culture
- Social Behavior
- "Synapses/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ANK2 autism mutation targeting giant ankyrin-B promotes axon branching and ectopic connectivity.
**Authors:** Yang R, Walder-Christensen KK, Kim N, Wu D, Lorenzo DN, Badea A, Jiang YH, Yin HH, Wetsel WC, Bennett V
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1904348116](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1904348116)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Jul 23;116(30):15262-15271. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1904348116. Epub 2019 Jul 8.

ANK2 autism mutation targeting giant ankyrin-B promotes axon branching and
ectopic connectivity.

Yang R(1)(2), Walder-Christensen KK(3)(2), Kim N(4), Wu D(1)(2), Lorenzo DN(5),
Badea A(6)(7), Jiang YH(4)(8)(9), Yin HH(4), Wetsel WC(1)(8)(10), Bennett
V(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710;
Kathryn.Walder@duke.edu benne012@mc.duke.edu.
(4)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.
(6)Department of Radiology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710.
(8)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710.
(10)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University, Durham,
NC 27710.

Giant ankyrin-B (ankB) is a neurospecific alternatively spliced variant of ANK2,
a high-confidence autism spectrum disorder (ASD) gene. We report that a mouse
model for human ASD mutation of giant ankB exhibits increased axonal branching
in cultured neurons with ectopic CNS axon connectivity, as well as with a
transient increase in excitatory synapses during postnatal development. We
elucidate a mechanism normally limiting axon branching, whereby giant ankB
localizes to periodic axonal plasma membrane domains through L1 cell-adhesion
molecule protein, where it couples microtubules to the plasma membrane and
prevents microtubule entry into nascent axon branches. Giant ankB mutation or
deficiency results in a dominantly inherited impairment in selected
communicative and social behaviors combined with superior executive function.
Thus, gain of axon branching due to giant ankB-deficiency/mutation is a
candidate cellular mechanism to explain aberrant structural connectivity and
penetrant behavioral consequences in mice as well as humans bearing ASD-related
ANK2 mutations.

Copyright © 2019 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1904348116
PMCID: PMC6660793
PMID: 31285321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
