---
reference_id: "PMID:16500024"
title: New founding mutation in MSH2 associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome on the Island of Tenerife.
authors:
- Medina-Arana V
- Barrios Y
- Fernández-Peralta A
- Herrera M
- Chinea N
- Lorenzo N
- Jiménez A
- Martín-López JV
- González-Hermoso F
- Salido E
- González-Aguilera JJ
journal: Cancer Lett
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2005.12.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New founding mutation in MSH2 associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome on the Island of Tenerife.
**Authors:** Medina-Arana V, Barrios Y, Fernández-Peralta A, Herrera M, Chinea N, Lorenzo N, Jiménez A, Martín-López JV, González-Hermoso F, Salido E, González-Aguilera JJ
**Journal:** Cancer Lett (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canlet.2005.12.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2005.12.033)

## Content

1. Cancer Lett. 2006 Dec 8;244(2):268-73. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2005.12.033. Epub
 2006 Feb 24.

New founding mutation in MSH2 associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal 
cancer syndrome on the Island of Tenerife.

Medina-Arana V(1), Barrios Y, Fernández-Peralta A, Herrera M, Chinea N, Lorenzo 
N, Jiménez A, Martín-López JV, González-Hermoso F, Salido E, González-Aguilera 
JJ.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Cirugía General y Digestiva, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, 
Ofra-La Cuesta 38071 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.

Lynch syndrome or hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is a 
hereditary syndrome with genetic heterogeneity. The disease is caused by 
mutations or epigenetic silencing in DNA mismatch repair genes, MLH1, MSH2, 
MSH6, PMS2 and MLH3, although the vast majority of cases correspond to mutations 
of MLH1 and MSH2. We herein describe a nucleotide change, c.2063T>G in exon 13 
of the MSH2 gene, present in families that fulfill the Amsterdam criteria for 
Lynch syndrome and originate from northern Tenerife (Canary Islands-Spain). This 
mutation is expected to result in a nonconservative amino acid change, M688R, at 
the ATPase domain of the MSH2 protein. We found five large families with this 
mutation, and about half the individuals heterozygous for M688R developed 
malignancies by the sixth decade of life. In many cases analyzed, their tumors 
revealed loss of the normal allele, being homozygous for M688R. There is an 
evidence of historical isolation for the population studied, which could have 
favored a considerable genetic drift. The presence of the same mutation and the 
disease associated-haplotype conservation in families not directly related can 
be probably the consequence of a bottleneck in the founding of this population 
(rather than a relatively recent founding of the mutation).

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2005.12.033
PMID: 16500024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]