---
reference_id: "PMID:30471718"
title: Recessive DNAH9 Loss-of-Function Mutations Cause Laterality Defects and Subtle Respiratory Ciliary-Beating Defects.
authors:
- Loges NT
- Antony D
- Maver A
- Deardorff MA
- Güleç EY
- Gezdirici A
- Nöthe-Menchen T
- Höben IM
- Jelten L
- Frank D
- Werner C
- Tebbe J
- Wu K
- Goldmuntz E
- Čuturilo G
- Krock B
- Ritter A
- Hjeij R
- Bakey Z
- Pennekamp P
- Dworniczak B
- Brunner H
- Peterlin B
- Tanidir C
- Olbrich H
- Omran H
- Schmidts M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.10.020
keywords:
- Axonemal Dyneins/genetics
- Axoneme/genetics
- Cilia/genetics
- Ciliary Motility Disorders/genetics
- Dyneins/genetics
- Humans
- Kartagener Syndrome/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive DNAH9 Loss-of-Function Mutations Cause Laterality Defects and Subtle Respiratory Ciliary-Beating Defects.
**Authors:** Loges NT, Antony D, Maver A, Deardorff MA, Güleç EY, Gezdirici A, Nöthe-Menchen T, Höben IM, Jelten L, Frank D, Werner C, Tebbe J, Wu K, Goldmuntz E, Čuturilo G, Krock B, Ritter A, Hjeij R, Bakey Z, Pennekamp P, Dworniczak B, Brunner H, Peterlin B, Tanidir C, Olbrich H, Omran H, Schmidts M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.10.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.10.020)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2018 Dec 6;103(6):995-1008. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.10.020. 
Epub 2018 Nov 21.

Recessive DNAH9 Loss-of-Function Mutations Cause Laterality Defects and Subtle 
Respiratory Ciliary-Beating Defects.

Loges NT(1), Antony D(2), Maver A(3), Deardorff MA(4), Güleç EY(5), Gezdirici 
A(5), Nöthe-Menchen T(1), Höben IM(1), Jelten L(1), Frank D(1), Werner C(1), 
Tebbe J(1), Wu K(6), Goldmuntz E(7), Čuturilo G(8), Krock B(9), Ritter A(10), 
Hjeij R(1), Bakey Z(2), Pennekamp P(1), Dworniczak B(1), Brunner H(6), Peterlin 
B(3), Tanidir C(11), Olbrich H(1), Omran H(12), Schmidts M(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, University Hospital Muenster, 48149 
Muenster, Germany.
(2)Genome Research Division, Human Genetics Department, Radboud University 
Medical Center and Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Geert 
Grooteplein Zuid 10, 6525KL Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Center for Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg University Faculty 
of Medicine, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79112 Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Šlajmerjeva 4, 1000 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(4)Departments of Pediatrics and Pathology, The Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Laboratory Medicine, 
The Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Health Sciences, Kanuni Sultan 
Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, 34303 Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Genome Research Division, Human Genetics Department, Radboud University 
Medical Center and Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Geert 
Grooteplein Zuid 10, 6525KL Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(7)Departments of Pediatrics and Pathology, The Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Division of Human 
Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, University Children's Hospital, 11000 
Belgrade, Serbia.
(9)Division of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA; Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(10)Laboratory Medicine, The Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Division of Human Genetics, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(11)University of Health Sciences, Mehmet Akif Ersoy Thoracic and Cardiovascular 
Surgery Training and Research Hospital, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, 
34303 Istanbul, Turkey.
(12)Department of General Pediatrics, University Hospital Muenster, 48149 
Muenster, Germany. Electronic address: heymut.omran@ukmuenster.de.
(13)Genome Research Division, Human Genetics Department, Radboud University 
Medical Center and Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Geert 
Grooteplein Zuid 10, 6525KL Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Center for Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg University Faculty 
of Medicine, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79112 Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
miriam.schmidts@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Dysfunction of motile monocilia, altering the leftward flow at the embryonic 
node essential for determination of left-right body asymmetry, is a major cause 
of laterality defects. Laterality defects are also often associated with reduced 
mucociliary clearance caused by defective multiple motile cilia of the airway 
and are responsible for destructive airway disease. Outer dynein arms (ODAs) are 
essential for ciliary beat generation, and human respiratory cilia contain 
different ODA heavy chains (HCs): the panaxonemally distributed γ-HC DNAH5, 
proximally located β-HC DNAH11 (defining ODA type 1), and the distally localized 
β-HC DNAH9 (defining ODA type 2). Here we report loss-of-function mutations in 
DNAH9 in five independent families causing situs abnormalities associated with 
subtle respiratory ciliary dysfunction. Consistent with the observed subtle 
respiratory phenotype, high-speed video microscopy demonstrates distally 
impaired ciliary bending in DNAH9 mutant respiratory cilia. DNAH9-deficient 
cilia also lack other ODA components such as DNAH5, DNAI1, and DNAI2 from the 
distal axonemal compartment, demonstrating an essential role of DNAH9 for distal 
axonemal assembly of ODAs type 2. Yeast two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation 
analyses indicate interaction of DNAH9 with the ODA components DNAH5 and DNAI2 
as well as the ODA-docking complex component CCDC114. We further show that 
during ciliogenesis of respiratory cilia, first proximally located DNAH11 and 
then distally located DNAH9 is assembled in the axoneme. We propose that the 
β-HC paralogs DNAH9 and DNAH11 achieved specific functional roles for the 
distinct axonemal compartments during evolution with human DNAH9 function 
matching that of ancient β-HCs such as that of the unicellular Chlamydomonas 
reinhardtii.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.10.020
PMCID: PMC6288205
PMID: 30471718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]