---
reference_id: "PMID:36031441"
title: "Brain Structure in Acutely Underweight and Partially Weight-Restored Individuals With Anorexia Nervosa: A Coordinated Analysis by the ENIGMA Eating Disorders Working Group."
authors:
- Walton E
- Bernardoni F
- Batury VL
- Bahnsen K
- Larivière S
- Abbate-Daga G
- Andres-Perpiña S
- Bang L
- Bischoff-Grethe A
- Brooks SJ
- Campbell IC
- Cascino G
- Castro-Fornieles J
- Collantoni E
- "D'Agata F"
- Dahmen B
- Danner UN
- Favaro A
- Feusner JD
- Frank GKW
- Friederich HC
- Graner JL
- Herpertz-Dahlmann B
- Hess A
- Horndasch S
- Kaplan AS
- Kaufmann LK
- Kaye WH
- Khalsa SS
- LaBar KS
- Lavagnino L
- Lazaro L
- Manara R
- Miles AE
- Milos GF
- Monteleone AM
- Monteleone P
- Mwangi B
- "O'Daly O"
- Pariente J
- Roesch J
- Schmidt UH
- Seitz J
- Shott ME
- Simon JJ
- Smeets PAM
- Tamnes CK
- Tenconi E
- Thomopoulos SI
- van Elburg AA
- Voineskos AN
- von Polier GG
- Wierenga CE
- Zucker NL
- Jahanshad N
- King JA
- Thompson PM
- Berner LA
- Ehrlich S
journal: Biol Psychiatry
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2022.04.022
keywords:
- "Anorexia Nervosa/diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- Cerebral Cortex/diagnostic imaging
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Multicenter Studies as Topic
- Prospective Studies
- Thinness
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain Structure in Acutely Underweight and Partially Weight-Restored Individuals With Anorexia Nervosa: A Coordinated Analysis by the ENIGMA Eating Disorders Working Group.
**Authors:** Walton E, Bernardoni F, Batury VL, Bahnsen K, Larivière S, Abbate-Daga G, Andres-Perpiña S, Bang L, Bischoff-Grethe A, Brooks SJ, Campbell IC, Cascino G, Castro-Fornieles J, Collantoni E, D'Agata F, Dahmen B, Danner UN, Favaro A, Feusner JD, Frank GKW, Friederich HC, Graner JL, Herpertz-Dahlmann B, Hess A, Horndasch S, Kaplan AS, Kaufmann LK, Kaye WH, Khalsa SS, LaBar KS, Lavagnino L, Lazaro L, Manara R, Miles AE, Milos GF, Monteleone AM, Monteleone P, Mwangi B, O'Daly O, Pariente J, Roesch J, Schmidt UH, Seitz J, Shott ME, Simon JJ, Smeets PAM, Tamnes CK, Tenconi E, Thomopoulos SI, van Elburg AA, Voineskos AN, von Polier GG, Wierenga CE, Zucker NL, Jahanshad N, King JA, Thompson PM, Berner LA, Ehrlich S
**Journal:** Biol Psychiatry (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopsych.2022.04.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2022.04.022)

## Content

1. Biol Psychiatry. 2022 Nov 1;92(9):730-738. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2022.04.022.  Epub 2022 May 31.

Brain Structure in Acutely Underweight and Partially Weight-Restored Individuals
With Anorexia Nervosa: A Coordinated Analysis by the ENIGMA Eating Disorders
Working Group.

Walton E(1), Bernardoni F(2), Batury VL(2), Bahnsen K(2), Larivière S(3),
Abbate-Daga G(4), Andres-Perpiña S(5), Bang L(6), Bischoff-Grethe A(7), Brooks
SJ(8), Campbell IC(9), Cascino G(10), Castro-Fornieles J(5), Collantoni E(11),
D'Agata F(12), Dahmen B(13), Danner UN(14), Favaro A(15), Feusner JD(16), Frank
GKW(7), Friederich HC(17), Graner JL(18), Herpertz-Dahlmann B(13), Hess A(19),
Horndasch S(20), Kaplan AS(21), Kaufmann LK(22), Kaye WH(7), Khalsa SS(23),
LaBar KS(18), Lavagnino L(24), Lazaro L(5), Manara R(11), Miles AE(21), Milos
GF(25), Monteleone AM(26), Monteleone P(10), Mwangi B(24), O'Daly O(27),
Pariente J(28), Roesch J(29), Schmidt UH(9), Seitz J(13), Shott ME(7), Simon
JJ(17), Smeets PAM(30), Tamnes CK(31), Tenconi E(15), Thomopoulos SI(32), van
Elburg AA(14), Voineskos AN(33), von Polier GG(34), Wierenga CE(7), Zucker
NL(35), Jahanshad N(32), King JA(2), Thompson PM(32), Berner LA(36), Ehrlich
S(37).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.
(2)Translational Developmental Neuroscience Section, Division of Psychological
and Social Medicine and Developmental Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine,
Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(3)Multimodal Imaging and Connectome Analysis Laboratory, McConnell Brain
Imaging Centre, Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec.
(4)Eating Disorders Center for Treatment and Research, University of Turin,
Turin, Italy.
(5)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychology, Institut Clinic
de Neurociències, Hospital Clínic Universitari, Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August
Pi i Sunyer, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo; Regional Department for Eating
Disorders, Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital,
Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California; Eating Disorders Center for Treatment and Research, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, California.
(8)School of Psychology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Liverpool John Moores
University, Liverpool, United Kingdom; Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala
University, Sweden.
(9)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London,
London, United Kingdom; Eating Disorders Unit, Department of Psychological
Medicine, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(10)Section of Neurosciences, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry,
Scuola Medica Salernitana, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.
(11)Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(12)Department of Neuroscience, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(13)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, University Hospital Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule
Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(14)Altrecht Eating Disorders Rintveld, Altrecht Mental Health Institute, Zeist,
the Netherlands; Faculty of Social Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.
(15)Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, Padova, Italy; Padova
Neuroscience Center, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(16)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University
of California Los Angeles, California.
(17)Centre for Psychosocial Medicine, Department of General Internal Medicine
and Psychosomatics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(18)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
(19)Institute for Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen, Germany.
(20)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University Clinic Erlangen,
Erlangen, Germany.
(21)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(22)Department of Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich; Division of Neuropsychology, Department
of Psychology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(23)Laureate Institute for Brain Research, University of Tulsa, Tulsa, Oklahoma;
Oxley College of Health Sciences, University of Tulsa, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
(24)Louis A. Faillace, MD, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
McGovern Medical School, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston Texas.
(25)Department of Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry and Psychosomatics, University
Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich.
(26)Department of Psychiatry, University of Campania L. Vanvitelli, Naples,
Italy.
(27)Centre for Neuroimaging Studies, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom; Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College
London, London, United Kingdom.
(28)Magnetic Resonance Image Core Facility, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.
(29)Department of Neuroradiology, University Clinic Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(30)UMC Utrecht Brain Center, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands;
Division of Human Nutrition and Health, Wageningen University, Wageningen, the
Netherlands.
(31)Norwegian Centre for Mental Disorders Research, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; PROMENTA Research Center, Department
of Psychology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Department of Psychiatric
Research, Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(32)Imaging Genetics Center, Mark and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics
Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Marina
del Rey, California.
(33)Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(34)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, University Hospital Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule
Aachen, Aachen, Germany; Institute for Neuroscience and Medicine: Brain and
Behaviour, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, Germany; Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University,
Frankfurt, Germany.
(35)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina.
(36)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York.
(37)Translational Developmental Neuroscience Section, Division of Psychological
and Social Medicine and Developmental Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine,
Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany; Eating Disorders Research and
Treatment Center, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of
Medicine, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. Electronic address:
transden.lab@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2022 Nov 1;92(9):e41-e42. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2022.07.026.

BACKGROUND: The pattern of structural brain abnormalities in anorexia nervosa
(AN) is still not well understood. While several studies report substantial
deficits in gray matter volume and cortical thickness in acutely underweight
patients, others find no differences, or even increases in patients compared
with healthy control subjects. Recent weight regain before scanning may explain
some of this heterogeneity. To clarify the extent, magnitude, and dependencies
of gray matter changes in AN, we conducted a prospective, coordinated
meta-analysis of multicenter neuroimaging data.
METHODS: We analyzed T1-weighted structural magnetic resonance imaging scans
assessed with standardized methods from 685 female patients with AN and 963
female healthy control subjects across 22 sites worldwide. In addition to a
case-control comparison, we conducted a 3-group analysis comparing healthy
control subjects with acutely underweight AN patients (n = 466) and partially
weight-restored patients in treatment (n = 251).
RESULTS: In AN, reductions in cortical thickness, subcortical volumes, and, to a
lesser extent, cortical surface area were sizable (Cohen's d up to 0.95),
widespread, and colocalized with hub regions. Highlighting the effects of
undernutrition, these deficits were associated with lower body mass index in the
AN sample and were less pronounced in partially weight-restored patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The effect sizes observed for cortical thickness deficits in acute
AN are the largest of any psychiatric disorder investigated in the ENIGMA
(Enhancing Neuro Imaging Genetics through Meta Analysis) Consortium to date.
These results confirm the importance of considering weight loss and renutrition
in biomedical research on AN and underscore the importance of treatment
engagement to prevent potentially long-lasting structural brain changes in this
population.

Copyright © 2022 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2022.04.022
PMCID: PMC12145862
PMID: 36031441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors report no conflict of
interest.
