---
reference_id: "PMID:33121223"
title: "Sialidosis Type I without a Cherry Red Spot- Is There a Genetic Basis?"
authors:
- Neeraja K
- Holla VV
- Prasad S
- Surisetti BK
- Rakesh K
- Kamble N
- Yadav R
- Pal PK
journal: J Mov Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.14802/jmd.20083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sialidosis Type I without a Cherry Red Spot- Is There a Genetic Basis?
**Authors:** Neeraja K, Holla VV, Prasad S, Surisetti BK, Rakesh K, Kamble N, Yadav R, Pal PK
**Journal:** J Mov Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.14802/jmd.20083](https://doi.org/10.14802/jmd.20083)

## Content

1. J Mov Disord. 2021 Jan;14(1):65-69. doi: 10.14802/jmd.20083. Epub 2020 Oct 31.

Sialidosis Type I without a Cherry Red Spot- Is There a Genetic Basis?

Neeraja K(1), Holla VV(1), Prasad S(1)(2), Surisetti BK(1), Rakesh K(1), Kamble
N(1), Yadav R(1), Pal PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and
Neurosciences, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, National Institute of Mental Health and
Neurosciences, Karnataka, India.

Sialidosis is an inborn error of metabolism due to a defect in the NEU1 gene and
manifests as two phenotypes: mild type I and severe type II. The cherry red spot
(CRS) is a characteristic feature in both types of sialidosis; reports of
sialidosis without a CRS are rare. We report two cases of genetically confirmed
sialidosis type I with a typical presentation of progressive cortical myoclonus
and ataxia but without the CRS. A previously reported homozygous pathogenic
variant p.Arg294Cys was detected in the first case, and a novel homozygous
pathogenic variant p.Arg305Pro was detected in the second case. Additionally, we
reviewed the literature describing cases with similar mutations to find a
genetic basis for the absence of a CRS. Milder mutation of both alleles detected
in both patients may be the reason for the absence of a CRS.

DOI: 10.14802/jmd.20083
PMCID: PMC7840231
PMID: 33121223

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have no
financial conflicts of interest.
