---
reference_id: "PMID:37722977"
title: Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors Have Comparable Efficacy with Platinum Chemotherapy in Patients with BRCA-positive Metastatic Castration-resistant Prostate Cancer. A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
authors:
- Fazekas T
- Széles ÁD
- Teutsch B
- Csizmarik A
- Vékony B
- Kói T
- Ács N
- Hegyi P
- Hadaschik B
- Nyirády P
- Szarvas T
journal: Eur Urol Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.euo.2023.09.001
keywords:
- Humans
- "Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant/drug therapy, pathology, mortality"
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Male
- Treatment Outcome
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors Have Comparable Efficacy with Platinum Chemotherapy in Patients with BRCA-positive Metastatic Castration-resistant Prostate Cancer. A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Fazekas T, Széles ÁD, Teutsch B, Csizmarik A, Vékony B, Kói T, Ács N, Hegyi P, Hadaschik B, Nyirády P, Szarvas T
**Journal:** Eur Urol Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.euo.2023.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euo.2023.09.001)

## Content

1. Eur Urol Oncol. 2024 Jun;7(3):365-375. doi: 10.1016/j.euo.2023.09.001. Epub
2023  Sep 16.

Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors Have Comparable Efficacy with Platinum
Chemotherapy in Patients with BRCA-positive Metastatic Castration-resistant
Prostate Cancer. A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Fazekas T(1), Széles ÁD(1), Teutsch B(2), Csizmarik A(3), Vékony B(3), Kói T(4),
Ács N(5), Hegyi P(6), Hadaschik B(7), Nyirády P(1), Szarvas T(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary; Centre for
Translational Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Centre for Translational Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary;
Institute for Translational Medicine, Medical School, University of Pécs, Pécs,
Hungary.
(3)Department of Urology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Centre for Translational Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary;
Department of Stochastics, Institute of Mathematics, Budapest University of
Technology and Economics, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Centre for Translational Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, Budapest,
Hungary.
(6)Centre for Translational Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary;
Institute for Translational Medicine, Medical School, University of Pécs, Pécs,
Hungary; Institute of Pancreatic Diseases, Semmelweis University, Budapest,
Hungary.
(7)Department of Urology, University of Duisburg-Essen and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK)-University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(8)Department of Urology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary; Department
of Urology, University of Duisburg-Essen and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK)-University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany. Electronic address:
sztibusz@gmail.com.

CONTEXT: Testing for mutations in Breast Cancer Gene 1/2 (BRCA) has emerged as a
novel decision-making tool for clinicians. Patients with metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) harboring pathogenic BRCA mutations
can benefit from poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor (PARPi) and platinum
treatments, whereas the impact of the mutation on sensitivity to cabazitaxel and
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA)-ligand therapy is currently unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy of PARPi, platinum, cabazitaxel, and
PSMA-ligand therapies in BRCA-positive mCRPC.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: Databases were queried in February 2022. We performed data
synthesis by using both proportional and individual patient data. For
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) response rate (≥50% decrease from baseline
[PSA50]) evaluation, we pooled event rates with 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
Progression-free (PFS) and overall (OS) survival analyses with individual
patient data were performed with the mixed-effect Cox proportional hazard model
and single-arm random-effect analysis, providing pooled medians.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: We included 23 eligible studies with 901 BRCA-positive mCRPC
patients. PSA50 response rates for PARPi and platinum were 69% (CI: 53-82%), and
74% (CI: 49-90%), respectively. Analyses of OS data showed no difference between
PARPi and platinum treatments (hazard ratio: 0.86; CI: 0.49-1.52; p = 0.6). The
single-arm OS and PFS analyses revealed similarities among different PARPis;
pooled PFS and OS medians were 9.7 mo (CI: 8.1-12.5) and 17.4 mo (CI:
12.7-20.1), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed that different PARPis were similarly effective in
terms of PFS and OS. Moreover, we found that PARPi and platinum therapy were
comparable in terms of PSA50 response rate and OS, highlighting that platinum is
a valid treatment option for BRCA-positive mCRPC patients. However, prospective
interventional studies comparing these agents are essential to provide a higher
level of evidence.
PATIENT SUMMARY: In this report, we found that different poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase inhibitors had similar efficacy, and platinum was a valid treatment
option in BRCA-positive metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
patients.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.euo.2023.09.001
PMID: 37722977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
