---
reference_id: "PMID:38132258"
title: "Cardiac Involvement in Classical Organic Acidurias: Clinical Profile and Outcome in a Pediatric Cohort."
authors:
- Passantino S
- Chiellino S
- Girolami F
- Zampieri M
- Calabri GB
- Spaziani G
- Bennati E
- Porcedda G
- Procopio E
- Olivotto I
- Favilli S
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13243674
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac Involvement in Classical Organic Acidurias: Clinical Profile and Outcome in a Pediatric Cohort.
**Authors:** Passantino S, Chiellino S, Girolami F, Zampieri M, Calabri GB, Spaziani G, Bennati E, Porcedda G, Procopio E, Olivotto I, Favilli S
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics13243674](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13243674)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Dec 15;13(24):3674. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics13243674.

Cardiac Involvement in Classical Organic Acidurias: Clinical Profile and Outcome 
in a Pediatric Cohort.

Passantino S(1), Chiellino S(1), Girolami F(1), Zampieri M(1), Calabri GB(1), 
Spaziani G(1), Bennati E(1), Porcedda G(1), Procopio E(2), Olivotto I(1), 
Favilli S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, 50139 
Florence, Italy.
(2)Inborn Metabolic and Muscular Disorders Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital 
IRCCS, 50139 Florence, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Cardiac involvement is reported in a significant proportion of 
patients with classical organic acidurias (OAs), contributing to disability and 
premature death. Different cardiac phenotypes have been described, among which 
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is predominant. Despite recent progress in 
diagnosis and treatment, the natural history of patients with OAs remains 
unresolved, specifically with regard to the impact of cardiac complications. We 
therefore performed a retrospective study to address this issue at our Referral 
Center for Pediatric Inherited Errors of Metabolism.
METHODS: Sixty patients with OAs (propionic (PA), methylmalonic (MMA) and 
isovaleric acidemias and maple syrup urine disease) diagnosed from 2000 to 2022 
were systematically assessed at baseline and at follow-up.
RESULTS: Cardiac anomalies were found in 23/60 OA patients, all with PA or MMA, 
represented by DCM (17/23 patients) and/or acquired long QT syndrome (3/23 
patients). The presence of DCM was associated with the worst prognosis. The rate 
of occurrence of major adverse cardiac events (MACEs) at 5 years was 55% in PA 
with cardiomyopathy; 35% in MMA with cardiomyopathy; and 23% in MMA without 
cardiomyopathy. Liver transplantation was performed in seven patients (12%), all 
with PA or MMA, due to worsening cardiac impairment, and led to the 
stabilization of metabolic status and cardiac function.
CONCLUSIONS: Cardiac involvement was documented in about one third of children 
diagnosed with classical OAs, confined to PA and MMA, and was often associated 
with poor outcome in over 50%. Etiological diagnosis of OAs is essential in 
guiding management and risk stratification.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13243674
PMCID: PMC10742676
PMID: 38132258

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.