---
reference_id: "PMID:40023766"
title: Circadian rhythm defects in Prader-Willi syndrome neurons.
authors:
- Victor AK
- Hedgecock T
- Ramanathan C
- Shen Y
- Liu AC
- Reiter LT
journal: HGG Adv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2025.100423
keywords:
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Circadian Rhythm/genetics
- "Period Circadian Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Female
- "ARNTL Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Mice
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Intrinsically Disordered Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circadian rhythm defects in Prader-Willi syndrome neurons.
**Authors:** Victor AK, Hedgecock T, Ramanathan C, Shen Y, Liu AC, Reiter LT
**Journal:** HGG Adv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xhgg.2025.100423](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2025.100423)

## Content

1. HGG Adv. 2025 Apr 10;6(2):100423. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2025.100423. Epub 2025
Mar  1.

Circadian rhythm defects in Prader-Willi syndrome neurons.

Victor AK(1), Hedgecock T(2), Ramanathan C(3), Shen Y(4), Liu AC(4), Reiter 
LT(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(2)Graduate Program in Neuroscience, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(3)College of Health Sciences, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN 38152, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology and Aging, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN 38163, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA; Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, 
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA. 
Electronic address: lreiter@tulane.edu.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a 
spectrum of symptoms, including developmental delay, intellectual disability, 
and increased risk of autism. PWS is an imprinting disorder caused by the loss 
of paternal expression of critical genes in the 15q11.2-q13 region, including 
MAGEL2, SNRPN/SNURF, and SNORD116. PWS patients often suffer from various sleep 
disorders, including sleep-disordered breathing and central hypersomnolence. 
Mouse models of PWS also exhibit disruptions in circadian rhythms and sleep. In 
cultured cells, Magel2 was shown to regulate the expression of Bmal1 and Per2, 
two core clock genes involved in the circadian rhythm regulatory process. Here, 
we investigated the circadian clock function in neurons derived from dental pulp 
stem cells (DPSCs) of PWS patients and neurotypical controls. To study the 
circadian rhythms of PWS patients in vitro, we introduced the Per2 
promoter-driven luciferase reporter (Per2:luc) to these DPSC cell lines to 
assess their circadian rhythm by bioluminescence. These Per2:luc cells were 
differentiated for 4 weeks to mature neuronal reporter cell lines, followed by 
kinetic measurements of luciferase activity over several days. We observed 
significant differences in circadian period length between PWS neurons and 
controls. Moreover, treatment with the small molecule longdaysin effectively 
lengthened the period length of PWS neurons with a shorter period length, as 
anticipated based on the mechanism of action of this compound. This work lays 
the foundation for a deeper understanding of PWS pathophysiology and represents 
a critical first step toward developing high-throughput assays for drug 
discovery targeting circadian and sleep dysfunction in PWS.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2025.100423
PMCID: PMC11957785
PMID: 40023766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.