---
reference_id: "PMID:27392710"
title: Keeping Our Calcium in Balance to Maintain Our Balance.
authors:
- Mark MD
- Schwitalla JC
- Groemmke M
- Herlitze S
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.07.020
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Calcium Signaling
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Keeping Our Calcium in Balance to Maintain Our Balance.
**Authors:** Mark MD, Schwitalla JC, Groemmke M, Herlitze S
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.07.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.07.020)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2017 Feb 19;483(4):1040-1050. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.07.020. Epub 2016 Jul 5.

Keeping Our Calcium in Balance to Maintain Our Balance.

Mark MD(1), Schwitalla JC(2), Groemmke M(2), Herlitze S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology and Neurobiology, ND7/31, Ruhr University Bochum, 
Universitätsstr. 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany. Electronic address: 
melanie.mark@rub.de.
(2)Department of Zoology and Neurobiology, ND7/31, Ruhr University Bochum, 
Universitätsstr. 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany.

Calcium is a key signaling molecule and ion involved in a variety of diverse 
processes in our central nervous system (CNS) which include gene expression, 
synaptic transmission and plasticity, neuronal excitability and cell 
maintenance. Proper control of calcium signaling is not only vital for neuronal 
physiology but also cell survival. Mutations in fundamental channels, 
transporters and second messenger proteins involved in orchestrating the balance 
of our calcium homeostasis can lead to severe neurodegenerative disorders, such 
as Spinocerebellar (SCA) and Episodic (EA) ataxias. Hereditary ataxias make up a 
remarkably diverse group of neurological disorders clinically characterized by 
gait ataxia, nystagmus, dysarthria, trunk and limb ataxia and often atrophy of 
the cerebellum. The largest family of hereditary ataxias is SCAs which consists 
of a growing family of 42 members. A relatively smaller family of 8 members 
compose the EAs. The gene mutations responsible for half of the EA members and 
over 35 of the SCA subtypes have been identified, and several have been found to 
be responsible for cerebellar atrophy, abnormal intracellular calcium levels, 
dysregulation of Purkinje cell pacemaking, altered cerebellar synaptic 
transmission and/or ataxia in mouse models. Although the genetic diversity and 
affected cellular pathways of hereditary ataxias are broad, one common theme 
amongst these genes is their effects on maintaining calcium balance in primarily 
the cerebellum. There is emerging evidence that the pathogenesis of hereditary 
ataxias may be caused by imbalances in intracellular calcium due to genetic 
mutations in calcium-mediating proteins. In this review we will discuss the 
current evidence supporting the role of deranged calcium as the culprit to 
neurodegenerative diseases with a primary focus on SCAs and EAs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.07.020
PMID: 27392710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]