---
reference_id: "PMID:11381030"
title: Comprehensive genome sequence analysis of a breast cancer amplicon.
authors:
- Collins C
- Volik S
- Kowbel D
- Ginzinger D
- Ylstra B
- Cloutier T
- Hawkins T
- Predki P
- Martin C
- Wernick M
- Kuo WL
- Alberts A
- Gray JW
journal: Genome Res
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1101/gr.gr1743r
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive genome sequence analysis of a breast cancer amplicon.
**Authors:** Collins C, Volik S, Kowbel D, Ginzinger D, Ylstra B, Cloutier T, Hawkins T, Predki P, Martin C, Wernick M, Kuo WL, Alberts A, Gray JW
**Journal:** Genome Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gr.gr1743r](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.gr1743r)

## Content

1. Genome Res. 2001 Jun;11(6):1034-42. doi: 10.1101/gr.gr1743r.

Comprehensive genome sequence analysis of a breast cancer amplicon.

Collins C(1), Volik S, Kowbel D, Ginzinger D, Ylstra B, Cloutier T, Hawkins T, 
Predki P, Martin C, Wernick M, Kuo WL, Alberts A, Gray JW.

Author information:
(1)University of California San Francisco Cancer Center, San Francisco, 
California 94143-0808, USA. collins@cc.ucsf.edu

Gene amplification occurs in most solid tumors and is associated with poor 
prognosis. Amplification of 20q13.2 is common to several tumor types including 
breast cancer. The 1 Mb of sequence spanning the 20q13.2 breast cancer amplicon 
is one of the most exhaustively studied segments of the human genome. These 
studies have included amplicon mapping by comparative genomic hybridization 
(CGH), fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH), array-CGH, quantitative 
microsatellite analysis (QUMA), and functional genomic studies. Together these 
studies revealed a complex amplicon structure suggesting the presence of at 
least two driver genes in some tumors. One of these, ZNF217, is capable of 
immortalizing human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) when overexpressed. In 
addition, we now report the sequencing of this region in human and mouse, and on 
quantitative expression studies in tumors. Amplicon localization now is 
straightforward and the availability of human and mouse genomic sequence 
facilitates their functional analysis. However, comprehensive annotation of 
megabase-scale regions requires integration of vast amounts of information. We 
present a system for integrative analysis and demonstrate its utility on 1.2 Mb 
of sequence spanning the 20q13.2 breast cancer amplicon and 865 kb of syntenic 
murine sequence. We integrate tumor genome copy number measurements with 
exhaustive genome landscape mapping, showing that amplicon boundaries are 
associated with maxima in repetitive element density and a region of 
evolutionary instability. This integration of comprehensive sequence annotation, 
quantitative expression analysis, and tumor amplicon boundaries provide evidence 
for an additional driver gene prefoldin 4 (PFDN4), coregulated genes, conserved 
noncoding regions, and associate repetitive elements with regions of genomic 
instability at this locus.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.gr1743r
PMCID: PMC311107
PMID: 11381030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]