---
reference_id: "PMID:36190515"
title: Pathogenic variants in GCSH encoding the moonlighting H-protein cause combined nonketotic hyperglycinemia and lipoate deficiency.
authors:
- Arribas-Carreira L
- Dallabona C
- Swanson MA
- Farris J
- Østergaard E
- Tsiakas K
- Hempel M
- Aquaviva-Bourdain C
- Koutsoukos S
- Stence NV
- Magistrati M
- Spector EB
- Kronquist K
- Christensen M
- Karstensen HG
- Feichtinger RG
- Achleitner MT
- Lawrence Merritt Ii J
- Pérez B
- Ugarte M
- Grünewald S
- Riela AR
- Julve N
- Arnoux JB
- Haldar K
- Donnini C
- Santer R
- Lund AM
- Mayr JA
- Rodriguez-Pombo P
- Van Hove JLK
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac246
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic variants in GCSH encoding the moonlighting H-protein cause combined nonketotic hyperglycinemia and lipoate deficiency.
**Authors:** Arribas-Carreira L, Dallabona C, Swanson MA, Farris J, Østergaard E, Tsiakas K, Hempel M, Aquaviva-Bourdain C, Koutsoukos S, Stence NV, Magistrati M, Spector EB, Kronquist K, Christensen M, Karstensen HG, Feichtinger RG, Achleitner MT, Lawrence Merritt Ii J, Pérez B, Ugarte M, Grünewald S, Riela AR, Julve N, Arnoux JB, Haldar K, Donnini C, Santer R, Lund AM, Mayr JA, Rodriguez-Pombo P, Van Hove JLK
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddac246](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddac246)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Mar 6;32(6):917-933. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac246.

Pathogenic variants in GCSH encoding the moonlighting H-protein cause combined 
nonketotic hyperglycinemia and lipoate deficiency.

Arribas-Carreira L(1), Dallabona C(2), Swanson MA(3), Farris J(4)(5), Østergaard 
E(6), Tsiakas K(7), Hempel M(8), Aquaviva-Bourdain C(9), Koutsoukos S(3), Stence 
NV(10), Magistrati M(2), Spector EB(3)(11), Kronquist K(3)(11), Christensen 
M(6), Karstensen HG(6), Feichtinger RG(12), Achleitner MT(12), Lawrence Merritt 
Ii J(13), Pérez B(1), Ugarte M(1), Grünewald S(14), Riela AR(15), Julve N(16), 
Arnoux JB(17), Haldar K(4), Donnini C(2), Santer R(7), Lund AM(6), Mayr JA(12), 
Rodriguez-Pombo P(1), Van Hove JLK(3).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Centro de Biología 
Molecular Severo Ochoa, CBM-CSIC, Departamento de Biología Molecular, Institute 
for Molecular Biology-IUBM, Universidad Autónoma Madrid, CIBERER, IDIPAZ, 28049 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Life Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, 
University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, 
University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Boler-Parseghian Center for Rare and Neglected Disease, and Department of 
Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, Saginaw Valley State University, University Center, 
MI, USA.
(6)Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Departments of Clinical Genetics and 
Pediatrics, Rigshospitalet - Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(9)Service Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, UM Pathologies Héréditaires du 
Métabolisme et du Globule Rouge, Centre de Biologie Est, CHU de Lyon, Lyon, 
France.
(10)Department of Radiology, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(11)Molecular Genetics Lab, Precision DX, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, 
CO, USA.
(12)University Children's Hospital, Salzburger Landeskliniken (SALK) and 
Paracelsus Medical University (PMU), Salzburg, Austria.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(14)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
(15)Texas Child Neurology, Plano, TX, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, IMED Valencia Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
(17)Centre de Reference des Maladies Hereditaires, Necker Enfants Malades, 
Paris, France.

Maintaining protein lipoylation is vital for cell metabolism. The H-protein 
encoded by GCSH has a dual role in protein lipoylation required for bioenergetic 
enzymes including pyruvate dehydrogenase and 2-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, and 
in the one-carbon metabolism through its involvement in glycine cleavage enzyme 
system, intersecting two vital roles for cell survival. Here, we report six 
patients with biallelic pathogenic variants in GCSH and a broad clinical 
spectrum ranging from neonatal fatal glycine encephalopathy to an attenuated 
phenotype of developmental delay, behavioral problems, limited epilepsy and 
variable movement problems. The mutational spectrum includes one insertion 
c.293-2_293-1insT, one deletion c.122_(228 + 1_229-1) del, one duplication of 
exons 4 and 5, one nonsense variant p.Gln76*and four missense p.His57Arg, 
p.Pro115Leu and p.Thr148Pro and the previously described p.Met1?. Via functional 
studies in patient's fibroblasts, molecular modeling, expression analysis in 
GCSH knockdown COS7 cells and yeast, and in vitro protein studies, we 
demonstrate for the first time that most variants identified in our cohort 
produced a hypomorphic effect on both mitochondrial activities, protein 
lipoylation and glycine metabolism, causing combined deficiency, whereas some 
missense variants affect primarily one function only. The clinical features of 
the patients reflect the impact of the GCSH changes on any of the two functions 
analyzed. Our analysis illustrates the complex interplay of functional and 
clinical impact when pathogenic variants affect a multifunctional protein 
involved in two metabolic pathways and emphasizes the value of the functional 
assays to select the treatment and investigate new personalized options.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac246
PMCID: PMC9990993
PMID: 36190515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]