---
reference_id: "PMID:35038959"
title: "The first reported case of CDH3-related hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy from Jordan: a case report."
authors:
- Al Zubi K
- Mwafi N
- Alrawashdeh HM
- Al Sarireh F
- Somkuwar A
- Abdulmannan DM
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2022.2028298
keywords:
- Adult
- "Cadherins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Jordan
- "Macular Degeneration/diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Stargardt Disease
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The first reported case of CDH3-related hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy from Jordan: a case report.
**Authors:** Al Zubi K, Mwafi N, Alrawashdeh HM, Al Sarireh F, Somkuwar A, Abdulmannan DM
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2022.2028298](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2022.2028298)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2022 Jun;43(3):420-424. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2022.2028298. 
Epub 2022 Jan 17.

The first reported case of CDH3-related hypotrichosis with juvenile macular 
dystrophy from Jordan: a case report.

Al Zubi K(1), Mwafi N(2), Alrawashdeh HM(3), Al Sarireh F(1), Somkuwar A(4), 
Abdulmannan DM(5).

Author information:
(1)Special Surgery Department, Faculty of Medicine, Mutah University, Al-karak, 
Jordan.
(2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Mutah 
University, Al-karak, Jordan.
(3)Ophthalmology Department, Sharif Eye Centers, Irbid, Jordan.
(4)Ophthalmology Department, Al-Karak Governmental Hospital, Al-karak, Jordan.
(5)Ophthalmology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Umm Alqura University, Makkah, 
Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Pathogenic variants in the Cadherin 3 (CDH3) gene are responsible 
for the occurrence of Hypotrichosis with Juvenile Macular Dystrophy (HJMD) and 
Ectodermal Dysplasia, Ectrodactyly and Macular Dystrophy Syndrome (EEMS), both 
of which are rare autosomal recessive disorders characterized by hypotrichosis 
and progressive macular dystrophy. The CDH3 gene encodes for P-cadherin, a 
calcium-binding protein that is essential for cell-cell adhesion, which is 
expressed in the retinal pigment epithelial cells and hair follicles.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fundus examination of both eyes was done in addition to 
clinical investigation. Genomic DNA was extracted from a whole-blood sample and 
whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed to identify the underlying 
etiology.All identified variants were evaluated for their pathogenicity and 
causality.
RESULTS: We present the first case of HJMD in a 23-year-old female patient from 
Jordan. The patient presented to our ophthalmology clinic with poor vision in 
both eyes. Gross examination revealed sparse scalp hair along with macular 
dystrophy on fundus exam in both eyes. HJMD was suspected and whole-exome 
sequencing (WES) confirmed the diagnosis with the identification of a homozygous 
frameshift deletion (p.Gly277AlafsTer20) localised in exon 7 of the CDH3 gene.
CONCLUSION: Blindness due to progressive macular degeneration is a common 
manifestation in numerous syndromic recessive disorders such as HJMD. 
Ophthalmologists should consider the importance of systemic manifestations and 
genetic testing for the confirmation of diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2022.2028298
PMID: 35038959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]