---
reference_id: "PMID:37887766"
title: "Glanders Diagnosis in an Asymptomatic Mare from Brazil: Insights from Serology, Microbiological Culture, Mass Spectrometry, and Genome Sequencing."
authors:
- Suniga PAP
- Mantovani C
- Dos Santos MG
- do Egito AA
- Verbisck NV
- Dos Santos LR
- Dávila AMR
- Zimpel CK
- Zerpa MCS
- Chiebao DP
- de Sá Guimarães AM
- de Castro Nassar AF
- de Araújo FR
journal: Pathogens
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/pathogens12101250
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glanders Diagnosis in an Asymptomatic Mare from Brazil: Insights from Serology, Microbiological Culture, Mass Spectrometry, and Genome Sequencing.
**Authors:** Suniga PAP, Mantovani C, Dos Santos MG, do Egito AA, Verbisck NV, Dos Santos LR, Dávila AMR, Zimpel CK, Zerpa MCS, Chiebao DP, de Sá Guimarães AM, de Castro Nassar AF, de Araújo FR
**Journal:** Pathogens (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pathogens12101250](https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens12101250)

## Content

1. Pathogens. 2023 Oct 17;12(10):1250. doi: 10.3390/pathogens12101250.

Glanders Diagnosis in an Asymptomatic Mare from Brazil: Insights from Serology,
Microbiological Culture, Mass Spectrometry, and Genome Sequencing.

Suniga PAP(1)(2), Mantovani C(3), Dos Santos MG(4), do Egito AA(1)(4), Verbisck
NV(4), Dos Santos LR(4), Dávila AMR(5), Zimpel CK(6), Zerpa MCS(7), Chiebao
DP(8), de Sá Guimarães AM(7), de Castro Nassar AF(8), de Araújo FR(4).

Author information:
(1)Postgraduate Program in Animal Science, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and
Animal Science-FAMEZ/UFMS, Federal University of Mato Grosso Do Sul, Av. Senador
Filinto Muller, 2443, Campo Grande 79074-460, MS, Brazil.
(2)MAI/DAI Scholarship, Federal University of Mato Grosso Do Sul, Cidade
Universitária, Av. Costa E Silva, Campo Grande 79070-900, MS, Brazil.
(3)Embrapa Beef Cattle/Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Scholarship,
Embrapa Beef Cattle, Av. Rádio Maia, 830, Campo Grande 79106-550, MS, Brazil.
(4)Embrapa Beef Cattle, Campo Grande 79106-550, MS, Brazil.
(5)Computational and Systems Biology Laboratory, Graduate Program in
Biodiversity and Health, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro
21040-900, RJ, Brazil.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.
(7)Laboratory of Applied Research in Mycobacteria, Department of Microbiology,
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo 05508-000,
SP, Brazil.
(8)Animal Health Research Center, Biological Institute, Av. Conselheiro
Rodrigues Alves, 1252, São Paulo 04014-002, SP, Brazil.

This manuscript elucidates the occurrence of glanders in an asymptomatic mare
from Brazil presenting positive Burkholderia mallei antibody titers. The
diagnosis was established through a multi-pronged approach encompassing
microbiological culture, mass spectrometry, and genome sequencing. The outbreak
occurred in 2019 in Tatuí, São Paulo, Brazil, and the infected mare, despite
displaying no clinical symptoms, had multiple miliary lesions in the liver, as
well as intense catarrhal discharge in the trachea. Samples were collected from
various organs and subjected to bacterial isolation, molecular detection, and
identification. The strain was identified as B. mallei using PCR and confirmed
by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Whole-genome sequencing revealed a genome size
of 5.51 Mb with a GC content of 65.8%, 5871 genes (including 4 rRNA and 53 tRNA
genes), and 5583 coding DNA sequences (CDSs). Additionally, 227 predicted
pseudogenes were detected. In silico analysis of different genomic loci that
allow for differentiation with Burkholderia pseudomallei confirmed the identity
of the isolate as B. mallei, in addition to the characteristic genome size. The
BAC 86/19 strain was identified as lineage 3, sublineage 2, which includes other
strains from Brazil, India, and Iran. The genome sequencing of this strain
provides valuable information that can be used to better understand the pathogen
and its epidemiology, as well as to develop diagnostic tools for glanders.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens12101250
PMCID: PMC10609850
PMID: 37887766

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
