---
reference_id: "PMID:33011111"
title: The Origin of Ovarian Cancer Species and Precancerous Landscape.
authors:
- Shih IM
- Wang Y
- Wang TL
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.09.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Origin of Ovarian Cancer Species and Precancerous Landscape.
**Authors:** Shih IM, Wang Y, Wang TL
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.09.006)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2021 Jan;191(1):26-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.09.006. Epub
2020  Oct 1.

The Origin of Ovarian Cancer Species and Precancerous Landscape.

Shih IM(1), Wang Y(2), Wang TL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; Pathobiology Graduate Program, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. Electronic address: 
ishih@jhmi.edu.
(2)Pathobiology Graduate Program, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; Pathobiology Graduate Program, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

Unlike other human cancers, in which all primary tumors arise de novo, ovarian 
epithelial cancers are primarily imported from either endometrial or fallopian 
tube epithelium. The prevailing paradigm in the genesis of high-grade serous 
carcinoma (HGSC), the most common ovarian cancer, posits to its development in 
fallopian tubes through stepwise tumor progression. Recent progress has been 
made not only in gathering terabytes of omics data but also in detailing the 
histologic-molecular correlations required for looking into, and making sense 
of, the tissue origin of HGSC. This emerging paradigm is changing many facets of 
ovarian cancer research and routine gynecology practice. The precancerous 
landscape in fallopian tubes contains multiple concurrent precursor lesions, 
including serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC), with genetic 
heterogeneity providing a platform for HGSC evolution. Mathematical models imply 
that a prolonged time (decades) elapses from the development of a TP53 mutation, 
the earliest known molecular alteration, to an STIC, followed by a shorter span 
(6 years) for progression to an HGSC. Genetic predisposition accelerates the 
trajectory. This timeline may allow for the early diagnosis of HGSC and STIC, 
followed by intent-to-cure surgery. This review discusses the recent advances in 
this tubal paradigm and its biological and clinical implications, alongside the 
promise and challenge of studying STIC and other precancerous lesions of HGSC.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.09.006
PMCID: PMC7786078
PMID: 33011111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]