---
reference_id: "PMID:33568808"
title: "Diffuse myocardial fibrosis: mechanisms, diagnosis and therapeutic approaches."
authors:
- López B
- Ravassa S
- Moreno MU
- José GS
- Beaumont J
- González A
- Díez J
journal: Nat Rev Cardiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41569-020-00504-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diffuse myocardial fibrosis: mechanisms, diagnosis and therapeutic approaches.
**Authors:** López B, Ravassa S, Moreno MU, José GS, Beaumont J, González A, Díez J
**Journal:** Nat Rev Cardiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41569-020-00504-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41569-020-00504-1)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2021 Jul;18(7):479-498. doi: 10.1038/s41569-020-00504-1. Epub
 2021 Feb 10.

Diffuse myocardial fibrosis: mechanisms, diagnosis and therapeutic approaches.

López B(#)(1)(2), Ravassa S(#)(1)(2), Moreno MU(#)(1)(2), José GS(1)(2), 
Beaumont J(1)(2), González A(3)(4), Díez J(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Program of Cardiovascular Diseases, CIMA Universidad de Navarra and IdiSNA, 
Pamplona, Spain.
(2)CIBERCV, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Program of Cardiovascular Diseases, CIMA Universidad de Navarra and IdiSNA, 
Pamplona, Spain. amiqueo@unav.es.
(4)CIBERCV, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. amiqueo@unav.es.
(5)Program of Cardiovascular Diseases, CIMA Universidad de Navarra and IdiSNA, 
Pamplona, Spain. jadimar@unav.es.
(6)CIBERCV, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. jadimar@unav.es.
(7)Departments of Nephrology and Cardiology, University of Navarra Clinic, 
Pamplona, Spain. jadimar@unav.es.
(#)Contributed equally

Diffuse myocardial fibrosis resulting from the excessive deposition of collagen 
fibres through the entire myocardium is encountered in a number of chronic 
cardiac diseases. This lesion results from alterations in the regulation of 
fibrillary collagen turnover by fibroblasts, facilitating the excessive 
deposition of type I and type III collagen fibres within the myocardial 
interstitium and around intramyocardial vessels. The available evidence suggests 
that, beyond the extent of fibrous deposits, collagen composition and the 
physicochemical properties of the fibres are also relevant in the detrimental 
effects of diffuse myocardial fibrosis on cardiac function and clinical outcomes 
in patients with heart failure. In this regard, findings from the past 20 years 
suggest that various clinicopathological phenotypes of diffuse myocardial 
fibrosis exist in patients with heart failure. In this Review, we summarize the 
current knowledge on the mechanisms and detrimental consequences of diffuse 
myocardial fibrosis in heart failure. Furthermore, we discuss the validity and 
usefulness of available imaging techniques and circulating biomarkers to assess 
the clinicopathological variation in this lesion and to track its clinical 
evolution. Finally, we highlight the currently available and potential future 
therapeutic strategies aimed at personalizing the prevention and reversal of 
diffuse myocardial fibrosis in patients with heart failure.

DOI: 10.1038/s41569-020-00504-1
PMID: 33568808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]