---
reference_id: "PMID:37415602"
title: Behavioral and neuropsychiatric challenges across the lifespan in individuals with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.
authors:
- "Qu'd D"
- Schmitt LM
- Leston A
- Harris JR
- Slavotinek A
- Riddle I
- Brightman DS
- Simpson BN
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1116919
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Behavioral and neuropsychiatric challenges across the lifespan in individuals with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.
**Authors:** Qu'd D, Schmitt LM, Leston A, Harris JR, Slavotinek A, Riddle I, Brightman DS, Simpson BN
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1116919](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1116919)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Jun 21;14:1116919. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1116919. 
eCollection 2023.

Behavioral and neuropsychiatric challenges across the lifespan in individuals 
with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

Qu'd D(1), Schmitt LM(2)(3), Leston A(4), Harris JR(5)(6), Slavotinek A(1)(3), 
Riddle I(4)(7), Brightman DS(1), Simpson BN(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(2)Division of Behavioral Medicine and Clinical Psychology, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(4)University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(5)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States.
(6)Division of Neurogenetics, Hugo W. Moser Research Institute, Kennedy Krieger 
Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(7)Division of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States.

Introduction: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a rare congenital disorder 
characterized by developmental and intellectual disability, broadening of thumbs 
and halluces, and characteristic facial features. Pathogenic variants in CREBBP 
lead to RSTS type 1 (RSTS1) and in EP300 lead to RSTS type 2 (RSTS2). 
Individuals with RSTS can demonstrate a variety of behavioral and 
neuropsychiatric challenges, including anxiety, hyperactivity/inattention, 
self-injury, repetitive behaviors, and aggression. Behavioral challenges are 
consistently reported as one of the primary factors impacting quality of life. 
Despite the high prevalence and morbidity of behavioral and neuropsychiatric 
features of RSTS, a paucity of data exists regarding its natural history. 
Methods: To better understand the neurocognitive and behavioral challenges faced 
by individuals with RSTS, 71 caregivers of individuals with RSTS, ranging in age 
from one to 61 years, completed four questionnaires measuring obsessive 
compulsive disorder (OCD)-like symptoms, anxiety, challenging behaviors, and 
adaptive behavior and living skills. Results: Results revealed a high prevalence 
of neuropsychiatric and behavioral challenges across ages. We found specific 
challenging behaviors were worse in school age individuals. Scaled adaptive 
behavior and living skill scores differed across ages with an increased gap 
between typically developing peers becoming more apparent at older ages. Between 
types, individuals with RSTS2 had better adaptive behavior and living skills and 
less stereotypic behaviors but higher social phobia than individuals with RSTS1. 
Further, female individuals with RSTS1 appear to have increased hyperactivity. 
However, both groups had impairments in adaptive functioning compared to 
typically developing peers. Discussion: Our findings support and expand previous 
reports of a high prevalence of neuropsychiatric and behavioral challenges in 
individuals with RSTS. However, we are the first to report differences between 
types of RSTS. Further, age-related differences were seen with higher 
challenging behaviors within school-age individuals, which may improve over 
time, and lower adaptive behavioral skills compared to normative scales. 
Anticipation of these potential differential challenges across age is vital for 
proactive management for individuals with RSTS. Our study underscores the 
importance of enacting neuropsychiatric and behavioral screening earlier in 
childhood so appropriate management can be implemented. However, further 
longitudinal studies in larger cohorts are needed to understand better how 
behavioral and neuropsychiatric characteristics of RSTS evolve over the lifespan 
and differentially affect subpopulation groups.

Copyright © 2023 Qu’d, Schmitt, Leston, Harris, Slavotinek, Riddle, Brightman 
and Simpson.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1116919
PMCID: PMC10321757
PMID: 37415602

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.