---
reference_id: "PMID:33232936"
title: Alterations of GABA B receptors in the APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Salazar AM
- Leisgang AM
- Ortiz AA
- Murtishaw AS
- Kinney JW
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.10.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alterations of GABA B receptors in the APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Salazar AM, Leisgang AM, Ortiz AA, Murtishaw AS, Kinney JW
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.10.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.10.013)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Aging. 2021 Jan;97:129-143. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.10.013.  Epub 2020 Oct 23.

Alterations of GABA B receptors in the APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Salazar AM(1), Leisgang AM(1), Ortiz AA(1), Murtishaw AS(1), Kinney JW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain Health, School of Integrated Health Sciences, University 
of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(2)Department of Brain Health, School of Integrated Health Sciences, University 
of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, USA. Electronic address: 
jefferson.kinney@unlv.edu.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the 
progressive decline of memory and cognitive function. The disease is 
characterized by the presence of amyloid plaques, tau tangles, altered 
inflammatory signaling, and alterations in numerous neurotransmitter signaling 
systems, including γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Given the extensive role of GABA 
in regulating neuronal activity, a careful investigation of GABA-related changes 
is needed. Further, given persistent inflammation has been demonstrated to drive 
AD pathology, the presence of GABA B receptor expressed on glia that serve a 
role regulation of the immune response adds to potential implications of altered 
GABA in AD. There has not previously been a systematic evaluation of 
GABA-related changes in an amyloid model of AD that specifically focuses on 
examining changes in GABA B receptors. In the present study, we examined 
alterations in several GABA-specific targets in the APP/PS1 mouse model at 
different ages. In the 4-month-old cohort, no significant deficits in spatial 
learning and memory or alterations in any of the GABAergic targets were observed 
compared with wild-type controls. However, we identified significant alterations 
in several GABA-related targets in the 6-month-old cohort that exhibited spatial 
learning deficits that include changes in glutamic acid decarboxylase 65, GABA 
transporter type 3, and GABA B receptors protein and mRNA levels. This was the 
same cohort at which learning and memory deficits and significant amyloid 
pathology was observed. Overall, our study provides evidence of altered 
GABAergic signaling in an amyloid model of AD at a time point consistent with 
AD-related deficits.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.10.013
PMID: 33232936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]