---
reference_id: "PMID:36544060"
title: Perspectives of colon-specific drug delivery in the management of morning symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Jain SN
- Patil SB
journal: Inflammopharmacology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10787-022-01120-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perspectives of colon-specific drug delivery in the management of morning symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Jain SN, Patil SB
**Journal:** Inflammopharmacology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10787-022-01120-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10787-022-01120-w)

## Content

1. Inflammopharmacology. 2023 Feb;31(1):253-264. doi: 10.1007/s10787-022-01120-w.
 Epub 2022 Dec 21.

Perspectives of colon-specific drug delivery in the management of morning 
symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis.

Jain SN(1), Patil SB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, SNJB's Shriman Sureshdada Jain College of 
Pharmacy, Neminagar, Chandwad, Nashik, Maharashtra, 423101, India.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, SNJB's Shriman Sureshdada Jain College of 
Pharmacy, Neminagar, Chandwad, Nashik, Maharashtra, 423101, India. 
sbpatil_99@rediffmail.com.

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic condition that is characterized by joint pain 
and inflammation. It is an autoimmune disorder in which the body tissues are 
erroneously attacked by the immune system of the host itself. It has been 
evident that rheumatoid arthritis symptoms follow a 24 h circadian rhythm and 
exhibit high thresholds of pain, functional disability, and stiffness 
predominantly early in the morning. Colon-specific drug delivery systems can be 
utilized in the formulations to be used in the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis. The colon-specific drug delivery system has shown promising results 
in the treatment of different diseases at the colonic site like Crohn's disease, 
ulcerative colitis, colon cancer, etc. The colon-specific drug delivery is 
capable of delivering the formulation at the predetermined location and 
predetermined time. The early morning symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis like pain 
and inflammation can be treated using the various approaches of the 
colon-specific drug delivery system because it will lead to patient compliance 
as the patient will not require administering the formulation immediately after 
waking up in the morning. This review also explains the immunological factors 
which may trigger rheumatoid arthritis in human beings. It further explores 
conventional approaches like pH-dependant, microorganisms-driven, 
pressure-controlled, and time-dependant formulations. By employing two or more 
conventional approaches given above the various novel approaches have been 
designed to eliminate the drawbacks of individual techniques.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s10787-022-01120-w
PMID: 36544060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]