---
reference_id: "PMID:31765853"
title: Exacerbation-Prone Asthma.
authors:
- Denlinger LC
- Heymann P
- Lutter R
- Gern JE
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2019.11.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exacerbation-Prone Asthma.
**Authors:** Denlinger LC, Heymann P, Lutter R, Gern JE
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2019.11.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2019.11.009)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020 Feb;8(2):474-482. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2019.11.009. Epub 2019 Nov 22.

Exacerbation-Prone Asthma.

Denlinger LC(1), Heymann P(2), Lutter R(3), Gern JE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine 
and Public Health, Madison, Wis. Electronic address: ldenling@wisc.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Va.
(3)Departments of Respiratory Medicine and Experimental Immunology, Amsterdam 
University Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam Infection and Immunity 
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, School of Medicine 
and Public Health, Madison, Wis.

Patients who are prone to exacerbations of asthma experience significant costs 
in terms of missed work and school, acute care visits, and hospitalizations. 
Exacerbations are largely driven by environmental exposures including 
pollutants, stress, and viral and bacterial pathogens. These exposures are most 
likely to induce acute severe "asthma attacks" in high-risk patients. These 
personal risk factors for exacerbations can vary with the phenotype of asthma 
and age of the patient. In children, allergic sensitization is a strong risk 
factor, especially for those children who develop sensitization early in life. 
Airway inflammation is an important risk factor, and biomarkers are under 
evaluation for utility in detecting eosinophilic and type 2 inflammation and 
neutrophilic inflammation as indicators of risk for recurrent exacerbations. 
Insights into inflammatory mechanisms have led to new approaches to prevent 
exacerbations using mAb-based biologics that target specific type 2 pathways. 
Challenges remain in developing an evidence base to support precision 
interventions with these effective yet expensive therapies, and in determining 
whether these treatments will be safe and effective in young children. 
Unfortunately, there has been less progress in developing treatments for acute 
exacerbations. Hopefully, greater understanding of mechanisms relating airway 
viruses, bacteria, mucin production, and neutrophilic inflammatory responses 
will lead to additional treatment options for patients experiencing acute 
exacerbations.

Copyright © 2019 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2019.11.009
PMCID: PMC6942520
PMID: 31765853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]