---
reference_id: "PMID:25851924"
title: "Sanfilippo syndrome: Overall review."
authors:
- Andrade F
- Aldámiz-Echevarría L
- Llarena M
- Couce ML
journal: Pediatr Int
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/ped.12636
keywords:
- Diagnostic Imaging
- Disease Management
- Global Health
- Glycosaminoglycans/metabolism
- Humans
- Morbidity
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis III/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sanfilippo syndrome: Overall review.
**Authors:** Andrade F, Aldámiz-Echevarría L, Llarena M, Couce ML
**Journal:** Pediatr Int (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ped.12636](https://doi.org/10.1111/ped.12636)

## Content

1. Pediatr Int. 2015 Jun;57(3):331-8. doi: 10.1111/ped.12636.

Sanfilippo syndrome: Overall review.

Andrade F(1), Aldámiz-Echevarría L(1), Llarena M(1), Couce ML(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, BioCruces Health Research Institute, CIBER de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barakaldo, Spain.
(2)Unit of Diagnosis and Treatment of Congenital Metabolic Diseases, Neonatology
Service, Department of Pediatrics, CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), IDIS
Clinic University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela, Coruña, Spain.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type III (MPS III, Sanfilippo syndrome) is a lysosomal
storage disorder, caused by a deficiency in one of the four enzymes involved in
the catabolism of glycosaminoglycan heparan sulfate. It is characterized by
progressive cognitive decline and severe hyperactivity, with relatively mild
somatic features. This review focuses on clinical features, diagnosis,
treatment, and follow-up of MPS III, and provides information about
supplementary tests and differential diagnosis. Given that few reviews of MPS
III have been published, several studies were compiled to establish diagnostic
recommendations. Quantitative urinary glycosaminoglycan analysis is strongly
recommended, and measurement of disaccharides, heparin cofactor II-thrombin
complex and gangliosides is also used. Enzyme activity of the different enzymes
in blood serum, leukocytes or fibroblasts, and mutational analysis for SGSH,
NAGLU, HGSNAT or GNS genes are required to confirm diagnosis and differentiate
four subtypes of MPS III. Although there is no global consensus for treatment,
enzyme replacement therapy and gene therapy can provide appropriate results. In
this regard, recent publications on treatment and follow-up are discussed.

© 2015 Japan Pediatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ped.12636
PMID: 25851924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
