---
reference_id: "PMID:31805229"
title: Investigating Bacterial Penetration of the Blood-Brain Barrier for the Pathogenesis, Prevention, and Therapy of Bacterial Meningitis.
authors:
- Kim KS
journal: ACS Infect Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00319
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigating Bacterial Penetration of the Blood-Brain Barrier for the Pathogenesis, Prevention, and Therapy of Bacterial Meningitis.
**Authors:** Kim KS
**Journal:** ACS Infect Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00319](https://doi.org/10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00319)

## Content

1. ACS Infect Dis. 2020 Jan 10;6(1):34-42. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00319. Epub
 2019 Dec 18.

Investigating Bacterial Penetration of the Blood-Brain Barrier for the 
Pathogenesis, Prevention, and Therapy of Bacterial Meningitis.

Kim KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases , Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine , 200 North Wolfe Street, Room 3157 , Baltimore , Maryland 21287 , 
United States.

The most distressing aspect of bacterial meningitis is limited improvement in 
the mortality and morbidity despite attributable advances in antimicrobial 
chemotherapy and supportive care. A major contributing factor to such mortality 
and morbidity is our incomplete understanding of the pathogenesis of this 
disease. Microbial penetration of the blood-brain barrier, a prerequisite for 
the development of bacterial meningitis, exploits specific host and bacterial 
factors as well as host cell signaling molecules. Determination and 
characterization of such host and bacterial factors have been instrumental for 
developing our current knowledge on the pathogenesis of bacterial meningitis. In 
addition, counteracting such host and microbial factors has been shown to be 
efficacious in the prevention of bacterial meningitis. Antimicrobial therapy 
alone has limited efficacy in improving the outcome of bacterial meningitis. 
Recent studies suggest that counteracting targets contributing to bacterial 
penetration of the blood-brain barrier are a beneficial therapeutic adjunct to 
antimicrobial therapy in improving the outcome of bacterial meningitis. Taken 
together, these findings indicate that the elucidation of host and bacterial 
factors contributing to microbial penetration of the blood-brain barrier 
provides a novel strategy for investigating the pathogenesis, prevention, and 
therapy of bacterial meningitis.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00319
PMID: 31805229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]