---
reference_id: "PMID:15162797"
title: "von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor: not only HIF's executioner."
authors:
- Czyzyk-Krzeska MF
- Meller J
journal: Trends Mol Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2004.02.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor: not only HIF's executioner.
**Authors:** Czyzyk-Krzeska MF, Meller J
**Journal:** Trends Mol Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmed.2004.02.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2004.02.004)

## Content

1. Trends Mol Med. 2004 Apr;10(4):146-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2004.02.004.

von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor: not only HIF's executioner.

Czyzyk-Krzeska MF(1), Meller J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Science, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH 45267-0505, USA. Maria.Czyzykkrzeska@uc.edu

Loss of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) protein function results in an 
autosomal-dominant cancer syndrome known as VHL disease, which manifests as 
angiomas of the retina, hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system, renal 
clear-cell carcinomas and pheochromocytomas. VHL tumor suppressor is a specific 
substrate-recognition component of the E3 ubiquitin complex, which regulates 
proteasomal degradation of the subunit of the hypoxia inducible transcription 
factor (HIF). Impaired VHL complex function leads to accumulation of HIF, 
overexpression of various HIF-induced gene products and formation of highly 
vascular neoplasia. However, the ubiquitylating role of the VHL complex extends 
beyond its function in regulating HIF, as it appears to regulate the stability 
of other proteins that might be involved in various steps of oncogenic 
processes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmed.2004.02.004
PMID: 15162797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]