---
reference_id: "PMID:36658342"
title: "Genome-scale metabolic reconstruction of 7,302 human microorganisms for personalized medicine."
authors:
- Heinken A
- Hertel J
- Acharya G
- Ravcheev DA
- Nyga M
- Okpala OE
- Hogan M
- Magnúsdóttir S
- Martinelli F
- Nap B
- Preciat G
- Edirisinghe JN
- Henry CS
- Fleming RMT
- Thiele I
journal: Nat Biotechnol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41587-022-01628-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-scale metabolic reconstruction of 7,302 human microorganisms for personalized medicine.
**Authors:** Heinken A, Hertel J, Acharya G, Ravcheev DA, Nyga M, Okpala OE, Hogan M, Magnúsdóttir S, Martinelli F, Nap B, Preciat G, Edirisinghe JN, Henry CS, Fleming RMT, Thiele I
**Journal:** Nat Biotechnol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41587-022-01628-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-022-01628-0)

## Content

1. Nat Biotechnol. 2023 Sep;41(9):1320-1331. doi: 10.1038/s41587-022-01628-0.
Epub  2023 Jan 19.

Genome-scale metabolic reconstruction of 7,302 human microorganisms for 
personalized medicine.

Heinken A(1)(2)(3), Hertel J(1)(4), Acharya G(5), Ravcheev DA(1)(2), Nyga M(6), 
Okpala OE(7), Hogan M(1)(2), Magnúsdóttir S(8), Martinelli F(1)(2), Nap B(1)(2), 
Preciat G(9), Edirisinghe JN(10)(11), Henry CS(11), Fleming RMT(1)(9), Thiele 
I(12)(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of Galway, Galway, Ireland.
(2)Ryan Institute, University of Galway, Galway, Ireland.
(3)INSERM UMRS 1256, Nutrition, Genetics, and Environmental Risk Exposure 
(NGERE), University of Lorraine, Nancy, France.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medicine Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(5)Integrated BioBank of Luxembourg, Dudelange, Luxembourg.
(6)University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
(7)Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(8)Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
the Netherlands.
(9)Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, Leiden University, Leiden, the 
Netherlands.
(10)Computation Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(11)Mathematics and Computer Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, 
Argonne, IL, USA.
(12)School of Medicine, University of Galway, Galway, Ireland. 
ines.thiele@universityofgalway.ie.
(13)Ryan Institute, University of Galway, Galway, Ireland. 
ines.thiele@universityofgalway.ie.
(14)Division of Microbiology, University of Galway, Galway, Ireland. 
ines.thiele@universityofgalway.ie.
(15)APC Microbiome Ireland, Cork, Ireland. ines.thiele@universityofgalway.ie.

The human microbiome influences the efficacy and safety of a wide variety of 
commonly prescribed drugs. Designing precision medicine approaches that 
incorporate microbial metabolism would require strain- and molecule-resolved, 
scalable computational modeling. Here, we extend our previous resource of 
genome-scale metabolic reconstructions of human gut microorganisms with a 
greatly expanded version. AGORA2 (assembly of gut organisms through 
reconstruction and analysis, version 2) accounts for 7,302 strains, includes 
strain-resolved drug degradation and biotransformation capabilities for 98 
drugs, and was extensively curated based on comparative genomics and literature 
searches. The microbial reconstructions performed very well against three 
independently assembled experimental datasets with an accuracy of 0.72 to 0.84, 
surpassing other reconstruction resources and predicted known microbial drug 
transformations with an accuracy of 0.81. We demonstrate that AGORA2 enables 
personalized, strain-resolved modeling by predicting the drug conversion 
potential of the gut microbiomes from 616 patients with colorectal cancer and 
controls, which greatly varied between individuals and correlated with age, sex, 
body mass index and disease stages. AGORA2 serves as a knowledge base for the 
human microbiome and paves the way to personalized, predictive analysis of 
host-microbiome metabolic interactions.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41587-022-01628-0
PMCID: PMC10497413
PMID: 36658342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.