---
reference_id: "PMID:37063661"
title: "Case report: Three novel variants on SLC25A13 in four infants with neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency."
authors:
- Wang K
- Zou B
- Chen F
- Zhang J
- Huang Z
- Shu S
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1103877
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Three novel variants on SLC25A13 in four infants with neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency.
**Authors:** Wang K, Zou B, Chen F, Zhang J, Huang Z, Shu S
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2023.1103877](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.1103877)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Mar 29;11:1103877. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1103877. 
eCollection 2023.

Case report: Three novel variants on SLC25A13 in four infants with neonatal 
intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency.

Wang K(1), Zou B(1), Chen F(1), Zhang J(1), Huang Z(1), Shu S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical Collage, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency 
(NICCD) is a common clinical phenotype of citrin deficiency in infants. Its 
phenotype is atypical, so genetic testing is quite necessary for the diagnosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report 4 patients with jaundice and low body weight. 
Furthermore, the biochemical examination of all showed abnormal liver function 
and metabolic changes. DNA samples of the patients were extracted and subjected 
to genetic screening. All candidate pathogenic variants were validated by Sanger 
sequencing, and CNVs were ascertained by qPCR. The genetic screening revealed 6 
variants in 4 patients, and all patients carried compound heterozygous variants 
of SLC25A13. Importantly, 3 variants were newly discovered: a nonsense mutation 
in exon17 (c.1803C > G), a frameshift mutation in exon 11(c.1141delG) and a 
deletion of the whole exon11. Thus, four NICCD patients were clearly caused by 
variants of SLC25A13. Biochemical indicators of all patients gradually returned 
to normal after dietary adjustment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study clarified the genetic etiology of the four infants, 
expanded the variant spectrum of SLC25A13, and provided a basis for genetic 
counseling of the family. Early diagnosis and intervention should be given to 
patients with NICCD.

© 2023 Wang, Zou, Chen, Zhang, Huang and Shu.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.1103877
PMCID: PMC10090684
PMID: 37063661

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.