---
reference_id: "PMID:31559730"
title: Treatment of maple syrup urine disease with high flow hemodialysis in a neonate.
authors:
- Aygün F
- Kıykım E
- Aktuğlu-Zeybek Ç
- Zubarioğlu T
- Cam H
journal: Turk J Pediatr
year: '2019'
doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2019.01.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of maple syrup urine disease with high flow hemodialysis in a neonate.
**Authors:** Aygün F, Kıykım E, Aktuğlu-Zeybek Ç, Zubarioğlu T, Cam H
**Journal:** Turk J Pediatr (2019)
**DOI:** [10.24953/turkjped.2019.01.017](https://doi.org/10.24953/turkjped.2019.01.017)

## Content

1. Turk J Pediatr. 2019;61(1):107-110. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2019.01.017.

Treatment of maple syrup urine disease with high flow hemodialysis in a neonate.

Aygün F(1), Kıykım E(2), Aktuğlu-Zeybek Ç(2), Zubarioğlu T(2), Cam H(1).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Pediatric Intensive Care, Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa
Faculty of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(2)Divisions of Nutrition and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul
University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.

Aygün F, Kıykım E, Aktuğlu-Zeybek Ç, Zubarioğlu T, Cam H. Treatment of maple
syrup urine disease with high flow hemodialysis in a neonate. Turk J Pediatr
2019; 61: 107-110. Continious renal replacement therapy (CRRT) is a well
recognizied treatment of choice in acute renal failure, however CRRT became a
preferred treatment of metabolic emergencies with high leucine and ammonia
levels like Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD). MSUD is a rare metabolic disorder
caused by deficiency in the activity of the branched-chain a-ketoacid
dehydrogenase complex. The toxic accumulation of branched chain amino acids
during acute metabolic decompensation is associated with the appearance of
permanent neurological symptoms. Four patients were admitted to our pediatric
intensive care department with complains of poor feeding, vomitting,
irratibility and coma. Physical examination of the neonates were similar having
stupor, hypotonia and depressed newborn reflexes. The leucine levels were
between 930-4400 μmol/L. The diagnosis of MSUD was confirmed in all four. They
were treated successfully with high flow CRRT having the rates were between 4120
ml/h/1.73m2 and 9830 ml/h/1.73m2. Early treatment is essential to prevent
neurotoxicity and death. CRRT is a choice of treatment in metabolic crisis of
MSUD. Herein, we report the successful treatment of acute metabolic
decompensation of MSUD with CRRT in 4 neonates.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjped.2019.01.017
PMID: 31559730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
