---
reference_id: "PMID:36592223"
title: "CACNA1A-Related Channelopathies: Clinical Manifestations and Treatment Options."
authors:
- Indelicato E
- Boesch S
journal: Handb Exp Pharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/164_2022_625
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ataxia/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/therapy, drug therapy"
- "Channelopathies/drug therapy, genetics, therapy"
- Migraine Disorders/drug therapy
- Mutation
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CACNA1A-Related Channelopathies: Clinical Manifestations and Treatment Options.
**Authors:** Indelicato E, Boesch S
**Journal:** Handb Exp Pharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/164_2022_625](https://doi.org/10.1007/164_2022_625)

## Content

1. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2023;279:227-248. doi: 10.1007/164_2022_625.

CACNA1A-Related Channelopathies: Clinical Manifestations and Treatment Options.

Indelicato E(1), Boesch S(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Rare Movement Disorders Innsbruck, Department of Neurology, 
Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. 
elisabetta.indelicato@i-med.ac.at.
(2)Center for Rare Movement Disorders Innsbruck, Department of Neurology, 
Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

In the last decade, variants in the Ca2+ channel gene CACNA1A emerged as a 
frequent aetiology of rare neurological phenotypes sharing a common denominator 
of variable paroxysmal manifestations and chronic cerebellar dysfunction. The 
spectrum of paroxysmal manifestations encompasses migraine with hemiplegic aura, 
episodic ataxia, epilepsy and paroxysmal non-epileptic movement disorders. 
Additional chronic neurological symptoms range from severe developmental 
phenotypes in early-onset cases to neurobehavioural disorders and chronic 
cerebellar ataxia in older children and adults.In the present review we 
systematically approach the clinical manifestations of CACNA1A variants, 
delineate genotype-phenotype correlations and elaborate on the emerging concept 
of an age-dependent phenotypic spectrum in CACNA1A disease. We furthermore 
reflect on different therapy options available for paroxysmal symptoms in 
CACNA1A and address open issues to prioritize in the future clinical research.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/164_2022_625
PMID: 36592223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]