---
reference_id: "PMID:21705976"
title: Pathophysiology of beta thalassaemia.
authors:
- Origa R
- Galanello R
journal: Pediatr Endocrinol Rev
year: '2011'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of beta thalassaemia.
**Authors:** Origa R, Galanello R
**Journal:** Pediatr Endocrinol Rev (2011)

## Content

1. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2011 Mar;8 Suppl 2:263-70.

Pathophysiology of beta thalassaemia.

Origa R(1), Galanello R.

Author information:
(1)Unitá di Ricerca Clinica Fase 1 srl-A.O. G.Brotzu-Cagliari, Italy.

In beta thalassemia, unbalanced alpha globin chain synthesis results in severely 
rheologically compromised erythrocytes with premature destruction in the 
peripheral circulation and ineffective erythropoiesis within the bone marrow and 
in extramedullary sites. In nontransfused beta thalassemia patients, 
erythropoiesis,anemia and hypoxia down-regulate hepcidin, the master regulator 
of iron homeostasis. Hepcidin deficiency in turn allows excessive duodenal iron 
absorption and development of systemic iron overload. In regularly transfused 
patients iron overload is mostly due to red cell breakdown. When the iron 
binding capacity of transferrin is saturated, iron can appear in the serum in a 
free form, called Non-Transferrin-Bound Iron, a powerful catalyst for the 
formation of free radicals, capable of causing oxidative stress and damage to 
mitochondria, lysosomes, lipid membranes, proteins, and DNA. Apart from the iron 
overload-related complications, other pathological conditions such as bone 
disease, gallstones and thromboembolic events occur in a relevant proportion of 
subjects with thalassemia.

PMID: 21705976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]