---
reference_id: "PMID:34577817"
title: "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis: A Review of Diagnosis and Management."
authors:
- Frantz R
- Huang S
- Are A
- Motaparthi K
journal: Medicina (Kaunas)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/medicina57090895
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Cyclosporine/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Skin
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis: A Review of Diagnosis and Management.
**Authors:** Frantz R, Huang S, Are A, Motaparthi K
**Journal:** Medicina (Kaunas) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medicina57090895](https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina57090895)

## Content

1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Aug 28;57(9):895. doi: 10.3390/medicina57090895.

Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis: A Review of Diagnosis 
and Management.

Frantz R(1), Huang S(2), Are A(1), Motaparthi K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32606, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32606, USA.

Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (SJS) and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (TEN) are rare 
diseases that are characterized by widespread epidermal necrosis and sloughing 
of skin. They are associated with significant morbidity and mortality, and early 
diagnosis and treatment is critical in achieving favorable outcomes for 
patients. In this scoping review, Excerpta Medica dataBASE and PubMed were 
searched for publications that addressed recent advances in the diagnosis and 
management of the disease. Multiple proteins (galectin 7 and RIP3) were 
identified that are promising potential biomarkers for SJS/TEN, although both 
are still in early phases of research. Regarding treatment, cyclosporine is the 
most effective therapy for the treatment of SJS, and a combination of 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) and corticosteroids is most effective for 
SJS/TEN overlap and TEN. Due to the rare nature of the disease, there is a lack 
of prospective, randomized controlled trials and conducting these in the future 
would provide valuable insights into the management of this disease.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57090895
PMCID: PMC8472007
PMID: 34577817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.