---
reference_id: "PMID:28371242"
title: "Oxytocin treatment in children with Prader-Willi syndrome: A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study."
authors:
- Miller JL
- Tamura R
- Butler MG
- Kimonis V
- Sulsona C
- Gold JA
- Driscoll DJ
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38160
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Over Studies
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Oxytocin/administration & dosage"
- Potassium/blood
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/blood, drug therapy, pathology"
- Quality of Life
- Sodium/blood
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxytocin treatment in children with Prader-Willi syndrome: A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study.
**Authors:** Miller JL, Tamura R, Butler MG, Kimonis V, Sulsona C, Gold JA, Driscoll DJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38160](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38160)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 May;173(5):1243-1250. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38160. Epub 
2017 Mar 30.

Oxytocin treatment in children with Prader-Willi syndrome: A double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, crossover study.

Miller JL(1), Tamura R(2), Butler MG(3), Kimonis V(4), Sulsona C(1), Gold JA(5), 
Driscoll DJ(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Departmentof Pediatrics College of Medicine, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida.
(2)Health Informatics Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida.
(3)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and Pediatrics, Kansas 
University Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas.
(4)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California Irvine, Irvine, California.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Loma Linda 
University Medical school, Loma Linda, California.
(6)Center for Epigenetics, College of Medicine, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a rare, complex multisystem genetic disorder 
which includes hypothalamic dysfunction, hyperphagia, cognitive and behavioral 
problems, increased anxiety, and compulsive behaviors. Individuals with PWS have 
a deficit of oxytocin producing neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the 
hypothalamus. Oxytocin plays a role in regulation of feeding behaviors, social 
interactions, and emotional reactivity, which are all issues that significantly 
affect the quality of life for individuals with this syndrome. We performed a 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study in 24 children with PWS at 
three academic institutions using 5 days of intranasal oxytocin (IN-OT) or 5 
days of intranasal placebo spray, followed by a 4 week washout period, and then 
patients returned for 5 days of treatment with the alternate source. 
Questionnaires, including the Aberrant Behavior Checklist, Social Responsiveness 
Scale, Repetitive Behavior Scale - Revised, and the Hyperphagia Questionnaire, 
as well as Clinical Global Impression scales were administered. Blood testing 
for sodium, potassium, and glucose levels on days 2, 4, and 6, and a 24 hr diet 
recall. All scales factor improvement from Day 3 to Day 6 favored oxytocin over 
placebo. No single factor showed a statistically significant difference 
(P < 0.05) between groups at Day 6. The drug effect appeared to be diminished at 
Day 14. There was no evidence of a difference between oxytocin and placebo in 
safety lab parameters, 60 min post dose vital signs, weight, or diet parameters. 
The results from this study suggest that low dose intranasal oxytocin is safe 
for individuals with PWS and may result in reduction in appetite drive, and 
improvements in socialization, anxiety, and repetitive behaviors. Further, 
long-term studies with a larger population of participants are necessary to 
confirm these findings. The results of this study are encouraging that oxytocin 
may be a safe and effective treatment for many of the issues that negatively 
impact individuals with PWS.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38160
PMCID: PMC5828021
PMID: 28371242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.