---
reference_id: "PMID:38715109"
title: A healthcare claims analysis to identify and characterize patients with suspected X-Linked Myotubular Myopathy (XLMTM) in the Brazilian Healthcare System.
authors:
- Souza PVS
- Haselkorn T
- Baima J
- Oliveira RW
- Hernández F
- Birck MG
- França MC Jr
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03144-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myopathies, Structural, Congenital/diagnosis, pathology"
- Male
- Brazil
- Child
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Delivery of Health Care
- Female
- Young Adult
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A healthcare claims analysis to identify and characterize patients with suspected X-Linked Myotubular Myopathy (XLMTM) in the Brazilian Healthcare System.
**Authors:** Souza PVS, Haselkorn T, Baima J, Oliveira RW, Hernández F, Birck MG, França MC Jr
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03144-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03144-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 May 7;19(1):188. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03144-7.

A healthcare claims analysis to identify and characterize patients with 
suspected X-Linked Myotubular Myopathy (XLMTM) in the Brazilian Healthcare 
System.

Souza PVS(1), Haselkorn T(2), Baima J(2), Oliveira RW(3), Hernández F(4), Birck 
MG(3), França MC Jr(5).

Author information:
(1)Federal University of Sao Paulo, Neuromuscular Unit, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Astellas Gene Therapies, San Francisco, USA.
(3)IQVIA, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(4)IQVIA, Bogota, Colombia.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), School of Medical 
Sciences, Campinas, Brazil. mcfjr@unicamp.br.

BACKGROUND: X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a rare, life-threatening 
congenital disease, which is not well-defined. To our knowledge, no studies 
characterizing the XLMTM disease burden have been conducted in Brazil. We 
identified and described patients with suspected XLMTM using administrative 
claims data from the Brazilian public healthcare system.
METHODS: Data from 2015 to 2019 were extracted from the DATASUS database. As no 
XLMTM-specific ICD-10 code was available, a stepwise algorithm was applied to 
identify patients with suspected XLMTM by selecting male patients with a 
congenital myopathies code (G71.2), aged < 18 years at index date (first claim 
of G71.2), with an associated diagnostic procedure (muscle biopsy/genetic test) 
and without spinal muscular atrophy or Duchenne muscular dystrophy. We attempted 
to identify patients with suspected severe XLMTM based on use of both 
respiratory and feeding support, which are nearly universal in the care of XLMTM 
patients. Analyses were performed for the overall cohort and stratified by age 
at index date < 5 years old and ≥ 5 years old.
RESULTS: Of 173 patients with suspected XLMTM identified, 39% were < 5 years old 
at index date. Nearly all (N = 166) patients (96%) were diagnosed by muscle 
biopsy (91% of patients < 5 years old and 99% of patients ≥ 5 years old), six 
(3.5%) were diagnosed by clinical evaluation (8% of patients < 5 years old and 
1% of patients ≥ 5 years old), and one was diagnosed by a genetic test. Most 
patients lived in Brasilia (n = 55), São Paulo (n = 33) and Minas Gerais 
(n = 27). More than 85% of patients < 5 years old and approximately 75% of 
patients ≥ 5 years old had physiotherapy at the index date. In both age groups, 
nearly 50% of patients required hospitalization at some point and 25% required 
mobility support. Respiratory and feeding support were required for 3% and 12% 
of patients, respectively, suggesting that between 5 and 21 patients may have 
had severe XLMTM.
CONCLUSION: In this real-world study, genetic testing for XLMTM appears to be 
underutilized in Brazil and may contribute to underdiagnosis of the disease. 
Access to diagnosis and care is limited outside of specific regions with 
specialized clinics and hospitals. Substantial use of healthcare resources 
included hospitalization, physiotherapy, mobility support, and, to a lesser 
extent, feeding support and respiratory support.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03144-7
PMCID: PMC11077759
PMID: 38715109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PVSS is a neurologist, assistant at Ambulatório 
de Doenças Neuromusculares (UNIFESP-EPM); TH and JB are employees and 
shareholders of Astellas Gene Therapy. CP is a consultant to Astellas Gene 
Therapy. RWO, FH, and MGB are employees of IQVIA. MF is a professor at the 
School of Medicine at UNICAMP.