---
reference_id: "PMID:10728684"
title: Irradiated mammary gland stroma promotes the expression of tumorigenic potential by unirradiated epithelial cells.
authors:
- Barcellos-Hoff MH
- Ravani SA
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2000'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Irradiated mammary gland stroma promotes the expression of tumorigenic potential by unirradiated epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Barcellos-Hoff MH, Ravani SA
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2000)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 1;60(5):1254-60.

Irradiated mammary gland stroma promotes the expression of tumorigenic potential 
by unirradiated epithelial cells.

Barcellos-Hoff MH(1), Ravani SA.

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 
California 94720, USA. mhbarcellos-hoff@lbl.gov

We have shown that ionizing radiation, a known carcinogen of human breast, 
elicits rapid, persistent, and global changes in the mammary microenvironment as 
evidenced by altered extracellular matrix composition and growth factor 
activities. To address whether these events contribute to radiogenic 
carcinogenesis, we evaluated the effect of irradiated mammary stroma on the 
neoplastic potential of COMMA-D mammary epithelial cells. Although COMMA-D cells 
harbor mutations in both alleles of p53, they are nontumorigenic when injected 
s.c. into syngeneic hosts. Unirradiated COMMA-D cells transplanted to mammary 
fat pads cleared previously of epithelia preferentially formed tumors in 
irradiated hosts. Tumor incidence at 6 weeks was 81% +/- 12 SE when animals were 
irradiated with 4 Gy, 3 days prior to transplantation, compared with 19% +/- 2 
SE (P < 0.005) in sham-irradiated hosts. This effect was evident when cells were 
transplanted 1 to 14 days after irradiation. Furthermore, tumors were 
significantly larger (243.1 +/- 61.3 mm3 versus 30.8 +/- 8.7 mm3) and arose more 
quickly (100% by 6 weeks versus 39% over 10 weeks in sham hosts) in fat pads in 
irradiated hosts. The contribution of local versus systemic effects was 
evaluated using hemibody (left versus right) irradiation; tumors formed only in 
fat pads on the irradiated side. These data indicate that radiation-induced 
changes in the stromal microenvironment can contribute to neoplastic progression 
in vivo. Disruption of solid tissue interactions is a heretofore unrecognized 
activity of ionizing radiation as a carcinogen.

PMID: 10728684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]