---
reference_id: "PMID:40392407"
title: "Recognizing multiple epiphyseal dysplasia in children presenting with joint pain: a commonly overlooked skeletal dysplasia."
authors:
- Daşar T
- İmren G
- Yıldız AE
- Demir GÜ
- Utine GE
- Yılmaz G
- Kiper PÖŞ
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-025-06176-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Child
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, diagnosis, complications"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Arthralgia/etiology
- Adolescent
- Retrospective Studies
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recognizing multiple epiphyseal dysplasia in children presenting with joint pain: a commonly overlooked skeletal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Daşar T, İmren G, Yıldız AE, Demir GÜ, Utine GE, Yılmaz G, Kiper PÖŞ
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-025-06176-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-025-06176-8)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2025 May 20;184(6):350. doi: 10.1007/s00431-025-06176-8.

Recognizing multiple epiphyseal dysplasia in children presenting with joint 
pain: a commonly overlooked skeletal dysplasia.

Daşar T(1)(2), İmren G(3), Yıldız AE(4), Demir GÜ(5), Utine GE(1)(5), Yılmaz 
G(6), Kiper PÖŞ(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Division, Department of Pediatric Basic Sciences, Institute of Child 
Health, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara Sincan 
Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(5)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Department of Orthopedics, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(7)Genetics Division, Department of Pediatric Basic Sciences, Institute of Child 
Health, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. poskiper@gmail.com.
(8)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. poskiper@gmail.com.

Multiple epiphyseal dysplasias are relatively common skeletal disorders, and 
diagnosing children can often be challenging due to various presenting 
complaints, including joint pain, short stature, waddling gait, joint 
deformities, and myopathy findings. Patients may experience early-onset 
osteoarthritis, and in some cases, joint replacement therapy may be required. 
Radiographs are characterized by flat, small, and irregularly shaped epiphyses, 
especially in the hips and knees. Multiple epiphyseal dysplasias are caused by 
variants in the genes encoding important cartilage extracellular matrix 
proteins, enzymes, and transporter proteins, including COMP, MATN3, COL9A1, 
COL9A2, COL9A3, CANT1, and SLC26A2. We aimed to investigate the clinical, 
radiographic, and molecular findings, along with the natural course of the 
disease, in a group of patients with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. The children 
with a clinical diagnosis of multiple epiphyseal dysplasia and their affected 
parents registered at our center over a period of 20 years were evaluated. The 
clinical and radiographic findings were reviewed. The genetic test was performed 
whenever possible, with the aid of Sanger sequencing or exome sequencing as 
appropriate. A total of 27 patients (21 children and six affected parents) from 
14 unrelated families were clinically diagnosed with multiple epiphyseal 
dysplasia. The genetic etiology could be revealed in 25 patients (n = 25/27, 
92.5%) from 12 unrelated families. Of the 25 patients, 16 (64%) were male and 
nine (36%) were female. The age at genetic diagnosis ranged from 4 to 50 years, 
with a median age of 10 years. Nine patients (9/25, 36%) had short stature, 17 
(17/25, 68%) experienced joint pain, and seven (7/25, 28%) required orthopedic 
surgery. The most frequent complaints leading to referral were joint pain and 
difficulty walking. Genetic tests revealed a total of 12 variants in 12 
families, among which three were novel: COMP (13/25 patients, 52%; 7/12 
families, 58.3%), MATN3 (5/25 patients, 20%; 2/12 families, 16.6%), SLC26A2 
(5/25 patients, 20%; 2/12 families, 16.6%), and COL9A2 (2/25 patients, 8%; 1/12 
families 8.3%). Of the patients who underwent orthopedic surgery (n = 7), five 
had COMP variants. Patients with COMP variants exhibited a more severe 
phenotype, consistent with the literature.
CONCLUSION: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasias represent a genetically heterogeneous 
group of disorders that may present clinical and diagnostic challenges. This 
condition should be considered when evaluating patients who experience joint 
pain and have radiographic findings suggestive of Perthes disease. A 
comprehensive skeletal survey and genetic tests are essential for the accurate 
diagnosis and management of this condition.
WHAT IS KNOWN: • MED represents one of the most prevalent categories of skeletal 
dysplasias, presenting clinically with progressive joint pain, skeletal 
deformities, gait disturbances, or features suggestive of an underlying 
myopathy.
WHAT IS NEW: • In this study, we present 25 patients with MED, identify three 
novel variants, establish significant correlations between genotype and 
phenotype, and demonstrate how genetic analysis facilitates the differentiation 
of MED subtypes, thereby offering clearer insights into the genetic foundations 
and clinical implications of this condition.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-025-06176-8
PMCID: PMC12092524
PMID: 40392407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval: The study 
protocol was approved by the Hacettepe University Ethics Committee (GO 
17/321–19) and followed the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Consent 
to participate: Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants 
and the parents included in the study. Competing interests: The authors declare 
no competing interests.