---
reference_id: "PMID:38873993"
title: ARID1A restrains EMT and stemness of ovarian cancer cells through the Hippo pathway.
authors:
- Xu S
- Zhu C
- Xu Q
- An Z
- Xu S
- Xuan G
- Lin C
- Tang C
journal: Int J Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3892/ijo.2024.5664
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Movement
- Cell Proliferation
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Hippo Signaling Pathway
- "Neoplastic Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Nuclear Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- "Transcription Factors/metabolism, genetics"
- Transcriptional Coactivator with PDZ-Binding Motif Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ARID1A restrains EMT and stemness of ovarian cancer cells through the Hippo pathway.
**Authors:** Xu S, Zhu C, Xu Q, An Z, Xu S, Xuan G, Lin C, Tang C
**Journal:** Int J Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3892/ijo.2024.5664](https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo.2024.5664)

## Content

1. Int J Oncol. 2024 Aug;65(2):76. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2024.5664. Epub 2024 Jun 14.

ARID1A restrains EMT and stemness of ovarian cancer cells through the Hippo
pathway.

Xu S(1), Zhu C(2), Xu Q(1), An Z(1), Xu S(1), Xuan G(3), Lin C(4), Tang C(1).

Author information:
(1)National Clinical Research Center for Child Health of the Children's
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310052,
P.R. China.
(2)The Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Gynecology, Ningbo Women and Children's Hospital, Ningbo,
Zhejiang 315012, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310052, P.R. China.

Genes encoding subunits of SWI/SNF (BAF) chromatin‑remodeling complexes are
recurrently mutated in a broad array of tumor types, and among the subunits,
ARID1A is the most frequent target with mutations. In the present study, it was
reported that ARID1A inhibits the epithelial‑mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
stemness of ovarian cancer cells, accompanied by reduced cell viability,
migration and colony formation, suggesting that ARID1A acts as a tumor
suppressor in ovarian cancer. Mechanistically, ARID1A exerts its inhibitory
effects on ovarian cancer cells by activating the Hippo signaling pathway.
Conversely, the overexpression of a gain‑of‑function transcriptional
co‑activator with PDZ‑binding motif (TAZ) mutant (TAZ‑Ser89) effectively
reverses the effects induced by ARID1A. In addition, activation of Hippo
signaling apparently upregulates ARID1A protein expression, whereas ectopic
expression of TAZ‑Ser89 results in the markedly decreased ARID1A levels,
indicating a feedback of ARID1A‑TAZ in regulating ovarian cancer cell EMT and
stemness. Thus, the present study uncovered the role of ARID1A through the
Hippo/TAZ pathway in modulating EMT and stemness of ovarian cancer cells, and
providing with evidence that TAZ inhibitors could effectively prevent initiation
and metastasis of ovarian cancer cases where ARID1A is lost or mutated.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2024.5664
PMCID: PMC11251745
PMID: 38873993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
