---
reference_id: "PMID:37963210"
title: The Chromatin Remodeler CHD4 Sustains Ewing Sarcoma Cell Survival by Controlling Global Chromatin Architecture.
authors:
- Graca Marques J
- Pavlovic B
- Ngo QA
- Pedot G
- Roemmele M
- Volken L
- Kisele S
- Perbet R
- Wachtel M
- Schäfer BW
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-22-3950
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Survival
- Chromatin/genetics
- DNA
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/genetics
- RNA-Binding Protein EWS
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Chromatin Remodeler CHD4 Sustains Ewing Sarcoma Cell Survival by Controlling Global Chromatin Architecture.
**Authors:** Graca Marques J, Pavlovic B, Ngo QA, Pedot G, Roemmele M, Volken L, Kisele S, Perbet R, Wachtel M, Schäfer BW
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-22-3950](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-22-3950)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2024 Jan 16;84(2):241-257. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-22-3950.

The Chromatin Remodeler CHD4 Sustains Ewing Sarcoma Cell Survival by Controlling
Global Chromatin Architecture.

Graca Marques J(1), Pavlovic B(#)(1), Ngo QA(#)(1), Pedot G(1), Roemmele M(1),
Volken L(1), Kisele S(1), Perbet R(2), Wachtel M(1), Schäfer BW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(#)Contributed equally

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive cancer with a defective response to DNA damage
leading to an enhanced sensitivity to genotoxic agents. Mechanistically, Ewing
sarcoma is driven by the fusion transcription factor EWS-FLI1, which reprograms
the tumor cell epigenome. The nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD)
complex is an important regulator of chromatin function, controlling both gene
expression and DNA damage repair, and has been associated with EWS-FLI1
activity. Here, a NuRD-focused CRISPR/Cas9 inactivation screen identified the
helicase CHD4 as essential for Ewing sarcoma cell proliferation. CHD4 silencing
induced tumor cell death by apoptosis and abolished colony formation. Although
CHD4 and NuRD colocalized with EWS-FLI1 at enhancers and super-enhancers, CHD4
promoted Ewing sarcoma cell survival not by modulating EWS-FLI1 activity and its
oncogenic gene expression program but by regulating chromatin structure. CHD4
depletion led to a global increase in DNA accessibility and induction of
spontaneous DNA damage, resulting in an increased susceptibility to DNA-damaging
agents. CHD4 loss delayed tumor growth in vivo, increased overall survival, and
combination with PARP inhibition by olaparib treatment further suppressed tumor
growth. Collectively, these findings highlight the NuRD subunit CHD4 as a
therapeutic target in Ewing sarcoma that can potentiate the antitumor activity
of genotoxic agents.
SIGNIFICANCE: CRISPR/Cas9 screening in Ewing sarcoma identifies a dependency on
CHD4, which is crucial for the maintenance of chromatin architecture to suppress
DNA damage and a promising therapeutic target for DNA damage repair-deficient
malignancies.

©2023 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-22-3950
PMID: 37963210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
