---
reference_id: "PMID:37580033"
title: "National Hospital-Based Sentinel Surveillance for Cholera in Bangladesh: Epidemiological Results from 2014 to 2021."
authors:
- Islam MT
- Hegde ST
- Khan AI
- Bhuiyan MTR
- Khan ZH
- Ahmmed F
- Begum YA
- Afrad MH
- Amin MA
- Tanvir NA
- Khan II
- Habib ZH
- Alam AN
- McMillan NA
- Shirin T
- Azman AS
- Qadri F
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.23-0074
content_type: abstract_only
---

# National Hospital-Based Sentinel Surveillance for Cholera in Bangladesh: Epidemiological Results from 2014 to 2021.
**Authors:** Islam MT, Hegde ST, Khan AI, Bhuiyan MTR, Khan ZH, Ahmmed F, Begum YA, Afrad MH, Amin MA, Tanvir NA, Khan II, Habib ZH, Alam AN, McMillan NA, Shirin T, Azman AS, Qadri F
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.23-0074](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.23-0074)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2023 Aug 14;109(3):575-583. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.23-0074.
Print  2023 Sep 6.

National Hospital-Based Sentinel Surveillance for Cholera in Bangladesh: 
Epidemiological Results from 2014 to 2021.

Islam MT(1)(2), Hegde ST(3), Khan AI(1), Bhuiyan MTR(1), Khan ZH(1), Ahmmed 
F(1), Begum YA(1), Afrad MH(1), Amin MA(1), Tanvir NA(1), Khan II(1), Habib 
ZH(4), Alam AN(4), McMillan NA(2), Shirin T(4), Azman AS(3), Qadri F(1).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Division, International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease 
Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b), Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)School of Medical Science, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR), Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.

Despite focusing on cholera burden, epidemiologic studies in Bangladesh tend to 
be limited in geographic scope. National-level cholera surveillance data can 
help inform cholera control strategies and assess the effectiveness of 
preventive measures. Hospital-based sentinel surveillance among patients with 
suspected diarrhea in different sites across Bangladesh has been conducted since 
2014. We selected an age-stratified sample of 20 suspected cholera cases each 
week from each sentinel site, tested stool for the presence of Vibrio cholerae 
O1/O139 by culture, and characterized antibiotic susceptibility in a subset of 
culture-positive isolates. We estimated the odds of being culture positive among 
suspected cholera cases according to different potential risk factors. From May 
4, 2014 through November 30, 2021, we enrolled 51,414 suspected cases from our 
sentinel surveillance sites. We confirmed V. cholerae O1 in 5.2% of suspected 
cases through microbiological culture. The highest proportion of confirmed 
cholera cases was from Chittagong (9.7%) and the lowest was from Rangpur 
Division (0.9%). Age, number of purges, duration of diarrhea, occupation, and 
season were the most relevant factors in distinguishing cholera-positive 
suspected cases from cholera-negative suspected cases. Nationwide surveillance 
data show that cholera is circulating in Bangladesh and the southern region is 
more affected than the northern region. Antimicrobial resistance patterns 
indicate that multidrug resistance (resistance to three or more classes of 
antibiotics) of V. cholerae O1 could be a major threat in the future. Alignment 
of these results with Bangladesh's cholera-control program will be the 
foundation for future research into the efficacy of cholera-control initiatives.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.23-0074
PMCID: PMC10484282
PMID: 37580033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]