---
reference_id: "PMID:15146186"
title: "Cornelia de Lange syndrome is caused by mutations in NIPBL, the human homolog of Drosophila melanogaster Nipped-B."
authors:
- Krantz ID
- McCallum J
- DeScipio C
- Kaur M
- Gillis LA
- Yaeger D
- Jukofsky L
- Wasserman N
- Bottani A
- Morris CA
- Nowaczyk MJ
- Toriello H
- Bamshad MJ
- Carey JC
- Rappaport E
- Kawauchi S
- Lander AD
- Calof AL
- Li HH
- Devoto M
- Jackson LG
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/ng1364
keywords:
- Animals
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 5/genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "De Lange Syndrome/embryology, genetics, pathology"
- Drosophila Proteins/genetics
- Drosophila melanogaster/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Insect"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Species Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cornelia de Lange syndrome is caused by mutations in NIPBL, the human homolog of Drosophila melanogaster Nipped-B.
**Authors:** Krantz ID, McCallum J, DeScipio C, Kaur M, Gillis LA, Yaeger D, Jukofsky L, Wasserman N, Bottani A, Morris CA, Nowaczyk MJ, Toriello H, Bamshad MJ, Carey JC, Rappaport E, Kawauchi S, Lander AD, Calof AL, Li HH, Devoto M, Jackson LG
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1364](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1364)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Jun;36(6):631-5. doi: 10.1038/ng1364. Epub 2004 May 16.

Cornelia de Lange syndrome is caused by mutations in NIPBL, the human homolog of
Drosophila melanogaster Nipped-B.

Krantz ID(1), McCallum J, DeScipio C, Kaur M, Gillis LA, Yaeger D, Jukofsky L,
Wasserman N, Bottani A, Morris CA, Nowaczyk MJ, Toriello H, Bamshad MJ, Carey
JC, Rappaport E, Kawauchi S, Lander AD, Calof AL, Li HH, Devoto M, Jackson LG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia and The University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. ian2@mail.med.upenn.edu

Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; OMIM 122470) is a dominantly inherited
multisystem developmental disorder characterized by growth and cognitive
retardation; abnormalities of the upper limbs; gastroesophageal dysfunction;
cardiac, ophthalmologic and genitourinary anomalies; hirsutism; and
characteristic facial features. Genital anomalies, pyloric stenosis, congenital
diaphragmatic hernias, cardiac septal defects, hearing loss and autistic and
self-injurious tendencies also frequently occur. Prevalence is estimated to be
as high as 1 in 10,000 (ref. 4). We carried out genome-wide linkage exclusion
analysis in 12 families with CdLS and identified four candidate regions, of
which chromosome 5p13.1 gave the highest multipoint lod score of 2.7. This
information, together with the previous identification of a child with CdLS with
a de novo t(5;13)(p13.1;q12.1) translocation, allowed delineation of a 1.1-Mb
critical region on chromosome 5 for the gene mutated in CdLS. We identified
mutations in one gene in this region, which we named NIPBL, in four sporadic and
two familial cases of CdLS. We characterized the genomic structure of NIPBL and
found that it is widely expressed in fetal and adult tissues. The fly homolog of
NIPBL, Nipped-B, facilitates enhancer-promoter communication and regulates Notch
signaling and other developmental pathways in Drosophila melanogaster.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1364
PMCID: PMC4902017
PMID: 15146186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
