---
reference_id: "PMID:25697599"
title: Cytokines as therapeutic targets in rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases.
authors:
- Siebert S
- Tsoukas A
- Robertson J
- McInnes I
journal: Pharmacol Rev
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1124/pr.114.009639
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytokines as therapeutic targets in rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases.
**Authors:** Siebert S, Tsoukas A, Robertson J, McInnes I
**Journal:** Pharmacol Rev (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1124/pr.114.009639](https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.114.009639)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Rev. 2015;67(2):280-309. doi: 10.1124/pr.114.009639.

Cytokines as therapeutic targets in rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory 
diseases.

Siebert S(1), Tsoukas A(2), Robertson J(2), McInnes I(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom (S.S., J.R., I.M.); and Division of Rheumatology, McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (A.T.) 
stefan.siebert@glasgow.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom (S.S., J.R., I.M.); and Division of Rheumatology, McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (A.T.).

The human immune system involves highly complex and coordinated processes in 
which small proteins named cytokines play a key role. Cytokines have been 
implicated in the pathogenesis of a number of inflammatory and autoimmune 
diseases. Cytokines are therefore attractive therapeutic targets in these 
conditions. Anticytokine therapy for inflammatory diseases became a clinical 
reality with the introduction of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors for the 
treatment of severe rheumatoid arthritis. Although these therapies have 
transformed the treatment of patients with severe inflammatory arthritis, there 
remain significant limiting factors: treatment failure is commonly seen in the 
clinic; safety concerns remain; there is uncertainty regarding the relevance of 
immunogenicity; the absence of biomarkers to direct therapy decisions and high 
drug costs limit availability in some healthcare systems. In this article, we 
provide an overview of the key efficacy and safety trials for currently approved 
treatments in rheumatoid arthritis and review the major lessons learned from a 
decade of use in clinical practice, focusing mainly on anti-TNF and 
anti-interleukin (IL)-6 agents. We also describe the clinical application of 
anticytokine therapies for other inflammatory diseases, particularly within the 
spondyloarthritis spectrum, and highlight differential responses across 
diseases. Finally, we report on the current state of trials for newer 
therapeutic targets, focusing mainly on the IL-17 and IL-23 pathways.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/pr.114.009639
PMID: 25697599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]