---
reference_id: PMID:29360981
title: From a dominant to an oligogenic model of inheritance with environmental modifiers in acute intermittent porphyria.
authors:
- Lenglet H
- Schmitt C
- Grange T
- Manceau H
- Karboul N
- Bouchet-Crivat F
- Robreau AM
- Nicolas G
- Lamoril J
- Simonin S
- Mirmiran A
- Karim Z
- Casalino E
- Deybach JC
- Puy H
- "Peoc'h K"
- Gouya L
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy030
keywords:
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- Female
- France/epidemiology
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- Humans
- Hydroxymethylbilane Synthase/genetics
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Penetrance
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/enzymology, epidemiology, genetics"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From a dominant to an oligogenic model of inheritance with environmental modifiers in acute intermittent porphyria.
**Authors:** Lenglet H, Schmitt C, Grange T, Manceau H, Karboul N, Bouchet-Crivat F, Robreau AM, Nicolas G, Lamoril J, Simonin S, Mirmiran A, Karim Z, Casalino E, Deybach JC, Puy H, Peoc'h K, Gouya L
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy030](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy030)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Apr 1;27(7):1164-1173. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy030.

From a dominant to an oligogenic model of inheritance with environmental
modifiers in acute intermittent porphyria.

Lenglet H(1)(2), Schmitt C(1)(3)(4), Grange T(5), Manceau H(1)(6), Karboul N(1),
Bouchet-Crivat F(1), Robreau AM(1)(4), Nicolas G(1), Lamoril J(7), Simonin S(4),
Mirmiran A(1), Karim Z(1), Casalino E(2)(3), Deybach JC(1)(3)(4), Puy
H(1)(3)(4)(8), Peoc'h K(1)(3)(6)(8), Gouya L(1)(3)(4)(8).

Author information:
(1)UMRs 1149, Centre de Recherche sur l'Inflammation, Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, F-75018 Paris, France.
(2)Département des Urgences, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, HUPNVS,
Hôpital Bichat, F-75018 Paris, France.
(3)Université Paris Diderot, F-75018 Paris, France.
(4)Centre Français des Porphyries, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
HUPNVS, Hôpital Louis Mourier, F-92701 Colombes, France.
(5)INSERM UMR_S1048 Laboratory for Vascular Translational Science (LVTS)
Université Paris Diderot, F-75018 Paris, France.
(6)Laboratoire de Biochimie, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, HUPNVS,
Hôpital Beaujon, 92110 Clichy, France and DHU Unity.
(7)Département de Génétique, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, HUPNVS,
Hôpital Bichat, F-75018 Paris, France.
(8)Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, F-75015 Paris, France.

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is a disease affecting the heme biosynthesis
pathway caused by mutations of the hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMBS) gene. AIP
is thought to display autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance.
We evaluated the prevalence, penetrance and heritability of AIP, in families
with the disease from the French reference center for porphyria (CFP) (602 overt
patients; 1968 relatives) and the general population, using Exome Variant Server
(EVS; 12 990 alleles) data. The pathogenicity of the 42 missense variants
identified was assessed in silico, and in vitro, by measuring residual HMBS
activity of the recombinant protein. The minimal estimated prevalence of AIP in
the general population was 1/1299. Thus, 50 000 subjects would be expected to
carry the AIP genetic trait in France. Penetrance was estimated at 22.9% in
families with AIP, but at only 0.5-1% in the general population. Intrafamily
correlation studies showed correlations to be strong overall and modulated by
kinship and the area in which the person was living, demonstrating strong
influences of genetic and environmental modifiers on inheritance. Null alleles
were associated with a more severe phenotype and a higher penetrance than for
other mutant alleles. In conclusion, the striking difference in the penetrance
of HMBS mutations between the general population and the French AIP families
suggests that AIP inheritance does not follow the classical autosomal dominant
model, instead of being modulated by strong environmental and genetic factors
independent from HMBS. An oligogenic inheritance model with environmental
modifiers might better explain AIP penetrance and heritability.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy030
PMID: 29360981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
