---
reference_id: "PMID:40996818"
title: Antimicrobial resistance rates of Campylobacter species isolated from clinical samples during 2010-2011 and 2023-2024 in Serbia.
authors:
- Tambur Z
- Miljković-Selimović B
- Biočanin V
- Stanojević I
- Kljajić D
- Rakonjac B
- Bulajić N
journal: Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1556/030.2025.02685
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antimicrobial resistance rates of Campylobacter species isolated from clinical samples during 2010-2011 and 2023-2024 in Serbia.
**Authors:** Tambur Z, Miljković-Selimović B, Biočanin V, Stanojević I, Kljajić D, Rakonjac B, Bulajić N
**Journal:** Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1556/030.2025.02685](https://doi.org/10.1556/030.2025.02685)

## Content

1. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2025 Sep 25;72(3):256-260. doi: 
10.1556/030.2025.02685. Print 2025 Oct 9.

Antimicrobial resistance rates of Campylobacter species isolated from clinical 
samples during 2010-2011 and 2023-2024 in Serbia.

Tambur Z(1), Miljković-Selimović B(2), Biočanin V(1), Stanojević I(3), Kljajić 
D(4), Rakonjac B(3), Bulajić N(3).

Author information:
(1)1Faculty of Stomatology, University Business Academy in Novi Sad, Pančevo, 
Serbia.
(2)2Faculty of Medicine, University of Niš, Serbia.
(3)3Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)4City Institute of Public Health, Belgrade, Serbia.

Campylobacteriosis is the most frequent zoonosis in Europe and its most 
important human pathogens are Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli. 
Resistance of Campylobacter to fluoroquinolones and tetracyclines, previously 
recommended for treatment of prolonged or complicated disease, has been 
emerging. We examined phenotypic resistance to erythromycin, tetracycline, 
ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and imipenem in 150 
Campylobacter isolates from human stool during 2010-2011 and the same number of 
strains during 2023-2024, using the antimicrobial gradient method in both 
periods, to determine minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). Comparing the two 
periods, resistance rate of C. jejuni increased by 35% and 38.43% to tetracyclin 
and ciprofloxacin, respectively and decreased by 0.83% to erythromycin. 
Prevalence of resistance in C. coli increased by 42.59% and 42.01% against 
tetracyclin and ciprofloxacin, respectively and all isolates were sensitive to 
erythromycin. Resistance of C. jejuni to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid decreased 
by 0.96% and increased by 3.70% in C. coli. All isolates showed sensitivity for 
imipenem in both periods, while only 2% of C. jejuni strains were resistant to 
gentamicin in 2023-2024. The difference of mean MICs for all antibiotics was 
statistically significant in two examined periods, with exception of those for 
erythromycin both in C. jejuni and C. coli. In 2023-2024, 79 isolates of C. 
jejuni and 22 isolates of C. coli were resistant against two and more 
antibiotics, most frequently tetracycline and ciprofloxacin. The present study 
provides evidence that in Campylobacter spp. the antimicrobial resistance to 
ciprofloxacin and tetracycline is on rise in Serbia. Our findings are in 
accordance with recent reports from countries geographically close to Serbia.

DOI: 10.1556/030.2025.02685
PMID: 40996818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]