---
reference_id: "PMID:31203306"
title: An Inflammation-Immunity Classifier of 11 Chemokines for Prediction of Overall Survival in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma.
authors:
- Liang Y
- Feng G
- Zhong S
- Gao X
- Tong Y
- Cui W
- Huang G
- Zhang Z
- Zhou X
journal: Med Sci Monit
year: '2019'
doi: 10.12659/MSM.915248
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# An Inflammation-Immunity Classifier of 11 Chemokines for Prediction of Overall Survival in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Liang Y, Feng G, Zhong S, Gao X, Tong Y, Cui W, Huang G, Zhang Z, Zhou X
**Journal:** Med Sci Monit (2019)
**DOI:** [10.12659/MSM.915248](https://doi.org/10.12659/MSM.915248)

## Content

1. Med Sci Monit. 2019 Jun 16;25:4485-4494. doi: 10.12659/MSM.915248.

An Inflammation-Immunity Classifier of 11 Chemokines for Prediction of Overall 
Survival in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Liang Y(1), Feng G(1), Zhong S(1), Gao X(1), Tong Y(1), Cui W(1), Huang G(1), 
Zhang Z(1), Zhou X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital 
of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China (mainland).
(2)Life Science Institute, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China 
(mainland).

BACKGROUND Chemokines are important in inflammation, immunity, tumor 
progression, and metastasis. The purpose of this research was to find an 
integrated-RNA signature of chemokine family genes to predict the survival 
prognosis in head and neck squamous carcinoma (HNSC) patients. MATERIAL AND 
METHODS Relevant data of 504 HNSC patients were extracted from The Cancer Genome 
Atlas (TCGA) database. Through analyzing RNA sequencing data, the univariate Cox 
model was used to identify chemokine family genes associated with survival and 
then to develop a multiple-RNA signature in the training set. The prediction 
value of this multiple-RNA signature was further verified in the validation and 
entire sets. The receiver operating characteristic curves were used to assess 
the predictive value of this multiple-RNA signature. RESULTS Eleven chemokines 
were included in this prognostic signature. Based on this 11-chemokine 
signature, we further categorized patients as high or low risk. Compared with 
low-risk patients, high-risk patients had shorter overall survival (OS) time in 
the training set [hazard ratio (HR)=3.497, 95% confidence interval 
(CI)=2.142-5.711, p<0.001], validation set (HR=3.575, 95% CI=1.988-6.390, 
p<0.001), and entire set (HR=3.416, 95% CI=2.363-4.939, p<0.001). This 
11-chemokine signature was an independent prognostic factor for OS in these 
datasets (p<0.05). The AUC values for predicting overall survival within 48 
months in the training, validation, and entire sets were 0.71, 0.69, and 0.69, 
respectively. CONCLUSIONS This 11-chemokine signature could serve as a reliable 
prognostic tool for HNSC patients and might be useful to guide individualized 
treatment or even gene target therapy for high-risk patients.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.915248
PMCID: PMC6592142
PMID: 31203306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSC) is the sixth most common and frequently lethal cancer worldwide, with about 350 000 cancer-related deaths per year [1]. The current staging system has limitation in identifying high-risk HNSC because large variability in clinical outcomes was found in same-stage patients [2–6]. To identify high-risk HNSC patients, new prognostic biomarkers are urgently needed for guiding the personalized treatment.

Chemokines are a particular group of cytokines that were originally described as being chemotactic to leukocytes [7]. They can bind to 7-transmembrane domain G-protein-coupled receptors that are predominantly expressed by leukocytes [8]. Chemokines are classified into 4 different subgroups (CXC, CC, CX3C, or C) depending on the position of the conserved cysteine residue [9]. Chemokines are closely associated with inflammation, immunity, tumor development, and prognosis [10–12]. Chemokines play vital roles in all phases of oncogenesis, tumor growth, angiogenesis, malignant transformation, and metastatic dissemination in HNSC patients [9–13]. Many studies have shown that these single biomarkers cannot be widely used for the prediction of tumor prognosis because of their controversial conclusions and the heterogeneity between tumors [14–17]. Risk stratification may require combined multiple-molecular biomarkers. The gene expression profiles were produced simultaneously by high-throughput sequencing during the past 2 decades. Therefore, we can use a bioinformatic discovery approach to identify a multiple-RNA classifier that can improve the prediction of overall survival in HNSC patients.

The clinical data for age, gender, primary sites, and clinical stage were downloaded from the TCGA database using the cBioPortal platform (2018.12.01). The inclusion criteria were: (i) histological diagnosis of HNSC; and (ii) adequate clinical characteristics (gender, age, primary sites, clinical stage, overall survival status, and time). Altogether, 504 HNSC patients were included and randomly divided into the training set (n=252) and validation set (n=252, detail shown in Table 1). The numbers of stage I, II, III, and IV patients were 20, 97, 104, and 283, respectively. In addition, 10 HNSC patients had received neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy; the other 494 patients had not. There were 334 HNSC patients <65 years, and the other 170 patients were >65 years. A total of 371 patients were male, and the other 133 patients were female. The RNA expression data of level 3 were downloaded from the cBioPortal platform and normalized. Chemokines were selected for which the expression data of >80% of HNSC patients were more than 0.

In the training set (n=252), we estimated the expression of the selected chemokines with overall survival (OS) by using the univariate Cox model. The candidate chemokines with a p-value of less than 0.05 were used to construct a predictive model by a multivariate Cox model. We calculated the prognostic risk score by the selected chemokines and their regression coefficients in the multivariate Cox model [18–20], as follow: Risk Score=expCCL2 * βCCL2+expCCL7 * βCCL7+expCCL22 * βCCL22+expXCL2 * βXCL2+expCXCL5 * βCXCL5+expCXCL8 * βCXCL8+expCCR4 * βCCR4+expCCR6 * βCCR6+expCCR7 * βCCR7+expXCR1 * βXCR1+expCX3CR1 * βCX3CR1 (exp=expression level; β=the regression coefficient derived from the multivariate Cox model). To plot the Kaplan-Meier curves in these sets, we classified the patients into low or high risk by the same cutoff point, based on the Youden index in the training set [21]. Survival differences between different risk groups were assessed and compared by the Kaplan-Meier estimate and log-rank test in the training, validation, and entire set. The time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis for this 11-chemokine signature was performed for the prediction ability of OS within 48 months by using the “survival ROC” package. If the p values were less than 0.05, the log-rank test, Cox regression analysis, and ROC curve analysis were considered to be significant.

To better understand the underlying function of these selected chemokines, the gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were analyzed using the Database for Annotation Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) [22].

The research flow for the development of this prognostic signature is shown in Figure 1. Gene expression data of 46 chemokines were extracted from TCGA sequencing data, and we further fitted these 46 chemokines in the univariate Cox model for the training set (n=252, shown in Supplementary Table 1). Therefore, we identified 11 chemokines whose expressions were significantly correlated with OS (p<0.05, shown in Table 1). Among the 11 chemokines, the coefficients in univariate Cox regression of CCL2, CCL7, CXCL5, and CXCL7 in univariate Cox model were positive, indicating that their higher levels of gene expression were associated with worse prognosis. In contrast, the coefficients of CCL22, XCL2, CCR4, CCR6, CCR7, XCR1, and CX3CR1 were negative, indicating that their higher levels of gene expression were associated with better prognosis.

The entire study cohort of 504 patients was randomly grouped into training (n=252) and validation (n=252) sets. Based on these chemokines and their regression coefficients in the multivariate Cox model, we calculated the risk scores for each patient in the training (n=252), validation (n=252), and entire (n=504) sets (Figure 2). Using the cutoff value of risk scores (0.83074), HNSC patients were divided into a low-risk group and a high-risk group for training (low-risk/high-risk: 94/158) and validation (low-risk/high-risk: 58/194) sets. After integrating analysis of these 2 sets, there were 152 low-risk patients and 352 high-risk patients in the entire set (n=504). As shown in Figure 2, high-risk HNSC patients tended to have higher risk of death in the training, validation, and entire sets.

Table 2 lists the comprehensive clinical features of HNSC patients in the low-risk and high-risk groups. As shown in Figure 3A and Table 3, further validation of this 11-chemokine signature using Kaplan-Meier and log-rank analysis significantly predicted OS in the training [hazard ratio (HR)=3.497, 95% confidence interval (CI)=2.142–5.711, p<0.001], validation (HR=3.575, 95% CI=1.988–6.390, p<0.001), and entire (HR=3.324, 95% CI=2.363–4.939, p<0.001) sets. These results indicated that high-risk HNSC patients had significantly shorter OS than low-risk patients.

We further assessed whether this risk score was independent of these clinical factors (age, sex, clinical stage, and primary sites) by a multivariate Cox model. As shown in Table 4, this integrated 11-chemokine signature was identified as an independent prognostic factor in the training, validation, and entire sets (all p<0.001) for HNSC patients. Hence, our findings suggest that this integrated 11-chemokine signature may become a reliable and independent biomarker for the prediction of overall survival in HNSC patients.

As shown in Figure 3B, the AUC values for predicting overall survival within 48 months in the training, validation, and entire sets were 0.71, 0.69, and 0.69, respectively, highlighting the validity of this 11-chemokine signature.

Gene functional analysis indicated 29 GO terms and 4 KEGG pathways which these 11 chemokines were enriched in (Figure 4A, 4B). The main 9 participating GO terms contained chemokine-mediated (GO: 0070098), inflammatory response (GO: 0006954), cellular response to interleukin-1 (GO: 00071347), neutrophil chemotaxis (GO: 0030593), cellular response to tumor necrosis factor (GO: 0071356), lymphocyte chemotaxis (GO: 0048247), monocyte chemotaxis (GO: 0002548), chemokine activity (GO: 0008009), and CCR chemokine receptor (GO: 0048020). The key involved KEGG pathways were chemokine signaling pathway (Kegg: 04062), cytokine-cytokine receptor (Kegg: 04060), NOD-like receptor signaling pathway (Kegg: 04621), and Malaria (Kegg: 05144).

Although the current tumor staging system has been used to define the risk stratification of HNSC for many years, it is inadequate at identifying high-risk HNSC patients [4,6,23,24]. Inconsistent clinical outcomes always existed among the same-stage patients with HNSC [5,25]. Many studies demonstrated that chemokine family genes play a pivotal role in tumor inflammation, immunity, progression, and metastasis [26–29]. A multiple-gene prognostic biomarker of chemokine family genes is urgently needed and may contribute to the identification of potential HNSC patients with worse prognosis. To identify this multiple-gene prognostic biomarker, we profiled chemokine ligands and their receptors by mining the RNA sequencing data of TCGA. Based on the bioinformatic discovery and validation method, we constructed an 11-chemokine signature that can improve the prognostic prediction of overall survival in HNSC patients. The clinical utility of this signature can improve the predictive ability of the current staging system. In addition, the clinical application of this signature could classify patients with HNSC into low-risk and high-risk groups after radical surgery. High-risk patients with HNSC had worse prognosis than low-risk patients. This signature may be used as an additional biomarker for identifying potentially high-risk patients, which may contribute to personalized treatment for HNSC.

There are 7 protective genes (CCL22, XCL2, CCR4, CCR6, CCR7, XCR1, CX3CR1) and 4 risk genes (CCL2, CCL7, CXCL5, CXCL8) in this 11-chemokine signature. Previous research indicated that CCL2 and CCL7 are associated with tumor proliferation, invasion, migration, and tumor burden [30,31]. In HNSC cells, decreased CXCL5 expression inhibits cell proliferation and reduces cell migration and invasion in vitro and inhibits tumor formation in vivo [32]. CXCL8 is known to be a promoter of angiogenesis and a regulator of cell growth and motility in HNSC [33]. The serum level of CXCL8 was used to predict a lower survival rate in patients, because the chemokine promotes metastasis by neutrophil infiltration and stimulates vascular endothelial cell proliferation, survival, and migration [34–36].

Several studies found that CCR7 expression was significantly associated with nodal metastasis [37–40]. Tsujikawa et al. concluded that CCR4 expression in primary HNSCC cells may be an attractive diagnostic biomarker to predict lymph node metastasis and subsequent prognosis of HNSC patients [41]. However, levels of CCL22 in the peripheral blood have no correlation with tumor stage of HNSC [42]. A previous study showed that high expression of CCR7 was associated with disease-free survival and CCR4 was correlated with tumor site, showing higher immune-reactive scores in tumors of the oral cavity [24]. CCR6 and CCR7 mRNA levels were significantly decreased in lymph node (+) patients with laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) [43]. The prognostic effect of these remaining chemokines (XCL2, XCR1, and CX3CR1) in HNSC should be further explored.

We should acknowledge some potential limitations for this 11-chemokine signature. Firstly, gene enrichment analysis found that this 11-chemokine signature was mainly involved in 9 GO terms and 4 KEGG pathways., but the GO terms and KEGG pathways involved by these 11 chemokines were not confirmed by cell, animal, or clinical studies. Further studies may should be performed to provide potential therapeutic targets for HNSC. Secondly, only 46 chemokine family genes were selected for in this study. The connection between overall survival and mRNA levels of the remaining 14 chemokines should be studied by tumor specimens of HNSC furtherly. Thirdly, this 11-chemokine signature was constructed by a bioinformatic discovery and validation approach. This prognostic signature was not further verified by protein level data of Western blot or immunohistochemistry or RNA level data of quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction from clinical tumor specimens. Moreover, research in other databases is needed to verify the potential significance of this signature among different cohorts of HNSC patients.

We performed a comprehensive analysis of chemokines mRNA expression profiles and clinical data of HNSC patients in the TCGA database. Then, we identified an 11-chemokine signature that may improve the prediction of overall survival in HNSC patients. This is the first study to demonstrate the link between an 11-chemokine signature and overall survival in HNSC patients. Our results may support useful risk stratification of overall survival in HNSC patients, which would contribute to gene target treatment for HNSC. However, this 11-chemokine signature should be further tested by tumor specimens of HNSC before clinical application.

Univariate Cox regression analysis of chemokine family genes associated with overall survival in the training set (n=252, TCGA).

CI – confidence index; HR – hazard ratio.