---
reference_id: "PMID:14580687"
title: Susceptibility to arsenic-induced hyperkeratosis and oxidative stress genes myeloperoxidase and catalase.
authors:
- Ahsan H
- Chen Y
- Kibriya MG
- Islam MN
- Slavkovich VN
- Graziano JH
- Santella RM
journal: Cancer Lett
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0304-3835(03)00471-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Susceptibility to arsenic-induced hyperkeratosis and oxidative stress genes myeloperoxidase and catalase.
**Authors:** Ahsan H, Chen Y, Kibriya MG, Islam MN, Slavkovich VN, Graziano JH, Santella RM
**Journal:** Cancer Lett (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0304-3835(03)00471-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0304-3835(03)00471-3)

## Content

1. Cancer Lett. 2003 Nov 10;201(1):57-65. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3835(03)00471-3.

Susceptibility to arsenic-induced hyperkeratosis and oxidative stress genes 
myeloperoxidase and catalase.

Ahsan H(1), Chen Y, Kibriya MG, Islam MN, Slavkovich VN, Graziano JH, Santella 
RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columfbia 
University, Room-720G, 722 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA. 
habidul.ahsan@columbia.edu

Chronic exposure to inorganic arsenic is known to cause non-melanocytic skin and 
internal cancers in humans. We examined whether genetic susceptibility, as 
determined by single nucleotide polymorphisms -463G-->A and -262C-->T in the 
oxidative stress genes myeloperoxidase (MPO) and catalase (CAT), respectively, 
are associated with the risk of arsenic-induced hyperkeratotic skin 
lesions-precursors of skin cancer-in a case-control study in Bangladesh. 
Carriers of the susceptible MPO and CAT genotypes were at elevated risk (OR 2.1 
and 95% CI 0.7-6.2 for MPO; OR 1.9 and 95% CI 0.8-4.7 for CAT) of hyperkeratosis 
after adjustment for arsenic exposure and other covariates. Subjects carrying 
the high-risk MPO genotype and with high arsenic exposure were at almost six 
times (OR 5.8; 95% CI 1.1-30.1) elevated risk of developing hyperkeratosis as 
compared to those carrying the low-risk genotype and with low arsenic exposure. 
Similarly, highly exposed subjects carrying the high-risk CAT genotype were at 
more than four times (OR 4.6; 95% CI 1.4-15.6) elevated risk of developing 
hyperkeratosis as compared to those carrying the low-risk genotype and with low 
arsenic exposure. Our findings, although based on small numbers, suggest that 
the oxidative stress genes MPO and CAT may influence the risk of arsenic-induced 
premalignant hyperkeratotic skin lesions.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3835(03)00471-3
PMID: 14580687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]