---
reference_id: "PMID:16042221"
title: "Reappraisal of Lhermitte's sign in multiple sclerosis."
authors:
- Al-Araji AH
- Oger J
journal: Mult Scler
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1191/1352458505ms1177oa
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Head Movements
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Motor Activity
- "Multiple Sclerosis/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Pain
- Reference Values
- Sensation Disorders/classification
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reappraisal of Lhermitte's sign in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Al-Araji AH, Oger J
**Journal:** Mult Scler (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1191/1352458505ms1177oa](https://doi.org/10.1191/1352458505ms1177oa)

## Content

1. Mult Scler. 2005 Aug;11(4):398-402. doi: 10.1191/1352458505ms1177oa.

Reappraisal of Lhermitte's sign in multiple sclerosis.

Al-Araji AH(1), Oger J.

Author information:
(1)Multiple Sclerosis Clinic, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
adnanalaraji@yahoo.com

Lhermitte's sign (LS) is strongly linked to multiple sclerosis (MS). Our aim is
to reassess its frequency, natural history, various characteristics and
neuroradiological correlation in a cohort of MS patients attending our
specialized MS clinic and to propose a working definition. Consecutive patients
with CDMS and normal controls were interviewed using a structured questionnaire.
Cervical MRIs were reviewed when available. There were 300 MS patients and 100
normal controls. Forty-one per cent of the patients and none of the controls
reported having LS during the course of their illness. In 53% of those who
reported LS, it started in the first three years of the illness and began as an
isolated symptom in 64% and was polysymptomatic in 36%. In all patients LS was a
short-lasting sensation in all patient who experienced it and was mostly
stereotyped in individual patients. Characteristics varied widely between
patients. Forty-three patients had cervical MRIs; 17 out of 18 patients who
reported LS had abnormalities, whereas only 13 out of the 25 with no LS had
abnormalities. The results indicate that LS is highly prevalent in MS, is
commonly stereotyped in individual patients, has a variable natural course and
correlates significantly with cervical MRI abnormalities. A working definition
is proposed.

DOI: 10.1191/1352458505ms1177oa
PMID: 16042221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
