---
reference_id: PMID:37998390
title: Molecular Mechanisms Associated with Antifungal Resistance in Pathogenic Candida Species.
authors:
- Czajka KM
- Venkataraman K
- Brabant-Kirwan D
- Santi SA
- Verschoor C
- Appanna VD
- Singh R
- Saunders DP
- Tharmalingam S
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12222655
keywords:
- Antifungal Agents/pharmacology
- Candida/genetics
- Fluconazole/pharmacology
- Echinocandins/pharmacology
- Azoles/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Mechanisms Associated with Antifungal Resistance in Pathogenic Candida Species.
**Authors:** Czajka KM, Venkataraman K, Brabant-Kirwan D, Santi SA, Verschoor C, Appanna VD, Singh R, Saunders DP, Tharmalingam S
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12222655](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12222655)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Nov 19;12(22):2655. doi: 10.3390/cells12222655.

Molecular Mechanisms Associated with Antifungal Resistance in Pathogenic Candida 
Species.

Czajka KM(1), Venkataraman K(1)(2), Brabant-Kirwan D(3), Santi SA(3), Verschoor 
C(1)(2)(3), Appanna VD(2), Singh R(1)(3), Saunders DP(1)(3), Tharmalingam 
S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Sciences Division, NOSM University, 935 Ramsey Lake Rd., Sudbury, ON 
P3E 2C6, Canada.
(2)School of Natural Sciences, Laurentian University, Sudbury, ON P3E 2C6, 
Canada.
(3)Health Sciences North Research Institute, Sudbury, ON P3E 2H2, Canada.

Candidiasis is a highly pervasive infection posing major health risks, 
especially for immunocompromised populations. Pathogenic Candida species have 
evolved intrinsic and acquired resistance to a variety of antifungal 
medications. The primary goal of this literature review is to summarize the 
molecular mechanisms associated with antifungal resistance in Candida species. 
Resistance can be conferred via gain-of-function mutations in target pathway 
genes or their transcriptional regulators. Therefore, an overview of the known 
gene mutations is presented for the following antifungals: azoles (fluconazole, 
voriconazole, posaconazole and itraconazole), echinocandins (caspofungin, 
anidulafungin and micafungin), polyenes (amphotericin B and nystatin) and 
5-fluorocytosine (5-FC). The following mutation hot spots were identified: (1) 
ergosterol biosynthesis pathway mutations (ERG11 and UPC2), resulting in azole 
resistance; (2) overexpression of the efflux pumps, promoting azole resistance 
(transcription factor genes: tac1 and mrr1; transporter genes: CDR1, CDR2, MDR1, 
PDR16 and SNQ2); (3) cell wall biosynthesis mutations (FKS1, FKS2 and PDR1), 
conferring resistance to echinocandins; (4) mutations of nucleic acid 
synthesis/repair genes (FCY1, FCY2 and FUR1), resulting in 5-FC resistance; and 
(5) biofilm production, promoting general antifungal resistance. This review 
also provides a summary of standardized inhibitory breakpoints obtained from 
international guidelines for prominent Candida species. Notably, N. glabrata, P. 
kudriavzevii and C. auris demonstrate fluconazole resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12222655
PMCID: PMC10670235
PMID: 37998390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.