---
reference_id: "PMID:29869595"
title: Poor Sensitivity of Commercial Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Hepatitis B e Antigen in Senegal, West Africa.
authors:
- Seck A
- Ndiaye F
- Maylin S
- Ndiaye B
- Simon F
- Funk AL
- Fontanet A
- Takahashi K
- Akbar SMF
- Mishiro S
- Bercion R
- Vray M
- Shimakawa Y
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0116
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Poor Sensitivity of Commercial Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Hepatitis B e Antigen in Senegal, West Africa.
**Authors:** Seck A, Ndiaye F, Maylin S, Ndiaye B, Simon F, Funk AL, Fontanet A, Takahashi K, Akbar SMF, Mishiro S, Bercion R, Vray M, Shimakawa Y
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.18-0116](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.18-0116)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Aug;99(2):428-434. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0116. Epub
2018  May 31.

Poor Sensitivity of Commercial Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Hepatitis B e Antigen 
in Senegal, West Africa.

Seck A(1)(2), Ndiaye F(3), Maylin S(4), Ndiaye B(2), Simon F(4), Funk AL(5), 
Fontanet A(6)(5), Takahashi K(7), Akbar SMF(7), Mishiro S(7), Bercion R(2), Vray 
M(8)(5), Shimakawa Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculté de Médecine, Pharmacie et d'Odontologie, Université Cheikh Anta Diop 
de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal.
(2)Laboratoire de Biologie Médicale, Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal.
(3)Université Paris-Est Créteil, Paris, France.
(4)Laboratoire de Virologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(5)Unité d'Épidémiologie des Maladies Émergentes, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.
(6)Unité PACRI, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Medical Sciences, Toshiba General Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Unité d'Épidémiologie des Maladies Infectieuses, Institut Pasteur de Dakar, 
Dakar, Sénégal.

Limited access to nucleic acid tests for hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA is a 
significant barrier to the effective management of chronic HBV infection in 
resource-poor countries. Alternatively, HBV e antigen (HBeAg) may accurately 
indicate high viral replication. We assessed the diagnostic performance of three 
commercially available rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) for HBeAg (SD Bioline, 
Insight and OneStep) against a quantitative chemiluminescent immunoassay (CLIA, 
Architect). Using stored sera from adults with chronic HBV infection, we tested 
RDTs in three groups in Senegal (48 HBeAg-positive, 196 HBeAg-negative, and 117 
cases with high HBV DNA (≥ 106 IU/mL)) and one group in France (17 
HBeAg-positive East Asians). In Senegal, the sensitivity and specificity for 
HBeAg detection were 29.8% and 100% for SD Bioline, 31.1% and 100% for Insight, 
and 42.5% and 98.4% for OneStep, respectively. The lower limits of detection of 
these RDTs were very high (> 2.5 log10 Paul Ehrlich Institut units/mL). Their 
low sensitivity was also confirmed in HBeAg-positive Asian samples (35.3-52.9%). 
The prevalence of HBeAg in highly viremic (≥ 106 IU/mL) Senegalese patients was 
low: 58.1% using CLIA and 24.5-37.5% using RDTs. Hepatitis B e antigen 
prevalence was similarly low in a subgroup of 28 Senegalese women of 
childbearing age with a high viral load (≥ 106 IU/mL). Approximately, half of 
highly viremic adults do not carry HBeAg in Africa, and HBeAg RDTs had 
remarkably poor analytical and diagnostic sensitivity. This implies that 
HBeAg-based antenatal screening, particularly if using the currently available 
HBeAg RDTs, may overlook most pregnant women at high risk of mother-to-child 
transmission in Africa.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0116
PMCID: PMC6090320
PMID: 29869595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]