---
reference_id: "PMID:38535182"
title: The Host Response to Coccidioidomycosis.
authors:
- Kirkland TN
- Hung CY
- Shubitz LF
- Beyhan S
- Fierer J
journal: J Fungi (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jof10030173
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Host Response to Coccidioidomycosis.
**Authors:** Kirkland TN, Hung CY, Shubitz LF, Beyhan S, Fierer J
**Journal:** J Fungi (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jof10030173](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof10030173)

## Content

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2024 Feb 25;10(3):173. doi: 10.3390/jof10030173.

The Host Response to Coccidioidomycosis.

Kirkland TN(1)(2), Hung CY(3), Shubitz LF(4), Beyhan S(1)(5)(6), Fierer 
J(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, San Diego School of 
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, San Diego School of Medicine, University of 
California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.
(3)South Texas Center for Emerging Infectious Disease, Department of Molecular 
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 
78249, USA.
(4)Valley Fever Center for Excellence, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, 
USA.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.
(6)Infectious Diseases Section, VA Healthcare San Diego, San Diego, CA 92161, 
USA.

Coccidioidomycosis is an important fungal disease that is found in many desert 
regions of the western hemisphere. The inhaled organisms are highly pathogenic, 
but only half of infected, immunologically intact people develop symptomatic 
pneumonia; most symptomatic infections resolve spontaneously, although some 
resolve very slowly. Furthermore, second infections are very rare and natural 
immunity after infection is robust. Therefore, the host response to this 
organism is very effective at resolving the infection in most cases and 
immunizing to prevent second infections. People who are immunocompromised are 
much more likely to develop disseminated infection. This is a comprehensive 
review of the innate and acquired immune responses to Coccidioides spp., the 
genetics of resistance to severe infection, and the search for an effective 
vaccine.

DOI: 10.3390/jof10030173
PMCID: PMC10971205
PMID: 38535182

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.