---
reference_id: "PMID:33923722"
title: "Mycosis Fungoides and Sézary Syndrome: An Integrative Review of the Pathophysiology, Molecular Drivers, and Targeted Therapy."
authors:
- García-Díaz N
- Piris MÁ
- Ortiz-Romero PL
- Vaqué JP
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cancers13081931
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycosis Fungoides and Sézary Syndrome: An Integrative Review of the Pathophysiology, Molecular Drivers, and Targeted Therapy.
**Authors:** García-Díaz N, Piris MÁ, Ortiz-Romero PL, Vaqué JP
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers13081931](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13081931)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Apr 16;13(8):1931. doi: 10.3390/cancers13081931.

Mycosis Fungoides and Sézary Syndrome: An Integrative Review of the
Pathophysiology, Molecular Drivers, and Targeted Therapy.

García-Díaz N(1), Piris MÁ(2), Ortiz-Romero PL(3), Vaqué JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Department, Universidad de Cantabria-Instituto de
Investigación Marqués de Valdecilla, IDIVAL, 39011 Santander, Spain.
(2)Department of Pathology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, CIBERONC, 28040 Madrid,
Spain.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Institute i+12, CIBERONC,
Medical School, University Complutense, 28041 Madrid, Spain.

Primary cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCLs) constitute a heterogeneous group of
diseases that affect the skin. Mycosis fungoides (MF) and Sézary syndrome (SS)
account for the majority of these lesions and have recently been the focus of
extensive translational research. This review describes and discusses the main
pathobiological manifestations of MF/SS, the molecular and clinical features
currently used for diagnosis and staging, and the different therapies already
approved or under development. Furthermore, we highlight and discuss the main
findings illuminating key molecular mechanisms that can act as drivers for the
development and progression of MF/SS. These seem to make up an orchestrated
constellation of genomic and environmental alterations generated around
deregulated T-cell receptor (TCR)/phospholipase C, gamma 1, (PLCG1) and Janus
kinase/ signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) activities
that do indeed provide us with novel opportunities for diagnosis and therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13081931
PMCID: PMC8074086
PMID: 33923722

Conflict of interest statement: M.Á.P. has received research funding from
Millenium/Takeda, Gilead, and Kura, as well as lecture fees from
Millenium/Takeda and Jansen. M.Á.P. has also been involved as a consultant and
expert witness for Millenium/Takeda, Gilead, Celgene, Jansen, Nanostring, and
Kyowa Kirin. And he is one of the inventors of Spanish patent P201231760.
P.L.O.-R. has received research funding from MEDA and has been involved as a
consultant and expert witness for 4SC, Takeda, Actelion, Innate Pharma,
Recordati Rare Diseases, Kyowa Kirin, and miRagen. P.L.O.-R. is one of the
inventors of Spanish patent P201231760.
