---
reference_id: "PMID:25667833"
title: Akinetopsia as epileptic seizure.
authors:
- Sakurai K
- Kurita T
- Takeda Y
- Shiraishi H
- Kusumi I
journal: Epilepsy Behav Case Rep
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebcr.2013.04.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Akinetopsia as epileptic seizure.
**Authors:** Sakurai K, Kurita T, Takeda Y, Shiraishi H, Kusumi I
**Journal:** Epilepsy Behav Case Rep (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebcr.2013.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebcr.2013.04.002)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Behav Case Rep. 2013 May 20;1:74-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ebcr.2013.04.002. 
eCollection 2013.

Akinetopsia as epileptic seizure.

Sakurai K(1), Kurita T(1), Takeda Y(1), Shiraishi H(2), Kusumi I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, Hokkaido University School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, 
Japan.

Akinetopsia is a rare syndrome in which a patient specifically loses the ability 
to perceive visual motion following bilateral cortical lesions outside the 
striate cortex. We describe a patient who showed akinetopsia recurrently as 
epileptic seizures. The patient was a 61-year-old man. At age 46, a cerebral 
arteriovenous malformation in the right parietal lobe was discovered. At age 58, 
he began to have a recurrent visual symptom by which smooth movements of objects 
suddenly appeared, resembling freeze frames in a motion picture. This symptom 
was paroxysmal and recurrent. Both EEG and magnetoencephalography showed 
repetitive right temporal spikes. We diagnosed his visual symptom as 
akinetopsia, which was aroused by hyperexcitability of the right temporal and 
parietal cortices, including area MT/V5. We administered carbamazepine 
200 mg/day, which suppressed his akinetopsic symptom completely.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebcr.2013.04.002
PMCID: PMC4150625
PMID: 25667833