---
reference_id: "PMID:38711727"
title: "Clinical Conundrum: Unveiling a Unique Presentation of Hypopharyngeal Carcinoma."
authors:
- Sahai A
- Dixit R
- Choudhary R
- Marfatia H
- Mohapatra P
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.57727
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Conundrum: Unveiling a Unique Presentation of Hypopharyngeal Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Sahai A, Dixit R, Choudhary R, Marfatia H, Mohapatra P
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.57727](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.57727)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Apr 6;16(4):e57727. doi: 10.7759/cureus.57727. eCollection 2024 
Apr.

Clinical Conundrum: Unveiling a Unique Presentation of Hypopharyngeal Carcinoma.

Sahai A(1), Dixit R(1), Choudhary R(1), Marfatia H(1), Mohapatra P(1).

Author information:
(1)Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Seth GS Medical College and KEM 
Hospital, Mumbai, IND.

Dysphagia is a common symptom encountered in clinical practice, typically 
associated with a wide range of etiologies, including structural abnormalities, 
inflammatory conditions, neoplasms, and neurological disorders. However, the 
combination of subcutaneous emphysema, vocal cord palsy, enlarged arytenoids, 
and pooling of saliva in a dysphagic patient represents a rare and intriguing 
presentation. A 33-year-old female presented at a tertiary care hospital in 
Western India with hoarseness of voice, difficulty in swallowing, productive 
cough, and neck pain for two months with an abrupt increase in the severity of 
all symptoms in two days. A history of chewable tobacco use for six years was 
disclosed. Clinical evaluation revealed a thin build with platynychia and 
conjunctival pallor, dental staining, drooling of saliva, the presence of 
extensive subcutaneous emphysema on palpation of the neck, and absent laryngeal 
crepitus. Endoscopic evaluation was suggestive of right vocal cord palsy and 
enlarged, congested arytenoid cartilages, post-cricoid growth with pooling of 
saliva in bilateral pyriform fossae. A CT scan of the neck showed a 2x3 cm 
neoplastic growth in the hypopharynx, with subcutaneous emphysema and free air 
foci in the head and neck region, prompting an immediate tracheostomy and biopsy 
of the hypopharyngeal growth with Ryle's tube insertion. Squamous cell carcinoma 
was confirmed on the biopsy report. Due to its rarity, the possible underlying 
cause of idiopathic subcutaneous emphysema should be sought whenever encountered 
in clinical practice since these patients are potentially misdiagnosed. A high 
index of suspicion among clinicians, along with a consideration of the 
constellation of other symptoms and clinical features of a possible underlying 
hypopharyngeal cancer whenever encountering such patients is of key importance 
for prompting further investigations and treatment.

Copyright © 2024, Sahai et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.57727
PMCID: PMC11073763
PMID: 38711727

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.