---
reference_id: "PMID:39335185"
title: Response Rates and Transplantation Impact in Patients with Relapsed Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia.
authors:
- Costa A
- Gurnari C
- Scalzulli E
- Cicconi L
- Guarnera L
- Carmosino I
- Cerretti R
- Bisegna ML
- Capria S
- Minotti C
- Iori AP
- Torrieri L
- Venditti A
- Pulsoni A
- Martelli M
- Voso MT
- Breccia M
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16183214
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Response Rates and Transplantation Impact in Patients with Relapsed Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia.
**Authors:** Costa A, Gurnari C, Scalzulli E, Cicconi L, Guarnera L, Carmosino I, Cerretti R, Bisegna ML, Capria S, Minotti C, Iori AP, Torrieri L, Venditti A, Pulsoni A, Martelli M, Voso MT, Breccia M
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16183214](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16183214)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Sep 21;16(18):3214. doi: 10.3390/cancers16183214.

Response Rates and Transplantation Impact in Patients with Relapsed Acute
Promyelocytic Leukemia.

Costa A(1), Gurnari C(2), Scalzulli E(3), Cicconi L(4), Guarnera L(2), Carmosino
I(3), Cerretti R(2), Bisegna ML(3), Capria S(3), Minotti C(3), Iori AP(3),
Torrieri L(3), Venditti A(2), Pulsoni A(4), Martelli M(3), Voso MT(2), Breccia
M(3).

Author information:
(1)Hematology Unit, Businco Hospital, Department of Medical Sciences and Public
Health, University of Cagliari, 09121 Cagliari, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome Tor Vergata,
00133 Rome, Italy.
(3)Hematology, Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, Az.
Policlinico Umberto I-Sapienza University, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Hematology, Polo Universitario Pontino, S.M. Goretti Hospital,
04100 Latina, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The introduction of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic
trioxide (ATO) has radically improved the prognosis of acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL), with cure rates above 80%. While relapse occurs in less than 20%
of cases, addressing this issue remains challenging. Identifying effective
salvage therapies for relapsed APL is crucial to improve patient outcomes.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was performed on a multicentric cohort of 67
APL patients in first relapse, treated in three Italian hematology centers from
June 1981 to November 2021. The overall survival (OS) and cumulative incidence
of relapse (CIR) were calculated, and predictive factors were assessed using Cox
regression models.
RESULTS: Overall, 61 patients (91%) received ATO ± ATRA (40.3%), chemo-based
regimens (40.3%), or ATRA ± Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) (10.4%). Complete
remission (CR) was achieved in 98.2% of patients (molecular CR, n = 71.4%). With
a median follow-up time of 54.5 months, the 5-year OS was 73% in the ATO ± ATRA
group, 44% in the chemo-based group, and 29% in the ATRA ± GO group (p = 0.035).
The 5-year OS rate was also higher for transplant recipients vs. non-recipients
within the chemo-based cohort (50% vs. 33%, p = 0.017), but not in the ATO-based
cohort (p = 0.12). ATO-based salvage therapy resulted in better OS in both
univariate (p = 0.025) and multivariate analyses (p = 0.026). The 2-year CIR was
higher in patients without molecular CR vs. patients in molecular CR (66% vs.
24%, p = 0.034). Molecular CR was a significant predictor of second relapse in
both univariate (p = 0.035) and multivariate analyses (p = 0.036).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the efficacy of ATO-based therapies in first
relapse of APL and confirm the achievement of molecular remission as an
independent outcome predictor in both first and second APL relapse.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16183214
PMCID: PMC11429657
PMID: 39335185

Conflict of interest statement: M.B. received honoraria from Novartis, Incyte,
BMS/Celgene, Pfizer, and Abbvie. The other authors declare no conflicts of
interest.
