---
reference_id: "PMID:37331533"
title: "Natural biomarocmolecule-based antimicrobial hydrogel for rapid wound healing: A review."
authors:
- Farazin A
- Shirazi FA
- Shafiei M
journal: Int J Biol Macromol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.125454
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural biomarocmolecule-based antimicrobial hydrogel for rapid wound healing: A review.
**Authors:** Farazin A, Shirazi FA, Shafiei M
**Journal:** Int J Biol Macromol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.125454](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.125454)

## Content

1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2023 Jul 31;244:125454. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.125454. Epub 2023 Jun 16.

Natural biomarocmolecule-based antimicrobial hydrogel for rapid wound healing: A 
review.

Farazin A(1), Shirazi FA(2), Shafiei M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Solid Mechanics, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, University 
of Kashan, P.O. Box 87317-53153, Kashan, Iran. Electronic address: 
a.farazin@grad.kashanu.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biological Science, Alzahra 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Bacteriology, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

Antibacterial hydrogels are a type of hydrogel that is designed to inhibit the 
growth of bacteria and prevent infections. These hydrogels typically contain 
antibacterial agents that are either integrated into the polymer network or 
coated onto the surface of the hydrogel. The antibacterial agents in these 
hydrogels can work through a variety of mechanisms, such as disrupting bacterial 
cell walls or inhibiting bacterial enzyme activity. Some examples of 
antibacterial agents that are commonly used in hydrogels include silver 
nanoparticles, chitosan, and quaternary ammonium compounds. Antibacterial 
hydrogels have a wide range of applications, including wound dressings, 
catheters, and medical implants. They can help to prevent infections, reduce 
inflammation, and promote tissue healing. In addition, they can be designed with 
specific properties to suit different applications, such as high mechanical 
strength or controlled release of antibacterial agents over time. Hydrogel wound 
dressings have come a long way in recent years, and the future looks very 
promising for these innovative wound care products. Overall, the future of 
hydrogel wound dressings is very promising, and we can expect to see continued 
innovation and advancement in this field in the years to come.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.125454
PMID: 37331533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.