---
reference_id: "PMID:29445534"
title: Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder.
authors:
- Nesbitt AD
journal: J Thorac Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.21037/jtd.2018.01.11
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder.
**Authors:** Nesbitt AD
**Journal:** J Thorac Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.21037/jtd.2018.01.11](https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2018.01.11)

## Content

1. J Thorac Dis. 2018 Jan;10(Suppl 1):S103-S111. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2018.01.11.

Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder.

Nesbitt AD(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Centre, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
UK.
(2)Department of Neurology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
UK.
(3)SleepCity, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's 
College London, London, UK.

Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder (DSWPD) is the most commonly encountered of 
the circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders (CRSDs), and is often confused with 
sleep initiation insomnia. It typically emerges in teenage years and persists 
into adulthood. In essence, people with the disorder have an abnormally delayed 
major sleep episode relative to the dark phase of the solar cycle, and hence 
great difficulty initiating sleep at an appropriately early time, and, as a 
knock-on effect, waking at a desirable time in the morning, leading to chronic, 
and often quite severe sleep restriction trying to conform to a 9 to 5 schedule. 
As a result, sleep on free days is often extended in compensation. When released 
from such schedule constraints, sleep duration and quality is normal; it is just 
delayed. This review highlights elements of our current understanding of the 
epidemiology, associations and pathophysiology of the disorder, before 
discussing how some of our knowledge of sleep and circadian physiology can be 
applied to guide treatment of it.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2018.01.11
PMCID: PMC5803043
PMID: 29445534

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The author has no 
conflicts of interest to declare.