---
reference_id: "PMID:27940911"
title: Climate variation drives dengue dynamics.
authors:
- Xu L
- Stige LC
- Chan KS
- Zhou J
- Yang J
- Sang S
- Wang M
- Yang Z
- Yan Z
- Jiang T
- Lu L
- Yue Y
- Liu X
- Lin H
- Xu J
- Liu Q
- Stenseth NC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1618558114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Climate variation drives dengue dynamics.
**Authors:** Xu L, Stige LC, Chan KS, Zhou J, Yang J, Sang S, Wang M, Yang Z, Yan Z, Jiang T, Lu L, Yue Y, Liu X, Lin H, Xu J, Liu Q, Stenseth NC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1618558114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1618558114)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jan 3;114(1):113-118. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1618558114. Epub 2016 Dec 9.

Climate variation drives dengue dynamics.

Xu L(1)(2), Stige LC(2), Chan KS(3), Zhou J(4), Yang J(1), Sang S(1), Wang M(5), 
Yang Z(5), Yan Z(5), Jiang T(6), Lu L(1), Yue Y(1), Liu X(1), Lin H(7), Xu J(8), 
Liu Q(8)(9)(10), Stenseth NC(11).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, National 
Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 102206, People's Republic of China.
(2)Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis (CEES), Department of 
Biosciences, University of Oslo, N-0316 Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA 52242.
(4)Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
People's Republic of China.
(5)Tropical Diseases Research Base of State Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease 
Prevention and Control, Guangzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Guangzhou 510440, People's Republic of China.
(6)National Climate Center, China Meteorological Administration, Beijing 100081, 
People's Republic of China.
(7)Guangdong Provincial Institute of Public Health, Guangdong Provincial Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou 511430, People's Republic of 
China.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, National 
Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 102206, People's Republic of China; 
n.c.stenseth@ibv.uio.no xujianguo@icdc.cn liuqiyong@icdc.cn.
(9)Shandong University Climate Change and Health Center, Jinan 250012, People's 
Republic of China.
(10)World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Vector Surveillance and 
Management Beijing 102206, People's Republic of China.
(11)Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis (CEES), Department of 
Biosciences, University of Oslo, N-0316 Oslo, Norway; n.c.stenseth@ibv.uio.no 
xujianguo@icdc.cn liuqiyong@icdc.cn.

Dengue, a viral infection transmitted between people by mosquitoes, is one of 
the most rapidly spreading diseases in the world. Here, we report the analyses 
covering 11 y (2005-2015) from the city of Guangzhou in southern China. Using 
the first 8 y of data to develop an ecologically based model for the dengue 
system, we reliably predict the following 3 y of dengue dynamics-years with 
exceptionally extensive dengue outbreaks. We demonstrate that climate 
conditions, through the effects of rainfall and temperature on mosquito 
abundance and dengue transmission rate, play key roles in explaining the 
temporal dynamics of dengue incidence in the human population. Our study thus 
contributes to a better understanding of dengue dynamics and provides a 
predictive tool for preventive dengue reduction strategies.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1618558114
PMCID: PMC5224358
PMID: 27940911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.