---
reference_id: "PMID:24647283"
title: Reconstruction of bilateral tibial aplasia and split hand-foot syndrome in a father and daughter.
authors:
- Al Kaissi A
- Ganger R
- Klaushofer K
- Grill F
journal: Afr J Paediatr Surg
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4103/0189-6725.129201
keywords:
- Adult
- Fathers
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, physiopathology, surgery"
- Male
- Nuclear Family
- Orthopedic Procedures/methods
- Radiography
- Plastic Surgery Procedures/methods
- "Tibia/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, surgery"
- Walking
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reconstruction of bilateral tibial aplasia and split hand-foot syndrome in a father and daughter.
**Authors:** Al Kaissi A, Ganger R, Klaushofer K, Grill F
**Journal:** Afr J Paediatr Surg (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0189-6725.129201](https://doi.org/10.4103/0189-6725.129201)

## Content

1. Afr J Paediatr Surg. 2014 Jan-Mar;11(1):3-7. doi: 10.4103/0189-6725.129201.

Reconstruction of bilateral tibial aplasia and split hand-foot syndrome in a 
father and daughter.

Al Kaissi A(1), Ganger R, Klaushofer K, Grill F.

Author information:
(1)Department of First Medical, Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology, Hanusch 
Hospital of WGKK and AUVA Trauma Centre Meidling, Hanusch Hospital; Department 
of Paediatric, Orthopaedic Hospital of Speising, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Tibial aplasia is of heterogeneous aetiology, the majority of 
reports are sporadic. We describe the reconstruction procedures in two subjects 
- a daughter and father manifested autosomal dominant (AD) inheritance of the 
bilateral tibial aplasia and split hand-foot syndrome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Reconstruction of these patients required multiple 
surgical procedures and orthoprosthesis was mandatory. The main goal of 
treatment was to achieve walking. Stabilization of the ankle joint by 
fibular-talar-chondrodesis on both sides, followed by bilateral Brown-procedure 
at the knee joint level has been applied accordingly.
RESULTS: The outcome was with improved function of the deformed limbs and 
walking was achieved with simultaneous designation of orthotic fitting.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study encompassing the diagnosis and management of 
a father and daughter with bilateral tibial aplasia associated with variable 
split hand/foot deformity without foot ablation. Our patients showed the typical 
AD pattern of inheritance of split-hand/foot and tibial aplasia.

DOI: 10.4103/0189-6725.129201
PMID: 24647283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]