---
reference_id: "PMID:38030482"
title: Methylmalonic acid in aging and disease.
authors:
- Tejero J
- Lazure F
- Gomes AP
journal: Trends Endocrinol Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2023.11.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Methylmalonic acid in aging and disease.
**Authors:** Tejero J, Lazure F, Gomes AP
**Journal:** Trends Endocrinol Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tem.2023.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2023.11.001)

## Content

1. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2024 Mar;35(3):188-200. doi:
10.1016/j.tem.2023.11.001.  Epub 2023 Nov 28.

Methylmalonic acid in aging and disease.

Tejero J(1), Lazure F(2), Gomes AP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research 
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA; Department of Molecular Medicine, University of 
South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research 
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research 
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. Electronic address: 
ana.dasilvagomes@moffitt.org.

Metabolic byproducts have conventionally been disregarded as waste products 
without functions. In this opinion article, we bring to light the multifaceted 
role of methylmalonic acid (MMA), a byproduct of the propionate metabolism 
pathway mostly commonly known as a clinical biomarker of vitamin B12 deficiency. 
MMA is normally present at low levels in the body, but increased levels can come 
from different sources, such as vitamin B12 deficiency, genetic mutations in 
enzymes related to the propionate pathway, the gut microbiota, and aggressive 
cancers. Here, we describe the diverse metabolic and signaling functions of MMA 
and discuss the consequences of increased MMA levels, such as during the aging 
process, for several age-related human pathologies.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tem.2023.11.001
PMCID: PMC10939937
PMID: 38030482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests No interests are 
declared.