---
reference_id: "PMID:32593337"
title: Pancreatic cancer.
authors:
- Mizrahi JD
- Surana R
- Valle JW
- Shroff RT
journal: Lancet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30974-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pancreatic cancer.
**Authors:** Mizrahi JD, Surana R, Valle JW, Shroff RT
**Journal:** Lancet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30974-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30974-0)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2020 Jun 27;395(10242):2008-2020. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30974-0.

Pancreatic cancer.

Mizrahi JD(1), Surana R(1), Valle JW(2), Shroff RT(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Division of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, Department of Medical 
Oncology, Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(3)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ, USA. Electronic address: rshroff@arizona.edu.

Comment in
    Hepatobiliary Surg Nutr. 2021 Jun;10(3):376-378. doi: 10.21037/hbsn-21-18.

Pancreatic cancer is a highly fatal disease with a 5-year survival rate of 
approximately 10% in the USA, and it is becoming an increasingly common cause of 
cancer mortality. Risk factors for developing pancreatic cancer include family 
history, obesity, type 2 diabetes, and tobacco use. Patients typically present 
with advanced disease due to lack of or vague symptoms when the cancer is still 
localised. High quality computed tomography with intravenous contrast using a 
dual phase pancreatic protocol is typically the best method to detect a 
pancreatic tumour and to determine surgical resectability. Endoscopic ultrasound 
is an increasingly used complementary staging modality which also allows for 
diagnostic confirmation when combined with fine needle aspiration. Patients with 
pancreatic cancer are often divided into one of four categories based on extent 
of disease: resectable, borderline resectable, locally advanced, and metastatic; 
patient condition is also an important consideration. Surgical resection 
represents the only chance for cure, and advancements in adjuvant chemotherapy 
have improved long-term outcomes in these patients. Systemic chemotherapy 
combinations including FOLFIRINOX (5-fluorouracil, folinic acid [leucovorin], 
irinotecan, and oxaliplatin) and gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel remain the 
mainstay of treatment for patients with advanced disease. Data on the benefit of 
PARP inhibition as maintenance therapy in patients with germline BRCA1 or BRACA2 
mutations might prove to be a harbinger of advancement in targeted therapy. 
Additional research efforts are focusing on modulating the pancreatic tumour 
microenvironment to enhance the efficacy of the immunotherapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30974-0
PMID: 32593337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]