---
reference_id: "PMID:39257666"
title: Soft X-ray spectromicroscopy of human fibroblasts with impaired sialin function.
authors:
- Mansikkala T
- Kangas SM
- Miinalainen I
- Angervaniva P
- Darin N
- Blomqvist M
- Hinttala R
- Huttula M
- Uusimaa J
- Patanen M
journal: RSC Adv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1039/d4ra05520a
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Soft X-ray spectromicroscopy of human fibroblasts with impaired sialin function.
**Authors:** Mansikkala T, Kangas SM, Miinalainen I, Angervaniva P, Darin N, Blomqvist M, Hinttala R, Huttula M, Uusimaa J, Patanen M
**Journal:** RSC Adv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1039/d4ra05520a](https://doi.org/10.1039/d4ra05520a)

## Content

1. RSC Adv. 2024 Sep 10;14(39):28797-28806. doi: 10.1039/d4ra05520a. eCollection 
2024 Sep 4.

Soft X-ray spectromicroscopy of human fibroblasts with impaired sialin function.

Mansikkala T(1)(2), Kangas SM(3), Miinalainen I(2), Angervaniva P(3), Darin 
N(4), Blomqvist M(5), Hinttala R(2)(3), Huttula M(1), Uusimaa J(3)(6), Patanen 
M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Nano and Molecular Systems Research Unit, 90014 University of Oulu PO Box 
3000 Finland leo.mansikkala@oulu.fi minna.patanen@oulu.fi.
(2)Biocenter Oulu, 90014 University of Oulu PO Box 5000 Finland.
(3)Research Unit of Clinical Medicine and Medical Research Center, Oulu 
University Hospital and University of Oulu 90014 Oulu Finland.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska 
Academy, University of Gothenburg 40530 Gothenburg Sweden.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of 
Gothenburg, Sweden and Department of Clinical Chemistry, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital 41345 Gothenburg Sweden.
(6)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Paediatric Neurology Unit, 
Oulu University Hospital 90029 Oulu Finland.

Salla disease (SD) is a lysosomal storage disease where free sialic acid (SA) 
accumulates in lysosomes due to the impaired function of a membrane protein, 
sialin. Synchrotron radiation-based scanning transmission soft X-ray 
spectromicroscopy (STXM) was used to analyze both SD patients' fibroblasts and 
normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF) from healthy controls. Both cell lines 
were also cultured with N-acetyl-d-mannosamine monohydrate (ManNAc) to see if it 
increased SA concentration in the cells. The STXM technique was chosen to 
simultaneously observe the morphological and chemical changes in cells. It was 
observed that free SA did not remain in the lysosomes during the sample 
processing, leaving empty vacuoles to the fibroblasts. The total cytosol and 
entire cell spectra, however, showed systematic differences between the SD and 
NHDF samples, indicating changes in the relative macromolecular concentrations 
of the cells. The NHDF cell lines contained a higher relative protein 
concentration compared to the SD cell lines, and the addition of ManNAc 
increased the relative protein concentration in both cell lines. In this study, 
two sample preparation methods were compared, resin-embedded thin sections and 
cells grown directly on sample analysis grids. While the samples grown on the 
grids exhibited clean, well-resolved spectra not masked by embedding resin, the 
low penetration depth of soft X-rays hindered the analysis to only the thin 
region of the microfilaments away from the thick nucleus.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d4ra05520a
PMCID: PMC11385984
PMID: 39257666

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.