---
reference_id: "PMID:39738060"
title: Mammalian SLC39A13 promotes ER/Golgi iron transport and iron homeostasis in multiple compartments.
authors:
- Li H
- Cui Y
- Hu Y
- Zhao M
- Li K
- Pang X
- Sun F
- Zhou B
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-55149-2
keywords:
- Animals
- Iron/metabolism
- "Cation Transport Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Homeostasis
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Golgi Apparatus/metabolism
- Humans
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- Biological Transport
- Cytosol/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mammalian SLC39A13 promotes ER/Golgi iron transport and iron homeostasis in multiple compartments.
**Authors:** Li H, Cui Y, Hu Y, Zhao M, Li K, Pang X, Sun F, Zhou B
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-55149-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-55149-2)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Dec 30;15(1):10838. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-55149-2.

Mammalian SLC39A13 promotes ER/Golgi iron transport and iron homeostasis in 
multiple compartments.

Li H(1), Cui Y(1), Hu Y(1), Zhao M(2), Li K(3), Pang X(4), Sun F(4), Zhou 
B(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced 
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, 518055, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory for Precancerous Lesion of Digestive Disease, 
Department of Gastroenterology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Medical School of Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, 210093, China.
(4)National Key Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, 100101, China.
(5)Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced 
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, 518055, China. 
bing.zhou@siat.ac.cn.
(6)Faculty of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology, 
Shenzhen, 518055, China. bing.zhou@siat.ac.cn.

Iron is a potent biochemical, and accurate homeostatic control is orchestrated 
by a network of interacting players at multiple levels. Although our 
understanding of organismal iron homeostasis has advanced, intracellular iron 
homeostasis is poorly understood, including coordination between organelles and 
iron export into the ER/Golgi. Here, we show that SLC39A13 (ZIP13), previously 
identified as a zinc transporter, promotes intracellular iron transport and 
reduces intracellular iron levels. ZIP13 loss causes an iron deficiency in the 
ER/Golgi and other intracellular compartments, such as lysosomes and 
mitochondria, as well as elevating iron in the cytosol. ZIP13 overexpression has 
the opposite effect, increasing iron in organellar compartments. We suggest that 
ZIP13 gatekeeps an iron trafficking route that shunts iron from the cytosol to 
the ER/Golgi hub. Zip13-knockout male mice have iron deposition in several 
tissues. These data demonstrate that mammalian ZIP13 is crucial for iron 
homeostasis and suggest a potential iron transport function.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-55149-2
PMCID: PMC11685566
PMID: 39738060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.