---
reference_id: "PMID:34895959"
title: An international survey of adherence to Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines 2016 regarding fluid resuscitation and vasopressors in the initial management of septic shock.
authors:
- Bitton E
- Zimmerman S
- Azevedo LCP
- Benhamou D
- Cecconi M
- De Waele JJ
- Lipman J
- Martin-Loeches I
- Pirracchio R
- Scheeren TWL
- Leone M
- Einav S
journal: J Crit Care
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2021.11.016
keywords:
- Fluid Therapy
- Humans
- Resuscitation
- Sepsis/drug therapy
- "Shock, Septic/drug therapy"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Vasoconstrictor Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An international survey of adherence to Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines 2016 regarding fluid resuscitation and vasopressors in the initial management of septic shock.
**Authors:** Bitton E, Zimmerman S, Azevedo LCP, Benhamou D, Cecconi M, De Waele JJ, Lipman J, Martin-Loeches I, Pirracchio R, Scheeren TWL, Leone M, Einav S
**Journal:** J Crit Care (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcrc.2021.11.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrc.2021.11.016)

## Content

1. J Crit Care. 2022 Apr;68:144-154. doi: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2021.11.016. Epub 2021
Dec  9.

An international survey of adherence to Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines
2016 regarding fluid resuscitation and vasopressors in the initial management of
septic shock.

Bitton E(1), Zimmerman S(1), Azevedo LCP(2), Benhamou D(3), Cecconi M(4), De
Waele JJ(5), Lipman J(6), Martin-Loeches I(7), Pirracchio R(8), Scheeren TWL(9),
Leone M(10), Einav S(1).

Author information:
(1)Intensive Care Unit of the Shaare Zedek Medical Center and the Hebrew
University Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Emergency Medicine Department, University of São Paulo, School of Medicine,
São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Département d'Anesthésie-Réanimation, Hôpital de Bicêtre, Université
Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin Bicêtre Cedex, France.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University Pieve Emanuele,
Milan, Italy; IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium.
(6)Intensive Care Services, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane,
Australia; The University of Queensland, Saint Lucia, Australia; Jamieson Trauma
Institute, Saint Lucia, Australia; Nimes University Hospital, University of
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(7)Department of Clinical Medicine, Multidisciplinary Intensive Care Research
Organization (MICRO), St James's Hospital & Trinity Centre for Health Sciences,
Dublin, Ireland.
(8)Department of Anaesthesia and Perioperative Medicine, Zuckerberg San
Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Centre, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States.
(9)Department of Anaesthesiology, University Medical Centre Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(10)Aix Marseille University, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Marseille, Department
of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Hospital Nord, Marseille, France.
Electronic address: marc.leone@ap-hm.fr.

Comment in
    J Crit Care. 2022 Apr;68:155-156. doi: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2021.11.015.

BACKGROUND: Our survey aimed to evaluate adherence to Surviving Sepsis Campaign
(SSC) Guidelines 2016 among intensive care practitioners and to identify issues
that remain controversial or lack clarity.
METHODS: Members of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM) were
surveyed using an anonymous web-based survey written by an international group
of experts. The primary outcome measure was the rate of adherence to specific
recommendations. Secondary outcomes were to describe areas of controversy and
lack of data and to associate specific practices with clinician characteristics.
RESULTS: Overall 820 questionnaires were completed. The SCC recommendations 2016
most adhered to were the choice of norepinephrine as first-line vasoactive drug
(96.5%), vasopressor prescription based on therapeutic goal rather than dose
(83.4%), targeting a specific mean arterial blood pressure during vasopressor
use (77.9%), monitoring of blood pressure invasively (62.8%) and adding
vasopressin or epinephrine as a second vasoactive agent (83.4%). We identified
an internal conflict with regards to parallel versus sequential administration
of fluids and vasoactive drugs and regional differences in practice that may be
related to drug availabilities.
CONCLUSION: The use of vasopressors and fluid use in septic shock is largely
compliant with current guidelines but several controversies should be addressed
in future guideline iterations.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2021.11.016
PMID: 34895959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest EB. No
relevant conflicts of interest. SZ. No relevant conflicts of interest. LCPA
received research grants from Ache Laboratorios farmaceuticos, consulting fees
from Halex-Istar and lecture fees from Pfizer and Baxter, all outside the
present work. DB. No relevant conflicts of interest. MC. No relevant conflicts
of interest. JDW received consulting fees from Pfizer and MSD (all outside the
present work, and honoraria were paid to his institution). JL. No relevant
conflicts of interest. IML received fees from MSD and Aspen for lectures and
from Pfizer, Gilead and Ambu for consulting. RP. No relevant conflicts of
interest. TWLS received research grants and honoraria from Edwards Lifesciences
(Irvine, CA, USA) and Masimo Inc. (Irvine, CA, USA) for consulting and lecturing
(all payments made to institution). ML. Received fees from MSD and Aspen for
lectures and from Amomed, Gilead and Ambu for consulting. SE. No relevant
conflicts of interest.
