---
reference_id: "PMID:32093722"
title: Systematic review and meta-analysis of the prevalence of chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME).
authors:
- Lim EJ
- Ahn YC
- Jang ES
- Lee SW
- Lee SH
- Son CG
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-020-02269-0
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/epidemiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Prevalence
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic review and meta-analysis of the prevalence of chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME).
**Authors:** Lim EJ, Ahn YC, Jang ES, Lee SW, Lee SH, Son CG
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-020-02269-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-020-02269-0)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2020 Feb 24;18(1):100. doi: 10.1186/s12967-020-02269-0.

Systematic review and meta-analysis of the prevalence of chronic fatigue 
syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME).

Lim EJ(1), Ahn YC(2), Jang ES(1), Lee SW(3), Lee SH(4), Son CG(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Integrative Medicine, Department of Korean 
Medicine, Daejeon University, 62 Daehak-ro, Dong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Health Service Management, Daejeon University, 96-3 
Yongun-dong, Dong-gu, Daejeon, 300-716, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Future Medicine, Korean Institute of Oriental Medicine, 
Yuseong-daero, 1672, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(4)The Catholic University of Korea, Daejeon St. Mary Hospital, 64, Daeheung-ro, 
Jung-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(5)Institute of Bioscience and Integrative Medicine, Department of Korean 
Medicine, Daejeon University, 62 Daehak-ro, Dong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. 
ckson@dju.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME) has been 
emerging as a significant health issue worldwide. This study aimed to 
systemically assess the prevalence of CFS/ME in various aspects of analyses for 
precise assessment.
METHODS: We systematically searched prevalence of CFS/ME from public databases 
from 1980 to December 2018. Data were extracted according to 7 categories for 
analysis: study participants, gender and age of the participants, case 
definition, diagnostic method, publication year, and country of the study 
conducted. Prevalence data were collected and counted individually for studies 
adopted various case definitions. We analyzed and estimated prevalence rates in 
various angles: average prevalence, pooled prevalence and meta-analysis of all 
studies.
RESULTS: A total of 1291 articles were initially identified, and 45 articles (46 
studies, 56 prevalence data) were selected for this study. Total 1085,976 
participants were enrolled from community-based survey (540,901) and primary 
care sites (545,075). The total average prevalence was 1.40 ± 1.57%, pooled 
prevalence 0.39%, and meta-analysis 0.68% [95% CI 0.48-0.97]. The prevalence 
rates were varied by enrolled participants (gender, study participants, and 
population group), case definitions and diagnostic methods. For example, in the 
meta-analysis; women (1.36% [95% CI 0.48-0.97]) vs. men (0.86% [95% CI 
0.48-0.97]), community-based samples (0.76% [95% CI 0.53-1.10]) vs. primary care 
sites (0.63% [95% CI 0.37-1.10]), adults ≥ 18 years (0.65% [95% CI 0.43-0.99]) 
vs. children and adolescents < 18 years (0.55% [95% CI 0.22-1.35]), CDC-1994 
(0.89% [95% CI 0.60-1.33]) vs. Holmes (0.17% [95% CI 0.06-0.49]), and interviews 
(1.14% [95% CI 0.76-1.72]) vs. physician diagnosis (0.09% [95% CI 0.05-0.13]), 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study comprehensively estimated the prevalence of CFS/ME; 
0.89% according to the most commonly used case definition CDC-1994, with women 
approximately 1.5 to 2 folds higher than men in all categories. However, we 
observed the prevalence rates are widely varied particularly by case definitions 
and diagnostic methods. An objective diagnostic tool is urgently required for 
rigorous assessment of the prevalence of CFS/ME.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-020-02269-0
PMCID: PMC7038594
PMID: 32093722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no potential conflicts of interest to 
disclose.