---
reference_id: "PMID:32121523"
title: "Brugada Syndrome: Oligogenic or Mendelian Disease?"
authors:
- Monasky MM
- Micaglio E
- Ciconte G
- Pappone C
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/ijms21051687
keywords:
- Animals
- Brugada Syndrome/genetics
- Humans
- Ion Channels/genetics
- Multifactorial Inheritance/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Sarcomeres/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brugada Syndrome: Oligogenic or Mendelian Disease?
**Authors:** Monasky MM, Micaglio E, Ciconte G, Pappone C
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms21051687](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21051687)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Mar 1;21(5):1687. doi: 10.3390/ijms21051687.

Brugada Syndrome: Oligogenic or Mendelian Disease?

Monasky MM(1), Micaglio E(1), Ciconte G(1), Pappone C(1).

Author information:
(1)Arrhythmology Department, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Piazza E. Malan 1,
San Donato Milanese, 20097 Milan, Italy.

Brugada syndrome (BrS) is diagnosed by a coved-type ST-segment elevation in the
right precordial leads on the electrocardiogram (ECG), and it is associated with
an increased risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD) compared to the general
population. Although BrS is considered a genetic disease, its molecular
mechanism remains elusive in about 70-85% of clinically-confirmed cases.
Variants occurring in at least 26 different genes have been previously
considered causative, although the causative effect of all but the SCN5A gene
has been recently challenged, due to the lack of systematic, evidence-based
evaluations, such as a variant's frequency among the general population, family
segregation analyses, and functional studies. Also, variants within a particular
gene can be associated with an array of different phenotypes, even within the
same family, preventing a clear genotype-phenotype correlation. Moreover, an
emerging concept is that a single mutation may not be enough to cause the BrS
phenotype, due to the increasing number of common variants now thought to be
clinically relevant. Thus, not only the complete list of genes causative of the
BrS phenotype remains to be determined, but also the interplay between rare and
common multiple variants. This is particularly true for some common
polymorphisms whose roles have been recently re-evaluated by outstanding works,
including considering for the first time ever a polygenic risk score derived
from the heterozygous state for both common and rare variants. The more common a
certain variant is, the less impact this variant might have on heart function.
We are aware that further studies are warranted to validate a polygenic risk
score, because there is no mutated gene that connects all, or even a majority,
of BrS cases. For the same reason, it is currently impossible to create animal
and cell line genetic models that represent all BrS cases, which would enable
the expansion of studies of this syndrome. Thus, the best model at this point is
the human patient population. Further studies should first aim to uncover
genetic variants within individuals, as well as to collect family segregation
data to identify potential genetic causes of BrS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21051687
PMCID: PMC7084676
PMID: 32121523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
