---
reference_id: "PMID:37708213"
title: Non-O ABO blood group genotypes differ in their associations with Plasmodium falciparum rosetting and severe malaria.
authors:
- Opi DH
- Ndila CM
- Uyoga S
- Macharia AW
- Fennell C
- Ochola LB
- Nyutu G
- Siddondo BR
- Ojal J
- Shebe M
- Awuondo KO
- Mturi N
- Peshu N
- Tsofa B
- Band G
- Maitland K
- Kwiatkowski DP
- Rockett KA
- Williams TN
- Rowe JA
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010910
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-O ABO blood group genotypes differ in their associations with Plasmodium falciparum rosetting and severe malaria.
**Authors:** Opi DH, Ndila CM, Uyoga S, Macharia AW, Fennell C, Ochola LB, Nyutu G, Siddondo BR, Ojal J, Shebe M, Awuondo KO, Mturi N, Peshu N, Tsofa B, Band G, Maitland K, Kwiatkowski DP, Rockett KA, Williams TN, Rowe JA
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1010910](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1010910)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2023 Sep 14;19(9):e1010910. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010910. 
eCollection 2023 Sep.

Non-O ABO blood group genotypes differ in their associations with Plasmodium 
falciparum rosetting and severe malaria.

Opi DH(1)(2), Ndila CM(1), Uyoga S(1), Macharia AW(1), Fennell C(2), Ochola 
LB(1), Nyutu G(1), Siddondo BR(1), Ojal J(1), Shebe M(1), Awuondo KO(1), Mturi 
N(1), Peshu N(1), Tsofa B(1), Band G(3), Maitland K(1)(4), Kwiatkowski DP(3), 
Rockett KA(3), Williams TN(1)(4), Rowe JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Kilifi, 
Kenya.
(2)Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, Institute of Immunology and 
Infection Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Institute for Global Health Innovation, Department of Surgery and Cancer, 
Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.

Blood group O is associated with protection against severe malaria and reduced 
size and stability of P. falciparum-host red blood cell (RBC) rosettes compared 
to non-O blood groups. Whether the non-O blood groups encoded by the specific 
ABO genotypes AO, BO, AA, BB and AB differ in their associations with severe 
malaria and rosetting is unknown. The A and B antigens are host RBC receptors 
for rosetting, hence we hypothesized that the higher levels of A and/or B 
antigen on RBCs from AA, BB and AB genotypes compared to AO/BO genotypes could 
lead to larger rosettes, increased microvascular obstruction and higher risk of 
malaria pathology. We used a case-control study of Kenyan children and in vitro 
adhesion assays to test the hypothesis that "double dose" non-O genotypes (AA, 
BB, AB) are associated with increased risk of severe malaria and larger rosettes 
than "single dose" heterozygotes (AO, BO). In the case-control study, compared 
to OO, the double dose genotypes consistently had higher odds ratios (OR) for 
severe malaria than single dose genotypes, with AB (OR 1.93) and AO (OR 1.27) 
showing most marked difference (p = 0.02, Wald test). In vitro experiments with 
blood group A-preferring P. falciparum parasites showed that significantly 
larger rosettes were formed with AA and AB host RBCs compared to OO, whereas AO 
and BO genotypes rosettes were indistinguishable from OO. Overall, the data show 
that ABO genotype influences P. falciparum rosetting and support the hypothesis 
that double dose non-O genotypes confer a greater risk of severe malaria than 
AO/BO heterozygosity.

Copyright: © 2023 Opi et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010910
PMCID: PMC10522014
PMID: 37708213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.