---
reference_id: "PMID:38307149"
title: "Distinguishing community-acquired bacterial and viral meningitis: Microbes and biomarkers."
authors:
- Ivaska L
- Herberg J
- Sadarangani M
journal: J Infect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2024.01.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinguishing community-acquired bacterial and viral meningitis: Microbes and biomarkers.
**Authors:** Ivaska L, Herberg J, Sadarangani M
**Journal:** J Infect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jinf.2024.01.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2024.01.010)

## Content

1. J Infect. 2024 Mar;88(3):106111. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2024.01.010. Epub 2024
Feb  1.

Distinguishing community-acquired bacterial and viral meningitis: Microbes and 
biomarkers.

Ivaska L(1), Herberg J(2), Sadarangani M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Turku University Hospital 
and University of Turku, Savitehtaankatu 5, 20521 Turku, Finland; InFLAMES 
Research Flagship Center, University of Turku, Kiinanmyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, 
Finland. Electronic address: lauri.ivaska@utu.fi.
(2)Section of Paediatric Infectious Disease, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial 
College London, Norfolk Place, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
j.herberg@imperial.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada; Vaccine Evaluation Center, BC Children's Hospital Research 
Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Electronic address: 
msadarangani@bcchr.ubc.ca.

Diagnostic tools to differentiate between community-acquired bacterial and viral 
meningitis are essential to target the potentially lifesaving antibiotic 
treatment to those at greatest risk and concurrently spare patients with viral 
meningitis from the disadvantages of antibiotics. In addition, excluding 
bacterial meningitis and thus decreasing antibiotic consumption would be 
important to help reduce antimicrobial resistance and healthcare expenses. The 
available diagnostic laboratory tests for differentiating bacterial and viral 
meningitis can be divided microbiological pathogen-focussed methods and 
biomarkers of the host response. Bacterial culture-independent microbiological 
methods, such as highly multiplexed nucleic acid amplification tests, are 
rapidly making their way into the clinical practice. At the same time, more 
conventional host protein biomarkers, such as procalcitonin and C-reactive 
protein, are supplemented by newer proteomic and transcriptomic signatures. This 
review aims to summarise the current state and the recent advances in diagnostic 
methods to differentiate bacterial from viral meningitis.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2024.01.010
PMID: 38307149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest MS has been an 
investigator on projects funded by GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Moderna, Pfizer, 
Sanofi-Pasteur, Seqirus, Symvivo and VBI Vaccines. All funds have been paid to 
his institute, and he has not received any personal payments. JH holds patents 
on gene expression signatures for host response-based diagnostic tests, although 
no tests are commercially available. Other authors have no competing interests 
to declare.