---
reference_id: "PMID:11212958"
title: Arterial hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias.
authors:
- Hennersdorf MG
- Strauer BE
journal: J Hypertens
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1097/00004872-200102000-00002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias.
**Authors:** Hennersdorf MG, Strauer BE
**Journal:** J Hypertens (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00004872-200102000-00002](https://doi.org/10.1097/00004872-200102000-00002)

## Content

1. J Hypertens. 2001 Feb;19(2):167-77. doi: 10.1097/00004872-200102000-00002.

Arterial hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias.

Hennersdorf MG(1), Strauer BE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Pneumology and Angiology, Medical Clinic and 
Policlinic B, Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany. 
hennersdorf@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

PURPOSE AND DATA IDENTIFICATION: One of the main clinical problems of patients 
with arterial hypertension is the presence of arrhythmias, especially if left 
ventricular hypertrophy exists. Recent results from our group and all data 
available via Med-Line-search have been analysed. The analysis was focused on 
atrial and ventricular arrhythmias and arrhythmic risk prediction, using 
non-invasive markers. RESULTS OF ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION: Arterial hypertension 
is a major cause of non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation and other supraventricular 
arrhythmias. The prevalence of ventricular arrhythmias is increased in 
hypertensive patients without left ventricular hypertrophy, compared to 
normotensives. If left ventricular hypertrophy is present, the risk for 
ventricular tachycardias is quadrupled. The presence of left ventricular 
hypertrophy is associated with an increase in all-cause mortality by a factor of 
seven in men and nine in women. In particular, patients with hypertrophy, 
increased rate of ventricular extrasystoles up to non-sustained ventricular 
tachycardia and ST-depression in long-term ECG are threatened by sudden cardiac 
death. At present, it is not possible to safely identify patients with increased 
risk. Regression of hypertrophy exists along with a decreased rate of 
ventricular extrasystoles. We hypothesize that by the regression of hypertrophy, 
the prevalence of sustained ventricular tachycardia decreases and therefore the 
prognosis of those patients can be improved, although controlled studies are not 
yet available.

DOI: 10.1097/00004872-200102000-00002
PMID: 11212958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]