---
reference_id: "PMID:38831203"
title: "GLP1-GIP receptor co-agonists: a promising evolution in the treatment of type 2 diabetes."
authors:
- Ciardullo S
- Morieri ML
- Daniele G
- Fiorentino TV
- Mezza T
- Tricò D
- Consoli A
- Del Prato S
- Giorgino F
- Piro S
- Solini A
- Avogaro A
journal: Acta Diabetol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00592-024-02300-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GLP1-GIP receptor co-agonists: a promising evolution in the treatment of type 2 diabetes.
**Authors:** Ciardullo S, Morieri ML, Daniele G, Fiorentino TV, Mezza T, Tricò D, Consoli A, Del Prato S, Giorgino F, Piro S, Solini A, Avogaro A
**Journal:** Acta Diabetol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00592-024-02300-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00592-024-02300-6)

## Content

1. Acta Diabetol. 2024 Aug;61(8):941-950. doi: 10.1007/s00592-024-02300-6. Epub 
2024 Jun 3.

GLP1-GIP receptor co-agonists: a promising evolution in the treatment of type 2 
diabetes.

Ciardullo S(1)(2), Morieri ML(3), Daniele G(4)(5), Fiorentino TV(6), Mezza 
T(7)(8), Tricò D(4), Consoli A(9)(10), Del Prato S(11), Giorgino F(12), Piro 
S(13), Solini A(14), Avogaro A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, Università degli Studi di Milano Bicocca, 
Milan, Italy. stefano.ciardullo@unimib.it.
(2)Department of Medicine and Rehabilitation, Policlinico di Monza, Via 
Modigliani 10, 20900, Monza, Italy. stefano.ciardullo@unimib.it.
(3)Unit of Metabolic Disease, University Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy.
(5)CISUP, Center for Instrument Sharing, University of Pisa, 56124, Pisa, Italy.
(6)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University Magna Graecia of 
Catanzaro, 88100, Catanzaro, Italy.
(7)Department of Medicine and Translational Surgery, Università Cattolica del 
Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(8)Digestive Disease Center, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino 
Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(9)Department of Medicine and Aging Sciences, Center for Advanced Studies and 
Technology (CAST, Ex CeSIMet) G. d'Annunzio University Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, 
Italy.
(10)Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, Pescara Health Service, Pescara, Italy.
(11)Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy.
(12)Department of Precision and Regenerative Medicine and Ionian Area, Section 
of Internal Medicine, Endocrinology, Andrology and Metabolic Diseases, 
University of Bari Aldo Moro, 70124, Bari, Italy.
(13)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Catania, 
Catania, Italy.
(14)Department of Surgical, Medical, Molecular and Critical Area Pathology, 
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Type 2 diabetes represents a growing challenge for global public health. Its 
prevalence is increasing worldwide, and, like obesity, it affects progressively 
younger populations compared to the past, with potentially greater impact on 
chronic complications. Dual glucagon like peptide 1 (GLP1) and glucose-dependent 
insulinotropic peptide (GIP) receptor agonists are among the new pharmacological 
strategies recently developed to address this challenge. Tirzepatide, 
characterized by its ability to selectively bind and activate receptors for the 
intestinal hormones GIP and GLP-1, has been tested in numerous clinical studies 
and is already currently authorized in several countries for the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes and obesity. In this context, the aim of the present document is 
to summarize, in the form of a narrative literature review, the currently 
available data on the main mechanisms of action of GIP/GLP-1 co-agonists and the 
clinical effects of tirzepatide evaluated in various clinical trials.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00592-024-02300-6
PMCID: PMC11329401
PMID: 38831203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SC received lecture or consultancy fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, MSD, Novo Nordisk; MLM received 
lecture or consultancy fees from Amarin, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, MSD, 
Novo Nordisk, SlaPharma, and Servier; DT received lecture or consultancy fees 
from Amarin, AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, and Novo Nordisk. SDP has received research 
funding from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Co., 
and Merck Sharpe & Dohme, and is a consultant for or has received honoraria from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly and Company, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Laboratoires Servier, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals Co., Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, and Takeda. AC has received 
consulting or speaker fees from Bristol Meyer Squibb, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Novo-Nordisk, 
Sanofi-Aventis, Sigma-Tau, Takeda. FG reports consultancies or paid advisory 
board memberships for Eli Lilly, Medtronic, Novo Nordisk, Roche Diabetes Care, 
and Sanofi; grants received from Eli Lilly, Lifescan, and Roche Diabetes Care; 
lecture fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Lifescan, Merck 
Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Roche Diabetes Care, and Sanofi; and 
patents pending from Roche Diabetes Care. AS reports consultant fees from, 
Bayer, Eli Lilly Novo Nordisk and Sankyo, and lecture fees from Bayer, Eli 
Lilly, Novo Nordisk, and Sanofi-Aventis. AA received research grants and lecture 
or advisory board fees from MSD, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Sanofi, Mediolanum, Janssen, Novo Nordisk, Lilly, Servier and Takeda. No other 
potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported.