---
reference_id: "PMID:8620967"
title: Wheezes.
authors:
- Meslier N
- Charbonneau G
- Racineux JL
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1183/09031936.95.08111942
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wheezes.
**Authors:** Meslier N, Charbonneau G, Racineux JL
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1183/09031936.95.08111942](https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.95.08111942)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 1995 Nov;8(11):1942-8. doi: 10.1183/09031936.95.08111942.

Wheezes.

Meslier N(1), Charbonneau G, Racineux JL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'EFR et de sommeil, Service de Pneumologie, Angers, France.

Wheezes are continuous adventitious lung sounds. The American Thoracic Society 
Committee on pulmonary nomenclature define wheezes as high-pitched continuous 
sounds with a dominant frequency of 400 Hz or more. Rhonchi are characterized as 
low-pitched continuous sounds with a dominant frequency of about 200 Hz or less. 
The large variability in the predominant frequency of wheezes is one of the 
difficulties encountered with automated analysis and quantification of wheezes. 
The large variations observed in automated wheeze characterization emphasize the 
need for standardization of breath sound analysis. This standardization would 
help determine diagnostic criteria for wheeze identification. The mechanism of 
wheeze production was first compared to a toy trumpet whose sound is produced by 
a vibrating reed. The pitch of the wheeze is dependent on the mass and 
elasticity of the airway walls and on the flow velocity. More recently, a model 
of wheeze production based on the mathematical analysis of the stability of 
airflow through a collapsible tube has been proposed. According to this model, 
wheezes are produced by the fluttering of the airways walls and fluid together, 
induced by a critical airflow velocity. Many circumstances are suitable for the 
production of continuous adventitious lung sounds. Thus, wheezes can be heard in 
several diseases, not only asthma. Wheezes are usual clinical signs in patients 
with obstructive airway diseases and particularly during acute episodes of 
asthma. A relationship between the degree of bronchial obstruction and the 
presence and characteristics of wheezes has been demonstrated in several 
studies. The best result is observed when the degree of bronchial obstruction is 
compared to the proportion of the respiratory cycle occupied by wheeze 
(tw/ttot). However, the relationship is too scattered to predict forced 
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) from wheeze duration. There is no 
relationship between the intensity or the pitch of wheezes and the pulmonary 
function. The presence or quantification of wheezes have also been evaluated for 
the assessment of bronchial hyperresponsiveness. Wheeze detection cannot fully 
replace spirometry during bronchial provocation testing but may add some 
interesting information. Continuous monitoring of wheezes might be a useful tool 
for evaluation of nocturnal asthma and its treatment.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.95.08111942
PMID: 8620967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]