---
reference_id: "PMID:35238756"
title: "Treatment of relapsing polychondritis: a systematic review."
authors:
- Petitdemange A
- Sztejkowski C
- Damian L
- Martin T
- Mouthon L
- Amoura Z
- Cutolo M
- Burmester GR
- Fonseca JE
- Rednic S
- Arnaud L
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/h9gq1o
keywords:
- Abatacept/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/drug therapy"
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Methotrexate/therapeutic use
- "Polychondritis, Relapsing/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
- Tumor Necrosis Factor Inhibitors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of relapsing polychondritis: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Petitdemange A, Sztejkowski C, Damian L, Martin T, Mouthon L, Amoura Z, Cutolo M, Burmester GR, Fonseca JE, Rednic S, Arnaud L
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.55563/clinexprheumatol/h9gq1o](https://doi.org/10.55563/clinexprheumatol/h9gq1o)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2022 May;40 Suppl 134(5):81-85. doi: 
10.55563/clinexprheumatol/h9gq1o. Epub 2022 Jan 28.

Treatment of relapsing polychondritis: a systematic review.

Petitdemange A(1), Sztejkowski C(2), Damian L(3), Martin T(1), Mouthon L(4), 
Amoura Z(5), Cutolo M(6), Burmester GR(7), Fonseca JE(8), Rednic S(3), Arnaud 
L(9).

Author information:
(1)Service d'Immunologie Clinique et de Médecine Interne, Hôpitaux 
Universitaires de Strasbourg, Centre National de Référence des Maladies 
Systémiques et Auto-immunes Rares Grand-Est Sud-Ouest (RESO), Strasbourg, 
France.
(2)Service de rhumatologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Centre 
National de Référence des Maladies Systémiques et Auto-immunes Rares Grand-Est 
Sud-Ouest (RESO), Strasbourg, France.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Emergency County Teaching Hospital, University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu Hatieganu, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(4)Service de Médecine Interne, Hôpital Cochin, Centre de Référence Maladies 
systémiques Autoimmunes Rares d'Ile de France, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris (AP-HP), Université de Paris, France.
(5)Service de Médecine interne, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Centre National de 
Référence pour le lupus, le syndrome des antiphospholipides et autres maladies 
auto-immunes rares, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, France.
(6)Laboratory of Experimental Rheumatology and Academic Division of Clinical 
Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, IRCCS Polyclinic Hospital San 
Martino, University of Genoa, Italy.
(7)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu 
Berlin, Germany.
(8)Rheumatology Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, 
Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon Academic Medical Centre, 
Portugal.
(9)Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Centre 
National de Référence des Maladies Systémiques et Auto-immunes Rares Grand-Est 
Sud-Ouest (RESO), Strasbourg, France. laurent.arnaud@chru-strasbourg.fr.

OBJECTIVES: Due to the rarity of relapsing polychondritis (RP), no randomised 
clinical trial has been conducted to date and treatment remains empirical. We 
performed a systematic literature review to assess the efficacy of the main 
conventional immunosuppressants and biotherapies used in RP.
METHODS: We searched MEDLINE for original articles without language restriction. 
Abstracts from American College of Rheumatology (ACR) and European Alliance of 
Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR) were also considered for inclusion. 
Observational studies and clinical trials reporting on the efficacy of 
conventional immunosuppressants and biotherapies in adult patients with RP were 
selected and pooled response rates for each treatment were computed.
RESULTS: Of 304 articles and abstracts identified, 31 underwent full-text 
review, and 11 were included. The studies involved a total of 177 patients, 
exposed to a total of 247 lines of treatments. The main treatments studied (by 
number of lines) were: TNF inhibitors (TNFi), n=92; methotrexate (MTX), n=38; 
tocilizumab (TCZ), n=26; anakinra (ANA), n=21; rituximab (RTX), n=16; abatacept 
(ABT), n=14; cyclophosphamide (CYC), n=14; azathioprine (AZA), n=13. The pooled 
response rates across studies were: 72% [95% CI: 42-95] for ABT, 66% [95% CI: 
49-82] for TCZ, 64% [95% CI: 53-74] for TNFi, 56% [95% CI: 37-73] for MTX, 47% 
[95% CI: 26-68] for ANA, 43% [95% CI: 20-68] for RTX. Based on more limited 
data, response rates for AZA and CYC ranged from 38 to 100% and from 25 to 100%, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review of available evidence regarding the 
treatment of relapsing polychondritis, ABT, TCZ and TNFi were the drugs 
associated with the best outcomes. ABT efficacy must be interpreted in light of 
the small number of patients treated. While MTX had slightly less efficacy, it 
is one of the drugs for which data are the most robust.

DOI: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/h9gq1o
PMID: 35238756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]