---
reference_id: "PMID:25884337"
title: 15q11.2 Duplication Encompassing Only the UBE3A Gene Is Associated with Developmental Delay and Neuropsychiatric Phenotypes.
authors:
- Noor A
- Dupuis L
- Mittal K
- Lionel AC
- Marshall CR
- Scherer SW
- Stockley T
- Vincent JB
- Mendoza-Londono R
- Stavropoulos DJ
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22800
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Gene Duplication
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Nervous System Diseases/genetics
- Phenotype
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 15q11.2 Duplication Encompassing Only the UBE3A Gene Is Associated with Developmental Delay and Neuropsychiatric Phenotypes.
**Authors:** Noor A, Dupuis L, Mittal K, Lionel AC, Marshall CR, Scherer SW, Stockley T, Vincent JB, Mendoza-Londono R, Stavropoulos DJ
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22800](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22800)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2015 Jul;36(7):689-93. doi: 10.1002/humu.22800.

15q11.2 Duplication Encompassing Only the UBE3A Gene Is Associated with 
Developmental Delay and Neuropsychiatric Phenotypes.

Noor A(1)(2)(3), Dupuis L(4), Mittal K(5), Lionel AC(6), Marshall CR(1)(6)(7), 
Scherer SW(6)(7)(8), Stockley T(1)(3), Vincent JB(5), Mendoza-Londono R(4), 
Stavropoulos DJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Laboratory Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital Joseph and Wolf 
Lebovic Health Complex, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)The Hospital for Sick Children, Department of Pediatrics, Division of 
Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(5)Molecular Neuropsychiatry & Development Lab, The Campbell Family Brain 
Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(6)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, 
The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)McLaughlin Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

Comment in
    Hum Mutat. 2015 Jul;36(7):iii. doi: 10.1002/humu.22656.

Duplications of chromosome region 15q11-q13 with the maternal imprint are 
associated with a wide spectrum of neuropsychiatric disorders, including autism 
spectrum disorders, developmental delay, learning difficulties, schizophrenia, 
and seizures. These observations suggest there is a dosage-sensitive imprinted 
gene or genes within this region that explains the increased risk for 
neuropsychiatric phenotypes. We present a female patient with developmental 
delay in whom we identified a maternally inherited 129-Kb duplication in 
chromosome region 15q11.2 encompassing only the UBE3A gene. Expression analysis 
in cultured fibroblasts confirmed overexpression of UBE3A in the proband, 
compared with age- and sex-matched controls. We further tested segregation of 
this duplication in four generations and found it segregated with 
neuropsychiatric phenotypes. Our study shows for the first time clinical 
features associated with overexpression of UBE3A in humans and underscores the 
significance of this gene in the phenotype of individuals with 15q11-q13 
duplication.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22800
PMID: 25884337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]