---
reference_id: "PMID:25395492"
title: "The yolk sac tumor: reflections on a remarkable neoplasm and two of the many intrigued by it-Gunnar Teilum and Aleksander Talerman-and the bond it formed between them."
authors:
- Young RH
journal: Int J Surg Pathol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1177/1066896914558265
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Clear Cell/pathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Endodermal Sinus Tumor/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Ovarian Neoplasms/pathology
- Testicular Neoplasms/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The yolk sac tumor: reflections on a remarkable neoplasm and two of the many intrigued by it-Gunnar Teilum and Aleksander Talerman-and the bond it formed between them.
**Authors:** Young RH
**Journal:** Int J Surg Pathol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1066896914558265](https://doi.org/10.1177/1066896914558265)

## Content

1. Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 Dec;22(8):677-87. doi: 10.1177/1066896914558265. Epub 
2014 Nov 12.

The yolk sac tumor: reflections on a remarkable neoplasm and two of the many 
intrigued by it-Gunnar Teilum and Aleksander Talerman-and the bond it formed 
between them.

Young RH(1).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA rhyoung@partners.org.

One of the most remarkable of human neoplasms, the yolk sac tumor, is reviewed, 
emphasizing its histologic diversity and differential diagnosis, occurrence at 
many sites, and the shared passion for this unique neoplasm of Dr Gunnar Teilum 
(who deserves almost all credit for delineation of the nature of the tumor and 
its features) and Dr Aleksander Talerman (who made his own contribution to our 
knowledge of it) and the friendship it helped forge between these 2 
distinguished pathologists. In a unique series of articles, beginning in the 
early 1940s, Teilum delineated the distinctive features of the neoplasm and 
recognized that it was 1 of 2 initially included as "mesonephroma ovarii" by Dr 
Walter Schiller in 1939 (the second we now know as clear cell carcinoma). Teilum 
named the tumor "endodermal sinus tumor" because it came to his attention that 
papillary formations common in the yolk sac tumor resembled the endodermal 
sinuses of the rat placenta. He focused on the histogenesis of the tumor and its 
morphologic features culminating in a classic paper in Cancer in 1959. Although 
Teilum and others recognized that yolk sac tumor could be a component of mixed 
germ cell tumors, Talerman was one of the first to emphasize that, particularly 
in the testis, it was common to see yolk sac tumor as a component of a mixed 
germ cell tumor. Teilum, working in Copenhagen, and Talerman, when the former 
was alive, working in Rotterdam, developed a warm friendship in part due to 
their great interest in the yolk sac tumor, although it also extended to other 
areas of gonadal neoplasia and indeed beyond the boundaries of medicine when 
they shared time together. The typical histologic features of the yolk sac tumor 
are the reticular-microcystic patterns Teilum described, but various other 
patterns, including solid and even rarer ones such as glandular and hepatoid, 
are now well known. There are some interesting variations in the age 
distribution of this tumor at various sites: for example, vaginal examples are 
almost restricted to children under 2 years of age; those of the testis that are 
pure also occur mostly in young boys (average age about 20 months) but are 
occasionally seen in later years; ovarian examples peak at about 19 years of 
age; mediastinal forms are mostly restricted to young adult males. Brief 
consideration is also given to the occurrence of this tumor at well-known 
extragonadal sites such as retroperitoneum, mediastinum, and pineal as well as 
more exotic locations. Note is made of the recently emphasized occurrence of the 
yolk sac tumor on the background of a somatic neoplasm, most often endometrioid 
carcinoma of the ovary. Given the wide ranging and fascinating clinical and 
pathologic aspects of the neoplasm, it is no surprise that it continues to be a 
source of great interest to any pathologist who sees one or more examples, and 
we are indebted to Dr Teilum for his monumental studies and to Dr Talerman for 
his own contributions.

© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/1066896914558265
PMID: 25395492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]