---
reference_id: "PMID:40791064"
title: "Efficacy and safety of cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine for cognitive symptoms in patients with Huntington's disease: A systematic review."
authors:
- Rodrigues CC
- Carvalho V
- Sotero FD
- Mulroy E
- Guedes LC
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/18796397251367689
keywords:
- Humans
- "Memantine/therapeutic use, adverse effects, pharmacology"
- "Cholinesterase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, adverse effects, pharmacology"
- "Huntington Disease/drug therapy, complications"
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/drug therapy, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine for cognitive symptoms in patients with Huntington's disease: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Rodrigues CC, Carvalho V, Sotero FD, Mulroy E, Guedes LC
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/18796397251367689](https://doi.org/10.1177/18796397251367689)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2025 Nov;14(4):331-339. doi: 10.1177/18796397251367689.
Epub  2025 Aug 12.

Efficacy and safety of cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine for cognitive 
symptoms in patients with Huntington's disease: A systematic review.

Rodrigues CC(1)(2)(3), Carvalho V(1)(2)(3), Sotero FD(1)(2)(4), Mulroy E(5), 
Guedes LC(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Serviço de Neurologia, Departamento de Neurociências, Hospital de Santa 
Maria, Unidade Local de Saúde Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Centro de Estudos Egas Moniz, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de 
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Instituto Gulbenkian de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina da 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Laboratório de Estudos de Linguagem da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade 
de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Department of clinical and movement neurosciences, UCL Queen Square Institute 
of Neurology, London, UK.

BackgroundHuntington's Disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative 
disorder. Clinical features encompass a broad spectrum of movement disorders, 
psychiatric and cognitive symptoms, often progressing to dementia and imposing a 
substantial burden on patients and their families. While cholinesterase 
inhibitors and memantine are often used for symptomatic treatment of Alzheimer's 
Disease and other dementias, there is currently no approved medication for 
treating cognitive symptoms in HD.ObjectiveWe aim to review, summarize, and 
appraise evidence from the literature for the use of cholinesterase inhibitors 
and memantine in the treatment of cognitive symptoms in patients with 
HD.MethodsA searched was conducted in PubMed and SCOPUS, from inception until 
February 2024, for Randomized Clinical Trials (RCTs), open-label, and 
case-control studies. Quality appraisal was performed using ROBINS-I and ROB2 
for non-randomized studies and RCTs, respectively.ResultsFive eligible studies 
(three RCTs, one extension study, and one retrospective case-control), exploring 
the use of rivastigmine (n = 3), memantine (n = 1), and donepezil (n = 1) were 
found. Only two had a follow-up period longer than eight months. Previous 
cognitive functioning was not specified in three out of five studies. Cognitive 
measures varied widely, with Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale and 
Mini-Mental State Exam being used more frequently. None of the studies showed a 
significant improvement in cognitive function. Side effects occurred in up to 
50% of patients and were usually considered mild.ConclusionsThere is 
insufficient evidence in the literature to support the use of cholinesterase 
inhibitors or memantine for cognitive symptoms in patients with HD.

DOI: 10.1177/18796397251367689
PMID: 40791064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.