---
reference_id: "PMID:25167772"
title: "Genetic variation in ORMDL3 gene may contribute to the risk of asthma: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhao YF
- Luo YM
- Xiong W
- Wu XL
journal: Hum Immunol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2014.08.202
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic variation in ORMDL3 gene may contribute to the risk of asthma: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhao YF, Luo YM, Xiong W, Wu XL
**Journal:** Hum Immunol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humimm.2014.08.202](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2014.08.202)

## Content

1. Hum Immunol. 2014 Sep;75(9):960-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2014.08.202. Epub
2014  Aug 27.

Genetic variation in ORMDL3 gene may contribute to the risk of asthma: a 
meta-analysis.

Zhao YF(1), Luo YM(2), Xiong W(1), Wu XL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Pudong New Area Gongli Hospital, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Diagnostics Teaching and Research Section, Southeast University Medical 
College, Nanjing 210009, China.
(3)Institute of Respiratory Medicine, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University, Chongqing 400037, China. Electronic address: xuelwu@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Since the first genome-wide association study report of an 
association between the ORMDL3 rs7216389 polymorphism and asthma, many studies 
have been carried out to establish its role in asthma susceptibility among 
different ethnic groups. However, results have not been consistent across all 
studies, compelling us to conduct the present meta-analysis.
METHODS: A literature search for eligible studies published before January 20, 
2014 was conducted in the MEDLINE, EMBASE, and CNKI databases. The association 
was assessed using pooled crude odds ratios (ORs) with their corresponding 95% 
confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: A total of 18 individual studies in 15 publications (total 7904 asthma 
patients and 10,874 healthy controls) were included in the meta-analysis. A 
meta-analysis of all included studies suggested that there was a highly 
significant risk effect conferred by the rs7216389*T allele on asthma 
susceptibility. In addition, we performed stratified analyses to evaluate 
ethnicity-specific and age-specific effects. Our subgroup analyses based on 
ethnicity and age-of-onset confirmed the role of the ORMDL3 rs7216389 
polymorphism in conferring susceptibility to both childhood- and adult-onset 
asthma, especially in Caucasians and Asians.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this meta-analysis firmly established that genetic 
variation at the rs7216389 locus, which controls the expression of the ORMDL3, 
may be a major, independent predisposing factor for asthma in ethnically diverse 
populations. However, further systematic studies are needed to determine the 
underlying mechanisms of this association.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2014.08.202
PMID: 25167772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]