---
reference_id: "PMID:24662765"
title: DMBA/TPA treatment is necessary for BCC formation from patched deficient epidermal cells in Ptch(flox/flox)CD4Cre(+/-) mice.
authors:
- Uhmann A
- Heß I
- Frommhold A
- König S
- Zabel S
- Nitzki F
- Dittmann K
- Lühder F
- Christiansen H
- Reifenberger J
- Schulz-Schaeffer W
- Hahn H
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.157
keywords:
- "9,10-Dimethyl-1,2-benzanthracene/adverse effects, pharmacology"
- Alleles
- Animals
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/pathology, physiology"
- "Carcinogenesis/chemically induced, drug effects"
- Carcinogens/pharmacology
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/chemically induced, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Epidermis/pathology, physiopathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation/genetics
- Patched Receptors
- Patched-1 Receptor
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- "Skin Neoplasms/chemically induced, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Stem Cells/pathology, physiology"
- "Tetradecanoylphorbol Acetate/adverse effects, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DMBA/TPA treatment is necessary for BCC formation from patched deficient epidermal cells in Ptch(flox/flox)CD4Cre(+/-) mice.
**Authors:** Uhmann A, Heß I, Frommhold A, König S, Zabel S, Nitzki F, Dittmann K, Lühder F, Christiansen H, Reifenberger J, Schulz-Schaeffer W, Hahn H
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jid.2014.157](https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2014.157)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Oct;134(10):2620-2629. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.157. Epub
 2014 Mar 24.

DMBA/TPA treatment is necessary for BCC formation from patched deficient
epidermal cells in Ptch(flox/flox)CD4Cre(+/-) mice.

Uhmann A(1), Heß I(2), Frommhold A(2), König S(2), Zabel S(2), Nitzki F(2),
Dittmann K(3), Lühder F(4), Christiansen H(5), Reifenberger J(6),
Schulz-Schaeffer W(7), Hahn H(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
Electronic address: auhmann@gwdg.de.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, University of Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Institute for Multiple Sclerosis Research, University of Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany.
(5)Department of Radiation Therapy and Radiation Oncology, University of
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Neuropathology, University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf Germany.
(7)Department of Neuropathology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Oct;134(10):2491-2493. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.233.

The development of basal cell carcinoma (BCC), the most frequently diagnosed
tumor among persons with European ancestry, is closely linked to mutations in
the Hedgehog (Hh) receptor and tumor suppressor Patched1 (Ptch). Using
Ptch(flox/flox)CD4Cre(+/-) mice, in which Ptch was ablated in CD4Cre-expressing
cells, we demonstrate that the targeted cells can give rise to BCC after
treatment with DMBA (7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene)/TPA
(12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate), but not after wounding of the skin. In
addition, in this model, BCC are not caused by malfunctioning of Ptch-deficient
T cells, as BCC did not develop when bone marrow (BM) of
Ptch(flox/flox)CD4Cre(+/-) mice was transplanted into Ptch wild-type mice.
Instead, lineage-tracing experiments and flow cytometric analyses suggest that
the tumors are initiated from rare Ptch-deficient stem cell-like cells of the
epidermis that express CD4. As DMBA/TPA is a prerequisite for BCC development in
this model, the initiated cells need a second stimulus for expansion and tumor
formation. However, in contrast to papilloma, this stimulus seems to be
unrelated to alterations in the Ras signaling cascade. Together, these data
suggest that biallelic loss of Ptch in CD4(+) cells does not suffice for BCC
formation and that BCC formation requires a second so far unknown event, at
least in the Ptch(flox/flox)CD4Cre(+/-) BCC mouse model.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2014.157
PMID: 24662765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
