---
reference_id: "PMID:11149158"
title: Sick-day management in type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Laffel L
journal: Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0889-8529(05)70160-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sick-day management in type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Laffel L
**Journal:** Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0889-8529(05)70160-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0889-8529(05)70160-2)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2000 Dec;29(4):707-23. doi: 
10.1016/s0889-8529(05)70160-2.

Sick-day management in type 1 diabetes.

Laffel L(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric and Adolescent Unit, Joslin Clinic, Joslin Diabetes Center, 
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
lori.laffel@joslin.harvard.edu

Illness and stress are common occurrences. For the person with type 1 diabetes, 
these events can be triggers for counterregulation and [table: see text] 
subsequent metabolic deterioration if there is no attention to diabetes 
management tasks. Sick-day management requires increased monitoring of blood 
glucose and assessment for ketosis. Although urine testing for ketones has been 
the standard approach to sick-day management, new technology for self-monitoring 
of blood 3HB levels is now available. According to the American Diabetes 
Association, blood measurement of 3HB "may offer a useful alternative to urine 
ketone testing." This new technology may provide an opportunity to improve the 
management of uncontrolled diabetes and sick days in an attempt to reduce the 
human and economic burden of DKA.

DOI: 10.1016/s0889-8529(05)70160-2
PMID: 11149158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]