---
reference_id: "PMID:33223229"
title: "Treatment of Eating Disorders in Adults Versus Adolescents: Similarities and Differences."
authors:
- Dalle Grave R
- Sartirana M
- Sermattei S
- Calugi S
journal: Clin Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2020.10.015
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/psychology, therapy"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Eating Disorders in Adults Versus Adolescents: Similarities and Differences.
**Authors:** Dalle Grave R, Sartirana M, Sermattei S, Calugi S
**Journal:** Clin Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinthera.2020.10.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2020.10.015)

## Content

1. Clin Ther. 2021 Jan;43(1):70-84. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2020.10.015. Epub
2020  Nov 20.

Treatment of Eating Disorders in Adults Versus Adolescents: Similarities and
Differences.

Dalle Grave R(1), Sartirana M(2), Sermattei S(3), Calugi S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Eating and Weight Disorders, Villa Garda Hospital, Garda,
Italy. Electronic address: rdalleg@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Eating and Weight Disorders, Villa Garda Hospital, Garda,
Italy. Electronic address: sartirana@adacentroobesitaanoressia.it.
(3)Department of Eating and Weight Disorders, Villa Garda Hospital, Garda,
Italy. Electronic address: selvsermattei@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Eating and Weight Disorders, Villa Garda Hospital, Garda,
Italy. Electronic address: si.calugi@gmail.com.

FINDINGS: Although several individual psychotherapies for adults with eating
disorders are empirically supported, with family-based treatment (FBT) being the
leading recommended empiric treatment in adolescents, patients with eating
disorders are still difficult to treat, and outcomes are often poor. In some
countries, the clinical services for adolescents and adults are separate, and it
is common for patients to receive treatments that differ in terms of both theory
and content when they are switched from adolescent to adult services. Changes in
the nature of treatment also often occur when patients move from less intensive
types of care to more intensive treatment, and vice versa. These transitions may
create a discontinuity in the care pathway and disorient patients and their
significant others about the strategies and procedures used for addressing
eating problems. However, the observation that younger and older patients
essentially share the same eating-disorder psychopathology has led to
evidence-based enhanced cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT-E) being adapted for
use in adolescents. Originally an evidence-based treatment for adults with
eating disorders, CBT-E has yielded promising results in trials in cohorts of
adolescent outpatients and inpatients, and is recommended as an alternative to
FBT in adolescent patients.
IMPLICATIONS: With a unified treatment such as CBT-E, several issues that plague
conventional eating-disorder services could be partially overcome, as patients
can move seamlessly from adolescence to adulthood and through different levels
of care, with no change in the nature of the treatment itself. Future
randomized, controlled trials should compare FBT to CBT-E to better clarify the
specific therapeutic needs of subgroups of adolescents and adult patients with
eating disorders.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2020.10.015
PMID: 33223229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors have indicated that they
have no conflicts of interest with regard to the content of this article.
