---
reference_id: "PMID:24357464"
title: "Interstitial deletion 14q22.3-q23.2: genotype-phenotype correlation."
authors:
- Martínez-Frías ML
- Ocejo-Vinyals JG
- Arteaga R
- Martínez-Fernández ML
- Macdonald A
- Pérez-Belmonte E
- Bermejo-Sánchez E
- Martínez S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36330
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Animals
- Child
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Facies
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mice
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interstitial deletion 14q22.3-q23.2: genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Martínez-Frías ML, Ocejo-Vinyals JG, Arteaga R, Martínez-Fernández ML, Macdonald A, Pérez-Belmonte E, Bermejo-Sánchez E, Martínez S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36330](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36330)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Mar;164A(3):639-47. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36330. Epub
2013  Dec 19.

Interstitial deletion 14q22.3-q23.2: genotype-phenotype correlation.

Martínez-Frías ML(1), Ocejo-Vinyals JG, Arteaga R, Martínez-Fernández ML, 
Macdonald A, Pérez-Belmonte E, Bermejo-Sánchez E, Martínez S.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid, Madrid, Spain; Spanish Collaborative Study of Congenital 
Malformations (ECEMC), CIAC (Research Center on Congenital Anomalies), Instituto 
de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) 
(U724), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, 
Madrid, Spain.

The increasing use of molecular tools in genetic diagnosis has produced a surge 
in the detection of genomic imbalances. Among the growing number of newly 
discovered chromosome alterations are the interstitial deletions 14q21-q23. In 
previous reports of this deletion, the patients appear to share ocular defects, 
pituitary alterations and hand/foot anomalies. Here, we present a 12-year-old 
girl with dysmorphic face, choanal atresia, gastroesophageal reflux, and 
moderate developmental delay, in whom an interstitial deletion 14q22.3-q23.2 was 
detected using a 180k array comparative genome hybridization. The 6.5 Mb 
deletion contains 27 genes, including three genes of the SIX family: SIX1, SIX4, 
and SIX6. In mammals, Six1 has been shown to be involved in ocular 
differentiation, whereas Six4 and Six6 are primarily expressed in the 
hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and facial bones. We used data on mouse embryos 
to evaluate the expression of the SIX genes, as well as other representative 
genes lost in the current patient and a previously published case with a similar 
phenotype, in order to correlate their pattern of expression with the functional 
anomalies that constitute the patient's phenotype. We also explored the 
possibility of other genetic influences, such as the existence of an imprinted 
region in chromosome 14q, which may provide a better understanding of the 
observed clinical variability.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36330
PMID: 24357464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]