---
reference_id: "PMID:28207005"
title: "Basal cell carcinoma arising in outdoor workers versus indoor workers: a retrospective study."
authors:
- Husein-Elahmed H
- Gutierrez-Salmeron MT
- Aneiros-Cachaza J
- Naranjo-Sintes R
journal: Cutis
year: '2017'
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Occupational Exposure/adverse effects
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Basal cell carcinoma arising in outdoor workers versus indoor workers: a retrospective study.
**Authors:** Husein-Elahmed H, Gutierrez-Salmeron MT, Aneiros-Cachaza J, Naranjo-Sintes R
**Journal:** Cutis (2017)

## Content

1. Cutis. 2017 Jan;99(1):55-60.

Basal cell carcinoma arising in outdoor workers versus indoor workers: a
retrospective study.

Husein-Elahmed H(1), Gutierrez-Salmeron MT(1), Aneiros-Cachaza J(2),
Naranjo-Sintes R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, San Cecilio University Hospital, Granada, Spain.
(2)Department of Pathology, San Cecilio University Hospital, Granada, Spain.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most prevalent malignancy in white individuals
and continues to be a serious health problem. Individuals who have sustained
exposure to UV radiation are at the highest risk for developing BCC. The aim of
this study was to compare the features of BCC in outdoor workers (OWs) with a
history of occupational exposure to UV radiation versus indoor workers (IWs). We
found that OWs are more likely to develop nodular BCC with no increased risk for
superficial BCC. The age of onset of BCC was older in OWs than in IWs. Truncal
BCC was more common in IWs, which may suggest other etiological factors are
involved in BCC such as genetic predisposition.

PMID: 28207005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
