---
reference_id: "PMID:28890050"
title: Modulation of hippocampal synapse maturation by activity-regulated E3 ligase via non-canonical pathway.
authors:
- Kumari P
- Srinivasan B
- Banerjee S
journal: Neuroscience
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.08.057
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Hippocampus/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- "Polycomb Repressive Complex 1/deficiency, metabolism"
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- "Receptors, AMPA"
- "Synapses/metabolism, physiology"
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/deficiency, metabolism"
- Ubiquitination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modulation of hippocampal synapse maturation by activity-regulated E3 ligase via non-canonical pathway.
**Authors:** Kumari P, Srinivasan B, Banerjee S
**Journal:** Neuroscience (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.08.057](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.08.057)

## Content

1. Neuroscience. 2017 Nov 19;364:226-241. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.08.057.  Epub 2017 Sep 8.

Modulation of hippocampal synapse maturation by activity-regulated E3 ligase via
non-canonical pathway.

Kumari P(1), Srinivasan B(1), Banerjee S(2).

Author information:
(1)Synapse Biology Laboratory, National Brain Research Center, NH-8, Nainwal
Mode, Manesar 122051, Haryana, India.
(2)Synapse Biology Laboratory, National Brain Research Center, NH-8, Nainwal
Mode, Manesar 122051, Haryana, India. Electronic address: sourav@nbrc.ac.in.

Development of functional synapses is crucial for the transmission and storage
of information in the brain. Post establishment of the initial synaptic contact,
synapses are stabilized through neuronal activity-induced signals. Emerging
studies have implicated ubiquitination; a reversible posttranslational
modification, as a key regulatory switch that modulates synapse development
through proteasomal degradation. Ubiquitination of proteins is precisely
regulated by E3 ligases, a set of enzymes that bind to specific substrates to
facilitate the conjugation of monomeric or polymeric ubiquitin. However, the
identity of specific E3 ubiquitin ligases that influence activity-dependent
maturation of synapses and the mechanism by which ubiquitination of proteins
regulate functional synapse development remain elusive. Here, we have identified
a RING domain containing E3 ligase, Rnf2, asan activity-regulated factor that
modulates glutamatergic synapse development in the hippocampus. Rnf2 is a
synapse associated E3 ligase that is stabilized by neuronal activity through
self-polyubiquitination. We have shown that neuronal activity shifts the balance
toward stabilization of Rnf2 through self-polyubiquitination rather than
triggering its degradation through polyubiquitination by Ube3A, an E3 ligase
implicated in Angelman Syndrome. Our synapse density measurements and whole-cell
patch-clamp recordings have revealed that the loss of Rnf2 function in cultured
hippocampal neurons result in the development of 'silent' synapses that lack
GluA1 containing functional AMPA receptors. These results provide a plausible
mechanistic approach toward understanding how synapse maturation is regulated
via the activity-dependent stabilization of Rnf2 through a non-canonical
function of polyubiquitination.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.08.057
PMID: 28890050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
