---
reference_id: "PMID:26803313"
title: Metabolomics study of fatigue in patients with rheumatoid arthritis naïve to biological treatment.
authors:
- Surowiec I
- Gjesdal CG
- Jonsson G
- Norheim KB
- Lundstedt T
- Trygg J
- Omdal R
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-016-3426-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metabolomics study of fatigue in patients with rheumatoid arthritis naïve to biological treatment.
**Authors:** Surowiec I, Gjesdal CG, Jonsson G, Norheim KB, Lundstedt T, Trygg J, Omdal R
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-016-3426-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-016-3426-2)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2016 May;36(5):703-11. doi: 10.1007/s00296-016-3426-2. Epub
2016  Jan 23.

Metabolomics study of fatigue in patients with rheumatoid arthritis naïve to 
biological treatment.

Surowiec I(1), Gjesdal CG(2)(3), Jonsson G(4), Norheim KB(5), Lundstedt T(6), 
Trygg J(7), Omdal R(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Computational Life Science Cluster (CLiC), Department of Chemistry, Umeå 
University, 901-87, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, 
Norway.
(5)Clinical Immunology Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Stavanger 
University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.
(6)Acureomics AB, Umeå, Sweden.
(7)Computational Life Science Cluster (CLiC), Department of Chemistry, Umeå 
University, 901-87, Umeå, Sweden. johan.trygg@umu.se.

Fatigue occurs in all chronic inflammatory diseases, in cancer, and in some 
neurological conditions. Patients often regard fatigue as one of their most 
debilitating problems, but currently there is no established treatment and the 
mechanisms that lead to and regulate fatigue are incompletely understood. Our 
objective was to more completely understand the physiology of this phenomenon. 
Twenty-four patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) naïve to treatment with 
biological drugs were enrolled for the study. Fatigue was measured with a 
fatigue visual analogue scale (fVAS). Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) 
plasma samples were subjected to gas chromatography-time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry (GC/MS-TOF)-based metabolite profiling. Obtained metabolite data 
were evaluated by multivariate data analysis with orthogonal projections to 
latent structures (OPLS) method to pinpoint metabolic changes related to fatigue 
severity. A significant multivariate OPLS model was obtained between the fVAS 
scores and the measured metabolic levels. Increasing fatigue scores were 
associated with a metabolic pattern characterized by down-regulation of 
metabolites from the urea cycle, fatty acids, tocopherols, aromatic amino acids, 
and hypoxanthine. Uric acid levels were increased. Apart from fatigue, we found 
no other disease-related variables that might be responsible for these changes. 
Our MS-based metabolomic approach demonstrated strong associations between 
fatigue and several biochemical patterns related to oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-016-3426-2
PMID: 26803313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]