---
reference_id: "PMID:37371790"
title: "Clinical and Molecular Aspects Associated with Defects in the Transcription Factor POU3F4: A Review."
authors:
- Bernardinelli E
- Huber F
- Roesch S
- Dossena S
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11061695
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Molecular Aspects Associated with Defects in the Transcription Factor POU3F4: A Review.
**Authors:** Bernardinelli E, Huber F, Roesch S, Dossena S
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines11061695](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines11061695)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2023 Jun 12;11(6):1695. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11061695.

Clinical and Molecular Aspects Associated with Defects in the Transcription 
Factor POU3F4: A Review.

Bernardinelli E(1), Huber F(1), Roesch S(2), Dossena S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Paracelsus Medical University, 5020 
Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Paracelsus Medical 
University, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.

X-linked deafness (DFNX) is estimated to account for up to 2% of cases of 
hereditary hearing loss and occurs in both syndromic and non-syndromic forms. 
POU3F4 is the gene most commonly associated with X-linked deafness (DFNX2, DFN3) 
and accounts for about 50% of the cases of X-linked non-syndromic hearing loss. 
This gene codes for a transcription factor of the POU family that plays a major 
role in the development of the middle and inner ear. The clinical features of 
POU3F4-related hearing loss include a pathognomonic malformation of the inner 
ear defined as incomplete partition of the cochlea type 3 (IP-III). Often, a 
perilymphatic gusher is observed upon stapedectomy during surgery, possibly as a 
consequence of an incomplete separation of the cochlea from the internal 
auditory canal. Here we present an overview of the pathogenic gene variants of 
POU3F4 reported in the literature and discuss the associated clinical features, 
including hearing loss combined with additional phenotypes such as cognitive and 
motor developmental delays. Research on the transcriptional targets of POU3F4 in 
the ear and brain is in its early stages and is expected to greatly advance our 
understanding of the pathophysiology of POU3F4-linked hearing loss.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11061695
PMCID: PMC10296620
PMID: 37371790

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.