---
reference_id: "PMID:17728275"
title: "Short-limbed dwarfism: slw is a new allele of Npr2 causing chondrodysplasia."
authors:
- Sogawa C
- Tsuji T
- Shinkai Y
- Katayama K
- Kunieda T
journal: J Hered
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/jhered/esm065
keywords:
- Animals
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Crosses, Genetic"
- Dwarfism/genetics
- "Exostoses, Multiple Hereditary/genetics, pathology"
- "Extremities/anatomy & histology"
- Female
- Growth Plate/pathology
- Guanylate Cyclase/genetics
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains/anatomy & histology, genetics"
- Probability
- "Receptors, Atrial Natriuretic Factor/genetics"
- Atrial Natriuretic Factor Receptor B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Short-limbed dwarfism: slw is a new allele of Npr2 causing chondrodysplasia.
**Authors:** Sogawa C, Tsuji T, Shinkai Y, Katayama K, Kunieda T
**Journal:** J Hered (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jhered/esm065](https://doi.org/10.1093/jhered/esm065)

## Content

1. J Hered. 2007 Sep-Oct;98(6):575-80. doi: 10.1093/jhered/esm065. Epub 2007 Aug 
28.

Short-limbed dwarfism: slw is a new allele of Npr2 causing chondrodysplasia.

Sogawa C(1), Tsuji T, Shinkai Y, Katayama K, Kunieda T.

Author information:
(1)The Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University, 
Tsushima-Naka, Okayama, Japan.

Short-limbed dwarfism (SLW) is a new mutant mouse characterized by a dwarf 
phenotype with markedly short body, limbs, and tail. In the present study, we 
investigated the skeletal phenotypes of the SLW mouse and determined the 
chromosomal localization to identify the gene responsible for the phenotypes 
(slw). Skeletal preparations stained with alcian blue and alizarin red revealed 
that longitudinal growth of the extremities of the affected (slw/slw) mice was 
significantly reduced in comparison with that of normal mice, whereas the 
positions and numbers of skeletal elements were normal. Histological examination 
of tibial growth plates of the affected mice showed that the numbers of 
proliferating and hypertrophic chondrocytes were obviously diminished. These 
phenotypes resembled to those of human chondrodysplasias caused by defective 
chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation. We mapped the slw locus on an 
11.7-cM interval of the proximal region of mouse chromosome 4 by linkage 
analysis. Furthermore, allelism test using Npr2(cn) locus, a mutant allele of 
Npr2 gene encoding a natriuretic peptide receptor B, revealed that slw locus is 
an allele of the Npr2 gene. These results suggest that the dwarf phenotype of 
the SLW mouse is caused by the disturbed endochondral ossification, and a 
mutation in the Npr2 gene is expected to be responsible for the phenotypes of 
the SLW mouse.

DOI: 10.1093/jhered/esm065
PMID: 17728275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]