---
reference_id: "PMID:32893075"
title: "Epilepsy in Angelman syndrome: A scoping review."
authors:
- Samanta D
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2020.08.014
keywords:
- "Angelman Syndrome/complications, physiopathology"
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electroencephalography
- "Epilepsy/physiopathology, therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Seizures/physiopathology, therapy"
- Status Epilepticus/drug therapy
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/metabolism
- Valproic Acid/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epilepsy in Angelman syndrome: A scoping review.
**Authors:** Samanta D
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2020.08.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2020.08.014)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2021 Jan;43(1):32-44. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2020.08.014. Epub
2020  Sep 4.

Epilepsy in Angelman syndrome: A scoping review.

Samanta D(1).

Author information:
(1)Child Neurology Section, Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Debopam Samanta 1 Children's Way, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA.
Electronic address: dsamanta@uams.edu.

Angelman Syndrome (AS) is characterized by severe developmental delays including
marked speech impairment, movement abnormalities(ataxia, tremor), and unique
behaviors such as frequent laughter and is caused by dysfunctional maternal
UBE3A gene (maternal 15q11-13 deletions, maternal specific UBE3A mutation,
uniparental disomy, and imprinting defect). Intractable epileptic seizures since
early childhood with characteristic EEG abnormalities are present in 80-90%
patients with AS. Underlying pathophysiology may involve neocortical and
thalamocortical hyperexcitability secondary to severe reduction of GABAergic
input, as well as dysfunctional synaptic plasticity, deficient synaptogenesis,
and neuronal morphological immaturity. The onset of epilepsy is most prevalent
between 1 and 3 years of age; however, approximately 25% of patients developed
epilepsy before one year of age. Various types of generalized seizures are most
prevalent, with most common types are myoclonic and atypical absence.More than
95% of epilepsy patients may have daily seizures at least for a limited time
during early childhood, and two-third patients develop disabling seizures. Fever
provoked seizures, and frequent occurrence of nonconvulsive status epilepticus
are two unique features. Seizures are frequently pharmacoresistant. Considering
underlying prominent GABAergic dysfunction, clinicians had used AEDs that target
GABAergic signaling such as valproate, phenobarbital, and clonazepam as
first-line therapies for AS. However, due to the unfavorable side effect profile
of these AEDs, a recent treatment approach involves priority use of
levetiracetam, clobazam, topiramate, lamotrigine, ethosuximide, VNS, and
carbohydrate-restricted diets. Besides symptomatic management, there has been
recent progress to find a curative treatment with the following approaches: 1.
Gene/protein replacement therapy (Adeno and lentiviral vector therapy to deliver
a gene or secretory protein); 2. Activation of the intact but silent paternal
copy of UBE3A (antisense oligonucleotide therapy and artificial transcription
factors); and 3. Downstream therapies (OV101/gaboxadol, ketone supplement, novel
compounds/peptides, anti-inflammatory/regenerative therapy).

Copyright © 2020 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2020.08.014
PMCID: PMC7688500
PMID: 32893075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests: The author is supported by the
Translational Research Institute (TRI), grant UL1 TR003107 through the National
Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health
(NIH). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.
