---
reference_id: "PMID:32621460"
title: "Why is Disease Penetration So Variable? Role of Genetic Modifiers of Lung Function in Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency."
authors:
- Hobbs BD
- Cho MH
journal: Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.3.2019.0159
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Why is Disease Penetration So Variable? Role of Genetic Modifiers of Lung Function in Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Hobbs BD, Cho MH
**Journal:** Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.15326/jcopdf.7.3.2019.0159](https://doi.org/10.15326/jcopdf.7.3.2019.0159)

## Content

1. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2020 Jul;7(3):214-223. doi:
10.15326/jcopdf.7.3.2019.0159.

Why is Disease Penetration So Variable? Role of Genetic Modifiers of Lung
Function in Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.

Hobbs BD(1), Cho MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Channing Division of Network Medicine and Division of Pulmonary and Critical
Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Individuals with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) have marked heterogeneity
in lung function, suspected to be related to a combination of both environmental
(e.g., cigarette smoking) and genetic factors. Lung function is heritable in the
general population and in persons with severe AATD. Several genetic modifiers of
lung function in persons with AATD have been described; however, replication is
lacking. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) of lung function in persons with
AATD has yet to be performed and may inform whether genetic determinants of lung
function are overlapping in persons with AATD and in the general population. As
GWASs require large sample sizes for adequate power, genetic risk scores offer
an alternate approach to assess the overlap of genetic determinants of lung
function in the general population in persons with AATD. Where GWASs are limited
to common genetic variant discovery, whole genome sequencing (for rare variant
discovery) and integrative genomic studies (examining the influence of genetic
variants on gene, protein, and metabolite levels) offer potential for an
expanded discovery of genetic modifiers of lung function in AATD. In the
following review we examine past descriptions of genetic modifiers of lung
function in AATD and describe a path forward to further investigate and define
the likely genetic modifiers of lung function in AATD.

JCOPDF © 2020.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.3.2019.0159
PMCID: PMC7857708
PMID: 32621460

Conflict of interest statement: BDH has nothing to declare. MHC has received
grant support from Bayer and GSK, and speaking and consulting fees from
AstraZeneca and Illumina.
