---
reference_id: "PMID:25618179"
title: The expanding role of co-trimoxazole in developing countries.
authors:
- Church JA
- Fitzgerald F
- Walker AS
- Gibb DM
- Prendergast AJ
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(14)71011-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The expanding role of co-trimoxazole in developing countries.
**Authors:** Church JA, Fitzgerald F, Walker AS, Gibb DM, Prendergast AJ
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(14)71011-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(14)71011-4)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015 Mar;15(3):327-39. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(14)71011-4. 
Epub 2015 Jan 21.

The expanding role of co-trimoxazole in developing countries.

Church JA(1), Fitzgerald F(2), Walker AS(3), Gibb DM(3), Prendergast AJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Paediatrics, Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK.
(2)UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(3)MRC Clinical Trials Unit at University College London, London, UK.
(4)Centre for Paediatrics, Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK; MRC Clinical Trials Unit at University College London, London, UK; 
Zvitambo Institute for Maternal and Child Health Research, Harare, Zimbabwe. 
Electronic address: a.prendergast@qmul.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2015 Mar;15(3):263. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(14)71012-6.

Comment in
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2015 Jul;15(7):764-5. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00076-6.

Co-trimoxazole is an inexpensive, broad-spectrum antimicrobial drug that is 
widely used in developing countries. Before antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
scale-up, co-trimoxazole prophylaxis reduced morbidity and mortality in adults 
and children with HIV by preventing bacterial infections, diarrhoea, malaria, 
and Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, despite high levels of microbial 
resistance. Co-trimoxazole prophylaxis reduces early mortality by 58% (95% CI 
39-71) in adults starting ART. Co-trimoxazole provides ongoing protection 
against malaria and non-malaria infections after immune reconstitution in 
ART-treated individuals in sub-Saharan Africa, leading to a change in WHO 
guidelines, which now recommend long-term co-trimoxazole prophylaxis for adults 
and children in settings with a high prevalence of malaria or severe bacterial 
infections. Co-trimoxazole prophylaxis is recommended for HIV-exposed infants 
from age 4-6 weeks; however, the risks and benefits of co-trimoxazole during 
infancy are unclear. Co-trimoxazole prophylaxis reduces anaemia and improves 
growth in children with HIV, possibly by reducing inflammation, either through 
direct immunomodulatory activity or through effects on the intestinal microbiota 
leading to reduced microbial translocation. Ongoing trials are now assessing the 
ability of adjunctive co-trimoxazole to reduce mortality in children after 
severe anaemia or severe acute malnutrition. In this Review, we discuss the 
mechanisms of action, benefits and risks, and clinical trials of co-trimoxazole 
in developing countries.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(14)71011-4
PMID: 25618179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]