---
reference_id: "PMID:41744110"
title: "Sex-Related Differences in Clinical Profile, Management, and Outcomes of Patients With Type A and B Acute Aortic Dissection: Observations From IRAD."
authors:
- Jackson E
- Carbone A
- Shalhub S
- Pai CW
- Ehrlich M
- Suzuki T
- Hughes GC
- Bhan A
- Faizer R
- Cittadini A
- Braverman A
- Isselbacher E
- Eagle K
- Nienaber C
- Bossone E
journal: J Am Heart Assoc
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.124.037506
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Aortic Dissection/therapy, mortality, diagnosis"
- Sex Factors
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Registries
- Hospital Mortality
- Acute Disease
- Treatment Outcome
- "Aortic Aneurysm/therapy, mortality, diagnosis"
- Risk Factors
- Retrospective Studies
- Endovascular Procedures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex-Related Differences in Clinical Profile, Management, and Outcomes of Patients With Type A and B Acute Aortic Dissection: Observations From IRAD.
**Authors:** Jackson E, Carbone A, Shalhub S, Pai CW, Ehrlich M, Suzuki T, Hughes GC, Bhan A, Faizer R, Cittadini A, Braverman A, Isselbacher E, Eagle K, Nienaber C, Bossone E
**Journal:** J Am Heart Assoc (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1161/JAHA.124.037506](https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.124.037506)

## Content

1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2026 Mar 3;15(5):e037506. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.124.037506. Epub
 2026 Feb 26.

Sex-Related Differences in Clinical Profile, Management, and Outcomes of
Patients With Type A and B Acute Aortic Dissection: Observations From IRAD.

Jackson E(#)(1), Carbone A(#)(2)(3), Shalhub S(4)(5), Pai CW(6), Ehrlich M(7),
Suzuki T(8), Hughes GC(9), Bhan A(10), Faizer R(11), Cittadini A(12)(13),
Braverman A(14), Isselbacher E(15), Eagle K(16), Nienaber C(#)(17), Bossone
E(#)(3)(13).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Disease University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham AL USA.
(2)Unit of Cardiology University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli" Naples Italy.
(3)Department of Public Health University of Naples "Federico II" Naples Italy.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology University of Washington School of Medicine
Seattle WA USA.
(5)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery Oregon
Health and Science University Portland OR USA.
(6)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine
University of Michigan Ann Arbor MI USA.
(7)Department of Cardiac Surgery Medical University of Vienna Vienna Austria.
(8)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences University of Leicester, BHF
Cardiovascular Research Centre, Glenfield Hospital Leicester UK.
(9)Division of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery Duke
University Medical Center Durham NC USA.
(10)Department of Cardiac Surgery Medanta The Medicity Gurgaon Haryana India.
(11)Division of Vascular Surgery University of Minnesota Minneapolis MN USA.
(12)Department of Translational Medical Sciences Federico II University Naples
Italy.
(13)Interdepartmental Genesis Center Federico II University Naples Italy.
(14)Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division Washington University School
of Medicine St. Louis MO USA.
(15)Corrigan Minehan Heart Center, Massachusetts General Hospital Harvard
Medical School Boston MA USA.
(16)Department of Internal Medicine University of Michigan Health System Ann
Arbor MI USA.
(17)Department of Cardiology Royal Brompton and Harefield Trust London UK.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Available data about sex differences in patients with acute aortic
dissection (AAD) are scant and conflicting. The aim of this study is to assess
sex-related differences in clinical characteristics, presentation, diagnostic
findings, management, and outcomes among patients with type A (TA-AAD) and type
B AAD (TB-AAD).
METHODS: Data about 11 586 patients enrolled in the IRAD (International Registry
of Acute Aortic Dissection) from 1996 to 2022, were analyzed; 7819 (67.5%)
experienced TA-AAD and 3867 (33.0%) TB-AAD. Men and women were compared with
regard to diagnosis, treatment, and in-hospital and long-term survival.
RESULTS: One third of patients were women (TA-AAD, 34.4%; and TB-AAD, 34.5%).
Women were older than men for both types of AAD. The median time from hospital
admission to diagnosis was longer in women for both TA-AAD and TB-AAD (P<0.001).
For TA-AAD, symptoms of hypotension and coma/altered mental status were more
common in women, whereas for TB-AAD women were more likely to present with
congestive heart failure. Surgical repair for TA-AAD was less frequent in women
than men (84.6% versus 89.0%; P<0.001). For both types of AAD, medical
management was more common among women than men (TA-AAD, 16.5% versus 11.6%;
P<0.001; TB-AAD, 65.6% versus 54.2%; P<0.001). The overall as well as surgical
in-hospital mortality rate was higher among women with TA-AAD compared with men
(P<0.001), whereas it was similar in those managed medically (P=0.23). No
difference in overall (P=1), medical (P=0.38), endovascular (P=1), and surgical
(P=0.51) mortality rates was observed for TB-AAD between men and women. After
TA-AAD, women showed lower 4-year survival compared with men (81.4% versus
86.6%, P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study highlights important sex-related differences in
AAD; there is a need to design tailored aortic disease management programs to
improve outcomes in women.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.124.037506
PMCID: PMC13055758
PMID: 41744110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K.E. received modest grant support from W.L.
Gore, Terumo, and Medtronic. No other authors have conflicts to disclose.
