---
reference_id: "PMID:1690950"
title: Malignant melanoma. Interaction with coagulation and fibrinolysis pathways in situ.
authors:
- Wojtukiewicz MZ
- Zacharski LR
- Memoli VA
- Kisiel W
- Kudryk BJ
- Rousseau SM
- Stump DC
journal: Am J Clin Pathol
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1093/ajcp/93.4.516
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant melanoma. Interaction with coagulation and fibrinolysis pathways in situ.
**Authors:** Wojtukiewicz MZ, Zacharski LR, Memoli VA, Kisiel W, Kudryk BJ, Rousseau SM, Stump DC
**Journal:** Am J Clin Pathol (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ajcp/93.4.516](https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcp/93.4.516)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Pathol. 1990 Apr;93(4):516-21. doi: 10.1093/ajcp/93.4.516.

Malignant melanoma. Interaction with coagulation and fibrinolysis pathways in 
situ.

Wojtukiewicz MZ(1), Zacharski LR, Memoli VA, Kisiel W, Kudryk BJ, Rousseau SM, 
Stump DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School, White River Junction, 
Vermont.

Immunohistochemical techniques applied to fresh frozen sections of metastatic 
malignant melanoma tissue revealed abundant fibrinogen (or fibrin I) in 
perivascular areas throughout the tumor connective tissue stroma. Fibrin was 
readily detected in a focal distribution in the connective tissue around nodules 
of viable tumor. Staining for D-dimer of cross-linked fibrin (using an antibody 
that cross-reacted with fragment D of fibrinogen) coincided with staining for 
fibrin. Diffuse staining of tumor cell bodies was observed for Factor X, and 
Factor XIII ("a" subunit) was detected in scattered areas of connective tissue 
throughout the tumors. Factor VII was not detected, and only rare tumor cells 
stained for tissue factor. These results support the concept that a tumor 
cell-associated, thrombin-generating pathway exists in situ in malignant 
melanoma tissue that includes Factor X but neither tissue factor nor Factor VII. 
By contrast, tumor cell staining was observed rarely for urokinase and to a 
variable extent for tissue plasminogen activator.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcp/93.4.516
PMID: 1690950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]