---
reference_id: "PMID:30209782"
title: Oral Ganglioside Supplement Improves Growth and Development in Patients with Ganglioside GM3 Synthase Deficiency.
authors:
- Wang H
- Sency V
- McJarrow P
- Bright A
- Huang Q
- Cechner K
- Szekely J
- Brace J
- Wang A
- Liu D
- Rowan A
- Wiznitzer M
- Zhou A
- Xin B
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2018_134
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral Ganglioside Supplement Improves Growth and Development in Patients with Ganglioside GM3 Synthase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Wang H, Sency V, McJarrow P, Bright A, Huang Q, Cechner K, Szekely J, Brace J, Wang A, Liu D, Rowan A, Wiznitzer M, Zhou A, Xin B
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2018_134](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2018_134)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2019;45:9-20. doi: 10.1007/8904_2018_134. Epub 2018 Sep 13.

Oral Ganglioside Supplement Improves Growth and Development in Patients with
Ganglioside GM3 Synthase Deficiency.

Wang H(1)(2)(3)(4), Sency V(5), McJarrow P(6), Bright A(5), Huang Q(7), Cechner
K(5), Szekely J(5), Brace J(5), Wang A(5), Liu D(7), Rowan A(6), Wiznitzer
M(8)(9), Zhou A(7), Xin B(5).

Author information:
(1)DDC Clinic - Center for Special Needs Children, Middlefield, OH, USA.
wang@ddcclinic.org.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH, USA. wang@ddcclinic.org.
(3)Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital, Cleveland, OH, USA. wang@ddcclinic.org.
(4)Department of Molecular Cardiology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
wang@ddcclinic.org.
(5)DDC Clinic - Center for Special Needs Children, Middlefield, OH, USA.
(6)Fonterra Research and Development Centre, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
(7)Department of Chemistry, Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Diseases,
Cleveland State University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(9)Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Ganglioside GM3 synthase is a key enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of
gangliosides. GM3 synthase deficiency (GM3D) causes an absence of GM3 and all
downstream biosynthetic derivatives. The affected individuals manifest with
severe irritability, intractable seizures, and profound intellectual disability.
The current study is to assess the effects of an oral ganglioside supplement to
patients with GM3D, particularly on their growth and development during early
childhood. A total of 13 young children, 11 of them under 40 months old,
received oral ganglioside supplement through a dairy product enriched in
gangliosides, for an average of 34 months. Clinical improvements were observed
in most children soon after the supplement was initiated. Significantly improved
growth and development were documented in these subjects as average percentiles
for weight, height, and occipitofrontal circumference increased in 1-2 months.
Three children with initial microcephaly demonstrated significant catch-up head
growth and became normocephalic. We also illustrated brief improvements in
developmental and cognitive scores, particularly in communication and
socialization domains through Vineland-II. However, all improvements seemed
transient and gradually phased out after 12 months of supplementation.
Gangliosides GM1 and GM3, although measureable in plasma during the study, were
not significantly changed with ganglioside supplementation for up to 30 months.
We speculate that the downstream metabolism of ganglioside biosynthesis is
fairly active and the potential need for gangliosides in the human body is
likely substantial. As we search for new effective therapies for GM3D,
approaches to reestablish endogenous ganglioside supplies in the affected
individuals should be considered.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2018_134
PMCID: PMC6336560
PMID: 30209782
