---
reference_id: "PMID:29980873"
title: "A novel compound heterozygous mutation of the L2HGDH gene in a Chinese boy with L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: case report and literature review."
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Wang C
- Yang K
- Wang S
- Tian G
- Chen Y
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-018-3483-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel compound heterozygous mutation of the L2HGDH gene in a Chinese boy with L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Wang C, Yang K, Wang S, Tian G, Chen Y
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-018-3483-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-018-3483-2)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2018 Oct;39(10):1697-1703. doi: 10.1007/s10072-018-3483-2. Epub
2018  Jul 6.

A novel compound heterozygous mutation of the L2HGDH gene in a Chinese boy with 
L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: case report and literature review.

Zhang Y(1), Wang C(1), Yang K(1), Wang S(1), Tian G(2), Chen Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Children's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, 355 Lu Ding Lu, Putuo Qu, Shanghai, 200062, China.
(2)Neonatal Screening Center, Shanghai Children's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shi, Shanghai, 200000, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Children's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, 355 Lu Ding Lu, Putuo Qu, Shanghai, 200062, China. 
chenyucaiphd@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria is a genetic metabolic disorder. Its 
clinical features include elevated levels of hydroxyglutaric acid in body fluids 
and abnormal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the subcortical white matter, 
which are affected by the accumulation of L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid.
METHOD: A boy with psychomotor retardation and progressive ataxia accompanied by 
abnormal brain MRI findings was tested using whole-exome sequencing.
RESULTS: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) revealed two novel compound 
heterozygous frameshift mutations, c.407 del A (p.K136SfsTer3) and c.699_c700 
ins A (p.D234RfsTer42), in the L-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (L2HGDH) gene, 
leading to premature termination codons and truncated FAD/NAD(P)-binding domain 
of L2HGDH protein. Further laboratory testing revealed an increase in the 
2-hydroxyglutaric acid level in the urine.
CONCLUSION: The results suggested that NGS could provide clues for identifying 
patients with abnormal neuroradiological findings in the subcortical white 
matter.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-018-3483-2
PMID: 29980873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]