---
reference_id: "PMID:19436038"
title: "Ki67 index, HER2 status, and prognosis of patients with luminal B breast cancer."
authors:
- Cheang MC
- Chia SK
- Voduc D
- Gao D
- Leung S
- Snider J
- Watson M
- Davies S
- Bernard PS
- Parker JS
- Perou CM
- Ellis MJ
- Nielsen TO
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/djp082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ki67 index, HER2 status, and prognosis of patients with luminal B breast cancer.
**Authors:** Cheang MC, Chia SK, Voduc D, Gao D, Leung S, Snider J, Watson M, Davies S, Bernard PS, Parker JS, Perou CM, Ellis MJ, Nielsen TO
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/djp082](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djp082)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009 May 20;101(10):736-50. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djp082. Epub
 2009 May 12.

Ki67 index, HER2 status, and prognosis of patients with luminal B breast cancer.

Cheang MC(1), Chia SK, Voduc D, Gao D, Leung S, Snider J, Watson M, Davies S, 
Bernard PS, Parker JS, Perou CM, Ellis MJ, Nielsen TO.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre, Vancouver Coastal Health Research 
Institute, British Columbia Cancer Agency, and University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009 Dec 16;101(24):1730; author reply 1730-1. doi: 
10.1093/jnci/djp390.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression profiling of breast cancer has identified two 
biologically distinct estrogen receptor (ER)-positive subtypes of breast cancer: 
luminal A and luminal B. Luminal B tumors have higher proliferation and poorer 
prognosis than luminal A tumors. In this study, we developed a clinically 
practical immunohistochemistry assay to distinguish luminal B from luminal A 
tumors and investigated its ability to separate tumors according to breast 
cancer recurrence-free and disease-specific survival.
METHODS: Tumors from a cohort of 357 patients with invasive breast carcinomas 
were subtyped by gene expression profile. Hormone receptor status, HER2 status, 
and the Ki67 index (percentage of Ki67-positive cancer nuclei) were determined 
immunohistochemically. Receiver operating characteristic curves were used to 
determine the Ki67 cut point to distinguish luminal B from luminal A tumors. The 
prognostic value of the immunohistochemical assignment for breast cancer 
recurrence-free and disease-specific survival was investigated with an 
independent tissue microarray series of 4046 breast cancers by use of 
Kaplan-Meier curves and multivariable Cox regression.
RESULTS: Gene expression profiling classified 101 (28%) of the 357 tumors as 
luminal A and 69 (19%) as luminal B. The best Ki67 index cut point to 
distinguish luminal B from luminal A tumors was 13.25%. In an independent cohort 
of 4046 patients with breast cancer, 2847 had hormone receptor-positive tumors. 
When HER2 immunohistochemistry and the Ki67 index were used to subtype these 
2847 tumors, we classified 1530 (59%, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 57% to 61%) 
as luminal A, 846 (33%, 95% CI = 31% to 34%) as luminal B, and 222 (9%, 95% CI = 
7% to 10%) as luminal-HER2 positive. Luminal B and luminal-HER2-positive breast 
cancers were statistically significantly associated with poor breast cancer 
recurrence-free and disease-specific survival in all adjuvant systemic treatment 
categories. Of particular relevance are women who received tamoxifen as their 
sole adjuvant systemic therapy, among whom the 10-year breast cancer-specific 
survival was 79% (95% CI = 76% to 83%) for luminal A, 64% (95% CI = 59% to 70%) 
for luminal B, and 57% (95% CI = 47% to 69%) for luminal-HER2 subtypes.
CONCLUSION: Expression of ER, progesterone receptor, and HER2 proteins and the 
Ki67 index appear to distinguish luminal A from luminal B breast cancer 
subtypes.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djp082
PMCID: PMC2684553
PMID: 19436038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]