---
reference_id: "PMID:27991864"
title: Gsα deficiency in the dorsomedial hypothalamus underlies obesity associated with Gsα mutations.
authors:
- Chen M
- Shrestha YB
- Podyma B
- Cui Z
- Naglieri B
- Sun H
- Ho T
- Wilson EA
- Li YQ
- Gavrilova O
- Weinstein LS
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1172/JCI88622
keywords:
- "Adipose Tissue, Brown/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Alleles
- Animals
- "Chromogranins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cold Temperature
- "Dorsomedial Hypothalamic Nucleus/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Energy Metabolism/genetics
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics, metabolism"
- Genomic Imprinting
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Obesity/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Pseudohypoparathyroidism/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gsα deficiency in the dorsomedial hypothalamus underlies obesity associated with Gsα mutations.
**Authors:** Chen M, Shrestha YB, Podyma B, Cui Z, Naglieri B, Sun H, Ho T, Wilson EA, Li YQ, Gavrilova O, Weinstein LS
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI88622](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI88622)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2017 Feb 1;127(2):500-510. doi: 10.1172/JCI88622. Epub 2016 Dec
 19.

Gsα deficiency in the dorsomedial hypothalamus underlies obesity associated with
Gsα mutations.

Chen M, Shrestha YB, Podyma B, Cui Z, Naglieri B, Sun H, Ho T, Wilson EA, Li YQ,
Gavrilova O, Weinstein LS.

Gsα, encoded by Gnas, mediates hormone and neurotransmitter receptor-stimulated
cAMP generation. Heterozygous Gsα-inactivating mutations lead to obesity in
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) patients, but only when the mutations
occur on the maternal allele. This parent-of-origin effect is due to Gsα
imprinting in the CNS, although the relevant CNS regions are unknown. We have
now shown that mice with a Gnas gene deletion disrupting Gsα expression on the
maternal allele, but not the paternal allele, in the dorsomedial nucleus of the
hypothalamus (DMH) developed obesity and reduced energy expenditure without
hyperphagia. Although maternal Gnas deletion impaired activation of brown
adipose tissue (BAT) in mice, their responses to cold environment remained
intact. Similar findings were observed in mice with DMH-specific deficiency of
melanocortin MC4R receptors, which are known to activate Gsα. Our results show
that Gsα imprinting in the DMH underlies the parent-of-origin metabolic
phenotype that results from Gsα mutations and that DMH MC4R/Gsα signaling is
important for regulation of energy expenditure and BAT activation, but not the
metabolic response to cold.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI88622
PMCID: PMC5272175
PMID: 27991864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no conflict of
interest exists.
