---
reference_id: "PMID:36898020"
title: Juvenile Hemochromatosis With Non-transfused Hemolytic Anemia Caused by a De Novo PIEZO1 Gene Mutation.
authors:
- Imashuku S
- Suemori SI
- Wakamatsu M
- Okuno Y
- Muramatsu H
- Makino S
- Miyoshi T
- Chonabayashi K
- Kanno H
journal: J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000002639
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile Hemochromatosis With Non-transfused Hemolytic Anemia Caused by a De Novo PIEZO1 Gene Mutation.
**Authors:** Imashuku S, Suemori SI, Wakamatsu M, Okuno Y, Muramatsu H, Makino S, Miyoshi T, Chonabayashi K, Kanno H
**Journal:** J Pediatr Hematol Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPH.0000000000002639](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPH.0000000000002639)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2023 May 1;45(4):e510-e513. doi: 
10.1097/MPH.0000000000002639. Epub 2023 Feb 21.

Juvenile Hemochromatosis With Non-transfused Hemolytic Anemia Caused by a De 
Novo PIEZO1 Gene Mutation.

Imashuku S(1), Suemori SI(2), Wakamatsu M(3), Okuno Y(4), Muramatsu H(3), Makino 
S(5), Miyoshi T(6), Chonabayashi K(5), Kanno H(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kawasaki Medical School.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine.
(4)Department of Virology, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences.
(5)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University.
(6)Department of Transfusion Medicine and Cell Processing, Tokyo Women's Medical 
University, Japan.

Differential diagnosis of juvenile hemochromatosis along with hemolytic anemia 
is often difficult. We report a 23-year-old woman with macrocytic hemolytic 
anemia with iron overload. The patient showed high serum ferritin and 
transferrin saturation and low serum transferrin and ceruloplasmin. We also 
noticed stomatocytes in her blood smear, which was confirmed by scanning 
electron microscopy. Target gene sequencing identified a mutation in PIEZO1 
(heterozygous c.6008C>A: p.A2003D). This mutation was reported previously in a 
family with dehydrated hereditary stomatocytosis (DHS1, [OMIM 194380]), but in 
the current case, it was identified to be a de novo mutation. We underscore DHS1 
in the differential diagnosis of iron overload associated with non-transfused 
hemolytic anemia in children and young adults.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000002639
PMID: 36898020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.