---
reference_id: "PMID:16237557"
title: Novel mutation of Endothelin-B receptor gene in Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Sangkhathat S
- Chiengkriwate P
- Kusafuka T
- Patrapinyokul S
- Fukuzawa M
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-005-1553-z
keywords:
- Female
- "Hirschsprung Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nuclear Family
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Endothelin B/genetics"
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel mutation of Endothelin-B receptor gene in Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Sangkhathat S, Chiengkriwate P, Kusafuka T, Patrapinyokul S, Fukuzawa M
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-005-1553-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-005-1553-z)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2005 Dec;21(12):960-3. doi: 10.1007/s00383-005-1553-z. Epub
2005 Oct 20.

Novel mutation of Endothelin-B receptor gene in Waardenburg-Hirschsprung
disease.

Sangkhathat S(1), Chiengkriwate P, Kusafuka T, Patrapinyokul S, Fukuzawa M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Homozygous mutations of EDNRB in human have been reported to result in
Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease (WS4), while mutated heterozygotes manifested
isolated Hirschsprung disease in lower penetrance. We investigated a case of WS4
together with all members of her nuclear family for the alteration of the EDNRB
gene by using PCR-SSCP and direct sequencing technique. The index patient, who
was born to a family with no history of Hirschsprung disease, presented total
colonic aganglionosis with small bowel extension, sensorineural hearing loss and
generalized cutaneous pigmentary defects. Interestingly, both irides were
normally black. The study detected a homozygous missense mutation at codon 196
in exon 2 (Ser196Asn), which has not been reported. Both parents and four in six
siblings harbored heterozygous mutation without any clinical manifestation. Our
findings were consistent with previous observations that full spectrum of WS4
occurred to the mutate homozygotes. Moreover, the non-penetrance of
heterozygotes in our pedigree, which differs from other reports, demonstrates
the high pleiotropic effect of EDNRB mutations in human.

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-005-1553-z
PMID: 16237557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
