---
reference_id: "PMID:33793303"
title: Increased Reactive Oxygen Species-Mediated Ca(2+)/Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase II Activation Contributes to Calcium Handling Abnormalities and Impaired Contraction in Barth Syndrome.
authors:
- Liu X
- Wang S
- Guo X
- Li Y
- Ogurlu R
- Lu F
- Prondzynski M
- de la Serna Buzon S
- Ma Q
- Zhang D
- Wang G
- Cotton J
- Guo Y
- Xiao L
- Milan DJ
- Xu Y
- Schlame M
- Bezzerides VJ
- Pu WT
journal: Circulation
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.048698
keywords:
- Animals
- "Barth Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Calcium/metabolism
- Calcium-Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase Type 2/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased Reactive Oxygen Species-Mediated Ca(2+)/Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase II Activation Contributes to Calcium Handling Abnormalities and Impaired Contraction in Barth Syndrome.
**Authors:** Liu X, Wang S, Guo X, Li Y, Ogurlu R, Lu F, Prondzynski M, de la Serna Buzon S, Ma Q, Zhang D, Wang G, Cotton J, Guo Y, Xiao L, Milan DJ, Xu Y, Schlame M, Bezzerides VJ, Pu WT
**Journal:** Circulation (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.048698](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.048698)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2021 May 11;143(19):1894-1911. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.048698. Epub 2021 Apr 1.

Increased Reactive Oxygen Species-Mediated Ca(2+)/Calmodulin-Dependent Protein
Kinase II Activation Contributes to Calcium Handling Abnormalities and Impaired
Contraction in Barth Syndrome.

Liu X(1)(2), Wang S(1), Guo X(1)(3), Li Y(4), Ogurlu R(1), Lu F(1), Prondzynski
M(1), de la Serna Buzon S(1), Ma Q(1), Zhang D(5), Wang G(1), Cotton J(1)(6),
Guo Y(1), Xiao L(7), Milan DJ(7), Xu Y(8), Schlame M(8), Bezzerides VJ(1), Pu
WT(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, MA (X.L., S.W., X.G.,
R.O., F.L., M.P., S.d.l.S.B., Q.M., G.W., J.C., Y.G., V.J.B., W.T.P.).
(2)Department of Radiology, Basic Medical School, Chongqing Medical University,
China (X.L.).
(3)Center of Scientific Research, the Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Zhejiang, China (X.G.).
(4)Key Laboratory of Birth Defects and Related Diseases of Women and Children of
MOE, Department of Pediatrics, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu (Y.L.).
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life
Science, Hubei University, Wuhan, China (D.Z.).
(6)Harvard College, Cambridge, MA (J.C.).
(7)Department of Cardiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston (L.X.,
D.J.M.).
(8)Department of Anesthesiology, New York University School of Medicine (Y.X.,
M.S.).
(9)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA (W.T.P.).

BACKGROUND: Mutations in tafazzin (TAZ), a gene required for biogenesis of
cardiolipin, the signature phospholipid of the inner mitochondrial membrane,
causes Barth syndrome (BTHS). Cardiomyopathy and risk of sudden cardiac death
are prominent features of BTHS, but the mechanisms by which impaired cardiolipin
biogenesis causes cardiac muscle weakness and arrhythmia are poorly understood.
METHODS: We performed in vivo electrophysiology to define arrhythmia
vulnerability in cardiac-specific TAZ knockout mice. Using cardiomyocytes
derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells and cardiac-specific TAZ
knockout mice as model systems, we investigated the effect of TAZ inactivation
on Ca2+ handling. Through genome editing and pharmacology, we defined a
molecular link between TAZ mutation and abnormal Ca2+ handling and
contractility.
RESULTS: A subset of mice with cardiac-specific TAZ inactivation developed
arrhythmias, including bidirectional ventricular tachycardia, atrial
tachycardia, and complete atrioventricular block. Compared with wild-type
controls, BTHS-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes had
increased diastolic Ca2+ and decreased Ca2+ transient amplitude. BTHS-induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes had higher levels of mitochondrial
and cellular reactive oxygen species than wild-type controls, which activated
CaMKII (Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II). Activated CaMKII
phosphorylated the RYR2 (ryanodine receptor 2) on serine 2814, increasing Ca2+
leak through RYR2. Inhibition of this reactive oxygen species-CaMKII-RYR2
pathway through pharmacological inhibitors or genome editing normalized aberrant
Ca2+ handling in BTHS-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes and
improved their contractile function. Murine Taz knockout cardiomyocytes also
exhibited elevated diastolic Ca2+ and decreased Ca2+ transient amplitude. These
abnormalities were ameliorated by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II or
reactive oxygen species inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified a molecular pathway that links TAZ mutation
with abnormal Ca2+ handling and decreased cardiomyocyte contractility. This
pathway may offer therapeutic opportunities to treat BTHS and potentially other
diseases with elevated mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.048698
PMCID: PMC8691127
PMID: 33793303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES WTP and VJB
hold intellectual property on AAV-mediated inhibition of CaMKII for treatment of
cardiac arrhythmias and for treatment of Barth syndrome, and are conducting
research sponsored by Cydan and Sarepta on CaMKII inhibition for the treatment
of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
