---
reference_id: "PMID:37004449"
title: "An arteriovenous malformation associated ischemic colitis in the setting of acute gastrointestinal clostridium difficile colitis and intestinal amebiasis: A case report."
authors:
- Maqboul I
- Demyati K
- Abdoh Q
- Suleiman Q
- Daraghmeh L
journal: Int J Surg Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108063
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An arteriovenous malformation associated ischemic colitis in the setting of acute gastrointestinal clostridium difficile colitis and intestinal amebiasis: A case report.
**Authors:** Maqboul I, Demyati K, Abdoh Q, Suleiman Q, Daraghmeh L
**Journal:** Int J Surg Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108063](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108063)

## Content

1. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2023 Apr;105:108063. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108063.
Epub  2023 Mar 30.

An arteriovenous malformation associated ischemic colitis in the setting of 
acute gastrointestinal clostridium difficile colitis and intestinal amebiasis: A 
case report.

Maqboul I(1), Demyati K(2), Abdoh Q(3), Suleiman Q(4), Daraghmeh L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, An-Najah 
National University Hospital, State of Palestine. Electronic address: 
imaqbool@najah.edu.
(2)An-Najah National University Hospital, State of Palestine. Electronic 
address: khaleddemyati@najah.edu.
(3)An-Najah National University Hospital, State of Palestine. Electronic 
address: Qusayabdoh@najah.edu.
(4)An-Najah National University Hospital, State of Palestine. Electronic 
address: Qutiba.s@najah.edu.
(5)An-Najah National University Hospital, State of Palestine.

BACKGROUND: There is one reported case of inferior mesenteric arteriovenous 
malformation presenting as ischemic colitis after an episode of gastrointestinal 
infection. We documented this case to emphasize the possible association between 
ischemic colitis and vascular malformations. In addition, this is the number 
15th case in the literature about this association.
CASE SUMMARY: A 40 years old male patient presented with abdominal pain and 
diarrhea of 10 days duration after he was diagnosed and managed as a case of 
Clostridium Difficile infection and amebiasis. Computed tomography angiography 
revealed a vascular malformation of the inferior mesenteric artery, repeated 
colonoscopy showed ulceration and sloughing of the mucosa, he underwent 
Hartmann's procedure due to colonic ischemia diagnosed by the previous measures. 
Later on he had a colostomy closure and end to end colorectal anastomosis.
CONCLUSION: There is a possible association between acute gastrointestinal 
infection and ischemic colitis in the setting of arteriovenous malformation.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108063
PMCID: PMC10112014
PMID: 37004449

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement All Authors have 
no conflict of interests.