---
reference_id: "PMID:39112932"
title: "A randomised, two-arm (1:1 ratio), double blind, placebo controlled phase III trial to assess the efficacy, safety, cost and cost-effectiveness of Rituximab in treating de novo or relapsing NS in patients with MCD/FSGS (TURING)."
authors:
- C Willcocks L
- Qian W
- Cader R
- Gatley K
- Siddiqui H
- Tabebisong E
- Champion K
- Kronbichler A
- Lightstone L
- Jayne D
- Wilson E
- Griffith M
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-024-03576-0
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Clinical Trials, Phase III as Topic"
- Cost-Benefit Analysis
- Double-Blind Method
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/drug therapy"
- "Immunologic Factors/therapeutic use, economics"
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/drug therapy"
- Nephrotic Syndrome/drug therapy
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Recurrence
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A randomised, two-arm (1:1 ratio), double blind, placebo controlled phase III trial to assess the efficacy, safety, cost and cost-effectiveness of Rituximab in treating de novo or relapsing NS in patients with MCD/FSGS (TURING).
**Authors:** C Willcocks L, Qian W, Cader R, Gatley K, Siddiqui H, Tabebisong E, Champion K, Kronbichler A, Lightstone L, Jayne D, Wilson E, Griffith M
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-024-03576-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-024-03576-0)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2024 Aug 7;25(1):253. doi: 10.1186/s12882-024-03576-0.

A randomised, two-arm (1:1 ratio), double blind, placebo controlled phase III 
trial to assess the efficacy, safety, cost and cost-effectiveness of Rituximab 
in treating de novo or relapsing NS in patients with MCD/FSGS (TURING).

C Willcocks L(1), Qian W(1), Cader R(1), Gatley K(1), Siddiqui H(1), Tabebisong 
E(1), Champion K(1), Kronbichler A(2), Lightstone L(3)(4), Jayne D(5), Wilson 
E(6), Griffith M(4).

Author information:
(1)Cambridge University Hospital NHS Trust, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2QQ, UK.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine IV, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria.
(3)Imperial College, London, UK.
(4)Imperial College Hospital NHS Trust, London, UK.
(5)University of Cambridge, Biomedical Campus, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK.
(6)University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

BACKGROUND: Minimal Change Disease (MCD) and Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis 
(FSGS) are a spectrum of disease causing the nephrotic syndrome (NS), 
characterised by proteinuria with debilitating oedema, as well as a high risk of 
venous thromboembolic disease and infection. Untreated, 50-60% patients with 
FSGS progress to end stage kidney disease after 5 years. These diseases respond 
to immunosuppression with high dose glucocorticoids, but 75% will relapse as the 
glucocorticoids are withdrawn, leading to significant morbidity associated with 
prolonged use. In children, the B cell depleting monoclonal antibody rituximab 
reduces relapse risk, but this drug has not been tested in randomised controlled 
trial in adults.
METHODS: 130-150 adults with new or relapsing MCD/FSGS, from UK Renal Units, are 
being randomised to receive either rituximab (two 1 g infusions two weeks apart) 
or placebo. Partipicipants are recruited when they present with nephrosis, and 
all are treated with glucocorticoids as per KDIGO guidelines. Once in remission, 
prednisolone is withdrawn according to a pre-specified regimen. If in remission 
at 6 months, participants receive a further dose of trial drug. If they relapse, 
they are unblinded, and if they have received placebo, they are offered open 
label rituximab with protocolised prednisolone as in the main phase of the 
trial. The primary end point is time from remission to relapse. A number of 
secondary endpoints will be assessed including the effect of rituximab on: (1) 
NHS and societal resource use and hence cost: (2) safety: (3) other measures of 
efficacy, such as achievement of partial and complete remission of NS and the 
preservation of renal function: (4) health status of participant.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: TURING received ethical approval on 14 Jun 2019 - REC 
reference: 19/LO/0738. It is registered on EudraCT, with ID number: 
2018-004611-50, with a start date of 2019-06-14.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-024-03576-0
PMCID: PMC11308314
PMID: 39112932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.