---
reference_id: PMID:20395504
title: Extending healthy life span--from yeast to humans.
authors:
- Fontana L
- Partridge L
- Longo VD
journal: Science
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1126/science.1172539
keywords:
- Aging
- Animals
- "Caenorhabditis elegans/genetics, physiology"
- Caloric Restriction
- "Drosophila/genetics, physiology"
- Eating
- Haplorhini
- Humans
- Longevity
- Mice
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics, physiology"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Extending healthy life span--from yeast to humans.
**Authors:** Fontana L, Partridge L, Longo VD
**Journal:** Science (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1172539](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1172539)

## Content

1. Science. 2010 Apr 16;328(5976):321-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1172539.

Extending healthy life span--from yeast to humans.

Fontana L(1), Partridge L, Longo VD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatrics and Nutritional Science, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. lfontana@dom.wustl.edu

Comment in
    Science. 2010 Aug 27;329(5995):1012-3; author reply 1013-4. doi: 
10.1126/science.329.5995.1012.
    Science. 2010 Aug 27;329(5995):1014-5; author reply 1015. doi: 
10.1126/science.329.5995.1014.

When the food intake of organisms such as yeast and rodents is reduced (dietary 
restriction), they live longer than organisms fed a normal diet. A similar 
effect is seen when the activity of nutrient-sensing pathways is reduced by 
mutations or chemical inhibitors. In rodents, both dietary restriction and 
decreased nutrient-sensing pathway activity can lower the incidence of 
age-related loss of function and disease, including tumors and 
neurodegeneration. Dietary restriction also increases life span and protects 
against diabetes, cancer, and cardiovascular disease in rhesus monkeys, and in 
humans it causes changes that protect against these age-related pathologies. 
Tumors and diabetes are also uncommon in humans with mutations in the growth 
hormone receptor, and natural genetic variants in nutrient-sensing pathways are 
associated with increased human life span. Dietary restriction and reduced 
activity of nutrient-sensing pathways may thus slow aging by similar mechanisms, 
which have been conserved during evolution. We discuss these findings and their 
potential application to prevention of age-related disease and promotion of 
healthy aging in humans, and the challenge of possible negative side effects.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1172539
PMCID: PMC3607354
PMID: 20395504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]