---
reference_id: "PMID:25492894"
title: "Renal Fanconi syndrome: taking a proximal look at the nephron."
authors:
- Klootwijk ED
- Reichold M
- Unwin RJ
- Kleta R
- Warth R
- Bockenhauer D
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfu377
keywords:
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- "Fanconi Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Kidney Tubules, Proximal/pathology"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Peroxisomal Bifunctional Enzyme/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal Fanconi syndrome: taking a proximal look at the nephron.
**Authors:** Klootwijk ED, Reichold M, Unwin RJ, Kleta R, Warth R, Bockenhauer D
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfu377](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfu377)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2015 Sep;30(9):1456-60. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfu377. Epub
 2014 Dec 9.

Renal Fanconi syndrome: taking a proximal look at the nephron.

Klootwijk ED(1), Reichold M(2), Unwin RJ(3), Kleta R(1), Warth R(2), Bockenhauer 
D(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Nephrology, University College London, London, UK.
(2)Medical Cell Biology, Institute of Physiology, Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Division of Medicine, University College London, London, UK.

Renal Fanconi syndrome (RFS) refers to the generalized dysfunction of the 
proximal tubule (PT) (Kleta R. Fanconi or not Fanconi? Lowe syndrome revisited. 
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 1244-1245). In its isolated form, RFS only 
affects the PT, but not the other nephron segments. The study of isolated RFS 
can thus provide specific insights into the function of the PT. In a recent 
paper, Klootwijk et al. investigated one such form of isolated RFS and revealed 
the underlying molecular basis (Klootwijk ED, Reichold M, Helip-Wooley A et al. 
Mistargeting of peroxisomal EHHADH and inherited renal Fanconi's syndrome. N 
Engl J Med 2014; 370: 129-138). The affected family had been described 
previously, demonstrating the typical features of RFS, such as low-molecular 
weight proteinuria, aminoaciduria, glycosuria and phosphaturia with consequent 
rickets; yet, importantly, patients had no evidence of impaired glomerular 
filtration (Tolaymat A, Sakarcan A, Neiberger R. Idiopathic Fanconi syndrome in 
a family. Part I. Clinical aspects. J Am Soc Nephrol 1992; 2: 1310-1317). 
Inheritance was consistent with an autosomal dominant mode. Klootwijk et al. 
discovered a surprising explanation: a heterozygous missense mutation causing 
partial mistargeting of the peroxisomal enzyme EHHADH to the mitochondria. 
Notably, disease causing was not the absence of the enzyme in the peroxisome, 
but its interference with mitochondrial function. The discovery of this novel 
disease mechanism not only confirmed the importance of mitochondrial function 
for PT transport, but also demonstrated the critical dependence of PT on fatty 
acid metabolism for energy generation.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfu377
PMID: 25492894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]