---
reference_id: "PMID:38667927"
title: "The Known and Unknown \"Knowns\" of Human Susceptibility to Coccidioidomycosis."
authors:
- Hsu AP
journal: J Fungi (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jof10040256
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Known and Unknown "Knowns" of Human Susceptibility to Coccidioidomycosis.
**Authors:** Hsu AP
**Journal:** J Fungi (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jof10040256](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof10040256)

## Content

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2024 Mar 28;10(4):256. doi: 10.3390/jof10040256.

The Known and Unknown "Knowns" of Human Susceptibility to Coccidioidomycosis.

Hsu AP(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.

Coccidioidomycosis occurs after inhalation of airborne spores of the endemic, 
dimorphic fungus, Coccidioides. While the majority of individuals resolve the 
infection without coming to medical attention, the fungus is a major cause of 
community-acquired pneumonia in the endemic region, and chronic pulmonary and 
extrapulmonary disease poses significant personal and economic burdens. This 
review explores the literature surrounding human susceptibility to 
coccidioidomycosis, including chronic pulmonary and extrapulmonary 
dissemination. Over the past century of study, themes have emerged surrounding 
factors impacting human susceptibility to severe disease or dissemination, 
including immune suppression, genetic susceptibility, sex, pregnancy, and 
genetic ancestry. Early studies were observational, frequently with small 
numbers of cases; several of these early studies are highly cited in review 
papers, becoming part of the coccidioidomycosis "canon". Specific genetic 
variants, sex, and immune suppression by TNF inhibitors have been validated in 
later cohort studies, confirming the original hypotheses. By contrast, some risk 
factors, such as ABO blood group, Filipino ancestry, or lack of erythema nodosum 
among black individuals, are repeated in the literature despite the lack of 
supporting studies or biologic plausibility. Using examination of historical 
reports coupled with recent cohort and epidemiology studies, evidence for 
commonly reported risk factors is discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/jof10040256
PMCID: PMC11051025
PMID: 38667927

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no competing financial 
interests.