---
reference_id: "PMID:40229738"
title: Utilization of CoRDS registry to monitor quality of life in patients with VCP multisystem proteinopathy.
authors:
- Abdoalsadig E
- Hamid M
- Peck A
- Johar L
- Kimonis V
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03567-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Registries
- Quality of Life
- Female
- Male
- "Valosin Containing Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Myositis, Inclusion Body/genetics"
- Adult
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/genetics
- Osteitis Deformans/genetics
- Frontotemporal Dementia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Utilization of CoRDS registry to monitor quality of life in patients with VCP multisystem proteinopathy.
**Authors:** Abdoalsadig E, Hamid M, Peck A, Johar L, Kimonis V
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03567-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03567-w)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Apr 15;20(1):178. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03567-w.

Utilization of CoRDS registry to monitor quality of life in patients with VCP
multisystem proteinopathy.

Abdoalsadig E(#)(1)(2), Hamid M(#)(1), Peck A(#)(3), Johar L(1)(4), Kimonis
V(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California Irvine, Lab and FEDEX: Hewitt Hall, Rm 2038, Health
Sciences Rd., Irvine, CA, 92697, USA.
(2)Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Cure VCP Disease, Inc., Warner Robins, GA, USA.
(4)College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific, Western University of Health
Sciences, Pomona, CA, USA.
(5)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California Irvine, Lab and FEDEX: Hewitt Hall, Rm 2038, Health
Sciences Rd., Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. vkimonis@hs.uci.edu.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of California Irvine Medical Center,
Orange, CA, USA. vkimonis@hs.uci.edu.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of California Irvine Medical Center,
Orange, CA, USA. vkimonis@hs.uci.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: VCP disease, also known as multisystem proteinopathy, is a rare,
autosomal dominant, adult-onset, neuromuscular disease that is caused by
variants in the valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene. VCP disease may exhibit
one or more of the following primary features: inclusion body myopathy, Paget's
disease of bone (PDB), Frontotemporal dementia, and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Due to its progressive nature, death normally occurs in their sixties
due to respiratory and cardiac failure. The purpose of this study is to utilize
the Cure VCP Disease patient registry hosted by the Coordination of Rare
Diseases at Sanford (CoRDS) to conduct a prospective natural history study.
METHODS: Seventy-nine participants enrolled in the patient registry and answered
demographic, VCP variant type, Patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs), and
quality of life (QOL) questionnaires over the course of 3 years. We additionally
investigated if any sex differences existed and if genotype-phenotype
correlations affected the rate of progression of the varying clinical
manifestations.
RESULTS: Overall, participants' mobility declined significantly as the disease
progressed. Participants reported a 0.6% decline in upper extremity function,
1.2% decline in lower extremity function, and 0.3% decline in cognitive function
per year of age. Furthermore, participants reported a 1.6% decline in upper and
lower extremity function and a 0.1% decline in cognitive function per year of
disease duration. The highest PROMs correlations were noted between overall
health and lower extremity function, upper extremity function, fatigue, and the
ability to perform vigorous activities. Genotype-phenotype correlations revealed
no significant differences except for the absence of PDB in the p.Arg159Cys
group.
CONCLUSION: The VCP CoRDS Registry was found to be a valuable tool for
monitoring the QOL in patients with VCP disease and capturing patient
perspectives for future clinical trials.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03567-w
PMCID: PMC11998231
PMID: 40229738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: Written informed consent was obtained from all individuals. This
study was approved by the University of California Irvine Institutional Review
Board (IRB) (#2007–5832). Consent for publication: Written informed consent was
obtained from all the subjects included in the study. In the case of deceased
patients, they provided their consents prior to their demise. Competing
interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
