---
reference_id: "PMID:24880943"
title: Targeted therapies for cutaneous melanoma.
authors:
- Kee D
- McArthur G
journal: Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.hoc.2014.02.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted therapies for cutaneous melanoma.
**Authors:** Kee D, McArthur G
**Journal:** Hematol Oncol Clin North Am (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hoc.2014.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hoc.2014.02.003)

## Content

1. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2014 Jun;28(3):491-505. doi: 
10.1016/j.hoc.2014.02.003. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

Targeted therapies for cutaneous melanoma.

Kee D(1), McArthur G(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Medicine and Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St 
Andrews Place, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia; Department of 
Pathology, University of Melbourne, Grattan Street, Parkville, Victoria 3010, 
Australia. Electronic address: Damien.Kee@petermac.org.
(2)Division of Cancer Medicine and Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St 
Andrews Place, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia; Department of 
Pathology, University of Melbourne, Grattan Street, Parkville, Victoria 3010, 
Australia; Department of Medicine, St Vincent Hospital, University of Melbourne, 
Victoria Parade, Fitzroy, Victoria 3065, Australia.

Melanoma is resistant to cytotoxic therapy, and treatment options for advanced 
disease have been limited historically. However, improved understanding of 
melanoma driver mutations, particularly those involving the mitogen-activated 
protein kinase pathway, has led to the development of targeted therapies that 
are effective in this previously treatment-refractory disease. In cutaneous 
melanomas with BRAF V600 mutations the selective RAF inhibitors, vemurafenib and 
dabrafenib, and the MEK inhibitor, trametinib, have demonstrated survival 
benefits. Early signals of efficacy have also been demonstrated with MEK 
inhibitors in melanomas with NRAS mutations, and KIT inhibitors offer promise in 
melanomas driven through activation of their target receptor.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hoc.2014.02.003
PMID: 24880943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]