---
reference_id: "PMID:11440409"
title: "Blood-borne infections in Dublin's opiate users."
authors:
- Fitzgerald M
- Barry J
- "O'Sullivan P"
- Thornton L
journal: Ir J Med Sci
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1007/BF03167717
keywords:
- HIV Infections/epidemiology
- "Hepatitis B/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Hepatitis B Vaccines
- Hepatitis C/epidemiology
- Humans
- Ireland/epidemiology
- Mass Screening
- Methadone
- Opioid-Related Disorders/rehabilitation
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blood-borne infections in Dublin's opiate users.
**Authors:** Fitzgerald M, Barry J, O'Sullivan P, Thornton L
**Journal:** Ir J Med Sci (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF03167717](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03167717)

## Content

1. Ir J Med Sci. 2001 Jan-Mar;170(1):32-4. doi: 10.1007/BF03167717.

Blood-borne infections in Dublin's opiate users.

Fitzgerald M(1), Barry J, O'Sullivan P, Thornton L.

Author information:
(1)Food Safety Authority of Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Injecting drug users are at high risk of acquiring blood-borne
infections. Ireland has had a harm reduction policy of methadone maintenance and
needle exchange since 1992.
AIM: To estimate prevalence of hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV infection and
appropriate uptake of hepatitis B vaccine in methadone attendees and to make
recommendations for a simple record-based surveillance system.
METHOD: Retrospective study of 138 client records for evidence of laboratory
tests or test results for blood-borne viruses and appropriate immunisation
against hepatitis B.
RESULTS: A total of 60% of clients had evidence of one or more laboratory tests
in their notes. Of those tested for individual viruses, 5.1% were positive for
hepatitis B surface antigen, 78.8% had antibodies to hepatitis C and 16.7% were
HIV positive. Nearly two-thirds of clients had no evidence of vaccination or
information on prior immunity in their records.
CONCLUSIONS: A standardised written protocol for screening for blood-borne
viruses and for immunisation against hepatitis B in methadone service attendees
was clearly needed, and was subsequently introduced by the Eastern Region Health
Authority.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03167717
PMID: 11440409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
