---
reference_id: "PMID:31419725"
title: Renal ciliopathies.
authors:
- Devlin LA
- Sayer JA
journal: Curr Opin Genet Dev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2019.07.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Devlin LA, Sayer JA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Genet Dev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gde.2019.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2019.07.005)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2019 Jun;56:49-60. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2019.07.005. Epub 
2019 Aug 13.

Renal ciliopathies.

Devlin LA(1), Sayer JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 
3BZ, UK.
(2)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 
3BZ, UK; Renal Services, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE7 7DN, UK; NIHR Newcastle Biomedical Research Centre, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE4 5PL, UK. Electronic address: 
john.sayer@newcastle.ac.uk.

Renal ciliopathies are a group of disorders characterised by nephronophthisis, 
cystic kidneys or renal cystic dysplasia whose underlying disease pathogenesis 
is related to abnormal structure or function of the primary cilia complex. The 
number of renal ciliopathies continues to expand as genomic and genetic 
approaches identify novel causes. This in turn provides new opportunities to 
explore disease mechanisms and therapeutic approaches to target cystic kidney 
disease and other associated phenotypes. Here we review recent advances in the 
field of renal ciliopathies and how these allow new insights into this 
fascinating spectrum of diseases.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gde.2019.07.005
PMID: 31419725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]