---
reference_id: "PMID:20619503"
title: Widespread Lewy body and tau accumulation in childhood and adult onset dystonia-parkinsonism cases with PLA2G6 mutations.
authors:
- Paisán-Ruiz C
- Li A
- Schneider SA
- Holton JL
- Johnson R
- Kidd D
- Chataway J
- Bhatia KP
- Lees AJ
- Hardy J
- Revesz T
- Houlden H
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.05.009
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Dystonic Disorders/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Group VI Phospholipases A2/genetics
- Humans
- "Lewy Bodies/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- alpha-Synuclein/metabolism
- tau Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Widespread Lewy body and tau accumulation in childhood and adult onset dystonia-parkinsonism cases with PLA2G6 mutations.
**Authors:** Paisán-Ruiz C, Li A, Schneider SA, Holton JL, Johnson R, Kidd D, Chataway J, Bhatia KP, Lees AJ, Hardy J, Revesz T, Houlden H
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.05.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.05.009)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Apr;33(4):814-23. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.05.009. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Widespread Lewy body and tau accumulation in childhood and adult onset
dystonia-parkinsonism cases with PLA2G6 mutations.

Paisán-Ruiz C(1), Li A, Schneider SA, Holton JL, Johnson R, Kidd D, Chataway J,
Bhatia KP, Lees AJ, Hardy J, Revesz T, Houlden H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

The 2 major types of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) are
the pantothenate kinase type 2 (PANK2)-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) and
NBIA2 or infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) due to mutations in the
phospholipase A2, group VI (PLA2G6) gene. We have recently demonstrated clinical
heterogeneity in patients with mutations in the PLA2G6 gene by identifying a
poorly defined subgroup of patients who present late with dystonia and
parkinsonism. We report the clinical and genetic features of 7 cases with PLA2G6
mutations. Brain was available in 5 cases with an age of death ranging from 8 to
36 years and showed widespread alpha-synuclein-positive Lewy pathology, which
was particularly severe in the neocortex, indicating that the Lewy pathology
spread corresponded to Braak stage 6 and was that of the "diffuse neocortical
type". In 3 cases there was hyperphosphorylated tau accumulation in both
cellular processes as threads and neuronal perikarya as pretangles and
neurofibrillary tangles. Later onset cases tended to have less tau involvement
but still severe alpha-synuclein pathology. The clinical and neuropathological
features clearly represent a link between PLA2G6 and parkinsonian disorders.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.05.009
PMCID: PMC3657696
PMID: 20619503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
