---
reference_id: "PMID:15347849"
title: Differences in airway remodeling between asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Aoshiba K
- Nagai A
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2004'
doi: "10.1385/CRIAI:27:1:035"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differences in airway remodeling between asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Aoshiba K, Nagai A
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1385/CRIAI:27:1:035](https://doi.org/10.1385/CRIAI:27:1:035)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2004 Aug;27(1):35-43. doi: 10.1385/CRIAI:27:1:035.

Differences in airway remodeling between asthma and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Aoshiba K(1), Nagai A.

Author information:
(1)First Department of Medicine, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

The functional consequence of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD)is airflow limitation, which is mostly reversible in asthma and not fully 
reversible in COPD. In both diseases, inflammatory conditions are associated 
with cellular and structural changes,referred to as remodeling, and these 
structural changes may lead to thickening of the airway wall, thereby promoting 
airway narrowing and airflow limitation. However, the pattern of infiltrated 
cells and the pattern of structural changes occur differently in the two 
diseases. In asthma, CD4+, T lymphocytes, eosinophils, and mast cells are the 
predominant cells involved,whereas in COPD, CD8+, T lymphocytes, and macrophages 
are predominantly involved. In severe cases of asthma and COPD, neutrophil 
infiltration becomes evident. Regarding structural changes, epithelial injury 
and early thickening of reticular basement membrane are highly characteristic of 
the airway wall of asthmatics. Increases in airway smooth muscle mass occur in 
large airways of severe asthmatics and in small airways of patients with COPD. 
Thickening of the airway wall, goblet cell hyperplasia, mucous gland 
hypertrophy, and the luminal obstruction caused by inflammatory exudates and 
mucous are features of both asthma and COPD. Squamous epithelial metaplasia and 
airway wall fibrosis are commonly observed characteristics of COPD. Destruction 
and fibrosis of the alveolar wall occur in COPD but not in asthma. The 
remodeling processes accompanied by chronic inflammatory infiltrates interact in 
a complex fashion and contribute to the development of airflow limitation in 
both asthma and COPD.

DOI: 10.1385/CRIAI:27:1:035
PMID: 15347849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]