---
reference_id: "PMID:28597065"
title: Cellular and molecular pathways of structural damage in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Harre U
- Schett G
journal: Semin Immunopathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00281-017-0634-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular and molecular pathways of structural damage in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Harre U, Schett G
**Journal:** Semin Immunopathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00281-017-0634-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00281-017-0634-0)

## Content

1. Semin Immunopathol. 2017 Jun;39(4):355-363. doi: 10.1007/s00281-017-0634-0.
Epub  2017 Jun 8.

Cellular and molecular pathways of structural damage in rheumatoid arthritis.

Harre U(1), Schett G(2).

Author information:
(1)Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-N체rnberg (FAU), Department of 
Internal Medicine 3 - Rheumatology and Immunology, Universit채tsklinikum 
Erlangen, Ulmenweg 18, 91054, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-N체rnberg (FAU), Department of 
Internal Medicine 3 - Rheumatology and Immunology, Universit채tsklinikum 
Erlangen, Ulmenweg 18, 91054, Erlangen, Germany. georg.schett@uk-erlangen.de.

Structural damage of cartilage and bone tissue is a hallmark of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). The resulting joint destruction constitutes one of the major 
disease consequences for patients and creates a significant burden for the 
society. The main cells executing bone and cartilage degradation are osteoclasts 
and fibroblast-like synoviocytes, respectively. The function of both cell types 
is heavily influenced by the immune system. In the last decades, research has 
identified several mediators of structural damage, ranging from infiltrating 
immune cells and inflammatory cytokines to autoantibodies. These factors result 
in an inflammatory milieu in the affected joints which leads to an increased 
development and function of osteoclasts and the transformation of 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes towards a highly migratory and destructive 
phenotype. In addition, repair mechanisms mediated by osteoblasts and 
chondrocytes are strongly impaired by the presence of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines. This article will review the current knowledge on the mechanisms of 
joint inflammation and the destruction of bone and cartilage.

DOI: 10.1007/s00281-017-0634-0
PMID: 28597065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]