---
reference_id: "PMID:22593918"
title: Propionic Acidemia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Galarreta Aima CI
- Shchelochkov OA
- Jerves Serrano T
- Venditti CP
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Propionic Acidemia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Galarreta Aima CI, Shchelochkov OA, Jerves Serrano T, Venditti CP

## Content

1. Propionic Acidemia.

Galarreta Aima CI(1), Shchelochkov OA(1), Jerves Serrano T(2), Venditti CP(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2012 May 17 [updated 2024 Sep 26].

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The spectrum of propionic acidemia (PA) ranges from
neonatal onset to late-onset disease. Neonatal-onset PA, the most common form,
is characterized by a healthy newborn with poor feeding and decreased arousal in
the first few days of life, followed by progressive encephalopathy of
unexplained origin. Without prompt diagnosis (often through newborn screening)
and management, this is followed by progressive encephalopathy manifesting as
lethargy, seizures, or coma that can result in death. It is frequently
accompanied by metabolic acidosis with anion gap, lactic acidosis, ketonuria,
hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and cytopenias. Individuals with late-onset PA may
remain asymptomatic and suffer a metabolic crisis under catabolic stress (e.g.,
illness, surgery, fasting) or may experience a more insidious onset with the
development of multiorgan complications including vomiting, protein intolerance,
failure to thrive, hypotonia, developmental delays or regression, movement
disorders, or cardiomyopathy. Isolated cardiomyopathy can be observed on rare
occasions in the absence of clinical metabolic decompensation or neurocognitive
deficits. Manifestations of neonatal-onset and late-onset PA over time can
include growth impairment, intellectual disability, seizures, basal ganglia
lesions, pancreatitis, cardiomyopathy, and chronic kidney disease. Other rarely
reported complications include optic atrophy, sensorineural hearing loss, and
premature ovarian insufficiency.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: PA is caused by deficiency of propionyl-coenzyme A
carboxylase (PCC), the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of propionyl-CoA to
methylmalonyl-CoA. Newborns with PA tested by expanded newborn screening (NBS)
have elevated C3 (propionylcarnitine). Testing of urine organic acids in persons
who are symptomatic or those detected by NBS reveals elevated
3-hydroxypropionate and the presence of methylcitrate, tiglylglycine,
propionylglycine, and lactic acid. Testing of plasma amino acids generally
reveals elevated glycine. Confirmation of the diagnosis relies on detection of
biallelic pathogenic variants in PCCA or PCCB by molecular genetic testing, or
detection of deficient PCC enzymatic activity. In individuals with equivocal
molecular genetic test results, a combination of enzymatic and molecular
diagnostics may be necessary.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: The treatment of individuals with
acutely decompensated PA is a medical emergency: treat precipitating factors
such as infection, dehydration, vomiting; reverse catabolism by providing
intravenous glucose and lipids; manage protein intake to reduce propiogenic
precursors; remove toxic compounds using intravenous carnitine, and when
necessary nitrogen scavenger medications and/or extracorporeal detoxification;
transfer to a center with biochemical genetics expertise and the ability to
support urgent hemodialysis, especially if hyperammonemia is present. Prevention
of primary manifestations: Individualized dietary management should be directed
by an experienced physician and metabolic dietician to control the intake of
propiogenic substrates and to guide increased caloric intake during illness to
prevent catabolism, typically by using specialized medical food. Gastrostomy
tube placement is an effective strategy to facilitate the administration of
medications and nutrition during acute decompensations and to improve adherence
in chronic management of PA. Medications may include L-carnitine supplementation
to enhance excretion of propionic acid and oral metronidazole to reduce
propionate production by gut bacteria. Orthotopic liver transplantation may be
indicated in those with frequent metabolic decompensations, uncontrollable
hyperammonemia, and/or poor growth. Prevention of secondary complications:
Consistent evaluation of the protein prescription, depending on age, sex, level
of physical activity, severity of disorder, and presence of other factors such
as intercurrent illness, surgery, and growth spurts to avoid insufficient or
excessive protein intake is necessary. Excessive protein restriction or
overreliance on medical foods can result in deficiency of essential amino acids
and impaired growth, as well as catabolism-induced metabolic decompensation.
Surveillance: Monitor affected individuals with a catabolic stressor (fasting,
fever, illness, injury, and surgery) closely to prevent and/or detect and manage
metabolic decompensations early. Regularly assess: (1) growth, nutritional
status, feeding ability, and psychomotor development; (2) vision and hearing;
(3) cardiac function for signs of cardiomyopathy and prolonged QT interval; (4)
metabolic status by monitoring routine chemistries, plasma ammonia, plasma amino
acids, and plasma carnitine levels; (5) complete blood count; and (6) kidney
function. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Avoid prolonged fasting, catabolic
stressors, and excessive protein intake. Lactated Ringer's solution is not
recommended in individuals with organic acidemias. In individuals with QT
abnormalities, avoid medications that can prolong the QT interval. Neuroleptic
antiemetics (e.g., promethazine) can mask symptoms of progressive encephalopathy
and are best avoided. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Testing of at-risk sibs
of an affected individual is warranted to allow for early diagnosis and
treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PA is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both
parents are known to be heterozygous for a PCCA or PCCB pathogenic variant, each
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected,
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of inheriting
neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Once the PCCA or PCCB pathogenic
variants have been identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic
carrier testing of at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 22593918
