---
reference_id: "PMID:21190457"
title: Homozygous BUB1B mutation and susceptibility to gastrointestinal neoplasia.
authors:
- Rio Frio T
- Lavoie J
- Hamel N
- Geyer FC
- Kushner YB
- Novak DJ
- Wark L
- Capelli C
- Reis-Filho JS
- Mai S
- Pastinen T
- Tischkowitz MD
- Marcus VA
- Foulkes WD
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1006565
keywords:
- Adenocarcinoma/genetics
- Adenoma/genetics
- "Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Aged
- Chromosome Disorders/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genomic Instability
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Mosaicism
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Spindle Apparatus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous BUB1B mutation and susceptibility to gastrointestinal neoplasia.
**Authors:** Rio Frio T, Lavoie J, Hamel N, Geyer FC, Kushner YB, Novak DJ, Wark L, Capelli C, Reis-Filho JS, Mai S, Pastinen T, Tischkowitz MD, Marcus VA, Foulkes WD
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1006565](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1006565)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Dec 30;363(27):2628-37. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1006565.

Homozygous BUB1B mutation and susceptibility to gastrointestinal neoplasia.

Rio Frio T(1), Lavoie J, Hamel N, Geyer FC, Kushner YB, Novak DJ, Wark L,
Capelli C, Reis-Filho JS, Mai S, Pastinen T, Tischkowitz MD, Marcus VA, Foulkes
WD.

Author information:
(1)Program in Cancer Genetics, Department of Oncology, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Dec 30;363(27):2665-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1008017.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Mar 31;364(13):1279-80. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1101053.

A patient received a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater at 34
years of age. Two decades later, adenomatous polyps were found, followed by
multiple primary invasive adenocarcinomas of both the colon and the stomach.
Premature chromatid separation and mosaic variegated aneuploidy, combined with
structural chromosomal abnormalities, were detected in his cells. We identified
a germline homozygous intronic mutation, c.2386-11A→G, in the spindle-assembly
checkpoint gene BUB1B, which creates a de novo splice site that is favored over
the authentic (i.e., preferentially used) site. Our findings expand the
phenotype associated with BUB1B mutations and the mosaic variegated aneuploidy
syndrome to include common adult-onset cancers and provide evidence for the
interdependency of the APC protein (encoded by the adenomatous polyposis coli
gene) and the BUBR1 protein (encoded by BUB1B) in humans. (Funded by the Turner
Family Cancer Research Fund and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1006565
PMID: 21190457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
