---
reference_id: "PMID:38245249"
title: "The pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease."
authors:
- Morris HR
- Spillantini MG
- Sue CM
- Williams-Gray CH
journal: Lancet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01478-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Morris HR, Spillantini MG, Sue CM, Williams-Gray CH
**Journal:** Lancet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01478-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01478-2)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2024 Jan 20;403(10423):293-304. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01478-2.

The pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.

Morris HR(1), Spillantini MG(2), Sue CM(3), Williams-Gray CH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences, Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, University College London, London, UK; University College London 
Movement Disorders Centre, University College London, London, UK; Aligning 
Science Across Parkinson's Collaborative Research Network, Chevy Chase, MD, USA. 
Electronic address: h.morris@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 
Aligning Science Across Parkinson's Collaborative Research Network, Chevy Chase, 
MD, USA.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 
Department of Neurology, South Eastern Sydney Local Health District, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia; Aligning Science Across Parkinson's Collaborative Research 
Network, Chevy Chase, MD, USA; Neuroscience Research Australia, Randwick, NSW, 
Australia. Electronic address: c.sue@neura.edu.au.
(4)John Van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Parkinson's disease is a progressive neurodegenerative condition associated with 
the deposition of aggregated α-synuclein. Insights into the pathogenesis of 
Parkinson's disease have been derived from genetics and molecular pathology. 
Biochemical studies, investigation of transplanted neurons in patients with 
Parkinson's disease, and cell and animal model studies suggest that abnormal 
aggregation of α-synuclein and spreading of pathology between the gut, 
brainstem, and higher brain regions probably underlie the development and 
progression of Parkinson's disease. At a cellular level, abnormal mitochondrial, 
lysosomal, and endosomal function can be identified in both monogenic and 
sporadic Parkinson's disease, suggesting multiple potential treatment 
approaches. Recent work has also highlighted maladaptive immune and inflammatory 
responses, possibly triggered in the gut, that accelerate the pathogenesis of 
Parkinson's disease. Although there are currently no disease-modifying 
treatments for Parkinson's disease, we now have a solid basis for the 
development of rational neuroprotective therapies that we hope will halt the 
progression of this disabling neurological condition.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01478-2
PMID: 38245249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests HRM is employed by 
University College London, and in the past 36 months reports paid consultancy 
from Roche, Aprinoia, and Amylyx; lecture fees and honoraria from the British 
Medical Journal, Kyowa Kirin, and the Movement Disorder Society; research grants 
from CBD Solutions, Drake Foundation, Parkinson's UK, Cure Parkinson's Trust, 
PSP Association, Medical Research Council, and the Michael J Fox Foundation 
(MJFF); and is a coapplicant on a patent application related to C9ORF72—method 
for diagnosing a neurodegenerative disease (PCT/GB2012/052140). MGS is a William 
Scholl Professor supported by the Scholl Foundation endowment to Cambridge 
University, is supported by the Wellcome Trust, is supported by the NIHR 
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre Dementia (NIHR203312) and Neurodegeneration 
Theme (146281), and in the past 12 months has been paid lecture fees or 
honoraria, or both, from the Movement Disorder Society and Institute San 
Raffaele; is on the Scientific Advisory Board of the Tau Consortium, Qatar 
Biomedical Research Institute, Fondazione Don Gnocchi, Eurac, and the European 
Brain Research Institute; is a consultant for Astex; is in scientific 
collaboration with Eli Lilly and Teva; and reports research grants from 
Parkinson's UK, MJFF, Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, 
the Scholl Foundation, Fondation de la Recherche Alzheimer, Alzheimer's Research 
UK, Medical Research Council, Wellcome Trust, and the Bill & Melinda Gates 
foundation. CMS is employed by South Eastern Sydney Local Health District, 
Neuroscience Research Australia, and University of New South Wales; is a 
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Practitioner Fellow 
(APP1136800); and in the past 12 months, has received research funding from the 
NHMRC, the Medical Research Futures Fund, MJFF, and Shake It Up Australia; and 
has been paid lecture fees and honoraria from the Movement Disorder Society and 
the Taiwan Movement Disorder Society. CHW-G is employed by the University of 
Cambridge, and in the past 12 months has received research funding from the 
Medical Research Council (MR/W029235/1), the National Institutes of Health 
Research (NIHR) Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre (NIHR203312), Parkinson's 
UK, Cure Parkinson's, the Evelyn Trust, and the Cambridge Centre for 
Parkinson-Plus; consultancy fees from Evidera; and speaker fees from GSK and the 
World Parkinson Congress.