---
reference_id: "PMID:19586929"
title: Phenotype and genotype in 17 patients with Goltz-Gorlin syndrome.
authors:
- Maas SM
- Lombardi MP
- van Essen AJ
- Wakeling EL
- Castle B
- Temple IK
- Kumar VK
- Writzl K
- Hennekam RC
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.068403
keywords:
- Acyltransferases
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Focal Dermal Hypoplasia/genetics, pathology"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype and genotype in 17 patients with Goltz-Gorlin syndrome.
**Authors:** Maas SM, Lombardi MP, van Essen AJ, Wakeling EL, Castle B, Temple IK, Kumar VK, Writzl K, Hennekam RC
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2009.068403](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2009.068403)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2009 Oct;46(10):716-20. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.068403. Epub 2009
Jul  7.

Phenotype and genotype in 17 patients with Goltz-Gorlin syndrome.

Maas SM(1), Lombardi MP, van Essen AJ, Wakeling EL, Castle B, Temple IK, Kumar 
VK, Writzl K, Hennekam RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Goltz-Gorlin syndrome or focal dermal hypoplasia is a highly 
variable, X-linked dominant syndrome with abnormalities of ectodermal and 
mesodermal origin. In 2007, mutations in the PORCN gene were found to be 
causative in Goltz-Gorlin syndrome.
METHOD: A series of 17 patients with Goltz-Gorlin syndrome is reported on, and 
their phenotype and genotype are described.
RESULTS: In 14 patients (13 females and one male), a PORCN mutation was found. 
Mutations included nonsense (n = 5), frameshift (n = 2), aberrant splicing (n = 
2) and missense (n = 5) mutations. No genotype-phenotype correlation was found. 
All patients with the classical features of the syndrome had a detectable 
mutation. In three females with atypical signs, no mutation was found. The male 
patient had classical features and showed mosaicism for a PORCN nonsense 
mutation in fibroblasts. Two affected sisters had a mutation not detectable in 
their parents, supporting germline mosaicism. Their father had undergone 
radiation for testicular cancer in the past. Two classically affected females 
had three severely affected female fetuses which all had midline thoracic and 
abdominal wall defects, resembling the pentalogy of Cantrell and the limb-body 
wall complex. Thoracic and abdominal wall defects were also present in two 
surviving patients. PORCN mutations can possibly cause pentalogy of Cantrell and 
limb-body wall complexes as well. Therefore, particularly in cases with limb 
defects, it seems useful to search for these.
CONCLUSIONS: PORCN mutations can be found in all classically affected cases of 
Goltz-Gorlin syndrome, including males. Somatic and germline mosaicism occur. 
There is no evident genotype-phenotype correlation.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2009.068403
PMID: 19586929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]