---
reference_id: "PMID:38576610"
title: "Therapeutic efficacy and safety of JAK inhibitors in treating polymyositis/dermatomyositis: a single-arm systemic meta-analysis."
authors:
- Ma C
- Liu M
- Cheng Y
- Wang X
- Zhao Y
- Wang K
- Wang W
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1382728
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic efficacy and safety of JAK inhibitors in treating polymyositis/dermatomyositis: a single-arm systemic meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Ma C, Liu M, Cheng Y, Wang X, Zhao Y, Wang K, Wang W
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1382728](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1382728)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Mar 21;15:1382728. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1382728. 
eCollection 2024.

Therapeutic efficacy and safety of JAK inhibitors in treating 
polymyositis/dermatomyositis: a single-arm systemic meta-analysis.

Ma C(#)(1), Liu M(#)(1), Cheng Y(1), Wang X(2), Zhao Y(1), Wang K(1), Wang W(2).

Author information:
(1)The Second Clinical Medical College of Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou, China.
(2)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: We performed a single-arm meta-analysis to evaluate the efficacy 
and safety of JAK inhibitors in the treatment of dermatomyositis (DM)/ 
polymyositis (PM).
METHODS: Relevant studies from four databases were systematically searched until 
April 25, 2023. The primary endpoint was Cutaneous Dermatomyositis Disease Area 
and Severity Index (CDASI) and other outcomes were Manual Muscle Testing (MMT) 
and Creatine Kinase (CK). According to the type of JAK and medication regimen, 
we conducted subgroup analyses. The registration number in PROSPERO was 
CRD42023416493.
RESULTS: According to the selection criteria, we identified 7 publications with 
a total of 91 patients. Regarding skin lesions, the CDASI decreased by 17.67 
(95% CI: -20.94 ~ -14.41). The CK increased by 8.64 U (95% CI: -28.25 ~ 45.53). 
About muscle lesions, MMT increased by 10.31 (95% CI: -2.83 ~ 23.46). Subgroup 
analysis revealed that different types of JAK inhibitors had various degrees of 
reduction. CDASI in patients treated with RUX had the lowest one [-20.00 (95% 
CI: -34.9 ~ -5.1)], followed by TOF [-18.29 (95% CI: -21.8 ~ -14.78)] and BAR 
[-11.2 (95% CI: -21.51 ~ -0.89)]. Additionally, the mean reduction in CDASI in 
patients treated with TOF alone was 16.16 (95% CI: -21.21 ~ -11.11), in 
combination with other immunosuppressants was 18.59 (95% CI: -22.74 ~ -14.45). 
For safety evaluation, one patient developed Orolabial HSV, and two patients 
developed thromboembolism events.
DISCUSSION: In summary, this meta-analysis demonstrated that JAK inhibitors can 
potentially treat DM/PM without severe adverse reactions.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: 
https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/display_record.php?ID=CRD42023416493, 
identifier CRD42023416493.

Copyright © 2024 Ma, Liu, Cheng, Wang, Zhao, Wang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1382728
PMCID: PMC10991784
PMID: 38576610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.