---
reference_id: "PMID:39676119"
title: "Demographics, Prognostic Factors, and Survival Outcomes in Hepatic Angiosarcoma: A Retrospective Analysis."
authors:
- Wali A
- Robinson J
- Iqbal A
- Yasinzai AQK
- Sohail AH
- Jain H
- Fadhil N
- Khan M
- Khan I
- Karki NR
- Ullah A
journal: J Gastrointest Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12029-024-01157-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hemangiosarcoma/mortality, therapy, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Liver Neoplasms/mortality, therapy, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Aged
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
- "SEER Program/statistics & numerical data"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Adult
- Neoplasm Staging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Demographics, Prognostic Factors, and Survival Outcomes in Hepatic Angiosarcoma: A Retrospective Analysis.
**Authors:** Wali A, Robinson J, Iqbal A, Yasinzai AQK, Sohail AH, Jain H, Fadhil N, Khan M, Khan I, Karki NR, Ullah A
**Journal:** J Gastrointest Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12029-024-01157-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12029-024-01157-w)

## Content

1. J Gastrointest Cancer. 2024 Dec 16;56(1):33. doi: 10.1007/s12029-024-01157-w.

Demographics, Prognostic Factors, and Survival Outcomes in Hepatic Angiosarcoma:
A Retrospective Analysis.

Wali A(1), Robinson J(2), Iqbal A(3), Yasinzai AQK(4), Sohail AH(5), Jain H(6),
Fadhil N(2), Khan M(7), Khan I(8), Karki NR(9), Ullah A(10).

Author information:
(1)Banner University Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(2)Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Northeastern Health System, Tahlequah, OK, USA.
(4)Department of GI Oncology, University of Florida Health Cancer Center,
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(6)All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur, India.
(7)Department of Medicine, Marshfield Clinic, Wisconsin, WI, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Insight Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, IL,
USA.
(9)University of South Alabama, Mobil, AL, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 3601
4Th ST, Lubbock, TX, USA. drasadkhankakar@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Hepatic angiosarcoma (HA) is a rare malignant vascular neoplasm.
Currently, there are no standardized protocols for treating HA. This study aims
to understand clinicopathologic analysis, prognostic factors, and treatment
outcomes comprehensively.
METHODS: The data retrieved from the SEER database was reviewed for hepatic
angiosarcoma cases between 2000 and 2021.
RESULTS: A total of 389 patients with hepatic angiosarcoma were identified with
a mean age of 63.9 years (SD ± 16). Most patients were male (64%), and per US
census data, non-Hispanic Asians or Pacific Islanders were the most common race
(17%). In known cases of tumor stage (61%), the most common tumor stage was
distant (22%), and most were grade III (18%) tumors. Overall, the 3-year
survival rate was 6.7% with a 95% confidence interval (95% CI 0.044-0.100),
disease-specific survival at a 1-year survival rate was 4.43% (95% CI
0.023-0.083), and no patients survived by 3 years. The best overall survival
rate was the 1-year rate for surgical resection, 18.20% (95% CI 0.075-0.441).
Chemotherapy had a 1-year survival rate of 11% (95% CI 0.057-0.211), and
radiation therapy had no survival significance (p = 0.2). Multivariate analysis
shows age above 70 years (H.R. 1.67 (95% CI 1.181-2.381), p < 0.05), no surgical
intervention (H.R. 2.29 (95% CI 1.585-3.336) p < 0.001), and distant stage (H.R.
2.54 (95% CI 1.696-3.805) p < 0.001) are negative prognostic factors, whereas
female sex (H.R. 0.68 (95% CI 0.536-0.875) p < 0.05) is a positive prognostic
factor.
CONCLUSION: Increasing age (> 70 years), male sex, and distant stage were found
to be strong predictors of poor survival outcomes. Patients had better outcomes
when surgical resection and chemotherapy were included in their treatment. These
results can provide continued evidence in the future management of patients with
hepatic angiosarcoma.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12029-024-01157-w
PMID: 39676119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing Interests: The authors
declare no competing interests.
