---
reference_id: PMID:20451172
title: A splice-site mutation in a retina-specific exon of BBS8 causes nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa.
authors:
- Riazuddin SA
- Iqbal M
- Wang Y
- Masuda T
- Chen Y
- Bowne S
- Sullivan LS
- Waseem NH
- Bhattacharya S
- Daiger SP
- Zhang K
- Khan SN
- Riazuddin S
- Hejtmancik JF
- Sieving PA
- Zack DJ
- Katsanis N
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.001
keywords:
- Alleles
- Alternative Splicing
- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- Exons
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Proteins/genetics
- RNA Splicing
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Retina/metabolism
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A splice-site mutation in a retina-specific exon of BBS8 causes nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Riazuddin SA, Iqbal M, Wang Y, Masuda T, Chen Y, Bowne S, Sullivan LS, Waseem NH, Bhattacharya S, Daiger SP, Zhang K, Khan SN, Riazuddin S, Hejtmancik JF, Sieving PA, Zack DJ, Katsanis N
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.001)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 May 14;86(5):805-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.001.
Epub  2010 May 6.

A splice-site mutation in a retina-specific exon of BBS8 causes nonsyndromic 
retinitis pigmentosa.

Riazuddin SA(1), Iqbal M, Wang Y, Masuda T, Chen Y, Bowne S, Sullivan LS, Waseem 
NH, Bhattacharya S, Daiger SP, Zhang K, Khan SN, Riazuddin S, Hejtmancik JF, 
Sieving PA, Zack DJ, Katsanis N.

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Tissue-specific alternative splicing is an important mechanism for providing 
spatiotemporal protein diversity. Here we show that an in-frame splice mutation 
in BBS8, one of the genes involved in pleiotropic Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), 
is sufficient to cause nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa (RP). A genome-wide 
scan of a consanguineous RP pedigree mapped the trait to a 5.6 Mb region; 
subsequent systematic sequencing of candidate transcripts identified a 
homozygous splice-site mutation in a previously unknown BBS8 exon. The allele 
segregated with the disorder, was absent from controls, was completely invariant 
across evolution, and was predicted to lead to the elimination of a 10 amino 
acid sequence from the protein. Subsequent studies showed the exon to be 
expressed exclusively in the retina and enriched significantly in the 
photoreceptor layer. Importantly, we found this exon to represent the major BBS8 
mRNA species in the mammalian photoreceptor, suggesting that the encoded 10 
amino acids play a pivotal role in the function of BBS8 in this organ. 
Understanding the role of this additional sequence might therefore inform the 
mechanism of retinal degeneration in patients with syndromic BBS or other 
related ciliopathies.

Copyright (c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.001
PMCID: PMC2869005
PMID: 20451172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]