---
reference_id: "PMID:39254839"
title: Review for Disease of the Year Clinical Features and Ocular Imaging in Intermediate Uveitis and Pars Planitis.
authors:
- Ozdal PÇ
- Tugal-Tutkun I
journal: Ocul Immunol Inflamm
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/09273948.2024.2401140
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review for Disease of the Year Clinical Features and Ocular Imaging in Intermediate Uveitis and Pars Planitis.
**Authors:** Ozdal PÇ, Tugal-Tutkun I
**Journal:** Ocul Immunol Inflamm (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09273948.2024.2401140](https://doi.org/10.1080/09273948.2024.2401140)

## Content

1. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2025 May;33(4):512-521. doi: 
10.1080/09273948.2024.2401140. Epub 2024 Sep 10.

Review for Disease of the Year Clinical Features and Ocular Imaging in 
Intermediate Uveitis and Pars Planitis.

Ozdal PÇ(1), Tugal-Tutkun I(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Uveacademy Eye Clinic, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Uveitis Service, Eye Protection Foundation Bayrampasa Eye Hospital, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.

Intermediate uveitis is a relatively common form of intraocular inflammation 
that can be seen at any age. The vitreous is the primary site of inflammation; 
and the presence of snowballs or snowbank defines its subtype, pars planitis. 
Since it is a clinical diagnosis, it is important to recognize the typical 
clinical features and associated ocular complications. Recent advances in ocular 
imaging have made significant contributions to the clinical appraisal and 
studies of intermediate uveitis. This narrative review includes clinical signs, 
ocular complications, and ocular imaging of intermediate uveitis and pars 
planitis.

DOI: 10.1080/09273948.2024.2401140
PMID: 39254839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]