---
reference_id: "PMID:30365056"
title: "Two novel pathogenic variants of L1CAM gene in two fetuses with isolated X‑linked hydrocephaly: A case report."
authors:
- Xie B
- Luo J
- Lei Y
- Yang Q
- Li M
- Yi S
- Luo S
- Wang J
- Qin Z
- Yang Z
- Wei H
- Fan X
journal: Mol Med Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3892/mmr.2018.9583
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Cerebral Aqueduct/abnormalities
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Fetus
- "Genes, X-Linked"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hydrocephalus/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule L1/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel pathogenic variants of L1CAM gene in two fetuses with isolated X‑linked hydrocephaly: A case report.
**Authors:** Xie B, Luo J, Lei Y, Yang Q, Li M, Yi S, Luo S, Wang J, Qin Z, Yang Z, Wei H, Fan X
**Journal:** Mol Med Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3892/mmr.2018.9583](https://doi.org/10.3892/mmr.2018.9583)

## Content

1. Mol Med Rep. 2018 Dec;18(6):5760-5764. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2018.9583. Epub 2018
Oct  24.

Two novel pathogenic variants of L1CAM gene in two fetuses with isolated 
X‑linked hydrocephaly: A case report.

Xie B(1), Luo J(1), Lei Y(1), Yang Q(1), Li M(1), Yi S(1), Luo S(1), Wang J(1), 
Qin Z(1), Yang Z(2), Wei H(3), Fan X(1).

Author information:
(1)Genetic and Metabolic Central Laboratory, Guangxi Maternal and Child Health 
Hospital, Nanning, Guangxi 530023, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Ultrasound, Guangxi Maternal and Child Health Hospital, 
Nanning, Guangxi 530023, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Guangxi Maternal and Child Health 
Hospital, Nanning, Guangxi 530023, P.R. China.

Hydrocephalus due to aqueductal stenosis (HSAS; Online Mendelian Inheritance in 
Man #307000) is a rare X‑linked, recessively‑inherited disease characterized by 
severe hydrocephaly and occasionally adducted thumbs, in addition to 
intellectual disability and spasticity in surviving individuals. The present 
study described two fetuses with severely enlarged ventricles of the brain. The 
clinical diagnosis of HSAS was made on the basis of family history and 
sonographic findings. Molecular testing of the L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM) 
gene revealed two novel hemizygous L1CAM variants, c.998C>T(p.Pro333Leu) and 
c.2362G>T(p.Val788Phe). The variants affect the highly conserved amino acids 
which are located in the key domains of the protein (the fourth Ig domain and 
second FnIII domain, respectively). The two variants were predicted to be 
'disease causing' by a number of prediction tools, and have been classified as 
likely pathogenic following the American College of Medical Genetics and 
Genomics/Association for Molecular Pathology guidelines. The present study 
highlights the importance of combining family history, prenatal ultrasonography 
and molecular testing in the diagnosis of HSAS. The novel variants expand the 
mutational spectrum of L1CAM gene in the Chinese population, and could be used 
in genetic counseling, carrier testing of female relatives, and prenatal, as 
well as preimplantation genetic diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2018.9583
PMID: 30365056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]