---
reference_id: "PMID:27550302"
title: Kidney disease in primary anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome.
authors:
- Gracia-Tello B
- Isenberg D
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kew307
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kidney disease in primary anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome.
**Authors:** Gracia-Tello B, Isenberg D
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kew307](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kew307)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017 Jul 1;56(7):1069-1080. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kew307.

Kidney disease in primary anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome.

Gracia-Tello B(1), Isenberg D(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Lozano Blesa University Hospital, Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Centre for Rheumatology, University College London Hospitals, London, UK.

Comment in
    Rheumatology (Oxford). 2018 Feb 1;57(2):403. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kex401.

APS is an autoimmune disease defined by the presence of arterial or venous 
thrombotic events and/or pregnancy morbidity in patients who test positive for 
aPL. APS can be isolated (primary APS) or associated with other autoimmune 
diseases. The kidney is a major target organ in APS, and renal thrombosis can 
occur at any level within the vasculature of the kidney (renal arteries, 
intrarenal vasculature and renal veins). Histological findings vary widely, 
including ischaemic glomeruli and thrombotic lesions without glomerular or 
arterial immune deposits on immunofluorescence. Renal involvement in patients 
with definite APS is treated with long-term anticoagulants as warfarin, but new 
treatments are being tried. The aim of this article is to review the links 
between primary APS and kidney disease.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kew307
PMID: 27550302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]