---
reference_id: "PMID:38651394"
title: "Management and Outcomes of Very Long-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency (VLCAD Deficiency): A Retrospective Chart Review."
authors:
- Al Bandari M
- Nagy L
- Cruz V
- Hewson S
- Hossain A
- Inbar-Feigenberg M
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijns10020029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management and Outcomes of Very Long-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency (VLCAD Deficiency): A Retrospective Chart Review.
**Authors:** Al Bandari M, Nagy L, Cruz V, Hewson S, Hossain A, Inbar-Feigenberg M
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns10020029](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns10020029)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2024 Mar 30;10(2):29. doi: 10.3390/ijns10020029.

Management and Outcomes of Very Long-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency 
(VLCAD Deficiency): A Retrospective Chart Review.

Al Bandari M(1), Nagy L(2), Cruz V(1)(3), Hewson S(4)(5), Hossain A(6), 
Inbar-Feigenberg M(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(2)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Clinical 
Dietetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(3)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Lawrence S, Bloomberg, Faculty 
of Nursing, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 1P8, Canada.
(4)Department of Genetic Counselling, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, 
Canada.
(6)Clinical Research Services (CRS), The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON 
M5G 1X8, Canada.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada.

Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency is a rare genetic 
condition affecting the mitochondrial beta-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids. 
This study reports on the clinical outcomes of patients diagnosed by newborn 
screening with VLCAD deficiency comparing metabolic parameters, enzyme 
activities, molecular results, and clinical management. It is a single-center 
retrospective chart review of VLCAD deficiency patients who met the inclusion 
criteria between January 2002 and February 2020. The study included 12 patients, 
7 of whom had an enzyme activity of more than 10%, and 5 patients had an enzyme 
activity of less than 10%. The Pearson correlation between enzyme activity and 
the C14:1 level at newborn screening showed a p-value of 0.0003, and the 
correlation between enzyme activity and the C14:1 level at diagnosis had a 
p-value of 0.0295. There was no clear correlation between the number of 
documented admissions and the enzyme activity level. Patients who had a high 
C14:1 value at diagnosis were started on a diet with a lower percentage of 
energy from long-chain triglycerides. The C14:1 result at diagnosis is the value 
that has been guiding our initial clinical management in asymptomatic diagnosed 
newborns. However, the newborn screening C14:1 value is the most sensitive 
predictor of low enzyme activity and may help guide dietary management.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns10020029
PMCID: PMC11036265
PMID: 38651394

Conflict of interest statement: M.I.-F. received research support and 
participated in an advisory board by Ultragenyx Pharmaceuticals; however, these 
activities are not related to this study. L.N. has participated in a research 
study funded by Ultragenyx Pharmaceuticals, but this activity is not related to 
this study. The rest of the authors declare no conflict of interest.