---
reference_id: "PMID:32485263"
title: CD4(+) and CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes may induce mesenchymal cell apoptosis in IgG(4)-related disease.
authors:
- Perugino CA
- Kaneko N
- Maehara T
- Mattoo H
- Kers J
- Allard-Chamard H
- Mahajan VS
- Liu H
- Della-Torre E
- Murphy SJH
- Ghebremichael M
- Wallace ZS
- Bolster MB
- Harvey LM
- Mylvaganam G
- Tuncay Y
- Liang L
- Montesi SB
- Zhang X
- Tinju A
- Mochizuki K
- Munemura R
- Sakamoto M
- Moriyama M
- Nakamura S
- Yosef N
- Stone JH
- Pillai S
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.05.022
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antigens, CD/immunology"
- Apoptosis/immunology
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology, pathology"
- Female
- Fibrosis
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin G4-Related Disease/immunology, pathology"
- Male
- "Mesenchymal Stem Cells/immunology, pathology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD4(+) and CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes may induce mesenchymal cell apoptosis in IgG(4)-related disease.
**Authors:** Perugino CA, Kaneko N, Maehara T, Mattoo H, Kers J, Allard-Chamard H, Mahajan VS, Liu H, Della-Torre E, Murphy SJH, Ghebremichael M, Wallace ZS, Bolster MB, Harvey LM, Mylvaganam G, Tuncay Y, Liang L, Montesi SB, Zhang X, Tinju A, Mochizuki K, Munemura R, Sakamoto M, Moriyama M, Nakamura S, Yosef N, Stone JH, Pillai S
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2020.05.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2020.05.022)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2021 Jan;147(1):368-382. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2020.05.022. Epub 2020 May 30.

CD4(+) and CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes may induce mesenchymal cell apoptosis
in IgG(4)-related disease.

Perugino CA(1), Kaneko N(2), Maehara T(2), Mattoo H(3), Kers J(4),
Allard-Chamard H(5), Mahajan VS(6), Liu H(7), Della-Torre E(8), Murphy SJH(9),
Ghebremichael M(9), Wallace ZS(10), Bolster MB(10), Harvey LM(10), Mylvaganam
G(9), Tuncay Y(9), Liang L(11), Montesi SB(11), Zhang X(12), Tinju A(13),
Mochizuki K(13), Munemura R(13), Sakamoto M(13), Moriyama M(13), Nakamura S(13),
Yosef N(12), Stone JH(10), Pillai S(14).

Author information:
(1)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Division of
Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Mass.
(2)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Section of Oral
and Maxillofacial Oncology, Division of Maxillofacial Diagnostic and Surgical
Sciences, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Immunology and
Inflammation Therapeutic Area, Sanofi, Cambridge, Mass.
(4)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Amsterdam UMC,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam Infection & Immunity Institute (AI&II),
Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences (ACS), Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Van't Hoff
Institute for Molecular Sciences (HIMS), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Division of
Rheumatology, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé de l' Université
de Sherbrooke et Centre de Recherche Clinique Étienne-Le Bel, Sherbrooke Québec,
Canada.
(6)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Mass.
(7)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Department of
Rheumatology and Immunology, First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.
(8)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Unit of
Immunology, Rheumatology, Allergy, and Rare Diseases (UnIRAR), IRCCS San
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(9)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass.
(10)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Mass.
(11)Division of Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Mass.
(12)University of California, Berkeley, Calif.
(13)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial Oncology, Division of Maxillofacial
Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.
(14)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass. Electronic
address: pillai@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is an immune-mediated fibrotic
disorder that has been linked to CD4+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CD4+CTLs). The
effector phenotype of CD4+CTLs and the relevance of both CD8+ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CD8+CTLs) and apoptotic cell death remain undefined in IgG4-RD.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to define CD4+CTL heterogeneity, characterize the CD8+CTL
response in the blood and in lesions, and determine whether enhanced apoptosis
may contribute to the pathogenesis of IgG4-RD.
METHODS: Blood analyses were undertaken using flow cytometry, cell sorting,
transcriptomic analyses at the population and single-cell levels, and
next-generation sequencing for the TCR repertoire. Tissues were interrogated
using multicolor immunofluorescence. Results were correlated with clinical data.
RESULTS: We establish that among circulating CD4+CTLs in IgG4-RD,
CD27loCD28loCD57hi cells are the dominant effector subset, exhibit marked clonal
expansion, and differentially express genes relevant to cytotoxicity,
activation, and enhanced metabolism. We also observed prominent infiltration of
granzyme A-expressing CD8+CTLs in disease tissues and clonal expansion in the
blood of effector/memory CD8+ T cells with an activated and cytotoxic phenotype.
Tissue studies revealed an abundance of cells undergoing apoptotic cell death
disproportionately involving nonimmune, nonendothelial cells of mesenchymal
origin. Apoptotic cells showed significant upregulation of HLA-DR.
CONCLUSIONS: CD4+CTLs and CD8+CTLs may induce apoptotic cell death in tissues of
patients with IgG4-RD with preferential targeting of nonendothelial, nonimmune
cells of mesenchymal origin.

Copyright © 2020 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.05.022
PMCID: PMC7704943
PMID: 32485263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement: The authors have declared
that no conflicts of interest exist.
