---
reference_id: "PMID:36865421"
title: "Loeffler's Syndrome and Multifocal Cutaneous Larva Migrans: Case report of an uncommon occurrence and review of the literature."
authors:
- Sil A
- Bhanja DB
- Chandra A
- Biswas SK
journal: Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.18295/squmj.5.2022.036
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Adult
- "Larva Migrans/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Skin
- Albendazole/therapeutic use
- India
- Levalbuterol
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loeffler's Syndrome and Multifocal Cutaneous Larva Migrans: Case report of an uncommon occurrence and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Sil A, Bhanja DB, Chandra A, Biswas SK
**Journal:** Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.18295/squmj.5.2022.036](https://doi.org/10.18295/squmj.5.2022.036)

## Content

1. Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J. 2023 Feb;23(1):104-108. doi: 
10.18295/squmj.5.2022.036. Epub 2023 Feb 23.

Loeffler's Syndrome and Multifocal Cutaneous Larva Migrans: Case report of an 
uncommon occurrence and review of the literature.

Sil A(1), Bhanja DB(2), Chandra A(3), Biswas SK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprosy, RG Kar Medical College 
and Hospital, Kolkata, India.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprosy, Midnapore Medical College 
and Hospital, West Bengal, India.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, RG Kar Medical College and Hospital, 
Kolkata, India.

Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is a zoonotic skin disease that is frequently 
diagnosed in tropical and subtropical countries. Loeffler's syndrome (LS) is a 
transient respiratory ailment characterised by pulmonary infiltration along with 
peripheral eosinophilia and commonly follows parasitic infestation. We report a 
33-year-old male patient who presented to a tertiary care hospital in eastern 
India in 2019 with LS that was attributed secondary to multifocal CLM. Treatment 
with seven-day course of oral albendazole (400 mg daily) coupled with 
nebulisation (levosalbutamol and budesonide) led to complete resolution of 
cutaneous lesions and respiratory complaints within two weeks. There was 
complete resolution of pulmonary pathology at four-weeks follow-up.

© Copyright 2023, Sultan Qaboos University Medical Journal, All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.18295/squmj.5.2022.036
PMCID: PMC9974021
PMID: 36865421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]