---
reference_id: "PMID:33587894"
title: "Circulating tumour DNA in patients with advanced melanoma treated with dabrafenib or dabrafenib plus trametinib: a clinical validation study."
authors:
- Syeda MM
- Wiggins JM
- Corless BC
- Long GV
- Flaherty KT
- Schadendorf D
- Nathan PD
- Robert C
- Ribas A
- Davies MA
- Grob JJ
- Gasal E
- Squires M
- Marker M
- Garrett J
- Brase JC
- Polsky D
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30726-9
keywords:
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Brain Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, secondary"
- "Circulating Tumor DNA/analysis, genetics"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Imidazoles/administration & dosage"
- Male
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- "Oximes/administration & dosage"
- Prognosis
- "Pyridones/administration & dosage"
- "Pyrimidinones/administration & dosage"
- Survival Rate
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Circulating tumour DNA in patients with advanced melanoma treated with dabrafenib or dabrafenib plus trametinib: a clinical validation study.
**Authors:** Syeda MM, Wiggins JM, Corless BC, Long GV, Flaherty KT, Schadendorf D, Nathan PD, Robert C, Ribas A, Davies MA, Grob JJ, Gasal E, Squires M, Marker M, Garrett J, Brase JC, Polsky D
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30726-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30726-9)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2021 Mar;22(3):370-380. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30726-9. Epub
 2021 Feb 12.

Circulating tumour DNA in patients with advanced melanoma treated with
dabrafenib or dabrafenib plus trametinib: a clinical validation study.

Syeda MM(1), Wiggins JM(1), Corless BC(1), Long GV(2), Flaherty KT(3),
Schadendorf D(4), Nathan PD(5), Robert C(6), Ribas A(7), Davies MA(8), Grob
JJ(9), Gasal E(10), Squires M(11), Marker M(10), Garrett J(12), Brase JC(13),
Polsky D(14).

Author information:
(1)NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Royal North Shore and
Mater Hospitals, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany; German Cancer Consortium,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)East and North NHS Trust, Northwood, UK.
(6)Institute Gustave Roussy and Paris-Sud University, Villejuif, France.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Melanoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(9)Dermatology and Skin Cancer Department, Aix-Marseille University, Marseille,
France.
(10)Novartis Pharmaceuticals, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(11)Novartis Institute for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(12)Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(13)Novartis Pharma, Basel, Switzerland.
(14)NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address:
david.polsky@nyulangone.org.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2021 Mar;22(3):291-293. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30758-0.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2021 May;18(5):258. doi: 10.1038/s41571-021-00494-0.

BACKGROUND: Melanoma lacks validated blood-based biomarkers for monitoring and
predicting treatment efficacy. Cell-free circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) is a
promising biomarker; however, various detection methods have been used, and, to
date, no large studies have examined the association between serial changes in
ctDNA and survival after BRAF, MEK, or BRAF plus MEK inhibitor therapy. We aimed
to evaluate whether baseline ctDNA concentrations and kinetics could predict
survival outcomes.
METHODS: In this clinical validation study, we used analytically validated
droplet digital PCR assays to measure BRAFV600-mutant ctDNA in pretreatment and
on-treatment plasma samples from patients aged 18 years or older enrolled in two
clinical trials. COMBI-d (NCT01584648) was a double-blind, randomised phase 3
study of dabrafenib plus trametinib versus dabrafenib plus placebo in previously
untreated patients with BRAFV600 mutation-positive unresectable or metastatic
melanoma. Patients had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance
status of 0 or 1. COMBI-MB (NCT02039947) was an open-label, non-randomised,
phase 2 study evaluating dabrafenib plus trametinib in patients with BRAFV600
mutation-positive metastatic melanoma and brain metastases. Patients in cohort A
of COMBI-MB had asymptomatic brain metastases, no previous local brain-directed
therapy, and an ECOG performance status of 0 or 1. Biomarker analysis was a
prespecified exploratory endpoint in both trials and performed in the
intention-to-treat populations in COMBI-d and COMBI-MB. We investigated the
association between mutant copy number (baseline or week 4 or zero conversion
status) and efficacy endpoints (progression-free survival, overall survival, and
best overall response). We used Cox models, Kaplan-Meier plots, and log-rank
tests to explore the association of pretreatment ctDNA concentrations with
progression-free survival and overall survival. The effect of additional
prognostic variables such as lactate dehydrogenase was also investigated in
addition to the mutant copy number.
FINDINGS: In COMBI-d, pretreatment plasma samples were available from 345 (82%)
of 423 patients and on-treatment (week 4) plasma samples were available from 224
(53%) of 423 patients. In cohort A of COMBI-MB, pretreatment and on-treatment
samples were available from 38 (50%) of 76 patients with intracranial and
extracranial metastatic melanoma. ctDNA was detected in pretreatment samples
from 320 (93%) of 345 patients (COMBI-d) and 34 (89%) of 38 patients (COMBI-MB).
When assessed as a continuous variable, elevated baseline BRAFV600
mutation-positive ctDNA concentration was associated with worse overall survival
outcome (hazard ratio [HR] 1·13 [95% CI 1·09-1·18], p<0·0001 by univariate
analysis), independent of treatment group and baseline lactate dehydrogenase
concentrations (1·08 [1·03-1·13], p=0·0020), in COMBI-d. A ctDNA cutoff point of
64 copies per mL of plasma stratified patients enrolled in COMBI-d as high risk
or low risk with respect to survival outcomes (HR 1·74 [95% CI 1·37-2·21],
p<0·0001 for progression-free survival; 2·23 [1·73-2·87], p<0·0001 for overall
survival) and was validated in the COMBI-MB cohort (3·20 [1·39-7·34], p=0·0047
for progression-free survival; 2·94 [1·18-7·32], p=0·016 for overall survival).
In COMBI-d, undetectable ctDNA at week 4 was significantly associated with
extended progression-free and overall survival, particularly in patients with
elevated lactate dehydrogenase concentrations (HR 1·99 [95% CI 1·08-3·64],
p=0·027 for progression-free survival; 2·38 [1·24-4·54], p=0·0089 for overall
survival).
INTERPRETATION: Pretreatment and on-treatment BRAFV600-mutant ctDNA measurements
could serve as independent, predictive biomarkers of clinical outcome with
targeted therapy.
FUNDING: Novartis.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30726-9
PMCID: PMC8034833
PMID: 33587894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Although early scan assessments are useful for monitoring antitumour responses, noninvasive methods with increased accuracy are needed to help predict clinical outcome. There are currently no validated blood-based biomarkers to monitor treatment efficacy in patients with advanced melanoma. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is an established prognostic factor; however, it lacks sufficient specificity and sensitivity to routinely inform on-treatment decision-making. Cell-free circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) has emerged as a promising biomarker in many types of cancers. Released primarily by dead or dying tumour cells, cancer-relevant genetic abnormalities have been measured in plasma or serum using various analytical techniques, and their detection/quantification has been associated with tumour burden, minimal residual disease, treatment response and clonal evolution.1 However, studies showing clinical utility are less common. Examples include the use of ctDNA assays to identify mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor and PIK3CA genes to determine eligibility for targeted therapies among non-small cell lung cancer and breast cancer patients.2,3

In melanoma, BRAF V600 or NRAS Q61 hot spot mutations are found mutually exclusively in approximately two-thirds of metastatic tumours. Patients with BRAF V600-mutant tumours can be treated with highly efficacious BRAF plus MEK targeted therapies. ctDNA studies in patients with metastatic melanoma receiving either targeted therapies or immune checkpoint inhibitors demonstrated associations between baseline and on-treatment ctDNA levels and several clinical parameters and outcomes. These include changes in tumour burden and response rates, early detection of disease progression, pseudoprogression, mutations associated with resistance to targeted therapies, and survival;4–7 suggesting the potential for ctDNA to serve as a biomarker to help guide patient management. However, nearly all studies have involved small, mostly retrospectively collected data, and have used a variety of detection methods with differing sensitivities, often lacking analytical validation details. In particular, two studies observed that ctDNA detection after a few weeks of treatment may be used to identify intrinsic resistance to immune checkpoint inhibitors.7,8 The only comparable study of targeted therapy with BRAF and MEK inhibitors in the metastatic melanoma setting examined 25 patients enrolled in a phase 2 trial.

To our knowledge, we present the first large-scale ctDNA evaluation of patients with BRAF V600 mutation-positive unresectable or metastatic melanoma treated with dabrafenib plus trametinib or dabrafenib plus placebo in two clinical trials using an analytically validated droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) method.

Patients with a minimum of 8 × 0·5 mL aliquots or 4 × 1 mL aliquots of plasma available were included. ctDNA analysis was performed on 345 plasma samples collected at baseline and 224 plasma samples collected at week 4 (222 had corresponding baseline plasma samples) from 423 patients enrolled in the COMBI-d trial (registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01584648). COMBI-d was a double-blind, randomised, phase 3 study of oral dabrafenib 150 mg twice daily plus oral trametinib 2 mg once daily vs dabrafenib plus placebo (screened for enrolment between May 4, 2012, and Nov 30, 2012).9 Eligible patients were aged at least 18 years and had histologically confirmed, unresectable or metastatic melanoma with BRAF V600E/K mutations. Patients were ineligible if they had previous systemic treatment for advanced or metastatic cancer. Patients with brain metastases that had been definitively treated and stable for at least 12 weeks were eligible. Patients continued treatment until disease progression, death, unacceptable toxicity, or withdrawal of consent. Randomisation and masking in COMBI-d are detailed in the appendix.

We included cohort A of COMBI-MB as a validation cohort using plasma samples collected at baseline and at weeks 4, 8, 16, 24, 32, and 40. COMBI-MB was an open label, nonrandomized, phase 2 trial evaluating dabrafenib plus trametinib in patients with BRAF V600–mutant metastatic melanoma and brain metastases (registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02039947).10 Cohort A enrolled patients with BRAF V600E mutation–positive asymptomatic melanoma brain metastases who had received no previous local brain-directed therapy and had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1. Additional study design details for COMBI-MB are included in the appendix.

For both trials, whole blood was collected in EDTA tubes, gently inverted (8–10 times), and plasma was separated by immediate centrifugation (10 minutes at 1500g ± 150g followed by 10 minutes at 3000g ± 150g), and plasma supernatant was stored at −70°C or colder prior to use.

The protocols for both COMBI-d and COMBI-MB (available with the primary publications9,10) were approved by the independent review board at each participating institution. The studies were conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical Practice guidelines. All patients provided written informed consent.

Each sample was labeled with a unique identifier assigned by the sponsor, and laboratory staff conducting the ctDNA measurements were blinded to all patient data with the exception of the specific tumour-associated BRAF mutation.

Plasma samples were thawed at room temperature and centrifuged (10 minutes at 16000g) immediately before ctDNA extraction using the QIAamp DSP Circulating NA Kit (Qiagen; Hilden, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and eluted in 85 μL of elution buffer. Total eluate from each sample was divided into eight replicate wells, and the concentration of BRAF V600E or V600K ctDNA was measured using analytically validated ddPCR assays run on a QX200 Droplet Digital PCR system and analysed by QuantaSoft Analysis Pro (version 1.0.596) (Bio-Rad Laboratories; Hercules, CA, USA) as previously described. The choice of assay (V600E vs V600K) was based on genotyping information determined during screening for trial enrolment. The normal assay range was determined using plasma from 30 healthy donors (BioIVT; Westbury, NY, USA), and the limit of blank was 0·28 copies/mL or 0·019% mutant fraction (BRAF V600E) and 0·34 copies/mL or 0·022% mutant fraction (BRAF V600K) using standard methods. Samples with concentrations exceeding these cutoffs were considered positive for ctDNA. Patients with detectable ctDNA at baseline were determined to have a ctDNA zeroconversion if levels decreased below the limit of blank at any follow-up time point.

The primary endpoint in COMBI-d was investigator-assessed progression-free survival, defined as the time from randomisation until progression or death from any cause. In COMBI-MB, the primary endpoint was intracranial response rate in cohort A, defined as the percentage of patients with a confirmed intracranial complete or partial response assessed by investigator using modified RECIST version 1.1. Analysis of ctDNA and association with clinical outcomes was an exploratory endpoint of both trials. Secondary endpoints are included in the appendix.

ctDNA analysis data from the two arms of COMBI-d were pooled after an initial analysis revealed no significant difference in the correlative analyses between the arms, and Cox models were adjusted for treatment arm information.

We used Cox models to investigate whether the mutant copy number (after logarithmic transformation) at baseline interacts with treatment arm in its relationship to progression-free survival; we found no interaction. To search empirically for an optimal cutoff for mutant copy number (considered as a continuous variable) at baseline, we sought to maximise a log-rank test. We used the method of Lausen and Schumacher, as implemented in the maxstat R package (R Foundation), to conduct the search and return an adjusted p-value assessing evidence that apparent difference in risk is not random. In accordance with Faraggi and Simon, we estimated cutoff performance by a two-fold cross-validation exercise, then estimated the final cutoff on the full data set. We evaluated the cutoff using Cox models, log-rank tests, and Kaplan-Meier plots. For each Kaplan-Meier plot, we calculated a p-value derived from the log-rank test for difference between the subgroups, and we fitted a Cox model to estimate the hazard ratio. We derived 95% Wald-type confidence intervals for each hazard ratio. Note that it is possible, in borderline cases, for the Wald-type confidence interval to contain 1·0 (indicating lack of evidence of difference at the 5% level) while the log-rank test yields a p-value less than 0·05, as they are not identical methods and each has a nominal 5% rate of indicating a difference when in truth no difference is present.

The linear form for logarithmic transformation of ctDNA at baseline was evaluated using plots of the cumulative Martingale residuals against the values of the covariate log ctDNA at baseline. The p value of a Kolmogorov-type supremum test based on a sample of 1000 simulated residual patterns was assessed.

In model-based analysis, missing data imputations or variable selection methods were not implemented. We first examined effects based on clinical relevance. Multivariate models were also fit to examine if other prognostic/baseline characteristics affected the relationship between mutant copies and efficacy. When performing model based analysis for mutant copy number, the impact of the following baseline characteristics and factors was examined: treatment, LDH strata, number of metastatic sites, BRAF status, ECOG status, gender, age, stage of disease at baseline.

We used R (version 3.4.3) and R packages maxstat (version 0.7.25), survival (version 2.41.3), and Hmisc (version 4.0.3) as well as SAS (version 9.4; SAS Institute; Cary, NC, USA) and SAS macro %fincut.

The study was designed by the authors and the funder of the study. Data were collected by the study site staff and authors and monitored by the funder. The funder was also involved in data analysis, data interpretation, and writing of the report. All authors had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

The number of pretreatment and on-treatment plasma samples from the COMBI-d trial are summarised in the appendix p 10. Baseline characteristics were similar between patients with and without available plasma samples at baseline and between patients with and without paired baseline and week 4 samples (table 1). For the COMBI-d study, median follow-up was 20 months (range, 0 to 76 months) in the combination therapy group and 16.0 months (range, 0 to 76 months) in the dabrafenib monotherapy (from randomization to last contact). Amongst the 345 patients analysed, 290 had BRAF V600E, 54 had BRAF V600K, and 1 had BRAF V600E and V600K. Plasma samples (median volume, 3·6 mL; [IQR, 3·0–4·2 mL]) were analysed using mutation-specific ddPCR. Median cell-free DNA/sample was 28·6 ng (range, <1 to 5990 ng). BRAF V600E/K mutations were detected in 320 (93%) of 345 baseline plasma samples.

Amongst the subset of patients with paired pretreatment and on-treatment plasma samples, 201 (90%) had detectable ctDNA at baseline, and 121 (60%) of 201 remained positive at week 4. Nearly all patients (111 of 121 [92%]) had a considerable decrease in mutant ctDNA copies after 4 weeks of therapy (appendix p 11). Median ctDNA concentrations at baseline and week 4 were 66·7 copies/mL (range, 0–266902 copies/mL) and 0·55 copies/mL (range, 0–11078 copies/mL), respectively. The median mutant fraction at baseline was 3·1% (range, 0%−79%) and at week 4 was 0·02% (range, 0%−47%). In 25 patients, a duplicate pretreatment sample was analysed by a different operator, on a different day, using a different lot of reagents, and there was a high correlation between log ctDNA values (R2=0·94) (appendix p 3).

Baseline characteristics were similar between patients with detectable vs undetectable ctDNA levels at screening and week 4, although LDH level, number of metastatic sites, and median sum of baseline lesion diameters were higher in patients with detectable ctDNA levels at baseline and week 4 than in patients with undetectable ctDNA levels at the respective time points (appendix p 4).

We tested the associations between pretreatment ctDNA levels and progression-free survival and overall survival with ddPCR, using ctDNA as a continuous variable. The analysis revealed that the quantity of ctDNA at baseline was directly associated with survival; higher ctDNA levels were associated with significantly shorter progression-free and/or overall survival. Specifically, log ctDNA was associated with progression-free survival and overall survival in univariate analysis adjusted for treatment arm (progression-free survival: hazard ratio [HR], 1·08 [95% CI, 1·04–1·12]; p<0·0001; overall survival: HR, 1·13 [95% CI, 1·09–1·18]; p<0·0001) as well as in multivariable analysis for overall survival when adjusting for pretreatment LDH and treatment arm information (HR, 1·08 [95% CI, 1·03–1·13]; p=0·0020).

Baseline ctDNA subgroups (positive vs negative; 320 [93%] of 345 patients with detectable ctDNA) were not associated with progression-free survival or overall survival (appendix p 12). At the time of the analysis, 253 (79%) of 320 patients in the positive baseline ctDNA subgroup and 18 (72%) of 25 patients in the negative baseline ctDNA subgroup had a progression-free survival event (progressed or died). There were 237 (74%) and 15 (60%) deaths, respectively. We explored potential cutoff values to stratify patients by high and low risk for disease progression and survival. We identified 64 copies/mL of plasma as a robust cut point to separate patients with shorter and longer survival. Specifically, patients with pretreatment ctDNA <64 copies/mL had a median progression-free survival of 12·7 months (95% CI, 10·8–16·3 months) compared with 6·5 months (95% CI, 5·6–7·4 months) in patients with ctDNA ≥64 copies/mL (HR, 1·74 [95% CI, 1·37–2·21]; p<0·0001]. At the time of the analysis, 122 (72%) of 170 patients and 149 (85%) of 175 patients, in each group respectively, progressed or died. Similarly, patients with ctDNA <64 copies/mL had a median overall survival of 35·1 months (95% CI, 27·1–48·8 months) compared with 13·4 months (95% CI, 11·9–16·1 months) in patients with ctDNA ≥64 copies/mL (HR, 2·23 [95% CI, 1·73–2·87]; p<0·0001). At the time of the analysis, 105 (62%) and 147 (84%) patients in each group, respectively, had died (figure 1).

We compared pretreatment and week 4 on-treatment plasma ctDNA levels in 224 patients with available on-treatment ctDNA results. In the subgroup with detectable ctDNA at baseline (n=201), achieving zeroconversion (ie, undetectable ctDNA) at week 4 was significantly associated with prolonged survival. Median progression-free survival and overall survival in patients who achieved zeroconversion was prolonged compared with patients with detectable ctDNA at week 4 (figure 2). There were 57 (71%) of 80 patients who achieved zeroconversion and 102 (84%) of 121 patients with detectable ctDNA at week 4 who progressed or died; 52 (65%) and 96 (79%) patients had died, respectively.

Amongst patients with detectable ctDNA at baseline and an evaluable ctDNA result at 4 weeks, there was a strong association between best overall response and zeroconversion status (figure 3; appendix p 6). Objective response rates in patients with detectable ctDNA at week 4 vs those who had zeroconversion were 53% (63 of 118) vs 81% (65 of 80); complete responses were achieved by 14% (16 of 118) vs 23% (18 of 80) of patients, respectively. All patients with zeroconversion had disease control (complete response, partial response, or stable disease) as best overall response. A proportional odds likelihood ratio test for association between zeroconversion status and the four best overall response categories yielded a p value of 0·0002, which strongly suggests that the association cannot be explained by chance. A similar association was found between best overall response and zeroconversion status in COMBI-d regardless of treatment arm (appendix p 13).

When patients were stratified by baseline LDH level (> or ≤ upper limit of normal), achieving undetectable ctDNA at week 4 was significantly associated with progression-free survival and overall survival in patients with LDH levels above the upper limit of normal (appendix p 14). Of these patients, 58 (91%) of 64 in the positive ctDNA subgroup and 13 (76%) of 17 in the negative ctDNA subgroup progressed or died; 58 (91%) and 11 (65%) patients in each subgroup had died, respectively. Detectable vs undetectable ctDNA at week 4 was not significantly associated with survival endpoints amongst patients with LDH levels at or below the upper limit of normal. Of these patients, 49 (77%) of 64 in the positive ctDNA subgroup and 56 (71%) of 79 patients in the negative ctDNA subgroup progressed or died; 42 (66%) and 52 (66%) patients in each subgroup had died, respectively. A test for interaction between baseline LDH and week-4 ctDNA groups in a Cox model for overall survival was significant (p=0.022), while that for progression-free survival was not significant (p=0.19).

We investigated the role of clinical markers using a multivariable Cox regression model that included baseline ctDNA status using the optimised cut point of 64 copies/mL (appendix p 7) and ctDNA status at week 4 (table 2). These models indicated that, even adjusting for treatment and clinical prognostic factors, baseline ctDNA and week 4 zeroconversion status had independent, predictive value. No evidence of interaction with treatment group was identified (data not shown).

We analysed plasma samples from 38 patients with intracranial and extracranial unresectable metastatic melanoma enrolled in cohort A of the COMBI-MB trial (all patients in COMBI-MB were recruited between Feb 28, 2014 and Aug 5, 2016 from 32 hospitals and institutions in Europe, North America, and Australia). Patient characteristics are summarised in appendix p 8. ctDNA was measured longitudinally for up to 40 weeks (n=157 samples) and was detectable in 34 of 38 patients (89%) before treatment initiation (appendix p 9). Baseline ctDNA levels were correlated with baseline sum of extracranial lesion diameters (Pearson r=0·48; p=0·0042); no correlation was observed with baseline sum of intracranial lesion diameters (Pearson r=0·16; p=0·33) (appendix p 15). ctDNA levels at baseline were not correlated with best overall response (either extracranial or intracranial) when analysed as a continuous or categorical value (appendix p 16).

Baseline ctDNA levels as a continuous variable were significantly associated with progression-free survival (HR, 1·17 [95% CI, 1·05–1·30]; p=0·0024) and overall survival (HR, 1·21 [95% CI, 1·07–1·38]; p=0·0020). Using a cutoff of 64-copies/mL, we stratified patients into groups with median progression-free survival of 5·3 months (95% CI, 3·7–7·2 months) and 11·6 months (95% CI, 5·6 months-not reached) in the ctDNA-high and -low groups, respectively (HR, 3·20 [95% CI, 1·39–7·34]; p=0·0047). All patients in the ctDNA-high group and 10 (91%) of 11 patients in the ctDNA-low group progressed or died. Similarly, median overall survival in patients with high or low ctDNA level at baseline was 9·0 months (95% CI, 8·1–13·5 months) and 34·5 months (95% CI, 21·0 months-not reached), respectively (HR, 2·94 [95% CI, 1·18–7·32]; p=0·016) (figure 4). At the time of the analysis, 23 (85%) of 27 patients in the ctDNA-high group and 6 (55%) of 11 patients in the ctDNA-low group had died. ctDNA zeroconversion (including all available longitudinal on-treatment samples) was associated with extracranial best overall response (odds ratio [OR], 5·8; p=0·041), but less so with intracranial best overall response (OR, 4·2; p=0·060) (appendix p 17).

To our knowledge, we present the first large-scale analysis of ctDNA measurements and their association with survival outcomes in patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma treated with targeted therapy. Strengths of this report include use of an analytically validated ddPCR method to obtain quantitative ctDNA measurements and analysis of patients from two prospective clinical trials. Taking advantage of the quantitative nature of ddPCR, we show that elevated pretreatment BRAF V600–mutant ctDNA levels predicted worse overall survival, independent of LDH levels. We also identified an optimised cut point for pretreatment samples that stratified patients with respect to survival outcomes in the COMBI-d cohort and validated that cut point in a second independent clinical trial cohort (COMBI-MB). Undetectable ctDNA at week 4 was significantly associated with extended progression-free survival and overall survival, especially in patients with elevated LDH levels.

In the current analysis, we detected ctDNA in 93% (COMBI-d) and 89% (COMBI-MB) of pretreatment samples, the highest liquid biopsy detection rates amongst melanoma studies. Detectable ctDNA levels were associated with LDH level, number of baseline metastatic sites, and median sum of lesion diameters, similar to other studies that found an association between ctDNA level and increased tumour burden.4,11 The ability of week 4 ctDNA measurement to identify patients with “high LDH” who had a more favourable response to targeted therapy could be due to differences between patients with respect to the number and distribution of metastatic sites with differing ctDNA shedding characteristics (eg, visceral vs skin), or differences in metastatic tumour volume, all of which have been associated with survival outcomes.12–14

Numerous studies have evaluated ctDNA as a blood-based biomarker for melanoma; most have described fewer than 90 patients and have used several different platforms to detect hot spot mutations in BRAF and other genes. Pretreatment ctDNA detection rates have varied from 33%−77%.15 In the largest of these studies, the overall detection rate was 76% and patients with undetectable pretreatment ctDNA had significantly longer progression-free survival and overall survival.4 Although in this study baseline ctDNA detection was described as a categorical variable, the findings were consistent with our quantitative finding that lower pretreatment levels are associated with improved survival. Another smaller study found that decreases in on-treatment ctDNA levels were associated with improved survival outcomes in patients treated with targeted therapies.16

With respect to immunotherapies, ctDNA measurements have also been associated with clinical outcomes. Pretreatment detection of BRAF or NRAS ctDNA was associated with shorter progression-free survival in patients receiving immunotherapy, and two other studies showed that patients with undetectable ctDNA after weeks 5 or 6 of anti–programmed death receptor 1–based therapies had durable responses and long survival. These findings are in slight contrast to our results, which show that patients with undetectable ctDNA after 4 weeks of BRAF/MEK therapy have an improved clinical outcome but may still develop acquired resistance over time.

The current study provides evidence of the clinical validity of ddPCR-based detection of BRAF V600–mutant ctDNA and the association with clinical outcome and response to targeted therapy in patients with metastatic melanoma, demonstrating utility of ctDNA as a predictive biomarker. The next step in biomarker development is to determine clinical utility from analysis of prospective studies. One possibility would be to use this test as a liquid biopsy in cases where there may be difficulties in obtaining tumour material or where there is an urgency for treatment initiation while awaiting results of a tumour biopsy. The turnaround time following blood collection is a matter of days compared with tissue-based testing, which can take weeks for sample acquisition, tissue retrieval, and genomic testing. These benefits are supplemented by the reduced risk and burden of liquid biopsies for patients. Future studies that identify blood-based biomarkers which aid selection between targeted treatment and immunotherapies would also be beneficial. Other potential applications include longitudinal monitoring of patients for disease progression while they are receiving treatment, as we and others have demonstrated previously. The resulting detection of “ctDNA relapse” might inform changes in radiographic scanning schedules outside of the central nervous system. Additionally, future studies could evaluate the added benefit of monitoring ctDNA levels with parallel scan assessments for adjusting treatment strategy, as needed. Finally, mutant ctDNA detection associated with resistance to targeted therapies, such as NRAS mutations in melanoma, could motivate a change in treatment plan, as indicated in non-small cell lung cancer with the detection of acquired resistance mutations and treatment with corresponding mutant-selective agents.

The current analysis has several limitations. Only one on-treatment plasma sample was available for ctDNA testing in COMBI-d. Because patients with undetectable ctDNA after 4 weeks of therapy may develop acquired resistance over time, additional longitudinal plasma collections may be needed to accurately predict clinical outcome. Also, only BRAF V600 was analysed. Additional variants, such as those associated with acquired resistance, may improve the accuracy of monitoring strategies. With respect to patients with melanoma brain metastases, we found that ctDNA may not be a useful monitoring tool for intracranial disease, confirming reports from other groups. Twenty of 21 samples from nine patients with isolated intracranial disease had no detectable ctDNA (data not shown). There were associations between baseline ctDNA levels and progression-free survival and overall survival as well as ctDNA zeroconversion and extracranial response, but the longitudinal ctDNA results beyond 4 weeks were hard to assess. Furthermore, because a relatively low number of patients composed the validation cohort, including 4 patients who had undetectable ctDNA levels at baseline, confirmational analyses are needed. The poor prognosis of patients with brain metastases limited the ability to analyse response and progression in the brain with sequential ctDNA measurements.

In conclusion, this large-scale study provides a foundation for investigating the clinical utility of ctDNA measurements to guide the management of patients with BRAF V600 mutation-positive unresectable or metastatic melanoma.
