---
reference_id: "PMID:34731461"
title: Inhaled Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors for the Treatment of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
authors:
- Singh D
- Lea S
- Mathioudakis AG
journal: Drugs
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s40265-021-01616-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhaled Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors for the Treatment of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
**Authors:** Singh D, Lea S, Mathioudakis AG
**Journal:** Drugs (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40265-021-01616-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-021-01616-9)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2021 Nov;81(16):1821-1830. doi: 10.1007/s40265-021-01616-9. Epub 2021
Nov  3.

Inhaled Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors for the Treatment of Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease.

Singh D(1)(2), Lea S(3), Mathioudakis AG(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, School of 
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester and Manchester 
University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(2)Medicines Evaluation Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester University 
NHS Foundation Hospital Trust, The Langley Building, Southmoor Road, Manchester, 
M23 9QZ, UK. dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(3)Division of Infection, Immunity and Respiratory Medicine, School of 
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester and Manchester 
University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.

Phosphodiesterase (PDE) 4 inhibitors prevent the metabolism of cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate, thereby reducing inflammation. Inhaled PDE4 inhibitors aim to 
restrict systemic drug exposure to enhance the potential for clinical benefits 
(in the lungs) versus adverse events (systemically). The orally administered 
PDE4 inhibitor roflumilast reduces exacerbation rates in the subgroup of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease patients with a history of exacerbations and the 
presence of chronic bronchitis, but can cause PDE4 related adverse effects due 
to systemic exposure. CHF6001 is an inhaled PDE4 inhibitor, while inhaled 
ensifentrine is an inhibitor of both PDE3 and PDE4; antagonism of PDE3 
facilitates smooth muscle relaxation and hence bronchodilation. These inhaled 
PDE inhibitors have both reported positive findings from early phase clinical 
trials, and have been well tolerated. Longer term trials are needed to firmly 
establish the clinical benefits of these drugs.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-021-01616-9
PMID: 34731461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]