---
reference_id: "PMID:18223332"
title: "Type I pleuropulmonary blastoma: pathology and biology study of 51 cases from the international pleuropulmonary blastoma registry."
authors:
- Hill DA
- Jarzembowski JA
- Priest JR
- Williams G
- Schoettler P
- Dehner LP
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181484165
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation of Lung, Congenital/pathology"
- Cysts/pathology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Family Health
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- International Cooperation
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Male
- "Pleural Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Pulmonary Blastoma/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type I pleuropulmonary blastoma: pathology and biology study of 51 cases from the international pleuropulmonary blastoma registry.
**Authors:** Hill DA, Jarzembowski JA, Priest JR, Williams G, Schoettler P, Dehner LP
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181484165](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181484165)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Feb;32(2):282-95. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181484165.

Type I pleuropulmonary blastoma: pathology and biology study of 51 cases from
the international pleuropulmonary blastoma registry.

Hill DA(1), Jarzembowski JA, Priest JR, Williams G, Schoettler P, Dehner LP.

Author information:
(1)Lauren V. Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Barnes-Jewish and St
Louis Children's Hospitals, Washington University Medical Center, St Louis, MO
63110, USA. hill@path.wustl.edu

Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) is a malignant neoplasm of the lung that presents
in early childhood. The early form of the disease, cystic type I PPB, can be
clinically and pathologically deceptive because of its resemblance to some
developmental lung cysts. This study reviews 51 cases of type I PPB and 6 lung
cysts from relatives of children with PPB. Type I PPB is a delicate multilocular
cyst with variable numbers of primitive mesenchymal cells beneath a benign
epithelial surface. Rhabdomyoblasts and cartilage nodules are seen in 49% and
40% of cases, respectively. Tumors in the youngest subset of patients, from
birth to 2 months of age, are more uniform in composition and cellularity
compared with those in older groups. Early tumors have a subtle transition
between normal developing lung and tumor, showing bland interstitial mesenchymal
cells uniformly expanding the alveolar septa. Presumed regressive changes
including cyst wall necrosis are common. This phenomenon may explain the
variable and sometimes sparse tumor cellularity seen in some type I PPBs. On a
biologic level, this process supports the concept that not all type I PPBs are
fated to progress to a type II or III PPB. Factors that control the balance
between progression and regression may be important in predicting tumor behavior
and determining which patients will benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy. In the
meantime, recognition of this lesion as a neoplasm with malignant potential
rather than a developmental cystic malformation is vital so the child can
receive complete excision and appropriate follow-up care.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181484165
PMID: 18223332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
