---
reference_id: "PMID:19592142"
title: "Bleeding in the heritable connective tissue disorders: mechanisms, diagnosis and treatment."
authors:
- Malfait F
- De Paepe A
journal: Blood Rev
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2009.06.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bleeding in the heritable connective tissue disorders: mechanisms, diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Malfait F, De Paepe A
**Journal:** Blood Rev (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.blre.2009.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.blre.2009.06.001)

## Content

1. Blood Rev. 2009 Sep;23(5):191-7. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2009.06.001. Epub 2009
Jul  9.

Bleeding in the heritable connective tissue disorders: mechanisms, diagnosis and 
treatment.

Malfait F(1), De Paepe A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 
Ghent B-9000, Belgium.

Easy bruising and bleeding are prominent features of some heritable disorders of 
connective tissue (HDCT), resulting from fragility of capillaries and the 
perivascular connective tissue rather than clotting or platelet dysfunction. The 
bleeding tendency is most prominent in the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), a 
heterogeneous group of HDCT sharing clinical manifestations of fragility in 
skin, ligaments, blood vessels and internal organs. Most EDS-subtypes are caused 
by mutations in genes encoding fibrillar collagens type I, III or V, or genes 
encoding enzymes involved in the posttranslational modification of collagens. In 
the vascular subtype of EDS, caused by defects in type III collagen, fragility 
of vessel walls can lead to life-threatening bleeding and premature death. 
Bleeding tendency is also a common feature in other EDS-subtypes, leading to 
bruising either spontaneously or after minimal trauma. This paper reviews the 
clinical aspects of bleeding and bruising in different HDCT and covers 
diagnostic and therapeutic aspects relevant to bleeding in these disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2009.06.001
PMID: 19592142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]