---
reference_id: "PMID:22974902"
title: "Liver transplantation for massive hepatomegaly due to polycystic liver disease: an extreme case."
authors:
- Gringeri E
- D'Amico FE
- Bassi D
- Mescoli C
- Bonsignore P
- Boetto R
- Lodo E
- Noaro G
- Polacco M
- D'Amico F
- Boccagni P
- Zanus G
- Brolese A
- Cillo U
journal: Transplant Proc
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2012.06.041
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver transplantation for massive hepatomegaly due to polycystic liver disease: an extreme case.
**Authors:** Gringeri E, D'Amico FE, Bassi D, Mescoli C, Bonsignore P, Boetto R, Lodo E, Noaro G, Polacco M, D'Amico F, Boccagni P, Zanus G, Brolese A, Cillo U
**Journal:** Transplant Proc (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.transproceed.2012.06.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.transproceed.2012.06.041)

## Content

1. Transplant Proc. 2012 Sep;44(7):2038-40. doi: 
10.1016/j.transproceed.2012.06.041.

Liver transplantation for massive hepatomegaly due to polycystic liver disease: 
an extreme case.

Gringeri E(1), D'Amico FE, Bassi D, Mescoli C, Bonsignore P, Boetto R, Lodo E, 
Noaro G, Polacco M, D'Amico F, Boccagni P, Zanus G, Brolese A, Cillo U.

Author information:
(1)Hepatobiliary and Liver Transplant Unit, Department of Surgical and 
Gastroenterologic Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Polycystic liver disease (PLD) is due to a genetic disorder and 
frequently coexists with polycystic kidney disease (PKD). If the cysts produce 
symptomatology owing to their number and size, many palliative treatments are 
available. When none of the liver parenchyma is spared, or kidney insufficiency 
is marked, the only potentially curable treatment is liver transplantation (LT).
CASE REPORT: A 49-year old woman, diagnosed with PLD and PKD, was listed in 
January 2008 for combined LT and kidney transplantation (KT). A compatible organ 
became available 8 months later. Despite preserved liver function, the patient's 
clinical condition was poor; she experienced dyspnea, advanced anorexia, 
abdominal pain, and severe ascites. At LT, which took 9 hours and was performed 
using the classic technique, the liver was hard, massive in size (15.5 kg), and 
not dissociable from the vena cava. The postoperative course was complicated by 
many septic episodes, the last one being fatal for the patient at 4 months after 
transplantation.
DISCUSSION: LT for PLD in many series shows a high mortality rate. The Model for 
End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score does not stage patients properly, because 
liver function is usually preserved. The liver can achieve a massive size 
causing many symptoms, especially malnutrition and ascites; in this setting LT 
is the only possible treatment. Patients with a low MELD score undergo LT with 
severe malnutrition that predisposes them to greater susceptibility to sepsis. 
To identify predictor factors, beyond MELD criteria that relate to the increased 
liver volume before development of late symptoms is essential to expeditiously 
treat patients with the poorest prognosis to improve their outcomes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2012.06.041
PMID: 22974902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]