---
reference_id: "PMID:31313078"
title: "Oral Lesions in Autoimmune Bullous Diseases: An Overview of Clinical Characteristics and Diagnostic Algorithm."
authors:
- Rashid H
- Lamberts A
- Diercks GFH
- Pas HH
- Meijer JM
- Bolling MC
- Horváth B
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s40257-019-00461-7
keywords:
- Algorithms
- "Autoantibodies/analysis, immunology"
- "Blister/diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Erythema/diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
- Humans
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- "Mouth Mucosa/immunology, pathology"
- "Oral Ulcer/diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes/diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
- "Pemphigoid, Bullous/complications, diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
- "Pemphigus/complications, diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral Lesions in Autoimmune Bullous Diseases: An Overview of Clinical Characteristics and Diagnostic Algorithm.
**Authors:** Rashid H, Lamberts A, Diercks GFH, Pas HH, Meijer JM, Bolling MC, Horváth B
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40257-019-00461-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40257-019-00461-7)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2019 Dec;20(6):847-861. doi: 10.1007/s40257-019-00461-7.

Oral Lesions in Autoimmune Bullous Diseases: An Overview of Clinical 
Characteristics and Diagnostic Algorithm.

Rashid H(1), Lamberts A(2), Diercks GFH(2)(3), Pas HH(2), Meijer JM(2), Bolling 
MC(2), Horváth B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands. h.rashid@umcg.nl.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Autoimmune bullous diseases are a group of chronic inflammatory disorders caused 
by autoantibodies targeted against structural proteins of the desmosomal and 
hemidesmosomal plaques in the skin and mucosa, leading to intra-epithelial or 
subepithelial blistering. The oral mucosa is frequently affected in these 
diseases, in particular, in mucous membrane pemphigoid, pemphigus vulgaris, and 
paraneoplastic pemphigus. The clinical symptoms are heterogeneous and may 
present with erythema, blisters, erosions, and ulcers localized anywhere on the 
oral mucosa, and lead to severe complaints for the patients including pain, 
dysphagia, and foetor. Therefore, a quick and proper diagnosis with adequate 
treatment is needed. Clinical presentations of autoimmune bullous diseases often 
overlap and diagnosis cannot be made based on clinical features alone. 
Immunodiagnostic tests are of great importance in differentiating between the 
different diseases. Direct immunofluorescence microscopy shows depositions of 
autoantibodies along the epithelial basement membrane zone in mucous membrane 
pemphigoid subtypes, or depositions on the epithelial cell surface in pemphigus 
variants. Additional immunoserological tests are useful to discriminate between 
the different subtypes of pemphigoid, and are essential to differentiate between 
pemphigus and paraneoplastic pemphigus. This review gives an overview of the 
clinical characteristics of oral lesions and the diagnostic procedures in 
autoimmune blistering diseases, and provides a diagnostic algorithm for daily 
practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-019-00461-7
PMCID: PMC6872602
PMID: 31313078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Barbara Horvath has received grants from AbbVIe, 
Janssen-Cilag, Solenne B.V., and Celgene; consulting fees from AbbVie, 
Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, UCB Pharma, Akari Pharmaceutics, Philips, and Roche and 
support for travel from AbbVie, Janssen-Cilag, and Novartis. Hanan Rashid, Aniek 
Lamberts, Gilles F.H. Diercks, Hendri H. Pas, Joost M. Meijer, and Maria C. 
Bollin have no conflicts of interest that are directly relevant to the content 
of this article.