---
reference_id: "PMID:35332618"
title: Comprehensive variant spectrum of the CNGA3 gene in patients affected by achromatopsia.
authors:
- Solaki M
- Baumann B
- Reuter P
- Andreasson S
- Audo I
- Ayuso C
- Balousha G
- Benedicenti F
- Birch D
- Bitoun P
- Blain D
- Bocquet B
- Branham K
- Català-Mora J
- De Baere E
- Dollfus H
- Falana M
- Giorda R
- Golovleva I
- Gottlob I
- Heckenlively JR
- Jacobson SG
- Jones K
- Jägle H
- Janecke AR
- Kellner U
- Liskova P
- Lorenz B
- Martorell-Sampol L
- Messias A
- Meunier I
- Belga Ottoni Porto F
- Papageorgiou E
- Plomp AS
- de Ravel TJL
- Reiff CM
- Renner AB
- Rosenberg T
- Rudolph G
- Salati R
- Sener EC
- Sieving PA
- Stanzial F
- Traboulsi EI
- Tsang SH
- Varsanyi B
- Weleber RG
- Zobor D
- Stingl K
- Wissinger B
- Kohl S
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24371
keywords:
- Color Vision Defects/genetics
- Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Cation Channels/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive variant spectrum of the CNGA3 gene in patients affected by achromatopsia.
**Authors:** Solaki M, Baumann B, Reuter P, Andreasson S, Audo I, Ayuso C, Balousha G, Benedicenti F, Birch D, Bitoun P, Blain D, Bocquet B, Branham K, Català-Mora J, De Baere E, Dollfus H, Falana M, Giorda R, Golovleva I, Gottlob I, Heckenlively JR, Jacobson SG, Jones K, Jägle H, Janecke AR, Kellner U, Liskova P, Lorenz B, Martorell-Sampol L, Messias A, Meunier I, Belga Ottoni Porto F, Papageorgiou E, Plomp AS, de Ravel TJL, Reiff CM, Renner AB, Rosenberg T, Rudolph G, Salati R, Sener EC, Sieving PA, Stanzial F, Traboulsi EI, Tsang SH, Varsanyi B, Weleber RG, Zobor D, Stingl K, Wissinger B, Kohl S
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24371](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24371)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2022 Jul;43(7):832-858. doi: 10.1002/humu.24371. Epub 2022 Apr 14.

Comprehensive variant spectrum of the CNGA3 gene in patients affected by 
achromatopsia.

Solaki M(1), Baumann B(1), Reuter P(1), Andreasson S(2), Audo I(3)(4), Ayuso 
C(5)(6), Balousha G(7), Benedicenti F(8), Birch D(9), Bitoun P(10), Blain D(11), 
Bocquet B(12), Branham K(13), Català-Mora J(14), De Baere E(15), Dollfus 
H(16)(17), Falana M(7), Giorda R(18), Golovleva I(19), Gottlob I(20), 
Heckenlively JR(13), Jacobson SG(21), Jones K(9), Jägle H(22), Janecke AR(23), 
Kellner U(24)(25), Liskova P(26)(27), Lorenz B(28)(29), Martorell-Sampol L(30), 
Messias A(31), Meunier I(32)(33), Belga Ottoni Porto F(34), Papageorgiou E(35), 
Plomp AS(36), de Ravel TJL(37), Reiff CM(38), Renner AB(39), Rosenberg T(40), 
Rudolph G(41), Salati R(42), Sener EC(43), Sieving PA(44), Stanzial F(8), 
Traboulsi EI(45), Tsang SH(46), Varsanyi B(47), Weleber RG(48), Zobor D(49)(50), 
Stingl K(51)(52), Wissinger B(1), Kohl S(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Lund, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, Paris, France.
(4)CHNO des Quinze-Vingts, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares REFERET, and 
INSERM-DGOS CIC1423, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Genetics & Genomics, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria - 
Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital - Universidad Autónoma de Madrid 
(IIS-FJD, UAM), Madrid, Spain.
(6)Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, 
Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Pathology and Histology, Faculty of Medicine, Al-Quds 
University, Eastern Jerusalem, Palestine.
(8)Clinical Genetics Service and South Tyrol Coordination Center for Rare 
Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of Bolzano, Bolzano, 
Italy.
(9)Retina Foundation of the Southwest, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(10)Genetique Medicale, CHU Paris Nord, Hopital Jean Verdier, Bondy Cedex, 
France.
(11)National Eye Institute/NEI, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(12)National Reference Centre for Inherited Sensory Diseases, Institute for 
Neurosciences of Montpellier (INM), University of Montpellier, INSERM, 
Montpellier, France.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Kellogg Eye Center, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(14)Unitat de Distròfies Hereditàries de Retina Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, 
Barcelona, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain.
(15)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent 
University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(16)CARGO, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(17)U-1112, Inserm, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, 
France.
(18)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Scientific Institute IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio 
Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(19)Department of Medical Biosciences/Medical and Clinical Genetics, University 
of Umea, Umea, Sweden.
(20)The University of Leicester Ulverscroft Eye Unit, Leicester Royal Infirmary, 
Leicester, UK.
(21)Department of Ophthalmology, Perelman School of Medicine, Scheie Eye 
Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(22)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(23)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria.
(24)Zentrum für Seltene Netzhauterkrankungen, AugenZentrum Siegburg, MVZ 
Augenärztliches Diagnostik- und Therapiecentrum Siegburg GmbH, Siegburg, 
Germany.
(25)RetinaScience, Bonn, 53192, Germany.
(26)Department of Paediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty 
of Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(27)Department of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University 
and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(28)Department of Ophthalmology, Justus-Liebig University Giessen, Giessen, 
Germany.
(29)Department of Ophthalmology, Universitaetsklinikum Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(30)Genetica Molecular-Edifici Docent, Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, 
Esplugues-Barcelona, Spain.
(31)Department of Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology, and Head and Neck Surgery, 
School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, 
Brazil.
(32)National Reference Centre for Inherited Sensory Diseases, Montpellier 
University Hospital, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(33)Sensgene Care Network, France.
(34)INRET Clínica e Centro de Pesquisa, IEP Santa Casa Belo Horizonte, Belo 
Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(35)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Larissa, Mezourlo, 
Larissa, Greece.
(36)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(37)Centre for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(38)Augenarztpraxis am Stadttheater, Freiburg, Germany.
(39)Augenarztpraxis Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(40)Department of Ophthalmology, National Eye Clinic, Glostrup Hospital, 
Glostrup, Denmark.
(41)University Eye Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany.
(42)Scientific Institute, IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Pediatric Ophthalmology Unit, 
Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(43)Strabismus and Pediatric Ophthalmology, Private Practice, Ankara, Turkey.
(44)Center for Ocular Regenerative Therapy, School of Medicine, University of 
California Davis, Sacramento, USA.
(45)Center for Genetic Eye Diseases, Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(46)Department of Ophthalmology, Pathology and Cell Biology, College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia Stem Cell Initiative, Columbia University, New 
York City, New York, USA.
(47)Department of Ophthalmology, Medical School, University of Pécs and Ganglion 
Medical Center, Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
(48)Oregon Health & Science University, Ophthalmic Genetics Service of the Casey 
Eye Institute, 515 SW Campus Drive, 97239, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(49)Centre for Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University 
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(50)Department of Ophthalmology, Semmelweis University Budapest, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(51)Center for Ophthalmology, University Eye Hospital, University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(52)Center for Rare Eye Diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Achromatopsia (ACHM) is a congenital cone photoreceptor disorder characterized 
by impaired color discrimination, low visual acuity, photosensitivity, and 
nystagmus. To date, six genes have been associated with ACHM (CNGA3, CNGB3, 
GNAT2, PDE6C, PDE6H, and ATF6), the majority of these being implicated in the 
cone phototransduction cascade. CNGA3 encodes the CNGA3 subunit of the cyclic 
nucleotide-gated ion channel in cone photoreceptors and is one of the major 
disease-associated genes for ACHM. Herein, we provide a comprehensive overview 
of the CNGA3 variant spectrum in a cohort of 1060 genetically confirmed ACHM 
patients, 385 (36.3%) of these carrying "likely disease-causing" variants in 
CNGA3. Compiling our own genetic data with those reported in the literature and 
in public databases, we further extend the CNGA3 variant spectrum to a total of 
316 variants, 244 of which we interpreted as "likely disease-causing" according 
to ACMG/AMP criteria. We report 48 novel "likely disease-causing" variants, 24 
of which are missense substitutions underlining the predominant role of this 
mutation class in the CNGA3 variant spectrum. In addition, we provide extensive 
in silico analyses and summarize reported functional data of previously analyzed 
missense, nonsense and splicing variants to further advance the pathogenicity 
assessment of the identified variants.

© 2022 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24371
PMID: 35332618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]