---
reference_id: PMID:26716893
title: "Sclerostin Antibody Treatment Improves the Bone Phenotype of Crtap(-/-) Mice, a Model of Recessive Osteogenesis Imperfecta."
authors:
- Grafe I
- Alexander S
- Yang T
- Lietman C
- Homan EP
- Munivez E
- Chen Y
- Jiang MM
- Bertin T
- Dawson B
- Asuncion F
- Ke HZ
- Ominsky MS
- Lee B
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2776
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Animals
- Antibodies/pharmacology
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Glycoproteins/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Molecular Chaperones
- Osteoclasts/metabolism
- "Osteogenesis/drug effects, genetics"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sclerostin Antibody Treatment Improves the Bone Phenotype of Crtap(-/-) Mice, a Model of Recessive Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
**Authors:** Grafe I, Alexander S, Yang T, Lietman C, Homan EP, Munivez E, Chen Y, Jiang MM, Bertin T, Dawson B, Asuncion F, Ke HZ, Ominsky MS, Lee B
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.2776](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2776)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 May;31(5):1030-40. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2776. Epub 2016
Feb  12.

Sclerostin Antibody Treatment Improves the Bone Phenotype of Crtap(-/-) Mice, a 
Model of Recessive Osteogenesis Imperfecta.

Grafe I(1), Alexander S(1), Yang T(1), Lietman C(1), Homan EP(1), Munivez E(1), 
Chen Y(1), Jiang MM(1), Bertin T(1), Dawson B(1), Asuncion F(2), Ke HZ(3), 
Ominsky MS(2), Lee B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Metabolic Disorders, Amgen, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA, USA.
(3)UCB Pharma, Slough, UK.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is characterized by low bone mass, poor bone 
quality, and fractures. Standard treatment for OI patients is limited to 
bisphosphonates, which only incompletely correct the bone phenotype, and seem to 
be less effective in adults. Sclerostin-neutralizing antibodies (Scl-Ab) have 
been shown to be beneficial in animal models of osteoporosis, and dominant OI 
resulting from mutations in the genes encoding type I collagen. However, Scl-Ab 
treatment has not been studied in models of recessive OI. Cartilage-associated 
protein (CRTAP) is involved in posttranslational type I collagen modification, 
and its loss of function results in recessive OI. In this study, we treated 
1-week-old and 6-week-old Crtap(-/-) mice with Scl-Ab for 6 weeks (25 mg/kg, 
s.c., twice per week), to determine the effects on the bone phenotype in models 
of "pediatric" and "young adult" recessive OI. Vehicle-treated Crtap(-/-) and 
wild-type (WT) mice served as controls. Compared with control Crtap(-/-) mice, 
micro-computed tomography (μCT) analyses showed significant increases in bone 
volume and improved trabecular microarchitecture in Scl-Ab-treated Crtap(-/-) 
mice in both age cohorts, in both vertebrae and femurs. Additionally, Scl-Ab 
improved femoral cortical parameters in both age cohorts. Biomechanical testing 
showed that Scl-Ab improved parameters of whole-bone strength in Crtap(-/-) 
mice, with more robust effects in the week 6 to 12 cohort, but did not affect 
the increased bone brittleness. Additionally, Scl-Ab normalized the increased 
osteoclast numbers, stimulated bone formation rate (week 6 to 12 cohort only), 
but did not affect osteocyte density. Overall, our findings suggest that Scl-Ab 
treatment may be beneficial in the treatment of recessive OI caused by defects 
in collagen posttranslational modification. © 2015 American Society for Bone and 
Mineral Research.

© 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2776
PMCID: PMC4862916
PMID: 26716893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]