---
reference_id: "PMID:33405951"
title: "Outcomes by Clinical and Molecular Features in Children With Medulloblastoma Treated With Risk-Adapted Therapy: Results of an International Phase III Trial (SJMB03)."
authors:
- Gajjar A
- Robinson GW
- Smith KS
- Lin T
- Merchant TE
- Chintagumpala M
- Mahajan A
- Su J
- Bouffet E
- Bartels U
- Schechter T
- Hassall T
- Robertson T
- Nicholls W
- Gururangan S
- Schroeder K
- Sullivan M
- Wheeler G
- Hansford JR
- Kellie SJ
- McCowage G
- Cohn R
- Fisher MJ
- Krasin MJ
- Stewart CF
- Broniscer A
- Buchhalter I
- Tatevossian RG
- Orr BA
- Neale G
- Klimo P Jr
- Boop F
- Srinivasan A
- Pfister SM
- Gilbertson RJ
- Onar-Thomas A
- Ellison DW
- Northcott PA
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.20.01372
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Cerebellar Neoplasms/genetics, mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Methylation
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Epigenome
- Epigenomics
- Female
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Medulloblastoma/genetics, mortality, secondary, therapy"
- Mutation
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Progression-Free Survival
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes by Clinical and Molecular Features in Children With Medulloblastoma Treated With Risk-Adapted Therapy: Results of an International Phase III Trial (SJMB03).
**Authors:** Gajjar A, Robinson GW, Smith KS, Lin T, Merchant TE, Chintagumpala M, Mahajan A, Su J, Bouffet E, Bartels U, Schechter T, Hassall T, Robertson T, Nicholls W, Gururangan S, Schroeder K, Sullivan M, Wheeler G, Hansford JR, Kellie SJ, McCowage G, Cohn R, Fisher MJ, Krasin MJ, Stewart CF, Broniscer A, Buchhalter I, Tatevossian RG, Orr BA, Neale G, Klimo P Jr, Boop F, Srinivasan A, Pfister SM, Gilbertson RJ, Onar-Thomas A, Ellison DW, Northcott PA
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.20.01372](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.20.01372)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2021 Mar 1;39(7):822-835. doi: 10.1200/JCO.20.01372. Epub 2021
Jan  6.

Outcomes by Clinical and Molecular Features in Children With Medulloblastoma 
Treated With Risk-Adapted Therapy: Results of an International Phase III Trial 
(SJMB03).

Gajjar A(1), Robinson GW(1), Smith KS(2), Lin T(3), Merchant TE(4), 
Chintagumpala M(5), Mahajan A(6), Su J(5), Bouffet E(7), Bartels U(7), Schechter 
T(7), Hassall T(8), Robertson T(9), Nicholls W(8), Gururangan S(10), Schroeder 
K(11), Sullivan M(12), Wheeler G(13), Hansford JR(12), Kellie SJ(14), McCowage 
G(14), Cohn R(15), Fisher MJ(16), Krasin MJ(4), Stewart CF(17), Broniscer A(18), 
Buchhalter I(19), Tatevossian RG(20), Orr BA(20), Neale G(21), Klimo P Jr(22), 
Boop F(22), Srinivasan A(23), Pfister SM(24), Gilbertson RJ(25), Onar-Thomas 
A(4), Ellison DW(2), Northcott PA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuro Oncology, Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's 
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.
(2)Division of Brain Tumor Research, Department of Developmental Neurobiology, 
St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
TN.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN.
(5)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON.
(8)Oncology Department, Queensland Children's Hospital and University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(9)Department of Pathology, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(10)Preston A. Wells Center for Brain Tumor Therapy and the Departments of 
Neurosurgery and Pediatrics, UF Health Shands Hospital, Gainesville, FL.
(11)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University, 
Durham, NC.
(12)Children's Cancer Center, Royal Children's Hospital, Murdoch Children's 
Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(13)Peter MacCallum Cancer Center, Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, 
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(14)The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney and Division of Child and 
Adolescent Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(15)Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children's Hospital, High Street, Randwick and 
School of Women's and Children's Health, UNSW, Sydney, Australia.
(16)Division of Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(17)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN.
(18)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, UPMC Children's 
Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(19)Omics IT and Data Management Core Facility (W610), German Cancer Research 
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(20)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.
(21)Hartwell Center, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.
(22)Department of Neurosurgery, College of Medicine, University of Tennessee, 
Memphis, TN.
(23)Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, St Jude 
Children's Hospital, Memphis TN.
(24)Hopp Children's Cancer Center (KiTZ), Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, 
German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(25)Department of Oncology, Cambridge Cancer Center, CRUK Cambridge Institute, 
Li Ka Shing Center, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2021 Mar;18(3):131. doi: 10.1038/s41571-021-00478-0.

PURPOSE: SJMB03 (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00085202) was a phase III 
risk-adapted trial that aimed to determine the frequency and clinical 
significance of biological variants and genetic alterations in medulloblastoma.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients 3-21 years old were stratified into average-risk 
and high-risk treatment groups based on metastatic status and extent of 
resection. Medulloblastomas were molecularly classified into subgroups (Wingless 
[WNT], Sonic Hedgehog [SHH], group 3, and group 4) and subtypes based on DNA 
methylation profiles and overlaid with gene mutations from next-generation 
sequencing. Coprimary study end points were (1) to assess the relationship 
between ERBB2 protein expression in tumors and progression-free survival (PFS), 
and (2) to estimate the frequency of mutations associated with WNT and SHH 
tumors. Clinical and molecular risk factors were evaluated, and the most robust 
were used to model new risk-classification categories.
RESULTS: Three hundred thirty eligible patients with medulloblastoma were 
enrolled. Five-year PFS was 83.2% (95% CI, 78.4 to 88.2) for average-risk 
patients (n = 227) and 58.7% (95% CI, 49.8 to 69.1) for high-risk patients (n = 
103). No association was found between ERBB2 status and PFS in the overall 
cohort (P = .74) or when patients were stratified by clinical risk (P = .71). 
Mutations in CTNNB1 (96%), DDX3X (37%), and SMARCA4 (24%) were most common in 
WNT tumors and PTCH1 (38%), TP53 (21%), and DDX3X (19%) in SHH tumors. Methylome 
profiling classified 53 WNT (17.4%), 48 SHH (15.7%), 65 group 3 (21.3%), and 139 
group 4 (45.6%) tumors. A comprehensive clinicomolecular risk factor analysis 
identified three low-risk groups (WNT, low-risk SHH, and low-risk combined 
groups 3 and 4) with excellent (5-year PFS > 90%) and two very high-risk groups 
(high-risk SHH and high-risk combined groups 3 and 4) with poor survival (5-year 
PFS < 60%).
CONCLUSION: These results establish a new risk stratification for future 
medulloblastoma trials.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.20.01372
PMCID: PMC10166353
PMID: 33405951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: OUTCOMES BY CLINICAL AND MOLECULAR FEATURES IN 
CHILDREN WITH MEDULLOBLASTOMA TREATED WITH RISK-ADAPTED THERAPY: RESULTS OF AN 
INTERNATIONAL PHASE III TRIAL (SJMB03): The following represents disclosure 
information provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are 
considered compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held 
unless noted. I = Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships 
may not relate to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information 
about ASCO’s conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
ascopubs.org/jco/authors/author-center. Open Payments is a public database 
containing information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed 
physicians (Open Payments). AMAR GAJJAR: Consulting or Advisory Role: 
Roche/Genentech Research Funding: Genentech, Kazia Pharmaceutical, QED 
Therapeutics Inc GILES W. ROBINSON: Consulting or Advisory Role: Lilly, 
Roche/Genentech Research Funding: Novartis, Genentech/Roche, Genentech/Roche 
THOMAS E. MERCHANT: Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Philips Healthcare ERIC 
BOUFFET: Consulting or Advisory Role: Novartis Research Funding: Roche, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb JORDAN R. HANSFORD: Consulting or Advisory Role: Bayer 
GEOFFREY MCCOWAGE: Consulting or Advisory Role: Biogen Research Funding: 
Novartis, Merck Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: BIOGEN MICHAEL J. FISHER: 
Honoraria: AstraZeneca Research Funding: AstraZeneca, Array BioPharma, Exelixis 
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: AstraZeneca, SpringWorks ALBERTO BRONISCER: 
Consulting or Advisory Role: QED Therapeutics, Inc FREDERICK BOOP: Employment: 
Semmes Murphey Clinic STEFAN M. PFISTER: Research Funding: Lilly, Bayer, Roche, 
PharmaMar, Pfizer Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: patent on 
utilizing DNA methylation profiling for tumor classification RICHARD J. 
GILBERTSON: Research Funding: AstraZeneca/MedImmune Patents, Royalties, Other 
Intellectual Property: Patent together with AstraZeneca/MedImmune and the 
University of Cambridge for the C11orf95-RELA diagnostic antibody ARZU 
ONAR-THOMAS: Consulting or Advisory Role: Roche Research Funding: Novartis, 
Apexigen, Pfizer, Celgene, Merck, Novocure Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: 
Roche DAVID W. ELLISON: Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Sole 
inventor of U.S. Patent No. 9,005,907 issued April 14, 2015 “Methods and 
Compositions for Typing Molecular Subgroups of Medulloblastoma”, 62627291/S88435 
1190US.P1 February 2018 “Epigenetic Histone Regulation Mediated by CXorf67” 
published August 2019 as WO 2019/155387 No other potential conflicts of interest 
were reported.