---
reference_id: "PMID:10678170"
title: "The murine SCP3 gene is required for synaptonemal complex assembly, chromosome synapsis, and male fertility."
authors:
- Yuan L
- Liu JG
- Zhao J
- Brundell E
- Daneholt B
- Höög C
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80404-9
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Chromosomes/genetics, physiology"
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Genomic Library
- "Infertility, Male/genetics"
- Male
- Meiosis
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nuclear Proteins/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Spermatocytes/pathology
- Spermatogenesis/genetics
- "Spermatozoa/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Synaptonemal Complex/genetics, physiology"
- Testis/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The murine SCP3 gene is required for synaptonemal complex assembly, chromosome synapsis, and male fertility.
**Authors:** Yuan L, Liu JG, Zhao J, Brundell E, Daneholt B, Höög C
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80404-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80404-9)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2000 Jan;5(1):73-83. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80404-9.

The murine SCP3 gene is required for synaptonemal complex assembly, chromosome 
synapsis, and male fertility.

Yuan L(1), Liu JG, Zhao J, Brundell E, Daneholt B, Höög C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

During meiosis, the homologous chromosomes pair and recombine. An evolutionarily 
conserved protein structure, the synaptonemal complex (SC), is located along the 
paired meiotic chromosomes. We have studied the function of a structural 
component in the axial/lateral element of the SC, the synaptonemal complex 
protein 3 (SCP3). A null mutation in the SCP3 gene was generated, and we noted 
that homozygous mutant males were sterile due to massive apoptotic cell death 
during meiotic prophase. The SCP3-deficient male mice failed to form 
axial/lateral elements and SCs, and the chromosomes in the mutant spermatocytes 
did not synapse. While the absence of SCP3 affected the nuclear distribution of 
DNA repair and recombination proteins (Rad51 and RPA), as well as synaptonemal 
complex protein 1 (SCP1), a residual chromatin organization remained in the 
mutant meiotic cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80404-9
PMID: 10678170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]