---
reference_id: "PMID:37068931"
title: Disability accrual in primary and secondary progressive multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Harding-Forrester S
- Roos I
- Nguyen AL
- Malpas CB
- Diouf I
- Moradi N
- Sharmin S
- Izquierdo G
- Eichau S
- Patti F
- Horakova D
- Kubala Havrdova E
- Prat A
- Girard M
- Duquette P
- Grand'Maison F
- Onofrj M
- Lugaresi A
- Grammond P
- Ozakbas S
- Amato MP
- Gerlach O
- Sola P
- Ferraro D
- Buzzard K
- Skibina O
- Lechner-Scott J
- Alroughani R
- Boz C
- Van Pesch V
- Cartechini E
- Terzi M
- Maimone D
- Ramo-Tello C
- Yamout B
- Khoury SJ
- La Spitaleri D
- Sa MJ
- Blanco Y
- Granella F
- Slee M
- Butler E
- Sidhom Y
- Gouider R
- Bergamaschi R
- Karabudak R
- Ampapa R
- Sánchez-Menoyo JL
- Prevost J
- Castillo-Trivino T
- McCombe PA
- Macdonell R
- Laureys G
- Van Hijfte L
- Oh J
- Altintas A
- de Gans K
- Turkoglu R
- van der Walt A
- Butzkueven H
- Vucic S
- Barnett M
- Cristiano E
- Hodgkinson S
- Iuliano G
- Kappos L
- Kuhle J
- Shaygannejad V
- Soysal A
- Weinstock-Guttman B
- Van Wijmeersch B
- Kalincik T
- MSBase investigators
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2022-330726
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disability accrual in primary and secondary progressive multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Harding-Forrester S, Roos I, Nguyen AL, Malpas CB, Diouf I, Moradi N, Sharmin S, Izquierdo G, Eichau S, Patti F, Horakova D, Kubala Havrdova E, Prat A, Girard M, Duquette P, Grand'Maison F, Onofrj M, Lugaresi A, Grammond P, Ozakbas S, Amato MP, Gerlach O, Sola P, Ferraro D, Buzzard K, Skibina O, Lechner-Scott J, Alroughani R, Boz C, Van Pesch V, Cartechini E, Terzi M, Maimone D, Ramo-Tello C, Yamout B, Khoury SJ, La Spitaleri D, Sa MJ, Blanco Y, Granella F, Slee M, Butler E, Sidhom Y, Gouider R, Bergamaschi R, Karabudak R, Ampapa R, Sánchez-Menoyo JL, Prevost J, Castillo-Trivino T, McCombe PA, Macdonell R, Laureys G, Van Hijfte L, Oh J, Altintas A, de Gans K, Turkoglu R, van der Walt A, Butzkueven H, Vucic S, Barnett M, Cristiano E, Hodgkinson S, Iuliano G, Kappos L, Kuhle J, Shaygannejad V, Soysal A, Weinstock-Guttman B, Van Wijmeersch B, Kalincik T, MSBase investigators
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2022-330726](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2022-330726)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2023 Sep;94(9):707-717. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2022-330726. Epub 2023 Apr 17.

Disability accrual in primary and secondary progressive multiple sclerosis.

Harding-Forrester S(1), Roos I(1)(2), Nguyen AL(1)(2), Malpas CB(1)(2), Diouf 
I(1)(2), Moradi N(1)(2), Sharmin S(1)(2), Izquierdo G(3), Eichau S(3), Patti 
F(4), Horakova D(5), Kubala Havrdova E(5), Prat A(6)(7), Girard M(6)(8), 
Duquette P(6)(8), Grand'Maison F(9), Onofrj M(10), Lugaresi A(11)(12), Grammond 
P(13), Ozakbas S(14), Amato MP(15)(16), Gerlach O(17), Sola P(18), Ferraro 
D(19)(20), Buzzard K(21), Skibina O(21), Lechner-Scott J(22)(23), Alroughani 
R(24), Boz C(25), Van Pesch V(26), Cartechini E(27), Terzi M(28), Maimone D(29), 
Ramo-Tello C(30), Yamout B(31)(32), Khoury SJ(31)(33), La Spitaleri D(34), Sa 
MJ(35)(36), Blanco Y(37), Granella F(38), Slee M(39), Butler E(40), Sidhom 
Y(41), Gouider R(42), Bergamaschi R(43), Karabudak R(44), Ampapa R(45), 
Sánchez-Menoyo JL(46), Prevost J(47), Castillo-Trivino T(48), McCombe PA(49), 
Macdonell R(50), Laureys G(51), Van Hijfte L(51), Oh J(52), Altintas A(53)(54), 
de Gans K(55), Turkoglu R(56), van der Walt A(57), Butzkueven H(58)(59), Vucic 
S(60), Barnett M(61), Cristiano E(62), Hodgkinson S(63), Iuliano G(64), Kappos 
L(65)(66), Kuhle J(65)(66), Shaygannejad V(67), Soysal A(68), Weinstock-Guttman 
B(69), Van Wijmeersch B(70)(71), Kalincik T(72)(2); MSBase investigators.

Author information:
(1)CORe, Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(2)Neuroimmunology Centre, Department of Neurology, The Royal Melbourne 
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Multiple Sclerosis Unit, Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, 
Andalucía, Spain.
(4)Neuroscience, Department of Surgical and Medical Sciences and Advanced 
Technologies 'G.F. Ingrassia', University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(5)Department of Neurology and Centre of Clinical Neuroscience, Charles 
University First Faculty of Medicine, Praha, Czech Republic.
(6)Centre Hospitalier, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(8)Faculté de Médecine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(9)Neuro Rive-Sud, Longueuil, Quebec, Canada.
(10)Department of Neurosciences, Imaging and Clinical Sciences, Gabriele 
d'Annunzio University of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
(11)UOSI Riabilitazione Sclerosi Multipla, IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze 
Neurologiche di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(12)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Neuromotorie, Università di Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.
(13)Centre intégré de santé et de services sociaux de Chaudière-Appalaches du 
Québec Centre de Recherche, Levis, Québec, Canada.
(14)Department of Neurology, Dokuz Eylul University, İzmir, Turkey.
(15)Department of Neurological Siences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(16)IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi, Florence, Italy.
(17)Department of Neurology, Zuyderland Medical Centre, Sittard-Geleen, The 
Netherlands.
(18)Neurology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria of Modena, Modena, Italy.
(19)Department of Neuroscience, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Modena, 
Modena, Emilia-Romagna, Italy.
(20)Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University of 
Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(21)Department of Neurology, Box Hill Hospital, Box Hill, Victoria, Australia.
(22)School of Medicine and Public Health, The University of Newcastle, 
Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia.
(23)Department of Neurology, John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(24)Department of Medicine, Al-Amiri Hospital, Kuwait City, Kuwait.
(25)Department of Neurology, Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey.
(26)Department of Neurology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(27)UOC Neurologia, Azienda Sanitaria Unica Regionale Marche-AV3, Macerata, 
Italy.
(28)Ondokuz Mayis Üniversitesi, Samsun, Turkey.
(29)UO Neurologia, Ospedale Garibaldi, Catania, Italy.
(30)Department of Neurosciences, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(31)Nehme and Therese Tohme Multiple Sclerosis Center, American University of 
Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon.
(32)Department of Neurology, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(33)American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(34)UOC Neurologia e Stroke, AORN San Giuseppe Moscati, Avellino, Italy.
(35)Department of Neurology, Centro Hospitalar de São João, Porto, Portugal.
(36)Health Sciences Faculty, Fernando Pessoa University, Porto, Portugal.
(37)Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalunya, Spain.
(38)Multiple Sclerosis Centre, Neurosciences, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(39)Department of Neurology, Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia.
(40)Department of Neurology, Monash Medical Centre Clayton, Clayton, Victoria, 
Australia.
(41)Department of Neurology, Hopital Razi, La Manouba, Tunisia.
(42)Department of Neurology, Razi Hospital, Rasht, Gilan, Iran.
(43)Multiple Sclerosis Centre, Neurological Institute C.Mondino, Pavia, Italy.
(44)Department of Neurology, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(45)Department of Neurology, Nemocnice Jihlava, Jihlava, Czech Republic.
(46)Department of Neurology, Hospital Galdakao-Usansolo, Galdacano, País Vasco, 
Spain.
(47)Centre integre de sante et de services sociaux des Laurentides point de 
service de Saint-Jerome, Saint-Jerome, Quebec, Canada.
(48)Department of Neurology, Donostia University Hospital, San Sebastian, Spain.
(49)UQCCR, The University of Queensland, Saint Lucia, Queensland, Australia.
(50)Department of Neurology, Austin Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia.
(51)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Ghent, Gent, Oost-Vlaanderen, 
Belgium.
(52)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, St Michael's Hospital, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(53)Department of Neurology, Koc Universitesi, Istanbul, Turkey.
(54)Koç University Research Center for Translational Medicine (KUTTAM), Koç 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(55)Department of Neurology, Groene Hart Ziekenhuis, Gouda, Zuid-Holland, The 
Netherlands.
(56)Department of Neurology, Haydarpasa Numune Training and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(57)Multiple Sclerosis and Neuroimmunology Unit, Monash University Central 
Clinical School, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(58)Department of Neuroscience, Monash University Central Clinical School, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(59)Department of Neurology, The Alfred, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(60)Department of Neurology, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(61)Brain and Mind Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(62)Centro de Esclerosis Múltiple de Buenos Aires, Hospital Italiano de Buenos 
Aires, Buenos Aires, Federal District, Argentina.
(63)Department of Neurology, Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(64)Ospedali Riuniti di Salerno, Salerno, Italy.
(65)Neurologic Clinic and Policlinic, Departments of Medicine, Biomedicine, and 
Clinical Research, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(66)Research Centre for Clinical Neuroimmunology and Neuroscience, University 
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(67)Department of Neurology, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, 
Iran.
(68)Department of Neurology, Bakirkoy Research and Training Hospital for 
Psychiatry, Neurology and Neurosurgery, Istanbul, Turkey.
(69)Department of Neurology, University at Buffalo Jacobs School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(70)Universitair MS Centrum, Hasselt University, Hasselt-Pelt, Belgium.
(71)Rehabilitation & MS Centre, Pelt, Belgium.
(72)CORe, Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia tomas.kalincik@unimelb.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Some studies comparing primary and secondary progressive multiple 
sclerosis (PPMS, SPMS) report similar ages at onset of the progressive phase and 
similar rates of subsequent disability accrual. Others report later onset and/or 
faster accrual in SPMS. Comparisons have been complicated by regional cohort 
effects, phenotypic differences in sex ratio and management and variable 
diagnostic criteria for SPMS.
METHODS: We compared disability accrual in PPMS and operationally diagnosed SPMS 
in the international, clinic-based MSBase cohort. Inclusion required PPMS or 
SPMS with onset at age ≥18 years since 1995. We estimated Andersen-Gill hazard 
ratios for disability accrual on the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS), 
adjusted for sex, age, baseline disability, EDSS score frequency and drug 
therapies, with centre and patient as random effects. We also estimated ages at 
onset of the progressive phase (Kaplan-Meier) and at EDSS milestones (Turnbull). 
Analyses were replicated with physician-diagnosed SPMS.
RESULTS: Included patients comprised 1872 with PPMS (47% men; 50% with activity) 
and 2575 with SPMS (32% men; 40% with activity). Relative to PPMS, SPMS had 
older age at onset of the progressive phase (median 46.7 years (95% CI 
46.2-47.3) vs 43.9 (43.3-44.4); p<0.001), greater baseline disability, slower 
disability accrual (HR 0.86 (0.78-0.94); p<0.001) and similar age at wheelchair 
dependence.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate later onset of the progressive phase and slower 
disability accrual in SPMS versus PPMS. This may balance greater baseline 
disability in SPMS, yielding convergent disability trajectories across 
phenotypes. The different rates of disability accrual should be considered 
before amalgamating PPMS and SPMS in clinical trials.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2022-330726
PMID: 37068931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: IR served on scientific 
advisory boards for Novartis and Merck, and received conference travel support 
and/or speaker honoraria from Roche, Novartis, Biogen, Teva, Sanofi Genzyme, and 
Merck. A-LN received grants from MS Research Australia; grants, personal fees, 
and nonfinancial support from Biogen; grants and personal fees from Merck 
Serono; personal fees from Teva and Novartis; and nonfinancial support from 
Roche and Sanofi Genzyme. GI received speaking honoraria from Biogen, Novartis, 
Sanofi, Merck, Roche, Almirall, and Teva. SE received speaker honoraria and 
consultant fees from Biogen Idec, Novartis, Merck, Bayer, Sanofi Genzyme, Roche, 
and Teva. FP received speaker honoraria and advisory board fees from Almirall, 
Bayer, Biogen, Celgene, Merck, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, and Teva, and 
research funding from Biogen, Merck, FISM (Fondazione Italiana Sclerosi 
Multipla), Reload Onlus Association, and the University of Catania. DH received 
speaker honoraria and consulting fees from Biogen, Merck, Teva, Roche, Sanofi 
Genzyme, and Novartis, and support for research activities from Biogen and the 
Czech Ministry of Education (project PROGRES Q27/LF1). EVH received honoraria or 
research support from Biogen, Merck Serono, Novartis, Roche, and Teva; has been 
a member of advisory boards for Actelion, Biogen, Celgene, Merck Serono, 
Novartis, and Sanofi Genzyme; and received research support from the Czech 
Ministry of Education (project PROGRES Q27/LF1). MG received consulting fees 
from Teva Canada Innovation, Biogen, Novartis, and Sanofi Genzyme; lecture 
payments from Teva Canada Innovation, Novartis, and EMD; and research support 
from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. PD served on editorial boards 
for, and has been supported to attend meetings by, EMD, Biogen, Novartis, 
Genzyme, and Teva Neuroscience; he holds grants from the Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research and the MS Society of Canada, and received funding for 
investigator-initiated trials from Biogen, Novartis, and Genzyme. FG’M received 
honoraria or research funding from Biogen, Genzyme, Novartis, Teva 
Neurosciences, Mitsubishi, and ONO Pharmaceuticals. AL received personal 
compensation for consulting, serving on a scientific advisory board, speaking, 
or other activities from Biogen, Merck Serono, Mylan, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi 
Genzyme, and Teva; her institutions have received research grants from Novartis 
(in the past 4 years). PG served on advisory boards for Novartis, EMD Serono, 
Roche, Biogen Idec, Sanofi Genzyme, and Pendopharm; received grant support from 
Genzyme and Roche; and received research grants for his institution from Biogen 
Idec, Sanofi Genzyme, and EMD Serono. MPA received honoraria as a consultant on 
scientific advisory boards for Biogen, Bayer Schering, Merck, Teva, and 
Sanofi-Aventis, and received research grants by Biogen, Bayer Schering, Merck, 
Teva, and Novartis. PS served on scientific advisory boards for Biogen Idec and 
Teva; received funding for travel and speaker honoraria from Biogen Idec, Merck, 
Teva, Sanofi Genzyme, Novartis, and Bayer; and received research grants for her 
institution from Bayer, Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Sanofi, and Teva. DF received 
travel grants and/or speaker honoraria from Merck, Teva, Novartis, Biogen, and 
Sanofi Genzyme. KB received honoraria and consulting fees from Biogen, Teva, 
Novartis, Sanofi Genzyme, Roche, Merck, CSL, and Grifols. JL-S received travel 
compensation from Novartis, Biogen, Roche, and Merck; her institution received 
honoraria for talks and advisory board commitments, as well as research grants 
from Biogen, Merck, Roche, Teva, and Novartis. RA received honoraria as a 
speaker and for serving on scientific advisory boards from Bayer, Biogen, GSK, 
Merck, Novartis, Roche, and Sanofi Genzyme. CB received conference travel 
support from Biogen, Novartis, Bayer Schering, Merck, and Teva, and participated 
in clinical trials by Sanofi-Aventis, Roche, and Novartis. VVP received travel 
grants from Merck, Biogen, Sanofi, Celgene, Almirall, and Roche; his institution 
received research grants and consultancy fees from Roche, Biogen, Sanofi, 
Celgene, Merck, and Novartis Pharma. MT received travel grants from Novartis, 
Bayer Schering, Merck, and Teva, and participated in clinical trials by 
Sanofi-Aventis, Roche, and Novartis. DM received speaker honoraria for advisory 
board service and travel grants from Almirall, Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Roche, 
Sanofi Genzyme, and Teva. CR-T received research funding, compensation for 
travel, or speaker honoraria from Biogen, Novartis, Genzyme, and Almirall. DLS 
received honoraria as a consultant on scientific advisory boards from Bayer 
Schering, Novartis, and Sanofi-Aventis, and compensation for travel from 
Novartis, Biogen, Sanofi-Aventis, Teva, and Merck. FG received an institutional 
research grant from Biogen and Sanofi Genzyme; served on scientific advisory 
boards for Biogen, Novartis, Merck, Sanofi Genzyme, and Roche; and received 
funding for travel and speaker honoraria from Biogen, Merck, and Sanofi-Aventis. 
MS participated in, but did not receive honoraria for, advisory board activity 
for Biogen, Merck, Bayer Schering, Sanofi-Aventis, and Novartis. RB received 
speaker honoraria from Bayer Schering, Biogen, Genzyme, Merck, Novartis, 
Sanofi-Aventis, and Teva; research grants from Bayer Schering, Biogen, Merck, 
Novartis, Sanofi-Aventis, and Teva; and congress, travel, and accommodation 
expense compensations from Almirall, Bayer Schering, Biogen, Genzyme, Merck, 
Novartis, Sanofi-Aventis, and Teva. RA received conference travel support from 
Novartis, Teva, Biogen, Bayer, and Merck, and participated in clinical trials by 
Biogen, Novartis, Teva, and Actelion. JLS-M received travel compensation from 
Novartis and Biogen; received speaking honoraria from Biogen, Novartis, Sanofi, 
Merck, Almirall, Bayer, and Teva; and participated in a clinical trial by 
Biogen. JP received travel compensation from Novartis, Biogen, Genzyme, and 
Teva, and speaking honoraria from Biogen, Novartis, Genzyme and Teva. TC-T 
received speaking or consulting fees and/or travel funding from Bayer, Biogen, 
Merck, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, and Teva. GL received travel and/or 
consultancy compensation from Sanofi Genzyme, Roche, Teva, Merck, Novartis, 
Celgene, and Biogen. JO received research funding from the MS Society of Canada, 
the National MS Society, Brain Canada, Biogen Idec, Roche, and EMD Serono, and 
personal compensation for consulting or speaking from EMD Serono, Sanofi 
Genzyme, Biogen Idec, Roche, Celgene, and Novartis. AA received personal fees 
and speaker honoraria from Teva, Merck, Biogen Gen Pharma, Roche, Novartis, 
Bayer, and Sanofi Genzyme, and received travel and registration grants from 
Merck, Biogen Gen Pharma, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, and Bayer. HB received 
compensation for consulting, talks, and advisory or steering board activities 
from Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Genzyme, Alfred Health, and Oxford Health Policy 
Forum, and research support from Novartis, Biogen, Roche, Merck, the National 
Health and Medical Research Council of Australia, Pennycook Foundation, and MS 
Research Australia MB served on scientific advisory boards for Biogen, Novartis, 
and Genzyme, received conference travel support from Biogen and Novartis, and 
serves on steering committees for trials conducted by Novartis; his institution 
received research support from Biogen, Merck, and Novartis. EC Cristiano 
received honoraria as a consultant on scientific advisory boards for Biogen, 
Bayer Schering, Merck, Genzyme, and Novartis, and participated in clinical 
trials or other research projects by Merck, Roche, and Novartis. SH received 
honoraria and consulting fees from Novartis, Bayer Schering, and Sanofi, and 
travel grants from Novartis, Biogen Idec, and Bayer Schering. GI received 
compensation for travel, accommodations, and meeting expenses from Bayer 
Schering, Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Sanofi-Aventis, and Teva. LK received 
research support from Acorda, Actelion, Allozyne, BaroFold, Bayer HealthCare, 
Bayer Schering, Bayhill Therapeutics, Biogen, Elan, European Union, Genmab, 
Gianni Rubatto Foundation, GlaxoSmithKline, Glenmark, MediciNova, Merck, 
Novartis, Novartis Research Foundation, Roche, Roche Research Foundation, 
Sanofi-Aventis, Santhera, the Swiss MS Society, the Swiss National Research 
Foundation, Teva Neuroscience, UCB, and Wyeth. BW-G participated in speakers' 
bureaus and/or served as a consultant for Biogen, EMD Serono, Novartis, 
Genentech, Celgene/Bristol Meyers Squibb, Sanofi Genzyme, Bayer, Janssen, and 
Horizon; received grant/research support from these same agencies; and serves on 
editorial boards for BMJ Neurology, Children, CNS Drugs, MS International, and 
Frontiers Epidemiology. BVW received research and travel grants and honoraria 
for advisory and speaking fees from Bayer Schering, Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, 
Merck, Novartis, Roche, and Teva. TK served on scientific advisory boards for 
BMS, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, Novartis, Merck, and Biogen, and the steering 
committee for the Brain Atrophy Initiative by Sanofi Genzyme; received 
conference travel support and/or speaker honoraria from WebMD Global, Novartis, 
Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, Teva, BioCSL, and Merck; and received support for 
research or educational events from Biogen, Novartis, Genzyme, Roche, Celgene, 
and Merck.