---
reference_id: "PMID:27417235"
title: A 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficient human skin fibroblast transcriptome reveals underlying mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress.
authors:
- Zandberg L
- van Dyk HC
- van der Westhuizen FH
- van Dijk AA
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.07.010
keywords:
- "Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Mitochondria/pathology
- Oxidative Stress
- Protein Interaction Maps
- Skin/cytology
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficient human skin fibroblast transcriptome reveals underlying mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress.
**Authors:** Zandberg L, van Dyk HC, van der Westhuizen FH, van Dijk AA
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2016.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2016.07.010)

## Content

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2016 Sep;78:116-129. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2016.07.010.  Epub 2016 Jul 12.

A 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficient human skin fibroblast transcriptome
reveals underlying mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress.

Zandberg L(1), van Dyk HC(1), van der Westhuizen FH(1), van Dijk AA(2).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Division, Centre for Human Metabolomics, North-West University,
Private Bag X6001, Potchefstroom, 2520, South Africa.
(2)Biochemistry Division, Centre for Human Metabolomics, North-West University,
Private Bag X6001, Potchefstroom, 2520, South Africa. Electronic address:
albie.vandijk@nwu.ac.za.

Isolated 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCC) deficiency is an autosomal
recessive inherited metabolic disease of leucine catabolism with a highly
variable phenotype. Apart from extensive mutation analyses of the MCCC1 and
MCCC2 genes encoding 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.4), molecular
data on MCC deficiency gene expression studies in human tissues is lacking. For
IEMs, unbiased '-omics' approaches are starting to reveal the secondary cellular
responses to defects in biochemical pathways. Here we present the first whole
genome expression profile of immortalized cultured skin fibroblast cells of two
clinically affected MCC deficient patients and two healthy individuals generated
using Affymetrix(®)HuExST1.0 arrays. There were 16191 significantly
differentially expressed transcript IDs of which 3591 were well annotated and
present in the predefined knowledge database of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
software used for downstream functional analyses. The most noticeable feature of
this MCCA deficient skin fibroblast transcriptome was the typical genetic
hallmark of mitochondrial dysfunction, decreased antioxidant response and
disruption of energy homeostasis, which was confirmed by mitochondrial
functional analyses. The MCC deficient transcriptome seems to predict oxidative
stress that could alter the complex secondary cellular response that involve
genes of the glycolysis, the TCA cycle, OXPHOS, gluconeogenesis, β-oxidation and
the branched-chain fatty acid metabolism. An important emerging insight from
this human MCCA transcriptome in combination with previous reports is that
chronic exposure to the primary and secondary metabolites of MCC deficiency and
the resulting oxidative stress might impact adversely on the quality of life and
energy levels, irrespective of whether MCC deficient individuals are clinically
affected or asymptomatic.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.07.010
PMID: 27417235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
