---
reference_id: "PMID:25657437"
title: "Familial ainhum: a case report of multiple toe involvement in a father and son, staging of ainhum with insight into different types of constricting bands."
authors:
- Priya B
- Suganthy RR
- Manimegalai M
- Krishnaveni A
journal: Indian J Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.4103/0019-5154.147879
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial ainhum: a case report of multiple toe involvement in a father and son, staging of ainhum with insight into different types of constricting bands.
**Authors:** Priya B, Suganthy RR, Manimegalai M, Krishnaveni A
**Journal:** Indian J Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0019-5154.147879](https://doi.org/10.4103/0019-5154.147879)

## Content

1. Indian J Dermatol. 2015 Jan-Feb;60(1):106. doi: 10.4103/0019-5154.147879.

Familial ainhum: a case report of multiple toe involvement in a father and son, 
staging of ainhum with insight into different types of constricting bands.

Priya B(1), Suganthy RR(1), Manimegalai M(1), Krishnaveni A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kilpauk Medical College, Chennai, India.

Ainhum, also known as dactylolysis spontanea, is a painful constriction of the 
base of the fifth toe, frequently followed by spontaneous amputation a few years 
later. The disease is often symmetrical on both the feet, but, occasionally, 
other toes are also affected and rarely the distal phalanx of the fifth finger. 
Pseudoainhum is a similar condition that occurs as a secondary event resulting 
from certain hereditary and nonhereditary diseases that lead to annular 
constriction of digits. We hereby present a case of familial ainhum in father 
and son with multiple toes affected, autoamputation, and more involvement of 
fourth toe than the fifth toe, which is a very rare finding.

DOI: 10.4103/0019-5154.147879
PMCID: PMC4318043
PMID: 25657437

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Nil.