---
reference_id: "PMID:24148783"
title: The genetic heterogeneity and mutational burden of engineered melanomas in zebrafish models.
authors:
- Yen J
- White RM
- Wedge DC
- Van Loo P
- de Ridder J
- Capper A
- Richardson J
- Jones D
- Raine K
- Watson IR
- Wu CJ
- Cheng J
- Martincorena I
- Nik-Zainal S
- Mudie L
- Moreau Y
- Marshall J
- Ramakrishna M
- Tarpey P
- Shlien A
- Whitmore I
- Gamble S
- Latimer C
- Langdon E
- Kaufman C
- Dovey M
- Taylor A
- Menzies A
- McLaren S
- "O'Meara S"
- Butler A
- Teague J
- Lister J
- Chin L
- Campbell P
- Adams DJ
- Zon LI
- Patton EE
- Stemple DL
- Futreal PA
journal: Genome Biol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-10-r113
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Amplification
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Homozygote
- INDEL Mutation
- "Melanoma/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/radiation effects
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Risk Factors
- Sequence Deletion
- Ultraviolet Rays
- Zebrafish/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetic heterogeneity and mutational burden of engineered melanomas in zebrafish models.
**Authors:** Yen J, White RM, Wedge DC, Van Loo P, de Ridder J, Capper A, Richardson J, Jones D, Raine K, Watson IR, Wu CJ, Cheng J, Martincorena I, Nik-Zainal S, Mudie L, Moreau Y, Marshall J, Ramakrishna M, Tarpey P, Shlien A, Whitmore I, Gamble S, Latimer C, Langdon E, Kaufman C, Dovey M, Taylor A, Menzies A, McLaren S, O'Meara S, Butler A, Teague J, Lister J, Chin L, Campbell P, Adams DJ, Zon LI, Patton EE, Stemple DL, Futreal PA
**Journal:** Genome Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/gb-2013-14-10-r113](https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2013-14-10-r113)

## Content

1. Genome Biol. 2013;14(10):R113. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-10-r113.

The genetic heterogeneity and mutational burden of engineered melanomas in
zebrafish models.

Yen J, White RM, Wedge DC, Van Loo P, de Ridder J, Capper A, Richardson J, Jones
D, Raine K, Watson IR, Wu CJ, Cheng J, Martincorena I, Nik-Zainal S, Mudie L,
Moreau Y, Marshall J, Ramakrishna M, Tarpey P, Shlien A, Whitmore I, Gamble S,
Latimer C, Langdon E, Kaufman C, Dovey M, Taylor A, Menzies A, McLaren S,
O'Meara S, Butler A, Teague J, Lister J, Chin L, Campbell P, Adams DJ, Zon LI,
Patton EE, Stemple DL, Futreal PA.

Comment in
    Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2014 Mar;27(2):155-6. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12214.

BACKGROUND: Melanoma is the most deadly form of skin cancer. Expression of
oncogenic BRAF or NRAS, which are frequently mutated in human melanomas, promote
the formation of nevi but are not sufficient for tumorigenesis. Even with
germline mutated p53, these engineered melanomas present with variable onset and
pathology, implicating additional somatic mutations in a multi-hit tumorigenic
process.
RESULTS: To decipher the genetics of these melanomas, we sequence the protein
coding exons of 53 primary melanomas generated from several BRAF(V600E) or
NRAS(Q61K) driven transgenic zebrafish lines. We find that engineered zebrafish
melanomas show an overall low mutation burden, which has a strong, inverse
association with the number of initiating germline drivers. Although tumors
reveal distinct mutation spectrums, they show mostly C > T transitions without
UV light exposure, and enrichment of mutations in melanogenesis, p53 and MAPK
signaling. Importantly, a recurrent amplification occurring with pre-configured
drivers BRAF(V600E) and p53-/- suggests a novel path of BRAF cooperativity
through the protein kinase A pathway.
CONCLUSION: This is the first analysis of a melanoma mutational landscape in the
absence of UV light, where tumors manifest with remarkably low mutation burden
and high heterogeneity. Genotype specific amplification of protein kinase A in
cooperation with BRAF and p53 mutation suggests the involvement of melanogenesis
in these tumors. This work is important for defining the spectrum of events in
BRAF or NRAS driven melanoma in the absence of UV light, and for informed
exploitation of models such as transgenic zebrafish to better understand
mechanisms leading to human melanoma formation.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-10-r113
PMCID: PMC3983654
PMID: 24148783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
