---
reference_id: "PMID:29520608"
title: Novel compound heterozygous mutations in SERPINH1 cause rare autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta type X.
authors:
- Song Y
- Zhao D
- Xu X
- Lv F
- Li L
- Jiang Y
- Wang O
- Xia W
- Xing X
- Li M
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-018-4448-2
keywords:
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use
- "Child, Preschool"
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- Follow-Up Studies
- HSP47 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- Heterozygote
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Osteoporotic Fractures/etiology, genetics, prevention & control"
- Phenotype
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Novel compound heterozygous mutations in SERPINH1 cause rare autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta type X.
**Authors:** Song Y, Zhao D, Xu X, Lv F, Li L, Jiang Y, Wang O, Xia W, Xing X, Li M
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-018-4448-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-018-4448-2)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2018 Jun;29(6):1389-1396. doi: 10.1007/s00198-018-4448-2. Epub
 2018 Mar 9.

Novel compound heterozygous mutations in SERPINH1 cause rare autosomal recessive 
osteogenesis imperfecta type X.

Song Y(1), Zhao D(1), Xu X(2), Lv F(1), Li L(1), Jiang Y(1), Wang O(1), Xia 
W(1), Xing X(1), Li M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, National Health 
and Family Planning Commission, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Shuaifuyuan No.1, 
Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Beijing Jishuitan Hospital, The Fourth Clinical 
Medical College of Peking University, Beijing, 100035, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, National Health 
and Family Planning Commission, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Shuaifuyuan No.1, 
Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730, China. limeilzh@sina.com.

We identified novel compound heterozygous mutations in SERPINH1 in a Chinese boy 
suffering from recurrent fractures, femoral deformities, and growth retardation, 
which resulted in extremely rare autosomal recessive OI type X. Long-term 
treatment of BPs was effective in increasing BMD Z-score, reducing fracture 
incidence and reshaping vertebrae compression.
INTRODUCTION: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable bone disorder 
characterized by low bone mineral density, recurrent fractures, and progressive 
bone deformities. Mutation in serpin peptidase inhibitor clade H, member 1 
(SERPINH1), which encodes heat shock protein 47 (HSP47), leads to rare autosomal 
recessive OI type X. We aimed to detect the phenotype and the pathogenic 
mutation of OI type X in a boy from a non-consanguineous Chinese family.
METHODS: We investigated the pathogenic mutations and analyzed their 
relationship with the phenotype in the patient using next-generation sequencing 
(NGS) and Sanger sequencing. Moreover, the efficacy of long-term bisphosphonate 
treatment in this patient was evaluated.
RESULTS: The patient suffered from multiple fractures, low bone mass, and bone 
deformities in the femur, without dentinogenesis imperfecta or hearing loss. 
Compound heterozygous variants were found in SERPINH1 as follows: c.149 T>G in 
exon 2 and c.1214G>A in exon 5. His parents were heterozygous carriers of each 
of these mutations, respectively. Bisphosphonates could be helpful in increasing 
BMD Z-score, reducing bone fracture risk and reshaping the compressed vertebral 
bodies of this patient.
CONCLUSION: We reported novel compound heterozygous mutations in SERPINH1 in a 
Chinese OI patient for the first time, which expanded the spectrum of phenotype 
and genotype of extremely rare OI type X.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-018-4448-2
PMID: 29520608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]