---
reference_id: "PMID:29110179"
title: "A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of triheptanoin in adult polyglucosan body disease and open-label, long-term outcome."
authors:
- Schiffmann R
- Wallace ME
- Rinaldi D
- Ledoux I
- Luton MP
- Coleman S
- Akman HO
- Martin K
- Hogrel JY
- Blankenship D
- Turner J
- Mochel F
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-017-0103-x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Cross-Over Studies
- Disability Evaluation
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Glycogen Storage Disease/drug therapy
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nervous System Diseases/drug therapy
- Regression Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
- Triglycerides/therapeutic use
- Walk Test
- Walking
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of triheptanoin in adult polyglucosan body disease and open-label, long-term outcome.
**Authors:** Schiffmann R, Wallace ME, Rinaldi D, Ledoux I, Luton MP, Coleman S, Akman HO, Martin K, Hogrel JY, Blankenship D, Turner J, Mochel F
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-017-0103-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-017-0103-x)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2018 Sep;41(5):877-883. doi: 10.1007/s10545-017-0103-x.
Epub 2017 Nov 6.

A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of triheptanoin in adult polyglucosan
body disease and open-label, long-term outcome.

Schiffmann R(1)(2), Wallace ME(3), Rinaldi D(4), Ledoux I(5), Luton MP(4),
Coleman S(6), Akman HO(7), Martin K(8), Hogrel JY(5), Blankenship D(3), Turner
J(3), Mochel F(4)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Baylor Scott & White Research Institute, Dallas, TX, USA.
Raphael.schiffmann@BSWhealth.org.
(2)Institute of Metabolic Disease, 3812 Elm Street, Dallas, TX, 75226, USA.
Raphael.schiffmann@BSWhealth.org.
(3)Baylor Scott & White Research Institute, Dallas, TX, USA.
(4)INSERM U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S
1127, Brain and Spine Institute, Paris, France.
(5)Institute of Myology, Neuromuscular Physiology and Evaluation Lab, F-75013,
Paris, France.
(6)Department of Orthopedics, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY,
USA.
(8)Clinical Research Unit, AP-HP, Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris,
France.
(9)Reference Center for Neurometabolic Diseases, Pitié-Salpêtrière University
Hospital and Neurometabolic Research Group, University Pierre and Marie Curie,
Paris, France.
(10)Department of Genetics, AP-HP, Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris,
France.

BACKGROUND: Adult polyglucosan body disease (APBD) is a progressive
neurometabolic disorder caused by a deficiency of glycogen branching enzyme. We
tested the efficacy of triheptanoin as a therapy for patients with APBD based on
the hypothesis that decreased glycogen degradation leads to brain energy
deficit.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This was a two-site, randomized crossover trial of 23
patients (age 35-73 years; 63% men) who received triheptanoin or vegetable oil
as placebo. The trial took place over 1 year and was followed by a 4-year
open-label phase. Generalized linear mixed models were used to analyze this
study. At baseline, using the 6-min walk test, patients could walk a mean of
389 ± 164 m (range 95-672; n = 19), highlighting the great clinical
heterogeneity of our cohort. The overall mean difference between patients on
triheptanoin versus placebo was 6 m; 95% confidence interval (CI) -11 to 22;
p = 0.50. Motion capture gait analysis, gait quality, and stair climbing showed
no consistent direction of change. All secondary endpoints were statistically
nonsignificant after false discovery rate adjustment. Triheptanoin was safe and
generally well tolerated. During the open-label phase of the study, the most
affected patients at baseline kept deteriorating while mildly disabled patients
remained notably stable up to 4 years.
CONCLUSIONS: We cannot conclude that triheptanoin was effective in the treatment
of APBD over a 6-month period, but we found it had a good safety profile. This
study also emphasizes the difficulty of conducting trials in very rare diseases
presenting with a wide clinical heterogeneity. ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT00947960.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-017-0103-x
PMID: 29110179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
