---
reference_id: "PMID:40850313"
title: "Targeted therapy for rare BRAF-mutated melanoma: Updated multicenter analysis and launch of a publicly accessible online outcome database."
authors:
- Menzer C
- Dugas-Breit S
- Dugas M
- Blank CU
- Groen EJ
- Reijers I
- Schlaak M
- Eckardt J
- Suijkerbuijk KPM
- Zimmer L
- Johnson DB
- Franklin C
- Meiss F
- Schilling B
- Meier F
- Gutzmer R
- Thoms KM
- Haalck T
- Müller M
- Kopp-Schneider A
- Carlino MS
- Long GV
- Menzies AM
- van der Veldt AAM
- de Groot JWB
- Eigentler T
- Stevense-den Boer M
- Pföhler C
- Herbschleb K
- Hassel JC
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115703
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, mortality"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Mutation
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, mortality"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted therapy for rare BRAF-mutated melanoma: Updated multicenter analysis and launch of a publicly accessible online outcome database.
**Authors:** Menzer C, Dugas-Breit S, Dugas M, Blank CU, Groen EJ, Reijers I, Schlaak M, Eckardt J, Suijkerbuijk KPM, Zimmer L, Johnson DB, Franklin C, Meiss F, Schilling B, Meier F, Gutzmer R, Thoms KM, Haalck T, Müller M, Kopp-Schneider A, Carlino MS, Long GV, Menzies AM, van der Veldt AAM, de Groot JWB, Eigentler T, Stevense-den Boer M, Pföhler C, Herbschleb K, Hassel JC
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115703](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115703)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2025 Oct 1;228:115703. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115703. Epub
2025  Aug 9.

Targeted therapy for rare BRAF-mutated melanoma: Updated multicenter analysis
and launch of a publicly accessible online outcome database.

Menzer C(1), Dugas-Breit S(1), Dugas M(2), Blank CU(3), Groen EJ(3), Reijers
I(3), Schlaak M(4), Eckardt J(4), Suijkerbuijk KPM(5), Zimmer L(6), Johnson
DB(7), Franklin C(8), Meiss F(9), Schilling B(10), Meier F(11), Gutzmer R(12),
Thoms KM(13), Haalck T(14), Müller M(15), Kopp-Schneider A(15), Carlino MS(16),
Long GV(17), Menzies AM(17), van der Veldt AAM(18), de Groot JWB(19), Eigentler
T(20), Stevense-den Boer M(21), Pföhler C(22), Herbschleb K(23), Hassel JC(24).

Author information:
(1)Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty Heidelberg, Department of Dermatology
and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), NCT Heidelberg, A Partnership
Between DKFZ and University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Informatics, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(3)Medical Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute-Antoni van Leeuwenhoek,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität
Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of Dermatology,
Venereology and Allergology, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Utrecht Cancer
Center, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Essen, University
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany and German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner Site
Essen/Düsseldorf, and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT-West), Campus
Essen, Essen, Germany.
(7)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN,
USA.
(8)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University of Cologne, Faculty of
Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(9)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Medical Center - University of
Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Venerology and Allergology, Goethe University
Frankfurt, University Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany; Department of Dermatology,
University Hospital Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl
Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany; Skin Cancer
Center at the National Center for Tumor Diseases and University Cancer Centre
Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(12)Department of Dermatology, Johannes Wesling Medical Center Minden, Ruhr
University Bochum, Minden, Germany; Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Skin
Cancer Center Hannover, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(13)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany.
(14)University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(15)German Cancer Research Center DKFZ, Division of Biostatistics, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(16)Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Australia;
Department of Medical Oncology Westmead and Blacktown Hospitals, Sydney,
Australia.
(17)Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, Australia; Royal
North Shore and Mater Hospitals, Sydney, Australia.
(18)Department of Medical Oncology and Radiology & Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus MC
Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(19)Medical Oncology, Oncology Center, Isala Zwolle, Zwolle, the Netherlands.
(20)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität
Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of Dermatology,
Venereology and Allergology, Berlin, Germany; Department of Dermatology, Center
for Dermatooncology, University Medical Center Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(21)Department of Internal Medicine, Amphia Hospital, Breda, the Netherlands.
(22)Department of Dermatology, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg,
Saar, Germany.
(23)Medical Oncology, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(24)Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty Heidelberg, Department of Dermatology
and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), NCT Heidelberg, A Partnership
Between DKFZ and University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic
address: jessica.hassel@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

INTRODUCTION: While BRAF-/MEK-inhibitor therapy is well established in
V600E/K-mutated melanoma, the efficacy in advanced melanoma with rare BRAF
mutations remains uncertain. This is an updated analysis of an international
data collection including 49 new patients, accompanied by development of a
publicly accessible global database.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted at 20 international
cancer centers, evaluating 143 patients with rare BRAF V600 (V600-nonE/K; 48 %)
and non-V600 (52 %) mutations. Treatments included BRAF/MEK inhibitor
combination therapy (BRAFi/MEKi) and the respective monotherapies. Clinical
outcomes concerning overall response rate (ORR), progression-free (PFS), and
overall survival (OS) were collected.
RESULTS: Included patients had a median age of 65 years (range 20-93), 101
(71 %) were male. Most patients (n = 92, 64 %) received BRAFi/MEKi, 42 (29 %)
BRAFi monotherapy, and 9 (6 %) MEKi monotherapy. The ORR was 35 % and higher in
V600-nonE/K (45 %) than non-V600 melanomas (26 %, p = 0.025). Median duration of
response was similar, with 8.2 months (range 2.9-53.1 +) for V600-nonE/K and 7.4
months (range 0.8-73.8 +) for non-V600. Combination therapy achieved best
results in both groups, however, differences between V600-nonE/K and
non-V600mutation were only found in ORR (51 % vs. 33 %, p = 0,11) and median PFS
(6.5 vs. 3.2 months, p = 0.01). Patients with the longest PFS (> 50 months) had
V600D/R, V600_K601D/E/N or K601E/N-, L597V/S/R/Q/P/K- mutations. OS was similar
in both groups (16.1 vs. 11.7 months, p = 0.96). Of note, in non-V600 melanomas
MEKi monotherapy revealed similar response rates as combination treatment (ORR
33 %, PFS 3 months); however, median OS was shorter (6.6 months, p = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: This updated analysis reinforces the benefit of BRAFi/MEKi therapy
in rare BRAF mutations. A database for ongoing data collection was developed and
is available at
https://www.klinikum.uni-heidelberg.de/en/hautklinik-zentrum/hauttumorzentrum/forschung/datenbank-seltene-braf-mutationen.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115703
PMID: 40850313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests: CM has received grant funding from
the Society of MSK and the German Research Foundation (DFG); he has served on
advisory boards, as a consultant, or given educational presentations for
MSD-Sharp and Dohme, Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Kyowa Kirin, Recordati Rare Diseases,
AstraZeneca, and Pierre Fabre Pharma. He has received support for travel and
meetings from Sun Pharma, Kyowa Kirin, and Novartis. CB has had an advisory role
for BMS, MSD, Roche, Novartis, GSK, AZ, Pfizer, Lilly, GenMab, Pierre Fabre,
Third Rock Ventures, and Senya. He has received research funding from BMS,
Novartis, NanoString, and 4SC. Stock ownerships: co-founder Flindr Therapeutics
to develop TNF sensitizers to clinicPatents (incl. submitted): WO 2021/177822 A1
(pending) US 2023/0114276 A1 (pending) > national phase, EP 4114450 A1 (pending)
> national phase, WO 2023/022596 A1 (pending), US (submitted by AOMB, not
published yet) > national phase, EP 4387683 A1 (pending) > national phase. MS
has no relevant conflicts of interest related to this manuscript. He has served
on advisory boards, as a consultant for MSD, Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Novartis,
Immunocore and Pierre Fabre Pharma. He has received support for travel and
meetings from Sun Pharma and Pierre Fabre Pharma. KB has had consulting/advisory
relationships with Abbvie, and Sairopa; received research funding from TigaTx,
Bristol Myers Squibb, Philips, Genmab, and Pierre Fabre; and received honoraria
from Bristol Myers Squibb - all relationships are not related to this work and
were paid to the institution. LZ served as consultant and has received honoraria
from BMS, MSD, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Sanofi, and Sunpharma and travel support
from MSD, BMS, Pierre Fabre, Sanofi, Sunpharma and Novartis, outside the
submitted work. DBJ has served on advisory boards or as a consultant for
AstraZeneca, BMS, The Jackson Laboratory, Merck, Mosaic ImmunoEngineering,
Novartis, Pfizer, and Teiko, and has received research funding from BMS and
Incyte, and has patents pending for use of MHC-II as a biomarker for immune
checkpoint inhibitor response, and abatacept as treatment for immune-related
adverse events. CF has been on the advisory board or has received honoraria from
Bristol Myers Squibb, Immunocore and Novartis and received travel grants from
Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis and Pierre Fabre. FM served as consultant and/or
has received honoraria from Novartis, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme,
Pierre Fabre, Sanofi Genzyme, Sun Pharma and travel support from Novartis, Sun
Pharma, Roche, Pierre Fabre and Merck Sharp & Dohme, outside the submitted work.
BS received personal honoraria from SUN Pharma, Immunocore, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Sanofi, Regeneron, Pierre Fabre Pharma, Novartis and Blueprint Medicines
for participation in advisory boards or for speaking engagements. RG declares
honoria for lectures/advice from BristolMyers Squibb, MerckSharpDohme, Novartis,
Merck-Serono, Almirall Hermal, Pierre-Fabre, Sun Pharma, Immunocore, Delcath,
and Sanofi/Regeneron; support of meeting participation from SUN Pharma, and
PierreFabre; and research support (to institution) from Novartis,
Sanofi/Regeneron, Merck Serono, Amgen, SUN Pharma, KyowaKirin, Almirall Hermal,
and Recordati. KMT has received speaker or consultant honoraria from Bristol
Myers Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Regeneron,
Immunocore, Sanofi, Sun Pharma, Amgen, LEO Pharma, Galderma, Almirall, Candela,
Lilly, Abbvie, and Johnson & Johnson. AMM has served on advisory board for BMS,
MSD, Novartis, Pierre-Fabre, Roche and QBiotics. MSC has served a consultant for
Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eisai, Ideaya, Merck Sharpe & Dohme, Medison,
Moderna, Nektar, Novartis, Oncosec, Pierre Fabre, Qbiotics, Regeneron, Roche,
Merck KGaA, Sanofi, and Strand therapeutics and received honoraria from Bristol
Myers Squibb, Merck Sharpe & Dohme, and Novartis. GVL is consultant advisor for
Agenus, Amgen, Array Biopharma, AstraZeneca, Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals
Inc, BioNTech SE, Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Evaxion Biotech A/S, Fortiva Biologics (USA) Inc, GI Innovation Inc, Hexal AG
(Sandoz Company), Highlight Therapeutics S.L., IOBiotech, Immunocore Ireland
Limited, Innovent Biologics USA Inc, Iovance Biotherapeutics Inc, Merck Sharpe &
Dohme, Novartis Pharma AG, OncoSec Medical Australia, PHMR Limited, Pierre
Fabre, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Scancell Limited, SkylineDX B.V. AvdV has
served on advisory boards (all paid to the institute) for BMS, MSD, Esai,
Pfizer, Novartis, Roche, Pierre Fabre, Ipsen, and Sanofi, and received travel
support from Ipsen. TE has served as a consultant for MSD, Novartis, Regeneron /
Sanofi, Anaveon, CureVac, Pierre Fabre, BMS, SunPharma, and Merck Darmstadt; he
declares stock ownership for CureVac, and Genmab. JCH has received honoraria for
talks from BMS, Delcath, Immunocore, MSD, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Sanofi, and
Sunpharma; and honoraria for advisory boards from Onkowissen and Sunpharma. SDB,
MB, IR, EJG, JE, FM, TH, AKS, MM, JWBdG, MSdB, CP, and KH have no potential
competing interests to declare.
