---
reference_id: "PMID:17309453"
title: "Cigarette smoking and acne in adolescents: results from a cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Rombouts S
- Nijsten T
- Lambert J
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2006.01915.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cigarette smoking and acne in adolescents: results from a cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Rombouts S, Nijsten T, Lambert J
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-3083.2006.01915.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-3083.2006.01915.x)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2007 Mar;21(3):326-33. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2006.01915.x.

Cigarette smoking and acne in adolescents: results from a cross-sectional study.

Rombouts S(1), Nijsten T, Lambert J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies on the association between smoking and acne have 
reported conflicting results.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between smoking and acne among 
school-going adolescents.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted. Smoking was defined as smoking > 
3 cigarettes daily for 6 months or more. We defined acne as having > 20 
retentional and/or inflammatory facial acne lesions. Multivariate (proportional) 
logistic regression models were used to adjust for confounding variables.
RESULTS: Of the 594 participants, 36.2% had acne. Acne sufferers were less 
likely to smoke (18.1 vs. 23.7%, P = 0.10). In girls, smoking was significantly 
associated with lower prevalence of acne (adjusted OR = 0.41, 95% CI = 0.13, 
0.82). Smoking, daily cigarette consumption and duration of smoking appeared to 
be protective in the development of inflammatory acne in girls. No significant 
associations between acne and smoking variables were detected among boys.
LIMITATIONS: although this study suggests a significant negative association 
between smoking and inflammatory acne in girls, it does not prove causality. 
This association did show a trend for linear relationship. Because of the 
unexpected differences between boys and girls, sample size may have affected our 
results.
CONCLUSION: The anti-inflammatory effects of smoking may inhibit the development 
of papulopustular acne in girls more than in boys. However, smoking should not 
be considered a therapeutic option for acne. Additional studies that consider 
possible differences across age, gender and type of acne are needed to clarify 
the association between smoking and acne.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2006.01915.x
PMID: 17309453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]