---
reference_id: "PMID:7697714"
title: Mutations in a putative global transcriptional regulator cause X-linked mental retardation with alpha-thalassemia (ATR-X syndrome).
authors:
- Gibbons RJ
- Picketts DJ
- Villard L
- Higgs DR
journal: Cell
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90287-2
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Brain/metabolism
- Chromosome Mapping
- Conserved Sequence
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Primers
- DNA Repair
- Fetus
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Gene Library
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Lod Score
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Multigene Family
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Sequence Deletion
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Syndrome
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- X Chromosome
- alpha-Thalassemia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in a putative global transcriptional regulator cause X-linked mental retardation with alpha-thalassemia (ATR-X syndrome).
**Authors:** Gibbons RJ, Picketts DJ, Villard L, Higgs DR
**Journal:** Cell (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(95)90287-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(95)90287-2)

## Content

1. Cell. 1995 Mar 24;80(6):837-45. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90287-2.

Mutations in a putative global transcriptional regulator cause X-linked mental 
retardation with alpha-thalassemia (ATR-X syndrome).

Gibbons RJ(1), Picketts DJ, Villard L, Higgs DR.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Molecular Haematology Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Headington, Oxford, England.

The ATR-X syndrome is an X-linked disorder comprising severe psychomotor 
retardation, characteristic facial features, genital abnormalities, and 
alpha-thalassemia. We have shown that ATR-X results from diverse mutations of 
XH2, a member of a subgroup of the helicase superfamily that includes proteins 
involved in a wide range of cellular functions, including DNA recombination and 
repair (RAD16, RAD54, and ERCC6) and regulation of transcription (SW12/SNF2, 
MOT1, and brahma). The complex ATR-X phenotype suggests that XH2, when mutated, 
down-regulates expression of several genes, including the alpha-globin genes, 
indicating that it could be a global transcriptional regulator. In addition to 
its role in the ATR-X syndrome, XH2 may be a good candidate for other forms of 
X-linked mental retardation mapping to Xq13.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90287-2
PMID: 7697714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]