---
reference_id: "PMID:7541282"
title: Aminoguanidine attenuates the delayed circulatory failure and improves survival in rodent models of endotoxic shock.
authors:
- Wu CC
- Chen SJ
- Szabó C
- Thiemermann C
- Vane JR
journal: Br J Pharmacol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.1995.tb14955.x
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Oxidoreductases/antagonists & inhibitors, drug effects"
- Animals
- "Arginine/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Blood Pressure/drug effects
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Guanidines/pharmacology
- Heart Rate/drug effects
- "Hypotension/chemically induced, prevention & control"
- Lipopolysaccharides/pharmacology
- Male
- Mice
- "NADPH Dehydrogenase/antagonists & inhibitors, drug effects"
- NG-Nitroarginine Methyl Ester
- "Nitric Oxide/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Nitric Oxide Synthase
- Norepinephrine/pharmacology
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
- "Shock, Septic/chemically induced, prevention & control"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aminoguanidine attenuates the delayed circulatory failure and improves survival in rodent models of endotoxic shock.
**Authors:** Wu CC, Chen SJ, Szabó C, Thiemermann C, Vane JR
**Journal:** Br J Pharmacol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1476-5381.1995.tb14955.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1476-5381.1995.tb14955.x)

## Content

1. Br J Pharmacol. 1995 Apr;114(8):1666-72. doi:
10.1111/j.1476-5381.1995.tb14955.x.

Aminoguanidine attenuates the delayed circulatory failure and improves survival
in rodent models of endotoxic shock.

Wu CC(1), Chen SJ, Szabó C, Thiemermann C, Vane JR.

Author information:
(1)William Harvey Research Institute, St. Bartholomew's Hospital Medical
College, London.

1. We have investigated the effects of aminoguanidine, a relatively selective
inhibitor of the cytokine-inducible isoform of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), on
the delayed circulatory failure, vascular hyporeactivity to vasoconstrictor
agents, and iNOS activity in a rat model of circulatory shock induced by
bacterial endotoxin (E. coli lipopolysaccharide; LPS). In addition, we have
evaluated the effect of aminoguanidine on the 24 h survival rate in a murine
model of endotoxaemia. 2. Male Wistar rats were anaesthetized and instrumented
for the measurement of mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) and heart rate (HR).
Injection of LPS (10 mg kg-1, i.v.) resulted in a fall in MAP from 115 +/- 4
mmHg (time 0, control) to 79 +/- 9 mmHg at 180 min (P < 0.05, n = 10). The
pressor effect of noradrenaline (NA, 1 microgram kg-1, i.v.) was also
significantly reduced at 60, 120 and 180 min after LPS injection. In contrast,
animals pretreated with aminoguanidine (15 mg kg-1, i.v., 20 min prior to LPS
injection) maintained a significantly higher MAP (at 180 min, 102 +/- 3 mmHg, n
= 10, P < 0.05) when compared to rats given only LPS (LPS-rats). Cumulative
administration of aminoguanidine (15 mg kg-1 and 45 mg kg-1) given 180 min after
LPS caused a dose-related increase in MAP and reversed the hypotension.
Aminoguanidine also significantly alleviated the reduction of the pressor
response to NA: indeed, at 180 min, the pressor response returned to normal in
aminoguanidine pretreated LPS-rats. 3. Thoracic aortae obtained from rats at 180
min after LPS showed a significant reduction in the contractile responses
elicited by NA (10-9- 10-6 M). Pretreatment with aminoguanidine (15 mg kg- 1,
i.v.,at 20 min prior to LPS) significantly prevented this LPS-induced
hyporeactivity to NA ex vivo.4. Endotoxaemia for 180 min resulted in a
significant increase in iNOS activity in the lung from 0.6 +/- 0.2 pmol mg-1
min-1 (control, n = 4) to 4.8 +/- 0.3 pmol mg-1 min-1 (P<0.05, n = 6). In
LPS-rats treated with aminoguanidine, iNOS activity in the lung was attenuated
by 44+/- 5% (n = 6, P <0.05).Moreover, when added in vitro to lung homogenates
obtained from LPS-rats, aminoguanidine and N omega-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester
(L-NAME; 10-8 to 10-3 M) caused a concentration-dependent inhibition of iNOS
activity (n = 3-6, IC50: 30 +/- 12 and 11 +/- 6pEM, respectively P>0.05). In
contrast,aminoguanidine was a less potent inhibitor than L-NAME of the
constitutive nitric oxide synthase in rat brain homogenates (n = 3-6, IC50 is
140 +/- 10 and 0.6 +/- 0.1 I1M, respectively, P<0.05). In addition, the
inhibitory effect of aminoguanidine on iNOS activity showed a slower onset than
that of L-NAME(maximal inhibition at 90 min and 30 min, respectively).5.
Treatment of conscious Swiss albino (T/O) mice with a high dose of endotoxin (60
mg kg-1, i.p.)resulted in a survival rate of only 8% at 24 h (n = 12). However,
therapeutic application of aminoguanidine (15 mg kg-1, i.p. at 2 h and 6 h after
LPS) increased the 24 h survival rate to 75%(n = 8), whereas L-NAME (3 mg kg-1,
i.p. at 2 h and 6 h after LPS) did not affect the survival rate(11%, n=9).6
Thus, aminoguanidine inhibits iNOS activity and attenuates the delayed
circulatory failure caused by endotoxic shock in the rat and improves survival
in a murine model of endotoxaemia. Aminoguanidine,or novel, more potent
selective inhibitors of iNOS may be useful in the therapy of septic shock.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.1995.tb14955.x
PMCID: PMC1510405
PMID: 7541282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
