---
reference_id: "PMID:7773297"
title: Thanatophoric dysplasia (types I and II) caused by distinct mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3.
authors:
- Tavormina PL
- Shiang R
- Thompson LM
- Zhu YZ
- Wilkin DJ
- Lachman RS
- Wilcox WR
- Rimoin DL
- Cohn DH
- Wasmuth JJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1038/ng0395-321
keywords:
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Female
- "Femur/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Radiography
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
- "Skull/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/classification, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thanatophoric dysplasia (types I and II) caused by distinct mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3.
**Authors:** Tavormina PL, Shiang R, Thompson LM, Zhu YZ, Wilkin DJ, Lachman RS, Wilcox WR, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH, Wasmuth JJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0395-321](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0395-321)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1995 Mar;9(3):321-8. doi: 10.1038/ng0395-321.

Thanatophoric dysplasia (types I and II) caused by distinct mutations in 
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3.

Tavormina PL(1), Shiang R, Thompson LM, Zhu YZ, Wilkin DJ, Lachman RS, Wilcox 
WR, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH, Wasmuth JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Human Genome Research Center, 
University of California, Irvine 92717, USA.

Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD), the most common neonatal lethal skeletal 
dysplasia, affects one out of 20,000 live births. Affected individuals display 
features similar to those seen in homozygous achondroplasia. Mutations causing 
achondroplasia are in FGFR3, suggesting that mutations in this gene may cause 
TD. A sporadic mutation causing a Lys650Glu change in the tyrosine kinase domain 
of FGFR3 was found in 16 of 16 individuals with one type of TD. Of 39 
individuals with a second type of TD, 22 had a mutation causing an Arg248Cys 
change and one had a Ser371Cys substitution, both in the extracellular region of 
the protein. None of these mutations were found in 50 controls showing that 
mutations affecting different functional domains of FGFR3 cause different forms 
of this lethal disorder.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0395-321
PMID: 7773297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]