---
reference_id: "PMID:20195045"
title: "Intravitreal bevacizumab for choroidal neovascular membrane associated with Best's vitelliform dystrophy."
authors:
- Rishi E
- Rishi P
- Mahajan S
journal: Indian J Ophthalmol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.4103/0301-4738.60096
keywords:
- "Angiogenesis Inhibitors/administration & dosage"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/administration & dosage"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized"
- Bevacizumab
- "Choroidal Neovascularization/complications, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Injections, Intraocular"
- Macular Degeneration/complications
- Male
- Visual Acuity
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravitreal bevacizumab for choroidal neovascular membrane associated with Best's vitelliform dystrophy.
**Authors:** Rishi E, Rishi P, Mahajan S
**Journal:** Indian J Ophthalmol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0301-4738.60096](https://doi.org/10.4103/0301-4738.60096)

## Content

1. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2010 Mar-Apr;58(2):160-2. doi: 10.4103/0301-4738.60096.

Intravitreal bevacizumab for choroidal neovascular membrane associated with
Best's vitelliform dystrophy.

Rishi E(1), Rishi P, Mahajan S.

Author information:
(1)Shri Bhagwan Mahavir Vitreoretinal Services, Sankara Nethralaya, 18, College
Road, Chennai-600 006, India.

Comment in
    Indian J Ophthalmol. 2011 May-Jun;59(3):262-3. doi: 10.4103/0301-4738.81034.

Best's vitelliform macular dystrophy is a hereditary form of progressive macular
dystrophy that can be complicated by choroidal neovascularization. Authors
report successful treatment of choroidal neovascularization with intravitreal
bevacizumab in one such eye in an 'adult' Indian male with visual improvement. A
23-year-old male presented with diminution of vision in the right eye for the
past sixteen months. Visual acuity was 20/400 in the that eye. After three
consecutive intravitreal injections of bevacizumab (1.25 mg/0.05 ml), vision
improved to 20/120. Seven months following the last injection of bevacizumab,
fundus appeared stable and visual acuity was maintained. No drug-related ocular
or systemic side effects were encountered. To the best of our knowledge (PubMed
search), this is the first report of its kind in an adult Indian patient.
Intravitreal bevacizumab appears to be a promising and cost-effective modality
of treatment in such eyes with potential for improvement in vision. However, a
long-term follow-up is warranted.

DOI: 10.4103/0301-4738.60096
PMCID: PMC2854453
PMID: 20195045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
