---
reference_id: "PMID:17414388"
title: "Natural history of plasma leakage in dengue hemorrhagic fever: a serial ultrasonographic study."
authors:
- Srikiatkhachorn A
- Krautrachue A
- Ratanaprakarn W
- Wongtapradit L
- Nithipanya N
- Kalayanarooj S
- Nisalak A
- Thomas SJ
- Gibbons RV
- Mammen MP Jr
- Libraty DH
- Ennis FA
- Rothman AL
- Green S
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1097/01.inf.0000258612.26743.10
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of plasma leakage in dengue hemorrhagic fever: a serial ultrasonographic study.
**Authors:** Srikiatkhachorn A, Krautrachue A, Ratanaprakarn W, Wongtapradit L, Nithipanya N, Kalayanarooj S, Nisalak A, Thomas SJ, Gibbons RV, Mammen MP Jr, Libraty DH, Ennis FA, Rothman AL, Green S
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.inf.0000258612.26743.10](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.inf.0000258612.26743.10)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2007 Apr;26(4):283-90; discussion 291-2. doi: 
10.1097/01.inf.0000258612.26743.10.

Natural history of plasma leakage in dengue hemorrhagic fever: a serial 
ultrasonographic study.

Srikiatkhachorn A(1), Krautrachue A, Ratanaprakarn W, Wongtapradit L, Nithipanya 
N, Kalayanarooj S, Nisalak A, Thomas SJ, Gibbons RV, Mammen MP Jr, Libraty DH, 
Ennis FA, Rothman AL, Green S.

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccine Research, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA. 
anon.srikiatkhachorn@umassmed.edu

BACKGROUND: Although plasma leakage is the major cause of mortality and 
morbidity in patients with dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF), a detailed assessment 
of the natural course of this process is still lacking. We employed serial 
ultrasound examination to delineate the locations and the timing of plasma 
leakage and to evaluate the usefulness of ultrasound in detecting plasma leakage 
in DHF.
METHOD: Daily ultrasound examinations of the abdomen and right thorax were 
performed in 158 suspected dengue cases to detect ascites, thickened gall 
bladder wall and pleural effusions. Cases were classified into dengue fever 
(DF), DHF or other febrile illness (OFI) based on serology and evidence of 
plasma leakage including hemoconcentration and pleural effusion detected by 
chest radiograph.
RESULTS: Ultrasonographic evidence of plasma leakage was detected in DHF cases 
starting from 2 days before defervescence and was detected in some cases within 
3 days after fever onset. Pleural effusion was the most common ultrasonographic 
sign of plasma leakage (62% of DHF cases one day after defervescence). 
Thickening of the gallbladder wall and ascites were detected less frequently 
(43% and 52% of DHF cases respectively) and resolved more rapidly than pleural 
effusions. The size of pleural effusions, ascites and gall bladder wall 
thickness in DHF grade I and II were smaller than those of grade III patients. 
Ultrasound detected plasma leakage in 12 of 17 DHF cases who did not meet the 
criteria for significant hemoconcentration.
CONCLUSIONS: Ultrasound examinations detected plasma leakage in multiple body 
compartments around the time of defervescence. Ultrasonographic signs of plasma 
leakage were detectable before changes in hematocrits. Ultrasound is a useful 
tool for detecting plasma leakage in dengue infection.

DOI: 10.1097/01.inf.0000258612.26743.10
PMID: 17414388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]