---
reference_id: "PMID:9689118"
title: Hepatocyte injury in tyrosinemia type 1 is induced by fumarylacetoacetate and is inhibited by caspase inhibitors.
authors:
- Kubo S
- Sun M
- Miyahara M
- Umeyama K
- Urakami K
- Yamamoto T
- Jakobs C
- Matsuda I
- Endo F
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.16.9552
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatocyte injury in tyrosinemia type 1 is induced by fumarylacetoacetate and is inhibited by caspase inhibitors.
**Authors:** Kubo S, Sun M, Miyahara M, Umeyama K, Urakami K, Yamamoto T, Jakobs C, Matsuda I, Endo F
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.95.16.9552](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.16.9552)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Aug 4;95(16):9552-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.16.9552.

Hepatocyte injury in tyrosinemia type 1 is induced by fumarylacetoacetate and is 
inhibited by caspase inhibitors.

Kubo S(1), Sun M, Miyahara M, Umeyama K, Urakami K, Yamamoto T, Jakobs C, 
Matsuda I, Endo F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Kumamoto 
860-8556, Japan.

Tyrosinemia type 1, caused by mutations in the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase 
gene (Fah), is characterized by severe liver injury. We earlier developed a 
tyrosinemic mouse model with two genetic defects, Fah and 
4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (Hpd) deficiencies. Apoptosis of hepatocytes 
was induced and an acute onset of liver failure occurred after administration of 
homogentisic acid (HGA), the intermediate metabolite between the enzymes HPD and 
FAH. Cytochrome c was released from mitochondria prior to liver failure in the 
Fah-/- Hpd-/- double-mutant mice after the administration of HGA. In a cell-free 
system, the addition of fumarylacetoacetate induced the release of cytochrome c 
from the mitochondria. We also found that caspase inhibitors were highly 
effective in preventing the liver failure induced by HGA in the double-mutant 
mice. Therefore, fumarylacetoacetate apparently induces the release of 
cytochrome c, which in turn triggers activation of the caspase cascade in 
hepatocytes of subjects with hereditary tyrosinemia type 1.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.16.9552
PMCID: PMC21376
PMID: 9689118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]