---
reference_id: "PMID:37565535"
title: Utility of sequencing for ATP6AP1 and ATP6AP2 to distinguish between atypical granular cell tumor with junctional component and melanoma.
authors:
- Warren SJ
- Alomari AK
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/cup.14503
keywords:
- Humans
- "Melanoma/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, diagnosis"
- "Granular Cell Tumor/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Aged
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Utility of sequencing for ATP6AP1 and ATP6AP2 to distinguish between atypical granular cell tumor with junctional component and melanoma.
**Authors:** Warren SJ, Alomari AK
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cup.14503](https://doi.org/10.1111/cup.14503)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2023 Nov;50(11):1014-1019. doi: 10.1111/cup.14503. Epub 2023
Aug  11.

Utility of sequencing for ATP6AP1 and ATP6AP2 to distinguish between atypical 
granular cell tumor with junctional component and melanoma.

Warren SJ(1)(2), Alomari AK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

BACKGROUND: Granular cell tumor (GCT) is a S100+ neoplasm with atypical and 
malignant variants. Similar to melanocytic neoplasms, the tumors make nests and 
can have junctional components raising a differential diagnosis of melanoma. 
Nevi and melanomas may also have granular cell cytoplasm. MelanA is useful in 
distinguishing melanocytic from granular cell lineage, but increasingly 
MelanA/SOX10 negative melanomas have been recognized by correlation with 
molecular methods.
METHODS: We encountered several cases with morphologic overlap between melanoma 
and atypical GCT necessitating additional molecular workup. We sequenced two 
cases and searched our archive for similar cases of GCT with overlapping 
features of melanocytic lineage.
RESULTS: In our two index cases, we excluded melanoma driver mutations and 
identified frameshift or premature stop codons in ATP6AP1/2 pathognomonic of 
granular cell lineage. Data retrieved from Cosmic identified 24 melanomas with 
missense single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in ATP6AP1 but no frameshift or 
premature stop codons. Twenty-one melanomas had missense SNVs in ATP6AP2. One 
melanoma had a premature stop codon in ATP6AP2, but this lesion also had a 
melanoma-associated driver mutation NRASQ61K. We found 1 of 23 additional cases 
of GCT in our archives with a junctional component and no additional cases with 
maturation.
CONCLUSIONS: Atypical and malignant GCT can have histopathologic overlap with 
melanoma. Frameshift and premature stop codons in ATP6AP1/2 are specific for 
granular cell lineage, and capable of excluding melanoma, in the absence of 
known melanoma-associated driver mutations.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Cutaneous Pathology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.14503
PMID: 37565535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]