---
reference_id: "PMID:38395082"
title: "Airway hyperresponsiveness in asthma: The role of the epithelium."
authors:
- Bradding P
- Porsbjerg C
- Côté A
- Dahlén SE
- Hallstrand TS
- Brightling CE
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2024.02.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Airway hyperresponsiveness in asthma: The role of the epithelium.
**Authors:** Bradding P, Porsbjerg C, Côté A, Dahlén SE, Hallstrand TS, Brightling CE
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2024.02.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2024.02.011)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2024 May;153(5):1181-1193. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2024.02.011. Epub 2024 Feb 21.

Airway hyperresponsiveness in asthma: The role of the epithelium.

Bradding P(1), Porsbjerg C(2), Côté A(3), Dahlén SE(4), Hallstrand TS(5), 
Brightling CE(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Sciences, Leicester Respiratory National Institute 
for Health and Care Research Biomedical Research Centre, Glenfield Hospital, 
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen 
University Hospital Bispebjerg, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Quebec Heart and Lung Institute, Université Laval, Laval, Quebec, Canada; 
Department of Medicine, Université Laval, Laval, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; 
Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep 
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Wash; Center for Lung Biology, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Wash. Electronic address: tealh@uw.edu.
(6)Department of Respiratory Sciences, Leicester Respiratory National Institute 
for Health and Care Research Biomedical Research Centre, Glenfield Hospital, 
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
ceb17@leicester.ac.uk.

Airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) is a key clinical feature of asthma. The 
presence of AHR in people with asthma provides the substrate for 
bronchoconstriction in response to numerous diverse stimuli, contributing to 
airflow limitation and symptoms including breathlessness, wheeze, and chest 
tightness. Dysfunctional airway smooth muscle significantly contributes to AHR 
and is displayed as increased sensitivity to direct pharmacologic 
bronchoconstrictor stimuli, such as inhaled histamine and methacholine (direct 
AHR), or to endogenous mediators released by activated airway cells such as mast 
cells (indirect AHR). Research in in vivo human models has shown that the 
disrupted airway epithelium plays an important role in driving inflammation that 
mediates indirect AHR in asthma through the release of cytokines such as thymic 
stromal lymphopoietin and IL-33. These cytokines upregulate type 2 cytokines 
promoting airway eosinophilia and induce the release of bronchoconstrictor 
mediators from mast cells such as histamine, prostaglandin D2, and cysteinyl 
leukotrienes. While bronchoconstriction is largely due to airway smooth muscle 
contraction, airway structural changes known as remodeling, likely mediated in 
part by epithelial-derived mediators, also lead to airflow obstruction and may 
enhance AHR. In this review, we outline the current knowledge of the role of the 
airway epithelium in AHR in asthma and its implications on the wider disease. 
Increased understanding of airway epithelial biology may contribute to better 
treatment options, particularly in precision medicine.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2024.02.011
PMID: 38395082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]