---
reference_id: "PMID:40468431"
title: Long-term outcome of CblC deficiency complicated with pulmonary hypertension.
authors:
- Ding S
- Deng Y
- Hao L
- Qiu W
- Wu S
- Chen Y
- Chen T
- Zhan X
- Han L
- Jiao X
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03839-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/genetics, drug therapy"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-cbl/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term outcome of CblC deficiency complicated with pulmonary hypertension.
**Authors:** Ding S, Deng Y, Hao L, Qiu W, Wu S, Chen Y, Chen T, Zhan X, Han L, Jiao X
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03839-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03839-5)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Jun 4;20(1):276. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03839-5.

Long-term outcome of CblC deficiency complicated with pulmonary hypertension.

Ding S(#)(1), Deng Y(#)(1), Hao L(1), Qiu W(1), Wu S(2), Chen Y(2), Chen T(1),
Zhan X(1), Han L(3), Jiao X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Xinhua
Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Pediatric Research, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, 1665 KongJiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Children's Hospital
Affiliated to Zhengzhou University, Henan Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan,
400052, China.
(3)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Xinhua
Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Pediatric Research, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, 1665 KongJiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China.
hanlianshu@xinhuamed.com.cn.
(4)Department of Pediatric Infection, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, 1665 KongJiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China.
jiaoxianting@xinhuamed.com.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Pulmonary Hypertension (PH) in patients with cblC deficiency is one
of the rare but lethal complications. This study aimed to described its
characteristics and long-term outcome.
METHODS: A total of 26 patients with cblC deficiency complicated by PH were
enrolled. Clinical and laboratory data were reviewed in detail.
RESULTS: Sixteen patients presented with PH manifestations as the initial
symptom while ten patients developed PH after the involvement of other systems.
The median onset age of PH was 3.25 years (ranging from 1 month to 13.4 years).
Sixteen cases had other cardiovascular damage, including right cardiac
enlargement, atrial septal defects, ventricular septal defects, left ventricular
hypertrophy, pericardial effusion, pulmonary artery fistula and mild pulmonary
artery stenosis. Intramuscular hydroxylcobalamin was given to all patients,
together with L-carnitine, betaine and folinic acid after diagnosis. And PH
targeted drags were given to 12 cases. As a result, propionylcarnitine,
propionylcarnitine/acetylcarnitine ratio, methylmalonic acid, methylcitric acid
and homocysteine levels decreased while methionine levels increased remarkably
after treatment(p<0.05). The c.80 A> G variant was the most frequent allele in
this cohort. Pulmonary artery systolic pressure was within the normal range in
all patients, except that one case still had PH and two cases died. Multi-system
involvement was improved overall.
CONCLUSION: cblC deficiency should be considered in patients with PH.
Multi-system evaluation, especially echocardiography is recommended to be
performed regularly at each patient visit. The c.80 A > G variant might be a
hot-spot mutation of cblC deficiency complicated with PH. Most patients show
optimistic prognosis, while neurological damage is usually difficult to reverse.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03839-5
PMCID: PMC12139289
PMID: 40468431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Xinhua Hospital
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine. Written informed
consent was obtained from all participants of their legal guardians (Approval
No. XHEC-D-2024-033). Consent for publication: All authors have read the final
version of the manuscript and consent to the publication. Competing interests:
All of the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
