---
reference_id: PMID:20661308
title: Genome-wide meta-analysis for serum calcium identifies significantly associated SNPs near the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) gene.
authors:
- Kapur K
- Johnson T
- Beckmann ND
- Sehmi J
- Tanaka T
- Kutalik Z
- Styrkarsdottir U
- Zhang W
- Marek D
- Gudbjartsson DF
- Milaneschi Y
- Holm H
- Diiorio A
- Waterworth D
- Li Y
- Singleton AB
- Bjornsdottir US
- Sigurdsson G
- Hernandez DG
- Desilva R
- Elliott P
- Eyjolfsson GI
- Guralnik JM
- Scott J
- Thorsteinsdottir U
- Bandinelli S
- Chambers J
- Stefansson K
- Waeber G
- Ferrucci L
- Kooner JS
- Mooser V
- Vollenweider P
- Beckmann JS
- Bochud M
- Bergmann S
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001035
keywords:
- Calcium/blood
- "Genome, Human"
- "Genome-Wide Association Study/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Receptors, Calcium-Sensing/genetics"
- "White People/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide meta-analysis for serum calcium identifies significantly associated SNPs near the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) gene.
**Authors:** Kapur K, Johnson T, Beckmann ND, Sehmi J, Tanaka T, Kutalik Z, Styrkarsdottir U, Zhang W, Marek D, Gudbjartsson DF, Milaneschi Y, Holm H, Diiorio A, Waterworth D, Li Y, Singleton AB, Bjornsdottir US, Sigurdsson G, Hernandez DG, Desilva R, Elliott P, Eyjolfsson GI, Guralnik JM, Scott J, Thorsteinsdottir U, Bandinelli S, Chambers J, Stefansson K, Waeber G, Ferrucci L, Kooner JS, Mooser V, Vollenweider P, Beckmann JS, Bochud M, Bergmann S
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1001035](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1001035)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jul 22;6(7):e1001035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001035.

Genome-wide meta-analysis for serum calcium identifies significantly associated 
SNPs near the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) gene.

Kapur K(1), Johnson T, Beckmann ND, Sehmi J, Tanaka T, Kutalik Z, Styrkarsdottir 
U, Zhang W, Marek D, Gudbjartsson DF, Milaneschi Y, Holm H, Diiorio A, 
Waterworth D, Li Y, Singleton AB, Bjornsdottir US, Sigurdsson G, Hernandez DG, 
Desilva R, Elliott P, Eyjolfsson GI, Guralnik JM, Scott J, Thorsteinsdottir U, 
Bandinelli S, Chambers J, Stefansson K, Waeber G, Ferrucci L, Kooner JS, Mooser 
V, Vollenweider P, Beckmann JS, Bochud M, Bergmann S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

Calcium has a pivotal role in biological functions, and serum calcium levels 
have been associated with numerous disorders of bone and mineral metabolism, as 
well as with cardiovascular mortality. Here we report results from a genome-wide 
association study of serum calcium, integrating data from four independent 
cohorts including a total of 12,865 individuals of European and Indian Asian 
descent. Our meta-analysis shows that serum calcium is associated with SNPs in 
or near the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) gene on 3q13. The top hit with a 
p-value of 6.3 x 10(-37) is rs1801725, a missense variant, explaining 1.26% of 
the variance in serum calcium. This SNP had the strongest association in 
individuals of European descent, while for individuals of Indian Asian descent 
the top hit was rs17251221 (p = 1.1 x 10(-21)), a SNP in strong linkage 
disequilibrium with rs1801725. The strongest locus in CASR was shown to 
replicate in an independent Icelandic cohort of 4,126 individuals (p = 1.02 x 
10(-4)). This genome-wide meta-analysis shows that common CASR variants modulate 
serum calcium levels in the adult general population, which confirms previous 
results in some candidate gene studies of the CASR locus. This study highlights 
the key role of CASR in calcium regulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001035
PMCID: PMC2908705
PMID: 20661308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Vincent Mooser and Dawn Waterworth are full-time 
employees of GlaxoSmithKline, a pharmaceutical company. Peter Vollenweider and 
Gerard Waeber received financial support from GlaxoSmithKline to build the 
CoLaus study. Daniel F Gudbjarsson, Unnur Styrkarsdottir, Hilma Holm, Unnur 
Thorsteinsdottir and Kari Stefansson are employees of deCODE genetics, a 
biotechnology company.