---
reference_id: "PMID:36721231"
title: "Genetic epidemiology of Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome in the Greater Middle East region and beyond: a systematic review."
authors:
- Kohil A
- Abdallah AM
- Hussain K
- Al-Shafai M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02614-8
keywords:
- Alopecia
- Diabetes Mellitus
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligase Complexes
- Basal Ganglia Diseases
- Hypogonadism
- Molecular Epidemiology
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac"
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability
- Nuclear Proteins
- Middle East
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic epidemiology of Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome in the Greater Middle East region and beyond: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Kohil A, Abdallah AM, Hussain K, Al-Shafai M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02614-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02614-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Jan 31;18(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02614-8.

Genetic epidemiology of Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome in the Greater Middle East 
region and beyond: a systematic review.

Kohil A(1), Abdallah AM(1), Hussain K(2), Al-Shafai M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, QU Health, 
Qatar University, 2713, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Endocrinology, Sidra Medicine, Doha, 
Qatar.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, QU Health, 
Qatar University, 2713, Doha, Qatar. malshafai@qu.edu.qa.

BACKGROUND: Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome (WSS) is a rare, autosomal recessive 
genetic disorder with variable clinical manifestations mainly affecting the 
endocrine and nervous systems. The aim of this study was to systematically 
review the genetic basis of WSS and report the genetic variants and clinical 
phenotypes associated with the disease.
METHODS: PubMed, Science Direct, Scopus, and Web of Science databases were 
searched from the time of inception until June 2022. Broad search terms were 
used to capture the literature describing all genetic variants associated with 
WSS. The search keywords used are "Woodhouse Sakati" along with the term 
"mutation" OR "gene" OR "variant" OR "polymorphism".
RESULTS: Twenty-five eligible studies were included in this study. One hundred 
and eighty-five patients in 97 families from 12 different countries were 
diagnosed with WSS. In patients from the Greater Middle East (GME) region, 
consanguineous marriages were common (67%). Thirteen different DCAF17 variants 
were associated with WSS development (including 8 identified in the GME region). 
The most frequent variant was a frameshift deletion variant (c.436delC, 
p.Ala147Hisfs*9) unique to Arabs that was reported in 11 cases from Tunisia, 
Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain, and Saudi Arabia. There were no clear genotype-phenotype 
correlations for the different variants.
CONCLUSIONS: This systematic review highlights the molecular basis and clinical 
manifestations of WSS globally, including the GME region, where the disease is 
prevalent due to consanguinity. Additional studies are now needed to understand 
the genotype-phenotype correlation for different DCAF17 variants and their 
impact on the phenotypic heterogeneity observed in WSS patients.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02614-8
PMCID: PMC9887781
PMID: 36721231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.