---
reference_id: "PMID:19506906"
title: "Candidate gene studies of ADHD: a meta-analytic review."
authors:
- Gizer IR
- Ficks C
- Waldman ID
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0694-x
keywords:
- Alleles
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- Dopamine Plasma Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Dopamine beta-Hydroxylase/genetics
- Genetic Markers
- Humans
- Monoamine Oxidase/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Receptor, Serotonin, 5-HT1B/genetics"
- "Receptor, Serotonin, 5-HT2A/genetics"
- "Receptors, Adrenergic, alpha-2/genetics"
- "Receptors, Dopamine D4/genetics"
- "Receptors, Dopamine D5/genetics"
- Synaptosomal-Associated Protein 25/genetics
- Tryptophan Hydroxylase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Candidate gene studies of ADHD: a meta-analytic review.
**Authors:** Gizer IR, Ficks C, Waldman ID
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-009-0694-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-009-0694-x)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2009 Jul;126(1):51-90. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0694-x. Epub 2009
Jun  9.

Candidate gene studies of ADHD: a meta-analytic review.

Gizer IR(1), Ficks C, Waldman ID.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 120
Mason Farm Road, Room 5015 Genetic Medicine Building CB 7264, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7264, USA. igizer@unc.edu

Quantitative genetic studies (i.e., twin and adoption studies) suggest that
genetic influences contribute substantially to the development of attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Over the past 15 years, considerable
efforts have been made to identify genes involved in the etiology of this
disorder resulting in a large and often conflicting literature of candidate gene
associations for ADHD. The first aim of the present study was to conduct a
comprehensive meta-analytic review of this literature to determine which
candidate genes show consistent evidence of association with childhood ADHD
across studies. The second aim was to test for heterogeneity across studies in
the effect sizes for each candidate gene as its presence might suggest
moderating variables that could explain inconsistent results. Significant
associations were identified for several candidate genes including DAT1, DRD4,
DRD5, 5HTT, HTR1B, and SNAP25. Further, significant heterogeneity was observed
for the associations between ADHD and DAT1, DRD4, DRD5, DBH, ADRA2A, 5HTT, TPH2,
MAOA, and SNAP25, suggesting that future studies should explore potential
moderators of these associations (e.g., ADHD subtype diagnoses, gender, exposure
to environmental risk factors). We conclude with a discussion of these findings
in relation to emerging themes relevant to future studies of the genetics of
ADHD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-009-0694-x
PMID: 19506906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
