---
reference_id: "PMID:35169084"
title: "[Diffuse midline glioma]."
authors:
- Saito R
journal: No Shinkei Geka
year: '2022'
doi: 10.11477/mf.1436204529
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Diffuse midline glioma].
**Authors:** Saito R
**Journal:** No Shinkei Geka (2022)
**DOI:** [10.11477/mf.1436204529](https://doi.org/10.11477/mf.1436204529)

## Content

1. No Shinkei Geka. 2022 Jan;50(1):29-38. doi: 10.11477/mf.1436204529.

[Diffuse midline glioma].

[Article in Japanese]

Saito R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nagoya University, Graduate School of Medicine.

Diffuse midline glioma(DMG), H3 K27M-mutant is an infiltrative midline 
high-grade glioma with predominantly astrocytic differentiation and a K27M 
mutation in either H3F3A or HIST1H3B/C. It is commonly located in the brain 
stem, thalamus, and spinal cord. DMG is predominant in children but can occur in 
adults. Brain stem disease, known as diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma(DIPG), is 
the representative: -80% harbor the H3 K27M mutation. Generally, the prognosis 
of DMG is poor: the 2-year survival rate is < 10%, despite intensive research 
and therapies. Consequently, radiation is the only treatment and there is no 
effective chemotherapeutic regimen. The recent findings concerning the genetic 
profiles of DMG shed light on precision medicine. Until today, approximately 250 
clinical trials with molecular targeted therapy as a strategy have been 
conducted for different biological pathways in DMG. Unfortunately, none of them 
has shown significant efficacy for DMG. One of the problems in these clinical 
trials is insufficient knowledge of whether the used molecular targeted agents 
penetrate the blood-brain barrier. Continuous efforts to develop effective 
precision medicine against DMG should pave the way for overcoming DMG in the 
future.

DOI: 10.11477/mf.1436204529
PMID: 35169084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]