---
reference_id: "PMID:9830628"
title: "Establishing the diagnosis of lymphoma: from initial biopsy to clinical staging."
authors:
- Gascoyne RD
journal: Oncology (Williston Park)
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishing the diagnosis of lymphoma: from initial biopsy to clinical staging.
**Authors:** Gascoyne RD
**Journal:** Oncology (Williston Park) (1998)

## Content

1. Oncology (Williston Park). 1998 Oct;12(10 Suppl 8):11-6.

Establishing the diagnosis of lymphoma: from initial biopsy to clinical staging.

Gascoyne RD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Successful therapy for most of the non-Hodgkin's lymphomas requires an accurate 
pathologic diagnosis. Routine morphologic examination of excisional biopsies 
from nodal or extranodal sites provides the cornerstone for establishing a 
definitive diagnosis. The list of ancillary studies, however, used to complement 
these routine approaches is increasing both in number and complexity. Proper use 
of these diagnostic tools can be of great help in arriving at the correct 
diagnosis in difficult cases. Fine-needle aspiration and needle-core biopsies 
have a role in lymphoma staging and in the assessment of recurrent disease, but 
are limited as primary diagnostic tests. This review will focus on the standard 
approaches used to establish a diagnosis of malignant lymphoma, and the clinical 
utility of immunophenotypic, molecular genetic, and cytogenetic studies in 
providing useful data for diagnosis. The standard practice of synthesizing all 
of the data from multiparameter analysis to arrive at a diagnosis in difficult 
cases will be emphasized.

PMID: 9830628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]