---
reference_id: "PMID:11075600"
title: "The barium enema in constipation: comparison with rectal manometry and biopsy to exclude Hirschsprung's disease after the neonatal period."
authors:
- Reid JR
- Buonomo C
- Moreira C
- Kozakevich H
- Nurko SJ
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s002470000298
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The barium enema in constipation: comparison with rectal manometry and biopsy to exclude Hirschsprung's disease after the neonatal period.
**Authors:** Reid JR, Buonomo C, Moreira C, Kozakevich H, Nurko SJ
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s002470000298](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002470000298)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2000 Oct;30(10):681-4. doi: 10.1007/s002470000298.

The barium enema in constipation: comparison with rectal manometry and biopsy to 
exclude Hirschsprung's disease after the neonatal period.

Reid JR(1), Buonomo C, Moreira C, Kozakevich H, Nurko SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The Cleveland Clinic Children's Hospital, OH 44195, 
USA. reidj@ccf.org

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of Hirschsprung's disease is usually made in neonates 
but often considered in older infants and children with constipation: these 
children may be referred for barium enema. Since it is widely accepted that a 
normal barium enema does not exclude Hirschsprung's disease, some children, 
after a normal enema, undergo more invasive procedures such as rectal manometry 
or biopsy. Our study asked how frequently a diagnosis of Hirschsprung's disease 
was made by biopsy or manometry in children who had normal barium enema.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We reviewed the medical records and barium enemas of 54 
patients older than 28 days with constipation or difficulty passing stool who 
had a barium enema followed by manometry and/or biopsy.
RESULTS: Forty-eight patients had normal enemas: 24 of those patients had 
biopsies, 16 had manometry, and 8 both manometry and biopsy. Only 1 had 
manometry suggestive of Hirschsprung's disease, confirmed by biopsy. Six 
patients had abnormal enemas. Five had biopsy and manometry compatible with 
Hirschsprung's disease; one had a normal biopsy and manometry study.
CONCLUSION: The barium enema is a good initial screening test for Hirschsprung's 
disease in severely constipated children since it correlates well with manometry 
and biopsy. The enema is particularly useful in centers without easy access to 
pediatric gastroenterology services, and a normal enema in this setting allows 
the continuation of medical therapy with further evaluation only if there is a 
lack of response. An abnormal enema, however, requires referral to a facility 
equipped to perform confirmatory manometry or biopsy.

DOI: 10.1007/s002470000298
PMID: 11075600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]