---
reference_id: "PMID:35780451"
title: The immune microenvironment features and response to immunotherapy in EBV-associated lymphoepithelioma-like cholangiocarcinoma.
authors:
- Chiang NJ
- Hou YC
- Tan KT
- Tsai HW
- Lin YJ
- Yeh YC
- Chen LT
- Hou YF
- Chen MH
- Shan YS
journal: Hepatol Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12072-022-10346-3
keywords:
- B7-H1 Antigen
- Bile Duct Neoplasms/complications
- "Bile Ducts, Intrahepatic/pathology"
- "Cholangiocarcinoma/complications, therapy"
- Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/complications
- "Herpesvirus 4, Human/genetics"
- Humans
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- Immunotherapy
- Mixed Function Oxygenases
- NF-kappa B
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins
- Retinoblastoma-Binding Protein 2
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The immune microenvironment features and response to immunotherapy in EBV-associated lymphoepithelioma-like cholangiocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Chiang NJ, Hou YC, Tan KT, Tsai HW, Lin YJ, Yeh YC, Chen LT, Hou YF, Chen MH, Shan YS
**Journal:** Hepatol Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12072-022-10346-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12072-022-10346-3)

## Content

1. Hepatol Int. 2022 Oct;16(5):1137-1149. doi: 10.1007/s12072-022-10346-3. Epub
2022 Jul 3.

The immune microenvironment features and response to immunotherapy in
EBV-associated lymphoepithelioma-like cholangiocarcinoma.

Chiang NJ(#)(1)(2)(3), Hou YC(#)(4)(5), Tan KT(6), Tsai HW(7), Lin YJ(8), Yeh
YC(2)(9), Chen LT(3)(10), Hou YF(11), Chen MH(#)(12)(13), Shan YS(#)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, No. 201, Sec. 2,
Shipai Rd., Beitou District, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Clinical Medical Research, National Cheng Kung University
Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, No. 138, Sheng-Li
Road, Tainan, 70428, Taiwan.
(6)ACT Genomics Co., Ltd, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Pathology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(8)Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, College of Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital and
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(11)Department of Oncology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, No. 201, Sec. 2,
Shipai Rd., Beitou District, Taipei, Taiwan. mhchen9@gmail.com.
(13)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei,
Taiwan. mhchen9@gmail.com.
(14)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan. ysshan@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
(15)Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, College of Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan.
ysshan@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Limited data are available for tumor immune
microenvironment (TIME) in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated
lymphoepithelioma-like cholangiocarcinoma (EBV-LELCC), a rare subtype of
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IHCC). We aimed to investigate TIME features in
EBV-LELCC and the correlation between the components of TIME and the clinical
outcomes.
METHODS: Tumor tissues from five EBV-LELCC cases confirmed through EBER in situ
hybridization and five stage-matched conventional IHCC (non-EBV IHCC) cases were
collected. These samples were used to evaluate genetic alterations, TIME
composition, and PD-L1 expression through ion AmpliSeq comprehensive cancer
panel, PanCancer immune profiling panel, immunohistochemistry, and
immunofluorescence staining. The correlation between clinical outcomes and TIME
components was analyzed in the two EBV-LELCC cases receiving anti-PD-1
treatment.
RESULTS: The genetic mutations identified in EBV-LELCC were BARD1, CD19, CD79B,
EPHA5, KDM5A, MUC6, MUC16, PTEN, RECQL4, TET1, and TNFAIP3. Both CD79B and
TNFAIP3 mutations were involved in the NF-κB signaling pathway. PD-L1 was highly
expressed in tumor-infiltrating immune cells, especially the T cells and
macrophages. The TIME of EBV-LELCC displayed abundant immune cell infiltration
with a stronger adaptive immune response. Increased Th1 cells, NK CD56dim cells,
and M1 macrophages, decreased M2 macrophages, exhausted CD8 T cell infiltration,
and increased T cell activation signatures in TIME were associated with longer
survival. Two patients with metastatic EBV-LELCC had good disease control after
anti-PD-1 antibody treatment. A significantly larger TIME component made
EBV-LELCCs more sensitive to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB).
CONCLUSION: A better understanding of the composition of TIME in EBV-LELCC is
critical for predicting the clinical outcomes of ICB treatment.

© 2022. Asian Pacific Association for the Study of the Liver.

DOI: 10.1007/s12072-022-10346-3
PMID: 35780451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
