---
reference_id: "PMID:37217093"
title: "Myocilin misfolding and glaucoma: A 20-year update."
authors:
- Saccuzzo EG
- Youngblood HA
- Lieberman RL
journal: Prog Retin Eye Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2023.101188
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myocilin misfolding and glaucoma: A 20-year update.
**Authors:** Saccuzzo EG, Youngblood HA, Lieberman RL
**Journal:** Prog Retin Eye Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preteyeres.2023.101188](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2023.101188)

## Content

1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2023 Jul;95:101188. doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2023.101188.
 Epub 2023 May 20.

Myocilin misfolding and glaucoma: A 20-year update.

Saccuzzo EG(1), Youngblood HA(1), Lieberman RL(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, 901 
Atlantic Dr. NW, Atlanta, GA, 30332-0400, USA.
(2)School of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, 901 
Atlantic Dr. NW, Atlanta, GA, 30332-0400, USA. Electronic address: 
Raquel.lieberman@chemistry.gatech.edu.

Mutations in the gene MYOC account for approximately 5% of cases of primary open 
angle glaucoma (POAG). MYOC encodes for the protein myocilin, a multimeric 
secreted glycoprotein composed of N-terminal coiled-coil (CC) and leucine zipper 
(LZ) domains that are connected via a disordered linker to a 30 kDa olfactomedin 
(OLF) domain. More than 90% of glaucoma-causing mutations are localized to the 
OLF domain. While myocilin is expressed in numerous tissues, mutant myocilin is 
only associated with disease in the anterior segment of the eye, in the 
trabecular meshwork. The prevailing pathogenic mechanism involves a gain of 
toxic function whereby mutant myocilin aggregates intracellularly instead of 
being secreted, which causes cell stress and an early timeline for TM cell 
death, elevated intraocular pressure, and subsequent glaucoma-associated retinal 
degeneration. In this review, we focus on the work our lab has conducted over 
the past ∼15 years to enhance our molecular understanding of myocilin-associated 
glaucoma, which includes details of the molecular structure and the nature of 
the aggregates formed by mutant myocilin. We conclude by discussing open 
questions, such as predicting phenotype from genotype alone, the elusive native 
function of myocilin, and translational directions enabled by our work.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2023.101188
PMCID: PMC10330797
PMID: 37217093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest RLL is a 
co-inventor of WO 2021/237213 A1 and US-2022-0026445-A1.