---
reference_id: "PMID:35836351"
title: Enamel defects of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and the role of PITX2 in its pathogenesis.
authors:
- Yang Y
- Zhu J
- Chiba Y
- Fukumoto S
- Qin M
- Wang X
journal: Oral Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/odi.14315
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enamel defects of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and the role of PITX2 in its pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Yang Y, Zhu J, Chiba Y, Fukumoto S, Qin M, Wang X
**Journal:** Oral Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/odi.14315](https://doi.org/10.1111/odi.14315)

## Content

1. Oral Dis. 2023 Nov;29(8):3654-3664. doi: 10.1111/odi.14315. Epub 2022 Jul 21.

Enamel defects of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and the role of PITX2 in its 
pathogenesis.

Yang Y(1), Zhu J(1), Chiba Y(2), Fukumoto S(2)(3), Qin M(1), Wang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Peking University School and Hospital of 
Stomatology, Beijing, China.
(2)Division of Oral Health, Section of Oral Medicine for Children, Growth and 
Development, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Oral Health and Development 
Sciences, Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the detailed ultrastructural patterns of dental 
abnormalities affected by Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) with a heterozygous 
microdeletion involving paired-like homeodomain 2 (PITX2) and explored the 
underlying molecular mechanisms driving enamel defects.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Sanger sequencing, genomic quantitative PCR analysis, and 
chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) were used to screen the disease-causing 
mutation in one ARS proband. An exfoliated tooth from an ARS patient was 
analyzed with scanning electron microscopy and micro-computerized tomography. A 
stable Pitx2 knockdown cell line was generated to simulate PITX2 
haploinsufficiency. Cell proliferation and ameloblast differentiation were 
analyzed, and the role of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway in proliferation of 
ameloblast precursor cells was investigated.
RESULTS: An approximately 0.216 Mb novel deletion encompassing PITX2 was 
identified. The affected tooth displayed a thinner and broken layer of enamel 
and abnormal enamel biomineralization. PITX2 downregulation inhibited the 
proliferation and differentiation of inner enamel epithelial cells, and LiCl 
stifmulation partially reversed the proliferation ability after Pitx2 knockdown.
CONCLUSIONS: Enamel formation is disturbed in some patients with ARS. Pitx2 
knockdown can influence the proliferation and ameloblast differentiation of 
inner enamel epithelial cells, and PITX2 may regulate cell proliferation via 
Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/odi.14315
PMID: 35836351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]