---
reference_id: "PMID:15015922"
title: Modeling infection transmission.
authors:
- Koopman J
journal: Annu Rev Public Health
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.25.102802.124353
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling infection transmission.
**Authors:** Koopman J
**Journal:** Annu Rev Public Health (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.publhealth.25.102802.124353](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.25.102802.124353)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Public Health. 2004;25:303-26. doi: 
10.1146/annurev.publhealth.25.102802.124353.

Modeling infection transmission.

Koopman J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
48109, USA. jkoopman@umich.edu

Understanding what determines patterns of infection spread in populations is 
important for controlling infection transmission. The science that advances this 
understanding uses mathematical and computer models that vary from deterministic 
models of continuous populations to models of dynamically evolving contact 
networks between individuals. These provide insight, serve as scientific 
theories, help design studies, and help analyze data. The key to their use lies 
in assessing the robustness of inferences made using them to violation of their 
simplifying assumptions. This involves changing model forms from deterministic 
to stochastic and from compartmental to network, as well as adding realistic 
detail and changing parameter values. Currently inferences about infection 
transmission are often made using stratified rate or risk comparisons, logistic 
regression models, or proportionate hazards models that assume an absence of 
transmission. Robustness assessment will show many of these inferences to be 
wrong. A community of epidemiologist modelers is needed for effective robustness 
assessment.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.25.102802.124353
PMID: 15015922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]