---
reference_id: "PMID:27879543"
title: Enzymopenic Congenital Methemoglobinemia in Children of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia).
authors:
- Burtseva TE
- Ammosova TN
- Protopopova NN
- Yakovleva SY
- Slobodchikova MP
journal: J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000705
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alternative Splicing
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cytochrome-B(5) Reductase/blood, deficiency, genetics"
- Erythrocyte Count
- Ethnicity/genetics
- Female
- Hemoglobins/analysis
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Methemoglobin/analysis
- "Methemoglobinemia/blood, epidemiology, genetics"
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- Sex Factors
- Siberia/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enzymopenic Congenital Methemoglobinemia in Children of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia).
**Authors:** Burtseva TE, Ammosova TN, Protopopova NN, Yakovleva SY, Slobodchikova MP
**Journal:** J Pediatr Hematol Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPH.0000000000000705](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPH.0000000000000705)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2017 Jan;39(1):42-45. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0000000000000705.

Enzymopenic Congenital Methemoglobinemia in Children of the Republic of Sakha
(Yakutia).

Burtseva TE(1), Ammosova TN, Protopopova NN, Yakovleva SY, Slobodchikova MP.

Author information:
(1)*Yakut Science Centre of Complex Medical Problems ‡The Consultation
Polyclinic of the Pediatric Center, Yakutsk §Saint Petersburg State Pediatric
Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia †Center for Sickle Cell Disease,
Howard University, Washington, DC.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2017 Nov;39(8):629. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0000000000000973.

Type I congenital methemoglobinemia is an autosomal recessive disorder. A high
frequency of congenital methemoglobinemia has been reported among Native
Americans inhabiting the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta. Other rare cases of congenital
methemoglobinemia of types I and II have been reported in Japan and other
countries. In Russia-namely, in Yakutia-a high frequency of type I congenital
methemoglobinemia has been reported. In 2009, the Consultation Polyclinic of the
Pediatric Center in Yakutsk city established a registry of children with
congenital methemoglobinemia. In total, 43 patients were registered between 2005
and 2009. The median methemoglobin level was 13.5% (ranging between 4.2% and
33.9%) and physical examination revealed cyanosis of the skin and mucus
membranes. There were significant positive relationships between percentage of
methemoglobin and erythrocyte count, hemoglobin concentration, and hematocrit
among male patients, consistent with an upregulation of the hypoxic response.
The prevalence per 100,000 children ranged from 12.7 to 47.0 in 3 geographic
regions of Yakutia. Further research is needed to clarify the clinical
consequences of congenital methemoglobinemia in the children of Yakutia and the
reasons for the high variability in the prevalence of the condition.

DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000705
PMID: 27879543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
