---
reference_id: "PMID:15507265"
title: "Primary, Secondary, Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome: is there a difference?"
authors:
- Harris EN
- Pierangeli SS
journal: Thromb Res
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2004.08.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary, Secondary, Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome: is there a difference?
**Authors:** Harris EN, Pierangeli SS
**Journal:** Thromb Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.thromres.2004.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2004.08.003)

## Content

1. Thromb Res. 2004;114(5-6):357-61. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2004.08.003.

Primary, Secondary, Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome: is there a 
difference?

Harris EN(1), Pierangeli SS.

Author information:
(1)Morehouse School of Medicine, 720 Westview Dr SW, Atlanta, GA 30310-1495, 
USA. harrise@msm.edu

Following broad recognition of the disorder called Antiphospholipid Syndrome 
(APS), it has come to be subcategorized into Primary (PAPS), Secondary (SAPS), 
and Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome (CAPS). Primary utilized when there 
is no associated disorder, secondary with an associated autoimmune disorder such 
as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and "catastrophic" when thrombosis occurs 
at multiple sites in a short space of time. Are these entities different? Such 
differences should be demonstrated in terms of their clinical presentation, 
disease course, pathogenesis, or management. If no differences exist, is there a 
basis for continued use of these terms? This manuscript will attempt to explore 
distinctions between subgroups of the APS and reasons for or against 
perpetuation of these classifications in the literature.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2004.08.003
PMID: 15507265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]