---
reference_id: "PMID:18272962"
title: "Cisplatin nephrotoxicity: mechanisms and renoprotective strategies."
authors:
- Pabla N
- Dong Z
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/sj.ki.5002786
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cisplatin nephrotoxicity: mechanisms and renoprotective strategies.
**Authors:** Pabla N, Dong Z
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.ki.5002786](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ki.5002786)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2008 May;73(9):994-1007. doi: 10.1038/sj.ki.5002786. Epub 2008 Feb
 13.

Cisplatin nephrotoxicity: mechanisms and renoprotective strategies.

Pabla N(1), Dong Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia and 
Charlie Norwood VA Medical Center, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Cisplatin is one of the most widely used and most potent chemotherapy drugs. 
However, side effects in normal tissues and organs, notably nephrotoxicity in 
the kidneys, limit the use of cisplatin and related platinum-based therapeutics. 
Recent research has shed significant new lights on the mechanism of cisplatin 
nephrotoxicity, especially on the signaling pathways leading to tubular cell 
death and inflammation. Renoprotective approaches are being discovered, but the 
protective effects are mostly partial, suggesting the need for combinatorial 
strategies. Importantly, it is unclear whether these approaches would limit the 
anticancer effects of cisplatin in tumors. Examination of tumor-bearing animals 
and identification of novel renoprotective strategies that do not diminish the 
anticancer efficacy of cisplatin are essential to the development of clinically 
applicable interventions.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ki.5002786
PMID: 18272962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]