---
reference_id: "PMID:24510737"
title: "Rehabilitation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: why it matters."
authors:
- Majmudar S
- Wu J
- Paganoni S
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/mus.24202
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rehabilitation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: why it matters.
**Authors:** Majmudar S, Wu J, Paganoni S
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.24202](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.24202)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2014 Jul;50(1):4-13. doi: 10.1002/mus.24202. Epub 2014 May 17.

Rehabilitation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: why it matters.

Majmudar S(1), Wu J, Paganoni S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Spaulding Rehabilitation 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease that 
results in a constellation of problematic symptoms and a high patient and 
caregiver burden. Multidisciplinary care includes rehabilitation interventions 
that have the goal of assisting people to teach their fullest potential despite 
the presence of a disabling disease. Given the progressive nature of ALS, the 
clinician must be aware of the expected disease trajectory and apply appropriate 
interventions at each stage. This review will present rehabilitation strategies 
that can be utilized to maximize patient independence, function, safety, and 
quality of life, and to minimize disease-related symptoms. The role of bracing, 
exercise, assistive devices, and adaptive equipment will be discussed. At each 
disease stage, an experienced rehabilitation team is well positioned to make a 
significant impact on the life of ALS patients.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.24202
PMCID: PMC4433000
PMID: 24510737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]