---
reference_id: PMID:23746838
title: The hallmarks of aging.
authors:
- López-Otín C
- Blasco MA
- Partridge L
- Serrano M
- Kroemer G
journal: Cell
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.039
keywords:
- "Aging/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Cellular Senescence
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Genomic Instability
- Humans
- "Telomere/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The hallmarks of aging.
**Authors:** López-Otín C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M, Kroemer G
**Journal:** Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.039)

## Content

1. Cell. 2013 Jun 6;153(6):1194-217. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.039.

The hallmarks of aging.

López-Otín C(1), Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M, Kroemer G.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Instituto Universitario de 
Oncología (IUOPA), Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.

Comment in
    Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):3475-6. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3422.

Aging is characterized by a progressive loss of physiological integrity, leading 
to impaired function and increased vulnerability to death. This deterioration is 
the primary risk factor for major human pathologies, including cancer, diabetes, 
cardiovascular disorders, and neurodegenerative diseases. Aging research has 
experienced an unprecedented advance over recent years, particularly with the 
discovery that the rate of aging is controlled, at least to some extent, by 
genetic pathways and biochemical processes conserved in evolution. This Review 
enumerates nine tentative hallmarks that represent common denominators of aging 
in different organisms, with special emphasis on mammalian aging. These 
hallmarks are: genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, 
loss of proteostasis, deregulated nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, 
cellular senescence, stem cell exhaustion, and altered intercellular 
communication. A major challenge is to dissect the interconnectedness between 
the candidate hallmarks and their relative contributions to aging, with the 
final goal of identifying pharmaceutical targets to improve human health during 
aging, with minimal side effects.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.039
PMCID: PMC3836174
PMID: 23746838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]