---
reference_id: "PMID:20816094"
title: Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 9 is required for the biogenesis of oxidative phosphorylation complex I.
authors:
- Nouws J
- Nijtmans L
- Houten SM
- van den Brand M
- Huynen M
- Venselaar H
- Hoefs S
- Gloerich J
- Kronick J
- Hutchin T
- Willems P
- Rodenburg R
- Wanders R
- van den Heuvel L
- Smeitink J
- Vogel RO
journal: Cell Metab
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.08.002
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase, Long-Chain/chemistry, classification, genetics, metabolism"
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenases/chemistry, classification, genetics, metabolism"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Electron Transport Complex I/biosynthesis
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, physiology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "NADH Dehydrogenase/genetics, metabolism"
- Oxidation-Reduction
- Oxidative Phosphorylation
- Phylogeny
- Pregnancy
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- RNA Interference
- Sequence Analysis
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 9 is required for the biogenesis of oxidative phosphorylation complex I.
**Authors:** Nouws J, Nijtmans L, Houten SM, van den Brand M, Huynen M, Venselaar H, Hoefs S, Gloerich J, Kronick J, Hutchin T, Willems P, Rodenburg R, Wanders R, van den Heuvel L, Smeitink J, Vogel RO
**Journal:** Cell Metab (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmet.2010.08.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2010.08.002)

## Content

1. Cell Metab. 2010 Sep 8;12(3):283-94. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.08.002.

Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 9 is required for the biogenesis of oxidative 
phosphorylation complex I.

Nouws J(1), Nijtmans L, Houten SM, van den Brand M, Huynen M, Venselaar H, Hoefs 
S, Gloerich J, Kronick J, Hutchin T, Willems P, Rodenburg R, Wanders R, van den 
Heuvel L, Smeitink J, Vogel RO.

Author information:
(1)Nijmegen Centre for Mitochondrial Disorders at the Department of Pediatrics, 
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2010 Sep 8;12(3):211-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.08.008.

Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 9 (ACAD9) is a recently identified member of the acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase family. It closely resembles very long-chain acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase (VLCAD), involved in mitochondrial beta oxidation of long-chain 
fatty acids. Contrary to its previously proposed involvement in fatty acid 
oxidation, we describe a role for ACAD9 in oxidative phosphorylation. ACAD9 
binds complex I assembly factors NDUFAF1 and Ecsit and is specifically required 
for the assembly of complex I. Furthermore, ACAD9 mutations result in complex I 
deficiency and not in disturbed long-chain fatty acid oxidation. This strongly 
contrasts with its evolutionary ancestor VLCAD, which we show is not required 
for complex I assembly and clearly plays a role in fatty acid oxidation. Our 
results demonstrate that two closely related metabolic enzymes have diverged at 
the root of the vertebrate lineage to function in two separate mitochondrial 
metabolic pathways and have clinical implications for the diagnosis of complex I 
deficiency.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.08.002
PMID: 20816094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]