---
reference_id: "PMID:34749265"
title: "Therapeutic vaccination strategies against EBOV by rVSV-EBOV-GP: the role of innate immunity."
authors:
- Pinski AN
- Messaoudi I
journal: Curr Opin Virol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.10.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic vaccination strategies against EBOV by rVSV-EBOV-GP: the role of innate immunity.
**Authors:** Pinski AN, Messaoudi I
**Journal:** Curr Opin Virol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coviro.2021.10.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coviro.2021.10.007)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Virol. 2021 Dec;51:179-189. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.10.007. Epub 
2021 Nov 5.

Therapeutic vaccination strategies against EBOV by rVSV-EBOV-GP: the role of 
innate immunity.

Pinski AN(1), Messaoudi I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; Center for Virus Research, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; Institute for Immunology, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular 
Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. 
Electronic address: ilhem.messaoudi@uky.edu.

Zaire Ebola virus (EBOV) is a member of the Filoviridae family. Infection with 
EBOV causes Ebola virus disease (EVD) characterized by excessive inflammation, 
lymphocyte death, coagulopathy, and multi-organ failure. In 2019, the 
FDA-approved the first anti-EBOV vaccine, rVSV-EBOV-GP (Ervebo® by Merck). This 
live-recombinant vaccine confers both prophylactic and therapeutic protection to 
nonhuman primates and humans. While mechanisms conferring prophylactic 
protection are well-investigated, those underlying protection conferred shortly 
before and after exposure to EBOV remain poorly understood. In this review, we 
review data from in vitro and in vivo studies analyzing early immune responses 
to rVSV-EBOV-GP and discuss the role of innate immune activation in therapeutic 
protection.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coviro.2021.10.007
PMCID: PMC8884032
PMID: 34749265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]