---
reference_id: "PMID:33209958"
title: High Levels of Frataxin Overexpression Lead to Mitochondrial and Cardiac Toxicity in Mouse Models.
authors:
- Belbellaa B
- Reutenauer L
- Messaddeq N
- Monassier L
- Puccio H
journal: Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtm.2020.08.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High Levels of Frataxin Overexpression Lead to Mitochondrial and Cardiac Toxicity in Mouse Models.
**Authors:** Belbellaa B, Reutenauer L, Messaddeq N, Monassier L, Puccio H
**Journal:** Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtm.2020.08.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2020.08.018)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2020 Sep 1;19:120-138. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2020.08.018. eCollection 2020 Dec 11.

High Levels of Frataxin Overexpression Lead to Mitochondrial and Cardiac
Toxicity in Mouse Models.

Belbellaa B(1)(2)(3)(4), Reutenauer L(1)(2)(3)(4), Messaddeq N(1)(2)(3)(4),
Monassier L(5), Puccio H(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
Illkirch 67404, France.
(2)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1258, Illkirch
67404, France.
(3)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7104, Illkirch 67404,
France.
(4)Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch 67404, France.
(5)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie et Toxicologie NeuroCardiovasculaire EA7296,
Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg 67085, France.

Friedreich ataxia (FA) is currently an incurable inherited mitochondrial disease
caused by reduced levels of frataxin (FXN). Cardiac dysfunction is the main
cause of premature death in FA. Adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated gene
therapy constitutes a promising approach for FA, as demonstrated in cardiac and
neurological mouse models. While the minimal therapeutic level of FXN protein to
be restored and biodistribution have recently been defined for the heart, it is
unclear if FXN overexpression could be harmful. Indeed, depending on the vector
delivery route and dose administered, the resulting FXN protein level could
reach very high levels in the heart, cerebellum, or off-target organs such as
the liver. The present study demonstrates safety of FXN cardiac overexpression
up to 9-fold the normal endogenous level but significant toxicity to the
mitochondria and heart above 20-fold. We show gradual severity with increasing
FXN overexpression, ranging from subclinical cardiotoxicity to left ventricle
dysfunction. This appears to be driven by impairment of the mitochondria
respiratory chain and ultrastructure, which leads to cardiomyocyte subcellular
disorganization, cell death, and fibrosis. Overall, this study underlines the
need, during the development of gene therapy approaches, to consider appropriate
vector expression level, long-term safety, and biomarkers to monitor such
events.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2020.08.018
PMCID: PMC7648087
PMID: 33209958
