---
reference_id: "PMID:39988727"
title: Two distinct phenotypes in Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome and characterization of the behavioral phenotype in a zebrafish model.
authors:
- Enomoto Y
- Shiromizu T
- Yasojima S
- Koiwa J
- Kuroda Y
- Ito H
- Yuge M
- Ohkawa M
- Shibata R
- Murakami H
- Naruto T
- Shiiya S
- Omotani N
- Nishimura Y
- Kurosawa K
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-025-01815-y
keywords:
- Animals
- Zebrafish/genetics
- Phenotype
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, pathology"
- "Behavior, Animal"
- Zebrafish Proteins/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Hypertelorism
- Facies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two distinct phenotypes in Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome and characterization of the behavioral phenotype in a zebrafish model.
**Authors:** Enomoto Y, Shiromizu T, Yasojima S, Koiwa J, Kuroda Y, Ito H, Yuge M, Ohkawa M, Shibata R, Murakami H, Naruto T, Shiiya S, Omotani N, Nishimura Y, Kurosawa K
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-025-01815-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-025-01815-y)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2025 Jun;33(6):747-757. doi: 10.1038/s41431-025-01815-y. Epub
 2025 Feb 23.

Two distinct phenotypes in Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome and characterization
of the behavioral phenotype in a zebrafish model.

Enomoto Y(#)(1), Shiromizu T(#)(2)(3), Yasojima S(#)(2), Koiwa J(2), Kuroda
Y(4), Ito H(2), Yuge M(2), Ohkawa M(2), Shibata R(2), Murakami H(4), Naruto
T(1), Shiiya S(4), Omotani N(4), Nishimura Y(5)(6), Kurosawa K(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Institute, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama,
Japan.
(2)Department of Integrative Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Mie
University, Tsu, Japan.
(3)Mie University Research Center for Cilia and Diseases, Tsu, Japan.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama,
Japan.
(5)Department of Integrative Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Mie
University, Tsu, Japan. yuhei@med.mie-u.ac.jp.
(6)Mie University Research Center for Cilia and Diseases, Tsu, Japan.
yuhei@med.mie-u.ac.jp.
(7)Clinical Research Institute, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama,
Japan. kurosawa-k@ncchd.go.jp.
(8)Mie University Research Center for Cilia and Diseases, Tsu, Japan.
kurosawa-k@ncchd.go.jp.
(9)Division of Medical Genetics, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama,
Japan. kurosawa-k@ncchd.go.jp.
(10)Department of Clinical Dysmorphology, Graduate School of Medicine, Mie
University, Tsu, Japan. kurosawa-k@ncchd.go.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

Chromatin remodeling is an important system controlling gene expression. CHD3,
which is a causative gene of Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome (SNIBCPS), is a
member of the chromodomain helicase DNA-binding (CHD) family related to
chromatin remodeling. SNIBCPS is characterized by developmental delay (DD),
intellectual disability (ID), macrocephaly, and facial features including a
prominent forehead and hypertelorism. Hypersociability/overfriendliness is a
notable behavioral feature in patients. Here, we describe five SNIBCPS patients
with CHD3 variants from four families, including a sibling pair caused by
parental gonosomal mosaicism. We observed two distinct phenotypes in our
patients in accordance with previous observations. Phenotype 1: macrocephaly,
hypertelorism, overgrowth, DD, and ID; and Phenotype 2: microcephaly, growth
retardation, DD, and ID. Phenotype 1 was consistent with the typical SNIBCPS
phenotype, while Phenotype 2 was distinct. To understand further the features of
the patients with SNIBCPS, we generated chd3-knockout (KO) zebrafish using
CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing. No morphological changes were observed in chd3-KO
zebrafish. However, behavioral tests showed that chd3-KO zebrafish had strong
and sustained interest in others, and were less aggressive toward others,
suggesting a recapitulation of the hypersociability/overfriendliness phenotype
in patients with SNIBCPS. Metabolomic analysis using whole brains showed changes
in metabolites processed by specific mitochondrial enzymes in chd3-KO zebrafish.
The administration of metformin, which reportedly ameliorates mitochondrial
dysfunction and behavioral abnormalities, attenuated the abnormal behavior of
chd3-KO zebrafish. Our study helps delineate the phenotypes of patients with
SNIBCPS, provides insights into a characteristic behavior of the disease, and
suggests a potential treatment to improve the behavioral symptoms of patients.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Human
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-025-01815-y
PMCID: PMC12185722
PMID: 39988727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests. Ethical approval and consent to participate: Written
informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patients in accordance
with the Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center Review Board and Ethics Committee.
This study was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of
Mie University (no. 2020-19).
