---
reference_id: "PMID:38648328"
title: Osteoglophonic Dysplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Othman AA
- Babcock HE
- Ferreira CR
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoglophonic Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Othman AA, Babcock HE, Ferreira CR

## Content

1. Osteoglophonic Dysplasia.

Othman AA(1), Babcock HE(1), Ferreira CR(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2024 Apr 18.

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Osteoglophonic dysplasia (OGD) is characterized by 
multisuture craniosynostosis (including cloverleaf skull), distinctive 
craniofacial features (prominent forehead, proptosis, widely spaced eyes, 
low-set ears, midface retrusion, short nose, anteverted nares, prognathism, high 
palate, failure of tooth eruption, and gingival overgrowth), profound short 
stature with rhizomelia, and short, broad hands and feet. Radiographs show 
copper beaten appearance to skull, multiple cystic long bone lesions consistent 
with non-ossifying fibromas, irregular vertebral bodies, and osteopenia with 
increased risk of fractures.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of OGD is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical and imaging findings and a heterozygous pathogenic 
gain-of-function variant in FGFR1 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management of musculoskeletal 
manifestations per skeletal dysplasia or physiatry clinic; address mobility 
issues in those with bone deformity; early intervention such as physical 
therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy to optimize developmental 
outcomes; surgical repair in the first year of life in those with multisuture 
craniosynostosis; early initiation of topical eye lubrication in those with 
inadequate lid closure; jaw surgery to advance the midface; pediatric dental and 
orthodontic care; surgical interventions as needed for sleep apnea; treatment 
with phosphate as needed per endocrinologist; standard treatment of hernias per 
gastroenterologist/surgeon. Surveillance: At each visit monitor growth, 
developmental progress, and educational needs, and assess for recurrent and 
pathologic fractures, incomplete eyelid closure, and manifestations of sleep 
apnea. Clinical evaluation of head circumference and for manifestations of 
increased intracranial pressure at least every three months in the first year of 
life. Evaluation by a craniofacial orthodontist when secondary teeth have 
erupted. Assess serum phosphate and serum FGF23 as recommended by 
endocrinologist. Monitor body temperature following sedation for procedures. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Sports restrictions may be necessary for 
activities that carry a potential for head or neck injury; individuals with 
severe proptosis need to wear protective eyewear during activities with risk of 
eye injury. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the 
genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of 
an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would 
benefit from prompt initiation of treatment of developmental and craniofacial 
manifestations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: OGD is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most 
individuals diagnosed with OGD represent simplex cases; some individuals 
diagnosed with OGD have an affected parent. Each child of an individual with OGD 
has a 50% chance of inheriting the FGFR1 pathogenic variant. Once the FGFR1 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal 
and preimplantation genetic testing are possible. Because many individuals with 
short stature have reproductive partners with short stature, offspring of 
individuals with OGD may be at risk of having double heterozygosity for two 
dominantly inherited bone growth disorders; the phenotypes of these individuals 
are distinct from those of the parents, and the affected individuals have 
serious sequelae and poor outcomes. Pregnant women carrying fetuses affected by 
OGD should be monitored during pregnancy for features that can affect early 
morbidity and mortality and should be encouraged to deliver in a hospital with 
ready access to a pediatric otolaryngologist, plastic surgeon, neurosurgeon, and 
pulmonary medicine specialist.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 38648328