---
reference_id: "PMID:39958669"
title: "Endoscopic features of solitary colorectal hamartomatous polyps: Solitary juvenile polyp and Peutz-Jeghers polyp."
authors:
- Kawasaki K
- Torisu T
- Umeno J
- Kurahara K
- Egashira S
- Miyazono S
- Taniguchi Y
- Oshiro Y
- Kawatoko S
- Nagasue T
- Matsuno Y
- Kawakubo N
- Nagata K
- Moriyama T
- Tajiri T
- Kitazono T
journal: Endosc Int Open
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1055/a-2467-9140
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endoscopic features of solitary colorectal hamartomatous polyps: Solitary juvenile polyp and Peutz-Jeghers polyp.
**Authors:** Kawasaki K, Torisu T, Umeno J, Kurahara K, Egashira S, Miyazono S, Taniguchi Y, Oshiro Y, Kawatoko S, Nagasue T, Matsuno Y, Kawakubo N, Nagata K, Moriyama T, Tajiri T, Kitazono T
**Journal:** Endosc Int Open (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2467-9140](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2467-9140)

## Content

1. Endosc Int Open. 2025 Jan 13;13:a24679140. doi: 10.1055/a-2467-9140.
eCollection  2025.

Endoscopic features of solitary colorectal hamartomatous polyps: Solitary 
juvenile polyp and Peutz-Jeghers polyp.

Kawasaki K(1), Torisu T(1), Umeno J(1), Kurahara K(2), Egashira S(2), Miyazono 
S(1), Taniguchi Y(1), Oshiro Y(3), Kawatoko S(1), Nagasue T(1), Matsuno Y(1), 
Kawakubo N(4), Nagata K(4), Moriyama T(1), Tajiri T(4), Kitazono T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Matsuyama Red Cross Hospital, Matsuyama, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Matsuyama Red Cross Hospital, Matsuyama, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND STUDY AIMS: The aim of this study was to clarify the endoscopic 
characteristics of colorectal hamartomatous polyps, including solitary juvenile 
polyp (JP) and solitary Peutz-Jeghers polyp (PJP).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We reviewed the clinicopathological and endoscopic 
findings of 151 colorectal polyps with a diagnosis of solitary JP or solitary 
PJP. The clinicopathological and endoscopic findings of 119 JPs and 32 PJPs were 
retrospectively compared.
RESULTS: Endoscopic findings included significantly higher incidences of 
erosion, whitish exudates, and chicken-skin mucosa in JPs compared with PJPs. A 
lobular surface was more common in PJPs. Magnified narrow-band imaging 
endoscopic findings indicated that expanded crypt openings, sparse marginal 
crypt epithelia, and proliferation of capillary vessels were characteristic of 
JPs. Branching structures were more prevalent in PJPs. Magnifying 
chromoendoscopy found a predominance of star-like pit patterns and decreased pit 
densities in JPs, whereas tubular and branching pit patterns were more frequent 
in PJPs. Neither type of polyp was found to contain adenomas, dysplasia, or 
malignant cells. Combinations of specific characteristic endoscopic findings in 
the JPs and PJPs showed high diagnostic accuracy for those polyps.
CONCLUSIONS: Solitary JPs and PJPs in the colorectum manifested characteristic 
endoscopic findings, and combinations of specific characteristic endoscopic 
findings may be useful for endoscopic diagnosis of solitary JPs and PJPs.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial-License, 
permitting copying and reproduction so long as the original work is given 
appropriate credit. Contents may not be used for commercial purposes, or 
adapted, remixed, transformed or built upon. 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/a-2467-9140
PMCID: PMC11827747
PMID: 39958669

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.