---
reference_id: "PMID:21122093"
title: "Clinical and genetic characterization of Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome patients: first report of large deletions in the ABHD5 gene."
authors:
- Redaelli C
- Coleman RA
- Moro L
- Dacou-Voutetakis C
- Elsayed SM
- Prati D
- Colli A
- Mela D
- Colombo R
- Tavian D
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-33
keywords:
- 1-Acylglycerol-3-Phosphate O-Acyltransferase/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- "Ichthyosiform Erythroderma, Congenital/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Ichthyosis, Lamellar/genetics, physiopathology"
- Infant
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Muscular Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Sequence Deletion
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic characterization of Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome patients: first report of large deletions in the ABHD5 gene.
**Authors:** Redaelli C, Coleman RA, Moro L, Dacou-Voutetakis C, Elsayed SM, Prati D, Colli A, Mela D, Colombo R, Tavian D
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-5-33](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-5-33)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2010 Dec 1;5:33. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-33.

Clinical and genetic characterization of Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome patients: 
first report of large deletions in the ABHD5 gene.

Redaelli C(1), Coleman RA, Moro L, Dacou-Voutetakis C, Elsayed SM, Prati D, 
Colli A, Mela D, Colombo R, Tavian D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Milan, 
Italy.

Erratum in
    Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2011 Feb 21;6(1):6.

BACKGROUND: Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome (CDS) is a rare autosomal recessive 
disorder characterized by nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma 
(NCIE) and an intracellular accumulation of triacylglycerol (TG) droplets in 
most tissues. The clinical phenotype involves multiple organs and systems, 
including liver, eyes, ears, skeletal muscle and central nervous system (CNS). 
Mutations in ABHD5/CGI58 gene are associated with CDS.
METHODS: Eight CDS patients belonging to six different families from 
Mediterranean countries were enrolled for genetic study. Molecular analysis of 
the ABHD5 gene included the sequencing of the 7 coding exons and of the putative 
5' regulatory regions, as well as reverse transcript-polymerase chain reaction 
analysis and sequencing of normal and aberrant ABHD5 cDNAs.
RESULTS: Five different mutations were identified, four of which were novel, 
including two splice-site mutations (c.47+1G>A and c.960+5G>A) and two large 
deletions (c.898_*320del and c.662-1330_773+46del). All the reported mutations 
are predicted to be pathogenic because they lead to an early stop codon or a 
frameshift producing a premature termination of translation. While nonsense, 
missense, frameshift and splice-site mutations have been identified in CDS 
patients, large genomic deletions have not previously been described.
CONCLUSIONS: These results emphasize the need for an efficient approach for 
genomic deletion screening to ensure an accurate molecular diagnosis of CDS. 
Moreover, in spite of intensive molecular screening, no mutations were 
identified in one patient with a confirmed clinical diagnosis of CDS, appointing 
to genetic heterogeneity of the syndrome.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-33
PMCID: PMC3019207
PMID: 21122093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]