---
reference_id: "PMID:38900074"
title: "Clinical Characteristics of Pediatric Parainfluenza Virus Infections: A Comparative Analysis of Parainfluenza Virus Serotypes 1-4 From April 2021 to October 2023 in Hokkaido, Japan."
authors:
- Sanada A
- Kondo K
- Takahashi F
- Higashide Y
- Kunizaki J
- Hoshino E
- Sakurai N
- Mori T
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000004444
keywords:
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Japan/epidemiology
- Child
- Male
- Female
- Infant
- Serogroup
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/virology, epidemiology"
- Adolescent
- "Paramyxoviridae Infections/epidemiology, virology"
- "Rubulavirus Infections/virology, epidemiology"
- "Parainfluenza Virus 1, Human/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characteristics of Pediatric Parainfluenza Virus Infections: A Comparative Analysis of Parainfluenza Virus Serotypes 1-4 From April 2021 to October 2023 in Hokkaido, Japan.
**Authors:** Sanada A, Kondo K, Takahashi F, Higashide Y, Kunizaki J, Hoshino E, Sakurai N, Mori T
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/INF.0000000000004444](https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0000000000004444)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2024 Oct 1;43(10):953-958. doi: 
10.1097/INF.0000000000004444. Epub 2024 Jun 19.

Clinical Characteristics of Pediatric Parainfluenza Virus Infections: A 
Comparative Analysis of Parainfluenza Virus Serotypes 1-4 From April 2021 to 
October 2023 in Hokkaido, Japan.

Sanada A(1), Kondo K, Takahashi F, Higashide Y, Kunizaki J, Hoshino E, Sakurai 
N, Mori T.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatrics, NTT Medical Center Sapporo, Sapporo, 
Hokkaido, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Parainfluenza virus (PIV) is widely known as a causative virus of 
acute respiratory tract infections in children, and 4 serotypes (PIV-1-PIV-4) 
have been identified. The purpose of the present study was to clarify the 
clinical characteristics of the PIV serotypes in pediatric PIV infections in 
Japan.
METHODS: Between April 2021 and October 2023, 8821 children aged <16 years who 
presented with respiratory symptoms underwent multiplex polymerase chain 
reaction analyses at the Department of Pediatrics, NTT Medical Center Sapporo. 
All 1490 cases in which PIV was detected were analyzed for their clinical 
characteristics by PIV serotypes.
RESULTS: Of the 1490 cases, 608 were positive for a single PIV serotype: 91 
(13.5%) for PIV-1, 54 (4.8%) for PIV-2, 361 (62.1%) for PIV-3 and 102 (19.6%) 
for PIV-4. The median ages were 3.5 years for PIV-1, 5.4 years for PIV-2, 1.9 
years for PIV-3 and 2.2 years for PIV-4, with a significantly older age for 
PIV-2. Compared with the other serotypes, croup was significantly more common in 
PIV-1 and lower respiratory tract infection was significantly more common in 
PIV-4. Of the 608 cases with a single PIV serotype, 114 were hospitalized. The 
proportion of hospitalized patients was higher for PIV-4 than for the other PIV 
serotypes, but the difference was not significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Lower respiratory tract infection was more frequent in PIV-4 than 
in the other PIV serotypes, and PIV-4 infection may increase the risk of 
hospitalization.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000004444
PMID: 38900074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding or conflicts of 
interest to disclose.