---
reference_id: "PMID:39980299"
title: Advancing the understanding and treatment of lung pathologies associated with alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Turner AM
- Ficker JH
- Vianello A
- Clarenbach CF
- Janciauskiene S
- Chorostowska-Wynimko J
- Stolk J
- McElvaney NG
journal: Ther Adv Respir Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/17534666251318841
keywords:
- Humans
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/complications, physiopathology, therapy, genetics, diagnosis"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Risk Factors
- "Lung Diseases/etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Lung/physiopathology, pathology"
- Genotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advancing the understanding and treatment of lung pathologies associated with alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Turner AM, Ficker JH, Vianello A, Clarenbach CF, Janciauskiene S, Chorostowska-Wynimko J, Stolk J, McElvaney NG
**Journal:** Ther Adv Respir Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/17534666251318841](https://doi.org/10.1177/17534666251318841)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2025 Jan-Dec;19:17534666251318841. doi: 
10.1177/17534666251318841.

Advancing the understanding and treatment of lung pathologies associated with 
alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Turner AM(1), Ficker JH(2), Vianello A(3), Clarenbach CF(4), Janciauskiene S(5), 
Chorostowska-Wynimko J(6), Stolk J(7), McElvaney NG(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
UK.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Allergology and Sleep Medicine, General 
Hospital Nuernberg and Paracelsus Medical University, Nuernberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public Health, 
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Department of Pulmonology, University Hospital and University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Infectious Diseases, Hannover Medical School, 
BREATH German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Hannover, Germany.
(6)Department of Genetics and Clinical Immunology, National Institute of 
Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases, Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
Zuid-Holland, Netherlands.
(8)Department of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Irish Centre 
for Genetic Lung Disease, Dublin, Ireland.

Alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a genetic disorder that alters the 
functionality and/or serum levels of alpha 1 antitrypsin (AAT). Dysfunctional 
forms of AAT, or low levels of serum AAT, predispose affected individuals to 
pulmonary complications. When AATD-associated lung disease develops, the most 
common pulmonary pathology is emphysema. The development of emphysema and 
decline in lung function varies by AATD genotype and is accelerated by risk 
factors, such as smoking. To improve the understanding and treatment of AATD, 
emerging knowledge and unresolved questions need to be discussed. Here we focus 
on developments in the areas of disease pathogenesis, biomarkers, and clinical 
endpoints for trials in AATD, as well as barriers to treatment. The clinical 
impact of AATD on lung function is highly variable and highlights the complexity 
of AATD pathogenesis, in which multiple underlying processes are involved. 
Reduced levels of functional AAT disrupt the protease-antiprotease homeostasis, 
leading to a loss of neutrophil elastase inhibition and the breakdown of elastin 
within the lung interstitium. Inflammatory processes also play a critical role 
in the development of AATD-associated lung disease, which is not yet fully 
understood. Biomarkers associated with the disease and its complications may 
have an important role in helping to address AATD underdiagnosis and evaluating 
response to treatment. To improve access to treatment, the problem of 
underdiagnosis needs to be addressed and the provision of therapeutic options 
needs to become uniform. Patients should also be empowered to play a key role in 
the self-management of the disease. Advancing our understanding of the disease 
will ultimately improve the life expectancy and quality of life for patients 
affected by AATD.

DOI: 10.1177/17534666251318841
PMCID: PMC11843710
PMID: 39980299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]