---
reference_id: "PMID:39523189"
title: "Association of Adult Atopic Dermatitis with Impaired Oral Health and Oral Dysbiosis: A Case-Control Study."
authors:
- Shahin A
- Leshem YA
- Taieb Y
- Baum S
- Barzilai A
- Jeddah D
- Sharon E
- Koren O
- Tzach-Nahman R
- Coppenhagen-Glazer S
- Hazan R
- Houri-Haddad Y
- Greenberger S
journal: Int Dent J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.identj.2024.10.003
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/complications, microbiology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Dysbiosis/microbiology
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Oral Health
- Prospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Microbiota
- Mouth/microbiology
- "RNA, Ribosomal, 16S"
- Periodontal Index
- Mouth Diseases/microbiology
- Oral Hygiene Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Adult Atopic Dermatitis with Impaired Oral Health and Oral Dysbiosis: A Case-Control Study.
**Authors:** Shahin A, Leshem YA, Taieb Y, Baum S, Barzilai A, Jeddah D, Sharon E, Koren O, Tzach-Nahman R, Coppenhagen-Glazer S, Hazan R, Houri-Haddad Y, Greenberger S
**Journal:** Int Dent J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.identj.2024.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.identj.2024.10.003)

## Content

1. Int Dent J. 2025 Feb;75(1):279-287. doi: 10.1016/j.identj.2024.10.003. Epub
2024  Nov 9.

Association of Adult Atopic Dermatitis with Impaired Oral Health and Oral 
Dysbiosis: A Case-Control Study.

Shahin A(1), Leshem YA(2), Taieb Y(3), Baum S(4), Barzilai A(4), Jeddah D(5), 
Sharon E(6), Koren O(6), Tzach-Nahman R(7), Coppenhagen-Glazer S(8), Hazan R(8), 
Houri-Haddad Y(7), Greenberger S(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Hadassah Medical Center, Faculty of Dental 
Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. Electronic address: 
dr.aayashahin@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Dermatology, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel; Faculty 
of Medicine & Health Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Division of Dermatology, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel.
(4)Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; 
The Department of Dermatology, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(5)Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, Safed, Israel.
(7)Department of Prosthodontics, Hadassah Medical Center, Faculty of Dental 
Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(8)Institute of Biomedical and Oral Research (IBOR), Faculty of Dental Medicine, 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(9)Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; 
The Department of Dermatology, Pediatric Dermatology Service, Sheba Medical 
Center, Ramat Gan, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Systemic alterations in the oral cavity can be reflected in skin 
disorders like psoriasis. However, data about oral health factors that are 
affected and controlled mainly by oral microbiota in atopic dermatitis (AD) are 
sparse. This study compared the oral status and oral microbiota of AD patients 
and healthy controls.
METHODS: This was a prospective sex- and age-matched case-control study 
comparing adult participants with and without dermatologist-verified AD. A 
dentist assessed oral health status, and oral flora samples were collected and 
subjected to 16S rRNA sequencing for microbiome analysis.
RESULTS: Forty-five AD participants and 41 non-AD controls were recruited. 
Compared to the participants in the control group, those with AD had 
significantly higher plaque levels (P = .04), poorer oral hygiene indices (P = 
.04), and higher gingival index trends (P = .05). The oral microbiome in the AD 
group showed significantly higher diversity, both in α and β diversities (P = 
.001, P = .0007, respectively). Furthermore, AD patients had a significantly 
increased abundance of taxa correlated with oral diseases and a decreased 
abundance of bacteria associated with a healthy oral status.
CONCLUSION: AD appears to be associated with poor oral health and oral 
dysbiosis. There is a need to increase both patients' and physicians' awareness 
of oral health.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.identj.2024.10.003
PMCID: PMC11806328
PMID: 39523189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Yael Houri-Haddad, Shoshana 
Greenberger reports financial support was provided by Pfizer. If there are other 
authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or 
personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported 
in this article.