---
reference_id: "PMID:40441036"
title: "Missense mutations in MMACHC protein from cblC disease affect its conformational stability and vitamin B12-binding activity: The example of R161Q mutation."
authors:
- Longo L
- Randazzo L
- Bollati M
- Carrotta R
- Costa MA
- De Rosa M
- Mangione MR
- Martorana V
- Culletta G
- Tutone M
- Mari E
- Ortore MG
- Garcia-Franco PM
- Velazquez-Campoy A
- Passantino R
- Vilasi S
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109150
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Vitamin B 12/metabolism
- "Homocystinuria/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Conformation
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, chemistry, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Stability
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, metabolism"
- Oxidoreductases/genetics
- "Muscle Spasticity/genetics, metabolism"
- Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Missense mutations in MMACHC protein from cblC disease affect its conformational stability and vitamin B12-binding activity: The example of R161Q mutation.
**Authors:** Longo L, Randazzo L, Bollati M, Carrotta R, Costa MA, De Rosa M, Mangione MR, Martorana V, Culletta G, Tutone M, Mari E, Ortore MG, Garcia-Franco PM, Velazquez-Campoy A, Passantino R, Vilasi S
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109150](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109150)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2025 Jul;145(3):109150. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109150.
Epub  2025 May 22.

Missense mutations in MMACHC protein from cblC disease affect its conformational
stability and vitamin B12-binding activity: The example of R161Q mutation.

Longo L(1), Randazzo L(2), Bollati M(3), Carrotta R(2), Costa MA(2), De Rosa
M(3), Mangione MR(2), Martorana V(2), Culletta G(4), Tutone M(4), Mari E(5),
Ortore MG(5), Garcia-Franco PM(6), Velazquez-Campoy A(7), Passantino R(8),
Vilasi S(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council, 90146 Palermo, Italy;
Department STEBICEF, University of Palermo, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
(2)Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council, 90146 Palermo, Italy.
(3)Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council, 20133 Milano, Italy.
(4)Department STEBICEF, University of Palermo, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
(5)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic University of
Marche, Ancona, Italy.
(6)Institute of Biocomputation and Physics of Complex Systems (BIFI),
Universidad de Zaragoza, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain; Certest Biotec S.L., 50840 San
Mateo de Gallego, Zaragoza, Spain.
(7)Institute of Biocomputation and Physics of Complex Systems (BIFI),
Universidad de Zaragoza, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain; Institute for Health Research
Aragon (IIS Aragon), 50009 Zaragoza, Spain; Networking Biomedical Research
Centre in Liver and Digestive Diseases (CIBERehd), 28029 Madrid, Spain;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cell Biology, University of
Zaragoza, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain.
(8)Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council, 90146 Palermo, Italy.
Electronic address: rosa.passantino@cnr.it.
(9)Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council, 90146 Palermo, Italy.
Electronic address: silvia.vilasi@cnr.it.

MMACHC protein plays a crucial role in the metabolism of vitamin B12 (cobalamin,
Cbl) by catalyzing its conversion into the active forms adenosylcobalamin
(AdoCbl) and methylcobalamin (MeCbl), which serve as essential cofactors in key
cellular reactions. Mutations in the gene encoding MMACHC lead to the rare
metabolic disorder known as methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, cblC
type. This condition predominantly affects children and is characterized by
cardiovascular dysfunction, intellectual disability, and a severe form of
maculopathy. The most common missense mutation, R161Q, impairs enzymatic
activity despite not being directly involved in cobalamin binding. Here, using a
comprehensive set of biophysical techniques, we demonstrate that this pathogenic
variant compromises MMACHC structural stability, alters the thermal unfolding
cooperativity and pathway, as well as the populations of conformational
intermediates. Moreover, we show that the R161Q mutation decreases AdoCbl
binding affinity and impairs the protein's ability to form homodimers, which are
supposed to have a functional role. A partial recovery in protein activity upon
treatment with betaine, an osmolyte known for its stabilizing effect on
proteins, was observed. This suggests a direct correlation between the
energetics of MMACHC thermal unfolding and its functional activity. These
findings contribute to a deeper understanding of the molecular mechanisms
underlying MMACHC function and open avenues for potential therapeutic
interventions.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109150
PMID: 40441036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.
