---
reference_id: "PMID:35103000"
title: Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension - Challenges and Pearls.
authors:
- Rohit W
- Rajesh A
- Mridula R
- Jabeen SA
journal: Neurol India
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.332276
keywords:
- Female
- Headache
- Humans
- Intracranial Hypertension
- Male
- "Pseudotumor Cerebri/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Stents
- Vision Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension - Challenges and Pearls.
**Authors:** Rohit W, Rajesh A, Mridula R, Jabeen SA
**Journal:** Neurol India (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0028-3886.332276](https://doi.org/10.4103/0028-3886.332276)

## Content

1. Neurol India. 2021 Nov-Dec;69(Supplement):S434-S442. doi: 
10.4103/0028-3886.332276.

Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension - Challenges and Pearls.

Rohit W(1), Rajesh A(2), Mridula R(3), Jabeen SA(3).

Author information:
(1)RVM Institute of Medical Science and Research Centre, Hyderabad, Telangana, 
India.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India.
(3)Department of Neurology, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India.

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) is defined as a syndrome of raised 
intracranial pressure with normal imaging of the brain and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) composition. There is a rising incidence and prevalence of this disease 
related to the increased prevalence of obesity. It typically affects women of 
working age, and headache is the predominant morbidity in over 90%. The disease 
is also more prevalent in young males. There are many controversies and myths 
that surround IIH. There are currently few treatment options for IIH, management 
is typically medical with those experiencing progressive visual loss undergoing 
surgical procedures. Weight loss and venous sinus stenting are a few therapies 
directed at the etiology.

DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.332276
PMID: 35103000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None