---
reference_id: "PMID:37178657"
title: "A rare presentation of Ludwig's angina with facial nerve palsy, case report."
authors:
- Dessalegn M
- Bogale M
- Alemayehu D
- Assefa W
- Deresse T
journal: Int J Surg Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108309
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare presentation of Ludwig's angina with facial nerve palsy, case report.
**Authors:** Dessalegn M, Bogale M, Alemayehu D, Assefa W, Deresse T
**Journal:** Int J Surg Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108309](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108309)

## Content

1. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2023 Jun;107:108309. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108309.
Epub  2023 May 9.

A rare presentation of Ludwig's angina with facial nerve palsy, case report.

Dessalegn M(1), Bogale M(2), Alemayehu D(2), Assefa W(2), Deresse T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, School of medicine, Debre Markos University, 269, 
Ethiopia. Electronic address: megbardessalegn@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Surgery, School of medicine, Debre Markos University, 269, 
Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Debre Berhan University, 445, 
Ethiopia.

INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE OF CASE: Ludwig's angina is an inflammation of neck 
spaces making it immediately life-threatening. The infection spreads to adjacent 
planes destructing facial planes, aspirations of infective particles, or septic 
embolism to distant areas. Understanding the rare presentations will help early 
diagnosis and treatment.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: This is about a 40 years-old man who presented with 
painful anterior neck swelling of 7 days duration. A diagnosis of Ludwig's 
angina with unilateral facial nerve paralysis and treated with immediate 
incision and drainage.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: Ludwig's may present clinical with a variety of 
complications. This complication may be related to ongoing sepsis or mass 
effects manifesting with airway compromise or nerve palsy.
CONCLUSION: Although facial nerve palsy associated with Ludwig's angina is rare, 
it improves with immediate surgical decompression.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108309
PMCID: PMC10196840
PMID: 37178657

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest There is no 
conflict of interest.