---
reference_id: "PMID:21658220"
title: "TRPV4 related skeletal dysplasias: a phenotypic spectrum highlighted byclinical, radiographic, and molecular studies in 21 new families."
authors:
- Andreucci E
- Aftimos S
- Alcausin M
- Haan E
- Hunter W
- Kannu P
- Kerr B
- McGillivray G
- McKinlay Gardner RJ
- Patricelli MG
- Sillence D
- Thompson E
- Zacharin M
- Zankl A
- Lamandé SR
- Savarirayan R
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-37
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRPV4 related skeletal dysplasias: a phenotypic spectrum highlighted byclinical, radiographic, and molecular studies in 21 new families.
**Authors:** Andreucci E, Aftimos S, Alcausin M, Haan E, Hunter W, Kannu P, Kerr B, McGillivray G, McKinlay Gardner RJ, Patricelli MG, Sillence D, Thompson E, Zacharin M, Zankl A, Lamandé SR, Savarirayan R
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-6-37](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-6-37)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2011 Jun 9;6:37. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-37.

TRPV4 related skeletal dysplasias: a phenotypic spectrum highlighted byclinical, 
radiographic, and molecular studies in 21 new families.

Andreucci E(1), Aftimos S, Alcausin M, Haan E, Hunter W, Kannu P, Kerr B, 
McGillivray G, McKinlay Gardner RJ, Patricelli MG, Sillence D, Thompson E, 
Zacharin M, Zankl A, Lamandé SR, Savarirayan R.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Health Services Victoria and Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia. elena.andreucci@unifi.it

BACKGROUND: The TRPV4 gene encodes a calcium-permeable ion-channel that is 
widely expressed, responds to many different stimuli and participates in an 
extraordinarily wide range of physiologic processes. Autosomal dominant 
brachyolmia, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia Kozlowski type (SMDK) and metatropic 
dysplasia (MD) are currently considered three distinct skeletal dysplasias with 
some shared clinical features, including short stature, platyspondyly, and 
progressive scoliosis. Recently, TRPV4 mutations have been found in patients 
diagnosed with these skeletal phenotypes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We critically analysed the clinical and radiographic data 
on 26 subjects from 21 families, all of whom had a clinical diagnosis of one of 
the conditions described above: 15 with MD; 9 with SMDK; and 2 with brachyolmia. 
We sequenced TRPV4 and identified 9 different mutations in 22 patients, 4 
previously described, and 5 novel. There were 4 mutation-negative cases: one 
with MD and one with SMDK, both displaying atypical clinical and radiographic 
features for these diagnoses; and two with brachyolmia, who had isolated spine 
changes and no metaphyseal involvement.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest the TRPV4 skeletal dysplasias represent a 
continuum of severity with areas of phenotypic overlap, even within the same 
family. We propose that AD brachyolmia lies at the mildest end of this spectrum 
and, since all cases described with this diagnosis and TRPV4 mutations display 
metaphyseal changes, we suggest that it is not a distinct entity but represents 
the mildest phenotypic expression of SMDK.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-37
PMCID: PMC3135501
PMID: 21658220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]