---
reference_id: "PMID:40458063"
title: Matching-adjusted indirect comparison of selpercatinib and pralsetinib in RET fusion-positive non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Hochmair M
- Kiiskinen U
- "D'yachkova Y"
- Puri T
- Wang X
- Wolowacz S
- Vickers A
- Nadal E
journal: Future Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/14796694.2025.2508132
keywords:
- Humans
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Male
- Female
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality, genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Aged
- "Pyrazoles/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- "Pyridines/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Adult
- "Pyrimidines/adverse effects, therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- "Pyrrolidines/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Progression-Free Survival
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Matching-adjusted indirect comparison of selpercatinib and pralsetinib in RET fusion-positive non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Hochmair M, Kiiskinen U, D'yachkova Y, Puri T, Wang X, Wolowacz S, Vickers A, Nadal E
**Journal:** Future Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14796694.2025.2508132](https://doi.org/10.1080/14796694.2025.2508132)

## Content

1. Future Oncol. 2025 Jun;21(15):1867-1878. doi: 10.1080/14796694.2025.2508132.
Epub 2025 Jun 3.

Matching-adjusted indirect comparison of selpercatinib and pralsetinib in RET
fusion-positive non-small cell lung cancer.

Hochmair M(1), Kiiskinen U(2)(3), D'yachkova Y(4), Puri T(5), Wang X(6),
Wolowacz S(7), Vickers A(7), Nadal E(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory & Critical Care Medicine, Karl Landsteiner
Institute of Lung Research & Pulmonary Oncology, Klinik Floridsdorf, Vienna,
Austria.
(2)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(3)International Value and Access, Eli Lilly and Company, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Statistics, Eli Lilly and Company, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Thoracic Oncology Global Medical Affairs, Eli Lilly and Company, Gurgaon,
Haryana, India.
(6)Real World Advanced Analysis, Eli Lilly & Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(7)Health Economics, RTI Health Solutions, Manchester, UK.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Català d'Oncologia (ICO),
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Preclinical and Experimental Research in Thoracic Tumors (PReTT) Group,
Oncobell Program, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL),
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.

AIMS: Selpercatinib and pralsetinib are approved for RET-rearranged non - small
cell lung cancer.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Efficacy and safety were compared using matching-adjusted
indirect comparison.
RESULTS: Median progression-free survival (PFS) was 22.1 and 13.3 months for
selpercatinib and pralsetinib, respectively (HR = 0.67; 95% CI, 0.53-0.85).
Objective response rate was 64.5% and 65.8%, and disease control rate was 92.1%
and 90.4%, respectively. Median overall survival was not reached for
selpercatinib and 43.9 months for pralsetinib (HR = 0.81; 95% CI, 0.60-1.09).
Grade ≥ 3 treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs) were reported in 39.3% and
62.6% of patients, with discontinuations due to TRAEs in 3.6% and 10.0% of
patients, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Outcomes were similar; however, PFS was significantly prolonged with
selpercatinib, with fewer grade ≥ 3 TRAEs.

DOI: 10.1080/14796694.2025.2508132
PMCID: PMC12150609
PMID: 40458063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MH reports receiving personal fees and
nonfinancial support from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Takeda, Lilly and
Roche; and personal fees from Merck Sharp & Dohme. EN received institutional
funding from Bristol Myers Squibb and Roche and has served on an advisory board
and/or as an invited speaker for Amgen, Apollomics, AstraZeneca, BeiGene,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, Genmab, Illumina,
Janssen, Lilly, Merck Sharp Dohme, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Qiagen, Regeneron,
Roche, Sanofi, and Takeda. AV and SW are full-time employees of RTI Health
Solutions, an independent nonprofit research organization, which was retained by
Eli Lilly and Company to conduct the research which is the subject of this
manuscript. Their compensation is unconnected to the studies on which they work.
YD, TP, XW, and UK are employees of Eli Lilly and Company and may hold shares
and/or stock options in the company. The authors have no other relevant
affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a
financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials
discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed. Medical writing support
was provided by Sara Musetti Jenkins, PhD, and Cassondra Saande, PhD, of RTI
Health Solutions and was funded by Eli Lilly and Company. Data analysis
performed in this study was conducted in line with the LIBRETTO-001
(NCT03157128) clinical trial protocol. The LIBRETTO-001 trial and the ARROW
clinical trials were conducted in line with country and local guidelines and the
protocols were approved by institutional review boards or ethics committees at
each site. All patients (or patient guardians) gave informed consent. Both
trials were conducted in accordance with the International Conference on
Harmonization for Good Clinical Practice and the Declaration of Helsinki.
