---
reference_id: "PMID:24316664"
title: "Irinotecan disrupts tight junction proteins within the gut : implications for chemotherapy-induced gut toxicity."
authors:
- Wardill HR
- Bowen JM
- Al-Dasooqi N
- Sultani M
- Bateman E
- Stansborough R
- Shirren J
- Gibson RJ
journal: Cancer Biol Ther
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4161/cbt.27222
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Phytogenic/toxicity"
- "Camptothecin/analogs & derivatives, toxicity"
- "Claudin-1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Diarrhea/chemically induced, pathology"
- Female
- "Intestinal Mucosa/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- "Intestine, Large/drug effects, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Intestine, Small/drug effects, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Irinotecan
- "Occludin/genetics, metabolism"
- Rats
- "Tight Junctions/drug effects, pathology"
- "Zonula Occludens-1 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Irinotecan disrupts tight junction proteins within the gut : implications for chemotherapy-induced gut toxicity.
**Authors:** Wardill HR, Bowen JM, Al-Dasooqi N, Sultani M, Bateman E, Stansborough R, Shirren J, Gibson RJ
**Journal:** Cancer Biol Ther (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4161/cbt.27222](https://doi.org/10.4161/cbt.27222)

## Content

1. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Feb;15(2):236-44. doi: 10.4161/cbt.27222. Epub 2013 Dec
 6.

Irinotecan disrupts tight junction proteins within the gut : implications for
chemotherapy-induced gut toxicity.

Wardill HR(1), Bowen JM(1), Al-Dasooqi N(2), Sultani M(1), Bateman E(2),
Stansborough R(1), Shirren J(1), Gibson RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Sciences; University of Adelaide; Adelaide, SA Australia.
(2)School of Medicine; University of Adelaide; Adelaide, SA Australia.

Chemotherapy for cancer causes significant gut toxicity, leading to severe
clinical manifestations and an increased economic burden. Despite much research,
many of the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood hindering effective
treatment options. Recently there has been renewed interest in the role tight
junctions play in the pathogenesis of chemotherapy-induced gut toxicity. To
delineate the underlying mechanisms of chemotherapy-induced gut toxicity, this
study aimed to quantify the molecular changes in key tight junction proteins,
ZO-1, claudin-1, and occludin, using a well-established preclinical model of gut
toxicity. Female tumor-bearing dark agouti rats received irinotecan or vehicle
control and were assessed for validated parameters of gut toxicity including
diarrhea and weight loss. Rats were killed at 6, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h
post-chemotherapy. Tight junction protein and mRNA expression in the small and
large intestines were assessed using semi-quantitative immunohistochemistry and
RT-PCR. Significant changes in protein expression of tight junction proteins
were seen in both the jejunum and colon, correlating with key histological
changes and clinical features. mRNA levels of claudin-1 were significantly
decreased early after irinotecan in the small and large intestines. ZO-1 and
occludin mRNA levels remained stable across the time-course of gut toxicity.
Findings strongly suggest irinotecan causes tight junction defects which lead to
mucosal barrier dysfunction and the development of diarrhea. Detailed research
is now warranted to investigate posttranslational regulation of tight junction
proteins to delineate the underlying pathophysiology of gut toxicity and
identify future therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.4161/cbt.27222
PMCID: PMC3928140
PMID: 24316664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
