---
reference_id: "PMID:24311462"
title: Haploinsufficiency of BMP4 gene may be the underlying cause of Frías syndrome.
authors:
- Martínez-Fernández ML
- Bermejo-Sánchez E
- Fernández B
- MacDonald A
- Fernández-Toral J
- Martínez-Frías ML
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36224
keywords:
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Banding
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Face/abnormalities
- Facies
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Gene Deletion
- "Growth Disorders/diagnosis, genetics"
- Haploinsufficiency
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haploinsufficiency of BMP4 gene may be the underlying cause of Frías syndrome.
**Authors:** Martínez-Fernández ML, Bermejo-Sánchez E, Fernández B, MacDonald A, Fernández-Toral J, Martínez-Frías ML
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36224](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36224)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Feb;164A(2):338-45. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36224. Epub
2013  Dec 5.

Haploinsufficiency of BMP4 gene may be the underlying cause of Frías syndrome.

Martínez-Fernández ML(1), Bermejo-Sánchez E, Fernández B, MacDonald A, 
Fernández-Toral J, Martínez-Frías ML.

Author information:
(1)CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) (U724), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, Madrid, Spain; Spanish Collaborative 
Study of Congenital Malformations (ECEMC), CIAC (Research Center on Congenital 
Anomalies), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

In 2005, we reported on a family as having Frías syndrome (OMIM: 609640), with 
four affected members displaying a pattern of congenital defects nearly 
identical to those observed in a mother and son described by Frias [Frías et al. 
(1975). Birth Defects Orig Artic Ser 11:30-33]. These defects included growth 
deficiency, facial anomalies, and hand and foot alterations. We had the 
opportunity to study this family again due to the birth of another affected 
girl, who presented with similar facial characteristics to those of her elder 
half-sister and the rest of affected relatives, which consisted of mild 
exophthalmia, bilateral palpebral ptosis, downslanting palpebral fissures, and 
hypertelorism. We performed array-CGH, which identified an identical 
interstitial deletion of chromosome 14q22.1-q22.3 in the mother and two 
daughters. The deletion is 4.06 Mb in length and includes the BMP4 gene, a 
member of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) family of secreted proteins. A 
review of the literature showed that deletions or mutations of this gene 
underlie congenital defects affecting brain, eye, teeth, and digit development. 
Although the clinical manifestations of the current family correlate with the 
defects observed in patients having either 14q22-q23 deletions or mutations of 
BMP4, they show a milder phenotype. In order to understand the clinical 
variability, we evaluated the already known functional characteristics of the 
BMP gene members. This gene family plays an important role during early 
embryogenesis, and the complex synergistic functions and redundancies of the 
BMPs led us to conclude that haploinsufficiency of BMP4 is likely to be 
responsible for the clinical expression of Frías syndrome.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36224
PMID: 24311462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]