---
reference_id: "PMID:33612763"
title: Laboratory findings and clinical characteristics of Pneumocystis pneumonia and tuberculosis infection among HIV-infected patients with pulmonary infiltrates in Jakarta, Indonesia.
authors:
- Rozaliyani A
- Wiyono WH
- Nawas MA
- Sijam R
- Adawiyah R
- Tugiran M
- Wahyuningsih R
journal: Trop Biomed
year: '2020'
doi: 10.47665/tb.37.4.1117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laboratory findings and clinical characteristics of Pneumocystis pneumonia and tuberculosis infection among HIV-infected patients with pulmonary infiltrates in Jakarta, Indonesia.
**Authors:** Rozaliyani A, Wiyono WH, Nawas MA, Sijam R, Adawiyah R, Tugiran M, Wahyuningsih R
**Journal:** Trop Biomed (2020)
**DOI:** [10.47665/tb.37.4.1117](https://doi.org/10.47665/tb.37.4.1117)

## Content

1. Trop Biomed. 2020 Dec 1;37(4):1117-1123. doi: 10.47665/tb.37.4.1117.

Laboratory findings and clinical characteristics of Pneumocystis pneumonia and 
tuberculosis infection among HIV-infected patients with pulmonary infiltrates in 
Jakarta, Indonesia.

Rozaliyani A(1), Wiyono WH(2), Nawas MA(2), Sijam R(1), Adawiyah R(1), Tugiran 
M(1), Wahyuningsih R(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, 
Jakarta, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Pulmonology and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Universitas Indonesia, Persahabatan Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Kristen 
Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia.

Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) and pulmonary tuberculosis infection (PTB) are 
important opportunistic infections in HIV-infected patients. The diagnosis 
remains challenging since Pneumocystis jirovecii cannot be cultured, and 
expectorated-sputum is frequently difficult to obtain. The monoclonal-antibody 
detection for P. jirovecii from induced sputum is promising in diagnosing PCP. 
This study determined the percentage of PCP in HIV-infected patients with 
pulmonary infiltrates at three government hospitals in Jakarta. The concurrent 
infection of PTB was carefully documented as well. This cross-sectional study 
was carried out by documenting the clinical symptoms, laboratory findings, chest 
X-ray, while clinical outcomes were evaluated during hospitalization. The sputum 
induction was conducted for P. jirovecii with monoclonal antibody detection at 
the laboratory of Parasitology Department, Faculty of Medicine Universitas 
Indonesia, as well as Ziehl-Nielsen staining for PTB. The results indicated that 
of 55 HIV-infected patients with pulmonary infiltrates, the positive monoclonal 
antibody for P. jirovecii was detected in eight patients (14.6%). Weight loss, 
fever, shortness of breath, and crackles were found in all PCP patients; while 
dry cough in five patients. Moreover, PTB cases with positive acid-fast bacilli 
(AFB) was detected in five patients (9.1%), the PTB cases with negative AFB was 
43.6% (24 out of 55 patients), and the rest 26 patients (47.3%) were not proven 
to have PTB. The concurrent infections of PCP and PTB were documented in three 
out of five positive AFB patients. The clinical outcome of eight PCP patients 
showed improvement in five patients, but the other three patients died. 
Laboratory findings play an important role in the diagnosis of PCP and PTB, 
along with clinical characteristics and radiological features. Low CD4+ cell 
count was considered a possible risk factor for PCP and poor clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.47665/tb.37.4.1117
PMID: 33612763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]