---
reference_id: "PMID:38145121"
title: "Anti-NMDAR antibodies, the blood-brain barrier, and anti-NMDAR encephalitis."
authors:
- Gong X
- Wang N
- Zhu H
- Tang N
- Wu K
- Meng Q
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1283511
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-NMDAR antibodies, the blood-brain barrier, and anti-NMDAR encephalitis.
**Authors:** Gong X, Wang N, Zhu H, Tang N, Wu K, Meng Q
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1283511](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1283511)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Dec 8;14:1283511. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1283511. 
eCollection 2023.

Anti-NMDAR antibodies, the blood-brain barrier, and anti-NMDAR encephalitis.

Gong X(1)(2), Wang N(3), Zhu H(4), Tang N(3), Wu K(2), Meng Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, Kunming, China.
(2)Department of MR, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, Kunming, 
Yunnan, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, 
Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan 
Province, Kunming, Yunnan, China.

Anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (anti-NMDAR) encephalitis is an 
antibody-related autoimmune encephalitis. It is characterized by the existence 
of antibodies against NMDAR, mainly against the GluN1 subunit, in cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF). Recent research suggests that anti-NMDAR antibodies may reduce 
NMDAR levels in this disorder, compromising synaptic activity in the 
hippocampus. Although anti-NMDAR antibodies are used as diagnostic indicators, 
the origin of antibodies in the central nervous system (CNS) is unclear. The 
blood-brain barrier (BBB), which separates the brain from the peripheral 
circulatory system, is crucial for antibodies and immune cells to enter or exit 
the CNS. The findings of cytokines in this disorder support the involvement of 
the BBB. Here, we aim to review the function of NMDARs and the relationship 
between anti-NMDAR antibodies and anti-NMDAR encephalitis. We summarize the 
present knowledge of the composition of the BBB, especially by emphasizing the 
role of BBB components. Finally, we further provide a discussion on the impact 
of BBB dysfunction in anti-NMDAR encephalitis.

Copyright © 2023 Gong, Wang, Zhu, Tang, Wu and Meng.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1283511
PMCID: PMC10748502
PMID: 38145121

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.