---
reference_id: "PMID:24499752"
title: Obstetric and gynecologic challenges in women with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Hurst BS
- Lange SS
- Kullstam SM
- Usadi RS
- Matthews ML
- Marshburn PB
- Templin MA
- Merriam KS
journal: Obstet Gynecol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000000123
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obstetric and gynecologic challenges in women with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Hurst BS, Lange SS, Kullstam SM, Usadi RS, Matthews ML, Marshburn PB, Templin MA, Merriam KS
**Journal:** Obstet Gynecol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/AOG.0000000000000123](https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000000123)

## Content

1. Obstet Gynecol. 2014 Mar;123(3):506-513. doi: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000000123.

Obstetric and gynecologic challenges in women with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Hurst BS(1), Lange SS, Kullstam SM, Usadi RS, Matthews ML, Marshburn PB, Templin 
MA, Merriam KS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Dickson Advanced Analytics, Carolinas Medical 
Center, Charlotte, North Carolina.

Comment in
    Obstet Gynecol. 2014 Mar;123(3):497-499. doi: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000000160.

OBJECTIVE: To determine how often women with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome experience 
obstetric and gynecologic issues both compared with the general population and 
within the three most common subtypes of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
METHODS: An anonymous, prospective, online questionnaire in English was posted 
to the Ehlers-Danlos National Foundation web site (http://ednf.org).
RESULTS: Of the 1,769 of those who completed the survey, 1,225 reported a typed 
diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Further stratification to the three most 
common types and reproductive-aged women (n=775) allowed conclusions to be made 
about differences in rates of obstetric complications and gynecologic 
dysfunction compared with the general population and between types of 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Rates of obstetric outcomes for women who reported at 
least one pregnancy included term pregnancy in 69.7%, preterm birth in 25.2%, 
spontaneous abortion in 57.2%, and ectopic pregnancy in 5.1%. Infertility was 
reported by 44.1% of survey respondents. Normal menstrual cycles were reported 
by only 32.8% with intermenstrual bleeding occurring in 18.6%. Heavy menstrual 
bleeding was reported by 32.9% survey participants. Gynecologic pain reported 
included dysmenorrhea by 92.5% and dyspareunia by 77.0%.
CONCLUSION: There is a much greater prevalence of obstetric and gynecologic 
issues reported by women with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome than in the general 
population. Additionally, rates differed significantly among the three most 
common types of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with vascular type having the highest 
rates of adverse pregnancy outcomes and menstrual abnormalities. Physician 
providers should be aware of these challenges and should counsel patients with 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome about relevant options and risks.

DOI: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000000123
PMID: 24499752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]