---
reference_id: PMID:28540663
title: BMAA and Neurodegenerative Illness.
authors:
- Cox PA
- Kostrzewa RM
- Guillemin GJ
journal: Neurotox Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12640-017-9753-6
keywords:
- "Amino Acids, Diamino/chemistry, toxicity"
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- Animals
- Cyanobacteria Toxins
- "Excitatory Amino Acid Agonists/chemistry, toxicity"
- Humans
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/chemically induced, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BMAA and Neurodegenerative Illness.
**Authors:** Cox PA, Kostrzewa RM, Guillemin GJ
**Journal:** Neurotox Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12640-017-9753-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12640-017-9753-6)

## Content

1. Neurotox Res. 2018 Jan;33(1):178-183. doi: 10.1007/s12640-017-9753-6. Epub
2017  May 24.

BMAA and Neurodegenerative Illness.

Cox PA(1), Kostrzewa RM(2), Guillemin GJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Brain Chemistry Labs, Institute for Ethnomedicine, PO Box 3464, Jackson Hole, 
WY, 83001, USA. paul@ethnomedicine.org.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Quillen College of Medicine, East 
Tennessee State University, PO Box 70577, Johnson City, TN, 37614, USA.
(3)Macquarie University, MND Research Centre, FMHS, 2 Technology Place, Sydney, 
NSW, 2109, Australia.

The cyanobacterial toxin β-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) now appears to be a 
cause of Guamanian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/parkinsonism dementia complex 
(ALS/PDC). Its production by cyanobacteria throughout the world combined with 
multiple mechanisms of BMAA neurotoxicity, particularly to vulnerable 
subpopulations of motor neurons, has significantly increased interest in 
investigating exposure to this non-protein amino acid as a possible risk factor 
for other forms of neurodegenerative illness. We here provide a brief overview 
of BMAA studies and provide an introduction to this collection of scientific 
manuscripts in this special issue on BMAA.

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-017-9753-6
PMID: 28540663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]