---
reference_id: "PMID:39083629"
title: NFIX-Related Malan Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Priolo M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NFIX-Related Malan Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Priolo M

## Content

1. NFIX-Related Malan Syndrome.

Priolo M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2024 Aug 1.

Author information:
(1)Operative Unit of Medical Genetics and Laboratory of Genetics, AORN A 
Cardarelli, Naples, Italy

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: NFIX-related Malan syndrome (MALNS) is characterized 
by prenatal and postnatal overgrowth, macrocephaly, advanced bone age and/or 
skeletal anomalies (scoliosis, pes planus), slender body habitus, developmental 
delay / intellectual disability (typically in the moderate-to-severe range), 
behavioral problems (including a specific anxious profile and 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD]), and ocular findings (most 
commonly strabismus, refractive errors, and blue sclerae). Affected individuals 
typically have distinctive facial features, including a long and triangular 
face, high anterior hair line with prominent forehead, depressed nasal bridge, 
deep-set eyes, downslanted palpebral fissures, short nose with anteverted nares 
and upturned tip, long philtrum, small mouth that is often held open, thin 
vermilion of the upper lip, an everted lower lip, and a prominent chin. Other 
findings may include autonomic signs (episodic ataxia with dizziness and nausea 
and/or postural fainting), seizures or EEG abnormalities, hypotonia, dental 
anomalies, long bone fractures, and (rarely) congenital heart defects. Four 
individuals with aortic root dilatation have been reported, with one adult 
individual experiencing progressive aortic dilation and dissection at age 38 
years. Additionally, one individual with rib osteosarcoma and another with Wilms 
tumor have been reported (an overall prevalence of malignancy of about 2%). 
Therefore, MALNS appears to be in the same low risk group as Sotos syndrome and 
Weaver syndrome with respect to a low likelihood of developing cancer.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MALNS is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and either a heterozygous pathogenic variant in NFIX (~75% 
of affected individuals) OR a heterozygous deletion of 19p13.2 that includes 
NFIX (~25% of affected individuals) identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Feeding therapy with a low threshold 
for clinical feeding evaluation &/or radiographic swallowing study for those 
with clinical signs or symptoms of dysphagia; gastrostomy tube placement may be 
required for persistent feeding issues. Stool softeners, prokinetics, osmotic 
agents, or laxatives as needed for constipation. Symptomatic treatment for 
autonomic signs based on the underlying cause. Cognitive behavioral therapy 
(CBT) may be used to treat anxiety and ADHD. Symptomatic aids (i.e., colored 
glasses, low voice tone) may reduce anxiety outbursts. Hearing aids may be 
helpful per otolaryngologist. Standard treatment for epilepsy, Chari I 
malformation, developmental delay / intellectual disability, scoliosis/kyphosis, 
pes planus, pectus anomalies, refractive error, strabismus, tooth anomalies / 
malocclusion, aortic root dilatation / valvular issues, and cryptorchidism. 
Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional 
status and safety of oral intake; monitor for signs/symptoms of constipation, 
Chari I malformation, and subtle and nonspecific neurovegetative findings; and 
assess for new manifestations, such as seizures and changes in tone. The first 
BMI evaluation should be performed after age two years; assess caloric intake 
and BMI every six months during the first two years of life, then at least 
annually. Monitor developmental progress, educational needs, and 
psychopathologic symptoms annually from age 12 months to age 36 months and then 
approximately every two years from age three to six years. Annual ophthalmology 
evaluation until puberty and then periodically in adults to evaluate for 
late-onset optic nerve degeneration. Annual audiology evaluation in childhood or 
as clinically indicated. At least annual routine dental/orthodontic evaluation. 
Consider DXA scan for bone mineral density periodically in those with a history 
of multiple fractures or previous low bone mineral density. If the baseline 
cardiovascular evaluation is normal, consider annual cardiology follow up; 
limited data on aortic root progression is available for adults. No tumor 
screening protocols have been proposed or recommended for individuals with 
MALNS.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MALNS is an autosomal dominant disorder typically caused by 
a de novo genetic alteration. Therefore, the risk to other family members is 
presumed to be low. Rarely, individuals diagnosed with MALNS have the disorder 
as the result of a genetic alteration inherited from a mosaic parent. Families 
with sib recurrence due to parental gonadal (or somatic and gonadal) mosaicism 
have been reported. Once an NFIX pathogenic variant has been identified in an 
affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are 
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 39083629