---
reference_id: "PMID:35142380"
title: "Clinical manifestation and long-term outcome of citrin deficiency: Report from a nationwide study in Japan."
authors:
- Kido J
- Häberle J
- Sugawara K
- Tanaka T
- Nagao M
- Sawada T
- Wada Y
- Numakura C
- Murayama K
- Watanabe Y
- Kojima-Ishii K
- Sasai H
- Kosugiyama K
- Nakamura K
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12483
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical manifestation and long-term outcome of citrin deficiency: Report from a nationwide study in Japan.
**Authors:** Kido J, Häberle J, Sugawara K, Tanaka T, Nagao M, Sawada T, Wada Y, Numakura C, Murayama K, Watanabe Y, Kojima-Ishii K, Sasai H, Kosugiyama K, Nakamura K
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12483](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12483)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2022 May;45(3):431-444. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12483. Epub
2022  Feb 25.

Clinical manifestation and long-term outcome of citrin deficiency: Report from a 
nationwide study in Japan.

Kido J(1)(2), Häberle J(3), Sugawara K(1), Tanaka T(4), Nagao M(4), Sawada 
T(1)(2), Wada Y(5), Numakura C(6), Murayama K(7), Watanabe Y(8)(9), Kojima-Ishii 
K(10), Sasai H(11), Kosugiyama K(12), Nakamura K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, 
Kumamoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Kumamoto University Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan.
(3)University Children's Hospital Zurich and Children's Research Centre, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Hokkaido Medical 
Center, Sapporo, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Metabolism, Center for Medical Genetics, Chiba Children's 
Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(8)Research Institute of Medical Mass Spectrometry, Kurume University School of 
Medicine, Kurume, Japan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Kurume University School of 
Medicine, Kurume, Japan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, 
Gifu, Japan.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Teine Keijinkai Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.

Citrin deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the 
SLC25A13 gene. The disease can present with age-dependent clinical 
manifestations: neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis by citrin deficiency (NICCD), 
failure to thrive, and dyslipidemia by citrin deficiency (FTTDCD), and 
adult-onset type II citrullinemia (CTLN2). As a nationwide study to investigate 
the clinical manifestations, medical therapy, and long-term outcome in Japanese 
patients with citrin deficiency, we collected clinical data of 222 patients 
diagnosed and/or treated at various different institutions between January 2000 
and December 2019. In the entire cohort, 218 patients were alive while 4 
patients (1 FTTDCD and 3 CTLN2) had died. All patients <20 years were alive. 
Patients with citrin deficiency had an increased risk for low weight and length 
at birth, and CTLN2 patients had an increased risk for growth impairment during 
adolescence. Liver transplantation has been performed in only 4 patients (1 
NICCD, 3 CTLN2) with a good response thereafter. This study reports the 
diagnosis and clinical course in a large cohort of patients with citrin 
deficiency and suggests that early intervention including a low carbohydrate 
diet and MCT supplementation can be associated with improved clinical course and 
long-term outcome.

© 2022 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12483
PMID: 35142380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]