---
reference_id: "PMID:29130651"
title: Further delineation of the GDF6 related multiple synostoses syndrome.
authors:
- Terhal PA
- Verbeek NE
- Knoers N
- Nievelstein RJAJ
- van den Ouweland A
- Sakkers RJ
- Speleman L
- van Haaften G
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38503
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Growth Differentiation Factor 6/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- "Synostosis/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Further delineation of the GDF6 related multiple synostoses syndrome.
**Authors:** Terhal PA, Verbeek NE, Knoers N, Nievelstein RJAJ, van den Ouweland A, Sakkers RJ, Speleman L, van Haaften G
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38503](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38503)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Jan;176(1):225-229. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38503. Epub
2017  Nov 12.

Further delineation of the GDF6 related multiple synostoses syndrome.

Terhal PA(1)(2), Verbeek NE(1)(2), Knoers N(1)(2), Nievelstein RJAJ(3), van den 
Ouweland A(4), Sakkers RJ(5), Speleman L(6), van Haaften G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
(2)Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Radiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, Netherlands.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, Netherlands.

A mutation in GDF6 was recently found to underlie a multiple synostoses 
syndrome. In this report, we describe the second family with GDF6-related 
multiple synostoses syndrome (SYNS4), caused by a novel c.1287C>A/p.Ser429Arg 
mutation in GDF6. In addition to synostoses of carpal and/or tarsal bones, at 
least 6 of 10 affected patients in this family have been diagnosed with mild to 
moderate hearing loss. In four of them otosclerosis was said to be present, one 
patient had hearing loss due to severe stapes fixation at the age of 6 years, 
providing evidence that hearing loss in the GDF6-related multiple synostoses 
syndrome can be present in childhood. Two others had surgery for stapes fixation 
at adult age. We hypothesize that, identical to the recently published 
GDF6-related multiple synostoses family, the p.Ser429Arg mutation also leads to 
a gain of function. The previously reported c.1330T>A/pTyr444Asn mutation was 
located in a predicted Noggin and receptor I interacting domain and the gain of 
function was partly due to resistance of the mutant GDF6 to the BMP-inhibitor 
Noggin. The results in our family show that mutations predicting to affect the 
type II receptor interface can lead to a similar phenotype and that otosclerosis 
presenting in childhood can be part of the GDF6-related multiple synostoses 
syndrome.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38503
PMID: 29130651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]