---
reference_id: "PMID:30685876"
title: "Ataxia-telangiectasia: A review of clinical features and molecular pathology."
authors:
- Amirifar P
- Ranjouri MR
- Yazdani R
- Abolhassani H
- Aghamohammadi A
journal: Pediatr Allergy Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/pai.13020
keywords:
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Pathology, Molecular"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia-telangiectasia: A review of clinical features and molecular pathology.
**Authors:** Amirifar P, Ranjouri MR, Yazdani R, Abolhassani H, Aghamohammadi A
**Journal:** Pediatr Allergy Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pai.13020](https://doi.org/10.1111/pai.13020)

## Content

1. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2019 May;30(3):277-288. doi: 10.1111/pai.13020. Epub 
2019 Mar 20.

Ataxia-telangiectasia: A review of clinical features and molecular pathology.

Amirifar P(1), Ranjouri MR(2), Yazdani R(3)(4), Abolhassani H(3)(4)(5), 
Aghamohammadi A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Department, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Molecular Medicine and Genetics Department, School of Medicine, Zanjan 
University of Medical Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.
(3)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, 
Children's Medical Center, Tehran, Iran.
(4)University of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Karolinska Institute at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive primary immunodeficiency 
(PID) disease that is caused by mutations in ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) 
gene encoding a serine/threonine protein kinase. A-T patients represent a broad 
range of clinical manifestations including progressive cerebellar ataxia, 
oculocutaneous telangiectasia, variable immunodeficiency, radiosensitivity, 
susceptibility to malignancies, and increased metabolic diseases. This 
congenital disorder has phenotypic heterogeneity, and the severity of symptoms 
varies in different patients based on severity of mutations and disease 
progression. The principal role of nuclear ATM is the coordination of cellular 
signaling pathways in response to DNA double-strand breaks, oxidative stress, 
and cell cycle checkpoint. The pathogenesis of A-T is not limited to the role of 
ATM in the DNA damage response (DDR) pathway, and it has other functions mainly 
in the hematopoietic cells and neurons. ATM adjusts the functions of organelles 
such as mitochondria and peroxisomes and also regulates angiogenesis and glucose 
metabolisms. However, ATM has other functions in the cells (especially cell 
viability) that need further investigations. In this review, we described 
functions of ATM in the nucleus and cytoplasm, and also its association with 
some disorder formation such as neurologic, immunologic, vascular, pulmonary, 
metabolic, and dermatologic complications.

© 2019 EAACI and John Wiley and Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley and Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pai.13020
PMID: 30685876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]