---
reference_id: "PMID:34369269"
title: "Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis associated with parvovirus B19-induced aplastic crisis in a hereditary spherocytosis patient: A case report and literature review."
authors:
- Kim KT
- Hong KT
- Kim BK
- An HY
- Choi JY
- Chang YH
- Kang HJ
journal: Pediatr Hematol Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/08880018.2021.1949082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis associated with parvovirus B19-induced aplastic crisis in a hereditary spherocytosis patient: A case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Kim KT, Hong KT, Kim BK, An HY, Choi JY, Chang YH, Kang HJ
**Journal:** Pediatr Hematol Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08880018.2021.1949082](https://doi.org/10.1080/08880018.2021.1949082)

## Content

1. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2022 Mar;39(2):158-165. doi: 
10.1080/08880018.2021.1949082. Epub 2021 Aug 9.

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis associated with parvovirus B19-induced 
aplastic crisis in a hereditary spherocytosis patient: A case report and 
literature review.

Kim KT(1), Hong KT(1)(2), Kim BK(1)(2), An HY(1)(2), Choi JY(1)(2), Chang YH(3), 
Kang HJ(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Seoul National University Cancer Research Institute, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Wide River Institute of Immunology, Seoul National University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a syndrome of pathologic immune 
activation. It occurs because of severe inflammation due to uncontrolled 
proliferation of activated lymphocytes and histiocytes, characterized by the 
production of excessive levels of cytokines. Virus-associated HLH is a 
well-known entity, and parvovirus B19 is one of the common causes. Parvovirus 
B19 can also affect blood cell lineages. Therefore, HLH may be accompanied by 
several diseases such as cytopenia, aplastic anemia, and myelodysplastic 
syndrome. Herein, we report the case of a patient with hereditary spherocytosis 
who was diagnosed with parvovirus B19-induced HLH and aplastic crisis. A 
7-year-old girl presented to our hospital with fever, pleural effusion, 
pancytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, and hypotension. A bone marrow biopsy was 
performed under the suspicion of HLH, which revealed hemophagocytes. The 
diagnostic criteria for HLH were met, and prompt chemoimmunotherapy was 
initiated considering the clinically unstable situation. Her health improved 
rapidly after initiating treatment. Further study revealed that she had 
hereditary spherocytosis, and parvovirus B19 had caused aplastic crisis and HLH. 
The patient's clinical progress was excellent, and chemoimmunotherapy was 
reduced and discontinued at an early stage. This case shows that aplastic crisis 
and HLH can coexist with parvovirus B19 infection in patients with hereditary 
spherocytosis. Although the prognosis was good in this case of HLH caused by 
parvovirus B19, early detection and active treatment are essential.

DOI: 10.1080/08880018.2021.1949082
PMID: 34369269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]