---
reference_id: "PMID:26770953"
title: Immune tolerance induction in patients with severe hemophilia A with inhibitors.
authors:
- Ryu JE
- Park YS
- Yoo KY
- Lee KD
- Choi YM
journal: Blood Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.5045/br.2015.50.4.248
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune tolerance induction in patients with severe hemophilia A with inhibitors.
**Authors:** Ryu JE, Park YS, Yoo KY, Lee KD, Choi YM
**Journal:** Blood Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.5045/br.2015.50.4.248](https://doi.org/10.5045/br.2015.50.4.248)

## Content

1. Blood Res. 2015 Dec;50(4):248-53. doi: 10.5045/br.2015.50.4.248. Epub 2015 Dec
 21.

Immune tolerance induction in patients with severe hemophilia A with inhibitors.

Ryu JE(1), Park YS(1), Yoo KY(2), Lee KD(3), Choi YM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong, Kyung
Hee University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Korea Hemophilia Foundation, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Health Insurance Review & Assessment Service, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Inhibitory antibodies to factor VIII (FVIII) are an important
complication when managing patients with hemophilia A. Immune tolerance
induction (ITI) has been regarded as a useful method for eradicating inhibitors.
We report the results of a retrospective study in Korean patients with
hemophilia A who underwent ITI.
METHODS: We reviewed the records of patients with hemophilia A with inhibitors
who underwent ITI from March 2004 to December 2014. ITI was started with FVIII
concentrates at 100 IU/kg, 3 times per week. The dose of FVIII was reduced
according to the inhibitor titer and recovery of FVIII. Inhibitor elimination
was defined as the time taken to achieve a negative inhibitor assay with no
anamnestic response and normal FVIII recovery and/or normal half-life.
RESULTS: In total, 17 patients with severe hemophilia A were evaluated. Complete
tolerance was achieved in 14 of 17 patients (83%). The mean peak inhibitor titer
before ITI was 38.4 BU/mL. The mean treatment duration was 26.2 months. The mean
duration between inhibitor detection and ITI was 5.1 years in the complete
tolerance group and 10.8 years in the partial tolerance and failed group.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that ITI can be an effective and well-tolerated
method for eradicating inhibitors. Possible influencing factors for ITI success
were age at the start of ITI treatment and duration after inhibitor detection.
More research to provide further insight about other factors and conditions is
needed.

DOI: 10.5045/br.2015.50.4.248
PMCID: PMC4705051
PMID: 26770953

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of
Interest: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were
reported.
