---
reference_id: "PMID:37399221"
title: "Potential hidden Plasmodium vivax malaria reservoirs from low parasitemia Duffy-negative Ethiopians: Molecular evidence."
authors:
- Abebe A
- Bouyssou I
- Mabilotte S
- Dugassa S
- Assefa A
- Juliano JJ
- Lo E
- Menard D
- Golassa L
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011326
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential hidden Plasmodium vivax malaria reservoirs from low parasitemia Duffy-negative Ethiopians: Molecular evidence.
**Authors:** Abebe A, Bouyssou I, Mabilotte S, Dugassa S, Assefa A, Juliano JJ, Lo E, Menard D, Golassa L
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0011326](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0011326)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2023 Jul 3;17(7):e0011326. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0011326. eCollection 2023 Jul.

Potential hidden Plasmodium vivax malaria reservoirs from low parasitemia 
Duffy-negative Ethiopians: Molecular evidence.

Abebe A(1)(2), Bouyssou I(3)(4), Mabilotte S(5), Dugassa S(1), Assefa A(2)(6), 
Juliano JJ(6), Lo E(7), Menard D(3)(5)(8)(9), Golassa L(1).

Author information:
(1)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, Ethiopia.
(2)Ethiopian Public Health Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(3)Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, Malaria Genetics and Resistance 
Unit, INSERM U1201, F-75015 Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Université, Collège Doctoral ED 515 Complexité du Vivant, Paris, 
France.
(5)Université de Strasbourg, Institute of Parasitology and Tropical Diseases, 
Dynamics of Host-Pathogen Interactions, F-67000 Strasbourg, France.
(6)Institute of Infectious Disease and Global Health, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, Bioinformatics Research Center, University 
of North Carolina at Charlotte, United States of America.
(8)Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, Malaria Parasite Biology and 
Vaccines Unit, Paris, France.
(9)CHU Strasbourg, Laboratory of Parasitology and Medical Mycology, Strasbourg, 
France.

BACKGROUND: The interaction between the Plasmodium vivax Duffy-binding protein 
and the corresponding Duffy Antigen Receptor for Chemokines (DARC) is primarily 
responsible for the invasion of reticulocytes by P. vivax. The Duffy-negative 
host phenotype, highly prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa, is caused by a single 
point mutation in the GATA-1 transcription factor binding site of the DARC gene 
promoter. The aim of this study was to assess the Duffy status of patients with 
P. vivax infection from different study sites in Ethiopia.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted from February 2021 to September 
2022 at five varying eco-epidemiological malaria endemic sites in Ethiopia. 
Outpatients who were diagnosed with P. vivax infection (pure and mixed P. 
vivax/P. falciparum) by microscopy and Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT) were 
subjected to PCR genotyping at the DARC promoter. The associations between P. 
vivax infection, host genotypes and other factors were evaluated.
RESULT: In total, 361 patients with P. vivax infection were included in the 
study. Patients with pure P. vivax infections accounted for 89.8% (324/361), 
while the remaining 10.2% (37/361) had mixed P. vivax/P. falciparum infections. 
About 95.6% (345/361) of the participants were Duffy-positives (21.2% homozygous 
and 78.8%, heterozygous) and 4.4% (16/361) were Duffy-negatives. The mean 
asexual parasite density in homozygous and heterozygous Duffy-positives was 
12,165 p/μl (IQR25-75: 1,640-24,234 p/μl) and11,655 p/μl (IQR25-75: 1,676-14,065 
p/μl), respectively, significantly higher than that in Duffy-negatives 
(1,227p/μl; IQR25-75: 539-1,732p/μl).
CONCLUSION: This study confirms that Duffy-negativity does not provide complete 
protection against P. vivax infection. The development of P. vivax-specific 
elimination strategies, including alternative antimalarial vaccines should be 
facilitated by a better understanding of the epidemiological landscape of vivax 
malaria in Africa. More importantly, low parasitemia associated with P. vivax 
infections in Duffy-negative patients may represent hidden reservoirs of 
transmission in Ethiopia.

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be 
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise 
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the 
Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011326
PMCID: PMC10348516
PMID: 37399221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.