---
reference_id: "PMID:30020611"
title: Giardiasis.
authors:
- Stephen T
- Tobin EH
- Juergens AL
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giardiasis.
**Authors:** Stephen T, Tobin EH, Juergens AL

## Content

1. Giardiasis.

Stephen T(1), Tobin EH(2), Juergens AL(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2025 Dec 13.

Author information:
(1)University of Rochester Medical Center
(2)Clinical Professor of Medicine and Infectious Diseases (retired), Albany 
Medical College; College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering State University 
of New York
(3)Baylor College of Medicine

Giardiasis, caused by the protozoan parasite Giardia duodenalis, is one of the 
most common treatable causes of gastroenteritis worldwide, with a burden higher 
in low-income countries. In high-income countries, risk factors for giardiasis 
include international travel, exposure to untreated freshwater sources, 
male-male sexual contact, contact with diapered children, recent antibiotic use, 
and underlying chronic gastrointestinal disease. The clinical presentation 
typically involves diarrhea, flatulence, abdominal pain, and bloating; however, 
asymptomatic colonization is also common. In some patients, a chronic infection 
may lead to malabsorption and weight loss. Treatment with nitroimidazoles or 
other antiparasitic medications is generally highly effective.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30020611

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Tyler Stephen declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Ellis Tobin 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Andrew Juergens declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.