---
reference_id: "PMID:39110777"
title: A self-amplifying RNA vaccine prevents enterovirus D68 infection and disease in preclinical models.
authors:
- Warner NL
- Archer J
- Park S
- Singh G
- McFadden KM
- Kimura T
- Nicholes K
- Simpson A
- Kaelber JT
- Hawman DW
- Feldmann H
- Khandhar AP
- Berglund P
- Vogt MR
- Erasmus JH
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adi1625
keywords:
- Animals
- "Enterovirus Infections/prevention & control, immunology, virology"
- "Enterovirus D, Human/immunology, genetics"
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing/immunology"
- Mice
- Viral Vaccines/immunology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- mRNA Vaccines
- "Antibodies, Viral/immunology"
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A self-amplifying RNA vaccine prevents enterovirus D68 infection and disease in preclinical models.
**Authors:** Warner NL, Archer J, Park S, Singh G, McFadden KM, Kimura T, Nicholes K, Simpson A, Kaelber JT, Hawman DW, Feldmann H, Khandhar AP, Berglund P, Vogt MR, Erasmus JH
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.adi1625](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.adi1625)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2024 Aug 7;16(759):eadi1625. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.adi1625.  Epub 2024 Aug 7.

A self-amplifying RNA vaccine prevents enterovirus D68 infection and disease in
preclinical models.

Warner NL(1), Archer J(1), Park S(1), Singh G(2), McFadden KM(3), Kimura T(1),
Nicholes K(1), Simpson A(1), Kaelber JT(4), Hawman DW(5), Feldmann H(5),
Khandhar AP(1), Berglund P(1), Vogt MR(2)(3), Erasmus JH(1).

Author information:
(1)HDT Bio, Seattle, WA 98102, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(4)Institute for Quantitative Biomedicine, Rutgers, State University of New
Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, NIAID, NIH, Rocky
Mountain Laboratories, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA.

The recent emergence and rapid response to severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 was enabled by prototype pathogen and vaccine platform approaches,
driven by the preemptive application of RNA vaccine technology to the related
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Recently, the National Institutes
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases identified nine virus families of concern,
eight enveloped virus families and one nonenveloped virus family, for which
vaccine generation is a priority. Although RNA vaccines have been described for
a variety of enveloped viruses, a roadmap for their use against nonenveloped
viruses is lacking. Enterovirus D68 was recently designated a prototype pathogen
within the family Picornaviridae of nonenveloped viruses because of its rapid
evolution and respiratory route of transmission, coupled with a lack of diverse
anti-enterovirus vaccine approaches in development. Here, we describe a
proof-of-concept approach using a clinical stage RNA vaccine platform that
induced robust enterovirus D68-neutralizing antibody responses in mice and
nonhuman primates and prevented upper and lower respiratory tract infections and
neurological disease in mice. In addition, we used our platform to rapidly
characterize the antigenic diversity within the six genotypes of enterovirus
D68, providing the necessary data to inform multivalent vaccine compositions
that can elicit optimal breadth of neutralizing responses. These results
demonstrate that RNA vaccines can be used as tools in our pandemic-preparedness
toolbox for nonenveloped viruses.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adi1625
PMCID: PMC11789928
PMID: 39110777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.L.W., S.P., T.K., A.S., J.H.E., A.P.K., J.A.,
and P.B. have equity interest in HDT Bio. J.H.E., A.P.K., J.A., T.K., and P.B.
are coinventors on patents (US Patent nos. 11,458,209; 11,433,142; 11,752,218;
11,648,321; and 11,654,200) and patent applications (PCT/US22/76787,
PCT/US23/60225, and PCT/US2024/010326) pertaining to the LION formulation and
repRNA compositions described in the studies. M.R.V. is coinventor on a patent
application (PCT/US2020/043415) for anti–EV-D68 human monoclonal antibodies,
received a contract from HDT Bio to support this work, and previously consulted
for HDT Bio. The other authors declare that they have no competing interests.
