---
reference_id: "PMID:23297193"
title: ABHD12 controls brain lysophosphatidylserine pathways that are deregulated in a murine model of the neurodegenerative disease PHARC.
authors:
- Blankman JL
- Long JZ
- Trauger SA
- Siuzdak G
- Cravatt BF
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1217121110
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ataxia/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Behavior, Animal/physiology"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cataract/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Lipid Metabolism
- Lysophospholipids/metabolism
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Microglia/metabolism
- "Models, Neurological"
- "Monoacylglycerol Lipases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Polyneuropathies/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ABHD12 controls brain lysophosphatidylserine pathways that are deregulated in a murine model of the neurodegenerative disease PHARC.
**Authors:** Blankman JL, Long JZ, Trauger SA, Siuzdak G, Cravatt BF
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1217121110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1217121110)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 22;110(4):1500-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1217121110. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

ABHD12 controls brain lysophosphatidylserine pathways that are deregulated in a 
murine model of the neurodegenerative disease PHARC.

Blankman JL(1), Long JZ, Trauger SA, Siuzdak G, Cravatt BF.

Author information:
(1)The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology and Departments of Chemical 
Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Advances in human genetics are leading to the discovery of new disease-causing 
mutations at a remarkable rate. Many such mutations, however, occur in genes 
that encode for proteins of unknown function, which limits our molecular 
understanding of, and ability to devise treatments for, human disease. Here, we 
use untargeted metabolomics combined with a genetic mouse model to determine 
that the poorly characterized serine hydrolase α/β-hydrolase domain-containing 
(ABHD)12, mutations in which cause the human neurodegenerative disorder PHARC 
(polyneuropathy, hearing loss, ataxia, retinosis pigmentosa, and cataract), is a 
principal lysophosphatidylserine (LPS) lipase in the mammalian brain. 
ABHD12(-/-) mice display massive increases in a rare set of very long chain LPS 
lipids that have been previously reported as Toll-like receptor 2 activators. We 
confirm that recombinant ABHD12 protein exhibits robust LPS lipase activity, 
which is also substantially reduced in ABHD12(-/-) brain tissue. Notably, 
elevations in brain LPS lipids in ABHD12(-/-) mice occur early in life (2-6 mo) 
and are followed by age-dependent increases in microglial activation and 
auditory and motor defects that resemble the behavioral phenotypes of human 
PHARC patients. Taken together, our data provide a molecular model for PHARC, 
where disruption of ABHD12 causes deregulated LPS metabolism and the 
accumulation of proinflammatory lipids that promote microglial and 
neurobehavioral abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1217121110
PMCID: PMC3557017
PMID: 23297193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.