---
reference_id: "PMID:34638340"
title: gsp Mutation Is Not a Molecular Biomarker of Long-Term Response to First-Generation Somatostatin Receptor Ligands in Acromegaly.
authors:
- Wildemberg LE
- Henriques D
- Elias PCL
- Lima CHA
- Musolino NRC
- Camacho AHS
- Faria O
- Nazato D
- Abucham J
- Vilar L
- Mota JI
- Huayllas MKP
- Chimelli L
- Castro M
- Kasuki L
- Gadelha MR
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cancers13194857
content_type: abstract_only
---

# gsp Mutation Is Not a Molecular Biomarker of Long-Term Response to First-Generation Somatostatin Receptor Ligands in Acromegaly.
**Authors:** Wildemberg LE, Henriques D, Elias PCL, Lima CHA, Musolino NRC, Camacho AHS, Faria O, Nazato D, Abucham J, Vilar L, Mota JI, Huayllas MKP, Chimelli L, Castro M, Kasuki L, Gadelha MR
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers13194857](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13194857)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Sep 28;13(19):4857. doi: 10.3390/cancers13194857.

gsp Mutation Is Not a Molecular Biomarker of Long-Term Response to
First-Generation Somatostatin Receptor Ligands in Acromegaly.

Wildemberg LE(1)(2), Henriques D(1), Elias PCL(3), Lima CHA(4), Musolino NRC(5),
Camacho AHS(4), Faria O(1), Nazato D(6), Abucham J(6), Vilar L(7), Mota JI(8),
Huayllas MKP(9), Chimelli L(4), Castro M(3), Kasuki L(1)(2), Gadelha
MR(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Unit and Neuroendocrinology Research Center, Medical School and
Hospital Universitário Clementino Fraga Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 21941-617, Brazil.
(2)Neuroendocrine Unit, Instituto Estadual do Cérebro Paulo Niemeyer, Secretaria
Estadual de Saúde, Rio de Janeiro 20231-092, Brazil.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Ribeirao Preto
Medical School, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto 14049-900, Brazil.
(4)Neuropathology and Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Instituto Estadual do
Cérebro Paulo Niemeyer, Secretaria Estadual de Saúde, Rio de Janeiro 20231-092,
Brazil.
(5)Neuroendocrine Unit, Division of Functional Neurosurgery, Hospital das
Clínicas da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo 05403-000, Brazil.
(6)Neuroendocrine Unit, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (Unifesp), São Paulo
04023-062, Brazil.
(7)Division of Endocrinology, Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade Federal de
Pernambuco, Recife 50670-901, Brazil.
(8)Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, Hospital Geral de Fortaleza, Secretaria
Estadual de Saúde, Fortaleza 60150-160, Brazil.
(9)Neuroendocrinology and Neurosurgery Unit, Hospital Brigadeiro, São Paulo
01401-000, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: It is still controversial if activating mutations in the stimulatory
G-protein α subunit (gsp mutation) are a biomarker of response to first
generation somatostatin receptor ligands (fg-SRL) treatment in acromegaly. Thus,
we aimed to evaluate whether gsp mutation predicts long-term response to fg-SRL
treatment and to characterize the phenotype of patients harboring gsp mutations.
METHODS: GNAS1 sequencing was performed by Sanger. SST2 and SST5 were analyzed
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and real-time RT-PCR. The cytokeratin granulation
pattern was evaluated by IHC. Biochemical control was defined as GH < 1.0 ng/mL
and normal age-adjusted IGF-I levels.
RESULTS: gsp mutation was found in 54 out of 136 patients evaluated. Biochemical
control with fg-SRL treatment was similar in gsp+ and gsp- patients (37% vs.
25%, p = 0.219). Tumors harboring gsp mutation were smaller (p = 0.035) and had
a lower chance of invading cavernous sinuses (p = 0.001). SST5 protein (p =
0.047) and mRNA (p = 0.013) expression levels were higher in wild-type tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: In this largest series available in the literature, we concluded
that gsp is not a molecular biomarker of response to fg-SRL treatment in
acromegaly. However, the importance of its negative association with cavernous
sinus invasion and SST5 expression needs to be further investigated.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13194857
PMCID: PMC8508484
PMID: 34638340

Conflict of interest statement: L.E.W. received speaker fees from Novartis and
participated on advisory board for Crinetics; L.V. has received speaker fees
from Novartis and Ipsen; L.K. has received speaker fees from Novartis and Ipsen;
M.R.G. has received speaker fees from Novartis, Ipsen, and Crinetics and a
member of the advisory board for Novartis, Chiasma, and Crinetics.
