---
reference_id: "PMID:27401626"
title: Eosinophilic Endotype of Asthma.
authors:
- Aleman F
- Lim HF
- Nair P
journal: Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.iac.2016.03.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eosinophilic Endotype of Asthma.
**Authors:** Aleman F, Lim HF, Nair P
**Journal:** Immunol Allergy Clin North Am (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.iac.2016.03.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iac.2016.03.006)

## Content

1. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2016 Aug;36(3):559-68. doi: 
10.1016/j.iac.2016.03.006.

Eosinophilic Endotype of Asthma.

Aleman F(1), Lim HF(2), Nair P(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respirology, St Joseph's Healthcare Hamilton, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Division of Respirology, St Joseph's Healthcare Hamilton, McMaster 
University, 50 Charlton Avenue East, Hamilton, Ontario L8N 4A6, Canada. 
Electronic address: parames@mcmaster.ca.

Asthma is a heterogeneous disease that can be classified into different clinical 
endotypes, depending on the type of airway inflammation, clinical severity, and 
response to treatment. This article focuses on the eosinophilic endotype of 
asthma, which is defined by the central role that eosinophils play in the 
pathophysiology of the condition. It is characterized by elevated sputum and/or 
blood eosinophils on at least 2 occasions and by a significant response to 
treatments that suppress eosinophilia. Histopathologic demonstration of 
eosinophils in the airways provides the most direct diagnosis of eosinophilic 
asthma; but it is invasive, thus, impractical in clinical practice.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.iac.2016.03.006
PMID: 27401626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]