---
reference_id: "PMID:36559271"
title: "Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in CSF1R-Related Leukoencephalopathy: Retrospective Study on Predictors of Outcomes."
authors:
- Dulski J
- Heckman MG
- White LJ
- Żur-Wyrozumska K
- Lund TC
- Wszolek ZK
journal: Pharmaceutics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14122778
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in CSF1R-Related Leukoencephalopathy: Retrospective Study on Predictors of Outcomes.
**Authors:** Dulski J, Heckman MG, White LJ, Żur-Wyrozumska K, Lund TC, Wszolek ZK
**Journal:** Pharmaceutics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pharmaceutics14122778](https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14122778)

## Content

1. Pharmaceutics. 2022 Dec 12;14(12):2778. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14122778.

Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in CSF1R-Related Leukoencephalopathy: 
Retrospective Study on Predictors of Outcomes.

Dulski J(1)(2)(3), Heckman MG(4), White LJ(4), Żur-Wyrozumska K(5), Lund TC(6), 
Wszolek ZK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Rd, Jacksonville, FL 
32224, USA.
(2)Division of Neurological and Psychiatric Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Medical University of Gdansk, 80-211 Gdansk, Poland.
(3)Neurology Department, St Adalbert Hospital, Copernicus PL Ltd., 80-462 
Gdansk, Poland.
(4)Division of Clinical Trials and Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 
32224, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Education, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 
30-688 Kraków, Poland.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Blood and Marrow Transplant, University 
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Mutations in the CSF1R gene are the most common cause of adult-onset 
leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia (ALSP), a 
neurodegenerative disease with rapid progression and ominous prognosis. 
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has been increasingly offered to 
patients with CSF1R-ALSP. However, different therapy results were observed, and 
it was not elucidated which patient should be referred for HSCT. This study 
aimed to determine predictors of good and bad HSCT outcomes in CSF1R-ALSP. We 
retrospectively analyzed 15 patients, 14 symptomatic and 1 asymptomatic, with 
CSF1R-ALSP that underwent HSCT. Median age of onset was 39 years, and the median 
age of HSCT was 43 years. Cognitive impairment was the most frequent initial 
manifestation (43%), followed by gait problems (21%) and neuropsychiatric 
symptoms (21%). Median post-HSCT follow-up was 26 months. Good outcomes were 
associated with gait problems as initial (p = 0.041) and predominant (p = 0.017) 
manifestation and younger age at HSCT (p = 0.044). Cognitive impairment as first 
manifestation was a predictor of a bad outcome (p = 0.016) and worsening of 
cognition post-HSCT (p = 0.025). In conclusion, gait problems indicated a milder 
phenotype with better response to HSCT and good therapy outcomes. In contrast, 
patients with a higher burden of cognitive symptoms were most likely not to 
benefit from HSCT.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14122778
PMCID: PMC9788080
PMID: 36559271

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.