---
reference_id: "PMID:40159127"
title: Abrocitinib alleviates the symptoms of Netherton syndrome and is well tolerated.
authors:
- Tang JT
- Qin YL
- Zhao WJ
- Tu Y
- Sun DJ
journal: J Dermatolog Treat
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/09546634.2024.2447883
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abrocitinib alleviates the symptoms of Netherton syndrome and is well tolerated.
**Authors:** Tang JT, Qin YL, Zhao WJ, Tu Y, Sun DJ
**Journal:** J Dermatolog Treat (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09546634.2024.2447883](https://doi.org/10.1080/09546634.2024.2447883)

## Content

1. J Dermatolog Treat. 2025 Dec;36(1):2447883. doi:
10.1080/09546634.2024.2447883.  Epub 2025 Mar 30.

Abrocitinib alleviates the symptoms of Netherton syndrome and is well tolerated.

Tang JT(1), Qin YL(1), Zhao WJ(1), Tu Y(1), Sun DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Kunming Medical University, Kunming, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the potential genetic basis of Netherton syndrome (NS) 
through first- and second-generation DNA sequencing techniques. Additionally, we 
evaluated the therapeutic efficacy of Abrocitinib in NS patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted whole-exome sequencing analysis on a 
pedigree comprising one affected individual with NS. Subsequently, the 
identified patient was treated with Abrocitinib, and clinical improvements in 
cutaneous manifestations were systematically assessed.
RESULTS: Genetic analysis revealed that the patient harbored compound 
heterozygous mutations in the SPINK5 gene, including a missense mutation in exon 
26 (c.2475G > T, p.Trp825Cys). Following six months of Abrocitinib therapy, the 
patient exhibited marked improvement in skin rash and overall disease severity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that SPINK5 missense mutations may contribute 
to the pathogenesis of NS. Furthermore, Abrocitinib demonstrates promising 
therapeutic potential in the management of NS, warranting further investigation 
in larger clinical cohorts.

DOI: 10.1080/09546634.2024.2447883
PMID: 40159127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]