---
reference_id: PMID:8393475
title: An autoimmune disease with multiple molecular targets abrogated by the transgenic expression of a single autoantigen in the thymus.
authors:
- Alderuccio F
- Toh BH
- Tan SS
- Gleeson PA
- van Driel IR
journal: J Exp Med
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1084/jem.178.2.419
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autoantigens/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Autoimmune Diseases/immunology
- Base Sequence
- DNA
- Gastritis/immunology
- Gene Expression
- H(+)-K(+)-Exchanging ATPase/immunology
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/immunology
- Immune Tolerance
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Stomach/enzymology
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "Thymus Gland/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An autoimmune disease with multiple molecular targets abrogated by the transgenic expression of a single autoantigen in the thymus.
**Authors:** Alderuccio F, Toh BH, Tan SS, Gleeson PA, van Driel IR
**Journal:** J Exp Med (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.178.2.419](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.178.2.419)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 1993 Aug 1;178(2):419-26. doi: 10.1084/jem.178.2.419.

An autoimmune disease with multiple molecular targets abrogated by the 
transgenic expression of a single autoantigen in the thymus.

Alderuccio F(1), Toh BH, Tan SS, Gleeson PA, van Driel IR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Monash University Medical School, 
Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Many autoimmune diseases are characterized by autoantibody reactivities to 
multiple cellular antigens. Autoantigens are commonly defined as targets of the 
autoimmune B cell response, but the role, if any, of these autoantigens in T 
cell-mediated autoimmune diseases is generally unknown. Murine experimental 
autoimmune gastritis is a CD4+ T cell-mediated organ-specific autoimmune disease 
induced by neonatal thymectomy of BALB/c mice. The murine disease is similar to 
human autoimmune gastritis and pernicious anemia, and is characterized by 
parietal and chief cell loss, submucosal mononuclear cell infiltrates, and 
autoantibodies to the alpha and beta subunits of the gastric H/K ATPase. 
However, the specificity of T cells that cause the disease is not known. To 
examine the role of the H/K ATPase in this T cell-mediated disease, transgenic 
mice were generated that express the beta subunit of the H/K ATPase under the 
control of the major histocompatibility complex class II I-Ek alpha promoter. We 
show that transgenic expression of the gastric H/K ATPase beta subunit 
specifically prevents the onset of autoimmune gastritis after neonatal 
thymectomy. In addition, thymocyte transfer experiments suggest that tolerance 
of pathogenic autoreactive T cells is induced within the thymus of the 
transgenic mice. We conclude that the beta subunit of the gastric H/K ATPase is 
a major T cell target in autoimmune gastritis and that thymic expression of a 
single autoantigen can abrogate an autoimmune response to multiple autoantigens.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.178.2.419
PMCID: PMC2191118
PMID: 8393475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]