---
reference_id: "PMID:38276922"
title: "AGA Clinical Practice Update on Diet and Nutritional Therapies in Patients With Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Expert Review."
authors:
- Hashash JG
- Elkins J
- Lewis JD
- Binion DG
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2023.11.303
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AGA Clinical Practice Update on Diet and Nutritional Therapies in Patients With Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Expert Review.
**Authors:** Hashash JG, Elkins J, Lewis JD, Binion DG
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2023.11.303](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2023.11.303)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2024 Mar;166(3):521-532. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2023.11.303. 
Epub 2024 Jan 23.

AGA Clinical Practice Update on Diet and Nutritional Therapies in Patients With 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Expert Review.

Hashash JG(1), Elkins J(2), Lewis JD(3), Binion DG(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, 
Florida. Electronic address: AlHashash.Jana@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Nutrition, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

DESCRIPTION: Diet plays a critical role in human health, but especially for 
patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Guidance about diet for patients 
with IBD are often controversial and a source of uncertainty for many physicians 
and patients. The role of diet has been investigated as a risk factor for IBD 
etiopathogenesis and as a therapy for active disease. Dietary restrictions, 
along with the clinical complications of IBD, can result in malnutrition, an 
underrecognized condition among this patient population. The aim of this 
American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) Clinical Practice Update (CPU) is 
to provide best practice advice statements, primarily to clinical 
gastroenterologists, covering the topics of diet and nutritional therapies in 
the management of IBD, while emphasizing identification and treatment of 
malnutrition in these patients. We provide guidance for tailored dietary 
approaches during IBD remission, active disease, and intestinal failure. A 
healthy Mediterranean diet will benefit patients with IBD, but may require 
accommodations for food texture in the setting of intestinal strictures or 
obstructions. New data in Crohn's disease supports the use of enteral liquid 
nutrition to help induce remission and correct malnutrition in patients heading 
for surgery. Parenteral nutrition plays a critical role in patients with IBD 
facing acute and/or chronic intestinal failure. Registered dietitians are an 
essential part of the interdisciplinary team approach for optimal nutrition 
assessment and management in the patient population with IBD.
METHODS: This expert review was commissioned and approved by the AGA Clinical 
Practice Updates Committee and the AGA Governing Board to provide timely 
guidance on a topic of high clinical importance to the AGA membership and 
underwent internal peer review by the CPU Committee and external peer review 
through standard procedures of Gastroenterology. The best practice advice 
statements were drawn from reviewing existing literature combined with expert 
opinion to provide practical advice on the role of diet and nutritional 
therapies in patients with IBD. Because this was not a systematic review, formal 
rating of the quality of evidence or strength of the presented considerations 
was not performed. Best Practice Advice Statements BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 1: 
Unless there is a contraindication, all patients with IBD should be advised to 
follow a Mediterranean diet rich in a variety of fresh fruits and vegetables, 
monounsaturated fats, complex carbohydrates, and lean proteins and low in 
ultraprocessed foods, added sugar, and salt for their overall health and general 
well-being. No diet has consistently been found to decrease the rate of flares 
in adults with IBD. A diet low in red and processed meat may reduce ulcerative 
colitis flares, but has not been found to reduce relapse in Crohn's disease. 
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 2: Patients with IBD who have symptomatic intestinal 
strictures may not tolerate fibrous, plant-based foods (ie, raw fruits and 
vegetables) due to their texture. An emphasis on careful chewing and cooking and 
processing of fruits and vegetables to a soft, less fibrinous consistency may 
help patients with IBD who have concomitant intestinal strictures incorporate a 
wider variety of plant-based foods and fiber in their diets. BEST PRACTICE 
ADVICE 3: Exclusive enteral nutrition using liquid nutrition formulations is an 
effective therapy for induction of clinical remission and endoscopic response in 
Crohn's disease, with stronger evidence in children than adults. Exclusive 
enteral nutrition may be considered as a steroid-sparing bridge therapy for 
patients with Crohn's disease. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 4: Crohn's disease exclusion 
diet, a type of partial enteral nutrition therapy, may be an effective therapy 
for induction of clinical remission and endoscopic response in mild to moderate 
Crohn's disease of relatively short duration. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 5: Exclusive 
enteral nutrition may be an effective therapy in malnourished patients before 
undergoing elective surgery for Crohn's disease to optimize nutritional status 
and reduce postoperative complications. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 6: In patients with 
IBD who have an intra-abdominal abscess and/or phlegmonous inflammation that 
limits ability to achieve optimal nutrition via the digestive tract, short-term 
parenteral nutrition may be used to provide bowel rest in the preoperative phase 
to decrease infection and inflammation as a bridge to definitive surgical 
management and to optimize surgical outcomes. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 7: We suggest 
the use of parenteral nutrition for high-output gastrointestinal fistula, 
prolonged ileus, short bowel syndrome, and for patients with IBD with severe 
malnutrition when oral and enteral nutrition has been trialed and failed or when 
enteral access is not feasible or contraindicated. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 8: In 
patients with IBD and short bowel syndrome, long-term parenteral nutrition 
should be transitioned to customized hydration management (ie, intravenous 
electrolyte support and/or oral rehydration solutions) and oral intake whenever 
possible to decrease the risk of developing long-term complications. Treatment 
with glucagon-like peptide-2 agonists can facilitate this transition. BEST 
PRACTICE ADVICE 9: All patients with IBD warrant regular screening for 
malnutrition by their provider by means of assessing signs and symptoms, 
including unintended weight loss, edema and fluid retention, and fat and muscle 
mass loss. When observed, more complete evaluation for malnutrition by a 
registered dietitian is indicated. Serum proteins are no longer recommended for 
the identification and diagnosis of malnutrition due to their lack of 
specificity for nutritional status and high sensitivity to inflammation. BEST 
PRACTICE ADVICE 10: All patients with IBD should be monitored for vitamin D and 
iron deficiency. Patients with extensive ileal disease or prior ileal surgery 
(resection or ileal pouch) should be monitored for vitamin B12 deficiency. BEST 
PRACTICE ADVICE 11: All outpatients and inpatients with complicated IBD warrant 
co-management with a registered dietitian, especially those who have 
malnutrition, short bowel syndrome, enterocutaneous fistula, and/or are 
requiring more complex nutrition therapies (eg, parenteral nutrition, enteral 
nutrition, or exclusive enteral nutrition), or those on a Crohn's disease 
exclusion diet. We suggest that all newly diagnosed patients with IBD have 
access to a registered dietitian. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 12: Breastfeeding is 
associated with a lower risk for diagnosis of IBD during childhood. A healthy, 
balanced, Mediterranean diet rich in a variety of fruits and vegetables and 
decreased intake of ultraprocessed foods have been associated with a lower risk 
of developing IBD.

Copyright © 2024 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2023.11.303
PMID: 38276922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]