---
reference_id: "PMID:27377297"
title: "Anti-phospholipid Antibodies and Smoking: An Overview."
authors:
- Binder SR
- Litwin CM
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-016-8565-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-phospholipid Antibodies and Smoking: An Overview.
**Authors:** Binder SR, Litwin CM
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-016-8565-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-016-8565-4)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2017 Aug;53(1):1-13. doi: 10.1007/s12016-016-8565-4.

Anti-phospholipid Antibodies and Smoking: An Overview.

Binder SR(1), Litwin CM(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Diagnostics Group, Bio-Rad Laboratories, 4000 Alfred Nobel Drive 
4-2115, Hercules, CA, 94547, USA. steve_binder@bio-rad.com.
(2)Medical University of South Carolina, 165 Ashley Ave, Suite 324G, MSC 908, 
Charleston, SC, 29425, USA.

Antiphospholipid syndrome is characterized by the presence of antiphospholipid 
antibodies, specifically lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, and 
anti-β2 glycoprotein-I antibodies. Antiphospholipid syndrome can occur on its 
own or in association with other autoimmune diseases, most commonly systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE). A connection between cigarette smoking and 
anti-phospholipid antibodies (aPL) was first reported in the late1980s. Systemic 
lupus erythematosus patients with aPL are more likely to be smokers than those 
without aPL. These patients have a particularly high frequency of vascular 
events. Recently, a potential link between periodontitis, tobacco, and aPL has 
been proposed. Research has also suggested that periodontitis and Porphyromonas 
gingivalis infection are associated with citrullination through the action of 
peptidylarginine deiminase. A strong correlation between smoking and the 
presence of citrillunated autoantibodies, which are characteristic of rheumatoid 
arthritis, has also been observed. While many studies have investigated possible 
links between infection and aPL in patients with autoimmune diseases, the 
association of smoking with aPL has not been systematically examined. The fact 
that both aPL and tobacco are risk factors for thrombosis has complicated 
efforts to evaluate these factors separately. Also, there has been great 
variability in measurement techniques, and laboratories lack routine methods for 
differentiating transient and persistent aPL; both of these factors can make 
interpretation of autoantibody results quite challenging. This review summarizes 
the clinical evidence supporting a posited link between aPL and smoking, both in 
patients with a systemic autoimmune disease and in patients with other medical 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-016-8565-4
PMID: 27377297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]