---
reference_id: "PMID:36702441"
title: Hand-foot-genital syndrome due to a duplication variant in the GC-rich region of HOXA13.
authors:
- Geng W
- Li F
- Zhang R
- Cao L
- Du X
- Gu W
- Xu M
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104711
keywords:
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics, diagnosis"
- Female
- Humans
- "Genes, Homeobox"
- Urogenital Abnormalities/genetics
- Homeodomain Proteins
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hand-foot-genital syndrome due to a duplication variant in the GC-rich region of HOXA13.
**Authors:** Geng W, Li F, Zhang R, Cao L, Du X, Gu W, Xu M
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104711](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104711)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2023 Mar;66(3):104711. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104711. Epub 
2023 Jan 24.

Hand-foot-genital syndrome due to a duplication variant in the GC-rich region of 
HOXA13.

Geng W(1), Li F(2), Zhang R(3), Cao L(1), Du X(2), Gu W(2), Xu M(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Hebei Children's Hospital, Shijiazhuang, 
China.
(2)Beijing Chigene Translational Medicine Research Center Co., Ltd, Beijing, 
China.
(3)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, 
China.
(4)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Hebei Children's Hospital, Shijiazhuang, 
China. Electronic address: 13833185617@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Hand-Foot-Genital Syndrome (HFGS) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
characterized by a broad phenotypic spectrum. Variants in HOXA13 gene were 
associated with HFGS. To date, only twenty families with HFGS have been 
reported. However, the challenge in HFGS is the limited sample sizes and 
phenotypic heterogeneity. The advent of next-generation sequencing has permitted 
the identification of patients with HOXA13 variants who do not manifest with the 
full HFGS syndromic features.
METHODS: Trio (parents-proband) Whole-exome sequence(WES) and whole-genome 
sequencing(WGS) was carried out in this study to investigate the underlying 
pathogenic genetic factor of the neonate with a wide variety of clinical 
abnormalities.
RESULTS: No possible pathogenetic variation was detected by trio-WES, and a 
duplication variant in HOXA13 (c.360_377dup, p.Ala128_Ala133dup), inherited from 
her mother, was identified by the subsequent WGS in the proband with 
malnutrition, feeding difficulties, electrolyte disorders, metabolic acidosis, 
recurrent urinary tract infections, hydronephrosis, nephrolithiasis, abnormal 
ureter morphology, cholelithiasis, uterus didelphys. Sequence analysis of the 
variant region (exon1) indicated a high GC content of 73.92%. In addition, 
further enquiry of the family history revealed that 5 members of the family in 4 
generations had hand and foot anomalies.
CONCLUSION: The neonate was diagnosed with HFGS by genetic analysis. GC content 
had less influence on sequence coverage in WGS than WES analysis. This was the 
first report of trio-WGS study for HFGS genetic diagnosis, revealed that 
subsequent WGS was necessary for identification of potentially pathogenic 
variants in unexplained genetic disorders.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104711
PMID: 36702441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]