---
reference_id: PMID:21849212
title: "Optic disc edema, globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts observed in astronauts after long-duration space flight."
authors:
- Mader TH
- Gibson CR
- Pass AF
- Kramer LA
- Lee AG
- Fogarty J
- Tarver WJ
- Dervay JP
- Hamilton DR
- Sargsyan A
- Phillips JL
- Tran D
- Lipsky W
- Choi J
- Stern C
- Kuyumjian R
- Polk JD
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2011.06.021
keywords:
- Aerospace Medicine
- Astronauts
- "Choroid Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Eye Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Hyperopia/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology"
- Intracranial Pressure/physiology
- Intraocular Pressure/physiology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Papilledema/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Space Flight
- Spinal Puncture
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- "Vision Disorders/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Weightlessness/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optic disc edema, globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts observed in astronauts after long-duration space flight.
**Authors:** Mader TH, Gibson CR, Pass AF, Kramer LA, Lee AG, Fogarty J, Tarver WJ, Dervay JP, Hamilton DR, Sargsyan A, Phillips JL, Tran D, Lipsky W, Choi J, Stern C, Kuyumjian R, Polk JD
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2011.06.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2011.06.021)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2011 Oct;118(10):2058-69. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2011.06.021.
Epub  2011 Aug 17.

Optic disc edema, globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts 
observed in astronauts after long-duration space flight.

Mader TH(1), Gibson CR, Pass AF, Kramer LA, Lee AG, Fogarty J, Tarver WJ, Dervay 
JP, Hamilton DR, Sargsyan A, Phillips JL, Tran D, Lipsky W, Choi J, Stern C, 
Kuyumjian R, Polk JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Alaska Native Medical Center, Anchorage, AK 
99508, USA. tmader@acsalaska.net

Comment in
    Ophthalmology. 2012 Jun;119(6):1290; author reply 1291. doi: 
10.1016/j.ophtha.2012.02.024.
    Ophthalmology. 2012 Nov;119(11):2420-1; author reply 2421-2. doi: 
10.1016/j.ophtha.2012.07.016.

PURPOSE: To describe the history, clinical findings, and possible etiologies of 
ophthalmic findings discovered in 7 astronauts after long-duration space flight, 
and document vision changes in approximately 300 additional astronauts.
DESIGN: Retrospective, observational examination of ophthalmic findings in 7 
astronauts and analysis of postflight questionnaires regarding in-flight vision 
changes in approximately 300 additional astronauts.
PARTICIPANTS: Seven astronauts with ophthalmic anomalies upon return from 
long-duration space missions to the International Space Station and 300 
additional astronauts who completed postflight questionnaires regarding 
in-flight vision changes.
METHODS: Before and after long-duration space flight, all 7 subjects underwent 
complete eye examinations, including cycloplegic and/or manifest refraction and 
fundus photography. Six underwent postmission optical coherence tomography (OCT) 
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); 4 had lumbar punctures (LP). Approximately 
300 astronauts were queried regarding visual changes during space missions.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Refractive change, fundus photograph examination, retina 
OCT, orbital MRI, LP opening pressures, and examination of visual acuity data.
RESULTS: After 6 months of space flight, 7 astronauts had ophthalmic findings, 
consisting of disc edema in 5, globe flattening in 5, choroidal folds in 5, 
cotton wool spots (CWS) in 3, nerve fiber layer thickening by OCT in 6, and 
decreased near vision in 6 astronauts. Five of 7 with near vision complaints had 
a hyperopic shift ≥+0.50 diopters (D) between pre/postmission spherical 
equivalent refraction in 1 or both eyes (range, +0.50 to +1.75 D). These 5 
showed globe flattening on MRI. Lumbar punctures performed in the 4 with disc 
edema documented opening pressures of 22, 21, 28, and 28.5 cm H(2)O performed 
60, 19, 12, and 57 days postmission, respectively. The 300 postflight 
questionnaires documented that approximately 29% and 60% of astronauts on short 
and long-duration missions, respectively, experienced a degradation in distant 
and near visual acuity. Some of these vision changes remain unresolved years 
after flight.
CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesize that the optic nerve and ocular changes we describe 
may result from cephalad fluid shifts brought about by prolonged microgravity 
exposure. The findings we report may represent parts of a spectrum of ocular and 
cerebral responses to extended microgravity exposure.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE(S): The authors have no proprietary or commercial interest 
in any of the materials discussed in this article.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2011.06.021
PMID: 21849212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]