---
reference_id: "PMID:20031451"
title: Vohwinkel Syndrome secondary to missense mutation D66H in GJB2 gene (connexin 26) can include epileptic manifestations.
authors:
- Serrano Castro PJ
- Naranjo Fernandez C
- Quiroga Subirana P
- Payan Ortiz M
journal: Seizure
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2009.11.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vohwinkel Syndrome secondary to missense mutation D66H in GJB2 gene (connexin 26) can include epileptic manifestations.
**Authors:** Serrano Castro PJ, Naranjo Fernandez C, Quiroga Subirana P, Payan Ortiz M
**Journal:** Seizure (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.seizure.2009.11.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seizure.2009.11.009)

## Content

1. Seizure. 2010 Mar;19(2):129-31. doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2009.11.009. Epub 2010 
Jan 19.

Vohwinkel Syndrome secondary to missense mutation D66H in GJB2 gene (connexin 
26) can include epileptic manifestations.

Serrano Castro PJ(1), Naranjo Fernandez C, Quiroga Subirana P, Payan Ortiz M.

Author information:
(1)Hospital Torrecardenas, Neurology and Neurophysiology Unit, Almeria, Spain.

Vohwinkel Syndrome (VS) is a type of diffuse hereditary palmoplantar 
keratodermas (DHPPK) accompanied by skeletal dimorphisms and sensorineural 
deafness. The most frequently reported genetic substrate in VS is a point 
mutation of GJB2 gene, responsible for encoding connexin 26, a gap-junction 
protein with a crucial role in neuronal migration in rats. We report the case of 
a 21-year-old male who is a second-generation member of a family with VS and 
developed cryptogenic focal epilepsy. Genetic study showed a nucleotide change 
(c.196G>C) in exon 1 of GJB2 gene, producing a missense mutation, D66H. It is 
plausible that a functional alteration of connexin 26, such as that resulting of 
the mutation of our case, can produce an alteration in cortical development with 
epileptogenic potential. The present case and experimental evidence that 
connexin 26 is related to animal epileptogenesis suggest that the phenotypic 
spectrum of VS could be expanded to include epileptic manifestations.

Copyright 2009 British Epilepsy Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.seizure.2009.11.009
PMID: 20031451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]