---
reference_id: "PMID:33595181"
title: "Liver chemistries in glycogenic hepatopathy associated with type 1 diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and pooled analysis."
authors:
- Haffar S
- Izzy M
- Habib H
- Sugihara T
- Li DK
- Sharma A
- Wang Z
- Murad MH
- Watt KD
- Bazerbachi F
journal: Liver Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/liv.14827
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver chemistries in glycogenic hepatopathy associated with type 1 diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and pooled analysis.
**Authors:** Haffar S, Izzy M, Habib H, Sugihara T, Li DK, Sharma A, Wang Z, Murad MH, Watt KD, Bazerbachi F
**Journal:** Liver Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/liv.14827](https://doi.org/10.1111/liv.14827)

## Content

1. Liver Int. 2021 Jul;41(7):1545-1555. doi: 10.1111/liv.14827. Epub 2021 Feb 28.

Liver chemistries in glycogenic hepatopathy associated with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus: A systematic review and pooled analysis.

Haffar S(1), Izzy M(2), Habib H(3), Sugihara T(4), Li DK(5), Sharma A(6), Wang 
Z(7), Murad MH(7), Watt KD(6), Bazerbachi F(8).

Author information:
(1)Digestive Center for Diagnosis and Treatment, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Damascus University, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic.
(4)Division of Medicine and Clinical Science, Department of Gastroenterology and 
Nephrology, Tottori University, Tottori, Japan.
(5)Section of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(7)Evidence-Based Practice Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Glycogenic hepatopathy (GH) in type 1 diabetes-mellitus 
(T1DM) is characterized by hepatomegaly and perturbations of liver chemistries 
(LC) that have not been well studied. Furthermore, misdiagnosis with other 
hepatic complications of T1DM, such as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, has 
been described. We perform a systematic review of biopsy-proven GH reports in 
T1DM patients to identify LC patterns.
METHODS: A systematic review identified reports of biopsy-proven GH in patients 
with T1DM. We excluded GH with other liver diseases, Mauriac syndrome, or GH 
without T1DM. Two reviewers screened and extracted studies and assessed their 
methodological quality. LC elevation magnitude, AST-to-ALT ratio, R-ratio to 
designate hepatocellular, cholestatic or mixed pattern of hepatic injury, and 
evolution of transaminases after glycemic control were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 192 patients were included, with median age of 20 years, 73% 
adults, 66% females, median duration of T1DM before diagnosis 10 years, median 
adult body mass index 21 kg/m2 , median HbA1c 12%, at least one episode of 
diabetic ketoacidosis 70%, and hepatomegaly 92%. ALT and AST showed 
moderate-to-severe elevation in 78% and 76%, respectively, AST/ALT >1 in 71% and 
hepatocellular to mixed pattern of hepatic injury in 81%. Transaminase 
improvement with glycemic control was the rule, regardless of other factors in 
multilinear regression analysis.
CONCLUSION: GH tends to have AST-predominant elevation with a median of 13 times 
the upper normal limit and R-ratio >2, which may distinguish it from other 
etiologies of AST-predominant LC elevation, and in the appropriate clinical 
context, may obviate invasive tests.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.14827
PMID: 33595181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]