---
reference_id: "PMID:32603431"
title: Extended clinical and immunological phenotype and transplant outcome in CD27 and CD70 deficiency.
authors:
- Ghosh S
- Köstel Bal S
- Edwards ESJ
- Pillay B
- Jiménez Heredia R
- Erol Cipe F
- Rao G
- Salzer E
- Zoghi S
- Abolhassani H
- Momen T
- Gostick E
- Price DA
- Zhang Y
- Oler AJ
- Gonzaga-Jauregui C
- Erman B
- Metin A
- Ilhan I
- Haskologlu S
- Islamoglu C
- Baskin K
- Ceylaner S
- Yilmaz E
- Unal E
- Karakukcu M
- Berghuis D
- Cole T
- Gupta AK
- Hauck F
- Kogler H
- Hoepelman AIM
- Baris S
- Karakoc-Aydiner E
- Ozen A
- Kager L
- Holzinger D
- Paulussen M
- Krüger R
- Meisel R
- Oommen PT
- Morris E
- Neven B
- Worth A
- van Montfrans J
- Fraaij PLA
- Choo S
- Dogu F
- Davies EG
- Burns S
- Dückers G
- Becker RP
- von Bernuth H
- Latour S
- Faraci M
- Gattorno M
- Su HC
- Pan-Hammarström Q
- Hammarström L
- Lenardo MJ
- Ma CS
- Niehues T
- Aghamohammadi A
- Rezaei N
- Ikinciogullari A
- Tangye SG
- Lankester AC
- Boztug K
journal: Blood
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2020006738
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Allografts
- CD27 Ligand/deficiency
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/genetics, immunology, mortality, therapy"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics, immunology, mortality, therapy"
- Infant
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Superfamily, Member 7/deficiency"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extended clinical and immunological phenotype and transplant outcome in CD27 and CD70 deficiency.
**Authors:** Ghosh S, Köstel Bal S, Edwards ESJ, Pillay B, Jiménez Heredia R, Erol Cipe F, Rao G, Salzer E, Zoghi S, Abolhassani H, Momen T, Gostick E, Price DA, Zhang Y, Oler AJ, Gonzaga-Jauregui C, Erman B, Metin A, Ilhan I, Haskologlu S, Islamoglu C, Baskin K, Ceylaner S, Yilmaz E, Unal E, Karakukcu M, Berghuis D, Cole T, Gupta AK, Hauck F, Kogler H, Hoepelman AIM, Baris S, Karakoc-Aydiner E, Ozen A, Kager L, Holzinger D, Paulussen M, Krüger R, Meisel R, Oommen PT, Morris E, Neven B, Worth A, van Montfrans J, Fraaij PLA, Choo S, Dogu F, Davies EG, Burns S, Dückers G, Becker RP, von Bernuth H, Latour S, Faraci M, Gattorno M, Su HC, Pan-Hammarström Q, Hammarström L, Lenardo MJ, Ma CS, Niehues T, Aghamohammadi A, Rezaei N, Ikinciogullari A, Tangye SG, Lankester AC, Boztug K
**Journal:** Blood (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2020006738](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020006738)

## Content

1. Blood. 2020 Dec 3;136(23):2638-2655. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020006738.

Extended clinical and immunological phenotype and transplant outcome in CD27 and
CD70 deficiency.

Ghosh S(1), Köstel Bal S(2)(3)(4), Edwards ESJ(5)(6), Pillay B(5)(6), Jiménez
Heredia R(2)(3)(4), Erol Cipe F(7), Rao G(5), Salzer E(2)(3)(4)(8), Zoghi
S(2)(3)(4)(9), Abolhassani H(9)(10), Momen T(11), Gostick E(12), Price
DA(12)(13), Zhang Y(14)(15), Oler AJ(15)(16), Gonzaga-Jauregui C(17), Erman
B(18)(19), Metin A(20), Ilhan I(21), Haskologlu S(22), Islamoglu C(22), Baskin
K(22), Ceylaner S(23), Yilmaz E(24)(25), Unal E(24)(25), Karakukcu M(24)(25),
Berghuis D(26), Cole T(27), Gupta AK(28), Hauck F(29), Kogler H(8), Hoepelman
AIM(30), Baris S(31)(32)(33), Karakoc-Aydiner E(31)(32)(33), Ozen A(31)(32)(33),
Kager L(8), Holzinger D(34), Paulussen M(35), Krüger R(36), Meisel R(1), Oommen
PT(1), Morris E(37), Neven B(38)(39), Worth A(40), van Montfrans J(41), Fraaij
PLA(42)(43), Choo S(27), Dogu F(22), Davies EG(40), Burns S(37)(44), Dückers
G(45), Becker RP(45), von Bernuth H(36)(46)(47), Latour S(48), Faraci M(49),
Gattorno M(50), Su HC(14)(15), Pan-Hammarström Q(51), Hammarström L(10)(52),
Lenardo MJ(15)(53), Ma CS(5)(6), Niehues T(42), Aghamohammadi A(9)(54), Rezaei
N(9)(54), Ikinciogullari A(22), Tangye SG(5)(6), Lankester AC(26), Boztug
K(2)(3)(4)(8)(55).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Medical
Faculty, Center of Child and Adolescent Health, Heinrich-Heine-University,
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna,
Austria.
(3)St. Anna Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), Vienna, Austria.
(4)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia.
(6)St. Vincent's Clinical School, UNSW Sydney, Randwick, NSW, Australia.
(7)Department of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Istinye University, Istanbul,
Turkey.
(8)St. Anna Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(9)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(10)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(11)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Child Growth and Development
Research Center, Research Institute for Primordial Prevention of
Non-Communicable Disease, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(12)Division of Infection and Immunity, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(13)Vaccine Research Center.
(14)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, Division of Intramural
Research.
(15)Clinical Genomics Program, and.
(16)Bioinformatics and Computational Biosciences Branch, Office of Cyber
Infrastructure and Computational Biology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(17)Regeneron Genetics Center, Tarrytown, NY.
(18)Institute of Child Health, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(19)Can Sucak Research Laboratory for Translational Immunology, Center for
Genomics and Rare Diseases, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(20)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, University of Health
Sciences/Ankara City Hospital/Children's Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(21)Division of Pediatric Oncology, University of Health Sciences/Ankara City
Hospital/Children's Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(22)Department of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, School of Medicine, Ankara
University, Ankara, Turkey.
(23)Intergen Genetic Diagnosis and Research Center, Ankara, Turkey.
(24)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematology & Oncology &
Molecular Biology and Genetic Department, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey.
(25)Gevher Nesibe Genom and Stem Cell Institution, GENKOK Genome and Stem Cell
Center, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey.
(26)Willem-Alexander Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(27)Department of Allergy and Immunology, The Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(28)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(29)Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilian
University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(30)Department of Internal Medicine and Infectious Diseases, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(31)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(32)The Isil Berat Barlan Center for Translational Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(33)Istanbul Jeffrey Modell Diagnostic and Research Center for Primary
Immunodeficiencies, Istanbul, Turkey.
(34)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University of Duisburg-Essen,
Essen, Germany.
(35)Vestische Kinder-und Jugendklinik, Witten/Herdecke University, Datteln,
Germany.
(36)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Immunology, and Intensive Care
Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(37)Institute of Immunity & Transplantation, University College London, Royal
Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(38)Unité d'Immuno-Hematologie et Rhumatologie, Département de Pédiatrie
Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP),
Paris, France.
(39)INSERM U1163, Imagine Institute, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(40)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(41)Department of Pediatric Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Wilhelmina
Children's Hospital, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(42)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(43)Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision Infectious Diseases and Immunology,
Erasmus MC-Sophia, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(44)Department of Immunology, Royal Free London National Health Service (NHS)
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(45)Department of Pediatrics, Helios Children's Hospital, Krefeld, Germany.
(46)Department of Immunology, Labor Berlin GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
(47)Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies, Berlin, Germany.
(48)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Activation and Susceptibility to EBV infection,
INSERM U1163, Imagine Institute, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(49)Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Unit and Istituto di Ricovero e Cura
Pediatrico a Carattere Scientifico (IRCSS) Istituto Giannina Gaslini Research
Institute Genova, Italy.
(50)Center for Autoinflammatory Diseases and Immunodeficiency, Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura Pediatrico a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Istituto Giannina
Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
(51)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition (NEO), Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska, Sweden.
(52)Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI) Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(53)Molecular Development of the Immune System Section, Laboratory of Immune
System Biology, NIAID, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(54)Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases Network (PIDNet), Universal Scientific
Education and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran; and.
(55)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Blood. 2020 Dec 3;136(23):2600-2602. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020007763.

Biallelic mutations in the genes encoding CD27 or its ligand CD70 underlie
inborn errors of immunity (IEIs) characterized predominantly by Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV)-associated immune dysregulation, such as chronic viremia, severe
infectious mononucleosis, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH),
lymphoproliferation, and malignancy. A comprehensive understanding of the
natural history, immune characteristics, and transplant outcomes has remained
elusive. Here, in a multi-institutional global collaboration, we collected the
clinical information of 49 patients from 29 families (CD27, n = 33; CD70, n =
16), including 24 previously unreported individuals and identified a total of 16
distinct mutations in CD27, and 8 in CD70, respectively. The majority of
patients (90%) were EBV+ at diagnosis, but only ∼30% presented with infectious
mononucleosis. Lymphoproliferation and lymphoma were the main clinical
manifestations (70% and 43%, respectively), and 9 of the CD27-deficient patients
developed HLH. Twenty-one patients (43%) developed autoinflammatory features
including uveitis, arthritis, and periodic fever. Detailed immunological
characterization revealed aberrant generation of memory B and T cells, including
a paucity of EBV-specific T cells, and impaired effector function of CD8+ T
cells, thereby providing mechanistic insight into cellular defects underpinning
the clinical features of disrupted CD27/CD70 signaling. Nineteen patients
underwent allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) prior to
adulthood predominantly because of lymphoma, with 95% survival without disease
recurrence. Our data highlight the marked predisposition to lymphoma of both
CD27- and CD70-deficient patients. The excellent outcome after HSCT supports the
timely implementation of this treatment modality particularly in patients
presenting with malignant transformation to lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020006738
PMCID: PMC7735164
PMID: 32603431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors
declare no competing financial interests.
