---
reference_id: "PMID:19629171"
title: A missense mutation in the SERPINH1 gene in Dachshunds with osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Drögemüller C
- Becker D
- Brunner A
- Haase B
- Kircher P
- Seeliger F
- Fehr M
- Baumann U
- Lindblad-Toh K
- Leeb T
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000579
keywords:
- Animals
- Dog Diseases/genetics
- Dogs
- HSP47 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, veterinary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A missense mutation in the SERPINH1 gene in Dachshunds with osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Drögemüller C, Becker D, Brunner A, Haase B, Kircher P, Seeliger F, Fehr M, Baumann U, Lindblad-Toh K, Leeb T
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1000579](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000579)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jul;5(7):e1000579. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000579. Epub
2009  Jul 24.

A missense mutation in the SERPINH1 gene in Dachshunds with osteogenesis 
imperfecta.

Drögemüller C(1), Becker D, Brunner A, Haase B, Kircher P, Seeliger F, Fehr M, 
Baumann U, Lindblad-Toh K, Leeb T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Berne, Berne, 
Switzerland.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a hereditary disease occurring in humans and 
dogs. It is characterized by extremely fragile bones and teeth. Most human and 
some canine OI cases are caused by mutations in the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes 
encoding the subunits of collagen I. Recently, mutations in the CRTAP and LEPRE1 
genes were found to cause some rare forms of human OI. Many OI cases exist where 
the causative mutation has not yet been found. We investigated Dachshunds with 
an autosomal recessive form of OI. Genotyping only five affected dogs on the 50 
k canine SNP chip allowed us to localize the causative mutation to a 5.82 Mb 
interval on chromosome 21 by homozygosity mapping. Haplotype analysis of five 
additional carriers narrowed the interval further down to 4.74 Mb. The SERPINH1 
gene is located within this interval and encodes an essential chaperone involved 
in the correct folding of the collagen triple helix. Therefore, we considered 
SERPINH1 a positional and functional candidate gene and performed mutation 
analysis in affected and control Dachshunds. A missense mutation (c.977C>T, 
p.L326P) located in an evolutionary conserved domain was perfectly associated 
with the OI phenotype. We thus have identified a candidate causative mutation 
for OI in Dachshunds and identified a fifth OI gene.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000579
PMCID: PMC2708911
PMID: 19629171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.