---
reference_id: "PMID:25592122"
title: Ophthalmic and molecular genetic findings in Kniest dysplasia.
authors:
- Sergouniotis PI
- Fincham GS
- McNinch AM
- Spickett C
- Poulson AV
- Richards AJ
- Snead MP
journal: Eye (Lond)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/eye.2014.334
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ophthalmic and molecular genetic findings in Kniest dysplasia.
**Authors:** Sergouniotis PI, Fincham GS, McNinch AM, Spickett C, Poulson AV, Richards AJ, Snead MP
**Journal:** Eye (Lond) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/eye.2014.334](https://doi.org/10.1038/eye.2014.334)

## Content

1. Eye (Lond). 2015 Apr;29(4):475-82. doi: 10.1038/eye.2014.334. Epub 2015 Jan
16.

Ophthalmic and molecular genetic findings in Kniest dysplasia.

Sergouniotis PI(1), Fincham GS(1), McNinch AM(2), Spickett C(3), Poulson AV(1), 
Richards AJ(2), Snead MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Vitreoretinal Service, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University NHS 
Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK.
(2)1] Vitreoretinal Service, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University NHS 
Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK [2] Department of Pathology, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

PURPOSE: To study the variability of the ophthalmic phenotype in Kniest 
dysplasia. Kniest dysplasia is an inherited disorder associated with defects in 
type II collagen and characterised by short-trunked dwarfism, kyphoscoliosis, 
and enlarged joints with restricted mobility. Other features include marked hand 
arthropathy, cleft palate, hearing loss, and ocular abnormalities (myopia, 
abnormal vitreous, and high risk of developing retinal detachment).
METHODS: Data from eight unrelated individuals with a clinical and molecular 
diagnosis of Kniest dysplasia are reported. Clinical assessment included an 
audiogram and ophthalmological examination in all but one patient who died in 
the immediate postnatal period. Sanger sequencing of the COL2A1 gene was 
performed.
RESULTS: Six of the seven patients tested were high myopes with one patient 
being an emmetrope. Bilateral quandratic cataracts and subluxed lenses were 
noted in one subject. Variable but abnormal vitreous architecture was observed 
in all seven individuals tested. Six of the seven patients had significant 
hearing impairment and five of the seven patients exhibited clefting 
abnormalities. One patient had bilateral retinal detachments in his twenties. 
Six dominant disease-causing COL2A1 variants were detected. In three cases, 
testing of parental samples revealed that the disease-causing variant was not 
present in either parent.
CONCLUSION: The ophthalmic features in Kniest dysplasia are very similar to 
those in other disorders of type II collagen such as Stickler syndrome. It is 
likely that different type II collagenopathies have a similar level of ocular 
morbidity and regular ophthalmologic examination is recommended. Kniest 
dysplasia is associated with heterozygous COL2A1 mutations that are frequently 
de novo.

DOI: 10.1038/eye.2014.334
PMCID: PMC4816360
PMID: 25592122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]