---
reference_id: "PMID:17351020"
title: MECP2 mutations in males.
authors:
- Villard L
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.049452
keywords:
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MECP2 mutations in males.
**Authors:** Villard L
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2007.049452](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2007.049452)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2007 Jul;44(7):417-23. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.049452. Epub 2007
Mar  9.

MECP2 mutations in males.

Villard L(1).

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U491, Faculté de Médecine de La Timone, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin, 
13385 Marseille cedex 5, France. laurent.villard@medecine.univ-mrs.fr

Rett syndrome (RS; MIM 312750) is a severe neurological disorder affecting 
exclusively females. Its prevalence is about 1 in 10,000 female births, and it 
is a prominent cause of profound mental handicap in women. RS is caused by 
mutations in the X-linked methyl CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene. These 
mutations were initially thought to be lethal in males. However, MECP2 mutations 
are now frequently identified in mentally retarded male patients. The frequency 
of disease-causing MECP2 mutations in this population is between 1.3% and 1.7%. 
Surprisingly, MECP2 mutations in males are responsible for a wide spectrum of 
neurological disorders, ranging from mild mental retardation to severe neonatal 
encephalopathy. The aim of this review is to describe the nature of the MECP2 
mutations identified in male patients to date and their associated phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2007.049452
PMCID: PMC2597995
PMID: 17351020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.