---
reference_id: "PMID:25791871"
title: Interventions for reducing inflammation in familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Wu B
- Xu T
- Li Y
- Yin X
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interventions for reducing inflammation in familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Wu B, Xu T, Li Y, Yin X
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Mar 20;(3):CD010893. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub2.

Interventions for reducing inflammation in familial Mediterranean fever.

Wu B(1), Xu T, Li Y, Yin X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, No.37,Guoxue 
Lane, Chengdu, Sichuan, China, 610041.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Oct 19;10:CD010893. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub3.

BACKGROUND: Familial Mediterranean fever, a hereditary auto-inflammatory 
disease, mainly affects ethnic groups living in the Mediterranean region. Early 
studies reported colchicine as a potential drug for preventing attacks of 
familial Mediterranean fever. For those people who are colchicine-resistant or 
intolerant, drugs such as rilonacept, anakinra, etanercept, infliximab, 
thalidomide and interferon-alpha might be beneficial.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of interventions for reducing 
inflammation in people with familial Mediterranean fever.
SEARCH METHODS: We used detailed search strategies to search the following 
databases: CENTRAL; MEDLINE; Embase; Chinese Biomedical Literature Database 
(CBM), China National Knowledge Infrastructure Database (CNKI); Wan Fang; and 
VIP. In addition, we also searched the clinical trials registries including 
ClinicalTrials.gov, the International Standard Randomized Controlled Trial 
Number Register, the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform and the 
Chinese Clinical Trial Registry, as well as references listed in relevant 
reports.Date of last search: 21 May 2014.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized controlled studies of people with diagnosis of 
familial Mediterranean fever, comparing active interventions (including 
colchicine, anakinra, rilonacept, etanercept, infliximab, thalidomide, 
interferon-alpha, ImmunoGuard™ (a herbal dietary supplement) and non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs) with placebo or no treatment, or comparing active drugs 
to each other.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: The authors independently selected studies, 
extracted data and assessed risk of bias. We pooled data to present the risk 
ratio or mean difference with their 95% confidence intervals. We assessed 
overall evidence quality according to the GRADE approach.
MAIN RESULTS: We included four randomized placebo-controlled studies with a 
total of 75 participants (aged three to 53 years); three were of cross-over and 
one of parallel design. Two studies used the active intervention of oral 
colchicine (0.6 mg three times daily or 0.5 mg twice daily), one study used oral 
ImmunoGuard™ and the fourth used rilonacept as a subcutaneous injection. The 
duration of each study arm ranged from one to three months.The two most recent 
studies were generally well-designed, except for an unclear risk of detection 
bias in one of these. However, some inadequacy existed in the other two older 
studies, where each had an unclear risk of selection bias, a high risk of 
attrition bias, an unclear risk of reporting bias and a high risk of other 
potential bias (baseline characteristics such as mutation status and disease 
severity were not described); one of these studies additionally had an unclear 
risk of detection bias.We aimed to report on the number of participants 
experiencing an attack, the timing of attacks, any adverse drug reactions and 
the response of a number of biochemical markers from the acute phase of an 
attack, but data were not available for all outcomes across all 
comparisons.Based on one study (15 participants), there was a significant 
reduction in the number of people experiencing attacks at three months when 
colchicine was administered at a dose of 0.6 mg three times daily (14% versus 
100%), risk ratio 0.21 (95% confidence interval 0.05 to 0.95); however, the 
GRADE evidence quality was low. Based on two further studies, there was no 
significant reduction in the number of participants experiencing attacks at two 
months when colchicine was administered at a dose of 0.5 mg twice daily (22 
participants) in people with familial Mediterranean fever, or at three months 
when rilonacept was used in individuals who were colchicine-resistant or 
colchicine-intolerant (14 participants). In the ImmunoGuard™ study (24 
participants) acute phase response indicators (including erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate, white blood cell count and C-reactive protein) were not 
reduced after one month treatment.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There were limited randomized controlled studies assessing 
interventions for people with familial Mediterranean fever. Based on the 
evidence, colchicine appears to reduce the number of people experiencing 
attacks; however, only a few low-quality randomized controlled studies 
contributed data for analysis. Further randomized controlled studies examining 
active interventions, not only colchicine, are necessary before a comprehensive 
conclusion regarding the efficacy and safety of interventions for reducing 
inflammation in familial Mediterranean fever can be drawn.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub2
PMID: 25791871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]