---
reference_id: "PMID:26517016"
title: DEPDC5 variants increase fibrosis progression in Europeans with chronic hepatitis C virus infection.
authors:
- Burza MA
- Motta BM
- Mancina RM
- Pingitore P
- Pirazzi C
- Lepore SM
- Spagnuolo R
- Doldo P
- Russo C
- Lazzaro V
- Fischer J
- Berg T
- Aghemo A
- Cheroni C
- De Francesco R
- Fargion S
- Colombo M
- Datz C
- Stickel F
- Valenti L
- Romeo S
journal: Hepatology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/hep.28322
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/etiology"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Disease Progression
- Female
- GTPase-Activating Proteins
- Genetic Variation
- Germany
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/complications, genetics"
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class I/genetics
- Humans
- Italy
- Liver Cirrhosis/etiology
- Liver Neoplasms/etiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Switzerland
- White People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DEPDC5 variants increase fibrosis progression in Europeans with chronic hepatitis C virus infection.
**Authors:** Burza MA, Motta BM, Mancina RM, Pingitore P, Pirazzi C, Lepore SM, Spagnuolo R, Doldo P, Russo C, Lazzaro V, Fischer J, Berg T, Aghemo A, Cheroni C, De Francesco R, Fargion S, Colombo M, Datz C, Stickel F, Valenti L, Romeo S
**Journal:** Hepatology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.28322](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.28322)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2016 Feb;63(2):418-27. doi: 10.1002/hep.28322. Epub 2015 Dec 18.

DEPDC5 variants increase fibrosis progression in Europeans with chronic
hepatitis C virus infection.

Burza MA(1), Motta BM(1), Mancina RM(1), Pingitore P(1), Pirazzi C(1), Lepore
SM(2), Spagnuolo R(3), Doldo P(3), Russo C(2), Lazzaro V(2), Fischer J(4), Berg
T(4), Aghemo A(5), Cheroni C(6), De Francesco R(6), Fargion S(7), Colombo
M(5)(7), Datz C(8), Stickel F(9), Valenti L(7), Romeo S(1)(2)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Clinical Nutrition Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Magna
Graecia University, Catanzaro, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Magna Graecia University,
Catanzaro, Italy.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Rheumatology, Section of Hepatology,
University Hospital, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale
Policlinico Milano, Milan, Italy.
(6)Virology Program, INGM-Istituto Nazionale di Genetica Molecolare "Romeo ed
Enrica Invernizzi", Milan, Italy.
(7)Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca'Granda Ospedale
Policlinico Milano, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Milan,
Italy.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Oberndorf, Teaching Hospital of the
Paracelsus Private University of Salzburg, Oberndorf, Austria.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital of Zürich,
Rämistrasse 100, CH-8091, Zürich, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Cardiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg,
Sweden.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection may progress to cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Recently, two genetic variants, DEPDC5 rs1012068
and MICA rs2596542, were associated with the onset of HCC in Asian subjects with
chronic HCV infection. The aim of the present study was to analyze whether
DEPDC5 and MICA genetic variants were associated with liver disease progression
in European subjects with chronic HCV infection. In a Northern Italian discovery
cohort (n = 477), neither DEPDC5 rs1012068 nor MICA rs2596542 were associated
with HCC (n = 150). However, DEPDC5 rs1012068 was independently associated with
cirrhosis (n = 300; P = 0.049). The association of rs1012068 with moderate to
severe fibrosis was confirmed in an independent cross-sectional German cohort (n
= 415; P = 0.006). Furthermore, DEPDC5 rs1012068 predicted faster fibrosis
progression in a prospective cohort (n = 247; P = 0.027). Next, we examined the
distribution of nonsynonymous DEPDC5 variants in the overall cross-sectional
cohort (n = 912). The presence of at least one variant increased the risk of
moderate/severe fibrosis by 54% (P = 0.040). To understand the molecular
mechanism underlying the genetic association of DEPDC5 variants with fibrosis
progression, we performed in vitro studies on immortalized hepatic stellate
cells (LX-2). In these cells, down-regulation of DEPDC5 resulted in increased
expression of β-catenin and production of its target matrix metallopeptidase 2
(MMP2), a secreted enzyme involved in fibrosis progression.
CONCLUSION: DEPDC5 variants increase fibrosis progression in European subjects
with chronic HCV infection. Our findings suggest that DEPDC5 down-regulation may
contribute to HCV-related fibrosis by increasing MMP2 synthesis through the
β-catenin pathway.

© 2015 The Authors. HEPATOLOGY published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc., on behalf
of the American Association for hte Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.28322
PMCID: PMC4737289
PMID: 26517016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
