---
reference_id: "PMID:39051378"
title: "Conservative Treatment in Avascular Necrosis of the Femoral Head: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Goncharov EN
- Koval OA
- Nikolaevich Bezuglov E
- Aleksandrovich Vetoshkin A
- Gavriilovich Goncharov N
- Encarnación Ramirez MJ
- Montemurro N
journal: Med Sci (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/medsci12030032
keywords:
- Humans
- Conservative Treatment
- Femur Head/pathology
- "Femur Head Necrosis/pathology, psychology, therapy"
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Conservative Treatment in Avascular Necrosis of the Femoral Head: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Goncharov EN, Koval OA, Nikolaevich Bezuglov E, Aleksandrovich Vetoshkin A, Gavriilovich Goncharov N, Encarnación Ramirez MJ, Montemurro N
**Journal:** Med Sci (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medsci12030032](https://doi.org/10.3390/medsci12030032)

## Content

1. Med Sci (Basel). 2024 Jul 2;12(3):32. doi: 10.3390/medsci12030032.

Conservative Treatment in Avascular Necrosis of the Femoral Head: A Systematic 
Review.

Goncharov EN(1), Koval OA(1), Nikolaevich Bezuglov E(2), Aleksandrovich 
Vetoshkin A(3), Gavriilovich Goncharov N(4), Encarnación Ramirez MJ(5), 
Montemurro N(6).

Author information:
(1)Russian Scientific Center of Surgery Named after Academician B. V. Petrovsky, 
121359 Moscow, Russia.
(2)Department of Sports Medicine and Medical Rehabilitation, Sechenov First 
Moscow State Medical University, 119435 Moscow, Russia.
(3)The Nikiforov Russian Center of Emergency and Radiation Medicine, 187015 St. 
Petersburg, Russia.
(4)Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional Education, 119435 Moscow, 
Russia.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, RUDN University, 121359 Moscow, Russia.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana (AOUP), 
56100 Pisa, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Avascular necrosis (AVN) of the femoral head is a pressing 
orthopedic issue, leading to bone tissue death due to disrupted blood supply and 
affecting the quality of life of individuals significantly. This review focuses 
on conservative treatments, evaluating their efficacy as mainstay therapies. 
Enhanced understanding of AVN's pathophysiology and advancements in diagnostic 
tools have rekindled interest in non-surgical interventions, emphasizing 
personalized, multidisciplinary approaches for improved outcomes.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: A systematic search was conducted on PubMed, SCOPUS, and 
Google Scholar databases from January 2020 to August 2023, with the objective of 
focusing on conservative treatments for AVN of the femoral head. Eligible 
studies, including original research, case reports, and observational studies, 
were examined for relevant, well-documented patient outcomes post-conservative 
treatments, excluding non-English and surgically focused articles without 
comparative conservative data.
RESULTS: A systematic search yielded 376 records on AVN of the femoral head 
across multiple databases. After de-duplication and rigorous screening for 
relevance and quality, 11 full-text articles were ultimately included for a 
comprehensive qualitative synthesis, focusing on conservatively managing the 
condition.
CONCLUSIONS: This review evaluates the effectiveness of conservative treatments 
such as pharmacological interventions and physical modalities in managing AVN of 
the femoral head. Despite promising results in symptom alleviation and disease 
progression delay, variability in outcomes and methodological limitations in 
studies necessitate further rigorous, randomized controlled trials for a robust, 
patient-centric approach to optimize therapeutic outcomes in AVN management.

DOI: 10.3390/medsci12030032
PMCID: PMC11270198
PMID: 39051378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.