---
reference_id: "PMID:35806195"
title: Retrospective Natural History Study of RPGR-Related Cone- and Cone-Rod Dystrophies While Expanding the Mutation Spectrum of the Disease.
authors:
- Nassisi M
- De Bartolo G
- Mohand-Said S
- Condroyer C
- Antonio A
- Lancelot ME
- Bujakowska K
- Smirnov V
- Pugliese T
- Neidhardt J
- Sahel JA
- Zeitz C
- Audo I
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23137189
keywords:
- Cone-Rod Dystrophies/genetics
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- "Genes, Regulator"
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/diagnosis, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrospective Natural History Study of RPGR-Related Cone- and Cone-Rod Dystrophies While Expanding the Mutation Spectrum of the Disease.
**Authors:** Nassisi M, De Bartolo G, Mohand-Said S, Condroyer C, Antonio A, Lancelot ME, Bujakowska K, Smirnov V, Pugliese T, Neidhardt J, Sahel JA, Zeitz C, Audo I
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23137189](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23137189)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jun 28;23(13):7189. doi: 10.3390/ijms23137189.

Retrospective Natural History Study of RPGR-Related Cone- and Cone-Rod 
Dystrophies While Expanding the Mutation Spectrum of the Disease.

Nassisi M(1)(2)(3)(4), De Bartolo G(1)(2), Mohand-Said S(1)(2), Condroyer C(1), 
Antonio A(1)(2), Lancelot ME(1), Bujakowska K(1)(5), Smirnov V(1)(6)(7), 
Pugliese T(1)(2), Neidhardt J(8)(9), Sahel JA(1)(2)(10), Zeitz C(1), Audo 
I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, 75012 Paris, 
France.
(2)Centre Hospitalier National d'Ophtalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, National Rare 
Disease Center REFERET and INSERM-DGOS CIC 1423, 75012 Paris, France.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
20122 Milan, Italy.
(4)Ophthalmology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico 
di Milano, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(5)Ocular Genomics Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Department of 
Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(6)Exploration de la Vision et Neuro-Ophthalmologie, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Lille, 59000 Lille, France.
(7)Faculté de Médecine, Université de Lille, 59000 Lille, France.
(8)Human Genetics, Faculty VI, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of Oldenburg, 26129 Oldenburg, Germany.
(9)Research Center Neurosensory Science, University Oldenburg, 26129 Oldenburg, 
Germany.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh Medical School, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Variants in the X-linked retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator gene (RPGR) and, 
specifically, in its retinal opening reading frame-15 isoform (RPGRORF15) may 
cause rod-cone (RCD), cone, and cone-rod dystrophies (CDs and CRDs). While 
RPGR-related RCDs have been frequently evaluated, the characteristics and 
progression of RPGR-related CD/CRDs are largely unknown. Therefore, the goal of 
our work was to perform genotype-phenotype correlations specifically in 
RPGRORF15-related CD/CRDs. This retrospective longitudinal study included 34 
index patients and two affected relatives with a molecular diagnosis of 
RPGR-related CD/CRDs. Patients were recruited at the "Quinze-Vingts" Hospital, 
Paris, France and screened for mutations in RPGRORF15 at the Institut de la 
Vision, Paris, France. We identified 29 distinct variants, of which 27 were 
truncating. All were located in the 3' half of the RPGRORF15 transcript. Twenty 
of them were novel. Fifteen subjects were affected by CD, the remaining had CRD. 
When analyzing the longitudinal data, a progressive decline in visual acuity 
(VA) was noted, with more than 60% of the patients reaching VA ≥ 1 LogMar in the 
best eye after the fifth decade of life. To our knowledge, this is the largest 
described study of a cohort of CD/CRD patients affected by RPGRORF15 variants. 
Longitudinal data showed a rapidly progressive disease, possibly locating an 
optimal window of intervention for future therapies in younger ages.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23137189
PMCID: PMC9266815
PMID: 35806195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.