---
reference_id: "PMID:34894815"
title: "Gyrate Atrophy of the Choroid and Retina: A Review."
authors:
- Elnahry AG
- Elnahry GA
journal: Eur J Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/11206721211067333
keywords:
- Atrophy/pathology
- Choroid/pathology
- "Gyrate Atrophy/diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- Ornithine
- Ornithine-Oxo-Acid Transaminase/genetics
- Retina/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gyrate Atrophy of the Choroid and Retina: A Review.
**Authors:** Elnahry AG, Elnahry GA
**Journal:** Eur J Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/11206721211067333](https://doi.org/10.1177/11206721211067333)

## Content

1. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2022 May;32(3):1314-1323. doi: 10.1177/11206721211067333.
Epub  2021 Dec 13.

Gyrate Atrophy of the Choroid and Retina: A Review.

Elnahry AG(1), Elnahry GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, 63526Cairo University,
Cairo, Egypt.

Gyrate atrophy (GA) of the choroid and retina is a rare autosomal recessive
genetic condition characterized by elevation of the plasma level of the amino
acid ornithine due to deficiency of the enzyme ornithine ketoacid
aminotransferase. Accumulation of ornithine occurs in various body tissues but
leads primarily to characteristic ophthalmic manifestations including myopia,
cataract, progressive chorioretinal atrophy, and macular changes. Patients
usually present with night blindness that starts in the first decade of life
followed by visual field constriction and eventually diminution of the central
visual acuity and blindness. The condition has been reported worldwide and its
differential diagnosis is broad and includes choroideremia and retinitis
pigmentosa. Treatment currently depends on life-long dietary modifications
including restriction of the amino acid arginine in diet. This article describes
in detail the pathogenesis, clinical features, multimodal imaging findings, and
treatment options for GA of the choroid and retina and its complications.

DOI: 10.1177/11206721211067333
PMID: 34894815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
