---
reference_id: "PMID:39445296"
title: "Genitopatellar Syndrome With a Novel Variant in the KAT6B Gene: Supporting Spectrum Delineation."
authors:
- Back W
- Mierzwa A
- Mahfooz N
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.69989
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genitopatellar Syndrome With a Novel Variant in the KAT6B Gene: Supporting Spectrum Delineation.
**Authors:** Back W, Mierzwa A, Mahfooz N
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.69989](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.69989)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Sep 23;16(9):e69989. doi: 10.7759/cureus.69989. eCollection 2024 
Sep.

Genitopatellar Syndrome With a Novel Variant in the KAT6B Gene: Supporting 
Spectrum Delineation.

Back W(1), Mierzwa A(2), Mahfooz N(3).

Author information:
(1)Surgery/Neurosurgery, The University of Toledo, College of Medicine and Life 
Sciences, Toledo, USA.
(2)Neurology, The University of Toledo, Toledo, USA.
(3)Pediatric Neurology, The University of Toledo, Toledo, USA.

Genitopatellar syndrome (GPS) and Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson syndrome 
(SBBYSS) are rare genetic disorders linked to mutations in the Lysine 
Acetyltransferase 6B (KAT6B) gene, affecting histone acetylation regulation and 
developmental processes. We present a case of an African American infant with 
classic GPS features and a novel KAT6B gene mutation (c.4066del, 
p.Glu1356Argfs*23). The patient exhibited skeletal anomalies, neurologic 
deficits, and genitourinary abnormalities, consistent with GPS. Genetic analysis 
revealed a de novo heterozygous pathogenic variant, adding to the growing 
understanding of KAT6B-related disorders. Reviewing recent literature, we found 
an increased prevalence of reported cases and novel gene variants, supporting 
the delineation of GPS and SBBYSS. Furthermore, analysis suggests a preference 
range within the gene associated with GPS phenotypes, challenging the notion of 
a spectrum of KAT6B-related disorders. As genetic sequencing advances, continued 
reporting of cases will inform decisions regarding the classification of these 
disorders.

Copyright © 2024, Back et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.69989
PMCID: PMC11497820
PMID: 39445296

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.