---
reference_id: "PMID:38879834"
title: "Testicular juvenile granulosa cell tumor: a case report."
authors:
- Baldazzi M
- Rossi E
- Minelli R
- Paviglianiti G
- Napolitano M
- Romeo P
- Galuppi F
- Di Vincenzo AO
- Greco L
- Vivacqua D
- Thomas E
- Lovato L
- Lima M
journal: J Ultrasound
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s40477-024-00905-9
keywords:
- Humans
- "Testicular Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, surgery, pathology"
- "Granulosa Cell Tumor/diagnostic imaging, surgery, pathology"
- Male
- Infant
- Ultrasonography
- "Testis/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Testicular juvenile granulosa cell tumor: a case report.
**Authors:** Baldazzi M, Rossi E, Minelli R, Paviglianiti G, Napolitano M, Romeo P, Galuppi F, Di Vincenzo AO, Greco L, Vivacqua D, Thomas E, Lovato L, Lima M
**Journal:** J Ultrasound (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40477-024-00905-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40477-024-00905-9)

## Content

1. J Ultrasound. 2025 Dec;28(4):1071-1074. doi: 10.1007/s40477-024-00905-9. Epub 
2024 Jun 16.

Testicular juvenile granulosa cell tumor: a case report.

Baldazzi M(1), Rossi E(2), Minelli R(3), Paviglianiti G(4), Napolitano M(5), 
Romeo P(6), Galuppi F(6), Di Vincenzo AO(7), Greco L(7), Vivacqua D(7), Thomas 
E(8), Lovato L(7), Lima M(8).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric and Adult CardioThoracic and Vascular, Oncohematologic and 
Emergency Radiology Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Di Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy. michelangelo.baldazzi@gmail.com.
(2)U.O.S.D. Diagnostica Per Immagini A.O.R.N. Santobono-Pausilipon, Pausilipon 
Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine, Health Sciences "Vincenzo Tiberio", University of 
Molise, Campobasso, Italy.
(4)UOC Radiologia Pediatrica ARNAS Civico-Di Cristina-Benfratelli, Palermo, 
Italy.
(5)ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, UOS Di Radiologia Interventistica Pediatrica, 
Presidio Ospedaliero Vittore Buzzi, Milan, Italy.
(6)Alma Mater Studiorum-Università di Bologna, IRCCS Azienda 
Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(7)Pediatric and Adult CardioThoracic and Vascular, Oncohematologic and 
Emergency Radiology Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Di Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.
(8)Pediatric Surgery, IRCCS Sant'Orsola Hospital University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.

The Testicular Juvenile Granulosa Cell Tumor (JGCT) is a rare testicular 
neoplasm that appears in the first months of life as a painless testicular mass. 
Following an accurate radiological ultrasound diagnosis, through which the 
cystic appearance of the lesion is observed, and histological confirmation, 
showing follicular growth pattern and an immunoreactivity for inhibin, the 
treatment process involves, when feasible, conservative surgery. We present the 
case of a 2-months old infant with a bilateral JGCT of the testis and we review 
the classical findings of the patology.

© 2024. Società Italiana di Ultrasonologia in Medicina e Biologia (SIUMB).

DOI: 10.1007/s40477-024-00905-9
PMCID: PMC12675841
PMID: 38879834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: Authors have 
no conflict of interest to disclose. Ethical approval: The publication of the 
case report to the journal. The research was conducted ethically in accordance 
with the World Medical association Declaration of Helsinki. Consent to publish: 
The participant has signed an informed consent, consented to the submission.