---
reference_id: "PMID:11115075"
title: Cyclooxygenase-2 expression is associated with the renal macula densa of patients with Bartter-like syndrome.
authors:
- Kömhoff M
- Jeck ND
- Seyberth HW
- Gröne HJ
- Nüsing RM
- Breyer MD
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2000.00425.x
keywords:
- "Bartter Syndrome/metabolism, pathology"
- Child
- Cyclooxygenase 2
- Dinoprostone/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic"
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- "Isoenzymes/analysis, genetics"
- "Juxtaglomerular Apparatus/enzymology, pathology"
- Membrane Proteins
- "Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide Synthases/analysis, genetics"
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis"
- Renin/metabolism
- Renin-Angiotensin System/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cyclooxygenase-2 expression is associated with the renal macula densa of patients with Bartter-like syndrome.
**Authors:** Kömhoff M, Jeck ND, Seyberth HW, Gröne HJ, Nüsing RM, Breyer MD
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1523-1755.2000.00425.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1755.2000.00425.x)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2000 Dec;58(6):2420-4. doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2000.00425.x.

Cyclooxygenase-2 expression is associated with the renal macula densa of
patients with Bartter-like syndrome.

Kömhoff M(1), Jeck ND, Seyberth HW, Gröne HJ, Nüsing RM, Breyer MD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Departments of Medicine and Molecular Physiology and
Biophysics, Veterans Administration Medical Center, and Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

BACKGROUND: Bartter-like syndrome (BLS) is a heterogeneous set of congenital
tubular disorders that is associated with significant renal salt and water loss.
The syndrome is also marked by increased urinary prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
excretion. In rodents, salt and volume depletion are associated with increased
renal macula densa cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression. The expression of COX-2
in human macula densa has not been demonstrated. The present studies examined
whether COX-2 can be detected in macula densa from children with salt-wasting
BLS versus control tissues.
METHODS: The intrarenal distribution of COX-2 protein and mRNA was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization in 12 patients with clinically
and/or genetically confirmed BLS. Renal tissue rejected for transplantation,
from six adult patients not affected by BLS, was also examined.
RESULTS: The expression of COX-2 immunoreactive protein was observed in cells of
the macula densa in 8 out 11 patients with BLS. In situ hybridization confirmed
the expression of COX-2 mRNA in the macula densa in 6 out of 10 cases. COX-2
protein was also detected in the macula densa in a patient with congestive heart
failure. The expression of COX-2 immunoreactive protein was not observed in
cells associated with the macula densa in kidneys from patients without
disorders associated with hyper-reninemia.
CONCLUSION: These studies demonstrate that COX-2 may be detected in the macula
densa of humans. Since macula densa COX-2 was detected in cases of BLS, renal
COX-2 expression may be linked to volume and renin status in humans, as well as
in animals.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2000.00425.x
PMID: 11115075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
