---
reference_id: PMID:23463246
title: "Echinocandins: production and applications."
authors:
- Emri T
- Majoros L
- Tóth V
- Pócsi I
journal: Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00253-013-4761-9
keywords:
- "Antifungal Agents/chemistry, metabolism, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Biosynthetic Pathways/genetics
- Biotechnology/methods
- "Drug Resistance, Fungal"
- "Echinocandins/chemistry, metabolism, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- "Mycoses/drug therapy, microbiology"
- "Technology, Pharmaceutical/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Echinocandins: production and applications.
**Authors:** Emri T, Majoros L, Tóth V, Pócsi I
**Journal:** Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00253-013-4761-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-013-4761-9)

## Content

1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Apr;97(8):3267-84. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-013-4761-9. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Echinocandins: production and applications.

Emri T(1), Majoros L, Tóth V, Pócsi I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial Biotechnology and Cell Biology, Faculty of Science 
and Technology, University of Debrecen, 4032 Debrecen, Hungary. 
emri.tamas@science.unideb.hu

The first echinocandin-type antimycotic (echinocandin B) was discovered in the 
1970s. It was followed by the isolation of more than 20 natural echinocandins. 
These cyclic lipo-hexapeptides are biosynthesized on non-ribosomal peptide 
synthase complexes by different ascomycota fungi. They have a unique mechanism 
of action; as non-competitive inhibitors of β-1,3-glucan synthase complex they 
target the fungal cell wall. Results of the structure-activity relationship 
experiments let us develop semisynthetic derivatives with improved properties. 
Three cyclic lipohiexapeptides (caspofungin, micafungin and anidulafungin) are 
currently approved for use in clinics. As they show good fungicidal (Candida 
spp.) or fungistatic (Aspergillus spp.) activity against the most important 
human pathogenic fungi including azole-resistant strains, they are an important 
addition to the antifungal armamentarium. Some evidence of acquired resistance 
against echinocandins has been detected among Candida glabrata strains in recent 
years, which enhanced the importance of data collected on the mechanism of 
acquired resistance developing against the echinocandins. In this review, we 
show the structural diversity of natural echinocandins, and we summarize the 
emerging data on their mode of action, biosynthesis and industrial production. 
Their clinical significance as well as the mechanism of natural and acquired 
resistance is also discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-013-4761-9
PMID: 23463246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]