---
reference_id: "PMID:38167423"
title: Choroid plexus volume enlargement in first-episode antipsychotic-naïve schizophrenia.
authors:
- Zeng J
- Zhang T
- Tang B
- Li S
- Yao L
- Bishop JR
- Sweeney JA
- Li Z
- Qiu C
- Gu S
- Gong Q
- Zhang W
- Lui S
journal: Schizophrenia (Heidelb)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41537-023-00424-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Choroid plexus volume enlargement in first-episode antipsychotic-naïve schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Zeng J, Zhang T, Tang B, Li S, Yao L, Bishop JR, Sweeney JA, Li Z, Qiu C, Gu S, Gong Q, Zhang W, Lui S
**Journal:** Schizophrenia (Heidelb) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41537-023-00424-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41537-023-00424-2)

## Content

1. Schizophrenia (Heidelb). 2024 Jan 2;10(1):1. doi: 10.1038/s41537-023-00424-2.

Choroid plexus volume enlargement in first-episode antipsychotic-naïve 
schizophrenia.

Zeng J(1)(2)(3), Zhang T(2)(4), Tang B(1)(2)(3), Li S(1)(2)(3), Yao L(1)(2)(3), 
Bishop JR(5), Sweeney JA(2)(6), Li Z(1), Qiu C(7), Gu S(4), Gong Q(1)(2)(3), 
Zhang W(8)(9)(10), Lui S(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, and Functional and Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory 
of Sichuan Province, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)Huaxi MR Research Center (HMRRC), West China Hospital of Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(3)Research Unit of Psychoradiology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Chengdu, China.
(4)School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science 
and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.
(5)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cincinnati Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(7)Mental Health Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(8)Department of Radiology, and Functional and Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory 
of Sichuan Province, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. 
wjzhang19@scu.edu.cn.
(9)Huaxi MR Research Center (HMRRC), West China Hospital of Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China. wjzhang19@scu.edu.cn.
(10)Research Unit of Psychoradiology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Chengdu, China. wjzhang19@scu.edu.cn.
(11)Department of Radiology, and Functional and Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory 
of Sichuan Province, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. 
lusuwcums@tom.com.
(12)Huaxi MR Research Center (HMRRC), West China Hospital of Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China. lusuwcums@tom.com.
(13)Research Unit of Psychoradiology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Chengdu, China. lusuwcums@tom.com.

Investigation of the choroid plexus in schizophrenia has seen growing interest 
due to its role in the interaction between neuroinflammation and brain 
dysfunction. Most previous studies included treated and long-term ill patients, 
while antipsychotics and illness course might both affect the choroid plexus. 
Here, we recruited first-episode antipsychotic-naïve schizophrenia patients, 
performed high-resolution structural brain scan and manually extracted choroid 
plexus volume. Choroid plexus volume was compared between patients and healthy 
controls after controlling for age, sex and intracranial volume. Age and sex 
effects were examined on choroid plexus volume in patient and healthy control 
groups respectively. In patients, we also examined the correlation of choroid 
plexus volume with volume measures of cortical and subcortical gray matter, 
white matter, lateral ventricular as well as symptom severity and cognitive 
function. Schizophrenia patients showed significantly enlarged choroid plexus 
volume compared with healthy controls. Choroid plexus volume was positively 
correlated with age in only patient group and we found significantly larger 
choroid plexus volumes in males than females in both patient and healthy control 
groups, while the sex effects did not differ between groups. Choroid plexus 
volume was only found correlated with lateral ventricular volume among the brain 
volume measures. No significant correlation between choroid plexus volume and 
clinical ratings or cognitive performance was observed. Without potential 
confounding effects of pharmacotherapy or illness course, our findings indicated 
the enlargement of choroid plexus in schizophrenia might be an enduring trait 
for schizophrenia.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41537-023-00424-2
PMCID: PMC10851692
PMID: 38167423

Conflict of interest statement: W.Z., S.Li and J.A.S. consult to VeraSci. The 
remaining authors have no conflicts of interest in relation to the subject of 
this study.