---
reference_id: "PMID:25227139"
title: "Desmoplakin mutations with palmoplantar keratoderma, woolly hair and cardiomyopathy."
authors:
- Pigors M
- Schwieger-Briel A
- Cosgarea R
- Diaconeasa A
- Bruckner-Tuderman L
- Fleck T
- Has C
journal: Acta Derm Venereol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.2340/00015555-1974
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Hair Diseases/congenital, diagnosis, genetics"
- Heredity
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Desmoplakin mutations with palmoplantar keratoderma, woolly hair and cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Pigors M, Schwieger-Briel A, Cosgarea R, Diaconeasa A, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Fleck T, Has C
**Journal:** Acta Derm Venereol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.2340/00015555-1974](https://doi.org/10.2340/00015555-1974)

## Content

1. Acta Derm Venereol. 2015 Mar;95(3):337-40. doi: 10.2340/00015555-1974.

Desmoplakin mutations with palmoplantar keratoderma, woolly hair and
cardiomyopathy.

Pigors M(1), Schwieger-Briel A, Cosgarea R, Diaconeasa A, Bruckner-Tuderman L,
Fleck T, Has C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center, University Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

Mutations in genes encoding for desmosomal components are associated with a
broad spectrum of phenotypes comprising skin and hair abnormalities and account
for 45-50% of cases of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Today,
more than 120 dominant and recessive desmoplakin (DSP) gene mutations have been
reported to be associated with skin, hair and/or heart defects. Here we report
on 3 cases with yet unreported DSP mutations, c.7566_7567delAAinsC,
p.R2522Sfs*39, c.7756C>T, p.R2586*, c.2131_2132delAG and c.1067C>A, p.T356K,
that were associated with variable woolly hair or hypotrichosis, palmoplantar
keratoderma, and cardiac manifestations. In addition, we review and summarise
the clinical features and DSP mutations of the patients described in the
literature, which illustrates the complexity of this group of disorders and of
their genotype-phenotype correlations, which cannot be easily predicted. Early
diagnosis is crucial and cardiac examinations have to be performed on a regular
basis.

DOI: 10.2340/00015555-1974
PMID: 25227139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
