---
reference_id: "PMID:27788613"
title: "Susac's syndrome: clinical course and epidemiology in a Central European population."
authors:
- Seifert-Held T
- Langner-Wegscheider BJ
- Komposch M
- Simschitz P
- Franta C
- Teuchner B
- Offenbacher H
- Otto F
- Sellner J
- Rauschka H
- Fazekas F
journal: Int J Neurosci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/00207454.2016.1254631
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Austria/epidemiology
- Community Health Planning
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- "Susac Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Susac's syndrome: clinical course and epidemiology in a Central European population.
**Authors:** Seifert-Held T, Langner-Wegscheider BJ, Komposch M, Simschitz P, Franta C, Teuchner B, Offenbacher H, Otto F, Sellner J, Rauschka H, Fazekas F
**Journal:** Int J Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00207454.2016.1254631](https://doi.org/10.1080/00207454.2016.1254631)

## Content

1. Int J Neurosci. 2017 Sep;127(9):776-780. doi: 10.1080/00207454.2016.1254631. 
Epub 2016 Nov 11.

Susac's syndrome: clinical course and epidemiology in a Central European 
population.

Seifert-Held T(1), Langner-Wegscheider BJ(2), Komposch M(3), Simschitz P(4), 
Franta C(5), Teuchner B(6), Offenbacher H(7), Otto F(8), Sellner J(9), Rauschka 
H(10), Fazekas F(11).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neurology , Medical University of Graz , Graz , Austria.
(2)b Department of Ophthalmology , Medical University of Graz , Graz , Austria.
(3)c Department of Neurology , Klinikum Klagenfurt , Klagenfurt , Austria.
(4)d Department of Neurology , Klinikum Klagenfurt , Klagenfurt , Austria.
(5)e Department of Neurology , University Hospital St. Pölten , St. Pölten , 
Austria.
(6)f Department of Ophthalmology , Medical University of Innsbruck , Innsbruck , 
Austria.
(7)g Department of Neurology , Landeskrankenhaus Judenburg-Knittelfeld , 
Knittelfeld , Austria.
(8)h Department of Neurology , Paracelsus Medical University , Salzburg , 
Austria.
(9)i Department of Neurology , Paracelsus Medical University , Salzburg , 
Austria.
(10)j Department of Neurology , Sozialmedizinisches Zentrum Ost , Wien , 
Austria.
(11)k Department of Neurology , Medical University of Graz , Graz , Austria.

OBJECTIVE: Susac's syndrome is characterized by inflammation and occlusion of 
pre-capillary arterioles with the clinical triad of branch retinal artery 
occlusion (BRAO), encephalopathy and hearing loss. No epidemiological data are 
available for the disease.
METHODS: All neurology departments in Austria were addressed to report adult 
patients who were on immunosuppressive treatment for a diagnosis of Susac's 
syndrome between 1 August 2010 and 1 August 2015. Clinical course, treatment 
regimens, period and point prevalence rates, and annual incidence of Susac's 
syndrome in Austria in people over 19 years of age are reported.
RESULTS: Ten patients with Susac's syndrome were identified, and eight of them 
were newly diagnosed within the five-year timeframe. Minimum five-year period 
prevalence of the disease is 0.148/100,000 (95% confidence interval (CI) 
0.071-0.272), annual incidence is 0.024/100,000 (95% CI 0.010-0.047). Minimum 
point prevalence rates varied from 0.030/100,000 (95% CI 0.004-0.108) to 
0.088/100,000 (95% CI 0.032-0.192). Of all 10 patients, 8 showed typical 
callosal or internal capsule magnetic resonance imaging lesions at first 
presentation, 7 presented with BRAO and 5 had hearing loss or tinnitus at the 
beginning of the disease. Four patients developed the complete clinical triad of 
Susac's syndrome during the observation period.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide for the first time population-based data about the 
clinical course, prevalence and incidence of Susac's syndrome.

DOI: 10.1080/00207454.2016.1254631
PMID: 27788613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]