---
reference_id: "PMID:15266230"
title: Physiotherapy in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Kavuncu V
- Evcik D
journal: MedGenMed
year: '2004'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Physiotherapy in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Kavuncu V, Evcik D
**Journal:** MedGenMed (2004)

## Content

1. MedGenMed. 2004 May 17;6(2):3.

Physiotherapy in rheumatoid arthritis.

Kavuncu V(1), Evcik D.

Author information:
(1)Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, Afyon-Turkey.

Comment in
    MedGenMed. 2004 May 17;6(2):9.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic and painful clinical condition that leads 
to progressive joint damage, disability, deterioration in quality of life, and 
shortened life expectancy. Even mild inflammation may result in irreversible 
damage and permanent disability. The clinical course according to symptoms may 
be either intermittent or progressive in patients with RA. In most patients, the 
clinical course is progressive, and structural damage develops in the first 2 
years. The aim of RA management is to achieve pain relief and prevent joint 
damage and functional loss. Physiotherapy and rehabilitation applications 
significantly augment medical therapy by improving the management of RA and 
reducing handicaps in daily living for patients with RA. In this review, the 
application of physiotherapy modalities is examined, including the use of 
cold/heat applications, electrical stimulation, and hydrotherapy. Rehabilitation 
treatment techniques for patients with RA such as joint protection strategies, 
massage, exercise, and patient education are also presented.

PMCID: PMC1395797
PMID: 15266230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]