---
reference_id: "PMID:23719228"
title: The natural history of SCO2 deficiency in 36 Polish children confirmed the genotype-phenotype correlation.
authors:
- Pronicka E
- Piekutowska-Abramczuk D
- Szymańska-Dębińska T
- Bielecka L
- Kowalski P
- Luczak S
- Karkucińska-Więckowska A
- Migdał M
- Kubalska J
- Zimowski J
- Jamroz E
- Wierzba J
- Sykut-Cegielska J
- Pronicki M
- Zaremba J
- Krajewska-Walasek M
journal: Mitochondrion
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2013.05.007
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Child
- DNA/genetics
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Chaperones
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Poland
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The natural history of SCO2 deficiency in 36 Polish children confirmed the genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Pronicka E, Piekutowska-Abramczuk D, Szymańska-Dębińska T, Bielecka L, Kowalski P, Luczak S, Karkucińska-Więckowska A, Migdał M, Kubalska J, Zimowski J, Jamroz E, Wierzba J, Sykut-Cegielska J, Pronicki M, Zaremba J, Krajewska-Walasek M
**Journal:** Mitochondrion (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mito.2013.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mito.2013.05.007)

## Content

1. Mitochondrion. 2013 Nov;13(6):810-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2013.05.007. Epub
2013  May 26.

The natural history of SCO2 deficiency in 36 Polish children confirmed the 
genotype-phenotype correlation.

Pronicka E(1), Piekutowska-Abramczuk D, Szymańska-Dębińska T, Bielecka L, 
Kowalski P, Luczak S, Karkucińska-Więckowska A, Migdał M, Kubalska J, Zimowski 
J, Jamroz E, Wierzba J, Sykut-Cegielska J, Pronicki M, Zaremba J, 
Krajewska-Walasek M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, 
Warsaw, Poland; Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health 
Institute, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: e.pronicka@czd.pl.

The aim of this study was to assess the natural history of the SCO2 deficiency 
in relation to the genotype in a cohort of 62 patients with SCO2 mutations (36 
this study, 26 previous reports). A novel, milder phenotype (disease onset 
delayed until one year after birth, nonspecific encephalomyopathy, and 2-4 year 
survival period) associated with compound heterozygosity of the common p.E140K 
and a novel p.M177T mutations extends the range of symptoms of the SCO2 
deficiency. The prevalence of SCO2 deficiency in Poland is relatively high. A 
search for SCO2 mutations in patients with histology resembling SMA appears to 
efficiently improve the detection rate.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights 
reserved. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mito.2013.05.007
PMID: 23719228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]