---
reference_id: "PMID:24979832"
title: "Cogan's syndrome: anti-Hsp70 antibodies are a serological marker in the typical form."
authors:
- Bonaguri C
- Orsoni J
- Russo A
- Rubino P
- Bacciu S
- Lippi G
- Melegari A
- Zavota L
- Ghirardini S
- Mora P
journal: Isr Med Assoc J
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cogan's syndrome: anti-Hsp70 antibodies are a serological marker in the typical form.
**Authors:** Bonaguri C, Orsoni J, Russo A, Rubino P, Bacciu S, Lippi G, Melegari A, Zavota L, Ghirardini S, Mora P
**Journal:** Isr Med Assoc J (2014)

## Content

1. Isr Med Assoc J. 2014 May;16(5):285-8.

Cogan's syndrome: anti-Hsp70 antibodies are a serological marker in the typical 
form.

Bonaguri C, Orsoni J, Russo A, Rubino P, Bacciu S, Lippi G, Melegari A, Zavota 
L, Ghirardini S, Mora P.

BACKGROUND: Cogan's syndrome (CS) is a rare autoimmune vasculitis characterized 
by ocular inflammation and sensorineural hearing loss. CS is divided into a 
"typical" form with non-syphilitic interstitial keratitis and audiovestibular 
symptoms, and an "atypical" form with ocular involvement affecting structures 
other than the cornea. Anti-Hsp70 antibodies were found at variable levels in 
patients presenting with various forms of autoimmune sensorineural hearing loss 
(ASNHL).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the correlation between anti-Hsp70 antibodies and specific 
ASNHL subgroups.
METHODS: We divided 112 subjects into four groups: 14 subjects with typical CS, 
24 with atypical CS, 55 with ASNHL, and 19 control subjects (healthy subjects 
and patients with systemic autoimmune diseases but no sensorineural hearing or 
audiovestibular alterations). Patients were tested for serological autoimmunity 
markers including anti-Hsp70.
RESULTS: Positivity of the anti-Hsp70 antibody test was highest in the typical 
CS group (92.9%) and lowest in the control group (5.2%). The test was positive 
in 52.7% of patients in the ASNHL group and 16.6% in the atypical CS group. The 
paired comparison analysis between groups showed that sensitivity of anti-Hsp70 
in the typical CS group was significantly higher, as compared to the other three 
study groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-Hsp70 antibodies can be considered a serological marker of 
"typical" CS. "Atypical" CS is conceivably a sort of "melting pot" of different 
forms of autoimmune diseases still characterized by ocular inflammation and 
sensorineural hearing loss but whose antigenic characteristics need to be 
further defined.

PMID: 24979832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]