---
reference_id: "PMID:14503346"
title: "[A case of acute bird fancier's lung caused by feather duvet]."
authors:
- Kondo K
- Inase N
- Ohtani Y
- Sumi Y
- Umino T
- Usui Y
- Yoshizawa Y
journal: Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [A case of acute bird fancier's lung caused by feather duvet].
**Authors:** Kondo K, Inase N, Ohtani Y, Sumi Y, Umino T, Usui Y, Yoshizawa Y
**Journal:** Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi (2003)

## Content

1. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2003 Aug;41(8):569-72.

[A case of acute bird fancier's lung caused by feather duvet].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo K(1), Inase N, Ohtani Y, Sumi Y, Umino T, Usui Y, Yoshizawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University.

A 57-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of cough and low-grade 
fever for 2 months and shortness of breath for 2 weeks. She had raised two 
budgerigars for the last 15 years and had been using a feather duvet for one 
year. A chest radiograph showed diffuse ground-glass opacities in both lung 
fields, and a chest CT scan showed centrilobular micronodules and ground-glass 
opacities. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) revealed a marked increase in 
lymphocytes, and a transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) specimen showed alveolitis 
due to the infiltration of mononuclear cells. Since she had specific antibodies 
against pigeon and budgerigar dropping extracts and her peripheral blood 
lymphocytes proliferated on addition of pigeon serum, she was diagnosed as 
having bird fancier's lung (BFL). She was treated with steroids, which brought 
about a marked improvement. After she visited her husband who had been 
hospitalized where a feather duvet was provided for each patient, both 
subjective and objective findings deteriorated. This deterioration was 
preventable when she wore a protective mask for micro-dust while visiting her 
husband. The feather duvets seemed to induce acute BFL in this case, though 
raising budgerigars may well be related to her sensitization with bird-related 
antigens.

PMID: 14503346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]