---
reference_id: "PMID:39349248"
title: Single-cell Profiling of Intrahepatic Immune Cells Reveals an Expansion of Tissue-resident Cytotoxic CD4(+) T Lymphocyte Subset Associated With Pathogenesis of Alcoholic-associated Liver Diseases.
authors:
- Gao C
- Wang S
- Xie X
- Ramadori P
- Li X
- Liu X
- Ding X
- Liang J
- Xu B
- Feng Y
- Tan X
- Wang H
- Zhang Y
- Zhang H
- Zhang T
- Mi P
- Li S
- Zhang C
- Yuan D
- Heikenwalder M
- Zhang P
journal: Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2024.101411
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell Profiling of Intrahepatic Immune Cells Reveals an Expansion of Tissue-resident Cytotoxic CD4(+) T Lymphocyte Subset Associated With Pathogenesis of Alcoholic-associated Liver Diseases.
**Authors:** Gao C, Wang S, Xie X, Ramadori P, Li X, Liu X, Ding X, Liang J, Xu B, Feng Y, Tan X, Wang H, Zhang Y, Zhang H, Zhang T, Mi P, Li S, Zhang C, Yuan D, Heikenwalder M, Zhang P
**Journal:** Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcmgh.2024.101411](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2024.101411)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2025;19(2):101411. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2024.101411. Epub 2024 Sep 28.

Single-cell Profiling of Intrahepatic Immune Cells Reveals an Expansion of 
Tissue-resident Cytotoxic CD4(+) T Lymphocyte Subset Associated With 
Pathogenesis of Alcoholic-associated Liver Diseases.

Gao C(1), Wang S(2), Xie X(3), Ramadori P(4), Li X(5), Liu X(6), Ding X(5), 
Liang J(5), Xu B(5), Feng Y(5), Tan X(5), Wang H(5), Zhang Y(5), Zhang H(7), 
Zhang T(8), Mi P(5), Li S(6), Zhang C(9), Yuan D(10), Heikenwalder M(11), Zhang 
P(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, General Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo 
College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, 
Jinan, Shandong, China; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, 
Jinan, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 
Shandong, China.
(4)Division of Chronic Inflammation and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; University Tuebingen, Faculty of Medicine, 
Institute for Interdisciplinary Research on Cancer Metabolism and Chronic 
Inflammation, M3-Research Center for Malignome, Metabolome and Microbiome, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 
China.
(6)Advanced Medical Research Institute, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 
China.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Heze Medical College, Heze, Shandong, China.
(8)Institute of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Cheeloo College of Medicine, 
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(9)Institute of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Cheeloo College of Medicine, 
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China; Department of Pathology, Qilu 
Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China. Electronic address: 
cuijuanzhang@sdu.edu.cn.
(10)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 
China. Electronic address: yuandt@sdu.edu.cn.
(11)Division of Chronic Inflammation and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; University Tuebingen, Faculty of Medicine, 
Institute for Interdisciplinary Research on Cancer Metabolism and Chronic 
Inflammation, M3-Research Center for Malignome, Metabolome and Microbiome, 
Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address: m.heikenwaelder@dkfz-heidelberg.de.
(12)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 
China. Electronic address: zhangpeng1990@sdu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The immunological mechanisms underpinning the pathogenesis of 
alcoholic-associated liver disease (ALD) remain incompletely elucidated. This 
study aims to explore the transcriptomic profiles of hepatic immune cells in ALD 
compared with healthy individuals and those with metabolic 
dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD).
METHODS: We utilized single-cell RNA sequencing to analyze liver samples from 
healthy subjects and patients with MASLD and ALD, focusing on the immune cell 
landscapes within the liver. Key alterations in immune cell subsets were further 
validated using liver biopsy samples from additional patient cohorts.
RESULTS: We observed a significant accumulation of CD4+ T cells in livers of 
patients with ALD, surpassing the prevalence of CD8+ T cells, in contrast to 
patients with MASLD and healthy counterparts, whereas natural killer (NK) cells 
and γδT cells exhibited reduced intrahepatic infiltration. In-depth 
transcriptional and developmental trajectory analyses unveiled that a distinct 
CD4+ subset characterized by granzyme K (GZMK) expression, displaying a 
tissue-resident signature and terminal effector state, prominently enriched 
among CD4+ T cells infiltrating the livers of patients with ALD. Subsequent 
examination of an independent ALD patient cohort corroborated the substantial 
enrichment of GZMK+CD4+ T lymphocytes, primarily within liver fibrotic zones, 
suggesting their potential involvement in disease progression. Additionally, we 
noted shifts in myeloid populations, with expanded APOE+ macrophage and FCGR3B+ 
monocyte subsets in ALD samples relative to MASLD and healthy tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, this study unravels the intricate cellular diversity 
within hepatic immune cell populations, highlighting the pivotal immune 
pathogenic role of the GZMK+CD4+ T lymphocyte subset in ALD pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2024.101411
PMCID: PMC11719870
PMID: 39349248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]