---
reference_id: "PMID:24482950"
title: "Aromatase deficiency: an unusual cause for primary amenorrhea with virilization."
authors:
- Sudeep K
- Abraham J
- Seshadri L
- Seshadri MS
journal: J Assoc Physicians India
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aromatase deficiency: an unusual cause for primary amenorrhea with virilization.
**Authors:** Sudeep K, Abraham J, Seshadri L, Seshadri MS
**Journal:** J Assoc Physicians India (2013)

## Content

1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2013 May;61(5):340-3.

Aromatase deficiency: an unusual cause for primary amenorrhea with virilization.

Sudeep K(1), Abraham J(1), Seshadri L(2), Seshadri MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Christian Medical College, Vellore-632 004.
(2)Department Obstetrics and Gynecology, Christian Medical College, Vellore-632 
004.

The most common cause for menstrual abnormality and virilization in children and 
adolescents would be congenital adrenal hyperplasia. An elevated 17(OH) 
progesterone is invariably seen in this condition. Aromatase deficiency can also 
lead to a similar presentation but differs in several aspects. The age of onset 
of the clinical manifestations, the phenotype, biochemical abnormalities and 
karyotype help us to arrive at a definitive diagnosis. However sometimes the 
history is atypical, biochemical abnormalities may overlap between the different 
conditions and prior treatment may modify the clinical features. We report here 
a young adult with a late presentation of aromatase deficiency to highlight the 
differences between the two conditions. A 27 year old lady presented to us with 
history of primary amenorrhea and masculine voice. She lacked feminine secondary 
sexual characters, had eunuchoid body habitus and prominent clitoromegaly. 
Consanguinity in the parents, a neonatal sibling death and elevated basal 17(OH) 
progesterone in the patient suggested a possibility of congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia. But the eunuchoid body habitus raised FSH and lack of response to 
dexamethasone led to a diagnosis of aromatase deficiency. Variability in the 
degree of aromatase deficiency is known such that maternal virilization may not 
occur in pregnancy. Aromatase deficiency should be suspected when a patient 
presents with primary amenorrhea, absence of female secondary sexual characters, 
virilization and tall stature with eunuchoid body proportions, and biochemical 
features of ovarian failure. In our country one should be aware that late 
presentation and prior treatment may modify disease expression and contribute to 
the diagnostic challenge.

PMID: 24482950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]