---
reference_id: "PMID:2852076"
title: Cellular mechanisms of renin release.
authors:
- Churchill PC
journal: Clin Exp Hypertens A
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1080/07300077.1988.11878910
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/physiology
- Cyclic AMP/physiology
- Juxtaglomerular Apparatus/metabolism
- Rats
- Renin/metabolism
- Second Messenger Systems
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular mechanisms of renin release.
**Authors:** Churchill PC
**Journal:** Clin Exp Hypertens A (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1080/07300077.1988.11878910](https://doi.org/10.1080/07300077.1988.11878910)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Hypertens A. 1988;10(6):1189-202. doi:
10.1080/07300077.1988.11878910.

Cellular mechanisms of renin release.

Churchill PC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan 48201.

The renin-angiotensin system plays a central role in salt and water balance and
in the regulation of arterial blood pressure. The level of activity of this
system is determined primarily by the rate at which the granulated
juxtaglomerular cells (JG cells) secrete renin into the blood. Physiologically,
renin secretory rate is controlled by a number of first messengers: afferent
arteriolar transmural pressure or some function of it, such as stretch (the
baroreceptor mechanism); solute transport in the macula densa segment of the
nephron (the macula densa mechanism); catecholamines released from the renal
nerves and the adrenal medulla (the beta-adrenergic mechanism); extracellular
concentrations of many organic and inorganic substances including angiotensin
II, vasopressin, K, and Mg (1-3). In addition to these physiological first
messengers, a number of pharmacological agents affect renin secretion (3). It is
an accepted principle of cellular biology that first messengers act by affecting
the intracellular concentrations of only a few second messengers. The evidence
that intracellular free ionic calcium, cyclic AMP, and cyclic GMP are second
messengers in renin secretion has been reviewed in detail recently (4-9). These
reviews are cited extensively, since space limitations precluded citing all the
original literature.

DOI: 10.1080/07300077.1988.11878910
PMID: 2852076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
