---
reference_id: "PMID:21568677"
title: Protease activity of the API2-MALT1 fusion oncoprotein in MALT lymphoma development and treatment.
authors:
- Rosebeck S
- Lucas PC
- McAllister-Lucas LM
journal: Future Oncol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2217/fon.11.35
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell, Marginal Zone/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "NF-kappa B/genetics, metabolism"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Peptide Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protease activity of the API2-MALT1 fusion oncoprotein in MALT lymphoma development and treatment.
**Authors:** Rosebeck S, Lucas PC, McAllister-Lucas LM
**Journal:** Future Oncol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fon.11.35](https://doi.org/10.2217/fon.11.35)

## Content

1. Future Oncol. 2011 May;7(5):613-7. doi: 10.2217/fon.11.35.

Protease activity of the API2-MALT1 fusion oncoprotein in MALT lymphoma 
development and treatment.

Rosebeck S(1), Lucas PC, McAllister-Lucas LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics & Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan, 
1150 West Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma is a prototypical 
cancer that occurs in the setting of chronic inflammation and an important model 
for understanding how deregulated NF-κB transcriptional activity contributes to 
malignancy. Most gastric MALT lymphomas require ongoing antigenic stimulation 
for continued tumor growth, and Stage I disease is usually cured by eradicating 
the causative microorganism, Helicobacter pylori, with antibiotics. However, in 
a subset of MALT lymphomas, chromosomal translocations are acquired that render 
the lymphoma antigen-independent. The recurrent translocation t(11;18)(q21;q21) 
is associated with failure to respond to antibiotic therapy and increased rate 
of dissemination. This translocation creates the API2-MALT1 fusion oncoprotein, 
which comprises the amino terminus of inhibitor of apoptosis 2 (API2 or cIAP2) 
fused to the carboxy terminus of MALT1. A common characteristic of chromosomal 
translocations in MALT lymphoma, including t(11;18), is that genes involved in 
the regulation of the NF-κB transcription factor are targeted by the 
translocations, and these genetic perturbations thereby result in deregulated, 
constitutive NF-κB stimulation. In the last decade, great insights into the 
roles of API2 and MALT1 in NF-κB signaling have been made. For example, recent 
pivotal studies have uncovered the long sought-after proteolytic activity of 
MALT1 and have demonstrated its critical involvement in the survival of certain 
lymphomas. Here, we review the current understanding of the role of MALT1 in 
normal lymphocyte function and lymphomagenesis. We then highlight our recent 
work that has revealed an intriguing link between the proteolytic activity of 
the API2-MALT1 fusion and its ability to influence lymphomagenesis by cleaving a 
key NF-κB regulatory protein, NF-κB-inducing kinase.

DOI: 10.2217/fon.11.35
PMCID: PMC3124218
PMID: 21568677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]