---
reference_id: "PMID:11254445"
title: A novel SCN1A mutation associated with generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus--and prevalence of variants in patients with epilepsy.
authors:
- Escayg A
- Heils A
- MacDonald BT
- Haug K
- Sander T
- Meisler MH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/319524
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Conserved Sequence/genetics
- Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinases/metabolism
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Epilepsy/genetics
- "Epilepsy, Generalized/genetics"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Gene Frequency/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- Genetic Variation/genetics
- Haplotypes/genetics
- Humans
- Introns/genetics
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- NAV1.1 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phosphorylation
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/metabolism
- "Seizures, Febrile/genetics"
- Sequence Alignment
- Sodium Channels/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel SCN1A mutation associated with generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus--and prevalence of variants in patients with epilepsy.
**Authors:** Escayg A, Heils A, MacDonald BT, Haug K, Sander T, Meisler MH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/319524](https://doi.org/10.1086/319524)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Apr;68(4):866-73. doi: 10.1086/319524. Epub 2001 Mar 14.

A novel SCN1A mutation associated with generalized epilepsy with febrile 
seizures plus--and prevalence of variants in patients with epilepsy.

Escayg A(1), Heils A, MacDonald BT, Haug K, Sander T, Meisler MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
USA.

We recently described mutations of the neuronal sodium-channel alpha-subunit 
gene, SCN1A, on chromosome 2q24 in two families with generalized epilepsy with 
febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) type 2. To assess the contribution that SCN1A 
makes to other types of epilepsy, 226 patients with either juvenile myoclonic 
epilepsy, absence epilepsy, or febrile convulsions were screened by 
conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis and manual sequencing of variants; 
the sample included 165 probands from multiplex families and 61 sporadic cases. 
The novel mutation W1204R was identified in a family with GEFS+. Seven other 
coding changes were observed; three of these are potential disease-causing 
mutations. Two common haplotypes, with frequencies of .67 and .33, were defined 
by five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning a 14-kb region of 
linkage disequilibrium. An SNP located 18 bp upstream of the splice-acceptor 
site for exon 3 was observed in 7 of the 226 patients but was not present in 185 
controls, suggesting possible association with a disease mutation. This work has 
confirmed the role of SCN1A in GEFS+, by identification of a novel mutation in a 
previously undescribed family. Although a few candidate disease alleles were 
identified, the patient survey suggests that SCN1A is not a major contributor to 
idiopathic generalized epilepsy. The SCN1A haplotypes and SNPs identified here 
will be useful in future association and linkage studies.

DOI: 10.1086/319524
PMCID: PMC1275640
PMID: 11254445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]