---
reference_id: "PMID:38844302"
title: "Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in ATTR Amyloidosis: A Clinical Update."
authors:
- Monda E
- Cirillo C
- Verrillo F
- Palmiero G
- Falco L
- Aimo A
- Emdin M
- Merlo M
- Limongelli G
journal: Heart Fail Clin
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2024.03.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in ATTR Amyloidosis: A Clinical Update.
**Authors:** Monda E, Cirillo C, Verrillo F, Palmiero G, Falco L, Aimo A, Emdin M, Merlo M, Limongelli G
**Journal:** Heart Fail Clin (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hfc.2024.03.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hfc.2024.03.006)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Clin. 2024 Jul;20(3):317-323. doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2024.03.006. Epub 
2024 Apr 10.

Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in ATTR Amyloidosis: A Clinical Update.

Monda E(1), Cirillo C(1), Verrillo F(1), Palmiero G(1), Falco L(1), Aimo A(2), 
Emdin M(3), Merlo M(4), Limongelli G(5).

Author information:
(1)Inherited and Rare Cardiovascular Disease Unit, Department of Translational 
Medical Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", AORN Dei Colli - 
Monaldi Hospital, Leonardo Bianchi Street, Naples 80100, Italy.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Fondazione Toscana Gabriele Monasterio, 
Interdisciplinary Center for Health Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Piazza 
Martiri Della Libertà 33, Pisa 56127, Italy.
(3)Cardiovascular Diseases, Health Science Interdisciplinary Center, Scuola 
Superiore Sant'Anna, Via S. Zeno 2, 56127, Pisa, Italy; Cardio-thoracic 
Department, Fondazione Toscana Gabriele Monasterio, Via G. Moruzzi 1, Pisa 
56124, Italy.
(4)Cardiovascular Department, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Giuliano-Isontina 
(ASUGI) and University of Trieste, Via P. Valdoni 7, Trieste 34100, Italy; 
European Reference Network for Rare Low Prevalence and Complex Diseases of the 
Heart-ERN GUARD Heart Via P. Valdoni 7 Trieste 34100, Italy.
(5)Inherited and Rare Cardiovascular Disease Unit, Department of Translational 
Medical Sciences, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", AORN Dei Colli - 
Monaldi Hospital, Leonardo Bianchi Street, Naples 80100, Italy. Electronic 
address: limongelligiuseppe@libero.it.

Hereditary transthyretin-related amyloidosis (hATTR) is the most common form of 
familial amyloidosis. It is an autosomal dominant disease caused by a pathogenic 
variant in the TTR gene. More than 140 TTR gene variants have been associated 
with hATTR, with the Val30Met variant representing the most common worldwide. 
The clinical phenotype varies according to the gene variant and includes 
predominantly cardiac, predominantly neurologic, and mixed phenotypes. The 
present review aims to describe the genotype-phenotype correlations in hATTR. 
Understanding these correlations is crucial to facilitate the early 
identification of the disease, predict adverse outcomes, and guide management 
with approved disease-modifying therapies.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hfc.2024.03.006
PMID: 38844302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure G. Limongelli received an 
unrestricted research grant from Pfitzer. The other authors declare that they 
have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this article.