---
reference_id: "PMID:37964400"
title: "Oral mucosa involvement in pediatric patients with xeroderma pigmentosum: a comprehensive review."
authors:
- Baskurt D
- Vural S
- Ertekin SS
- Baykal C
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.16890
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Mouth Mucosa/pathology
- Basal Cell Carcinoma/pathology
- Melanoma/complications
- "Mouth Neoplasms/etiology, therapy"
- DNA Repair
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral mucosa involvement in pediatric patients with xeroderma pigmentosum: a comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Baskurt D, Vural S, Ertekin SS, Baykal C
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.16890](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.16890)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2024 Jan;63(1):59-72. doi: 10.1111/ijd.16890. Epub 2023 Nov
14.

Oral mucosa involvement in pediatric patients with xeroderma pigmentosum: a
comprehensive review.

Baskurt D(1), Vural S(1)(2), Ertekin SS(2), Baykal C(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Koç University School of Medicine,
Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Istanbul University, Faculty of
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder
presenting with an inability to repair UV-induced DNA damage. This can lead to
the development of neoplasms affecting multiple organ systems, with onset often
in childhood. Unfortunately, no cure currently exists for XP, and management
strategies focus on sun protection and early intervention for malignancies.
Although most skin problems in XP patients are UV induced, various oral lesions
are also described. However, the literature has not extensively characterized
the oral manifestations and their prognostic significance.
METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive review to evaluate the prevalence and
nature of oral mucosal lesions in pediatric XP patients.
RESULTS: Our literature search yielded 130 pediatric XP patients with oral
involvement and 210 associated tumoral or non-tumoral lesions. Squamous cell
carcinoma was the most common type of oral mucosal tumor reported, with other
malignancies including basal cell carcinoma, melanoma, angiosarcoma,
fibrosarcoma, and trichilemmal carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: Given the potential morbidity and mortality associated with oral
mucosal tumors in XP patients, our study aims to raise awareness of these
manifestations. Early diagnosis and treatment are crucial for managing these
lesions effectively, and routine oral exams should be considered a critical
component of dermatological evaluations for XP patients, especially in the
pediatric age group.

© 2023 The Authors. International Journal of Dermatology published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC on behalf of the International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.16890
PMID: 37964400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
