---
reference_id: "PMID:25440529"
title: "Tuberculin skin test positivity without tuberculosis contact: A major challenge in childhood."
authors:
- Gedik AH
- Cakir E
- Donmez T
- Ari E
- Koksalan OK
journal: J Paediatr Child Health
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/jpc.12779
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculin skin test positivity without tuberculosis contact: A major challenge in childhood.
**Authors:** Gedik AH, Cakir E, Donmez T, Ari E, Koksalan OK
**Journal:** J Paediatr Child Health (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jpc.12779](https://doi.org/10.1111/jpc.12779)

## Content

1. J Paediatr Child Health. 2015 Jun;51(6):632-8. doi: 10.1111/jpc.12779. Epub
2014  Nov 30.

Tuberculin skin test positivity without tuberculosis contact: A major challenge 
in childhood.

Gedik AH(1), Cakir E(1), Donmez T(2), Ari E(2), Koksalan OK(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, Bezmialem Vakif University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Bezmialem Vakif University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Molecular Tuberculosis Epidemiology Laboratory, Institute for Medical 
Experimental Research (DETAE), Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.

AIM: Worldwide, tuberculin skin tests (TSTs) commonly give false positive 
results for those who had been given the Bacillus-Calmette-Guerin vaccine such 
as is routinely administered in Turkey. This study aimed to evaluate the 
patients referred to us who had positive TSTs despite lack of tuberculosis (TB) 
disease contacts.
METHODS: Between September 2011 and September 2012, 183 patients were 
prospectively evaluated for differential diagnosis of TST positivity despite 
lack of TB disease contact. They were then followed up by us to determine an 
accurate diagnosis.
RESULTS: Among our patients' most common symptoms indicating a need for TST were 
chronic cough, productive cough or sputum expectoration, and recurrent or 
persistent wheezing. Chest x-rays were taken of all patients, and the findings 
were noted. Interferon gamma release assays were performed on 75% of the 
patients, of which 96% were negative for TB. The most common final diagnoses 
were asthma (44%), allergic rhinitis (13%), bronchopneumonia (11%) and reactive 
lymphadenitis (6.5%). Further evaluations for TB were required of 36 patients, 
and TB disease was established in 12 of them (6.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients who had had no known TB contact, the most common 
symptom indicating need for TST was chronic cough; the most common diagnoses 
were asthma and allergic rhinitis. Cavitary lesions, haemoptysis, persistent 
infiltration, pleural effusion and thoracic lymphadenopathy despite 
antibiotherapy should alert physicians to the possibility of TB.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health © 2014 Paediatrics 
and Child Health Division (Royal Australasian College of Physicians).

DOI: 10.1111/jpc.12779
PMID: 25440529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]