---
reference_id: "PMID:32925978"
title: Heterogeneity of dengue transmission in an endemic area of Colombia.
authors:
- Estupiñán Cárdenas MI
- Herrera VM
- Miranda Montoya MC
- Lozano Parra A
- Zaraza Moncayo ZM
- Flórez García JP
- Rodríguez Barraquer I
- Villar Centeno LÁ
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008122
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterogeneity of dengue transmission in an endemic area of Colombia.
**Authors:** Estupiñán Cárdenas MI, Herrera VM, Miranda Montoya MC, Lozano Parra A, Zaraza Moncayo ZM, Flórez García JP, Rodríguez Barraquer I, Villar Centeno LÁ
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0008122](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008122)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Sep 14;14(9):e0008122. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008122. eCollection 2020 Sep.

Heterogeneity of dengue transmission in an endemic area of Colombia.

Estupiñán Cárdenas MI(1), Herrera VM(1), Miranda Montoya MC(1), Lozano Parra 
A(1), Zaraza Moncayo ZM(1), Flórez García JP(1), Rodríguez Barraquer I(2), 
Villar Centeno LÁ(1).

Author information:
(1)Grupo de Epidemiología Clínica, Universidad Industrial de Santander, 
Bucaramanga, Santander, Colombia.
(2)Division of HIV, ID and Global Medicine, Department of Medicine, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of 
America.

Population based serological surveys are the gold-standard to quantify dengue 
(DENV) transmission. The purpose of this study was to estimate the age-specific 
seroprevalence and the force of infection of DENV in an endemic area of 
Colombia. Between July and October 2014, we conducted a household based 
cross-sectional survey among 1.037 individuals aged 2 to 40 years living in 40 
randomly selected locations in urban Piedecuesta, Santander, Colombia. In 
addition, we also enrolled 246 indviduals living in rural "veredas". 
Participants were asked to answer a questionnaire that included demographic, 
socioeconomic and environmental questions and to provide a 5 ml blood sample. 
Sera were tested using the IgG indirect ELISA (Panbio) kit to determine past 
DENV infection. The overall DENV seroprevalence was 70% (95% CI = 67%-71%), but 
was significantly higher in urban (81%, 95% CI = 78%-83%) as compared to rural 
(21%, 95% CI = 17%-27%) locations. Age was a major predictor of seropositivity, 
consistent with endemic circulation of the virus. Using catalytic models we 
estimated that on average, 12% (95%CI = 11%-13%) of susceptible individuals 
living in the city are infected by DENV each year. Beyond age, the only 
predictor of seropositivity in urban locations was prior history of dengue 
diagnosed by a physician (aPR 1.15, 95% CI = 0.98-1.35). Among participants 
living in rural settings, those that reported traveling outside of their vereda 
were more likely to be seropositive (aPR 3.60, 95%CI = 1.54-8.42) as well as 
those who were born outside of Santander department (aPR = 2.77, 95%CI = 
1.20-6.37). These results are consistent with long term endemic circulation of 
DENV in Piedecuesta, with large heterogeneities between urban and rural areas 
located just a few kilometers apart. Design of DENV control interventions, 
including vaccination, will need to consider this fine scale spatial 
heterogeneity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008122
PMCID: PMC7571714
PMID: 32925978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.