---
reference_id: "PMID:38347588"
title: Progranulin haploinsufficiency mediates cytoplasmic TDP-43 aggregation with lysosomal abnormalities in human microglia.
authors:
- Sung W
- Noh MY
- Nahm M
- Kim YS
- Ki CS
- Kim YE
- Kim HJ
- Kim SH
journal: J Neuroinflammation
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12974-024-03039-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progranulin haploinsufficiency mediates cytoplasmic TDP-43 aggregation with lysosomal abnormalities in human microglia.
**Authors:** Sung W, Noh MY, Nahm M, Kim YS, Ki CS, Kim YE, Kim HJ, Kim SH
**Journal:** J Neuroinflammation (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12974-024-03039-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-024-03039-1)

## Content

1. J Neuroinflammation. 2024 Feb 13;21(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s12974-024-03039-1.

Progranulin haploinsufficiency mediates cytoplasmic TDP-43 aggregation with 
lysosomal abnormalities in human microglia.

Sung W(#)(1), Noh MY(#)(1), Nahm M(2), Kim YS(1), Ki CS(3), Kim YE(4), Kim 
HJ(1), Kim SH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, 222, 
Wangsimni-Ro, Seongdong-Gu, Seoul, 04763, Republic of Korea.
(2)Dementia Research Group, Korea Brain Research Institute, Daegu, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)GC Genome, Yongin, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, 222, 
Wangsimni-Ro, Seongdong-Gu, Seoul, 04763, Republic of Korea. 
kimsh1@hanyang.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Progranulin (PGRN) haploinsufficiency due to progranulin gene (GRN) 
variants can cause frontotemporal dementia (FTD) with aberrant TAR DNA-binding 
protein 43 (TDP-43) accumulation. Despite microglial burden with TDP-43-related 
pathophysiology, direct microglial TDP-43 pathology has not been clarified yet, 
only emphasized in neuronal pathology. Thus, the objective of this study was to 
investigate TDP-43 pathology in microglia of patients with PGRN 
haploinsufficiency.
METHODS: To design a human microglial cell model with PGRN haploinsufficiency, 
monocyte-derived microglia (iMGs) were generated from FTD-GRN patients carrying 
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants (p.M1? and p.W147*) and three healthy 
controls.
RESULTS: iMGs from FTD-GRN patients with PGRN deficiency exhibited severe 
neuroinflammation phenotype and failure to maintain their homeostatic molecular 
signatures, along with impaired phagocytosis. In FTD-GRN patients-derived iMGs, 
significant cytoplasmic TDP-43 aggregation and accumulation of lipid droplets 
with profound lysosomal abnormalities were observed. These pathomechanisms were 
mediated by complement C1q activation and upregulation of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides considerable cellular and molecular evidence 
that loss-of-function variants of GRN in human microglia can cause microglial 
dysfunction with abnormal TDP-43 aggregation induced by inflammatory milieu as 
well as the impaired lysosome. Elucidating the role of microglial TDP-43 
pathology in intensifying neuroinflammation in individuals with FTD due to PGRN 
deficiency and examining consequential effects on microglial dysfunction might 
yield novel insights into the mechanisms underlying FTD and neurodegenerative 
disorders.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-024-03039-1
PMCID: PMC10863104
PMID: 38347588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.