---
reference_id: "PMID:36622444"
title: Variants in complement genes are uncommon in patients with anti-factor H autoantibody-associated atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
authors:
- Khandelwal P
- Joshi A
- Mathur A
- Puraswani M
- Gurjar BS
- Sinha A
- Hari P
- Faruq M
- Bagga A
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-022-05862-1
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/genetics
- Autoantibodies
- Complement Factor H/genetics
- Complement System Proteins/genetics
- Homozygote
- Prospective Studies
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variants in complement genes are uncommon in patients with anti-factor H autoantibody-associated atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
**Authors:** Khandelwal P, Joshi A, Mathur A, Puraswani M, Gurjar BS, Sinha A, Hari P, Faruq M, Bagga A
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-022-05862-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-022-05862-1)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2023 Aug;38(8):2659-2668. doi: 10.1007/s00467-022-05862-1.
Epub  2023 Jan 9.

Variants in complement genes are uncommon in patients with anti-factor H
autoantibody-associated atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.

Khandelwal P(1), Joshi A(2), Mathur A(2), Puraswani M(1), Gurjar BS(1), Sinha
A(1), Hari P(1), Faruq M(2), Bagga A(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, ICMR Center for Advanced
Research in Nephrology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar,
New Delhi, 110029, India.
(2)Genomics and Molecular Medicine, CSIR Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, Delhi, India.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, ICMR Center for Advanced
Research in Nephrology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar,
New Delhi, 110029, India. arvindbagga@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Coexisting genetic variants in patients with anti-factor H
(FH)-associated atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) have implications for
therapy. We estimated the prevalence of complement genetic variants in children
with anti-FH aHUS from a prospective nationwide cohort and determined if
significant genetic variants impact long-term kidney outcomes.
METHODS: Of 436 patients in the database, 77 consecutive patients, 21 with a
relapse and 9 with kidney failure and/or death were included. Targeted
sequencing, using a 27-gene panel including CFH, CFI, CFB, C3, CD46, PLG, DGKE,
and THBD and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification of CFH-CFHR
region, was performed. The adverse outcome was eGFR < 30 ml/min/1.73 m2 or
death.
RESULTS: Patients had high anti-FH titers 5670 (2177-13,545) AU/ml, relapsing
course (42.1%), and adverse outcomes (19.6%). Variants, chiefly of unknown
significance, were found in 7 (6.5%; 95% CI 3.1-13.2%); a pathogenic variant was
found in one patient. Homozygous deletion of CFHR1 was present in 91.6% compared
to 9.8% in 184 healthy controls. Plasma exchanges and immunosuppression showed a
trend of improving outcomes, independent of genetic defects (HR 0.32;
P = 0.070). Meta-analysis of 18 studies (384 patients) showed that the pooled
prevalence of pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants was 3% (95% CI 0-8%). Of
37 total variants in the meta-analysis, 7 (18.9%) each were pathogenic and
likely pathogenic; others were variants of unknown significance.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant variants in complement regulatory genes are rare in
patients with anti-FH-associated aHUS. Irrespective of genetic defects, plasma
exchanges and immunosuppression showed a statistical trend to improved outcomes.
A higher resolution version of the Graphical abstract is available as
Supplementary information.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International Pediatric
Nephrology Association.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-022-05862-1
PMID: 36622444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
