---
reference_id: "PMID:28288723"
title: Clinical features and management of non-gastrointestinal non-ocular extranodal mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (ENMALT) marginal zone lymphomas.
authors:
- Matutes E
- Montalban C
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Haematol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.beha.2016.07.005
keywords:
- "Hashimoto Disease/diagnosis, immunology, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell, Marginal Zone/diagnosis, immunology, pathology, therapy"
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and management of non-gastrointestinal non-ocular extranodal mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (ENMALT) marginal zone lymphomas.
**Authors:** Matutes E, Montalban C
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Haematol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beha.2016.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beha.2016.07.005)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2017 Mar-Jun;30(1-2):99-108. doi: 
10.1016/j.beha.2016.07.005. Epub 2016 Nov 5.

Clinical features and management of non-gastrointestinal non-ocular extranodal 
mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (ENMALT) marginal zone lymphomas.

Matutes E(1), Montalban C(2).

Author information:
(1)Hematopathology Unit, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: 
estella.matutes.juan@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Hematology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Madrid, Spain. 
Electronic address: carlosmontalbans@gmail.com.

Extranodal mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (ENMALT) marginal zone lymphomas 
may arise at any site of the body. The most frequent localizations other than 
gastrointestinal and eye are salivary gland, skin, lung and thyroid. These 
lymphomas usually arise in a setting of inflammation due to a persistent 
infection or autoimmune diseases such as Sjogren syndrome in salivary MALT 
lymphomas and Hashimoto's thryroiditis in thyroid lymphomas. They affect 
middle-aged patients with a female predominance when lymphoma arises in certain 
locations. Patients often present with localised stage I or II although 
disseminated disease may be present at diagnosis or relapse in a third of the 
cases. Biopsy of the affected site is mandatory to establish the diagnosis and a 
full work-up staging is recommended. The clinical course is indolent and 
prognosis is good despite that recurrences following response to therapy are 
frequent. Surgery, radiotherapy and/or Rituximab based regimens are effective in 
these lymphomas.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beha.2016.07.005
PMID: 28288723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]