---
reference_id: "PMID:37009283"
title: Two novel heterozygote mutations of ATM in a Chinese family with dystonia-dominant ataxia telangiectasia and literature review.
authors:
- Liu ZJ
- Wang YL
- Xu Y
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.975696
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel heterozygote mutations of ATM in a Chinese family with dystonia-dominant ataxia telangiectasia and literature review.
**Authors:** Liu ZJ, Wang YL, Xu Y
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2023.975696](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.975696)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Mar 15;11:975696. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.975696.
eCollection  2023.

Two novel heterozygote mutations of ATM in a Chinese family with
dystonia-dominant ataxia telangiectasia and literature review.

Liu ZJ(1), Wang YL(1), Xu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder with
high clinical heterogeneity. A-T may present in complicated variable forms,
including classic A-T and milder form of AT. Contrary to the classic A-T, the
milder form does not present the cardinal features of A-T such as ataxia and
telangiectasia. A few ATM mutations have been reported in variant A-T cases
manifesting isolated generalized or segmental dystonia without any signs of
classical A-T.
METHODS: An A-T pedigree with predominant dystonia was collected. Genetic
testing was performed by targeted panel of genes involved in movement disorders.
The candidate variants were further confirmed by Sanger sequencing. We then
reviewed previously published literatures of genetically confirmed A-T cases
with predominant dystonia and summarized the clinical characteristics of
dystonia-dominant A-T.
RESULTS: Two novel ATM mutations, p.I2683T and p.S2860P, were identified in the
family. The proband presented isolated segmental dystonia without any signs of
ataxia and telangiectasias. We reviewed the literatures and found that the
patients with dystonia-dominant A-T tend to have a later-onset and slower
progression of the disease.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first report of A-T patient with
predominant dystonia in China. Dystonia may appear as one of the predominant
manifestations or initial symptom of A-T. Early ATM genetic testing should be
considered for those patients with predominant dystonia, despite without
accompanying ataxia or telangiectasia.

© 2023 Liu, Wang and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.975696
PMCID: PMC10050558
PMID: 37009283

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
