---
reference_id: "PMID:20301575"
title: Fanconi Anemia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Mehta PA
- Ebens C
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fanconi Anemia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Mehta PA, Ebens C

## Content

1. Fanconi Anemia.

Mehta PA(1), Ebens C(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2025.
2002 Feb 14 [updated 2021 Jun 3].

Author information:
(1)Professor, Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune Deficiency, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio
(2)Assistant Professor, Division of Blood and Marrow Transplant & Cellular 
Therapy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Fanconi anemia (FA) is characterized by physical 
abnormalities, bone marrow failure, and increased risk for malignancy. Physical 
abnormalities, present in approximately 75% of affected individuals, include one 
or more of the following: short stature, abnormal skin pigmentation, skeletal 
malformations of the upper and/or lower limbs, microcephaly, and ophthalmic and 
genitourinary tract anomalies. Progressive bone marrow failure with pancytopenia 
typically presents in the first decade, often initially with thrombocytopenia or 
leukopenia. The incidence of acute myeloid leukemia is 13% by age 50 years. 
Solid tumors – particularly of the head and neck, skin, and genitourinary tract 
– are more common in individuals with FA.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of FA is established in a proband with 
increased chromosome breakage and radial forms on cytogenetic testing of 
lymphocytes with diepoxybutane (DEB) and mitomycin C (MMC) and/or one of the 
following identified on molecular genetic testing: biallelic pathogenic variants 
in one of the 21 genes known to cause autosomal recessive FA; a heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in RAD51 known to cause autosomal dominant FA; or a 
hemizygous pathogenic variant in FANCB known to cause X-linked FA.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Administration of oral androgens (e.g., 
oxymetholone) improves blood counts (red cell and platelets) in approximately 
50% of individuals with FA; granulocyte colony-stimulating factor improves the 
neutrophil count in some individuals; hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT) is the only curative therapy for the hematologic manifestations of FA, 
but the high risk for solid tumors remains and may even be increased in those 
undergoing HSCT. All these treatments have potential significant toxicity. early 
detection and surgical removal remains the mainstay of therapy for solid tumors. 
Treatment of growth deficiency, limb anomalies, ocular anomalies, renal 
malformations, genital anomalies, hypothyroidism, cardiac anomalies, and 
dermatologic manifestations as recommended by the subspecialty care provider. 
Hearing aids may be helpful for hearing loss as per otolaryngologist; 
supplemental feeding as needed by nasogastric tube or gastrostomy; vitamin D 
supplementation; early intervention for developmental delays; individualized 
education plan for school-age children; speech, occupational, and physical 
therapy as needed; liberal use of sunscreen and rash guards; social work and 
care coordination as needed. Prevention of primary manifestations: Human 
papilloma virus (HPV) vaccination to reduce the risk for gynecologic cancer in 
females, and possibly reduce the risk of oral cancer in all individuals. 
Prevention of secondary complications: T-cell depletion of the donor graft to 
minimize the risk of graft-vs-host disease; conditioning regimen without 
radiation prior to HSCT to reduce the subsequent risk of developing solid 
tumors. Surveillance: Clinical assessment of growth, feeding, nutrition, spine, 
and ocular issues at each visit throughout childhood. Annual ophthalmology 
examination; annual evaluation with endocrinologist including TSH, free T4, 
25-hydroxy vitamin D, two-hour glucose tolerance testing, and insulin levels; 
assessment of pubertal stage and hormone levels at puberty and every two years 
until puberty is complete; follow up hearing evaluation if exposed to ototoxic 
drugs; annual developmental assessment; blood counts every three to four months 
or as needed; bone marrow aspirate and biopsy to evaluate morphology and 
cellularity, FISH and cytogenetics to evaluate for emergence of a malignant 
clone at least annually after age two years; liver function tests every three to 
six months and liver ultrasound examination every six to twelve months in those 
receiving androgen therapy; gynecologic assessment for genital lesions annually 
beginning at age 13 years; vulvo-vaginal examinations and Pap smear annually 
beginning at age 18 years; oral examinations for tumors every six months 
beginning at age nine to ten years; annual nasolaryngoscopy beginning at age ten 
years; dermatology evaluation every six to 12 months; annual abdominal 
ultrasound and brain MRI in those with BRCA2-related FA. Additional cancer 
surveillance for individuals with BRCA1-, BRCA2-, PALB2-, BRIP1-, and 
RAD51C-related FA. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Transfusions of red cells or 
platelets for persons who are candidates for HSCT; family members as blood 
donors if HSCT is being considered; blood products that are not filtered 
(leukodepleted) or irradiated; toxic agents that have been implicated in 
tumorigenesis; unsafe sex practices, which increase the risk of HPV-associated 
malignancy; excessive sun exposure. Radiographic studies solely for the purpose 
of surveillance (i.e., in the absence of clinical indications) should be 
minimized. Evaluation of relatives at risk: DEB/MMC testing or molecular genetic 
testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variants are known) of all sibs of a 
proband for early diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring for physical 
abnormalities, bone marrow failure, and related cancers.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Fanconi anemia (FA) can be inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner, an autosomal dominant manner (RAD51-related FA), or an 
X-linked manner (FANCB-related FA). Autosomal recessive FA: Each sib of an 
affected individual has a 25% chance of inheriting both pathogenic variants and 
being affected, a 50% chance of inheriting one pathogenic variant and being a 
heterozygote, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the familial FA-related 
pathogenic variants. Heterozygotes are not at risk for autosomal recessive FA. 
However, heterozygous mutation of a subset of FA-related genes (e.g., BRCA1, 
BRCA2, PALB2, BRIP1, and RAD51C) is associated with an increased risk for breast 
and other cancers. Autosomal dominant FA: Given that all affected individuals 
with RAD51-related FA reported to date have the disorder as a result of a de 
novo RAD51 pathogenic variant, the risk to other family members is presumed to 
be low. X-linked FA: For carrier females the chance of transmitting the 
pathogenic variant in each pregnancy is 50%; males who inherit the pathogenic 
variant will be affected; females who inherit the pathogenic variant will be 
carriers and will usually not be affected. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
(for autosomal recessive and X-linked FA) and prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are 
known.

Copyright © 1993-2025, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301575