---
reference_id: "PMID:33505133"
title: Activated Carbon Fabric Mask Reduces Lead Absorption and Improves the Heme Biosynthesis and Hematological Parameters of Battery Manufacturing Workers.
authors:
- Patil JA
- Kshirsagar MS
- Patil AJ
journal: Indian J Clin Biochem
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12291-019-00868-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activated Carbon Fabric Mask Reduces Lead Absorption and Improves the Heme Biosynthesis and Hematological Parameters of Battery Manufacturing Workers.
**Authors:** Patil JA, Kshirsagar MS, Patil AJ
**Journal:** Indian J Clin Biochem (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12291-019-00868-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12291-019-00868-3)

## Content

1. Indian J Clin Biochem. 2021 Jan;36(1):94-99. doi: 10.1007/s12291-019-00868-3. 
Epub 2019 Dec 13.

Activated Carbon Fabric Mask Reduces Lead Absorption and Improves the Heme 
Biosynthesis and Hematological Parameters of Battery Manufacturing Workers.

Patil JA(1), Kshirsagar MS(1), Patil AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Krishna Institute of Medical Sciences, Karad, 
Maharashtra 415539 India.

Activated carbon fabrics (ACF) mask prevents the absorption of lead and reduce 
its adverse effects of human health. Aim of this study to know the blood lead 
level and its effects on heme biosynthesis and hematological parameters after 
using 2 months activated carbon fabric mask of battery manufacturing workers 
(BMW). Blood lead level, heme biosynthesis and hematological parameters were 
measured by using standard method. Blood lead level (P < 0.001, - 13.5%) was 
significantly decreased, activated δ-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (P < 0.001, 
11.97%) and non-activated δ- aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (P < 0.001, 23.17%) 
enzyme activity were significantly increased, however, the ratio of activated to 
Non-activated δ- ALAD (P < 0.001, - 10.13%) was significantly decreased, urinary 
excretion of δ- aminolevulinic acid (P < 0.001, - 10.49%) and porphobilinogen 
(P < 0.001, - 7.38%) were significantly decreased after using 2 months ACF mask 
as compared to before using mask of BMW. Hematological parameters i.e Hb 
(P < 0.05, 13.42%), PCV (P < 0.05, 7.23%), MCV (P < 0.05, 1.9%) were 
significantly increased and total WBC count (P < 0.05, - 5.18%) was 
significantly decreased after using 2 months ACF mask as compared to before 
using mask of BMW. Two months using ACF mask reduces the blood lead level and 
improves the δ-ALDH activity and hematological parameters, decreases the urinary 
excretion of δ-ALA, PBG of battery manufacturing workers. Therefore, the regular 
using of ACF mask is beneficial to prevent the lead absorption and its adverse 
effects on human health.

© Association of Clinical Biochemists of India 2019.

DOI: 10.1007/s12291-019-00868-3
PMCID: PMC7817749
PMID: 33505133

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.