---
reference_id: "PMID:29563141"
title: Monosomy 18p is a risk factor for facioscapulohumeral dystrophy.
authors:
- Balog J
- Goossens R
- Lemmers RJLF
- Straasheijm KR
- van der Vliet PJ
- Heuvel AVD
- Cambieri C
- Capet N
- Feasson L
- Manel V
- Contet J
- Kriek M
- Donlin-Smith CM
- Ruivenkamp CAL
- Heard P
- Tapscott SJ
- Cody JD
- Tawil R
- Sacconi S
- van der Maarel SM
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-105153
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Chromatin/genetics
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosome Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18/genetics"
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Female
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Monosomy/genetics, pathology"
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation
- Risk Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monosomy 18p is a risk factor for facioscapulohumeral dystrophy.
**Authors:** Balog J, Goossens R, Lemmers RJLF, Straasheijm KR, van der Vliet PJ, Heuvel AVD, Cambieri C, Capet N, Feasson L, Manel V, Contet J, Kriek M, Donlin-Smith CM, Ruivenkamp CAL, Heard P, Tapscott SJ, Cody JD, Tawil R, Sacconi S, van der Maarel SM
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-105153](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-105153)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2018 Jul;55(7):469-478. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-105153. Epub 
2018 Mar 21.

Monosomy 18p is a risk factor for facioscapulohumeral dystrophy.

Balog J(1), Goossens R(1), Lemmers RJLF(1), Straasheijm KR(1), van der Vliet 
PJ(1), Heuvel AVD(1), Cambieri C(2), Capet N(3), Feasson L(4)(5), Manel V(6), 
Contet J(7), Kriek M(8), Donlin-Smith CM(9), Ruivenkamp CAL(8), Heard P(10), 
Tapscott SJ(11), Cody JD(10), Tawil R(9), Sacconi S(3)(7), van der Maarel SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Rare Neuromuscular Diseases Center, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)Peripheral Nervous System, Muscle and ALS Department, Université Côte d'Azur, 
Nice, France.
(4)Laboratoire Interuniversitaire de Biologie de la Motricité, Université de 
Lyon, Université Jean Monnet-Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France.
(5)Unité de Myologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Saint-Etienne, Centre 
Référent Maladies Neuromusculaires EURO-NMD, Saint-Etienne, France.
(6)Service d'Epileptologie Clinique, des Troubles du Sommeil-et de Neurologie 
Fonctionnelle de l'Enfant, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 
Bron, France.
(7)Institute for Research on Cancer and Aging of Nice, Faculty of Medicine, 
Université Côte d'Azur, Nice, France.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(9)Neuromuscular Disease Unit, Department of Neurology, University of Rochester 
Medical Center, Rochester, New York, USA.
(10)Chromosome 18 Research Center, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA.
(11)Division of Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.

BACKGROUND: 18p deletion syndrome is a rare disorder caused by partial or full 
monosomy of the short arm of chromosome 18. Clinical symptoms caused by 18p 
hemizygosity include cognitive impairment, mild facial dysmorphism, strabismus 
and ptosis. Among other genes, structural maintenance of chromosomes flexible 
hinge domain containing 1 (SMCHD1) is hemizygous in most patients with 18p 
deletions. Digenic inheritance of a SMCHD1 mutation and a moderately sized D4Z4 
repeat on a facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) permissive genetic 
background of chromosome 4 can cause FSHD type 2 (FSHD2).
OBJECTIVES: Since 12% of Caucasian individuals harbour moderately sized D4Z4 
repeats on an FSHD permissive background, we tested if people with 18p deletions 
are at risk of developing FSHD.
METHODS: To test our hypothesis we studied different cellular systems 
originating from individuals with 18p deletions not presenting FSHD2 phenotype 
for transcriptional and epigenetic characteristics of FSHD at D4Z4. Furthermore, 
individuals with an idiopathic muscle phenotype and an 18p deletion were 
subjected to neurological examination.
RESULTS: Primary fibroblasts hemizygous for SMCHD1 have a D4Z4 chromatin 
structure comparable with FSHD2 concomitant with DUX4 expression after 
transdifferentiation into myocytes. Neurological examination of 18p deletion 
individuals from two independent families with a moderately sized D4Z4 repeat 
identified muscle features compatible with FSHD.
CONCLUSIONS: 18p deletions leading to haploinsufficiency of SMCHD1, together 
with a moderately sized FSHD permissive D4Z4 allele, can associate with symptoms 
and molecular features of FSHD. We propose that patients with 18p deletion 
should be characterised for their D4Z4 repeat size and haplotype and monitored 
for clinical features of FSHD.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-105153
PMCID: PMC6019561
PMID: 29563141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.