---
reference_id: "PMID:41581529"
title: Endocrine-metabolic effects of kisspeptin in mammals.
authors:
- Pastor FM
- Santos BR
- Silva JF
- Ocarino NM
- Serakides R
journal: Gen Comp Endocrinol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2026.114888
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrine-metabolic effects of kisspeptin in mammals.
**Authors:** Pastor FM, Santos BR, Silva JF, Ocarino NM, Serakides R
**Journal:** Gen Comp Endocrinol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ygcen.2026.114888](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygcen.2026.114888)

## Content

1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2026 Feb;377:114888. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2026.114888.
Epub  2026 Jan 23.

Endocrine-metabolic effects of kisspeptin in mammals.

Pastor FM(1), Santos BR(2), Silva JF(2), Ocarino NM(1), Serakides R(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Clínica e Cirurgia Veterinárias, Escola de Veterinária, 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais. Avenida Antônio Carlos 6627, 31270-901. 
Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Centro de Microscopia Eletrônica, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, 
Universidade Estadual de Santa Cruz, Campus Soane Nazaré de Andrade, 45662-900 
Ilhéus, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Clínica e Cirurgia Veterinárias, Escola de Veterinária, 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais. Avenida Antônio Carlos 6627, 31270-901. 
Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic address: 
serakidesufmg@gmail.com.

Kisspeptins (Kp) play crucial roles in regulating reproductive functions. In 
recent decades, new effects of Kp on other systems, such as the cardiovascular, 
respiratory, and musculoskeletal systems, and its possible therapeutic effects 
on gestational hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and neoplasms have been 
identified. Additionally, Kp signaling has been investigated in 
endocrine-metabolic regulation; nonetheless, there are few reviews on this 
subject. This study aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the effects of 
Kp on endocrine-metabolic physiology in mammals. Kp modulates the release of 
hormones from various endocrine organs, including the hypothalamus, pituitary, 
gonadal, adrenal, and pancreatic glands. The metabolic effects of Kp exhibit 
significant sexual dimorphism, manifesting as an increase in metabolic activity, 
a decrease in body weight in females, and an increase in weight gain in males. 
Further research is necessary to investigate the effects of Kp on a wide variety 
of systems, which will help in advancing knowledge in this field. Further 
sex-specific studies are needed to investigate the therapeutic potential of Kp.

Copyright © 2026 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2026.114888
PMID: 41581529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.