---
reference_id: "PMID:22291085"
title: "Estrogen receptor (ER) mRNA and ER-related gene expression in breast cancers that are 1% to 10% ER-positive by immunohistochemistry."
authors:
- Iwamoto T
- Booser D
- Valero V
- Murray JL
- Koenig K
- Esteva FJ
- Ueno NT
- Zhang J
- Shi W
- Qi Y
- Matsuoka J
- Yang EJ
- Hortobagyi GN
- Hatzis C
- Symmans WF
- Pusztai L
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.2574
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estrogen receptor (ER) mRNA and ER-related gene expression in breast cancers that are 1% to 10% ER-positive by immunohistochemistry.
**Authors:** Iwamoto T, Booser D, Valero V, Murray JL, Koenig K, Esteva FJ, Ueno NT, Zhang J, Shi W, Qi Y, Matsuoka J, Yang EJ, Hortobagyi GN, Hatzis C, Symmans WF, Pusztai L
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2011.36.2574](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2011.36.2574)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Mar 1;30(7):729-34. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.2574. Epub
2012  Jan 30.

Estrogen receptor (ER) mRNA and ER-related gene expression in breast cancers 
that are 1% to 10% ER-positive by immunohistochemistry.

Iwamoto T(1), Booser D, Valero V, Murray JL, Koenig K, Esteva FJ, Ueno NT, Zhang 
J, Shi W, Qi Y, Matsuoka J, Yang EJ, Hortobagyi GN, Hatzis C, Symmans WF, 
Pusztai L.

Author information:
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77230-1439, 
USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2012 Mar 1;30(7):686-9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.38.9619.
    J Clin Oncol. 2012 Aug 10;30(23):2929-30; author reply 2931. doi: 
10.1200/JCO.2012.43.2831.

PURPOSE: We examined borderline estrogen receptor (ER) -positive cancers, 
defined as having 1% to 10% positivity by immunohistochemistry (IHC), to 
determine whether they show the same global gene-expression pattern and high 
ESR1 mRNA expression as ER-positive cancers or if they are more similar to 
ER-negative cancers.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: ER status was determined by IHC in 465 primary breast 
cancers and with the Affymetrix U133A gene chip. We compared expressions of ESR1 
mRNA and a 106 probe set ER-associated gene signature score between ER-negative 
(n = 183), 1% to 9% (n = 25), 10% (n = 6), and more than 10% (n = 251) 
ER-positive cancers. We also assessed the molecular class by using the PAM50 
classifier and plotted survival by ER status.
RESULTS: Among the 1% to 9%, 10%, and more than 10% ER IHC-positive patients, 
24%, 67%, and 92% were also positive by ESR1 mRNA expression. The average ESR1 
expression was significantly higher in the ≥ 10% ER-positive cohorts compared 
with the 1% to 9% or ER-negative cohort. The average ER gene signature scores 
were similar for the ER-negative and 1% to 9% IHC-positive patients and were 
significantly lower than in ≥ 10% ER-positive patients. Among the 1% to 9% 
ER-positive patients, 8% were luminal B and 48% were basal-like; among the 10% 
ER-positive patients, 50% were luminal. The overall survival rate of 1% to 9% 
ER-positive patients with cancer was between those of patients in the ≥ 10% 
ER-positive and ER-negative groups.
CONCLUSION: A minority of the 1% to 9% IHC ER-positive tumors show molecular 
features similar to those of ER-positive, potentially endocrine-sensitive 
tumors, whereas most show ER-negative, basal-like molecular characteristics. The 
safest clinical approach may be to use both adjuvant endocrine therapy and 
chemotherapy in this rare subset of patients.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.2574
PMID: 22291085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]