---
reference_id: "PMID:31883816"
title: "[Recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax revealing Marfan's syndrome]."
authors:
- El Ouali Z
- Id El Haj N
- Boubia S
- Ridai M
journal: Rev Mal Respir
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2019.11.649
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax revealing Marfan's syndrome].
**Authors:** El Ouali Z, Id El Haj N, Boubia S, Ridai M
**Journal:** Rev Mal Respir (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmr.2019.11.649](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmr.2019.11.649)

## Content

1. Rev Mal Respir. 2020 Jan;37(1):86-90. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2019.11.649. Epub
2019  Dec 27.

[Recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax revealing Marfan's syndrome].

[Article in French]

El Ouali Z(1), Id El Haj N(2), Boubia S(2), Ridai M(2).

Author information:
(1)Service de chirurgie thoracique, CHU d'Ibn Rochd, Casablanca, Maroc. 
Electronic address: dr.elouali.zakaria@gmail.com.
(2)Service de chirurgie thoracique, CHU d'Ibn Rochd, Casablanca, Maroc.

INTRODUCTION: Because of its rarity and lack of specific symptoms, the diagnosis 
of Marfan's syndrome can be delayed. Though cardiovascular, skeletal and 
ophthalmological manifestations are the most frequent features, the respiratory 
system can also be involved.
OBSERVATION: We report the case of a 35-year-old patient who presented with a 
large, right sided, encysted pyopneumothorax. The history revealed two episodes 
of spontaneous pneumothorax, cataract surgery ten years before his admission, 
and a similar case in the family. Clinical examination showed skeletal 
abnormalities of the wrist and thumb as well as deformity of the hindfoot with a 
flat foot. He had no characteristic thoracic deformity. Ophthalmologically, the 
right eye had a subluxed lens and the left eye had a totally subluxed cataract.
CONCLUSION: The development of the third episode of pneumothorax led to the 
diagnosis of Marfan's syndrome thanks to the patient's combination of symptoms. 
To avoid diagnostic delay, criteria were established in 1996 and revised in 
2010 to ensure an early diagnosis of this condition.

Copyright © 2019 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2019.11.649
PMID: 31883816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]