---
reference_id: "PMID:20301649"
title: Inclusion Body Myopathy with Paget Disease of Bone and/or Frontotemporal Dementia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Kimonis V
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inclusion Body Myopathy with Paget Disease of Bone and/or Frontotemporal Dementia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Kimonis V

## Content

1. Inclusion Body Myopathy with Paget Disease of Bone and/or Frontotemporal 
Dementia.

Kimonis V(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 May 25 [updated 2019 Sep 12].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, 
University of California Irvine Medical Center, Orange, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease 
of bone (PDB) and/or frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD) is characterized by 
adult-onset proximal and distal muscle weakness (clinically resembling a 
limb-girdle muscular dystrophy syndrome), early-onset PDB, and premature 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Muscle weakness progresses to involve other limb 
and respiratory muscles. PDB involves focal areas of increased bone turnover 
that typically lead to spine and/or hip pain and localized enlargement and 
deformity of the long bones; pathologic fractures occur on occasion. Early 
stages of FTD are characterized by dysnomia, dyscalculia, comprehension 
deficits, and paraphasic errors, with minimal impairment of episodic memory; 
later stages are characterized by inability to speak, auditory comprehension 
deficits for even one-step commands, alexia, and agraphia. Mean age at diagnosis 
for muscle disease and PDB is 42 years; for FTD, 56 years. Dilated 
cardiomyopathy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Parkinson disease are now 
known to be part of the spectrum of findings associated with IBMPFD.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of IBMPFD is established in a proband with 
typical clinical findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in HNRNPA1, 
HNRNPA2B1, or VCP identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Weight control to avoid obesity; 
physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent 
contractures; mechanical aids (canes, walkers, orthotics, wheelchairs) for 
ambulation/mobility; surgical intervention for foot deformity and scoliosis; 
respiratory aids when indicated; social and emotional support; assisted living 
arrangements for muscle weakness and/or dementia; bisphosphonates to relieve 
pain and disability from PDB. Surveillance: At periodic intervals: 
echocardiogram and EKG to monitor for evidence of cardiomyopathy; pulmonary 
function studies; sleep study; alkaline phosphatase, skeletal x-rays and bone 
scans to monitor for PDB onset and effectiveness of therapy; assessment of 
behavior and mental status.
GENETIC COUNSELING: IBMPFD is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. An 
estimated 80% of affected individuals have an affected parent; approximately 20% 
have the disorder as a result of a de novo pathogenic variant. Each child of an 
individual with IBMPFD has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. 
Once the IBMPFD-causing pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301649