---
reference_id: "PMID:28473268"
title: "The congenital great toe malformation of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva? - A close call."
authors:
- Towler OW
- Shore EM
- Xu M
- Bamford A
- Anderson I
- Pignolo RJ
- Kaplan FS
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.04.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The congenital great toe malformation of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva? - A close call.
**Authors:** Towler OW, Shore EM, Xu M, Bamford A, Anderson I, Pignolo RJ, Kaplan FS
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.04.013)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2017 Jul;60(7):399-402. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.04.013. Epub
 2017 May 1.

The congenital great toe malformation of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva? 
- A close call.

Towler OW(1), Shore EM(2), Xu M(1), Bamford A(3), Anderson I(3), Pignolo RJ(4), 
Kaplan FS(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Perelman School of Medicine at The 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; The Center for Research 
in FOP & Related Disorders, The Perelman School of Medicine at The University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Perelman School of Medicine at The 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Genetics, 
The Perelman School of Medicine at The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA; The Center for Research in FOP & Related Disorders, The Perelman 
School of Medicine at The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.
(3)The University of Tennessee Genetics Center, Knoxville, TN 37920, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Perelman School of Medicine at The 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Medicine, 
The Perelman School of Medicine at The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA; The Center for Research in FOP & Related Disorders, The Perelman 
School of Medicine at The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.
(5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Perelman School of Medicine at The 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Medicine, 
The Perelman School of Medicine at The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA; The Center for Research in FOP & Related Disorders, The Perelman 
School of Medicine at The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA. Electronic address: frederick.kaplan@uphs.upenn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Congenital bilateral hallux valgus with associated absence or fusion 
of the interphalangeal joint is a classic diagnostic feature of fibrodysplasia 
ossificans progressiva (FOP), a human genetic disease of extra-skeletal bone 
formation caused in nearly all cases by a gain-of-function mutation in Activin A 
Receptor I/Activin-like Kinase 2 (ACVR1/ALK2), which encodes a bone 
morphogenetic protein (BMP) Type 1 receptor. This toe malformation prompts the 
suspicion of FOP even before the appearance of extra-skeletal bone. Here we 
report the case of a four-month-old child who was suspected of having FOP on the 
basis of a great toe malformation identical to that seen in children with the 
disease.
METHODS: The patient's genomic DNA of the coding region of ACVR1 was sequenced 
and analyzed for mutations known to cause FOP and novel mutations. Subsequent 
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
analyses were performed to detect mutations elsewhere in the genome.
RESULTS: Genetic testing exonerated ACVR1 as culpable for the patient's toe 
malformation. CGH and SNP analyses identified a large intragenic deletion in a 
different BMP Type 1 receptor gene, BMP Receptor 1B/Activin-like kinase 6 
(BMPR1B/ALK6), a gene associated with a variable spectrum of autosomal dominant 
brachydactyly phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: This report illustrates that while toe morphology remains the 
earliest indicator of FOP, toe morphology alone is not an unequivocal clinical 
diagnostic feature of FOP, and supports that embryonic development of the great 
toe is highly sensitive to dysregulated signaling from at least two BMP type I 
receptors.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.04.013
PMID: 28473268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]