---
reference_id: "PMID:26443184"
title: Mutation Update for COL2A1 Gene Variants Associated with Type II Collagenopathies.
authors:
- Barat-Houari M
- Sarrabay G
- Gatinois V
- Fabre A
- Dumont B
- Genevieve D
- Touitou I
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22915
keywords:
- Collagen Type II/genetics
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnosis, genetics"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation Update for COL2A1 Gene Variants Associated with Type II Collagenopathies.
**Authors:** Barat-Houari M, Sarrabay G, Gatinois V, Fabre A, Dumont B, Genevieve D, Touitou I
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22915](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22915)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2016 Jan;37(1):7-15. doi: 10.1002/humu.22915. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Mutation Update for COL2A1 Gene Variants Associated with Type II 
Collagenopathies.

Barat-Houari M(1)(2), Sarrabay G(1)(2), Gatinois V(1)(3), Fabre A(1), Dumont 
B(1), Genevieve D(2)(3)(4), Touitou I(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Rare and Autoinflammatory Diseases, CHRU, Montpellier, France.
(2)Genetics & Immunopathology of Inflammatory Osteoarticular Diseases, INSERM 
UMR1183, Montpellier, France.
(3)University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Reference Center for Developmental 
Abnormalities and Constitutional Bone Diseases, CHRU, Montpellier, France.

Mutations in the COL2A1 gene cause a spectrum of rare autosomal-dominant 
conditions characterized by skeletal dysplasia, short stature, and sensorial 
defects. An early diagnosis is critical to providing relevant patient care and 
follow-up, and genetic counseling to affected families. There are no recent 
exhaustive descriptions of the causal mutations in the literature. Here, we 
provide a review of COL2A1 mutations extracted from the Leiden Open Variation 
Database (LOVD) that we updated with data from PubMed and our own patients. Over 
700 patients were recorded, harboring 415 different mutations. One-third of the 
mutations are dominant-negative mutations that affect the glycine residue in the 
G-X-Y repeats of the alpha 1 chain. These mutations disrupt the collagen triple 
helix and are common in achondrogenesis type II and hypochondrogenesis. The 
mutations resulting in a premature stop codon are found in less severe 
phenotypes such as Stickler syndrome. The p.(Arg275Cys) substitution is found in 
all patients with COL2A1-associated Czech dysplasia. LOVD-COL2A1 provides 
support and potential collaborative material for scientific and clinical 
projects aimed at elucidating phenotype-genotype correlation and differential 
diagnosis in patients with type II collagenopathies.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22915
PMID: 26443184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]