---
reference_id: "PMID:24886261"
title: "Polycystic liver disease: an overview of pathogenesis, clinical manifestations and management."
authors:
- Cnossen WR
- Drenth JP
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-69
keywords:
- "Cysts/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Liver Diseases/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polycystic liver disease: an overview of pathogenesis, clinical manifestations and management.
**Authors:** Cnossen WR, Drenth JP
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-9-69](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-9-69)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 May 1;9:69. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-69.

Polycystic liver disease: an overview of pathogenesis, clinical manifestations
and management.

Cnossen WR, Drenth JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Institute for Genetic and
Metabolic Disease, Radboud university medical center, Geert Grooteplein-Zuid 10,
P,O, Box 9101, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands. joostphdrenth@cs.com.

Polycystic liver disease (PLD) is the result of embryonic ductal plate
malformation of the intrahepatic biliary tree. The phenotype consists of
numerous cysts spread throughout the liver parenchyma. Cystic bile duct
malformations originating from the peripheral biliary tree are called Von
Meyenburg complexes (VMC). In these patients embryonic remnants develop into
small hepatic cysts and usually remain silent during life. Symptomatic PLD
occurs mainly in the context of isolated polycystic liver disease (PCLD) and
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). In advanced stages, PCLD
and ADPKD patients have massively enlarged livers which cause a spectrum of
clinical features and complications. Major complaints include abdominal pain,
abdominal distension and atypical symptoms because of voluminous cysts resulting
in compression of adjacent tissue or failure of the affected organ. Renal
failure due to polycystic kidneys and non-renal extra-hepatic features are
common in ADPKD in contrast to VMC and PCLD. In general, liver function remains
prolonged preserved in PLD. Ultrasonography is the first instrument to assess
liver phenotype. Indeed, PCLD and ADPKD diagnostic criteria rely on detection of
hepatorenal cystogenesis, and secondly a positive family history compatible with
an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Ambiguous imaging or screening may be
assisted by genetic counseling and molecular diagnostics. Screening mutations of
the genes causing PCLD (PRKCSH and SEC63) or ADPKD (PKD1 and PKD2) confirm the
clinical diagnosis. Genetic studies showed that accumulation of somatic hits in
cyst epithelium determine the rate-limiting step for cyst formation. Management
of adult PLD is based on liver phenotype, severity of clinical features and
quality of life. Conservative treatment is recommended for the majority of PLD
patients. The primary aim is to halt cyst growth to allow abdominal
decompression and ameliorate symptoms. Invasive procedures are required in a
selective patient group with advanced PCLD, ADPKD or liver failure.
Pharmacological therapy by somatostatin analogues lead to beneficial outcome of
PLD in terms of symptom relief and liver volume reduction.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-69
PMCID: PMC4030533
PMID: 24886261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
