---
reference_id: "PMID:38306007"
title: "A case of pseudo-Bartter/Gitelman syndrome caused by long-term laxative abuse, leading to end-stage kidney disease."
authors:
- Kondo A
- Yoshiya K
- Sakakibara N
- Nagano C
- Horinouchi T
- Nozu K
journal: CEN Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s13730-024-00851-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Laxatives/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Middle Aged
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic"
- "Gitelman Syndrome/diagnosis, complications"
- Constipation/etiology
- Hypokalemia/etiology
- Renal Dialysis
- "Acute Kidney Injury/etiology, diagnosis"
- Substance-Related Disorders/complications
- "Bartter Syndrome/diagnosis, complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of pseudo-Bartter/Gitelman syndrome caused by long-term laxative abuse, leading to end-stage kidney disease.
**Authors:** Kondo A, Yoshiya K, Sakakibara N, Nagano C, Horinouchi T, Nozu K
**Journal:** CEN Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13730-024-00851-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13730-024-00851-9)

## Content

1. CEN Case Rep. 2024 Oct;13(5):326-329. doi: 10.1007/s13730-024-00851-9. Epub
2024  Feb 2.

A case of pseudo-Bartter/Gitelman syndrome caused by long-term laxative abuse,
leading to end-stage kidney disease.

Kondo A(1), Yoshiya K(2), Sakakibara N(3), Nagano C(3), Horinouchi T(3), Nozu
K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1,
Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan. akondo@med.kobe-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Hara Genitourinary Hospital, 5-7-17,
Kitanagasadoori, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1,
Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan.

Pseudo-Bartter/Gitelman syndrome (PBS/PGS) is a disorder that presents with
hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis resembling Gitelman syndrome (GS) due to
secondary factors, such as lifestyle and /or medicines. Notably, PBS/PGS is more
likely to cause renal dysfunction than GS. We report the first case of PBS/PGS
due to long-term laxative abuse leading to end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). The
patient was a 49-year-old woman with a history of constipation since school, who
had used excessive doses of laxatives on her own judgment for nine years at
least from 22 years of age. Two years later, blood tests revealed hypokalemia
(serum K 3.1 mEq/L), and nine years later, the patient's renal function began to
deteriorate (Cr-eGFR 48.7 mL/min/1.73 m2). Since abuse of laxatives was
suspected as the cause, it was changed to the proper dosage of laxatives. At
33 years, the patient developed acute kidney injury (AKI), due to a urinary
tract infection, and required intensive treatment, including hemodialysis.
Although the patient was eventually weaned off dialysis, the renal function did
not recover to pre-AKI levels. In suspected GS, comprehensive genetic testing
for renal disease-related genes was performed; however, no obvious pathogenic
variants were identified. Thereafter, despite decreasing the laxative doses and
potassium supplementation, her renal function continued to decline. At 49 years,
the patient developed ESKD and was started on maintenance hemodialysis. PBS/PGS
is a disease that can lead to ESKD. An early diagnosis of PBS/PGS is crucial to
prevent renal function deterioration, and the underlying causes should be
removed immediately.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Japanese Society of
Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1007/s13730-024-00851-9
PMCID: PMC11442729
PMID: 38306007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no conflict of
interest exists.
