---
reference_id: "PMID:22383169"
title: The miR-17-92 cluster and its target THBS1 are differentially expressed in angiosarcomas dependent on MYC amplification.
authors:
- Italiano A
- Thomas R
- Breen M
- Zhang L
- Crago AM
- Singer S
- Khanin R
- Maki RG
- Mihailovic A
- Hafner M
- Tuschl T
- Antonescu CR
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.21943
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Female
- Gene Amplification
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Genes, myc"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- "MicroRNAs/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Middle Aged
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-myc/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "RNA, Long Noncoding"
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- "Thrombospondin 1/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Transcription Factors/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Vascular Neoplasms/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The miR-17-92 cluster and its target THBS1 are differentially expressed in angiosarcomas dependent on MYC amplification.
**Authors:** Italiano A, Thomas R, Breen M, Zhang L, Crago AM, Singer S, Khanin R, Maki RG, Mihailovic A, Hafner M, Tuschl T, Antonescu CR
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.21943](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.21943)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Jun;51(6):569-78. doi: 10.1002/gcc.21943. Epub
2012 Mar 2.

The miR-17-92 cluster and its target THBS1 are differentially expressed in
angiosarcomas dependent on MYC amplification.

Italiano A(1), Thomas R, Breen M, Zhang L, Crago AM, Singer S, Khanin R, Maki
RG, Mihailovic A, Hafner M, Tuschl T, Antonescu CR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA. italiano@bergonie.org

Angiosarcomas (ASs) represent a heterogeneous group of malignant vascular tumors
that may occur spontaneously as primary tumors or secondarily after radiation
therapy or in the context of chronic lymphedema. Most secondary ASs have been
associated with MYC oncogene amplification, whereas the role of MYC
abnormalities in primary AS is not well defined. Twenty-two primary and
secondary ASs were analyzed by array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH)
and by deep sequencing of small RNA libraries. By aCGH and subsequently
confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization, MYC amplification was
identified in three out of six primary tumors and in 8 out of 12 secondary AS.
We have also found MAML1 as a new potential oncogene in MYC-amplified AS.
Significant upregulation of the miR-17-92 cluster was observed in MYC-amplified
AS compared to AS lacking MYC amplification and the control group (other
vascular tumors, nonvascular sarcomas). Moreover, MYC-amplified ASs were
associated with a significantly lower expression of thrombospondin-1 (THBS1)
than AS without MYC amplification or controls. Altogether, our study implicates
MYC amplification not only in the pathogenesis of secondary AS but also in a
subset of primary AS. Thus, MYC amplification may play a crucial role in the
angiogenic phenotype of AS through upregulation of the miR-17-92 cluster, which
subsequently downregulates THBS1, a potent endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.21943
PMCID: PMC3360479
PMID: 22383169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
