---
reference_id: "PMID:38418465"
title: Applying a genetic risk score model to enhance prediction of future multiple sclerosis diagnosis at first presentation with optic neuritis.
authors:
- Loginovic P
- Wang F
- Li J
- Ferrat L
- Mirshahi UL
- Rao HS
- Petzold A
- Tyrrell J
- Green HD
- Weedon MN
- Ganna A
- Tuomi T
- Carey DJ
- "UKBB Eye & Vision Consortium"
- FinnGen
- Geisinger-Regeneron DiscovEHR Collaboration
- Oram RA
- Braithwaite T
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-44917-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Genetic Risk Score
- "Multiple Sclerosis/diagnosis, genetics, complications"
- "Optic Neuritis/diagnosis, genetics, complications"
- Risk Factors
- Finland
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Applying a genetic risk score model to enhance prediction of future multiple sclerosis diagnosis at first presentation with optic neuritis.
**Authors:** Loginovic P, Wang F, Li J, Ferrat L, Mirshahi UL, Rao HS, Petzold A, Tyrrell J, Green HD, Weedon MN, Ganna A, Tuomi T, Carey DJ, UKBB Eye & Vision Consortium, FinnGen, Geisinger-Regeneron DiscovEHR Collaboration, Oram RA, Braithwaite T
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-44917-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44917-9)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Feb 28;15(1):1415. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-44917-9.

Applying a genetic risk score model to enhance prediction of future multiple 
sclerosis diagnosis at first presentation with optic neuritis.

Loginovic P(#)(1), Wang F(#)(2), Li J(#)(3), Ferrat L(4), Mirshahi UL(3), Rao 
HS(3), Petzold A(5)(6)(7), Tyrrell J(8), Green HD(9), Weedon MN(4), Ganna 
A(2)(10), Tuomi T(2)(11)(12)(13), Carey DJ(3); UKBB Eye & Vision Consortium; 
FinnGen; Geisinger-Regeneron DiscovEHR Collaboration; Oram RA(14)(15), 
Braithwaite T(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)University of Exeter Medical School, College of Medicine and Health, 
University of Exeter, Heavitree Road, Exeter, EX1 2HZ, UK.
(2)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), HiLIFE, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Weis Center for Research, Geisinger, Danville, PA, USA.
(4)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical 
School, St Luke's Campus, University of Exeter, Heavitree Road, Exeter, Devon, 
EX1 2LU, UK.
(5)Neuro-ophthalmology Expert Center, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Neuro-ophthalmology, The National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Queen Square, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(7)Neuro-ophthalmology service, Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK.
(8)Genetics of Complex Traits, University of Exeter Medical School, University 
of Exeter, Exeter, EX2 5DW, UK.
(9)Exeter Centre of Excellence for Diabetes Research (EXCEED), University of 
Exeter Medical School, St Luke's Campus, University of Exeter, Heavitree Road, 
Exeter, Devon, EX1 2LU, UK.
(10)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Abdominal Center, Endocrinology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki 
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(12)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Folkhälsan Research Center, Biomedicum, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(13)Lund University Diabetes Centre, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Malmö, Sweden.
(14)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical 
School, St Luke's Campus, University of Exeter, Heavitree Road, Exeter, Devon, 
EX1 2LU, UK. R.Oram@exeter.ac.uk.
(15)Academic Kidney Unit, Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS Foundation 
Trust, Exeter, UK. R.Oram@exeter.ac.uk.
(16)King's College London, School of Immunology & Microbial Sciences and School 
of Life Course and Population Sciences, London, UK.
(17)Medical Eye Unit, St Thomas' Hospital, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation 
Trust, Westminster Bridge Road, London, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

Optic neuritis (ON) is associated with numerous immune-mediated inflammatory 
diseases, but 50% patients are ultimately diagnosed with multiple sclerosis 
(MS). Differentiating MS-ON from non-MS-ON acutely is challenging but important; 
non-MS ON often requires urgent immunosuppression to preserve vision. Using data 
from the United Kingdom Biobank we showed that combining an MS-genetic risk 
score (GRS) with demographic risk factors (age, sex) significantly improved MS 
prediction in undifferentiated ON; one standard deviation of MS-GRS increased 
the Hazard of MS 1.3-fold (95% confidence interval 1.07-1.55, P < 0.01). 
Participants stratified into quartiles of predicted risk developed incident MS 
at rates varying from 4% (95%CI 0.5-7%, lowest risk quartile) to 41% (95%CI 
33-49%, highest risk quartile). The model replicated across two cohorts 
(Geisinger, USA, and FinnGen, Finland). This study indicates that a combined 
model might enhance individual MS risk stratification, paving the way for 
precision-based ON treatment and earlier MS disease-modifying therapy.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-44917-9
PMCID: PMC10902342
PMID: 38418465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.A.O. is a co-investigator on a Randox 
Laboratories R&D research grant and received translational industry academic 
funding from Randox Laboratories R&D relating to autoimmune GRS for prediction 
and classification of disease. There are no established patents, loyalties, or 
licensing agreements relating to this grant. It is a 3-year grant (February 
2022–2025). The approximate value is a £2.2 million program grant on GRS across 
autoimmune disease. A.P. reports personal fees from Novartis, Heidelberg 
Engineering, Zeiss, grants from Novartis, outside the submitted work; and is 
part of the steering committee of the OCTiMS study which is sponsored by 
Novartis and the Angio-OCT steering committee which is sponsored by Zeiss. He 
does not receive compensation for these activities. Other authors have no 
competing interests to declare.