---
reference_id: "PMID:29595935"
title: ASAH1-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Dyment DA
- Bennett SAL
- Medin JA
- Levade T
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ASAH1-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Dyment DA, Bennett SAL, Medin JA, Levade T

## Content

1. ASAH1-Related Disorders.

Dyment DA(1), Bennett SAL(2), Medin JA(3), Levade T(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2018 Mar 29.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
(4)Laboratoire de Biochimie Métabolique, CHU Toulouse, INSERM U1037, Centre de
Recherches en Cancérologie de Toulouse, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse,
France

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The spectrum of ASAH1-related disorders ranges from
Farber disease (FD) to spinal muscular atrophy with progressive myoclonic
epilepsy (SMA-PME). Classic FD is characterized by onset in the first weeks of
life of painful, progressive deformity of the major joints; palpable
subcutaneous nodules of joints and mechanical pressure points; and a hoarse cry
resulting from granulomas of the larynx and epiglottis. Life expectancy is
usually less than two years. In the other less common types of FD, onset,
severity, and primary manifestations vary. SMA-PME is characterized by
early-childhood-onset progressive lower motor neuron disease manifest typically
between ages three and seven years as proximal lower-extremity weakness,
followed by progressive myoclonic and atonic seizures, tremulousness/tremor, and
sensorineural hearing loss. Myoclonic epilepsy typically begins in late
childhood after the onset of weakness and can include jerking of the upper
limbs, action myoclonus, myoclonic status, and eyelid myoclonus. Other findings
include generalized tremor, and cognitive decline. The time from disease onset
to death from respiratory complications is usually five to 15 years.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of an ASAH1-related disorder is established in
a proband with suggestive clinical findings by identification of biallelic
pathogenic variants in ASAH1 and/or decreased activity of the enzyme acid
ceramidase in peripheral blood leukocytes or cultured skin fibroblasts.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations is symptomatic and multidisciplinary.
For FD: Management may include gastrostomy tube placement, surgical removal of
oral and airway granulomas, and treatment of seizures as per standard practice.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation may be an option in affected individuals
who do not have significant neurologic involvement. For SMA-PME: Management may
include standard treatment for hearing loss, scoliosis, seizures, and tremor.
Weakness can be mitigated with the use of orthotics, wheelchairs, or other
assistive devices. Surveillance: For FD: At each visit assess growth with
emphasis on feeding and nutritional status; airway, joint mobility, and
developmental milestones. For SMA-PME: At each visit monitor growth with
emphasis on feeding and nutritional status, pulmonary function, back for
evidence of scoliosis, strength, seizure control, functional capacity (e.g.,
mobility, communication); assess hearing annually.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ASAH1-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal
recessive manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25%
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Sibs with the same two
pathogenic variants would be expected to have the same (or very similar)
phenotype. Once the ASAH1 pathogenic variants have been identified in an
affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal and
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 29595935
