---
reference_id: "PMID:34818480"
title: "Belzutifan, a Potent HIF2α Inhibitor, in the Pacak-Zhuang Syndrome."
authors:
- Kamihara J
- Hamilton KV
- Pollard JA
- Clinton CM
- Madden JA
- Lin J
- Imamovic A
- Wall CB
- Wassner AJ
- Weil BR
- Heeney MM
- Vargas SO
- Kaelin WG Jr
- Janeway KA
- Perini RF
- Zojwalla NJ
- Voss SD
- DuBois SG
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2110051
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenal Gland Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Adrenal Glands/diagnostic imaging, drug effects, pathology"
- "Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Chromogranins/blood
- Female
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Humans
- "Indenes/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Normetanephrine/blood
- "Paraganglioma/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Polycythemia/drug therapy, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- Syndrome
- Whole Genome Sequencing
- Endothelial PAS Domain-Containing Protein 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Belzutifan, a Potent HIF2α Inhibitor, in the Pacak-Zhuang Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kamihara J, Hamilton KV, Pollard JA, Clinton CM, Madden JA, Lin J, Imamovic A, Wall CB, Wassner AJ, Weil BR, Heeney MM, Vargas SO, Kaelin WG Jr, Janeway KA, Perini RF, Zojwalla NJ, Voss SD, DuBois SG
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2110051](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2110051)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 Nov 25;385(22):2059-2065. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2110051.

Belzutifan, a Potent HIF2α Inhibitor, in the Pacak-Zhuang Syndrome.

Kamihara J(1), Hamilton KV(1), Pollard JA(1), Clinton CM(1), Madden JA(1), Lin
J(1), Imamovic A(1), Wall CB(1), Wassner AJ(1), Weil BR(1), Heeney MM(1), Vargas
SO(1), Kaelin WG Jr(1), Janeway KA(1), Perini RF(1), Zojwalla NJ(1), Voss SD(1),
DuBois SG(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Pediatric Oncology (J.K., K.V.H., J.A.P., C.M.C.,
A.I., C.B.W., K.A.J., S.G.D.) and Medical Oncology (W.G.K.), Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, the Divisions of Hematology and Oncology
(J.K., J.A.P., M.M.H., K.A.J., S.G.D.) and Endocrinology (A.J.W.) and the
Departments of Surgery (B.R.W.), Pathology (S.O.V.), and Radiology (S.D.V.),
Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, and the Manton Center for
Orphan Disease Research and the Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston
Children's Hospital (J.A.M., J.L.) - all in Boston; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chevy Chase, MD (W.G.K.); and Merck, Kenilworth, NJ (R.F.P., N.J.Z.).

Comment in
    Endocr Pract. 2022 Jul;28(7):734-735. doi: 10.1016/j.eprac.2022.04.012.

The integration of genomic testing into clinical care enables the use of
individualized approaches to the management of rare diseases. We describe the
use of belzutifan, a potent and selective small-molecule inhibitor of the
protein hypoxia-inducible factor 2α (HIF2α), in a patient with polycythemia and
multiple paragangliomas (the Pacak-Zhuang syndrome). The syndrome was caused in
this patient by somatic mosaicism for an activating mutation in EPAS1. Treatment
with belzutifan led to a rapid and sustained tumor response along with
resolution of hypertension, headaches, and long-standing polycythemia. This case
shows the application of a targeted therapy for the treatment of a patient with
a rare tumor-predisposition syndrome. (Funded by the Morin Family Fund for
Pediatric Cancer and Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2110051
PMCID: PMC11245359
PMID: 34818480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
