---
reference_id: "PMID:20640941"
title: "Infant and childhood diet and type 1 diabetes risk: recent advances and prospects."
authors:
- Norris JM
journal: Curr Diab Rep
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s11892-010-0131-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infant and childhood diet and type 1 diabetes risk: recent advances and prospects.
**Authors:** Norris JM
**Journal:** Curr Diab Rep (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11892-010-0131-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11892-010-0131-5)

## Content

1. Curr Diab Rep. 2010 Oct;10(5):345-9. doi: 10.1007/s11892-010-0131-5.

Infant and childhood diet and type 1 diabetes risk: recent advances and 
prospects.

Norris JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, University of 
Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, 13001 East 17th Place, Aurora, CO 
80045, USA. jill.norris@ucdenver.edu

Type 1 diabetes is a chronic autoimmune disease characterized by a preclinical 
period of autoimmunity. It is well accepted that both genetic and environmental 
factors contribute to disease risk. Given that type 1 diabetes, and its 
preclinical autoimmunity, appear early in life, infant and childhood diet have 
been implicated as potential initiating exposures in the etiology of the 
disease. Several publications in the past year have provided further evidence 
for existing hypotheses regarding the roles of wheat, cow's milk, omega-3 fatty 
acids, and the maternal diet during pregnancy. However, inconsistencies in 
findings between studies suggest the need for collaboration and standardization 
of study methods to move forward in research in this area. One such example of 
this is the TEDDY (The Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young) 
study, which is an international, multicenter birth cohort study with 
standardized recruitment, dietary collection methodologies, and analytic 
approaches.

DOI: 10.1007/s11892-010-0131-5
PMCID: PMC4443269
PMID: 20640941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]