---
reference_id: "PMID:24555660"
title: Frequency of the transthyretin Val30Met mutation in the northern Swedish population.
authors:
- Olsson M
- Jonasson J
- Cederquist K
- Suhr OB
journal: Amyloid
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3109/13506129.2013.860027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of the transthyretin Val30Met mutation in the northern Swedish population.
**Authors:** Olsson M, Jonasson J, Cederquist K, Suhr OB
**Journal:** Amyloid (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3109/13506129.2013.860027](https://doi.org/10.3109/13506129.2013.860027)

## Content

1. Amyloid. 2014 Mar;21(1):18-20. doi: 10.3109/13506129.2013.860027. Epub 2014
Feb  6.

Frequency of the transthyretin Val30Met mutation in the northern Swedish 
population.

Olsson M(1), Jonasson J, Cederquist K, Suhr OB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University , Umeå , 
Sweden and.

By genotyping a large number of samples from the Northern Sweden Health and 
Disease Study cohort, a carrier frequency could be determined for the Skellefteå 
and Lycksele populations. A previous study of the amyloidogenic transthyretin 
mutation TTRV30M in Northern Sweden's endemic area has shown a large variation 
in carrier frequency and penetrance of the trait within the area. However, the 
estimations have been based on a small sample size within the different regions 
in the area and therefore, the wide variation in TTRV30M carrier frequency 
observed between the Lycksele and Skellefteå populations are uncertain. Based on 
a total of 3460 samples, the estimated overall carrier frequency in the two 
regions was 1.82% with a carrier frequency in the Skellefteå and Lycksele 
population of 1.63% and 2.02%, respectively. Thus, the previously reported 
extremely high frequency in the Lycksele region compared to that of the 
Skellefteå region could not be substantiated. However, it does not change the 
previous finding of a surprisingly higher carrier frequency in the population 
from endemic area of Northern Sweden compared to that reported from endemic 
areas in Portugal.

DOI: 10.3109/13506129.2013.860027
PMID: 24555660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]