---
reference_id: "PMID:38027029"
title: "Advances in the treatment of autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis, a look towards the repositioning of drugs."
authors:
- Peña-Corona SI
- Gutiérrez-Ruiz SC
- Echeverria MLDC
- Cortés H
- González-Del Carmen M
- Leyva-Gómez G
journal: Front Pharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1274248
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in the treatment of autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis, a look towards the repositioning of drugs.
**Authors:** Peña-Corona SI, Gutiérrez-Ruiz SC, Echeverria MLDC, Cortés H, González-Del Carmen M, Leyva-Gómez G
**Journal:** Front Pharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphar.2023.1274248](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2023.1274248)

## Content

1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Nov 9;14:1274248. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1274248. 
eCollection 2023.

Advances in the treatment of autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis, a look 
towards the repositioning of drugs.

Peña-Corona SI(1), Gutiérrez-Ruiz SC(1), Echeverria MLDC(1), Cortés H(2), 
González-Del Carmen M(3), Leyva-Gómez G(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Farmacia, Facultad de Química, Universidad Nacional Autónoma 
de México, Ciudad de México, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Medicina Genómica, Departamento de Genómica, Instituto 
Nacional de Rehabilitación Luis Guillermo Ibarra Ibarra, Ciudad de Mexico, 
Mexico.
(3)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Veracruzana, Ciudad Mendoza, Veracruz, 
Mexico.

Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyoses (ARCI) are a skin pathology due to 
genetic causes characterized by a variable degree of desquamation, accompanied 
by erythema. The degree of symptoms is variable, different altered genes are 
involved, and the symptoms drastically affect patients' quality of life. Topical 
treatments are a first-choice strategy due to their ease of application and 
cost; however, enteral administration of retinoids offers greater efficacy, 
although with certain limitations. Despite the treatment alternatives, ARCI will 
persist throughout life, disabling people. Therefore, the search for new 
treatments always remains necessary. Especially repositioning drugs could be a 
short-term alternative to new affordable treatments for patients. Taking 
advantage of extensive knowledge of known drugs or biologics could ensure more 
accessible and possibly lower-cost treatments. This review briefly and concisely 
addresses possible repositioning strategies with drugs and biologics for 
ichthyosis.

Copyright © 2023 Peña-Corona, Gutiérrez-Ruiz, Echeverria, Cortés, González-Del 
Carmen and Leyva-Gómez.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1274248
PMCID: PMC10665491
PMID: 38027029

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.