---
reference_id: "PMID:20197744"
title: Genetics of pigmentation and melanoma predisposition.
authors:
- Pho LN
- Leachman SA
journal: G Ital Dermatol Venereol
year: '2010'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of pigmentation and melanoma predisposition.
**Authors:** Pho LN, Leachman SA
**Journal:** G Ital Dermatol Venereol (2010)

## Content

1. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2010 Feb;145(1):37-45.

Genetics of pigmentation and melanoma predisposition.

Pho LN(1), Leachman SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt 
Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

About 5-10% of human cutaneous malignant melanoma is hereditary and known to 
involve rare germline mutations in highly penetrant, autosomal dominant genes. 
These genes are important in cell cycle control but are not responsible for all 
familial cases of melanoma. Epidemiologic studies have linked specific 
phenotypic traits including fair skin, light-colored eyes, and poor tanning 
ability to melanoma risks. The ability to visually discern and define pigmentary 
phenotypes in humans and in animal models has permitted elucidation of many 
genes involved in pigmentation and melanin biosynthesis. Additional genetic 
epidemiological studies have recently identified a subset of these pigmentation 
genes that are associated with risk for melanoma and other cutaneous 
malignancies as well as photosensitivity. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) 
have unveiled single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or genetic variants in 
MC1R, TPCN2, ASIP, KITLG, NCKX5, TYR, IRF4, OCA2, and TYRP1 pigmentation genes. 
These findings emphasize the contribution of pigmentation pathways to melanoma 
predisposition and tumorigenesis through gene-environment interactions. Since 
pigmentation genes in the melanin synthesis pathway also confer risk for 
cutaneous malignancy, a better understanding of the operative molecular 
mechanisms involved in this relationship has the potential to impact individual 
risk assessment for cutaneous malignant melanoma in the future. This paper is an 
overview of our current understanding of pigmentation gene modifications that 
have been associated with melanoma risk and how these genes can enrich clinical 
management, prevention, and early detection of malignant melanoma.

PMID: 20197744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]