---
reference_id: "PMID:35550817"
title: Prevalence and Outcomes of Primary Left Ventricular Dysfunction in Marfan Syndrome.
authors:
- Connor BS
- Algaze CA
- Narkevičiūtė A
- Anguiano B
- Pariani M
- Zarate YA
- Collins RT
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2022.04.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and Outcomes of Primary Left Ventricular Dysfunction in Marfan Syndrome.
**Authors:** Connor BS, Algaze CA, Narkevičiūtė A, Anguiano B, Pariani M, Zarate YA, Collins RT
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjcard.2022.04.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2022.04.012)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 2022 Jul 15;175:119-126. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2022.04.012.
Epub  2022 May 9.

Prevalence and Outcomes of Primary Left Ventricular Dysfunction in Marfan 
Syndrome.

Connor BS(1), Algaze CA(2), Narkevičiūtė A(3), Anguiano B(3), Pariani M(4), 
Zarate YA(5), Collins RT(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Lucile Packard Children's Hospital, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California. Electronic 
address: bsconnor@stanford.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Lucile Packard Children's Hospital, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics, Cardiovascular Connective Tissue Disorders, 
Lucile Packard Children's Hospital, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo 
Alto, California.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics, Stanford Marfan Center, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California.
(5)Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arizona.

Even in the absence of significant valvular disease, patients with Marfan 
syndrome (MFS) have evidence of impaired left ventricular (LV) performance, 
suggestive of a primary cardiomyopathy. However, the true prevalence and 
long-term outcomes of this disease process remain largely unknown. We performed 
a retrospective analysis of all adult patients with confirmed MFS followed at 
Stanford Health Care. Those with significant valvular regurgitation, coronary 
artery disease, or previous cardiac surgery were excluded. LV systolic 
dysfunction was defined as a LV ejection fraction (LVEF) <55% on transthoracic 
echocardiography. A total of 753 patients with confirmed MFS were followed up 
over a median duration of 8 years (interquartile range 4 to 13). Of those, 241 
patients (53% women, 71% White) met inclusion criteria and comprised the study 
cohort. LV systolic dysfunction was present in 30 patients (12%), with a median 
age of onset of 25 years (interquartile range 19 to 37), median EF of 52% 
(interquartile range 48 to 54), and evidence of clinical heart failure (New York 
Heart Association functional class ≥II) in 10% of patients. LV systolic 
dysfunction was more common in patients with larger aortic root diameters (≥4.0 
cm: Odds ratio = 4.5, 95% confidence interval = 1.2 to 17.1) but was not 
associated with other cardiovascular manifestations of MFS or traditional 
atherosclerotic risk factors. In conclusion, apart from significant valvular 
pathology, LV systolic dysfunction was prevalent in MFS from a young age, 
suggestive of a primary cardiomyopathy. LV dysfunction was typically mild and 
subclinical and occurred more commonly in patients with more pronounced 
aortopathies.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2022.04.012
PMID: 35550817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors have no conflict of 
interest to declare.