---
reference_id: "PMID:27245663"
title: "Germline or somatic GPR101 duplication leads to X-linked acrogigantism: a clinico-pathological and genetic study."
authors:
- Iacovazzo D
- Caswell R
- Bunce B
- Jose S
- Yuan B
- Hernández-Ramírez LC
- Kapur S
- Caimari F
- Evanson J
- Ferraù F
- Dang MN
- Gabrovska P
- Larkin SJ
- Ansorge O
- Rodd C
- Vance ML
- Ramírez-Renteria C
- Mercado M
- Goldstone AP
- Buchfelder M
- Burren CP
- Gurlek A
- Dutta P
- Choong CS
- Cheetham T
- Trivellin G
- Stratakis CA
- Lopes MB
- Grossman AB
- Trouillas J
- Lupski JR
- Ellard S
- Sampson JR
- Roncaroli F
- Korbonits M
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-016-0328-1
keywords:
- "Acromegaly/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Adenoma/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Gene Duplication
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Gigantism/complications, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Male
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics"
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline or somatic GPR101 duplication leads to X-linked acrogigantism: a clinico-pathological and genetic study.
**Authors:** Iacovazzo D, Caswell R, Bunce B, Jose S, Yuan B, Hernández-Ramírez LC, Kapur S, Caimari F, Evanson J, Ferraù F, Dang MN, Gabrovska P, Larkin SJ, Ansorge O, Rodd C, Vance ML, Ramírez-Renteria C, Mercado M, Goldstone AP, Buchfelder M, Burren CP, Gurlek A, Dutta P, Choong CS, Cheetham T, Trivellin G, Stratakis CA, Lopes MB, Grossman AB, Trouillas J, Lupski JR, Ellard S, Sampson JR, Roncaroli F, Korbonits M
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-016-0328-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-016-0328-1)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2016 Jun 1;4(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s40478-016-0328-1.

Germline or somatic GPR101 duplication leads to X-linked acrogigantism: a
clinico-pathological and genetic study.

Iacovazzo D(1), Caswell R(2), Bunce B(2), Jose S(3), Yuan B(4),
Hernández-Ramírez LC(1)(5), Kapur S(1), Caimari F(1), Evanson J(6), Ferraù F(1),
Dang MN(1), Gabrovska P(1), Larkin SJ(7), Ansorge O(7), Rodd C(8), Vance ML(9),
Ramírez-Renteria C(10), Mercado M(10), Goldstone AP(11), Buchfelder M(12),
Burren CP(13), Gurlek A(14), Dutta P(15), Choong CS(16), Cheetham T(17),
Trivellin G(5), Stratakis CA(5), Lopes MB(18), Grossman AB(19), Trouillas J(20),
Lupski JR(4)(21)(22)(23), Ellard S(2), Sampson JR(3), Roncaroli F(24), Korbonits
M(25).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Endocrinology, Barts and The London School of Medicine, London,
EC1M 6BQ, UK.
(2)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter, EX2 5DW, UK.
(3)Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, CF14 4XN, UK.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(5)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), NIH, Bethesda, MD,
20892, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, EC1A 7BE, UK.
(7)Department of Neuropathology, Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 2JD, UK.
(8)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, R3T 2 N2, Canada.
(9)Department of Endocrinology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 22908,
USA.
(10)Endocrinology Service and Experimental Endocrinology Unit, Hospital de
Especialidades Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, IMSS, UNAM, Mexico City, 06720,
Mexico.
(11)Imperial Centre for Endocrinology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust,
W12 0HS, London, UK.
(12)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, 45141,
Germany.
(13)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, University Hospitals Bristol NHS
Foundation Trust, Bristol, BS2 8HW, UK.
(14)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe
University, Ankara, 06100, Turkey.
(15)Department of Endocrinology, PGIMER, Chandigarh, 160012, India.
(16)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Princess Margaret Hospital for
Children, Subiaco, 6008, Australia.
(17)Newcastle University c/o Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal
Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE1 4LP, UK.
(18)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 22908,
USA.
(19)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Radcliffe
Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 2JD, UK.
(20)Department of Pathology, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de
Lyon, Bron, 69500, France.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine Houston, Houston, TX,
77030, USA.
(22)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine Houston, Houston,
TX, 77030, USA.
(23)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(24)Institute of Brain, Behaviour and Mental Health, University of Manchester,
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK.
(25)Centre for Endocrinology, Barts and The London School of Medicine, London,
EC1M 6BQ, UK. m.korbonits@qmul.ac.uk.

Non-syndromic pituitary gigantism can result from AIP mutations or the recently
identified Xq26.3 microduplication causing X-linked acrogigantism (XLAG). Within
Xq26.3, GPR101 is believed to be the causative gene, and the c.924G > C
(p.E308D) variant in this orphan G protein-coupled receptor has been suggested
to play a role in the pathogenesis of acromegaly.We studied 153 patients (58
females and 95 males) with pituitary gigantism. AIP mutation-negative cases were
screened for GPR101 duplication through copy number variation droplet digital
PCR and high-density aCGH. The genetic, clinical and histopathological features
of XLAG patients were studied in detail. 395 peripheral blood and 193 pituitary
tumor DNA samples from acromegaly patients were tested for GPR101 variants.We
identified 12 patients (10 females and 2 males; 7.8 %) with XLAG. In one
subject, the duplicated region only contained GPR101, but not the other three
genes in found to be duplicated in the previously reported patients, defining a
new smallest region of overlap of duplications. While females presented with
germline mutations, the two male patients harbored the mutation in a mosaic
state. Nine patients had pituitary adenomas, while three had hyperplasia. The
comparison of the features of XLAG, AIP-positive and GPR101&AIP-negative
patients revealed significant differences in sex distribution, age at onset,
height, prolactin co-secretion and histological features. The pathological
features of XLAG-related adenomas were remarkably similar. These tumors had a
sinusoidal and lobular architecture. Sparsely and densely granulated
somatotrophs were admixed with lactotrophs; follicle-like structures and
calcifications were commonly observed. Patients with sporadic of
familial acromegaly did not have an increased prevalence of the c.924G > C
(p.E308D) GPR101 variant compared to public databases.In conclusion, XLAG can
result from germline or somatic duplication of GPR101. Duplication of GPR101
alone is sufficient for the development of XLAG, implicating it as the causative
gene within the Xq26.3 region. The pathological features of XLAG-associated
pituitary adenomas are typical and, together with the clinical phenotype, should
prompt genetic testing.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-016-0328-1
PMCID: PMC4888203
PMID: 27245663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
