---
reference_id: "PMID:29571929"
title: "Pediatric Tonsil Cancer: A National and Institutional Perspective."
authors:
- Adil EA
- Medina G
- Cunningham MJ
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.01.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Tonsil Cancer: A National and Institutional Perspective.
**Authors:** Adil EA, Medina G, Cunningham MJ
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.01.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.01.022)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2018 Jun;197:255-261.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.01.022. Epub
2018  Mar 21.

Pediatric Tonsil Cancer: A National and Institutional Perspective.

Adil EA(1), Medina G(2), Cunningham MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Communication Enhancement, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA; Department of Otolaryngology, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA. Electronic address: Eelam.Adil@childrens.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology and Communication Enhancement, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology and Communication Enhancement, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA; Department of Otolaryngology, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2018 Jun;197:3-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.04.018.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate childhood and adolescent tonsil cancer incidence and to 
identify the clinical characteristics indicative of those patients who would 
benefit from urgent operative intervention.
STUDY DESIGN: The Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results 18 database, 
inclusive of national cancer statistics from 1973 to 2013, provided quantitative 
tonsil cancer incidence data. An institutional retrospective chart review of 
pediatric patients diagnosed with tonsil malignancy from January 2013 to January 
2017 identified supplementary qualitative clinical presentation information.
RESULTS: The Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results 18 database included 138 
pediatric patients with tonsil cancer with an age-adjusted incidence rate of 
0.021/100 000 patients per year. The majority of cases were unilateral (79.7%), 
and there was both a male and Caucasian predominance. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
(84.1%) was the most common malignancy, of which Burkitt lymphoma (31.1%), 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (26.8%), and follicular lymphoma (10.1%) were the 
most common subtypes. Five tonsillar malignancy patients were identified upon 
institutional chart review. The majority likewise had non-Hodgkin lymphoma and 
all shared a history of rapid tonsillar enlargement over ≤12 weeks. Significant 
tonsillar asymmetry was present in 4 patients. Four patients additionally 
exhibited prominent cervical lymphadenopathy.
CONCLUSIONS: Pediatric tonsil cancer is rare, with non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
accounting for the majority of pediatric tonsillar malignancies. A high index of 
suspicion is appropriate in children who present with relatively rapid tonsil 
enlargement, tonsillar asymmetry characterized by a difference in tonsillar size 
of ≥2 degrees on the Brodsky scale, or concurrent prominent cervical 
lymphadenopathy.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.01.022
PMID: 29571929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]