---
reference_id: "PMID:31373469"
title: "[Acute kidney failure in differentiation syndrome: a possible complication during therapy with differentiating agents for acute promyelocytic leukemia. A case report]."
authors:
- Di Micco L
- Mirenghi F
- Morelli E
- De Simone E
journal: G Ital Nefrol
year: '2019'
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/chemically induced, therapy"
- Adult
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- Arsenic Trioxide/adverse effects
- Dexamethasone/therapeutic use
- Edema/chemically induced
- Fever of Unknown Origin/chemically induced
- Humans
- Hypotension/chemically induced
- Induction Chemotherapy/adverse effects
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/drug therapy"
- Male
- Renal Dialysis
- Respiratory Distress Syndrome/chemically induced
- Syndrome
- Tretinoin/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Acute kidney failure in differentiation syndrome: a possible complication during therapy with differentiating agents for acute promyelocytic leukemia. A case report].
**Authors:** Di Micco L, Mirenghi F, Morelli E, De Simone E
**Journal:** G Ital Nefrol (2019)

## Content

1. G Ital Nefrol. 2019 Jul 24;36(4):2019-vol4.

[Acute kidney failure in differentiation syndrome: a possible complication
during therapy with differentiating agents for acute promyelocytic leukemia. A
case report].

[Article in Italian]

Di Micco L(1), Mirenghi F(2), Morelli E(3), De Simone E(4).

Author information:
(1)UOC Nefrologia e Dialisi, Ospedale Del Mare, ASL Napoli 1 Centro, Napoli,
Italia.
(2)UOC Nefrologia, Azienda Ospedaliera Dei Colli, Napoli, Italia.
(3)UOC Ematologia-Oncologia e Trapianto, Istituto nazionale Tumori -IRCCS-
Fondazione G. Pascale, Napoli, Italia.
(4)UOC Nefrologia e Dialisi, Ospedale San Giovanni Bosco, Torino, Italia.

Differentiation syndrome (DS), previously known as retinoic acid syndrome or
ATRA (all-trans retinoic acid) or ATO (arsenic trioxide) syndrome, is a
life-threatening complication of the therapy with differentiating agents in
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The latter is a rare subtype
of acute myeloid leukemia and represents a hematological emergency. The clinical
manifestations of DS, after induction therapy with differentiating agents,
include unexplained fever, acute respiratory distress with interstitial
pulmonary infiltrates, unexplained hypotension, peripheral edema, congestive
heart failure and acute renal failure. The therapy is based on early intravenous
administration of high-dose dexamethasone, in order to counteract the cytokine
storm responsible for the DS. Among the supportive measures for the management
of DS, furosemide (in 87% of patients) and dialysis (12% of patients) are used
to manage acute renal failure, peripheral and pulmonary edema. We describe a
case of acute renal failure, treated with haemodialysis, in a young patient with
APL and an early and severe DS after induction therapy. This is a rare
condition, not well known among nephrologists, where early recognition and
treatment are crucial for the prognosis.

Copyright by Società Italiana di Nefrologia SIN, Rome, Italy.

PMID: 31373469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
