---
reference_id: "PMID:7495217"
title: Congestive heart failure due to hypertensive ventricular diastolic dysfunction.
authors:
- Iriarte MM
- Perez Olea J
- Sagastagoitia D
- Molinero E
- Murga N
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(99)80491-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congestive heart failure due to hypertensive ventricular diastolic dysfunction.
**Authors:** Iriarte MM, Perez Olea J, Sagastagoitia D, Molinero E, Murga N
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0002-9149(99)80491-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9149(99)80491-3)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 1995 Nov 2;76(13):43D-47D. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(99)80491-3.

Congestive heart failure due to hypertensive ventricular diastolic dysfunction.

Iriarte MM(1), Perez Olea J, Sagastagoitia D, Molinero E, Murga N.

Author information:
(1)University of the Basque Country Institute of Cardiology, Bilbao (Bizkaia), 
Spain.

Left ventricular (LV) diastolic dysfunction is the first discernible 
manifestation of heart disease in hypertensive patients. Arterial hypertension 
with LV hypertrophy leads to reduced preload followed by impaired cardiac output 
(systolic dysfunction stemming from primary diastolic dysfunction). Diastolic 
dysfunction leads more often than systolic dysfunction to hypertensive heart 
failure and is in many cases clearly distinguishable from heart failure with low 
ejection fraction (EF). Mortality due to heart failure from impaired inotropism 
is higher than mortality due to diastolic dysfunction, but morbidity is lower. 
Hypertensive cardiomyopathies can be divided into 4 ascending categories, 
according to the pathophysiologic and clinical impact of hypertension on the 
heart: Degree I: LV diastolic dysfunction with no associated LV hypertrophy 
Degree II: LV diastolic dysfunction with echocardiographic LV hypertrophy Degree 
IIA: Normal exercise capacity in terms of maximal oxygen consumption Degree IIB: 
Impaired exercise capacity in terms of maximal oxygen consumption Degree III: 
Congestive heart failure (severe dyspnea and radiographically determined 
pulmonary edema with normal (> or = 50%) EF Degree IIIA: LV mass/volume ratio > 
1.8 with little or no myocardial ischemia Degree IIIB: LV mass/volume ratio < 
1.8 with significant myocardial ischemia Degree IV: Profile of dilated 
cardiomyopathy; LV hypertrophy and impaired EF (< 50%).

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9149(99)80491-3
PMID: 7495217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]