---
reference_id: "PMID:33866032"
title: "Randomized Trial of the Efficacy and Safety of Berotralstat (BCX7353) as an Oral Prophylactic Therapy for Hereditary Angioedema: Results of APeX-2 Through 48 Weeks (Part 2)."
authors:
- Wedner HJ
- Aygören-Pürsün E
- Bernstein J
- Craig T
- Gower R
- Jacobs JS
- Johnston DT
- Lumry WR
- Zuraw BL
- Best JM
- Iocca HA
- Murray SC
- Desai B
- Nagy E
- Sheridan WP
- Kiani-Alikhan S
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2021.03.057
keywords:
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/drug therapy"
- Double-Blind Method
- Humans
- Pyrazoles
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized Trial of the Efficacy and Safety of Berotralstat (BCX7353) as an Oral Prophylactic Therapy for Hereditary Angioedema: Results of APeX-2 Through 48 Weeks (Part 2).
**Authors:** Wedner HJ, Aygören-Pürsün E, Bernstein J, Craig T, Gower R, Jacobs JS, Johnston DT, Lumry WR, Zuraw BL, Best JM, Iocca HA, Murray SC, Desai B, Nagy E, Sheridan WP, Kiani-Alikhan S
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2021.03.057](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2021.03.057)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2021 Jun;9(6):2305-2314.e4. doi:
10.1016/j.jaip.2021.03.057. Epub 2021 Apr 15.

Randomized Trial of the Efficacy and Safety of Berotralstat (BCX7353) as an Oral
Prophylactic Therapy for Hereditary Angioedema: Results of APeX-2 Through 48
Weeks (Part 2).

Wedner HJ(1), Aygören-Pürsün E(2), Bernstein J(3), Craig T(4), Gower R(5),
Jacobs JS(6), Johnston DT(7), Lumry WR(8), Zuraw BL(9), Best JM(10), Iocca
HA(10), Murray SC(10), Desai B(10), Nagy E(10), Sheridan WP(11), Kiani-Alikhan
S(12).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, John T. Milliken Department of Internal
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Mo.
(2)Hereditary Angioedema Center, Department of Children and Adolescents,
University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Division of Immunology, Rheumatology, and Allergy, Department of Medicine,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(4)Division of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
Pediatrics, and Graduate Studies, Penn State University, Hershey, Pa.
(5)University of Washington School of Medicine, Marycliff Clinical Research,
Spokane, Wash.
(6)Allergy & Asthma Clinical Research, Walnut Creek, Calif.
(7)Carolina Allergy and Asthma Center, Charlotte, NC.
(8)Allergy & Asthma Specialists of Dallas, Dallas, Texas.
(9)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of California San Diego, San Diego, Calif.
(10)BioCryst Pharmaceuticals, Durham, NC.
(11)BioCryst Pharmaceuticals, Durham, NC. Electronic address:
BSheridan@biocryst.com.
(12)Department of Immunology, Royal London Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust,
London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Berotralstat (BCX7353) is a recently approved, oral, once-daily
kallikrein inhibitor for hereditary angioedema (HAE) prophylaxis. In the APeX-2
trial, berotralstat reduced HAE attack rates over 24 weeks, with a favorable
safety and tolerability profile.
OBJECTIVE: Evaluate berotralstat safety, tolerability, and effectiveness over 48
weeks.
METHODS: APeX-2 is a phase 3, parallel-group, multicenter trial (NCT03485911) in
patients with HAE due to C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency. Part 1 was
double-blind and placebo-controlled, with patients randomized to 24 weeks of
berotralstat 150 mg, 110 mg, or placebo. In part 2, patients continued
berotralstat the same dose or, if initially randomized to placebo, were
rerandomized to berotralstat 150 mg or 110 mg through weeks 24 to 48. The
primary end point was safety and tolerability.
RESULTS: One hundred eight patients received 1 or more doses of berotralstat in
part 2. Treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) occurred in 30 of 39 patients
(77%) in the placebo group during part 1, and 25 of 34 patients (74%)
re-randomized from placebo to berotralstat 110 mg or 150 mg in part 2, with
drug-related TEAEs in 13 of 39 (33%), and 11 of 34 (32%) in the same groups.
Most TEAEs were mild or moderate, with no serious drug-related TEAEs. The most
common TEAEs were upper respiratory tract infections, abdominal pain, diarrhea,
and vomiting. Mean (±standard error of the mean) monthly attack rates at
baseline and week 48 were 3.06 (±0.25) and 1.06 (±0.25) in the berotralstat
150mg 48-week group and 2.97 (±0.21) and 1.35 (±0.33) in the berotralstat 110mg
48-week group.
CONCLUSIONS: The safety, tolerability, and effectiveness of berotralstat were
maintained over 48 weeks of treatment.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2021.03.057
PMID: 33866032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
