---
reference_id: "PMID:27658762"
title: "Efficacy and safety of canakinumab in Schnitzler syndrome: A multicenter randomized placebo-controlled study."
authors:
- Krause K
- Tsianakas A
- Wagner N
- Fischer J
- Weller K
- Metz M
- Church MK
- Maurer M
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.07.041
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized"
- C-Reactive Protein/analysis
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Quality of Life
- Schnitzler Syndrome/drug therapy
- Serum Amyloid A Protein/analysis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of canakinumab in Schnitzler syndrome: A multicenter randomized placebo-controlled study.
**Authors:** Krause K, Tsianakas A, Wagner N, Fischer J, Weller K, Metz M, Church MK, Maurer M
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2016.07.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.07.041)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017 Apr;139(4):1311-1320. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2016.07.041. Epub 2016 Sep 19.

Efficacy and safety of canakinumab in Schnitzler syndrome: A multicenter 
randomized placebo-controlled study.

Krause K(1), Tsianakas A(2), Wagner N(3), Fischer J(4), Weller K(5), Metz M(5), 
Church MK(5), Maurer M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany; Autoinflammation Reference Center Charité, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: 
karoline.krause@charite.de.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Klinikum Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Universitätsklinik Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(5)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(6)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany; Autoinflammation Reference Center Charité, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Schnitzler syndrome is an adult-onset autoinflammatory disease 
characterized by urticarial exanthema and monoclonal gammopathy accompanied by 
systemic symptoms such as fever, bone, and muscle pain. Up to now, approved 
treatment options are not available.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed effects of the anti-IL-1β mAb canakinumab on the clinical 
signs and symptoms of Schnitzler syndrome.
METHODS: In this phase II, randomized placebo-controlled multicenter study, 20 
patients with active disease enrolled in 4 German study centers. Patients were 
randomly assigned to receive single subcutaneous canakinumab 150 mg or placebo 
injections for 7 days, followed by a 16-week open-label phase with canakinumab 
injections on confirmed relapse of symptoms. The primary end point was the 
proportion of patients with complete clinical response evaluated by physician 
global assessment at day 7. Key secondary end points included changes in 
patient-reported disease activity (Schnitzler activity score), inflammation 
markers (C-reactive protein and serum amyloid A), and quality-of-life 
assessments (Dermatology Life Quality Index and 36-item short form health 
survey).
RESULTS: The proportion of patients with complete clinical response at day 7 was 
significantly higher (P = .001) in the canakinumab-treated group (n = 5 of 7) 
than in the placebo group (n = 0 of 13). Levels of inflammation markers 
C-reactive protein and serum amyloid A and quality-of-life scores were 
significantly reduced in canakinumab-treated but not in placebo-treated 
individuals. Positive effects continued up to 16 weeks. Adverse events were 
manageable and included respiratory tract infections, gastrointestinal symptoms, 
and hypertension.
CONCLUSIONS: In this first placebo-controlled study, canakinumab was effective 
in patients with Schnitzler syndrome, and thus canakinumab may be further 
evaluated as a therapeutic option for this rare disease.

Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.07.041
PMID: 27658762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]