---
reference_id: "PMID:30293640"
title: "Thoraco-Abdominal Abnormalities in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: Situs Inversus and Heterotaxy."
authors:
- Olson AJ
- Krentz AD
- Finta KM
- Okorie UC
- Haws RM
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.08.068
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thoraco-Abdominal Abnormalities in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: Situs Inversus and Heterotaxy.
**Authors:** Olson AJ, Krentz AD, Finta KM, Okorie UC, Haws RM
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.08.068](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.08.068)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2019 Jan;204:31-37. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.08.068. Epub 2018 Oct
 4.

Thoraco-Abdominal Abnormalities in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: Situs Inversus and 
Heterotaxy.

Olson AJ(1), Krentz AD(2), Finta KM(1), Okorie UC(1), Haws RM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Marshfield Clinic, Marshfield, WI.
(2)PreventionGenetics, Marshfield, WI.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Marshfield Clinic, Marshfield, WI. Electronic 
address: haws.robert@marshfieldclinic.org.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2020 Mar;218:264. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2019.10.051.
    J Pediatr. 2020 Mar;218:263-264. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2019.10.050.

OBJECTIVES: To characterize the diversity and prevalence of thoraco-abdominal 
abnormalities in Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), a model ciliopathy for 
understanding the role of cilia in human health.
STUDY DESIGN: The Clinical Registry Investigating BBS, a worldwide registry 
exploring the phenotype and natural history of BBS, was used to conduct the 
study. Protected health information was obtained by subject or family interview 
and Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act-approved release of data 
including imaging studies and genetic testing. Echocardiography and imaging 
findings were independently confirmed by 2 cardiologists.
RESULTS: Thoraco-abdominal abnormalities were identified in 6 of 368 (1.6%) 
subjects with a minimum prevalence of 1 in 60 Clinical Registry Investigating 
BBS participants. Diverse laterality defects were observed suggesting that the 
underlying ciliopathy randomly alters embryonic left-right axis orientation. 
Congenital heart disease, common in heterotaxy, was present in 2 subjects. 
Additional defects, uncommonly reported in BBS, were observed in the central 
nervous, genitourinary, gastrointestinal, and musculoskeletal systems in the 
subjects. No BBS genotype was favored in the cohort. One subject had genetic and 
clinical phenotype diagnostic of both primary ciliary dyskinesia and BBS.
CONCLUSIONS: The variety of thoraco-abdominal abnormalities in BBS suggests the 
pleiotropic nature of these anomalies is not confined to a single pattern or 
genotype. Clinicians providing care to individuals with BBS should consider the 
increased prevalence of thoraco-abdominal anomalies in BBS. Individuals with 
features suggestive of other ciliopathies, such as primary ciliary dyskinesia, 
should undergo further evaluation for additional genetic disorders.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02329210.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.08.068
PMID: 30293640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]