---
reference_id: "PMID:39305655"
title: "PPP3CA gene-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy: Expanding the electro-clinical phenotype."
authors:
- Favaro J
- Iodice A
- Nosadini M
- Asta F
- Toldo I
- Ancona C
- Cavaliere E
- Pelizza MF
- Casara G
- Parmeggiani L
- Sartori S
journal: Seizure
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2024.08.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PPP3CA gene-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy: Expanding the electro-clinical phenotype.
**Authors:** Favaro J, Iodice A, Nosadini M, Asta F, Toldo I, Ancona C, Cavaliere E, Pelizza MF, Casara G, Parmeggiani L, Sartori S
**Journal:** Seizure (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.seizure.2024.08.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seizure.2024.08.017)

## Content

1. Seizure. 2024 Oct;121:253-261. doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2024.08.017. Epub 2024
Aug  24.

PPP3CA gene-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy: Expanding the 
electro-clinical phenotype.

Favaro J(1), Iodice A(2), Nosadini M(3), Asta F(2), Toldo I(3), Ancona C(3), 
Cavaliere E(4), Pelizza MF(4), Casara G(5), Parmeggiani L(5), Sartori S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Child's Health, University of Padua, Padua, Italy; 
Paediatric Neurology and Neurophysiology Unit - University Hospital of Padua, 
Padova, Italy. Electronic address: jacopo.favaro@studenti.unipd.it.
(2)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, S. Chiara Hospital, APSS, Trento, Italy.
(3)Department of Women's and Child's Health, University of Padua, Padua, Italy; 
Paediatric Neurology and Neurophysiology Unit - University Hospital of Padua, 
Padova, Italy.
(4)Paediatric Neurology and Neurophysiology Unit - University Hospital of Padua, 
Padova, Italy.
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Bolzano Hospital, Bolzano, Italy.

PURPOSE: The objective of this study is to characterize the electro-clinical 
phenotype of individuals affected by the rare PPP3CA gene-related developmental 
and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE).
METHODS: We provide a detailed electro-clinical description of four previously 
unreported subjects, with unremarkable structural brain MRI and a normal 
screening for inborn errors of metabolism, who carry pathogenic variants within 
the regulatory domain of the PPP3CA gene, which encodes for calcineurin. We also 
conducted a literature review via PubMed and SCOPUS (up to December 2023) to 
collect all the studies reporting clinical details of subjects with PPP3CA 
pathogenic variants within the regulatory domain.
RESULTS: Our in-depth investigation reveals two distinct electro-clinical 
phenotypes with unique interictal and ictal patterns. Pathogenic variants within 
the calmodulin-binding domain result in childhood-onset epilepsy with focal and 
generalized seizures, developmental and intellectual impairments. Pathogenic 
variants within the regulatory domain lead to early onset drug-resistant severe 
epilepsy and potentially fatal outcomes. Comparative analysis with existing 
literature corroborates the notion that truncating mutations, prevalent in the 
regulatory domain but also possible in the calmodulin-binding domain, 
consistently associate with more profound disabilities and drug-resistant 
epilepsy.
CONCLUSION: Our study emphasizes the critical role of pathogenic variants' type 
and location on the severity of PPP3CA-related DEE. We also speculate, based on 
peculiar EEG patterns, on potential pathophysiological mechanisms involving 
calcineurin dysfunction and calcium homeostasis. In order to improve our 
understanding of this rare DEE, we need both collaborative efforts to gather 
larger cohorts and further experimental studies.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.seizure.2024.08.017
PMID: 39305655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None of the 
authors has any conflict of interest to disclose.