---
reference_id: "PMID:38113962"
title: Fas(lpr) gene dosage tunes the extent of lymphoproliferation and T cell differentiation in lupus.
authors:
- Bohat R
- Liang X
- Chen Y
- Xu C
- Zheng N
- Guerrero A
- Hou J
- Jaffery R
- Egan NA
- Li Y
- Tang Y
- Unsal E
- Robles A
- Chen S
- Major AM
- Elldakli H
- Chung SH
- Liang H
- Hicks MJ
- Du Y
- Lin JS
- Chen X
- Mohan C
- Peng W
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2023.109874
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fas(lpr) gene dosage tunes the extent of lymphoproliferation and T cell differentiation in lupus.
**Authors:** Bohat R, Liang X, Chen Y, Xu C, Zheng N, Guerrero A, Hou J, Jaffery R, Egan NA, Li Y, Tang Y, Unsal E, Robles A, Chen S, Major AM, Elldakli H, Chung SH, Liang H, Hicks MJ, Du Y, Lin JS, Chen X, Mohan C, Peng W
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2023.109874](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2023.109874)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2024 Jan;258:109874. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2023.109874. Epub 2023 
Dec 17.

Fas(lpr) gene dosage tunes the extent of lymphoproliferation and T cell 
differentiation in lupus.

Bohat R(1), Liang X(1), Chen Y(2), Xu C(1), Zheng N(1), Guerrero A(1), Hou J(1), 
Jaffery R(1), Egan NA(1), Li Y(2), Tang Y(3), Unsal E(1), Robles A(1), Chen 
S(1), Major AM(4), Elldakli H(1), Chung SH(1), Liang H(5), Hicks MJ(4), Du Y(6), 
Lin JS(7), Chen X(8), Mohan C(9), Peng W(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 
77204, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX 
77204, United States of America.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, United States of America; 
UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson, Houston, TX 77030, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX 77030, United States of America.
(5)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, United States of America; 
Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, United States of America.
(6)Department of Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Penn State College of 
Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, United States of America.
(7)Section of Nephrology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, United States of America.
(8)Department of Neurology, Mass General Institute for Neurodegenerative 
Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02114, United States of America; Aligning Science Across Parkinson's (ASAP) 
Collaborative Research Network, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, United States of America.
(9)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX 
77204, United States of America; Aligning Science Across Parkinson's (ASAP) 
Collaborative Research Network, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, United States of America.
(10)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 
77204, United States of America; Aligning Science Across Parkinson's (ASAP) 
Collaborative Research Network, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, United States of America. 
Electronic address: wpeng2@Central.uh.edu.

Sle1 and Faslpr are two lupus susceptibility loci that lead to manifestations of 
systemic lupus erythematosus. To evaluate the dosage effects of Faslpr in 
determining cellular and serological phenotypes associated with lupus, we 
developed a new C57BL/6 (B6) congenic lupus strain, B6.Sle1/Sle1.Faslpr/+ 
(Sle1homo.lprhet) and compared it with B6.Faslpr/lpr (lprhomo), B6.Sle1/Sle1 
(Sle1homo), and B6.Sle1/Sle1.Faslpr/lpr (Sle1homo.lprhomo) strains. Whereas 
Sle1homo.lprhomo mice exhibited profound lymphoproliferation and early 
mortality, Sle1homo.lprhet mice had a lifespan comparable to B6 mice, with no 
evidence of splenomegaly or lymphadenopathy. Compared to B6 monogenic lupus 
strains, Sle1homo.lprhet mice exhibited significantly elevated serum ANA 
antibodies and increased proteinuria. Additionally, Sle1homo.lprhet T cells had 
an increased propensity to differentiate into Th1 cells. Gene dose effects of 
Faslpr were noted in upregulating serum IL-1⍺, IL-2, and IL-27. Taken together, 
Sle1homo.lprhet strain is a new C57BL/6-based model of lupus, ideal for genetic 
studies, autoantibody repertoire investigation, and for exploring Th1 effector 
cell skewing without early-age lymphoproliferative autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2023.109874
PMCID: PMC12374782
PMID: 38113962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest W. Peng served 
as an advisor for Fresh Wind Biotechnologies. No potential conflicts of interest 
were disclosed by other authors.