---
reference_id: "PMID:15750039"
title: Mislocalization of DNAH5 and DNAH9 in respiratory cells from patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- Fliegauf M
- Olbrich H
- Horvath J
- Wildhaber JH
- Zariwala MA
- Kennedy M
- Knowles MR
- Omran H
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.200411-1583OC
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mislocalization of DNAH5 and DNAH9 in respiratory cells from patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Fliegauf M, Olbrich H, Horvath J, Wildhaber JH, Zariwala MA, Kennedy M, Knowles MR, Omran H
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.200411-1583OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.200411-1583OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005 Jun 15;171(12):1343-9. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.200411-1583OC. Epub 2005 Mar 4.

Mislocalization of DNAH5 and DNAH9 in respiratory cells from patients with 
primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Fliegauf M(1), Olbrich H, Horvath J, Wildhaber JH, Zariwala MA, Kennedy M, 
Knowles MR, Omran H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79106 
Freiburg, Germany.

RATIONALE: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetically heterogeneous 
disorder characterized by recurrent infections of the airways and situs inversus 
in half of the affected offspring. The most frequent genetic defects comprise 
recessive mutations of DNAH5 and DNAI1, which encode outer dynein arm (ODA) 
components. Diagnosis of PCD usually relies on electron microscopy, which is 
technically demanding and sometimes difficult to interpret.
METHODS: Using specific antibodies, we determined the subcellular localization 
of the ODA heavy chains DNAH5 and DNAH9 in human respiratory epithelial and 
sperm cells of patients with PCD and control subjects by high-resolution 
immunofluorescence imaging. We also assessed cilia and sperm tail function by 
high-speed video microscopy.
RESULTS: In normal ciliated airway epithelium, DNAH5 and DNAH9 show a specific 
regional distribution along the ciliary axoneme, indicating the existence of at 
least two distinct ODA types. DNAH5 was completely or only distally absent from 
the respiratory ciliary axoneme in patients with PCD with DNAH5- (n = 3) or 
DNAI1- (n = 1) mutations, respectively, and instead accumulated at the 
microtubule-organizing centers. In contrast to respiratory cilia, sperm tails 
from a patient with DNAH5 mutations had normal ODA heavy chain distribution, 
suggesting different modes of ODA generation in these cell types. Blinded 
investigation of a large cohort of patients with PCD and control subjects 
identified DNAH5 mislocalization in all patients diagnosed with ODA defects by 
electron microscopy (n = 16). Cilia with complete axonemal DNAH5 deficiency were 
immotile, whereas cilia with distal DNAH5 deficiency showed residual motility.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunofluorescence staining can detect ODA defects, which will 
possibly aid PCD diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200411-1583OC
PMCID: PMC2718478
PMID: 15750039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]