---
reference_id: "PMID:39029407"
title: Epidemiology and outcome of infantile spasms in Denmark in 1996-2019.
authors:
- Winther CCH
- Klein-Petersen AW
- Preel M
- Kofoed IR
- Bo Nissen I
- Axelgaard S
- Green J
- Miranda MJ
- Hoei-Hansen CE
journal: Seizure
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2024.07.008
keywords:
- Humans
- Denmark/epidemiology
- "Spasms, Infantile/epidemiology, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- Infant
- Female
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Vigabatrin/therapeutic use
- Electroencephalography
- Registries
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and outcome of infantile spasms in Denmark in 1996-2019.
**Authors:** Winther CCH, Klein-Petersen AW, Preel M, Kofoed IR, Bo Nissen I, Axelgaard S, Green J, Miranda MJ, Hoei-Hansen CE
**Journal:** Seizure (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.seizure.2024.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seizure.2024.07.008)

## Content

1. Seizure. 2024 Aug;120:173-179. doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2024.07.008. Epub 2024
Jul  11.

Epidemiology and outcome of infantile spasms in Denmark in 1996-2019.

Winther CCH(1), Klein-Petersen AW(2), Preel M(3), Kofoed IR(4), Bo Nissen I(5),
Axelgaard S(6), Green J(7), Miranda MJ(8), Hoei-Hansen CE(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department Paediatric and Adolescent
Medicine, University Hospital of Herlev and Gentofte, Herlev, Denmark.
Electronic address: camillehw@live.dk.
(2)Department Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital of Herlev
and Gentofte, Herlev, Denmark.
(3)Department of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of Aalborg, Aalborg, Denmark.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Kolding University Hospital, Kolding, Denmark.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Herning Hospital, Herning, Denmark.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.
(8)Department Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital of Herlev
and Gentofte, Herlev, Denmark; Department of Clinical Medicine, University of
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Department of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Clinical Medicine, University
of Copenhagen, Denmark.

PURPOSE: To investigate the treatment of infantile epileptic spasm syndrome
(IESS) in Denmark.
METHODS: National retrospective cohort study of all patients born 1996-2019 who
had a diagnosis of IESS in the National Patient Registry. Medical records were
reviewed to evaluate the diagnosis. Patients were included if semiology was
compatible with IESS, or if unclear semiology if there was an abnormal EEG or
EEG with hypsarrhythmia.
RESULTS: Number of cases with a register based IESS diagnosis was 538. Medical
records were unavailable in 48 and 164 did not fulfil the inclusion criteria.
Thereby the cohort consisted of 326 children. Mean age at onset of IESS was 5.9
months and mean lead time to treatment was 26.6 days (SD= 63.5). Consistent with
the Danish treatment guidelines most patients received vigabatrin as first
treatment. In the cohort 44.7 % of patients solely received vigabatrin, whereas
combined vigabatrin and corticosteroid was given to 28.3 % (either
hydrocortisone or prednisolone). Other anti-seizure medication was given to 28.4
% within 90 days of IESS onset. Aetiology was prenatal (40.3 %), perinatal (10.5
%), postnatal (3.7 %), with unknown timing (10.2 %) or with unknown aetiology
(33.5 %). The cohort was followed to a mean age of 8.2 years. At latest
follow-up severe neurodevelopmental outcome was seen in 44.2 % and 76.4 % still
had epilepsy. The incidence of IESS was 22 per 100.000 live births.
CONCLUSION: In Denmark treatment algorithm is based on start of treatment with
vigabatrin. A total of 44.7 % became seizure free by vigabatrin.
Neurodevelopmental outcome was severe. A national incidence could be
established.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.seizure.2024.07.008
PMID: 39029407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
