---
reference_id: "PMID:37800171"
title: "SETting up the genome: KMT2D and KDM6A genomic function in the Kabuki syndrome craniofacial developmental disorder."
authors:
- Shpargel KB
- Quickstad G
journal: Birth Defects Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/bdr2.2253
keywords:
- Chromatin/genetics
- Child
- "Histone Demethylases/genetics, metabolism"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Humans
- Genomics
- Histones/genetics
- Lysine/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Neoplasm Proteins
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Face/abnormalities
- Hematologic Diseases
- Vestibular Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SETting up the genome: KMT2D and KDM6A genomic function in the Kabuki syndrome craniofacial developmental disorder.
**Authors:** Shpargel KB, Quickstad G
**Journal:** Birth Defects Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bdr2.2253](https://doi.org/10.1002/bdr2.2253)

## Content

1. Birth Defects Res. 2023 Dec 1;115(20):1885-1898. doi: 10.1002/bdr2.2253. Epub 
2023 Oct 6.

SETting up the genome: KMT2D and KDM6A genomic function in the Kabuki syndrome 
craniofacial developmental disorder.

Shpargel KB(1), Quickstad G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND: Kabuki syndrome is a congenital developmental disorder that is 
characterized by distinctive facial gestalt and skeletal abnormalities. Although 
rare, the disorder shares clinical features with several related craniofacial 
syndromes that manifest from mutations in chromatin-modifying enzymes. 
Collectively, these clinical studies underscore the crucial, concerted functions 
of chromatin factors in shaping developmental genome structure and driving 
cellular transcriptional states. Kabuki syndrome predominantly results from 
mutations in KMT2D, a histone H3 lysine 4 methylase, or KDM6A, a histone H3 
lysine 27 demethylase.
AIMS: In this review, we summarize the research efforts to model Kabuki syndrome 
in vivo to understand the cellular and molecular mechanisms that lead to the 
craniofacial and skeletal pathogenesis that defines the disorder.
DISCUSSION: As several studies have indicated the importance of KMT2D and KDM6A 
function through catalytic-independent mechanisms, we highlight noncanonical 
roles for these enzymes as recruitment centers for alternative chromatin and 
transcriptional machinery.

© 2023 The Authors. Birth Defects Research published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/bdr2.2253
PMCID: PMC11190966
PMID: 37800171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.