---
reference_id: "PMID:39730074"
title: "Cholangiocarcinoma Targeted Therapies: Mechanisms of Action and Resistance."
authors:
- Ellis H
- Braconi C
- Valle JW
- Bardeesy N
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2024.11.005
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cholangiocarcinoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Bile Duct Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy/methods
- Animals
- Precision Medicine
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholangiocarcinoma Targeted Therapies: Mechanisms of Action and Resistance.
**Authors:** Ellis H, Braconi C, Valle JW, Bardeesy N
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2024.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2024.11.005)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2025 Mar;195(3):437-452. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2024.11.005. Epub 
2024 Dec 19.

Cholangiocarcinoma Targeted Therapies: Mechanisms of Action and Resistance.

Ellis H(1), Braconi C(2), Valle JW(3), Bardeesy N(4).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Krantz Family Center for Cancer 
Research, Boston, Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom; 
Beatson West of Scotland Cancer Centre, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Cholangiocarcinoma Foundation, Herriman, Utah; Division of Cancer Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Krantz Family Center for Cancer 
Research, Boston, Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. 
Electronic address: bardeesy.nabeel@mgh.harvard.edu.

Cholangiocarcinoma is an aggressive bile duct malignancy with heterogeneous 
genomic features. Although most patients receive standard-of-care 
chemotherapy/immunotherapy, genomic changes that can be targeted with 
established or emerging therapeutics are common. Accordingly, precision medicine 
strategies are transforming the next-line treatment for patient subsets. Hotspot 
IDH1 mutations and activating fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 fusions occur 
frequently, and small-molecule inhibitors against these alterations are US Food 
and Drug Administration approved. Translational and basic science studies have 
elucidated the mechanisms of response and resistance in cholangiocarcinoma, 
providing insights into these targets that extend to other cancers. Additional 
US Food and Drug Administration-approved and National Comprehensive Cancer 
Network guideline-recommended treatments for recurrent genomic changes include 
BRAF inhibition (BRAF-V600E) and trastumazab deruxtecan (human epidermal growth 
factor receptor 2 amplification). Furthermore, ongoing clinical trials show 
promising results with KRAS inhibition (KRAS-codon 12 mutations), PRTM5 
inhibition, alone or with methylthioadenosine inhibition (5-methylthioadenosine 
phosphorylase deletion), and murine double minute 2 inhibition (murine double 
minute 2 amplification). Despite these advances, the rate, depth, and duration 
of response to each treatment need improvement. Moreover, many patients do not 
have currently targetable genotypes. This review examines the clinical efficacy 
and mechanisms of resistance associated with these treatments, as well as 
insights into the molecular and biological effects of pathway activation and 
inhibition, based on study of patient samples and preclinical models. It also 
explores strategies to overcome resistance and possible precision medicine 
approaches for additional patient subsets.

Copyright © 2025 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2024.11.005
PMCID: PMC11841491
PMID: 39730074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement H.E. received honoraria as 
a speaker (Jazz Pharmaceuticals) and consultant (Cogent Biosciences and Jazz 
Pharmaceuticals). C.B. received honoraria as a speaker (AstraZeneca and Incyte) 
and consultant (Incyte, Servier, Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Jazz 
Therapeutics, and Taiho), received research funds (Avacta, Medannex, and 
Servier), and her spouse is an employee of AstraZeneca. J.W.V. received 
honoraria/served on advisory boards (personal: AstraZeneca, Incyte, Taiho 
Oncology, Servier, and Jazz Pharmaceuticals; institution: Redx Pharma, Cogent 
Biosciences, Owkin, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, and Ocosil).