---
reference_id: "PMID:16199712"
title: "WAGR syndrome: a clinical review of 54 cases."
authors:
- Fischbach BV
- Trout KL
- Lewis J
- Luis CA
- Sika M
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2004-0467
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "WAGR Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WAGR syndrome: a clinical review of 54 cases.
**Authors:** Fischbach BV, Trout KL, Lewis J, Luis CA, Sika M
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2004-0467](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2004-0467)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2005 Oct;116(4):984-8. doi: 10.1542/peds.2004-0467.

WAGR syndrome: a clinical review of 54 cases.

Fischbach BV(1), Trout KL, Lewis J, Luis CA, Sika M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA. fischbachb@dneph.com

WAGR syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by a de novo deletion of 
11p13 and is clinically associated with Wilms' tumor, aniridia, genitourinary 
anomalies, and mental retardation (W-A-G-R). Although the genotypic defects in 
WAGR syndrome have been well established, the large variety of phenotypic 
manifestations of the syndrome has never been reported. We report on 54 cases of 
WAGR syndrome to demonstrate both the classical clinical signs and nonclassical 
manifestations found in a large population of individuals with this disorder. An 
understanding of WAGR syndrome and its clinical findings can provide important 
insight regarding the functions of the involved genetic region. Recommendations 
for diagnosis, evaluation, and surveillance of patients with WAGR syndrome are 
also presented.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2004-0467
PMID: 16199712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]