---
reference_id: "PMID:34938205"
title: Ectodysplasin A/Ectodysplasin A Receptor System and Their Roles in Multiple Diseases.
authors:
- Cai Z
- Deng X
- Jia J
- Wang D
- Yuan G
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.788411
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ectodysplasin A/Ectodysplasin A Receptor System and Their Roles in Multiple Diseases.
**Authors:** Cai Z, Deng X, Jia J, Wang D, Yuan G
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2021.788411](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2021.788411)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2021 Dec 6;12:788411. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.788411.
eCollection  2021.

Ectodysplasin A/Ectodysplasin A Receptor System and Their Roles in Multiple 
Diseases.

Cai Z(1), Deng X(1), Jia J(1), Wang D(1), Yuan G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, 
Zhenjiang, China.

Ectodysplasin A (EDA) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family of 
ligands that was initially reported to induce the formation of various 
ectodermal derivatives during normal prenatal development. EDA exerts its 
biological activity as two splice variants, namely, EDA-A1 and EDA-A2. The 
former binds to the EDA receptor (EDAR), resulting in the recruitment of the 
intracellular EDAR-associated death domain (EDARADD) adapter protein and the 
activation of the NF-κB signaling pathway, while the latter binds to a different 
receptor, EDA2R, also known as X-linked ectodermal dysplasia receptor (XEDAR). 
Inactivation mutation of the EDA gene or the genes coding for its receptors can 
result in hypohidrosis ectodermal dysplasia (HED), a condition that is 
characterized by oligotrichosis, edentulosis or oligodontia, and oligohidrosis 
or anhidrosis. Recently, as a new liver factor, EDA is gradually known and 
endowed with some new functions. EDA levels were observed to be upregulated in 
several metabolic diseases, such as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), 
obesity, and insulin resistance. In addition, EDA and its receptors have been 
implicated in tumor pathogenesis through the regulation of tumor cell 
proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, and migration. Here, we first review 
the role of EDA and its two-receptor system in various signaling pathways and 
then discuss the physiological and pathological roles of EDA and its receptors.

Copyright © 2021 Cai, Deng, Jia, Wang and Yuan.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.788411
PMCID: PMC8685516
PMID: 34938205

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.