---
reference_id: "PMID:20848653"
title: Generation and analysis of the thiazide-sensitive Na+ -Cl- cotransporter (Ncc/Slc12a3) Ser707X knockin mouse as a model of Gitelman syndrome.
authors:
- Yang SS
- Lo YF
- Yu IS
- Lin SW
- Chang TH
- Hsu YJ
- Chao TK
- Sytwu HK
- Uchida S
- Sasaki S
- Lin SH
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21364
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Calcium Channels/metabolism
- Cell Size/drug effects
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- Diet
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Gene Knock-In Techniques/methods
- "Gitelman Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Kidney/drug effects, metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Phenotype
- "Potassium Chloride/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- "RNA Stability/drug effects, genetics"
- "Receptors, Drug/genetics, metabolism"
- Serine/genetics
- Sodium/metabolism
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 3"
- "Symporters/genetics, metabolism"
- Thiazides/pharmacology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation and analysis of the thiazide-sensitive Na+ -Cl- cotransporter (Ncc/Slc12a3) Ser707X knockin mouse as a model of Gitelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Yang SS, Lo YF, Yu IS, Lin SW, Chang TH, Hsu YJ, Chao TK, Sytwu HK, Uchida S, Sasaki S, Lin SH
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21364](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21364)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Dec;31(12):1304-15. doi: 10.1002/humu.21364. Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Generation and analysis of the thiazide-sensitive Na+ -Cl- cotransporter
(Ncc/Slc12a3) Ser707X knockin mouse as a model of Gitelman syndrome.

Yang SS(1), Lo YF, Yu IS, Lin SW, Chang TH, Hsu YJ, Chao TK, Sytwu HK, Uchida S,
Sasaki S, Lin SH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

Gitelman syndrome (GS) is characterized by salt-losing hypotension,
hypomagnesemia, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, and hypocalciuria. To better
model human GS caused by a specific mutation in the thiazide-sensitive Na(+)
-Cl(-) cotransporter (NCC) gene SLC12A3, we generated a nonsense Ncc Ser707X
knockin mouse corresponding to human p.Ser710X (c.2135C>A), a recurrent mutation
with severe phenotypes in Chinese GS patients. Compared with wild-type or
heterozygous littermates, homozygous (Hom) knockin mice fully recapitulated the
phenotype of human GS. The markedly reduced Ncc mRNA and virtually absent Ncc
protein expression in kidneys of Hom mice was primarily due to nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay (NMD) surveillance mechanisms. Expression of epithelial Na(+) channel
(Enac), Ca(2+) channels (Trpv5 and Trpv6), and K(+) channels (Romk1 and maxi-K)
were significantly increased. Late distal convoluted tubules (DCT) volume was
increased and DCT cell ultrastructure appeared intact. High K(+) intake could
not correct hypokalemia but caused a further increase in maxi-K but not Romk1
expression. Renal tissue from a patient with GS also showed the enhanced TRPV5
and ROMK1 expression in distal tubules. We suggest that the upregulation of
TRPV5/6 and of ROMK1 and Maxi-K may contribute to hypocalciuria and hypokalemia
in Ncc Ser707X knockin mice and human GS, respectively.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21364
PMID: 20848653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
