---
reference_id: "PMID:28693477"
title: Clinical consequences of untreated dental caries assessed using PUFA index and its covariates in children residing in orphanages of Pakistan.
authors:
- Kamran R
- Farooq W
- Faisal MR
- Jahangir F
journal: BMC Oral Health
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s12903-017-0399-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Orphaned/statistics & numerical data"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- DMF Index
- "Dental Caries/complications, epidemiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Orphanages/statistics & numerical data"
- Pakistan/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical consequences of untreated dental caries assessed using PUFA index and its covariates in children residing in orphanages of Pakistan.
**Authors:** Kamran R, Farooq W, Faisal MR, Jahangir F
**Journal:** BMC Oral Health (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12903-017-0399-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12903-017-0399-9)

## Content

1. BMC Oral Health. 2017 Jul 11;17(1):108. doi: 10.1186/s12903-017-0399-9.

Clinical consequences of untreated dental caries assessed using PUFA index and
its covariates in children residing in orphanages of Pakistan.

Kamran R(1), Farooq W(2), Faisal MR(3), Jahangir F(4).

Author information:
(1)Margalla Institute of Health Sciences, Quaid-e-Azam Avenue, Gulrez III,
Rawalpindi, Pakistan. ramsha_k@outlook.com.
(2)Margalla Institute of Health Sciences, Quaid-e-Azam Avenue, Gulrez III,
Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Community & Preventive Dentistry, Margalla Institute of Health
Sciences, Quaid-e-Azam Avenue, Gulrez III, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Oral Medicine, Margalla Institute of Health Sciences,
Quaid-e-Azam Avenue, Gulrez III, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to determine the prevalence and
clinical effects of untreated dental caries in Pakistani children residing in
orphanages using the DMFT and PUFA index; association of decay and untreated
dental caries with demographics including type of orphanage; behavioural and
dental visiting pattern; and association of dental pain experience and type of
orphanage with dental visiting.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey was conducted on a total of 753 orphan
children belonging to 4-17 years of age group residing in twin cities of
Rawalpindi and Islamabad, Pakistan. Clinical examination of children was
performed using the DMFT and PUFA index for the assessment of dental caries and
untreated decay, followed by questionnaire enquiring about eating and oral
hygiene habits, dental visiting pattern and dental pain and swelling experience.
Association between dental decay, child's dental visiting and pain as a
consequence of untreated decay was carried out using chi square test and
logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: The overall caries prevalence was 34.8% and overall prevalence of
PUFA/pufa was 15.9%. The mean score of DMFT and dmft was 1.18 (SD 0.39) and 1.04
(SD 0.23), and mean PUFA was 1.18 (SD 0.57) and mean pufa score 1.14 (SD 0.35).
Untreated caries ratio was found to be 49.1% indicating half the decay had
progressed to involve the pulp. No significant association of gender was found
with DMFT, dmft, PUFA and pufa (p > 0.05), however, when analysed individually,
the 'D' component of DMFT was significantly associated with male gender
(p = 0.05). Furthermore, no significant association of DMFT/dmft or PUFA/pufa in
either dentition was found with behavioural characteristics such as dietary and
oral hygiene habits. Also, 66.2% children who experienced pain had not been to
the dentist in the past year (p = 0.013) and 52.6% children who mentioned
experiencing pain at night had not been to the dentist in the past year
(p = 0.009). Children with decay were more likely to have visited the dentist
(OR 3.3, 95% CI 1.42-7.6, p = 0.006). However, children who reported to have
experienced pain were less likely to have visited the dentist in the past year
(OR 0.53, 95% CI 0.32-0.88, p = 0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: Moderate levels of decay were found in the sample with 'd'
component majorly responsible for the cumulative DMFT index. However, alarmingly
almost half of the decay component (49.1%) had progressed to involve the pulp.
Experiencing pain in teeth prompted dental visits. Initiation of preventive
services for children residing in orphanages in Pakistan would help greatly
towards reducing the burden of untreated decay.

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-017-0399-9
PMCID: PMC5504620
PMID: 28693477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This
study was approved by the Margalla Institute of Health Sciences Review and
Ethics Committee. Written informed Consent for participation was obtained from
caretakers of the orphanage and children were given the option to opt out if
they did not wish to participate. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable.
COMPETING INTERESTS: Authors declare they have no financial or non-financial
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
