---
reference_id: "PMID:11136691"
title: "Genotype-phenotype correlation in the long-QT syndrome: gene-specific triggers for life-threatening arrhythmias."
authors:
- Schwartz PJ
- Priori SG
- Spazzolini C
- Moss AJ
- Vincent GM
- Napolitano C
- Denjoy I
- Guicheney P
- Breithardt G
- Keating MT
- Towbin JA
- Beggs AH
- Brink P
- Wilde AA
- Toivonen L
- Zareba W
- Robinson JL
- Timothy KW
- Corfield V
- Wattanasirichaigoon D
- Corbett C
- Haverkamp W
- Schulze-Bahr E
- Lehmann MH
- Schwartz K
- Coumel P
- Bloise R
journal: Circulation
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1161/01.cir.103.1.89
keywords:
- Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Adult
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/etiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Electrocardiography
- Emotions
- Exercise
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Ion Channels/genetics
- "Long QT Syndrome/classification, diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Phenotype
- Sex Factors
- Sleep
- Survival Rate
- Syncope/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype correlation in the long-QT syndrome: gene-specific triggers for life-threatening arrhythmias.
**Authors:** Schwartz PJ, Priori SG, Spazzolini C, Moss AJ, Vincent GM, Napolitano C, Denjoy I, Guicheney P, Breithardt G, Keating MT, Towbin JA, Beggs AH, Brink P, Wilde AA, Toivonen L, Zareba W, Robinson JL, Timothy KW, Corfield V, Wattanasirichaigoon D, Corbett C, Haverkamp W, Schulze-Bahr E, Lehmann MH, Schwartz K, Coumel P, Bloise R
**Journal:** Circulation (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.cir.103.1.89](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.103.1.89)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2001 Jan 2;103(1):89-95. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.103.1.89.

Genotype-phenotype correlation in the long-QT syndrome: gene-specific triggers
for life-threatening arrhythmias.

Schwartz PJ(1), Priori SG, Spazzolini C, Moss AJ, Vincent GM, Napolitano C,
Denjoy I, Guicheney P, Breithardt G, Keating MT, Towbin JA, Beggs AH, Brink P,
Wilde AA, Toivonen L, Zareba W, Robinson JL, Timothy KW, Corfield V,
Wattanasirichaigoon D, Corbett C, Haverkamp W, Schulze-Bahr E, Lehmann MH,
Schwartz K, Coumel P, Bloise R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Policlinico S. Matteo IRCCS and University of
Pavia, Pavia, Italy. PJQT@compuserve.com

BACKGROUND: The congenital long-QT syndrome (LQTS) is caused by mutations on
several genes, all of which encode cardiac ion channels. The progressive
understanding of the electrophysiological consequences of these mutations opens
unforeseen possibilities for genotype-phenotype correlation studies. Preliminary
observations suggested that the conditions ("triggers") associated with cardiac
events may in large part be gene specific.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We identified 670 LQTS patients of known genotype (LQT1,
n=371; LQT2, n=234; LQT3, n=65) who had symptoms (syncope, cardiac arrest,
sudden death) and examined whether 3 specific triggers (exercise, emotion, and
sleep/rest without arousal) differed according to genotype. LQT1 patients
experienced the majority of their events (62%) during exercise, and only 3%
occurred during rest/sleep. These percentages were almost reversed among LQT2
and LQT3 patients, who were less likely to have events during exercise (13%) and
more likely to have events during rest/sleep (29% and 39%). Lethal and nonlethal
events followed the same pattern. Corrected QT interval did not differ among
LQT1, LQT2, and LQT3 patients (498, 497, and 506 ms, respectively). The percent
of patients who were free of recurrence with ss-blocker therapy was higher and
the death rate was lower among LQT1 patients (81% and 4%, respectively) than
among LQT2 (59% and 4%, respectively) and LQT3 (50% and 17%, respectively)
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Life-threatening arrhythmias in LQTS patients tend to occur under
specific circumstances in a gene-specific manner. These data allow new insights
into the mechanisms that relate the electrophysiological consequences of
mutations on specific genes to clinical manifestations and offer the possibility
of complementing traditional therapy with gene-specific approaches.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.103.1.89
PMID: 11136691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
