---
reference_id: "PMID:38541652"
title: RAS/Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Signaling Pathway in Testicular Germ Cell Tumors.
authors:
- Onorato A
- Guida E
- Colopi A
- Dolci S
- Grimaldi P
journal: Life (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/life14030327
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RAS/Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Signaling Pathway in Testicular Germ Cell Tumors.
**Authors:** Onorato A, Guida E, Colopi A, Dolci S, Grimaldi P
**Journal:** Life (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/life14030327](https://doi.org/10.3390/life14030327)

## Content

1. Life (Basel). 2024 Feb 29;14(3):327. doi: 10.3390/life14030327.

RAS/Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Signaling Pathway in Testicular Germ Cell 
Tumors.

Onorato A(1), Guida E(1), Colopi A(1), Dolci S(1), Grimaldi P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome Tor Vergata, 
00133 Rome, Italy.

Germ cell tumors (GCTs) are relatively rare tumors. However, they are the most 
diagnosed malignancies occurring in the testis among men aged between 15 and 40 
years. Despite high aneuploidy and a paucity of somatic mutations, several 
genomic and transcriptomic assays have identified a few significantly mutated 
somatic genes, primarily KIT and K-RAS. The receptor Tyrosine Kinase (RTK) 
pathway and the downstream related Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) 
cascades are crucial signal transduction pathways that preside over various 
cellular processes, including proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and 
responses to stressors. They are well described in solid malignancies, where 
many of the involved factors are used as prognostic molecular markers or targets 
for precision therapy. This narrative review focused, in the first part, on 
PGCs' survival/proliferation and differentiation and on the genetic and 
epigenetic factors involved in the pathogenesis of testicular germ cell tumors 
(TGCTs) and, in the second part, on the most recent investigations about the 
KIT-RAS pathway in TGCTs and in other cancers, highlighting the efforts that are 
being made to identify targetable markers for precision medicine approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/life14030327
PMCID: PMC10971273
PMID: 38541652

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.