---
reference_id: "PMID:30963242"
title: Biallelic variants in SMAD6 are associated with a complex cardiovascular phenotype.
authors:
- Kloth K
- Bierhals T
- Johannsen J
- Harms FL
- Juusola J
- Johnson MC
- Grange DK
- Kutsche K
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-019-02011-x
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- Smad6 Protein/genetics
- Exome Sequencing/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic variants in SMAD6 are associated with a complex cardiovascular phenotype.
**Authors:** Kloth K, Bierhals T, Johannsen J, Harms FL, Juusola J, Johnson MC, Grange DK, Kutsche K
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-019-02011-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-019-02011-x)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2019 Jun;138(6):625-634. doi: 10.1007/s00439-019-02011-x. Epub 2019
 Apr 8.

Biallelic variants in SMAD6 are associated with a complex cardiovascular
phenotype.

Kloth K(1), Bierhals T(1), Johannsen J(2), Harms FL(1), Juusola J(3), Johnson
MC(4), Grange DK(5), Kutsche K(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistraße 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.
(3)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(4)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Washington
University School of Medicine/St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(5)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
Washington University School of Medicine/St. Louis Children's Hospital, St.
Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistraße 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany. kkutsche@uke.de.

Rare heterozygous variants in SMAD6 have been identified as a significant
genetic contributor to bicuspid aortic valve-associated thoracic aortic aneurysm
on one hand and non-syndromic midline craniosynostosis on the other. In this
study, we report two individuals with biallelic missense variants in SMAD6 and a
complex cardiac phenotype. Trio exome sequencing in Proband 1, a male who had
aortic isthmus stenosis, revealed the homozygous SMAD6 variant p.(Ile466Thr). He
also had mild intellectual disability and radio-ulnar synostosis. Proband 2 is a
female who presented with a more severe cardiac phenotype with a dysplastic and
stenotic pulmonary valve and dilated cardiomyopathy. In addition, she had
vascular anomalies, including a stenotic left main coronary artery requiring a
bypass procedure, narrowing of the proximal left pulmonary artery and a venous
anomaly in the brain. Proband 2 has compound heterozygous SMAD6 missense
variants, p.(Phe357Ile) and p.(Ser483Pro). Absence of these SMAD6 variants in
the general population and high pathogenicity prediction scores suggest that
these variants caused the probands' phenotypes. This is further corroborated by
cardiovascular anomalies and appendicular skeletal defects in Smad6-deficient
mice. SMAD6 acts as an inhibitory SMAD and preferentially inhibits bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP)-induced signaling. Our data suggest that biallelic
variants in SMAD6 may affect the inhibitory activity of SMAD6 and cause enhanced
BMP signaling underlying the cardiovascular anomalies and possibly other
clinical features in the two probands.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-019-02011-x
PMID: 30963242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
