---
reference_id: "PMID:40629326"
title: Obsessive-compulsive disorder in the World Mental Health surveys.
authors:
- Stein DJ
- Ruscio AM
- Altwaijri Y
- Chiu WT
- Sampson NA
- Aguilar-Gaxiola S
- Al-Hamzawi A
- Alonso J
- Chardoul S
- Gureje O
- Hu C
- Karam EG
- McGrath JJ
- Navarro-Mateu F
- Scott KM
- Stagnaro JC
- Torres Y
- Vladescu C
- Wciórka J
- Xavier M
- Kessler RC
- World Mental Health Survey collaborators
journal: BMC Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12916-025-04209-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder/epidemiology, therapy, diagnosis"
- Adult
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Health Surveys
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- Global Health
- Age of Onset
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obsessive-compulsive disorder in the World Mental Health surveys.
**Authors:** Stein DJ, Ruscio AM, Altwaijri Y, Chiu WT, Sampson NA, Aguilar-Gaxiola S, Al-Hamzawi A, Alonso J, Chardoul S, Gureje O, Hu C, Karam EG, McGrath JJ, Navarro-Mateu F, Scott KM, Stagnaro JC, Torres Y, Vladescu C, Wciórka J, Xavier M, Kessler RC, World Mental Health Survey collaborators
**Journal:** BMC Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12916-025-04209-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-025-04209-5)

## Content

1. BMC Med. 2025 Jul 9;23(1):416. doi: 10.1186/s12916-025-04209-5.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder in the World Mental Health surveys.

Stein DJ(#)(1), Ruscio AM(#)(2), Altwaijri Y(3), Chiu WT(4), Sampson NA(4), 
Aguilar-Gaxiola S(5), Al-Hamzawi A(6), Alonso J(7)(8)(9), Chardoul S(10), Gureje 
O(11)(12), Hu C(13), Karam EG(14)(15), McGrath JJ(16)(17)(18), Navarro-Mateu 
F(19)(20)(21), Scott KM(22), Stagnaro JC(23), Torres Y(24), Vladescu C(25)(26), 
Wciórka J(27), Xavier M(28), Kessler RC(4); World Mental Health Survey 
collaborators.

Collaborators: Altwaijri YA, Andrade LH, Atwoli L, Benjet C, Borges G, 
Bruffaerts R, Bunting B, Caldas-de-Almeida JM, Cardoso G, Degenhardt L, de 
Girolamo G, Haro JM, Harris MG, Hinkov H, Hu C, de Jonge P, Karam AN, Karam G, 
Kazdin AE, Kawakami N, Kiejna A, Kovess-Masfety V, Medina-Mora ME, Moskalewicz 
J, Nishi D, Piazza M, Posada-Villa J, Roest A, Ten Have M, Tintle N, Viana MC, 
Vigo DV, Williams DR, Wojtyniak B, Zaslavsky AM.

Author information:
(1)SAMRC Unit On Risk & Resilience in Mental Disorders, Dept of Psychiatry & 
Neuroscience Institute, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. 
dan.stein@uct.ac.za.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Scientific Computing Department, King Faisal 
Specialist Hospital & Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Reducing Health Disparities, UC 
Davis Health System, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(6)College of Medicine, University of Al-Qadisiya, Al Diwaniyah, Diwaniya 
Governorate, Iraq.
(7)Health Services Research Unit, Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute 
(IMIM), Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Department of Medicine and Life Sciences, Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Epidemiología y Salud Pública 
(CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain.
(10)Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(13)Shenzhen Institute of Mental Health & Shenzhen Kangning Hospital, Shenzhen, 
China.
(14)Institute for Development, Research, Advocacy and Applied Care (IDRAAC), 
ResearchBeirut, Lebanon.
(15)Department of Psychiatry and Clinical Psychology, St George Hospital 
University Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon.
(16)Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research, The Park Centre for Mental 
Health, Wacol, QLD, Australia.
(17)Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, 
Australia.
(18)National Centre for Register-Based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(19)Unidad de Docencia, Investigacion y Formación en Salud Mental (UDIF-SM), 
Servicio Murciano de Salud, Murcia Health Service, C/Lorca, nº 58. - El Palmar, 
Murcia, 30120, Spain.
(20)Instituto Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria - Pascual Parrilla 
(IMIB-Pascual Parrilla), Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, El Palmar, Murcia, 
30120, Spain.
(21)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en ERed en Epidemíologia y Salud Pública 
(CIBERESP), Madrid, 28029, Spain.
(22)Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, Otago, 
New Zealand.
(23)Departamento de Psiquiatría y Salud Mental, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(24)Center for Excellence On Research in Mental Health, CES University, 
Medellín, Colombia.
(25)National Institute for Health Services Management, Bucharest, Romania.
(26)University Titu Maiorescu, Bucharest, Romania.
(27)Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(28)Nova Medical School, Nova University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    Res Sq. 2025 Mar 03:rs.3.rs-6090427. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-6090427/v1.

BACKGROUND: National surveys have suggested that obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD) is a prevalent and impairing condition. However, there are few 
cross-national data on OCD, with data particularly scarce in low- and 
middle-income countries. Here we employ data from the World Mental Health 
surveys to characterize the onset, course, severity, and treatment of OCD across 
a range of countries in different geographic regions of the world.
METHODS: Data came from general population surveys carried out in 10 countries 
(Argentina, Australia, Colombia, Iraq, Poland, People's Republic of China, 
Portugal, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Spain) using a consistent research protocol and 
interview. A total of 26,136 adults were assessed for OCD in face-to-face 
interviews and were included in the present analyses. We examined lifetime and 
12-month prevalence as well as age of onset, persistence, severity, and 
treatment of DSM-IV OCD in six high-income countries (HICs) and four low- or 
middle-income countries (LMICs). We also investigated socio-demographic 
variables and temporally prior mental disorders as predictors of OCD onset, 
persistence, severity, and treatment.
RESULTS: Across the 10 countries surveyed, OCD has a combined lifetime 
prevalence of 4.1%. The 12-month prevalence (3.0%) is nearly as high, suggesting 
a highly persistent course of illness. Age of onset is early, with more than 80% 
of OCD cases beginning by early adulthood. Most OCD cases in the community are 
mild (47.0%) or very mild (27.5%), with a smaller percentage designated as 
moderate (22.9%) or severe (2.7%) by the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale. 
Only 19.8% of respondents with OCD received any mental health treatment in the 
past year, with treatment rates much higher in HICs (40.5%) than LMICs (7.0%). 
Cross-nationally, OCD commonly emerges in adolescence or early adulthood against 
a backdrop of earlier-occurring mental disorders. With few exceptions (e.g., 
prior social phobia), the socio-demographic and psychopathological risk factors 
for OCD onset, persistence, severity, and treatment are distinct.
CONCLUSIONS: These cross-national data underscore clinical lessons regarding the 
importance of early diagnosis of OCD and comprehensive evaluation of 
comorbidity; draw attention to OCD as an undertreated disorder, particularly in 
LMIC contexts; and emphasize the public health significance of this 
often-overlooked condition.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-025-04209-5
PMCID: PMC12239380
PMID: 40629326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: At all survey sites, the local ethics or institutional review 
committee reviewed and approved the protocol to ensure protection of human 
subjects, in line with appropriate international and local guidelines. Details 
of the ethics committees for the WMH surveys can be viewed at this link:  
http://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/wmh/ftpdir/WMH_Ethics_approval.pdf . Consent for 
publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: In the past 3 years, Dr. 
Kessler was a consultant for Cambridge Health Alliance, Canandaigua VA Medical 
Center, Child Mind Institute, Holmusk, Massachusetts General Hospital, Partners 
Healthcare, Inc., RallyPoint Networks, Inc., Sage Therapeutics and University of 
North Carolina. He has stock options in Cerebral Inc., Mirah, PYM (Prepare Your 
Mind), Roga Sciences and Verisense Health. Dr. Stein has received consultancy 
honoraria from Discovery Vitality, Johnson & Johnson, Kanna, L’Oreal, Lundbeck, 
Orion, Servier, Seaport Therapeutics, Takeda, Vistagen, and Wellcome. All other 
authors report no conflicts of interest related to this manuscript.