---
reference_id: "PMID:17080092"
title: XIAP deficiency in humans causes an X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome.
authors:
- Rigaud S
- Fondanèche MC
- Lambert N
- Pasquier B
- Mateo V
- Soulas P
- Galicier L
- Le Deist F
- Rieux-Laucat F
- Revy P
- Fischer A
- de Saint Basile G
- Latour S
journal: Nature
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/nature05257
keywords:
- Adult
- Apoptosis
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Infant
- "Lymphoproliferative Disorders/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/immunology, pathology"
- "X-Linked Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# XIAP deficiency in humans causes an X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome.
**Authors:** Rigaud S, Fondanèche MC, Lambert N, Pasquier B, Mateo V, Soulas P, Galicier L, Le Deist F, Rieux-Laucat F, Revy P, Fischer A, de Saint Basile G, Latour S
**Journal:** Nature (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature05257](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05257)

## Content

1. Nature. 2006 Nov 2;444(7115):110-4. doi: 10.1038/nature05257.

XIAP deficiency in humans causes an X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome.

Rigaud S(1), Fondanèche MC, Lambert N, Pasquier B, Mateo V, Soulas P, Galicier 
L, Le Deist F, Rieux-Laucat F, Revy P, Fischer A, de Saint Basile G, Latour S.

Author information:
(1)Inserm 768, Laboratoire du Développement Normal et Pathologique du Système 
Immunitaire, Univ. René Descartes, Paris, F-75015, France.

The homeostasis of the immune response requires tight regulation of the 
proliferation and apoptosis of activated lymphocytes. In humans, defects in 
immune homeostasis result in lymphoproliferation disorders including 
autoimmunity, haemophagocytic lymphohystiocytosis and lymphomas. The X-linked 
lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP) is a rare, inherited immunodeficiency that is 
characterized by lymphohystiocytosis, hypogammaglobulinaemia and lymphomas, and 
that usually develops in response to infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). 
Mutations in the signalling lymphocyte activation molecule (SLAM)-associated 
protein SAP, a signalling adaptor molecule, underlie 60% of cases of familial 
XLP. Here, we identify mutations in the gene that encodes the X-linked 
inhibitor-of-apoptosis XIAP (also termed BIRC4) in patients with XLP from three 
families without mutations in SAP. These mutations lead to defective expression 
of XIAP. We show that apoptosis of lymphocytes from XIAP-deficient patients is 
enhanced in response to various stimuli including the T-cell antigen receptor 
(TCR)-CD3 complex, the death receptor CD95 (also termed Fas or Apo-1) and the 
TNF-associated apoptosis-inducing ligand receptor (TRAIL-R). We also found that 
XIAP-deficient patients, like SAP-deficient patients, have low numbers of 
natural killer T-lymphocytes (NKT cells), indicating that XIAP is required for 
the survival and/or differentiation of NKT cells. The observation that 
XIAP-deficiency and SAP-deficiency are both associated with a defect in NKT 
cells strengthens the hypothesis that NKT cells have a key role in the immune 
response to EBV. Furthermore, by identifying an XLP immunodeficiency that is 
caused by mutations in XIAP, we show that XIAP is a potent regulator of 
lymphocyte homeostasis in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/nature05257
PMID: 17080092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]