---
reference_id: "PMID:10534762"
title: "Genes, chromosomes, and rhabdomyosarcoma."
authors:
- Anderson J
- Gordon A
- Pritchard-Jones K
- Shipley J
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '1999'
keywords:
- Animals
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Humans
- Rhabdomyosarcoma/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genes, chromosomes, and rhabdomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Anderson J, Gordon A, Pritchard-Jones K, Shipley J
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (1999)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Dec;26(4):275-85.

Genes, chromosomes, and rhabdomyosarcoma.

Anderson J(1), Gordon A, Pritchard-Jones K, Shipley J.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Molecular Hematology and Oncology, Institute of Child Health, London,
United Kingdom.

Rhabdomyosarcomas are a heterogeneous group of malignant tumors and are the most
common soft-tissue sarcoma of childhood. Rhabdomyosarcomas resemble developing
skeletal muscle, notably in their expression of the MRF family of transcription
factors and the PAX3 and PAX7 genes. These PAX genes are also involved through
specific translocations, t(2;13)(q35;q14) and variant t(1;13)(p36;q14) in the
alveolar subtype, which result in PAX3-FKHR and PAX7-FKHR fusion genes,
respectively. The fusion genes are thought critically to affect downstream
targets of PAX3 and PAX7 or possibly have novel targets. Similar downstream
changes may also be involved in embryonal and fusion gene negative cases.
Genomic amplification of such genes as MYCN, MDM2, CDK4, and PAX7-FKHR is a
feature mainly of the alveolar subtype, while specific chromosomal gains,
including chromosomes 2, 8, 12, and 13, are associated with the embryonal
subtype. Loss of alleles and imprinting at 11p15.5 and disruption of genes such
as IGF2, ATR, PTC, P16, and TP53 have also been implicated in rhabdomyosarcoma
development. Whereas there is now a realistic possibility of cure in the
majority of cases, there remains a subset that is resistant to multimodality
therapy, including high-dose chemotherapy. Characterization of the defining
molecular features of tumors that are likely to behave aggressively represents a
particular challenge. Current research is leading toward a better understanding
of rhabdomyosarcoma tumorigenesis, which may ultimately result in novel
therapeutic strategies that increase the overall cure. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
26:275-285, 1999.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10534762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
