---
reference_id: "PMID:33638179"
title: MECP2 and the biology of MECP2 duplication syndrome.
authors:
- "D'Mello SR 3rd"
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jnc.15331
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MECP2 and the biology of MECP2 duplication syndrome.
**Authors:** D'Mello SR 3rd
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jnc.15331](https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.15331)

## Content

1. J Neurochem. 2021 Oct;159(1):29-60. doi: 10.1111/jnc.15331. Epub 2021 Aug 25.

MECP2 and the biology of MECP2 duplication syndrome.

D'Mello SR 3rd(1).

Author information:
(1)Neugeneron, Dallas, TX, USA.

MECP2 duplication syndrome (MDS), a rare X-linked genomic disorder affecting 
predominantly males, is caused by duplication of the chromosomal region 
containing the methyl CpG binding protein-2 (MECP2) gene, which encodes 
methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2), a multi-functional protein required for 
proper brain development and maintenance of brain function during adulthood. 
Disease symptoms include severe motor and cognitive impairment, delayed or 
absent speech development, autistic features, seizures, ataxia, recurrent 
respiratory infections, and shortened lifespan. The cellular and molecular 
mechanisms by which a relatively modest increase in MECP2 protein causes such 
severe disease symptoms are poorly understood and consequently there are no 
treatments available for this fatal disorder. This review summarizes what is 
known to date about the structure and zcomplex regulation of MECP2 and its many 
functions in the developing and adult brain. Additionally, recent experimental 
findings on the cellular and molecular underpinnings of MDS based on cell 
culture and mouse models of the disorder are reviewed. The emerging picture from 
these studies is that MDS is a neurodegenerative disorder in which neurons die 
in specific parts of the central nervous system, including the cortex, 
hippocampus, cerebellum, and spinal cord. Neuronal death likely results from 
astrocytic dysfunction, including a breakdown of glutamate homeostatic 
mechanisms. The role of elevations in the expression of glial acidic fibrillary 
protein (GFAP) in astrocytes and the microtubule-associated protein, Tau, in 
neurons to the pathogenesis of MDS is discussed. Lastly, potential therapeutic 
strategies to potentially treat MDS are discussed.

© 2021 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.15331
PMID: 33638179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]