---
reference_id: "PMID:25776230"
title: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV is associated with a novel G984R COL3A1 mutation.
authors:
- Deng Y
- Wei S
- Hu S
- Chen J
- Tan Z
- Yang Y
journal: Mol Med Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3488
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV is associated with a novel G984R COL3A1 mutation.
**Authors:** Deng Y, Wei S, Hu S, Chen J, Tan Z, Yang Y
**Journal:** Mol Med Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3892/mmr.2015.3488](https://doi.org/10.3892/mmr.2015.3488)

## Content

1. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):1119-24. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3488. Epub 2015 Mar
 13.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV is associated with a novel G984R COL3A1 mutation.

Deng Y(1), Wei S(1), Hu S(1), Chen J(1), Tan Z(1), Yang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, P.R. China.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV is an autosomal dominant connective tissue 
disease. Mutations in COL3A1 have been identified to underlie this disease; 
however, to the best of our knowledge, no COL3A1 mutations have been reported in 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV patients with an ascending aortic aneurysm. In 
order to develop further understanding of COL3A1 mutations, an Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome type IV patient diagnosed with an ascending aortic aneurysm and a 
familial history of sudden mortality was analyzed. Genomic DNA was isolated from 
the peripheral blood of the patient and his family members. All coding exons of 
eight aneurysm-related genes (FBN1, TGFBR1, TGFBR 2, MYH11, ACTA2, SLC2A10, 
NOTCH1 and COL3A1) were amplified using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The PCR 
products were sequenced with the ABI 3100 Genetic Analyzer, and a mutation was 
predicted and identified using Polyphen-2, SIFT and Mutation Taster. The novel 
mutation was identified as c.2950G>A in COL3A1, which results in p.G984R. All 
three programs predicted this mutation to be deleterous to the protein function. 
The novel mutation identified in this study is potentially responsible for 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV in this patient, and expands the spectrum of 
COL3A1 mutations.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3488
PMID: 25776230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]