---
reference_id: "PMID:39057225"
title: "Mealybug Population Dynamics: A Comparative Analysis of Sampling Methods for Saccharicoccus sacchari and Heliococcus summervillei in Sugarcane (Saccharum sp. Hybrids)."
authors:
- Xu H
- Humpal JA
- Wilson BAL
- Ash GJ
- Powell KS
journal: Insects
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/insects15070492
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mealybug Population Dynamics: A Comparative Analysis of Sampling Methods for Saccharicoccus sacchari and Heliococcus summervillei in Sugarcane (Saccharum sp. Hybrids).
**Authors:** Xu H, Humpal JA, Wilson BAL, Ash GJ, Powell KS
**Journal:** Insects (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/insects15070492](https://doi.org/10.3390/insects15070492)

## Content

1. Insects. 2024 Jul 1;15(7):492. doi: 10.3390/insects15070492.

Mealybug Population Dynamics: A Comparative Analysis of Sampling Methods for 
Saccharicoccus sacchari and Heliococcus summervillei in Sugarcane (Saccharum sp. 
Hybrids).

Xu H(1)(2), Humpal JA(3), Wilson BAL(1), Ash GJ(4), Powell KS(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Crop Health, University of Southern Queensland, West Street, 
Toowoomba, QLD 4350, Australia.
(2)Sugar Research Australia, 34 Hall Road, Gordonvale, QLD 4865, Australia.
(3)Grains Research and Development Corporation, Herries Street, Toowoomba, QLD 
4350, Australia.
(4)Institute for Life Sciences and the Environment, University of Southern 
Queensland, West Street, Toowoomba, QLD 4350, Australia.
(5)Sugar Research Australia, Queen Street, Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia.

This research is focused on a comparative field-based study of the population 
dynamics and sampling methods of two mealybug species, Saccharicoccus sacchari 
(Cockerell, 1895) (Hemiptera: Coccomorpha, Pseudococcidae) and Heliococcus 
summervillei (Brookes, 1978) (Hemiptera: Coccomorpha, Pseudococcidae), in 
sugarcane (Saccharum sp. hybrids) (f. Poaceae) over consecutive growing seasons. 
The research monitored and compared the above- and belowground populations and 
seasonal abundance of these two mealybug species in sugarcane fields in Far 
North Queensland, with non-destructive sampling techniques of yellow sticky 
traps, pan traps, and stem traps, and destructive sampling of the whole leaf and 
whole plant. The results indicated that S. sacchari (n = 29,137) was more 
abundant and detected throughout the growing season, with population peaks in 
the mid-season, while H. summervillei (n = 2706) showed peaks of the 
early-season activity. S. sacchari is primarily located on sugarcane stems and 
roots, compared to H. summervillei, which is located on leaves and roots. The 
whole-leaf collection and stem trap were the most effective sampling techniques 
for quantification of H. summervillei and S. sacchari, respectively. This study 
enhanced the understanding of S. sacchari and the first-ever record of H. 
summervillei on sugarcane in Australia and will contribute to the development of 
more effective pest management strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/insects15070492
PMCID: PMC11277012
PMID: 39057225

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.