---
reference_id: "PMID:23154428"
title: Evidence that FGFR1 loss-of-function mutations may cause variable skeletal malformations in patients with Kallmann syndrome.
authors:
- Jarzabek K
- Wolczynski S
- Lesniewicz R
- Plessis G
- Kottler ML
journal: Adv Med Sci
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2478/v10039-012-0036-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Bone Development/genetics
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Female
- Humans
- "Kallmann Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1/chemistry, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence that FGFR1 loss-of-function mutations may cause variable skeletal malformations in patients with Kallmann syndrome.
**Authors:** Jarzabek K, Wolczynski S, Lesniewicz R, Plessis G, Kottler ML
**Journal:** Adv Med Sci (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2478/v10039-012-0036-4](https://doi.org/10.2478/v10039-012-0036-4)

## Content

1. Adv Med Sci. 2012;57(2):314-21. doi: 10.2478/v10039-012-0036-4.

Evidence that FGFR1 loss-of-function mutations may cause variable skeletal
malformations in patients with Kallmann syndrome.

Jarzabek K(1), Wolczynski S, Lesniewicz R, Plessis G, Kottler ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Reproduction and Gynecological Endocrinology, Medical
University of Bialystok, Poland. kasia.jarzabek@gmail.com

PURPOSE: Loss-of-function mutations in FGFR1 have been identified in
approximately 10% of the Kallmann syndrome (KS) patients. Previous reports have
focused mainly on olfactory, reproductive, and some other features such as cleft
lip/palate and dental agenesis. Given the ubiquitous expression of FGFR1 during
development, other abnormal phenotypes might, however, have been overlooked in
these patients. Here, we demonstrate skeletal phenotypic characterization of
patients presented with KS and FGFR1 mutations.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Using the Sanger DNA sequencing technique a cohort of 29
KS patients was screened.
RESULTS: Here, we report on 5 KS patients who carry FGFR1 mutations (Gly270Asp,
Gly97Ser, Met161Thr, Ser685Phe and Ala167Ser/Ala167Ser). Three patients
presented with skeletal abnormalities, i.e. spine (hemivertebra and butterfly
vertebra) and limb (oligodactyly of the feet, fusion of the 4th and 5th
metacarpal bones) malformations in two patients and one patient, respectively.
The hand phenotype found in the patient cannot be thought of as a counter-type
of the hand phenotype resulting from FGFR1 gain-of-function mutations. The
skeletal anomalies identified in the 3 KS patients are close to those observed
in Fgfr1 conditional knockout mice.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that FGFR1 loss-of-function mutations can
be associated with skeletal abnormalities also in humans. Further investigations
in KS patients who carry FGFR1 mutations are needed to evaluate the prevalence
of skeletal defects in this genetic form of KS. Conversely, the presence of bone
malformations in a KS patient should direct the geneticist towards a search for
mutations in FGFR1.

DOI: 10.2478/v10039-012-0036-4
PMID: 23154428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
