---
reference_id: "PMID:39036637"
title: "Primary familial brain calcification presenting with parkinsonism and motor complications caused by a novel SLC20A2 variant: a case report."
authors:
- Sun D
- Wang Y
- Wang J
- Wang S
- Zhu L
- Xia K
- Zhang Y
- Wang X
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1382534
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary familial brain calcification presenting with parkinsonism and motor complications caused by a novel SLC20A2 variant: a case report.
**Authors:** Sun D, Wang Y, Wang J, Wang S, Zhu L, Xia K, Zhang Y, Wang X
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2024.1382534](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2024.1382534)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2024 Jul 5;15:1382534. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1382534. 
eCollection 2024.

Primary familial brain calcification presenting with parkinsonism and motor 
complications caused by a novel SLC20A2 variant: a case report.

Sun D(#)(1)(2), Wang Y(#)(3), Wang J(2), Wang S(2), Zhu L(2), Xia K(2), Zhang 
Y(3), Wang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Graduate, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei, China.
(2)Institute of Neurology, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Yueyang Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese 
and Western Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Shanghai, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Primary familial brain calcification (PFBC), also known as Fahr's disease, is a 
central nervous system calcium deposition disorder with symmetrical basal 
ganglia calcification. Most PFBC cases are caused by SLC20A2 gene variant. We 
report a Chinese female patient with PFBC and dopamine-responsive parkinsonism 
who had motor fluctuations and dyskinesia and recovered effectively after 
symptomatic medication adjustment. A novel heterozygous missense variant was 
found by whole-exome sequencing and proven harmful by family validation and 
genetic analysis. This example expands the phenotype of SLC20A2-associated PFBC 
patients and shows the clinical efficacy of dopaminergic replacement treatment.

Copyright © 2024 Sun, Wang, Wang, Wang, Zhu, Xia, Zhang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1382534
PMCID: PMC11257840
PMID: 39036637

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.