---
reference_id: "PMID:38251897"
title: Deep Brain Stimulation Improves Symptoms of Spasmodic Dysphonia Through Targeting of Thalamic Sensorimotor Connectivity.
authors:
- Hart MG
- Polyhronopoulos N
- Sandhu MK
- Honey CR
journal: Neurosurgery
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1227/neu.0000000000002836
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep Brain Stimulation Improves Symptoms of Spasmodic Dysphonia Through Targeting of Thalamic Sensorimotor Connectivity.
**Authors:** Hart MG, Polyhronopoulos N, Sandhu MK, Honey CR
**Journal:** Neurosurgery (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1227/neu.0000000000002836](https://doi.org/10.1227/neu.0000000000002836)

## Content

1. Neurosurgery. 2024 Jan 22;94(6):1291-300. doi: 10.1227/neu.0000000000002836. 
Online ahead of print.

Deep Brain Stimulation Improves Symptoms of Spasmodic Dysphonia Through 
Targeting of Thalamic Sensorimotor Connectivity.

Hart MG(1), Polyhronopoulos N(2), Sandhu MK(2), Honey CR(2).

Author information:
(1)St George's, University of London & St George's Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Institute of Molecular and Clinical Sciences, Neurosciences Research 
Centre, London, UK.
(2)Division of Neurosurgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Spasmodic dysphonia is a dystonia of the vocal chords 
producing difficulty with speech. Current hypotheses are that this is a 
condition of dysregulated thalamic sensory motor integration. A recent 
randomized controlled trial of thalamic deep brain stimulation (DBS) 
demonstrated its safety and efficacy. Our objective was to determine whether the 
outcome could be predicted by stimulation of thalamic sensorimotor areas and 
adjacent white matter connectivity as assessed by diffusion tractography.
METHODS: A cohort of 6 participants undergoing thalamic DBS for adductor 
spasmodic dysphonia was studied. Electrodes were localized with the Lead-DBS 
toolbox. Group-based analyses were performed with atlases, coordinates, and 
using voxel-based symptom mapping. Diffusion tensor imaging (3 T, 64 directions, 
2-mm isotropic) was used to perform individual probabilistic tractography 
(cerebellothalamic tract and pallidothalamic tract) and segmentation of the 
thalamus. Monopolar review was performed at 0.5 V and binarised as effective or 
ineffective.
RESULTS: Effective contacts stimulated more of thalamic sensorimotor areas than 
ineffective contacts (P < .05, false discovery rate corrected). This effect was 
consistent across analytical and statistical techniques. Group-level and 
tractography analyses did not identify a specific "sweet spot" suggesting the 
benefit of DBS is derived from modulating individual thalamic sensorimotor 
areas. Stimulations at 1 year involved predicted thalamic sensorimotor regions 
with additional cerebellothalamic tract involvement.
CONCLUSION: Stimulation of thalamic sensorimotor areas was associated with 
improvement in symptoms of spasmodic dysphonia. These data are consistent with 
DBS acting on pathophysiologically dysregulated thalamic sensorimotor 
integration in spasmodic dysphonia.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the Congress of Neurological Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1227/neu.0000000000002836
PMCID: PMC11073779
PMID: 38251897