---
reference_id: PMID:39055508
title: "Anatomic and Functional Outcomes of Vitrectomy for Advanced Retinopathy of Prematurity: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Casey A
- Zahra RA
- Barliana JD
journal: J Ophthalmic Vis Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.18502/jovr.v19i2.14027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anatomic and Functional Outcomes of Vitrectomy for Advanced Retinopathy of Prematurity: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Casey A, Zahra RA, Barliana JD
**Journal:** J Ophthalmic Vis Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.18502/jovr.v19i2.14027](https://doi.org/10.18502/jovr.v19i2.14027)

## Content

1. J Ophthalmic Vis Res. 2024 Jun 21;19(2):246-254. doi:
10.18502/jovr.v19i2.14027.  eCollection 2024 Apr-Jun.

Anatomic and Functional Outcomes of Vitrectomy for Advanced Retinopathy of 
Prematurity: A Systematic Review.

Casey A(1), Zahra RA(1), Barliana JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Dr. 
Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(2)Pediatric Ophthalmology Division, Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Dr. Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, Jakarta, 
Indonesia.

The success of vitrectomy in the advanced stages of retinopathy of prematurity 
(ROP) is defined not only by anatomical results, but also by functional 
outcomes. Studies have indicated that vitrectomy produces better outcomes when 
performed at an earlier stage (stage 4 vs. stage 5 ROP). This study reviewed the 
outcomes of vitrectomy in advanced stages of ROP and the associated factors. 
PubMed, ScienceDirect, Cochrane, Wiley, and WorldCat databases were 
systematically searched for articles published in the last 10 years. Studies 
involving participants with stages 4 and 5 ROP who underwent vitrectomy were 
included. The final search was performed on March 24, 2023. Risk of bias was 
assessed using the National Institutes of Health Quality Assessment Tool.The 
results were presented in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 2020 guidelines. Ten studies were included 
in the review. A total of 1179 eyes underwent vitrectomy (72% lens-sparing 
vitrectomy [LSV] and 28% lensectomy-vitrectomy [LV]). LSV was mainly performed 
in stage 4 ROP and LV in stage 5 ROP. Anatomical and functional successes were 
more significant in stages 4A and 4B than in stage 5. Factors that improved 
prognosis included no plus diseases, stage 4, prior treatments such as laser or 
intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injection, and sparing the 
lens intraoperatively. Vitrectomy resulted in better outcomes in patients with 
stage 4 ROP. Early detection and a strict screening protocol are needed to 
prevent ROP progression into stage 5.

Copyright © 2024 Casey et al.

DOI: 10.18502/jovr.v19i2.14027
PMCID: PMC11267137
PMID: 39055508