---
reference_id: "PMID:33433757"
title: Lynch syndrome-associated repeated stroke with MLH1 frame-shift mutation.
authors:
- Zhang M
- Yang H
- Chen Z
- Fan Y
- Hu X
- Liu W
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-020-04987-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lynch syndrome-associated repeated stroke with MLH1 frame-shift mutation.
**Authors:** Zhang M, Yang H, Chen Z, Fan Y, Hu X, Liu W
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-020-04987-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-020-04987-1)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2021 Apr;42(4):1631-1635. doi: 10.1007/s10072-020-04987-1. Epub
2021  Jan 12.

Lynch syndrome-associated repeated stroke with MLH1 frame-shift mutation.

Zhang M(1), Yang H(1), Chen Z(1), Fan Y(1), Hu X(1), Liu W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, 
Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, 
Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China. Liuwp@csu.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Neurol Sci. 2021 Apr;42(4):1641. doi: 10.1007/s10072-021-05098-1.

Lynch syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease caused by 
germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes, including MLH1, MSH2, 
MSH6, and PMS2, which predisposes patients to various malignant neoplasms. 
Previous studies showed that MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 mutation in LS were 
associated with an elevated risk of colorectal, gastric, endometria, ovarian, 
and other cancers among family members. Patients of these kinds of cancers had 
high incidence of synchronous and metasynchronus. We describe the case of a 
34-year-old female patient with 50 days of sudden dizziness and left limb 
weakness, whose head CT scan showed large infarction in the right frontal 
temporal parietal lobe and basal ganglia area. Imaging examinations and 
pathological biopsy indicated high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) IIIA1 of the 
right ovary. In addition, a novel frame-shift mutation in the MLH1 gene 
(c.1621dupG, p.A541Gfs*16) was found in the genetic panel sequence. It may 
render declining of MLH1 protein and also associate with the patient's 
progressive clinical manifestations of multiple systems. Therefore, the timely 
use of prenatal diagnosis to prevent unnecessary new cases of this severe 
genetic disease is available.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-020-04987-1
PMID: 33433757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]