---
reference_id: "PMID:31310406"
title: A recurrent missense mutation in the EDAR gene causes severe autosomal recessive hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in two consanguineous Kashmiri families.
authors:
- Sadia
- Foo JN
- Khor CC
- Jelani M
- Ali G
journal: J Gene Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/jgm.3113
keywords:
- Alleles
- Consanguinity
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/diagnosis, genetics"
- Edar Receptor/genetics
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A recurrent missense mutation in the EDAR gene causes severe autosomal recessive hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in two consanguineous Kashmiri families.
**Authors:** Sadia, Foo JN, Khor CC, Jelani M, Ali G
**Journal:** J Gene Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jgm.3113](https://doi.org/10.1002/jgm.3113)

## Content

1. J Gene Med. 2019 Sep;21(9):e3113. doi: 10.1002/jgm.3113. Epub 2019 Aug 5.

A recurrent missense mutation in the EDAR gene causes severe autosomal recessive 
hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in two consanguineous Kashmiri families.

Sadia(1), Foo JN(2)(3), Khor CC(3), Jelani M(4), Ali G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Azad Jammu and Kashmir, 
Muzaffarabad, Pakistan.
(2)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Human Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Center for Omic Sciences, , Islamia College Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a rare congenital 
disorder arising from the abnormal development of ectoderm derived structures, 
including skin, hair, nails, teeth and glands. These patients have sparse hair 
on the whole body, including the scalp, as well as hypoplastic teeth. They have 
no resistance to heat as a result of abnormal sweat glands. In total, four 
genes, namely ectodysplasin A (EDA), ectodysplasin A receptor (EDAR), 
EDAR-associated death domain protein (EDARADD) and Wnt family member 10A 
(WNT10A), are known to be involved in the etiology of HED.
METHODS: In the present study, we investigated two consanguineous Kashmiri 
families (A &B) with an autosomal recessive form of HED. Using whole exome 
sequencing and different bioinformatics tools, we detected a recurrent mutation 
causing severe HED.
RESULTS: We identified an already known rare homozygous missense (NM_022336 
c.1300 T>C; p.W434R; minor allele frequency 0.00007) variant in exon 12 of the 
EDAR gene. This variant segregated with a homozygous form in all patients and 
their obligate carriers were heterozygous. A panel of > 100 unrelated ethnically 
matched controls was screened, and the mutation was not identified outside the 
families. Furthermore, the candidate variant is predicted to be damaging by in 
silico software giving a CADD (Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion) score of 
25.5, which indicates that the variant is among the top 1% of the deleterious 
variants in the human genome.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of the same homozygous mutation segregating with 
disease in two different families supports the important role of the gene in the 
development of the disorder and this may contribute to novel approaches, 
prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling of families with EDAR related 
disorders.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.3113
PMID: 31310406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]