---
reference_id: "PMID:28668823"
title: Desmoid Tumors in Familial Adenomatous Polyposis.
authors:
- DE Marchis ML
- Tonelli F
- Quaresmini D
- Lovero D
- Della-Morte D
- Silvestris F
- Guadagni F
- Palmirotta R
journal: Anticancer Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.21873/anticanres.11702
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Desmoid Tumors in Familial Adenomatous Polyposis.
**Authors:** DE Marchis ML, Tonelli F, Quaresmini D, Lovero D, Della-Morte D, Silvestris F, Guadagni F, Palmirotta R
**Journal:** Anticancer Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.21873/anticanres.11702](https://doi.org/10.21873/anticanres.11702)

## Content

1. Anticancer Res. 2017 Jul;37(7):3357-3366. doi: 10.21873/anticanres.11702.

Desmoid Tumors in Familial Adenomatous Polyposis.

DE Marchis ML(1), Tonelli F(2), Quaresmini D(3), Lovero D(3), Della-Morte 
D(4)(5), Silvestris F(3), Guadagni F(1)(4), Palmirotta R(6).

Author information:
(1)Interinstitutional Multidisciplinary Biobank (BioBIM), IRCCS San Raffaele 
Pisana, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Surgery and Translational Medicine, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Oncology, Aldo Moro University 
of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(4)San Raffaele Roma Open University, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Systems Medicine, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Oncology, Aldo Moro University 
of Bari, Bari, Italy raffaelepalmirotta@gmail.com.

Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a cancer syndrome caused by a germline 
mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. It is characterized by 
the presence of hundreds of colonic polyps, which have a high tendency to 
undergo malignant transformation. Among associated lesions in FAP, desmoid 
tumors represent a common possible life-threatening condition that requires 
special attention. They are rare tumors occurring with a particularly high 
incidence in FAP, especially after surgery. In agreement with Knudson's 
'two-hit' theory, the inactivation of the residual APC gene in FAP is a critical 
step in the development of both colorectal cancer and desmoids. Several lines of 
evidence show that germline mutations affect the functional domains of the APC 
gene that are responsible for interactions of the transcript with β-catenin, 
whereas somatic second mutations involve the downstream region of the gene. 
Hence, an understanding of the molecular pathways underlying desmoid progression 
in FAP could be important for research and a valid resource for the early 
prevention and tailored treatment of this disease. In this review, we provide an 
updated insight into desmoids in FAP syndrome, from molecular pathogenesis to 
the main issues in management, with special attention given to genetic and 
molecular features of these tumors.

Copyright© 2017, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J. 
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.11702
PMID: 28668823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]