---
reference_id: "PMID:34002083"
title: "Pancreatic cancer epidemiology: understanding the role of lifestyle and inherited risk factors."
authors:
- Klein AP
journal: Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41575-021-00457-x
keywords:
- Comorbidity
- Early Detection of Cancer
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Life Style
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, mortality"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pancreatic cancer epidemiology: understanding the role of lifestyle and inherited risk factors.
**Authors:** Klein AP
**Journal:** Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41575-021-00457-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41575-021-00457-x)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021 Jul;18(7):493-502. doi: 
10.1038/s41575-021-00457-x. Epub 2021 May 17.

Pancreatic cancer epidemiology: understanding the role of lifestyle and 
inherited risk factors.

Klein AP(1).

Author information:
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. Aklein1@jhmi.edu.

Pancreatic cancer is a leading cause of cancer death worldwide and its global 
burden has more than doubled over the past 25 years. The highest incidence 
regions for pancreatic cancer include North America, Europe and Australia, and 
although much of this increase is due to ageing worldwide populations, there are 
key modifiable risk factors for pancreatic cancer such as cigarette smoking, 
obesity, diabetes and alcohol intake. The prevalence of these risk factors is 
increasing in many global regions, resulting in increasing age-adjusted 
incidence rates for pancreatic cancer, but the relative contribution from these 
risk factors varies globally due to variation in the underlying prevalence and 
prevention strategies. Inherited genetic factors, although not directly 
modifiable, are an important component of pancreatic cancer risk, and include 
pathogenic variants in hereditary cancer genes, genes associated with hereditary 
pancreatitis, as well as common variants identified in genome-wide association 
studies. Identification of the genetic changes that underlie pancreatic cancer 
not only provides insight into the aetiology of this cancer but also provides an 
opportunity to guide early detection strategies. The goal of this Review is to 
provide an up-to-date overview of the established modifiable and inherited risk 
factors for pancreatic cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/s41575-021-00457-x
PMCID: PMC9265847
PMID: 34002083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The author declares no 
competing interests.