---
reference_id: "PMID:41089687"
title: "Scalp seborrheic dermatitis demonstrates a skewing of Th1 activation: a proteomic study in lesional skin."
authors:
- Shen N
- Chen W
- Hu L
- Huang J
- Dong Q
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1638710
keywords:
- Humans
- "Th1 Cells/immunology, metabolism"
- Female
- Proteomics/methods
- "Dermatitis, Seborrheic/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Lymphocyte Activation/immunology
- "Scalp/pathology, immunology"
- "Skin/immunology, pathology, metabolism"
- Aged
- Signal Transduction
- "Scalp Dermatoses/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scalp seborrheic dermatitis demonstrates a skewing of Th1 activation: a proteomic study in lesional skin.
**Authors:** Shen N, Chen W, Hu L, Huang J, Dong Q
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2025.1638710](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2025.1638710)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2025 Sep 29;16:1638710. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1638710. 
eCollection 2025.

Scalp seborrheic dermatitis demonstrates a skewing of Th1 activation: a 
proteomic study in lesional skin.

Shen N(1), Chen W(1), Hu L(1), Huang J(1), Dong Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Dermatology Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Huzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.

INTRODUCTION: Scalp seborrheic dermatitis (SSD) is a common, chronic 
inflammatory skin disease. Its pathogenesis and immunological features have been 
poorly studied.
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the molecular profile of adult patients with SSD in 
lesional scalps.
METHODS: Using punch biopsies, we assessed 92 inflammatory biomarkers in the 
lesional scalps of SSD patients (n=16) and demographically matched healthy 
controls (HCs; n=12) via Olink high-throughput proteomics.
RESULTS: We identified 16 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between 
lesional scalps of patients with SSD and those of HCs. SSD lesional scalps 
demonstrated significantly greater expressions of proteins related to 
T-cell/lymphocyte activation, the cytokine storm signaling pathway and the 
CGAS-STING signaling pathway. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) highlighted Th1 
skewing. These data suggest that SSD is associated with Th1 skewing and the 
dysregulation of lipid metabolism.
CONCLUSION: These analyses provide a rationale for novel treatment approaches 
for SSD patients, mainly those targeting Th1 pathways.

Copyright © 2025 Shen, Chen, Hu, Huang and Dong.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1638710
PMCID: PMC12515636
PMID: 41089687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.