---
reference_id: "PMID:38713001"
title: "Differential diagnosis of contact dermatitis: A practical-approach review by the EADV Task Force on contact dermatitis."
authors:
- Pesqué D
- Aerts O
- Bizjak M
- Gonçalo M
- Dugonik A
- Simon D
- Ljubojević-Hadzavdić S
- Malinauskiene L
- Wilkinson M
- Czarnecka-Operacz M
- Krecisz B
- John SM
- Balato A
- Ayala F
- Rustemeyer T
- Giménez-Arnau AM
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.20052
keywords:
- Humans
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Dermatitis, Contact/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Dermatitis, Allergic Contact/diagnosis"
- "Dermatitis, Irritant/diagnosis, etiology"
- Patch Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential diagnosis of contact dermatitis: A practical-approach review by the EADV Task Force on contact dermatitis.
**Authors:** Pesqué D, Aerts O, Bizjak M, Gonçalo M, Dugonik A, Simon D, Ljubojević-Hadzavdić S, Malinauskiene L, Wilkinson M, Czarnecka-Operacz M, Krecisz B, John SM, Balato A, Ayala F, Rustemeyer T, Giménez-Arnau AM
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.20052](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.20052)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2024 Sep;38(9):1704-1722. doi:
10.1111/jdv.20052.  Epub 2024 May 7.

Differential diagnosis of contact dermatitis: A practical-approach review by the 
EADV Task Force on contact dermatitis.

Pesqué D(1), Aerts O(2), Bizjak M(3), Gonçalo M(4)(5), Dugonik A(6), Simon D(7), 
Ljubojević-Hadzavdić S(8), Malinauskiene L(9), Wilkinson M(10), 
Czarnecka-Operacz M(11), Krecisz B(12), John SM(13), Balato A(14), Ayala F(15), 
Rustemeyer T(16), Giménez-Arnau AM(17).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Department, Hospital del Mar Research Institute, Department of 
Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Antwerp (UZA) and Research 
Group Immunology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Division of Allergy, University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases 
Golnik, Golnik, Slovenia.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Coimbra University Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, 
Slovenia.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Inselspital University Hospital of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(8)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University Hospital Center Zagreb, 
School of Medicine University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(9)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Clinic of Chest 
Diseases, Immunology and Allergology, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(10)Leeds Centre for Dermatology, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Chapel 
Allerton Hospital, Leeds, UK.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Poznan, Poznan, Poland.
(12)Collegium Medicum, Jan Kochanowski University Kielce, Kielce, Poland.
(13)Department of Dermatology, Environmental Medicine, Osnabrueck University, 
Osnabrueck, Germany.
(14)Dermatology Unit, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(15)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples Federico 
II, Naples, Italy.
(16)Dermato-Allergology and Occupational Dermatology, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centers, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(17)Dermatology Department, Hospital del Mar Research Institute, Universitat 
Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.

The diagnosis of eczema ('dermatitis') is mostly clinical and depends on the 
clinical history and exploratory objective findings (primary lesions, patterns). 
Contact dermatitis remains as an important condition in the group of eczematous 
disorders, with important socioeconomic and occupational relevance. Although 
irritant and allergic contact dermatitis have a different pathogenesis, both are 
characterized by a rather typical morphology, are triggered by external factors 
and tend to occur primarily in the area of contact with the exogenous agent. In 
addition, allergic and irritant dermatitis may also co-exist. The importance of 
diagnosing contact dermatitis, especially when allergic in nature, is both due 
to the possibility of avoiding the trigger, and due to its role in aggravating 
other skin conditions. Nevertheless, the heterogeneity of clinical presentations 
in daily practice may pose an important challenge for the suspicion and correct 
diagnosis of contact dermatitis. Furthermore, other conditions, with different 
pathogenesis and treatment, may clinically simulate contact dermatitis. The Task 
Force aims to conduct a review of the unifying clinical features of contact 
dermatitis and characterize its main clinical phenotypes, and its simulators, in 
order to contribute to an early suspicion or recognition of contact dermatitis 
and enable a correct differential diagnosis.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of 
Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.20052
PMID: 38713001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]