---
reference_id: "PMID:36670547"
title: The molecular mechanisms of acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity and its potential therapeutic targets.
authors:
- Luo G
- Huang L
- Zhang Z
journal: Exp Biol Med (Maywood)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/15353702221147563
keywords:
- Humans
- Acetaminophen/adverse effects
- Oxidative Stress
- Chemical and Drug Induced Liver Injury/drug therapy
- Acetylcysteine/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The molecular mechanisms of acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity and its potential therapeutic targets.
**Authors:** Luo G, Huang L, Zhang Z
**Journal:** Exp Biol Med (Maywood) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/15353702221147563](https://doi.org/10.1177/15353702221147563)

## Content

1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2023 May;248(5):412-424. doi:
10.1177/15353702221147563.  Epub 2023 Jan 20.

The molecular mechanisms of acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity and its 
potential therapeutic targets.

Luo G(1), Huang L(2), Zhang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Jinhua Municipal Central Hospital, Jinhua 321000, China.
(2)Ningbo Medical Center Lihuili Hospital, Ningbo 315040, China.

Acetaminophen (APAP), a widely used antipyretic and analgesic drug in clinics, 
is relatively safe at therapeutic doses; however, APAP overdose may lead to 
fatal acute liver injury. Currently, N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is clinically used 
as the main antidote for APAP poisoning, but its therapeutic effect remains 
limited owing to rapid disease progression and the general diagnosis of advanced 
poisoning. As is well known, APAP-induced hepatotoxicity (AIH) is mainly caused 
by the toxic metabolite N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI), and the toxic 
mechanisms of AIH are complicated. Several cellular processes are involved in 
the pathogenesis of AIH, including liver metabolism, mitochondrial oxidative 
stress and dysfunction, sterile inflammation, endoplasmic reticulum stress, 
autophagy, and microcirculation dysfunction. Mitochondrial oxidative stress and 
dysfunction are the major cellular events associated with APAP-induced liver 
injury. Many biomolecules involved in these biological processes are potential 
therapeutic targets for AIH. Therefore, there is an urgent need to 
comprehensively clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying AIH and to explore 
novel therapeutic strategies. This review summarizes the various cellular events 
involved in AIH and discusses their potential therapeutic targets, with the aim 
of providing new ideas for the treatment of AIH.

DOI: 10.1177/15353702221147563
PMCID: PMC10281617
PMID: 36670547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.