---
reference_id: "PMID:38582079"
title: Human iPSC 4R tauopathy model uncovers modifiers of tau propagation.
authors:
- Parra Bravo C
- Giani AM
- Madero-Perez J
- Zhao Z
- Wan Y
- Samelson AJ
- Wong MY
- Evangelisti A
- Cordes E
- Fan L
- Ye P
- Zhu D
- Pozner T
- Mercedes M
- Patel T
- Yarahmady A
- Carling GK
- Sterky FH
- Lee VMY
- Lee EB
- DeTure M
- Dickson DW
- Sharma M
- Mok SA
- Luo W
- Zhao M
- Kampmann M
- Gong S
- Gan L
journal: Cell
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.015
keywords:
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- tau Proteins/metabolism
- "Tauopathies/metabolism, pathology"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Mice
- "Alzheimer Disease/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- Cell Differentiation
- Mutation
- Autophagy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human iPSC 4R tauopathy model uncovers modifiers of tau propagation.
**Authors:** Parra Bravo C, Giani AM, Madero-Perez J, Zhao Z, Wan Y, Samelson AJ, Wong MY, Evangelisti A, Cordes E, Fan L, Ye P, Zhu D, Pozner T, Mercedes M, Patel T, Yarahmady A, Carling GK, Sterky FH, Lee VMY, Lee EB, DeTure M, Dickson DW, Sharma M, Mok SA, Luo W, Zhao M, Kampmann M, Gong S, Gan L
**Journal:** Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.015)

## Content

1. Cell. 2024 May 9;187(10):2446-2464.e22. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.015. Epub 
2024 Apr 5.

Human iPSC 4R tauopathy model uncovers modifiers of tau propagation.

Parra Bravo C(1), Giani AM(2), Madero-Perez J(2), Zhao Z(2), Wan Y(2), Samelson 
AJ(3), Wong MY(2), Evangelisti A(2), Cordes E(2), Fan L(2), Ye P(2), Zhu D(2), 
Pozner T(2), Mercedes M(2), Patel T(4), Yarahmady A(4), Carling GK(2), Sterky 
FH(5), Lee VMY(6), Lee EB(7), DeTure M(8), Dickson DW(8), Sharma M(2), Mok 
SA(4), Luo W(2), Zhao M(2), Kampmann M(3), Gong S(9), Gan L(10).

Author information:
(1)Helen and Robert Appel Alzheimer's Disease Institute, Feil Family Brain and 
Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA; 
Neuroscience Graduate Program, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA.
(2)Helen and Robert Appel Alzheimer's Disease Institute, Feil Family Brain and 
Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA.
(3)Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of Biochemistry and 
Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, 
USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7, 
Canada.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Gothenburg, 41345 
Gothenburg, Sweden; Department of Clinical Chemistry, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, 41345 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(6)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(7)Institute of Aging, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.
(8)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(9)Helen and Robert Appel Alzheimer's Disease Institute, Feil Family Brain and 
Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA. 
Electronic address: shg3006@med.cornell.edu.
(10)Helen and Robert Appel Alzheimer's Disease Institute, Feil Family Brain and 
Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA; 
Neuroscience Graduate Program, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA. 
Electronic address: lig2033@med.cornell.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jun 22:2023.06.19.544278. doi: 10.1101/2023.06.19.544278.

Tauopathies are age-associated neurodegenerative diseases whose mechanistic 
underpinnings remain elusive, partially due to a lack of appropriate human 
models. Here, we engineered human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived 
neuronal lines to express 4R Tau and 4R Tau carrying the P301S MAPT mutation 
when differentiated into neurons. 4R-P301S neurons display progressive Tau 
inclusions upon seeding with Tau fibrils and recapitulate features of tauopathy 
phenotypes including shared transcriptomic signatures, autophagic body 
accumulation, and reduced neuronal activity. A CRISPRi screen of genes 
associated with Tau pathobiology identified over 500 genetic modifiers of 
seeding-induced Tau propagation, including retromer VPS29 and genes in the 
UFMylation cascade. In progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and Alzheimer's 
Disease (AD) brains, the UFMylation cascade is altered in 
neurofibrillary-tangle-bearing neurons. Inhibiting the UFMylation cascade 
in vitro and in vivo suppressed seeding-induced Tau propagation. This model 
provides a robust platform to identify novel therapeutic strategies for 4R 
tauopathy.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.015
PMCID: PMC11365117
PMID: 38582079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.