---
reference_id: "PMID:20301393"
title: Mucolipidosis IV.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Misko A
- Grishchuk Y
- Goldin E
- Schiffmann R
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucolipidosis IV.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Misko A, Grishchuk Y, Goldin E, Schiffmann R

## Content

1. Mucolipidosis IV.

Misko A(1), Grishchuk Y(2), Goldin E(3), Schiffmann R(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Jan 28 [updated 2021 Feb 11].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Center for Genomic 
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(3)Section on Molecular Neurogenetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human 
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(4)Baylor Scott & White Research Institute, Dallas, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Mucolipidosis IV (MLIV) is an ultra-rare lysosomal 
storage disorder characterized by severe psychomotor delay, progressive visual 
impairment, and achlorhydria. Individuals with MLIV typically present by the end 
of the first year of life with delayed developmental milestones (due to a 
developmental brain abnormality) and impaired vision (resulting from a 
combination of corneal clouding and retinal degeneration). By adolescence, all 
individuals with MLIV have severe visual impairment. A neurodegenerative 
component of MLIV has become more widely appreciated, with the majority of 
individuals demonstrating progressive spastic quadriparesis and loss of 
psychomotor skills starting in the second decade of life. About 5% of 
individuals have atypical MLIV, manifesting with less severe psychomotor 
impairment, but still exhibiting progressive retinal degeneration and 
achlorhydria.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: MLIV is suspected in individuals with typical clinical 
findings and elevated plasma gastrin concentration or polymorphic lysosomal 
inclusions in skin or conjunctival biopsy. Identification of biallelic 
pathogenic variants in MCOLN1 confirms the diagnosis.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Developmental and educational services 
including speech therapy; physical therapy and bracing for hypotonia and 
spasticity; intramuscular botulinum toxin injections or oral medications for 
muscle spasticity and rigidity as needed; anti-seizure medication as needed; 
surgical correction of strabismus; high-contrast black and white materials for 
those with visual impairment; topical lubricating eye drops, artificial tears, 
gels, or ointments for ocular irritation; feeding therapy and/or gastrostomy 
tube placement may be required for persistent feeding issues; management of 
constipation and bile reflux per gastroenterologist; treatment of kidney failure 
per nephrologist; iron supplementation as needed. Surveillance: Monitor those 
with seizures and assess for new neurologic manifestations at least annually; 
assessment of musculoskeletal complications as indicated; monitor developmental 
progress at least annually; annual ophthalmology examination; feeding and growth 
evaluation at least annually; cystatin C levels to monitor kidney function at 
least annually; complete blood count and iron studies annually. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Chloroquine may be contraindicated.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MLIV is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the MCOLN1 pathogenic variants have 
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301393