---
reference_id: "PMID:37143126"
title: Pathogenic mechanisms and regulatory factors involved in alcoholic liver disease.
authors:
- Yan C
- Hu W
- Tu J
- Li J
- Liang Q
- Han S
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-023-04166-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic mechanisms and regulatory factors involved in alcoholic liver disease.
**Authors:** Yan C, Hu W, Tu J, Li J, Liang Q, Han S
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-023-04166-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-023-04166-8)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2023 May 4;21(1):300. doi: 10.1186/s12967-023-04166-8.

Pathogenic mechanisms and regulatory factors involved in alcoholic liver 
disease.

Yan C(1), Hu W(2), Tu J(3), Li J(4), Liang Q(2), Han S(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Anhui Province Key Laboratory of 
Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division 
of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, 
Hefei, 230001, Anhui, China.
(2)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Key 
Lab of Microanalytical Methods & Instrumentation, Department of Chemistry, 
Center for Synthetic and Systems Biology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, 
China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Wannan Medical College, Yijishan Hospital of 
Wannan Medical College of Wuhu, Wannan Medical College, Wuhu, 241000, Anhui, 
China.
(4)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Biological Resources and Genetic Engineering, 
College of Life Science and Technology, Xinjiang University, Urumqi, 830046, 
China.
(5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Anhui Province Key Laboratory of 
Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division 
of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, 
Hefei, 230001, Anhui, China. 1439658593@qq.com.
(6)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Biological Resources and Genetic Engineering, 
College of Life Science and Technology, Xinjiang University, Urumqi, 830046, 
China. 1439658593@qq.com.

Alcoholism is a widespread and damaging behaviour of people throughout the 
world. Long-term alcohol consumption has resulted in alcoholic liver disease 
(ALD) being the leading cause of chronic liver disease. Many metabolic enzymes, 
including alcohol dehydrogenases such as ADH, CYP2E1, and CATacetaldehyde 
dehydrogenases ALDHsand nonoxidative metabolizing enzymes such as SULT, UGT, and 
FAEES, are involved in the metabolism of ethanol, the main component in 
alcoholic beverages. Ethanol consumption changes the functional or expression 
profiles of various regulatory factors, such as kinases, transcription factors, 
and microRNAs. Therefore, the underlying mechanisms of ALD are complex, 
involving inflammation, mitochondrial damage, endoplasmic reticulum stress, 
nitrification, and oxidative stress. Moreover, recent evidence has demonstrated 
that the gut-liver axis plays a critical role in ALD pathogenesis. For example, 
ethanol damages the intestinal barrier, resulting in the release of endotoxins 
and alterations in intestinal flora content and bile acid metabolism. However, 
ALD therapies show low effectiveness. Therefore, this review summarizes ethanol 
metabolism pathways and highly influential pathogenic mechanisms and regulatory 
factors involved in ALD pathology with the aim of new therapeutic insights.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-023-04166-8
PMCID: PMC10158301
PMID: 37143126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.