---
reference_id: "PMID:19386237"
title: Enhanced degradation of synaptophysin by the proteasome in mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIB.
authors:
- Vitry S
- Ausseil J
- Hocquemiller M
- Bigou S
- Dos Santos Coura R
- Heard JM
journal: Mol Cell Neurosci
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2009.01.001
keywords:
- "Acetylglucosaminidase/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Behavior/physiology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Cerebral Cortex/cytology, metabolism, pathology"
- Child
- Female
- GAP-43 Protein/metabolism
- Heparan Sulfate/metabolism
- Humans
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis III/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Neurons/cytology, metabolism"
- Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/metabolism
- R-SNARE Proteins/metabolism
- "Synaptophysin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enhanced degradation of synaptophysin by the proteasome in mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIB.
**Authors:** Vitry S, Ausseil J, Hocquemiller M, Bigou S, Dos Santos Coura R, Heard JM
**Journal:** Mol Cell Neurosci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcn.2009.01.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcn.2009.01.001)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2009 May;41(1):8-18. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2009.01.001. Epub
2009 Jan 21.

Enhanced degradation of synaptophysin by the proteasome in mucopolysaccharidosis
type IIIB.

Vitry S(1), Ausseil J, Hocquemiller M, Bigou S, Dos Santos Coura R, Heard JM.

Author information:
(1)Unité Rétrovirus et Transfert Génétique, INSERM U622, Department of
Neuroscience, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris, France.

The interruption of the lysosomal degradation of heparan sulfate
oligosaccharides has deleterious consequences on the central nervous system in
children or in animals with mucopolysaccharidosis type III (Sanfilippo
syndrome). Behavioural manifestations are prominent at disease onset, suggesting
possible early synaptic defects in cortical neurons. We report that
synaptophysin, the most abundant protein of the synaptic vesicle membrane, was
detected at low levels in the rostral cortex of MPSIII type B mice as early as
10 days after birth. This defect preceded other disease manifestations, was
associated with normal neuron and synapse density and corrected after gene
transfer inducing re-expression of the missing lysosomal enzyme. Clearance of
heparan sulfate oligosaccharides in cultured embryonic MPSIIIB cortical neurons
or treatment with proteasome inhibitors restored normal synaptophysin levels
indicating that heparan sulfate oligosaccharides activate the degradation of
synaptophysin by the proteasome with consequences on synaptic vesicle components
that are relevant to clinical manifestations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcn.2009.01.001
PMID: 19386237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
