---
reference_id: "PMID:39350244"
title: Identifying SETBP1 haploinsufficiency molecular pathways to improve patient diagnosis using induced pluripotent stem cells and neural disease modelling.
authors:
- Shaw NC
- Chen K
- Farley KO
- Hedges M
- Forbes C
- Baynam G
- Lassmann T
- Fear VS
journal: Mol Autism
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13229-024-00625-1
keywords:
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, cytology"
- Humans
- Haploinsufficiency
- Cell Differentiation
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "GATA2 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- Wnt Signaling Pathway/genetics
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identifying SETBP1 haploinsufficiency molecular pathways to improve patient diagnosis using induced pluripotent stem cells and neural disease modelling.
**Authors:** Shaw NC, Chen K, Farley KO, Hedges M, Forbes C, Baynam G, Lassmann T, Fear VS
**Journal:** Mol Autism (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13229-024-00625-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-024-00625-1)

## Content

1. Mol Autism. 2024 Sep 30;15(1):42. doi: 10.1186/s13229-024-00625-1.

Identifying SETBP1 haploinsufficiency molecular pathways to improve patient 
diagnosis using induced pluripotent stem cells and neural disease modelling.

Shaw NC(#)(1), Chen K(#)(1), Farley KO(1), Hedges M(1), Forbes C(1), Baynam 
G(2), Lassmann T(#)(1), Fear VS(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)The Kids Research Institute of Australia, The University of Western 
Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(2)Rare Care Centre, Perth Children's Hospital, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(3)The Kids Research Institute of Australia, The University of Western 
Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia. vanessa.fear@telethonkids.org.au.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: SETBP1 Haploinsufficiency Disorder (SETBP1-HD) is characterised by 
mild to moderate intellectual disability, speech and language impairment, mild 
motor developmental delay, behavioural issues, hypotonia, mild facial 
dysmorphisms, and vision impairment. Despite a clear link between SETBP1 
mutations and neurodevelopmental disorders the precise role of SETBP1 in neural 
development remains elusive. We investigate the functional effects of three 
SETBP1 genetic variants including two pathogenic mutations p.Glu545Ter and 
SETBP1 p.Tyr1066Ter, resulting in removal of SKI and/or SET domains, and a point 
mutation p.Thr1387Met in the SET domain.
METHODS: Genetic variants were introduced into induced pluripotent stem cells 
(iPSCs) and subsequently differentiated into neurons to model the disease. We 
measured changes in cellular differentiation, SETBP1 protein localisation, and 
gene expression changes.
RESULTS: The data indicated a change in the WNT pathway, RNA polymerase II 
pathway and identified GATA2 as a central transcription factor in disease 
perturbation. In addition, the genetic variants altered the expression of gene 
sets related to neural forebrain development matching characteristics typical of 
the SETBP1-HD phenotype.
LIMITATIONS: The study investigates changes in cellular function in 
differentiation of iPSC to neural progenitor cells as a human model of SETBP1 HD 
disorder. Future studies may provide additional information relevant to disease 
on further neural cell specification, to derive mature neurons, neural forebrain 
cells, or brain organoids.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a human SETBP1-HD model and identified perturbations 
to the WNT and POL2RA pathway, genes regulated by GATA2. Strikingly neural cells 
for both the SETBP1 truncation mutations and the single nucleotide variant 
displayed a SETBP1-HD-like phenotype.

© 2024. Crown.

DOI: 10.1186/s13229-024-00625-1
PMCID: PMC11443744
PMID: 39350244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.