---
reference_id: "PMID:40349694"
title: Potential Key Genes for Giant Cell Arteritis Revealed Based on Single-Cell Sequencing and Mendelian Randomization Analysis.
authors:
- Cheng T
- Chen J
- Shan X
- Jia B
- Sang S
- Wang Y
- Wei Y
- Hu Y
journal: Int Arch Allergy Immunol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1159/000546323
keywords:
- Giant Cell Arteritis/genetics
- Humans
- Mendelian Randomization Analysis
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Quantitative Trait Loci
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential Key Genes for Giant Cell Arteritis Revealed Based on Single-Cell Sequencing and Mendelian Randomization Analysis.
**Authors:** Cheng T, Chen J, Shan X, Jia B, Sang S, Wang Y, Wei Y, Hu Y
**Journal:** Int Arch Allergy Immunol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000546323](https://doi.org/10.1159/000546323)

## Content

1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2026;187(2):199-212. doi: 10.1159/000546323. Epub
2025  May 9.

Potential Key Genes for Giant Cell Arteritis Revealed Based on Single-Cell
Sequencing and Mendelian Randomization Analysis.

Cheng T(1)(2), Chen J(2), Shan X(1)(2), Jia B(1)(2), Sang S(3), Wang Y(1)(2),
Wei Y(4), Hu Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Cardiological Medicine, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences Guang'anmen Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Shenzhen Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Shenzhen,
China.
(4)Department of Cardiological Medicine, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences Guang'anmen Hospital, Beijing, China, tiandianxiaowu3@163.com.
(5)Department of Cardiological Medicine, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences Guang'anmen Hospital, Beijing, China, huiyuhui55@sohu.com.

INTRODUCTION: Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is an autoimmune disease affecting
medium and large arteries. It varies in presentation and often recurs,
potentially leading to blindness and aneurysms. The pathogenesis of GCA is not
well understood. This study aimed to identify key genes linked to GCA and
explore potential pathogenic mechanisms.
METHODS: This study integrated single-cell RNA sequencing, expression
quantitative trait loci, and genome-wide association study data, employing a
two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) method to explore the causal effects of
marker genes in CD4+ T cells on the development of GCA. Additionally,
colocalization analysis was conducted to determine whether there was a shared
causal variant.
RESULTS: Through single-cell RNA sequencing and MR analysis, we identified three
key genes, RCAN3, RPS6, and HLA-DQB1, that had a causal relationship with a
reduced risk of GCA. Specifically, RCAN3 (OR = 0.49, 95% CI = 0.26-0.93, p =
0.03), RPS6 (OR = 0.21, 95% CI = 0.06-0.73, p = 0.01), and HLA-DQB1 (OR = 0.76,
95% CI = 0.62-0.93, p = 0.01) were inversely associated with the disease.
Multiple sensitivity analysis methods showed no heterogeneity and pleiotropy,
and ruled out potential reverse causality, demonstrating the robustness of MR
analysis results. Colocalization analysis revealed that HLA-DQB1 and GCA were
related to SNPs within the same genomic region but involved different causal
variants.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified three potential key genes (RCAN3, RPS6, and
HLA-DQB1) linked to the causality of GCA, providing new perspectives on the
pathogenesis of GCA and new avenues for therapeutic strategies.

© 2025 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000546323
PMID: 40349694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
