---
reference_id: "PMID:36063482"
title: Long-Chain Hydroxyacyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency / Trifunctional Protein Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Prasun P
- LoPiccolo MK
- Ginevic I
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Chain Hydroxyacyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency / Trifunctional Protein Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Prasun P, LoPiccolo MK, Ginevic I

## Content

1. Long-Chain Hydroxyacyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency / Trifunctional Protein
Deficiency.

Prasun P(1), LoPiccolo MK(1), Ginevic I(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2022 Sep 1.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Long-chain hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD)
deficiency and trifunctional protein (TFP) deficiency are caused by impairment
of mitochondrial TFP. TFP has three enzymatic activities – long-chain enoyl-CoA
hydratase, long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, and long-chain
3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase. In individuals with LCHAD deficiency, there is isolated
deficiency of long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, while deficiency of
all three enzymes occurs in individuals with TFP deficiency. Individuals with
TFP deficiency can present with a severe-to-mild phenotype, while individuals
with LCHAD deficiency typically present with a severe-to-intermediate phenotype.
Neonates with the severe phenotype present within a few days of birth with
hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, encephalopathy, and often cardiomyopathy. The
intermediate phenotype is characterized by hypoketotic hypoglycemia precipitated
by infection or fasting in infancy. The mild (late-onset) phenotype is
characterized by myopathy and/or neuropathy. Long-term complications include
peripheral neuropathy and retinopathy.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of LCHAD/TFP deficiency is established in a
proband with elevation of long-chain 3-hydroxyacylcarnitine species in plasma
and/or increased excretion of 3-hydroxy-dicarboxylic acids in urine in
combination with identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in HADHA or
HADHB by molecular genetic testing. Distinguishing LCHAD deficiency from TFP
deficiency requires identification of isolated long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency on enzymatic assay in lymphocytes or skin fibroblasts.
TFP deficiency is confirmed by the identification of deficiencies in all three
TFP enzymatic activities (long-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase, long-chain
3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, and long-chain 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase) in
lymphocytes or skin fibroblasts.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment: Avoidance of fasting using frequent feeds, decreasing
feeding intervals and supplemental carbohydrates during illness, and continuing
overnight feeds in older children as needed for hypoglycemia; medium-chain
triglyceride (MCT) or triheptanoin supplementation; low-fat diet; carnitine
supplementation in those with carnitine deficiency; feeding therapy and
gastrostomy tube as needed; developmental services; and treatment of cardiac
dysfunction, peripheral neuropathy, and retinopathy by relevant specialists.
Emergency outpatient treatment for mild decompensation includes decreasing the
fasting interval, administration of antipyretics for fever, and antiemetics as
needed for vomiting. Acute treatment includes hospitalization with intravenous
fluid containing at least 10% dextrose, and bicarbonate therapy for severe
metabolic acidosis; management of hyperammonemia and rhabdomyolysis; and
management of cardiomyopathy per cardiologist. Prevention of primary
manifestations: Avoidance of fasting; supplementation with MCT or triheptanoin;
strict dietary management; education of parents and caregivers to ensure prompt
treatment; written protocol for emergency treatment. Surveillance: Monitor
nutrition, serum plasma free and total carnitine, acylcarnitine profile,
creatine kinase, AST, and ALT with frequency based on age; annual comprehensive
fatty acid profile; monitor head size, growth, and development at each visit
throughout childhood; neuropsychological testing and quality of life assessments
as needed; EKG and echocardiography annually or more frequently as needed;
annual neurology evaluation with nerve conduction velocity and electromyography
as needed; annual ophthalmology evaluation with electroretinography every two to
three years. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Fasting; inadequate calories during
stressors; dehydration; high-fat diets including ketogenic and carbohydrate
restricted diet; anesthetics that contain high doses of long-chain fatty acids;
intravenous intralipids during acute metabolic crisis. Evaluation of relatives
at risk: Testing of all at-risk sibs of any age is warranted (targeted molecular
genetic testing if the familial pathogenic variants are known or plasma
acylcarnitine profile, plasma free and total carnitine, and urine organic acid
assay if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known) to allow for early
diagnosis and treatment of LCHAD/TFP deficiency. Pregnancy management: Increase
MCT intake in the third trimester; high dextrose infusion in the peripartum
period. Monitor for HELLP syndrome and acute fatty liver of pregnancy in
pregnant females who are heterozygous for an HADHA or HADHB pathogenic variant
(including suspected carriers).
GENETIC COUNSELING: LCHAD/TFP deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an HADHA or HADHB
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25%
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a
25% chance of inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Once the
HADHA or HADHB pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family
member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal and preimplantation
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 36063482
