---
reference_id: "PMID:37373084"
title: New Cases and Mutations in SEC23B Gene Causing Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type II.
authors:
- Musri MM
- Venturi V
- Ferrer-Cortès X
- Romero-Cortadellas L
- Hernández G
- Leoz P
- Ricard Andrés MP
- Morado M
- Fernández Valle MDC
- Beneitez Pastor D
- Ortuño Cabrero A
- Moreno Gamiz M
- Senent Peris L
- Perez-Valencia AI
- Pérez-Montero S
- Tornador C
- Sánchez M
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24129935
keywords:
- Humans
- "Anemia, Dyserythropoietic, Congenital/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Exons
- Alleles
- "Vesicular Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Cases and Mutations in SEC23B Gene Causing Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type II.
**Authors:** Musri MM, Venturi V, Ferrer-Cortès X, Romero-Cortadellas L, Hernández G, Leoz P, Ricard Andrés MP, Morado M, Fernández Valle MDC, Beneitez Pastor D, Ortuño Cabrero A, Moreno Gamiz M, Senent Peris L, Perez-Valencia AI, Pérez-Montero S, Tornador C, Sánchez M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24129935](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24129935)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jun 9;24(12):9935. doi: 10.3390/ijms24129935.

New Cases and Mutations in SEC23B Gene Causing Congenital Dyserythropoietic 
Anemia Type II.

Musri MM(1), Venturi V(2), Ferrer-Cortès X(1)(2), Romero-Cortadellas L(2), 
Hernández G(1)(2), Leoz P(3), Ricard Andrés MP(4), Morado M(5), Fernández Valle 
MDC(6), Beneitez Pastor D(7), Ortuño Cabrero A(7), Moreno Gamiz M(8), Senent 
Peris L(9), Perez-Valencia AI(10), Pérez-Montero S(1), Tornador C(1), Sánchez 
M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)BloodGenetics S.L. Diagnostics in Inherited Blood Diseases, 08950 Esplugues 
de Llobregat, Spain.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, Iron Metabolism: Regulation and Diseases Group, 
Universitat Internacional de Catalunya, 08195 Sant Cugat del Vallès, Spain.
(3)Red Blood Cell Disorders Unit, Department of Hematology, Hospital de la Santa 
Creu i Sant Pau, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Hematology and Hemotherapy, Hospital Universitario Fundación Alcorcón, Avda 
Budapest, 28922 Alcorcon, Spain.
(5)Department of Hematology, University Hospital La Paz, 28046 Madrid, Spain.
(6)Hospital Universitario Puerta del Mar, 11009 Cádiz, Spain.
(7)Red Blood Cell Disorders Unit, Hematology Department, Hospital Universitari 
Vall d'Hebron, VHIO, VHIR, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Hospital Universitario Cruces, 48903 Barakaldo, Spain.
(9)Laboratory of Cytomorphology, Unity of Hematologic Diagnostic, Hospital 
Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, 46026 Valencia, Spain.
(10)Department of Hematology, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, 
Spain.

Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II (CDA II) is an inherited autosomal 
recessive blood disorder which belongs to the wide group of ineffective 
erythropoiesis conditions. It is characterized by mild to severe normocytic 
anemia, jaundice, and splenomegaly owing to the hemolytic component. This often 
leads to liver iron overload and gallstones. CDA II is caused by biallelic 
mutations in the SEC23B gene. In this study, we report 9 new CDA II cases and 
identify 16 pathogenic variants, 6 of which are novel. The newly reported 
variants in SEC23B include three missenses (p.Thr445Arg, p.Tyr579Cys, and 
p.Arg701His), one frameshift (p.Asp693GlyfsTer2), and two splicing variants 
(c.1512-2A>G, and the complex intronic variant c.1512-3delinsTT linked to 
c.1512-16_1512-7delACTCTGGAAT in the same allele). Computational analyses of the 
missense variants indicated a loss of key residue interactions within the beta 
sheet and the helical and gelsolin domains, respectively. Analysis of SEC23B 
protein levels done in patient-derived lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) showed a 
significant decrease in SEC23B protein expression, in the absence of SEC23A 
compensation. Reduced SEC23B mRNA expression was only detected in two probands 
carrying nonsense and frameshift variants; the remaining patients showed either 
higher gene expression levels or no expression changes at all. The skipping of 
exons 13 and 14 in the newly reported complex variant 
c.1512-3delinsTT/c.1512-16_1512-7delACTCTGGAAT results in a shorter protein 
isoform, as assessed by RT-PCR followed by Sanger sequencing. In this work, we 
summarize a comprehensive spectrum of SEC23B variants, describe nine new CDA II 
cases accounting for six previously unreported variants, and discuss innovative 
therapeutic approaches for CDA II.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24129935
PMCID: PMC10298408
PMID: 37373084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.