---
reference_id: "PMID:23620515"
title: Durable tumor regression in genetically altered malignant rhabdoid tumors by inhibition of methyltransferase EZH2.
authors:
- Knutson SK
- Warholic NM
- Wigle TJ
- Klaus CR
- Allain CJ
- Raimondi A
- Porter Scott M
- Chesworth R
- Moyer MP
- Copeland RA
- Richon VM
- Pollock RM
- Kuntz KW
- Keilhack H
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1303800110
keywords:
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Apoptosis
- Biphenyl Compounds/pharmacology
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation
- Drug Design
- Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 Protein
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- HEK293 Cells
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- Neoplasm Transplantation
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, therapy"
- "Polycomb Repressive Complex 2/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Pyridines/pharmacology
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/enzymology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Durable tumor regression in genetically altered malignant rhabdoid tumors by inhibition of methyltransferase EZH2.
**Authors:** Knutson SK, Warholic NM, Wigle TJ, Klaus CR, Allain CJ, Raimondi A, Porter Scott M, Chesworth R, Moyer MP, Copeland RA, Richon VM, Pollock RM, Kuntz KW, Keilhack H
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1303800110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1303800110)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):7922-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1303800110. Epub 2013 Apr 25.

Durable tumor regression in genetically altered malignant rhabdoid tumors by
inhibition of methyltransferase EZH2.

Knutson SK(1), Warholic NM, Wigle TJ, Klaus CR, Allain CJ, Raimondi A, Porter
Scott M, Chesworth R, Moyer MP, Copeland RA, Richon VM, Pollock RM, Kuntz KW,
Keilhack H.

Author information:
(1)Epizyme, Inc, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Inactivation of the switch/sucrose nonfermentable complex component SMARCB1 is
extremely prevalent in pediatric malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs) or atypical
teratoid rhabdoid tumors. This alteration is hypothesized to confer oncogenic
dependency on EZH2 in these cancers. We report the discovery of a potent,
selective, and orally bioavailable small-molecule inhibitor of EZH2 enzymatic
activity,
(N-((4,6-dimethyl-2-oxo-1,2-dihydropyridin-3-yl)methyl)-5-(ethyl(tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-yl)amino)-4-methyl-4'-(morpholinomethyl)-[1,1'-biphenyl]-3-carboxamide).
The compound induces apoptosis and differentiation specifically in
SMARCB1-deleted MRT cells. Treatment of xenograft-bearing mice with
(N-((4,6-dimethyl-2-oxo-1,2-dihydropyridin-3-yl)methyl)-5-(ethyl(tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-yl)amino)-4-methyl-4'-(morpholinomethyl)-[1,1'-biphenyl]-3-carboxamide)
leads to dose-dependent regression of MRTs with correlative diminution of
intratumoral trimethylation levels of lysine 27 on histone H3, and prevention of
tumor regrowth after dosing cessation. These data demonstrate the dependency of
SMARCB1 mutant MRTs on EZH2 enzymatic activity and portend the utility of
EZH2-targeted drugs for the treatment of these genetically defined cancers.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1303800110
PMCID: PMC3651445
PMID: 23620515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: All authors
except V.M.R. are employees of Epizyme, Inc.
