---
reference_id: "PMID:18812473"
title: Trisomy 21 enhances human fetal erythro-megakaryocytic development.
authors:
- Chou ST
- Opalinska JB
- Yao Y
- Fernandes MA
- Kalota A
- Brooks JS
- Choi JK
- Gewirtz AM
- Danet-Desnoyers GA
- Nemiroff RL
- Weiss MJ
journal: Blood
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-157859
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- "Down Syndrome/embryology, pathology"
- Erythrocytes/physiology
- Erythroid Precursor Cells/physiology
- Female
- Fetal Tissue Transplantation/physiology
- Hematopoietic System/embryology
- Humans
- "Liver/cytology, embryology, pathology"
- Liver Transplantation/physiology
- Megakaryocytes/physiology
- Mice
- "Mice, SCID"
- Myeloid Progenitor Cells/physiology
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trisomy 21 enhances human fetal erythro-megakaryocytic development.
**Authors:** Chou ST, Opalinska JB, Yao Y, Fernandes MA, Kalota A, Brooks JS, Choi JK, Gewirtz AM, Danet-Desnoyers GA, Nemiroff RL, Weiss MJ
**Journal:** Blood (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2008-05-157859](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2008-05-157859)

## Content

1. Blood. 2008 Dec 1;112(12):4503-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-157859. Epub 2008
 Sep 23.

Trisomy 21 enhances human fetal erythro-megakaryocytic development.

Chou ST(1), Opalinska JB, Yao Y, Fernandes MA, Kalota A, Brooks JS, Choi JK,
Gewirtz AM, Danet-Desnoyers GA, Nemiroff RL, Weiss MJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, USA

Children with Down syndrome exhibit 2 related hematopoietic diseases: transient
myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL).
Both exhibit clonal expansion of blasts with biphenotypic erythroid and
megakaryocytic features and contain somatic GATA1 mutations. While altered GATA1
inhibits erythro-megakaryocytic development, less is known about how trisomy 21
impacts blood formation, particularly in the human fetus where TMD and AMKL
originate. We used in vitro and mouse transplantation assays to study
hematopoiesis in trisomy 21 fetal livers with normal GATA1 alleles. Remarkably,
trisomy 21 progenitors exhibited enhanced production of erythroid and
megakaryocytic cells that proliferated excessively. Our findings indicate that
trisomy 21 itself is associated with cell-autonomous expansion of
erythro-megakaryocytic progenitors. This may predispose to TMD and AMKL by
increasing the pool of cells susceptible to malignant transformation through
acquired mutations in GATA1 and other cooperating genes.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-157859
PMCID: PMC2597125
PMID: 18812473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
