---
reference_id: "PMID:25132663"
title: "Incidence of giant cell arteritis and characteristics of patients: data-driven analysis of comorbidities."
authors:
- Petri H
- Nevitt A
- Sarsour K
- Napalkov P
- Collinson N
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/acr.22429
keywords:
- Age Distribution
- Age Factors
- Aged
- Comorbidity
- "Databases, Factual"
- Drug Prescriptions
- Female
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Odds Ratio
- "Prednisolone/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Prevalence
- Primary Health Care
- Risk Factors
- Sex Distribution
- Sex Factors
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- United Kingdom/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence of giant cell arteritis and characteristics of patients: data-driven analysis of comorbidities.
**Authors:** Petri H, Nevitt A, Sarsour K, Napalkov P, Collinson N
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.22429](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.22429)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2015 Mar;67(3):390-5. doi: 10.1002/acr.22429.

Incidence of giant cell arteritis and characteristics of patients: data-driven 
analysis of comorbidities.

Petri H(1), Nevitt A, Sarsour K, Napalkov P, Collinson N.

Author information:
(1)Petri Consulting, St Albans, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To establish the incidence of giant cell arteritis (GCA), cumulative 
use of prednisolone, and comorbidities most associated with GCA.
METHODS: The data source was the UK Clinical Practice Research Datalink. 
Selection criteria included ≥1 record of a diagnostic term for GCA between 
January 1, 2000 and December 31, 2011, age ≥50 years, and ≥1 prescription of 
oral or systemic corticosteroid. Controls were selected randomly (2:1), with 
year of birth, practice, and followup duration (<2 or ≥2 years) as matching 
variables. Analysis was data driven; all comorbidities were identified in a 
2-year window, with relative risk (RR) calculated and rank ordered.
RESULTS: A total of 4,671 patients fulfilled the definition of GCA (incidence, 
1.0 per 10,000 person-years), with highest incidence (7.4 per 10,000 
person-years) in women ages 70-79 years. Of the 4,671 patients, 4,655 (99.7%) 
were prescribed prednisolone. In the group with ≥2 years' followup (n = 3,074), 
the mean number of prednisolone prescriptions was 32.1, and the mean cumulative 
dose was 8,640 mg; 1,034 patients (33.4%) received a cumulative dose of ≥10,000 
mg. Comorbidities strongly associated with GCA were polymyalgia rheumatica (RR 
14.9, 95% confidence interval [95% CI] 11.9-18.7), visual disturbances (RR 4.6, 
95% CI 2.7-7.8), facial pain (RR 3.3, 95% CI 2.1-5.3), osteoporosis (RR 2.9, 95% 
2.3-3.7), hypokalemia (RR 2.5, 95% CI 1.6-3.9), and various infections such as 
oral/esophageal thrush (RR 3.7, 95% CI 2.2-6.0) and herpes zoster (RR 2.6, 95% 
CI 1.6-4.1).
CONCLUSION: GCA is relatively uncommon; its incidence peaks at age 70-79 years 
in women. Overall, GCA patients in the UK are treated with high cumulative 
prednisolone doses. Many conditions are associated with GCA, including several 
related to corticosteroid use.

Copyright © 2015 by the American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.22429
PMID: 25132663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]