---
reference_id: "PMID:23671276"
title: Impaired very long-chain acyl-CoA β-oxidation in human X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy fibroblasts is a direct consequence of ABCD1 transporter dysfunction.
authors:
- Wiesinger C
- Kunze M
- Regelsberger G
- Forss-Petter S
- Berger J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.445445
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily B, Member 3"
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily D, Member 1"
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, metabolism"
- Acyl Coenzyme A/metabolism
- Adrenoleukodystrophy/metabolism
- Biological Transport
- Cytosol/metabolism
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Oxygen/metabolism
- Peroxisomes/metabolism
- Skin/pathology
- Subcellular Fractions/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired very long-chain acyl-CoA β-oxidation in human X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy fibroblasts is a direct consequence of ABCD1 transporter dysfunction.
**Authors:** Wiesinger C, Kunze M, Regelsberger G, Forss-Petter S, Berger J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.445445](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.445445)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 28;288(26):19269-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.445445. Epub
2013 May 13.

Impaired very long-chain acyl-CoA β-oxidation in human X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy fibroblasts is a direct consequence of ABCD1 transporter
dysfunction.

Wiesinger C(1), Kunze M, Regelsberger G, Forss-Petter S, Berger J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Brain Research, Medical University of Vienna, Spitalgasse 4, 1090
Vienna, Austria.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), an inherited peroxisomal disorder, is
caused by mutations in the ABCD1 gene encoding the peroxisomal ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) transporter ABCD1 (adrenoleukodystrophy protein, ALDP).
Biochemically, X-ALD is characterized by an accumulation of very long-chain
fatty acids and partially impaired peroxisomal β-oxidation. In this study, we
used primary human fibroblasts from X-ALD and Zellweger syndrome patients to
investigate the peroxisomal β-oxidation defect. Our results show that the
degradation of C26:0-CoA esters is as severely impaired as degradation of
unesterified very long-chain fatty acids in X-ALD and is abolished in Zellweger
syndrome. Interestingly, the β-oxidation rates for both C26:0-CoA and C22:0-CoA
were similarly affected, although C22:0 does not accumulate in patient
fibroblasts. Furthermore, we show that the β-oxidation defect in X-ALD is
directly caused by ABCD1 dysfunction as blocking ABCD1 function with a specific
antibody reduced β-oxidation to levels observed in X-ALD fibroblasts. By
quantification of mRNA and protein levels of the peroxisomal ABC transporters
and by blocking with specific antibodies, we found that residual β-oxidation
activity toward C26:0-CoA in X-ALD fibroblasts is mediated by ABCD3, although
the efficacy of ABCD3 appeared to be much lower than that of ABCD1. Finally,
using isolated peroxisomes, we show that β-oxidation of C26:0-CoA is independent
of additional CoA but requires a cytosolic factor of >10-kDa molecular mass that
is resistant to N-ethylmaleimide and heat inactivation. In conclusion, our
findings in human cells suggest that, in contrast to yeast cells, very
long-chain acyl-CoA esters are transported into peroxisomes by ABCD1
independently of additional synthetase activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.445445
PMCID: PMC3696697
PMID: 23671276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
