---
reference_id: "PMID:29693572"
title: "Sialidosis: A Review of Morphology and Molecular Biology of a Rare Pediatric Disorder."
authors:
- Khan A
- Sergi C
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics8020029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sialidosis: A Review of Morphology and Molecular Biology of a Rare Pediatric Disorder.
**Authors:** Khan A, Sergi C
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics8020029](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics8020029)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2018 Apr 25;8(2):29. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics8020029.

Sialidosis: A Review of Morphology and Molecular Biology of a Rare Pediatric 
Disorder.

Khan A(1), Sergi C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology (5B4.09), University of 
Alberta, 8440 112 St NW, Edmonton, AB T6G 2B7, Canada. draizakhan@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology (5B4.09), University of 
Alberta, 8440 112 St NW, Edmonton, AB T6G 2B7, Canada. sergi@ualberta.ca.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Stollery Children's Hospital, University of Alberta 
Hospital, Edmonton, AB T6G 2B7, Canada. sergi@ualberta.ca.

Sialidosis (MIM 256550) is a rare, autosomal recessive inherited disorder, 
caused by &alpha;-N-acetyl neuraminidase deficiency resulting from a mutation in 
the neuraminidase gene (NEU1), located on 6p21.33. This genetic alteration leads 
to abnormal intracellular accumulation as well as urinary excretion of 
sialyloligosaccharides. A definitive diagnosis is made after the identification 
of a mutation in the NEU1 gene. So far, 40 mutations of NEU1 have been reported. 
An association exists between the impact of the individual mutations and the 
severity of clinical presentation of sialidosis. According to the clinical 
symptoms, sialidosis has been divided into two subtypes with different ages of 
onset and severity, including sialidosis type I (normomorphic or mild form) and 
sialidosis type II (dysmorphic or severe form). Sialidosis II is further 
subdivided into (i) congenital; (ii) infantile; and (iii) juvenile. Despite 
being uncommon, sialidosis has enormous clinical relevance due to its 
debilitating character. A complete understanding of the underlying pathology 
remains a challenge, which in turn limits the development of effective 
therapeutic strategies. Furthermore, in the last few years, some atypical cases 
of sialidosis have been reported as well. We herein attempt to combine and 
discuss the underlying molecular biology, the clinical features, and the 
morphological patterns of sialidosis type I and II.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics8020029
PMCID: PMC6023449
PMID: 29693572

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.