---
reference_id: "PMID:26411935"
title: "[Exploration of Epigenetic Changes and DNA Methylation Markers Associated with Liver Tumors Induced by Inorganic Arsenite Exposure in Mice]."
authors:
- Suzuki T
- Nohara K
journal: Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1265/jjh.70.181
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Exploration of Epigenetic Changes and DNA Methylation Markers Associated with Liver Tumors Induced by Inorganic Arsenite Exposure in Mice].
**Authors:** Suzuki T, Nohara K
**Journal:** Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1265/jjh.70.181](https://doi.org/10.1265/jjh.70.181)

## Content

1. Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi. 2015;70(3):181-5. doi: 10.1265/jjh.70.181.

[Exploration of Epigenetic Changes and DNA Methylation Markers Associated with 
Liver Tumors Induced by Inorganic Arsenite Exposure in Mice].

[Article in Japanese]

Suzuki T(1), Nohara K.

Author information:
(1)Center for Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute for 
Environmental Studies.

Naturally occurring inorganic arsenic is known to increase the risk of cancers 
of the skin and several other organs, including the urinary bladder, lung, and 
liver. Epidemiological studies have also indicated that gestational arsenic 
exposure is associated with increased incidences of cancers in several organs, 
including the bladder and liver, in adulthood. Previous studies have shown that 
epigenetic changes are involved in arsenic-induced carcinogenesis. Among 
epigenetic changes, DNA methylation changes that are specific to arsenic-induced 
tumors would be useful for distinguishing such tumors from tumors induced by 
other factors and for clarifying arsenic carcinogenesis. It has been reported 
that gestational arsenic exposure of C3H mice, whose males tend to spontaneously 
develop liver tumors, increases the incidence of tumors in the male offspring. 
Using the same experimental protocol, we found a number of regions where the DNA 
methylation status was altered in the liver tumors compared with the normal 
liver tissues by the methylated DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP)-CpG island 
microarray method. Among such regions, we demonstrated using real-time 
methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing that a gene body region of the 
oncogene Fosb underwent alteration in DNA methylation following gestational 
arsenic exposure. We also showed that the Fosb expression level significantly 
increased following gestational arsenic exposure. These findings suggest that 
the DNA methylation status of the Fosb region is implicated in tumor 
augmentation and can also be utilized for characterizing tumors induced by 
gestational arsenic exposure.

DOI: 10.1265/jjh.70.181
PMID: 26411935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]