---
reference_id: "PMID:38784038"
title: "206,977 newborn screening results reveal the ethnic differences in the spectrum of inborn errors of metabolism in Huaihua, China."
authors:
- Xiao G
- Feng Z
- Xu C
- Huang X
- Chen M
- Zhao M
- Li Y
- Gao Y
- Wu S
- Shen Y
- Peng Y
journal: Front Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1387423
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 206,977 newborn screening results reveal the ethnic differences in the spectrum of inborn errors of metabolism in Huaihua, China.
**Authors:** Xiao G, Feng Z, Xu C, Huang X, Chen M, Zhao M, Li Y, Gao Y, Wu S, Shen Y, Peng Y
**Journal:** Front Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2024.1387423](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2024.1387423)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2024 May 9;15:1387423. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1387423.
eCollection  2024.

206,977 newborn screening results reveal the ethnic differences in the spectrum 
of inborn errors of metabolism in Huaihua, China.

Xiao G(#)(1), Feng Z(#)(1), Xu C(2), Huang X(2), Chen M(1), Zhao M(1), Li Y(1), 
Gao Y(1), Wu S(1), Shen Y(1), Peng Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Disease Screening Center, Huaihua City Maternal and Child Health 
Care Hospital, Huaihua, Hunan Province, China.
(2)Technical Support Center, Zhejiang Biosan Biochemical Technologies Co., Ltd, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, National Health Commission Key Laboratory of 
Birth Defects Research, Hunan Provincial Maternal and Child Healthcare Hospital, 
Changsha, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) are rare diseases caused by 
inherited defects in various biochemical pathways that strongly correlate with 
early neonatal mortality and stunting. Currently, no studies have reported on 
the incidence of IEMs of multi-ethnic groups in Huaihua, China.
METHODS: A total of 206,977 neonates with self-reported ethnicity who underwent 
IEM screening at Huaihua from 2015 to 2021 were selected for observation. Among 
them, 69 suspected IEM-positive neonates were referred for urine gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis, biochemical detection, 
next-generation sequencing, and Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: Sixty-nine newborns were diagnosed with IEMs, with an overall incidence 
of 1:3,000. The two most common disorders were 2-methylbutyryl glycinuria 
(1:7,137) and phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency (1:22,997). Moreover, the 
incidence of IEMs in the minority ethnic group (Miao, Dong, Tujia and Yao) 
(1:1,852) was markedly higher than in the Han ethnic group (1:4,741). Some 
ethnic features variants were identified; NM_001609.4:c.1165A>G in the ACADSB 
gene for Miao and Dong ethnic groups, NM_014251.2:c.852_855del in the SLC25A13 
gene for Miao ethnic groups.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed the IEM incidence within the minority ethnic 
groups is markedly higher than among the Han nationality and the gene variant 
spectrum is dramatically different in Huaihua, China. Hence, It serves as a 
theoretical reference for the screening and diagnosing of neonatal IEMs of 
multi-ethnic groups in the Huaihua area, and across China.

Copyright © 2024 Xiao, Feng, Xu, Huang, Chen, Zhao, Li, Gao, Wu, Shen and Peng.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1387423
PMCID: PMC11112075
PMID: 38784038

Conflict of interest statement: Authors CX and XH were employed by the company 
Zhejiang Biosan Biochemical Technologies Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare 
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.