---
reference_id: "PMID:39088276"
title: Mitochondrial bioenergetics and cardiolipin remodeling abnormalities in mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency.
authors:
- Vieira Neto E
- Wang M
- Szuminsky AJ
- Ferraro L
- Koppes E
- Wang Y
- "Van't Land C"
- Mohsen AW
- Zanatta G
- El-Gharbawy AH
- Anthonymuthu TS
- Tyurina YY
- Tyurin VA
- Kagan V
- Bayır H
- Vockley J
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.176887
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial bioenergetics and cardiolipin remodeling abnormalities in mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency.
**Authors:** Vieira Neto E, Wang M, Szuminsky AJ, Ferraro L, Koppes E, Wang Y, Van't Land C, Mohsen AW, Zanatta G, El-Gharbawy AH, Anthonymuthu TS, Tyurina YY, Tyurin VA, Kagan V, Bayır H, Vockley J
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.176887](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.176887)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Sep 10;9(17):e176887. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.176887.

Mitochondrial bioenergetics and cardiolipin remodeling abnormalities in 
mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency.

Vieira Neto E(1)(2), Wang M(1), Szuminsky AJ(3), Ferraro L(1)(4), Koppes E(1), 
Wang Y(1), Van't Land C(1), Mohsen AW(1), Zanatta G(5), El-Gharbawy AH(6), 
Anthonymuthu TS(7), Tyurina YY(8), Tyurin VA(8), Kagan V(8)(9), Bayır H(10), 
Vockley J(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)Genetic and Genomic Medicine Division, Department of Pediatrics, UPMC 
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh.
(2)Children's Neuroscience Institute, Department of Pediatrics, School of 
Medicine, and.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Kenneth P. Dietrich School of Arts and 
Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)School of Medicine and.
(5)Department of Biophysics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.
(6)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(7)Adeptrix Corporation, Beverly, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Center for Free Radical 
and Antioxidant Health, School of Public Health.
(9)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, School of Medicine; 
Department of Chemistry, Kenneth P. Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences; and 
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(10)Division of Critical Care and Hospital Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Redox Health Center, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.
(11)Department of Human Genetics, School of Public Health, Center for Rare 
Disease Therapy, UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (TFP) deficiency is an inherited metabolic 
disorder leading to a block in long-chain fatty acid β-oxidation. Mutations in 
HADHA and HADHB, which encode the TFP α and β subunits, respectively, usually 
result in combined TFP deficiency. A single common mutation, HADHA c.1528G>C 
(p.E510Q), leads to isolated 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. TFP 
also catalyzes a step in the remodeling of cardiolipin (CL), a phospholipid 
critical to mitochondrial membrane stability and function. We explored the 
effect of mutations in TFP subunits on CL and other phospholipid content and 
composition and the consequences of these changes on mitochondrial bioenergetics 
in patient-derived fibroblasts. Abnormalities in these parameters varied 
extensively among different fibroblasts, and some cells were able to maintain 
basal oxygen consumption rates similar to controls. Although CL reduction was 
universally identified, a simultaneous increase in monolysocardiolipins was 
discrepant among cells. A similar profile was seen in liver mitochondria 
isolates from a TFP-deficient mouse model. Response to new potential drugs 
targeting CL metabolism might be dependent on patient genotype.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.176887
PMCID: PMC11385086
PMID: 39088276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.