---
reference_id: "PMID:39768129"
title: "Astrocytic Alterations and Dysfunction in Down Syndrome: Focus on Neurogenesis, Synaptogenesis, and Neural Circuits Formation."
authors:
- Uguagliati B
- Grilli M
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13242037
keywords:
- Humans
- Neurogenesis
- "Astrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Down Syndrome/pathology, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Synapses/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "Nerve Net/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Brain/pathology, growth & development, metabolism"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Astrocytic Alterations and Dysfunction in Down Syndrome: Focus on Neurogenesis, Synaptogenesis, and Neural Circuits Formation.
**Authors:** Uguagliati B, Grilli M
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13242037](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13242037)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Dec 10;13(24):2037. doi: 10.3390/cells13242037.

Astrocytic Alterations and Dysfunction in Down Syndrome: Focus on Neurogenesis,
Synaptogenesis, and Neural Circuits Formation.

Uguagliati B(1), Grilli M(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroplasticity, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Piemonte Orientale, 28100 Novara, Italy.

Down syndrome (DS) is characterized by severe neurodevelopmental alterations
that ultimately lead to the typical hallmark of DS: intellectual disability. In
the DS brain, since the prenatal life stages, the number of astrocytes is
disproportional compared to the healthy brain. This increase is due to a shift
from neuron to astrocyte differentiation during brain development. Astrocytes
are involved in numerous functions during brain development, including balancing
pro-neurogenic and pro-gliogenic stimuli, sustaining synapse formation,
regulating excitatory/inhibitory signal equilibrium, and supporting the
maintenance and integration of functional neural circuits. The enhanced number
of astrocytes in the brain of DS individuals leads to detrimental consequences
for brain development. This review summarizes the mechanisms underlying
astrocytic dysfunction in DS, and particularly the dysregulation of key
signaling pathways, which promote astrogliogenesis at the expense of
neurogenesis. It further examines the implications of astrocytic alterations on
dendritic branching, spinogenesis and synaptogenesis, and the impact of the
abnormal astrocytic number in neural excitability and in the maintenance of the
inhibitory/excitatory balance. Identifying deregulated pathways and the
consequences of astrocytic alterations in early DS brain development may help in
identifying new therapeutic targets, with the ultimate aim of ameliorating the
cognitive disability that affects individuals with DS.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13242037
PMCID: PMC11674571
PMID: 39768129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
