---
reference_id: "PMID:30093205"
title: "Spinal Cord Infarction: Clinical and Radiological Features."
authors:
- Yadav N
- Pendharkar H
- Kulkarni GB
journal: J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.06.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- Dependent Ambulation
- Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Disability Evaluation
- Female
- Humans
- "Infarction/diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mobility Limitation
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Recovery of Function
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Spinal Cord/blood supply, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Spinal Cord Ischemia/diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Walking
- Wheelchairs
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal Cord Infarction: Clinical and Radiological Features.
**Authors:** Yadav N, Pendharkar H, Kulkarni GB
**Journal:** J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.06.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.06.008)

## Content

1. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2018 Oct;27(10):2810-2821. doi:
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.06.008. Epub 2018 Aug 6.

Spinal Cord Infarction: Clinical and Radiological Features.

Yadav N(1), Pendharkar H(2), Kulkarni GB(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroimaging & Interventional Radiology, National Institute of
Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore 560029, India. Electronic address:
nishthayadav@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Neuroimaging & Interventional Radiology, National Institute of
Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore 560029, India. Electronic address:
himasp2@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and
Neurosciences, Bangalore 560029, India. Electronic address:
gbk5000@rediffmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Spinal cord infarction is an uncommon disease varying in its
clinical presentation. This study describes the clinical and radiological
presentation of spinal cord infarcts in 17 consecutive patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Clinical and MR imaging data of 17 patients were reviewed.
Inclusion criteria were acute or subacute presentation (peak within 72 hours)
and MRI showing typical signal changes on T2WI compatible with spinal cord
infarct. Exclusion criteria were clinical or MRI findings suggesting other
etiologies.
RESULTS: Clinical presentation included dissociative anesthesia, weakness of
limbs, back or neck pain, and autonomic symptoms with symptom onset to peak time
ranging from few minutes to 48 hours in patients with anterior spinal artery
infarct (n = 16), and weakness and sensory loss in ipsilateral upper limb in
patient with posterior spinal artery infarct (n = 1). One patient presented with
"man-in-the-barrel syndrome (MIB)." MRI findings in anterior spinal artery
infarcts included pencillike hyperintensities on T2 sagittal (n = 16, 100%) and
"owl eye" appearance on T2 axial (n = 6, 37.5%) images. Diffusion restriction
was noted in 8 cases and enhancement was noted in 2 cases. The posterior spinal
artery infarct showed T2 hyperintensity in left posterior paramedian triangular
distribution in cervical cord (C2-C7). Follow-up was available for 9 patients
(period ranging from 15-41 months). Four patients had a favorable outcome who
could walk independently, 1 patient could walk with support, and 2 patients were
wheelchair bound. Two patients died.
CONCLUSION: Spinal cord infarction is a rare but important cause of acute spinal
syndrome. Typical distribution and appropriate imaging can help in timely
diagnosis.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2018.06.008
PMID: 30093205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
