---
reference_id: PMID:38254937
title: KMT2D Deficiency Causes Sensorineural Hearing Loss in Mice and Humans.
authors:
- Kalinousky AJ
- Luperchio TR
- Schrode KM
- Harris JR
- Zhang L
- DeLeon VB
- Fahrner JA
- Lauer AM
- Bjornsson HT
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes15010048
keywords:
- Animals
- Child
- Humans
- Mice
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Causality
- CHARGE Syndrome
- Deafness
- Face/abnormalities
- Hearing
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Hematologic Diseases
- Vestibular Diseases
- Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase
- Myeloid-Lymphoid Leukemia Protein
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Neoplasm Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KMT2D Deficiency Causes Sensorineural Hearing Loss in Mice and Humans.
**Authors:** Kalinousky AJ, Luperchio TR, Schrode KM, Harris JR, Zhang L, DeLeon VB, Fahrner JA, Lauer AM, Bjornsson HT
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15010048](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15010048)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Dec 28;15(1):48. doi: 10.3390/genes15010048.

KMT2D Deficiency Causes Sensorineural Hearing Loss in Mice and Humans.

Kalinousky AJ(1), Luperchio TR(1), Schrode KM(2), Harris JR(1)(3), Zhang L(1), 
DeLeon VB(4), Fahrner JA(1)(5), Lauer AM(2), Bjornsson HT(1)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery and Center for Hearing and 
Balance, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(4)Department of Anthropology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, 
USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21205, USA.
(6)Landspitali University Hospital, 102 Reykjavik, Iceland.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland.

Individuals with Kabuki syndrome type 1 (KS1) often have hearing loss recognized 
in middle childhood. Current clinical dogma suggests that this phenotype is 
caused by frequent infections due to the immune deficiency in KS1 and/or 
secondary to structural abnormalities of the ear. To clarify some aspects of 
hearing loss, we collected information on hearing status from 21 individuals 
with KS1 and found that individuals have both sensorineural and conductive 
hearing loss, with the average age of presentation being 7 years. Our data 
suggest that while ear infections and structural abnormalities contribute to the 
observed hearing loss, these factors do not explain all loss. Using a KS1 mouse 
model, we found hearing abnormalities from hearing onset, as indicated by 
auditory brainstem response measurements. In contrast to mouse and human data 
for CHARGE syndrome, a disorder possessing overlapping clinical features with KS 
and a well-known cause of hearing loss and structural inner ear abnormalities, 
there are no apparent structural abnormalities of the cochlea in KS1 mice. The 
KS1 mice also display diminished distortion product otoacoustic emission levels, 
which suggests outer hair cell dysfunction. Combining these findings, our data 
suggests that KMT2D dysfunction causes sensorineural hearing loss compounded 
with external factors, such as infection.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15010048
PMCID: PMC10815913
PMID: 38254937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.T.B. is a consultant for Mahzi therapeutics. 
J.R.H. receives research funding from Oryzon Genomics. The funders had no role 
in the design of this study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of 
data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the 
results.