---
reference_id: "PMID:29522370"
title: Increased macrophage-derived SPARC precedes collagen deposition in myocardial fibrosis.
authors:
- McDonald LT
- Zile MR
- Zhang Y
- Van Laer AO
- Baicu CF
- Stroud RE
- Jones JA
- LaRue AC
- Bradshaw AD
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00719.2017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased macrophage-derived SPARC precedes collagen deposition in myocardial fibrosis.
**Authors:** McDonald LT, Zile MR, Zhang Y, Van Laer AO, Baicu CF, Stroud RE, Jones JA, LaRue AC, Bradshaw AD
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00719.2017](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00719.2017)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2018 Jul 1;315(1):H92-H100. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.00719.2017. Epub 2018 Mar 9.

Increased macrophage-derived SPARC precedes collagen deposition in myocardial 
fibrosis.

McDonald LT(1)(2), Zile MR(3)(2), Zhang Y(3), Van Laer AO(3)(2), Baicu CF(3)(2), 
Stroud RE(2)(4), Jones JA(2)(4), LaRue AC(1)(2), Bradshaw AD(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina , Charleston, South Carolina.
(2)Ralph H. Johnson Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center , Charleston, 
South Carolina.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina , Charleston, South Carolina.
(4)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical University 
of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina.

Myocardial fibrosis and the resultant increases in left ventricular stiffness 
represent pivotal consequences of chronic pressure overload (PO) that impact 
both functional capacity and the rates of morbid and mortal events. However, the 
time course and cellular mechanisms that underlie PO-induced fibrosis have not 
been completely defined. Secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) is 
a matricellular protein that has been shown to be required for insoluble 
collagen deposition and increased myocardial stiffness in response to PO in 
mice. As macrophages are associated with increases in fibrillar collagen, the 
hypothesis that macrophages represent a source of increased SPARC production in 
the PO myocardium was tested. The time course of changes in the myocardial 
macrophage population was compared with changes in procollagen type I mRNA, 
production of SPARC, fibrillar collagen accumulation, and diastolic stiffness. 
In PO hearts, mRNA encoding collagen type I was increased at 3 days, whereas 
increases in levels of total collagen protein did not occur until 1 wk and were 
followed by increases in insoluble collagen at 2 wk. Increases in muscle 
stiffness were not detected before increases in insoluble collagen content (>1 
wk). Significant increases in myocardial macrophages that coincided with 
increased SPARC were found but did not coincide with increases in mRNA encoding 
collagen type I. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry identified 
macrophages as a cellular source of SPARC. We conclude that myocardial 
macrophages play an important role in the time-dependent increases in SPARC that 
enhance postsynthetic collagen processing, insoluble collagen content, and 
myocardial stiffness and contribute to the development of fibrosis. NEW & 
NOTEWORTHY Myocardial fibrosis and the resultant increases in left ventricular 
and myocardial stiffness represent pivotal consequences of chronic pressure 
overload. In this study a murine model of cardiac fibrosis induced by pressure 
overload was used to establish a time course of collagen expression, collagen 
deposition, and cardiac macrophage expansion.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00719.2017
PMCID: PMC6087775
PMID: 29522370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]