---
reference_id: "PMID:33346115"
title: Beyond the joints, the extra-articular manifestations in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Conforti A
- Di Cola I
- Pavlych V
- Ruscitti P
- Berardicurti O
- Ursini F
- Giacomelli R
- Cipriani P
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102735
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beyond the joints, the extra-articular manifestations in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Conforti A, Di Cola I, Pavlych V, Ruscitti P, Berardicurti O, Ursini F, Giacomelli R, Cipriani P
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102735](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102735)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2021 Feb;20(2):102735. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102735. Epub 
2020 Dec 17.

Beyond the joints, the extra-articular manifestations in rheumatoid arthritis.

Conforti A(1), Di Cola I(1), Pavlych V(1), Ruscitti P(2), Berardicurti O(1), 
Ursini F(3), Giacomelli R(1), Cipriani P(1).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology, Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, 
University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(2)Rheumatology, Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, 
University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy. Electronic address: 
piero.ruscitti@univaq.it.
(3)IRRCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy; Department of Biomedical 
and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Italy.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory disease typically affecting the 
joints, but the systemic inflammatory process may involve other tissues and 
organs. Many extra-articular manifestations are recognized, which are related to 
worse long outcomes. Rheumatoid nodules are the most common extra-articular 
feature, found in about 30% of patients. Secondary Sjögren's syndrome and 
pulmonary manifestations are observed in almost 10% of patients, also in the 
early disease. Active RA with high disease activity has been associated with an 
increased risk of such features. Male gender, smoking habit, severe joint 
disease, worse function, high pro-inflammatory markers levels, high titer of 
rheumatoid factor, and HLA-related shared epitope have been reported as clinical 
predictors of occurrence of these rheumatoid complications. In addition, there 
is a little evidence deriving from randomized controlled trials in this field, 
thus the therapeutic strategy is mainly empiric and based on small case series 
and retrospective studies. However, considering that these extra-articular 
manifestations are usually related to the more active and severe RA, an 
aggressive therapeutic strategy is usually employed in view of the poor outcomes 
of these patients. The extra-articular features of RA remain, despite the 
improvement of joint damage, a major diagnostic and therapeutic challenge, since 
these are associated with a poor prognosis and need to be early recognized and 
promptly managed.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102735
PMID: 33346115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]