---
reference_id: "PMID:33669056"
title: Role of the DDX11 DNA Helicase in Warsaw Breakage Syndrome Etiology.
authors:
- Santos D
- Mahtab M
- Boavida A
- Pisani FM
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22052308
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Animals
- "Cell Cycle/genetics, physiology"
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Chromatids/metabolism, pathology"
- "Chromatin/metabolism, pathology"
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics, metabolism"
- Chromosome Segregation
- "DEAD-box RNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Replication/genetics
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phylogeny
- "Rare Diseases/congenital, enzymology, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Cohesins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the DDX11 DNA Helicase in Warsaw Breakage Syndrome Etiology.
**Authors:** Santos D, Mahtab M, Boavida A, Pisani FM
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22052308](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22052308)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Feb 25;22(5):2308. doi: 10.3390/ijms22052308.

Role of the DDX11 DNA Helicase in Warsaw Breakage Syndrome Etiology.

Santos D(1), Mahtab M(1)(2), Boavida A(1), Pisani FM(1).

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Biochimica e Biologia Cellulare, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Via P. Castellino 111, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Ambientali, Biologiche e Farmaceutiche, 
Università degli Studi della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Via Vivaldi 43, 81100 
Caserta, Italy.

Warsaw breakage syndrome (WABS) is a genetic disorder characterized by sister 
chromatid cohesion defects, growth retardation, microcephaly, hearing loss and 
other variable clinical manifestations. WABS is due to biallelic mutations of 
the gene coding for the super-family 2 DNA helicase DDX11/ChlR1, orthologous to 
the yeast chromosome loss protein 1 (Chl1). WABS is classified in the group of 
"cohesinopathies", rare hereditary diseases that are caused by mutations in 
genes coding for subunits of the cohesin complex or protein factors having 
regulatory roles in the sister chromatid cohesion process. In fact, among the 
cohesion regulators, an important player is DDX11, which is believed to be 
important for the functional coupling of DNA synthesis and cohesion 
establishment at the replication forks. Here, we will review what is known about 
the molecular and cellular functions of human DDX11 and its role in WABS 
etiopathogenesis, even in light of recent findings on the role of cohesin and 
its regulator network in promoting chromatin loop formation and regulating 
chromatin spatial organization.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22052308
PMCID: PMC7956524
PMID: 33669056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.