---
reference_id: "PMID:40548098"
title: "HMG-CoA Synthase-2 Deficiency: Neonatal Hyperammonemic Coma and Abnormal Metabolic Screening Resembling Maple Syrup Urine Disease."
authors:
- Vaseenon H
- Tim-Aroon T
- Saengow VE
- Sangcakul A
- Wongkittichote P
- Khongkraparn A
- Wattanasirichaigoon D
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.70028
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HMG-CoA Synthase-2 Deficiency: Neonatal Hyperammonemic Coma and Abnormal Metabolic Screening Resembling Maple Syrup Urine Disease.
**Authors:** Vaseenon H, Tim-Aroon T, Saengow VE, Sangcakul A, Wongkittichote P, Khongkraparn A, Wattanasirichaigoon D
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.70028](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.70028)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2025 Jun 22;66(4):e70028. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.70028. eCollection 2025
Jul.

HMG-CoA Synthase-2 Deficiency: Neonatal Hyperammonemic Coma and Abnormal
Metabolic Screening Resembling Maple Syrup Urine Disease.

Vaseenon H(1)(2), Tim-Aroon T(1), Saengow VE(3), Sangcakul A(4), Wongkittichote
P(1), Khongkraparn A(1), Wattanasirichaigoon D(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine
Ramathibodi Hospital Mahidol University Bangkok Thailand.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine Vajira Hospital
Navamindradhiraj University Bangkok Thailand.
(3)Department of Pediatrics Maharat Nakhon Ratchasima Hospital Nakhon Ratchasima
Thailand.
(4)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital Mahidol
University Bangkok Thailand.

Mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase-2 (HMGCS2) deficiency is characterized by
hypoketotic hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, hepatomegaly, and encephalopathy
with onset between 3 and 36 months of age. Approximately 50 cases were reported
worldwide. We describe two patients with HMGCS2 deficiency. Patient 1 presented
on day of life 7 with a sepsis-like condition, coma, metabolic acidosis, and
marked elevation of ammonium level at 1081 μmol/L. Metabolic screening
demonstrated elevated valine and leucine/isoleucine concentrations, resembling
maple syrup urine disease (MSUD). The patient received a blood exchange
transfusion, which lowered the ammonium level to 92 μmol/L. Urine organic acid
analysis did not confirm MSUD. At 1 year and 4 months, the patient experienced
acute decompensation again. Exome sequencing revealed a homozygous HMGCS2
variant, c.1502G>C (p.Arg501Pro). Patient 2, an older sibling of Patient 1, was
healthy but diagnosed through genetic testing. Both patients exhibited abnormal
biochemical profiles, including dicarboxylic aciduria and increased urinary
excretion of 4-hydroxy-6-methyl-2-pyrone (4-HMP) after 8 h of fasting,
suggesting that a clinically asymptomatic patient, like Patient 2, may
eventually develop acute decompensation. Therefore, preemptive treatment with
fasting avoidance with or without l-carnitine during intercurrent illness should
be advised. The present cases were the second and third patients of p.Arg501Pro
homozygosity. The elevated branched-chain amino acids in the metabolic screening
(without including alloisoleucine) and the described organic acid profile can be
found during the catabolic state, resembling MSUD, and severe hyperammonemia is
an uncommon phenotype and an exception to neonatal decompensation in HMGCS2
deficiency. Our findings demonstrated intrafamilial variability and expanded the
clinical and biochemical spectrum of HMGCS2 deficiency.

© 2025 The Author(s). JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf
of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.70028
PMCID: PMC12182750
PMID: 40548098

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
