---
reference_id: "PMID:15539463"
title: Bbs2-null mice have neurosensory deficits, a defect in social dominance, and retinopathy associated with mislocalization of rhodopsin.
authors:
- Nishimura DY
- Fath M
- Mullins RF
- Searby C
- Andrews M
- Davis R
- Andorf JL
- Mykytyn K
- Swiderski RE
- Yang B
- Carmi R
- Stone EM
- Sheffield VC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0405496101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bbs2-null mice have neurosensory deficits, a defect in social dominance, and retinopathy associated with mislocalization of rhodopsin.
**Authors:** Nishimura DY, Fath M, Mullins RF, Searby C, Andrews M, Davis R, Andorf JL, Mykytyn K, Swiderski RE, Yang B, Carmi R, Stone EM, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0405496101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0405496101)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Nov 23;101(47):16588-93. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0405496101. Epub 2004 Nov 11.

Bbs2-null mice have neurosensory deficits, a defect in social dominance, and 
retinopathy associated with mislocalization of rhodopsin.

Nishimura DY(1), Fath M, Mullins RF, Searby C, Andrews M, Davis R, Andorf JL, 
Mykytyn K, Swiderski RE, Yang B, Carmi R, Stone EM, Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a heterogeneous, pleiotropic human disorder 
characterized by obesity, retinopathy, polydactyly, renal and cardiac 
malformations, learning disabilities, hypogenitalism, and an increased incidence 
of diabetes and hypertension. No information is available regarding the specific 
function of BBS2. We show that mice lacking Bbs2 gene expression have major 
components of the human phenotype, including obesity and retinopathy. In 
addition, these mice have phenotypes associated with cilia dysfunction, 
including retinopathy, renal cysts, male infertility, and a deficit in 
olfaction. With the exception of male infertility, these phenotypes are not 
caused by a complete absence of cilia. We demonstrate that BBS2 retinopathy 
involves normal retina development followed by apoptotic death of 
photoreceptors, the primary ciliated cells of the retina. Photoreceptor cell 
death is preceded by mislocalization of rhodopsin, indicating a defect in 
transport. We also demonstrate that Bbs2(-/-) mice and a second BBS mouse model, 
Bbs4(-/-), have a defect in social function. The evaluation of Bbs2(-/-) mice 
indicates additional phenotypes that should be evaluated in human patients, 
including deficits in social interaction and infertility.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0405496101
PMCID: PMC534519
PMID: 15539463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]