---
reference_id: "PMID:30286368"
title: "Association on DISC1 SNPs with schizophrenia risk: A meta-analysis."
authors:
- Ma JH
- Sun XY
- Guo TJ
- Barot E
- Wang DF
- Yan LL
- Ni DW
- Huang NH
- Xie Q
- Zeng J
- Ou-Yang L
- Liu YQ
- Lu QB
journal: Psychiatry Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2018.09.056
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association on DISC1 SNPs with schizophrenia risk: A meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Ma JH, Sun XY, Guo TJ, Barot E, Wang DF, Yan LL, Ni DW, Huang NH, Xie Q, Zeng J, Ou-Yang L, Liu YQ, Lu QB
**Journal:** Psychiatry Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psychres.2018.09.056](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2018.09.056)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Res. 2018 Dec;270:306-309. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2018.09.056.
Epub  2018 Sep 23.

Association on DISC1 SNPs with schizophrenia risk: A meta-analysis.

Ma JH(1), Sun XY(2), Guo TJ(3), Barot E(4), Wang DF(5), Yan LL(6), Ni DW(7), 
Huang NH(8), Xie Q(9), Zeng J(10), Ou-Yang L(11), Liu YQ(12), Lu QB(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratorial Science and Technology, School of Public Health, 
Peking University, No. 38 Xue-Yuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100191, PR 
China. Electronic address: mjh@bjmu.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Laboratorial Science and Technology, School of Public Health, 
Peking University, No. 38 Xue-Yuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100191, PR 
China. Electronic address: 1376476693@qq.com.
(3)Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China. 
Electronic address: 756210458@qq.com.
(4)Bioinformatics Center, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark. 
Electronic address: rdx236@alumni.ku.dk.
(5)Chongqing Blood Center, Chongqing, 400015 P.R. China.. Electronic address: 
wangdongfang@bjmu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Laboratorial Science and Technology, School of Public Health, 
Peking University, No. 38 Xue-Yuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100191, PR 
China. Electronic address: yll@bjmu.edu.cn.
(7)Central Hospital of Fengxian, Shanghai 201499, China.
(8)Department of Laboratorial Science and Technology, School of Public Health, 
Peking University, No. 38 Xue-Yuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100191, PR 
China. Electronic address: hnh@bjmu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Laboratorial Science and Technology, School of Public Health, 
Peking University, No. 38 Xue-Yuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100191, PR 
China. Electronic address: xieqing94@bjmu.edu.cn.
(10)Department of Laboratorial Science and Technology, School of Public Health, 
Peking University, No. 38 Xue-Yuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100191, PR 
China. Electronic address: zengjing@bjmu.edu.cn.
(11)Department of Laboratorial Science and Technology, School of Public Health, 
Peking University, No. 38 Xue-Yuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100191, PR 
China. Electronic address: ouyangli@bjmu.edu.cn.
(12)Department of Laboratorial Science and Technology, School of Public Health, 
Peking University, No. 38 Xue-Yuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100191, PR 
China. Electronic address: liuyaqiong@bjmu.edu.cn.
(13)Department of Laboratorial Science and Technology, School of Public Health, 
Peking University, No. 38 Xue-Yuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100191, PR 
China. Electronic address: qingbinlu@bjmu.edu.cn.

Schizophrenia is a major psychiatric disorder with complex genetic, 
environmental, and psychological etiologies. Although DISC1 gene has been shown 
as a risk factor for schizophrenia in some reports, there is a lack of a 
consensus. We therefore performed separate meta-analyses aiming to assess the 
associations between DISC1 SNPs and schizophrenia risk. We found that SNP 
rs821597 is significantly associated with schizophrenia risk in terms of both 
allelic and genotypic distribution, while SNP rs821616 is associated with 
schizophrenia in terms of genotypic distribution, especially in cases above 40 
years old.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2018.09.056
PMID: 30286368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]