---
reference_id: "PMID:37255930"
title: Achieving symptom relief in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis by targeting the neuro-immune interface and optimizing disease tolerance.
authors:
- Rodriguez L
- Pou C
- Lakshmikanth T
- Zhang J
- Mugabo CH
- Wang J
- Mikes J
- Olin A
- Chen Y
- Rorbach J
- Juto JE
- Li TQ
- Julin P
- Brodin P
journal: Oxf Open Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/oxfimm/iqad003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Achieving symptom relief in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis by targeting the neuro-immune interface and optimizing disease tolerance.
**Authors:** Rodriguez L, Pou C, Lakshmikanth T, Zhang J, Mugabo CH, Wang J, Mikes J, Olin A, Chen Y, Rorbach J, Juto JE, Li TQ, Julin P, Brodin P
**Journal:** Oxf Open Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfimm/iqad003](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfimm/iqad003)

## Content

1. Oxf Open Immunol. 2023 Apr 17;4(1):iqad003. doi: 10.1093/oxfimm/iqad003. 
eCollection 2023.

Achieving symptom relief in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis by targeting 
the neuro-immune interface and optimizing disease tolerance.

Rodriguez L(1), Pou C(1), Lakshmikanth T(1), Zhang J(2)(3), Mugabo CH(1), Wang 
J(1), Mikes J(1), Olin A(1), Chen Y(1), Rorbach J(2)(3), Juto JE(4), Li 
TQ(4)(5), Julin P(6)(7), Brodin P(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Solna 
17121, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Solna 17176, Sweden.
(3)Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing-Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, 
Karolinska Institutet, Solna 17176, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska 
Institutet, Solna 17177, Sweden.
(5)Department of Medical Radiation Physics and Nuclear Medicine, Karolinska 
University Hospital, Solna 17176, Sweden.
(6)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Solna 17176, Sweden.
(7)Neurological Rehabilitation Clinic, Stora Sköndal, Sköndal 12864, Sweden.
(8)Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Imperial College London, London 
W12 0NN, UK.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) previously also known as chronic fatigue syndrome 
is a heterogeneous, debilitating syndrome of unknown etiology responsible for 
long-lasting disability in millions of patients worldwide. The most well-known 
symptom of ME is post-exertional malaise, but many patients also experience 
autonomic dysregulation, cranial nerve dysfunction and signs of immune system 
activation. Many patients also report a sudden onset of disease following an 
infection. The brainstem is a suspected focal point in ME pathogenesis and 
patients with structural impairment to the brainstem often show ME-like 
symptoms. The brainstem is also where the vagus nerve originates, a critical 
neuro-immune interface and mediator of the inflammatory reflex which regulate 
systemic inflammation. Here, we report the results of a randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial using intranasal mechanical stimulation targeting nerve 
endings in the nasal cavity, likely from the trigeminal nerve, possibly 
activating additional centers in the brainstem of ME patients and correlating 
with a ∼30% reduction in overall symptom scores after 8 weeks of treatment. By 
performing longitudinal, systems-level monitoring of the blood immune system in 
these patients, we uncover signs of chronic immune activation in ME, as well as 
immunological correlates of improvement that center around gut-homing immune 
cells and reduced inflammation. The mechanisms of symptom relief remain to be 
determined, but transcriptional analyses suggest an upregulation of disease 
tolerance mechanisms. We believe that these results are suggestive of ME as a 
condition explained by a maladaptive disease tolerance response following 
infection.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfimm/iqad003
PMCID: PMC10148714
PMID: 37255930

Conflict of interest statement: J.-E.J. is a co-founder and shareholder of 
Abilion Medical Systems AB. P.B., T.L., A.O. and J.M. are founders of Cytodelics 
AB, a company commercializing reagents for blood sample preservation used in 
this study.