---
reference_id: "PMID:21881831"
title: "Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia with corticobasal degeneration pathology: phenotypic comparison to bvFTD with Pick's disease."
authors:
- Rankin KP
- Mayo MC
- Seeley WW
- Lee S
- Rabinovici G
- Gorno-Tempini ML
- Boxer AL
- Weiner MW
- Trojanowski JQ
- DeArmond SJ
- Miller BL
journal: J Mol Neurosci
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9615-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia with corticobasal degeneration pathology: phenotypic comparison to bvFTD with Pick's disease.
**Authors:** Rankin KP, Mayo MC, Seeley WW, Lee S, Rabinovici G, Gorno-Tempini ML, Boxer AL, Weiner MW, Trojanowski JQ, DeArmond SJ, Miller BL
**Journal:** J Mol Neurosci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12031-011-9615-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12031-011-9615-2)

## Content

1. J Mol Neurosci. 2011 Nov;45(3):594-608. doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9615-2. Epub 
2011 Sep 1.

Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia with corticobasal degeneration 
pathology: phenotypic comparison to bvFTD with Pick's disease.

Rankin KP(1), Mayo MC, Seeley WW, Lee S, Rabinovici G, Gorno-Tempini ML, Boxer 
AL, Weiner MW, Trojanowski JQ, DeArmond SJ, Miller BL.

Author information:
(1)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
krankin@memory.ucsf.edu

Patients with corticobasal degeneration (CBD) pathology present with diverse 
clinical syndromes also associated with other neuropathologies, including 
corticobasal syndrome, progressive nonfluent aphasia, and an Alzheimer's-type 
dementia. Some present with behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), 
though this subtype still requires more detailed clinical characterization. All 
patients with CBD pathology and clinical assessment were reviewed (N = 17) and 
selected if they initially met criteria for bvFTD [bvFTD(CBD), N = 5]. Available 
bvFTD patients with Pick's [bvFTD(Pick's), N = 5] were selected as controls. 
Patients were also compared to healthy older controls [N = 53] on 
neuropsychological and neuroimaging measures. At initial presentation, 
bvFTD(CBD) showed few neuropsychological or motor differences from 
bvFTD(Pick's). Neuropsychiatrically, they were predominantly apathetic with less 
florid social disinhibition and eating disturbances, and were more anxious than 
bvFTD(Pick's) patients. Voxel-based morphometry revealed similar patterns of 
predominantly frontal atrophy between bvFTD groups, though overall degree of 
atrophy was less severe in bvFTD(CBD), who also showed comparative preservation 
of the frontoinsular rim, with dorsal > ventral frontal atrophy, and sparing of 
temporal and parietal structures relative to bvFTD(Pick's) patients. Despite a 
remarkable overlap between the two patient types, bvFTD patients with underlying 
CBD pathology show subtle clinical features that may distinguish them from 
patients with Pick's disease neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-011-9615-2
PMCID: PMC3208125
PMID: 21881831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]