---
reference_id: "PMID:12426114"
title: Molecular mechanism of copper transport in Wilson disease.
authors:
- Fatemi N
- Sarkar B
journal: Environ Health Perspect
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1289/ehp.02110s5695
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mechanism of copper transport in Wilson disease.
**Authors:** Fatemi N, Sarkar B
**Journal:** Environ Health Perspect (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1289/ehp.02110s5695](https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.02110s5695)

## Content

1. Environ Health Perspect. 2002 Oct;110 Suppl 5(Suppl 5):695-8. doi: 
10.1289/ehp.02110s5695.

Molecular mechanism of copper transport in Wilson disease.

Fatemi N(1), Sarkar B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology and Biochemistry Research, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, University of Toronto, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario 
M59 1X8, Canada.

Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper metabolism. The 
Wilson disease protein is a putative copper-transporting P-type ATPase, ATP7B, 
whose malfunction results in the toxic accumulation of copper in the liver and 
brain, causing the hepatic and/or neurological symptoms accompanying this 
disease. The cytosolic N-terminal domain (approximately 70 kDa) of this ATPase 
comprises six heavy metal-associated domains, each of which contains the 
conserved metal-binding motif GMTCXXC. The N-terminal domain (Wilson disease 
copper-binding domain [WCBD]) has been expressed, purified, and characterized 
using various techniques. The WCBD binds six atoms of copper in the +1 oxidation 
state competitively, and with a greater affinity than all other metals. The 
copper atom is coordinated by two cysteines in a distorted linear geometry. 
Copper binds the WCBD in a cooperative manner and induces secondary and tertiary 
conformation changes. Zinc binding to the WCBD has also been characterized by 
circular dichroism spectroscopy and shown to produce conformational changes that 
are completely different from those induced by copper. The 
phosphorylation/nucleotide-binding domain of ATP7B has also been expressed and 
characterized and shown to be capable of binding ATP but lacking ATPase 
activity. A peptide corresponding to the sixth transmembrane domain of ATP7B has 
been constructed and shown to undergo secondary conformational changes upon 
binding a single atom of copper. Finally, a chimeric protein consisting of the 
WCBD and truncated ZntA, a zinc-transporting ATPase lacking the N-terminal 
domain, has been constructed and analyzed for metal ion selectivity. These 
results suggest that the core determines the metal ion specificity of P-type 
ATPases, and the N-terminal metal-binding domain may play a regulatory role.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.02110s5695
PMCID: PMC1241227
PMID: 12426114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]