---
reference_id: "PMID:27106809"
title: "ADCK3 mutations with epilepsy, stroke-like episodes and ataxia: a POLG mimic?"
authors:
- Hikmat O
- Tzoulis C
- Knappskog PM
- Johansson S
- Boman H
- Sztromwasser P
- Lien E
- Brodtkorb E
- Ghezzi D
- Bindoff LA
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/ene.13003
keywords:
- Adult
- "Ataxia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies/diagnosis
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- "Muscle Weakness/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Ubiquinone/deficiency, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADCK3 mutations with epilepsy, stroke-like episodes and ataxia: a POLG mimic?
**Authors:** Hikmat O, Tzoulis C, Knappskog PM, Johansson S, Boman H, Sztromwasser P, Lien E, Brodtkorb E, Ghezzi D, Bindoff LA
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ene.13003](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.13003)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2016 Jul;23(7):1188-94. doi: 10.1111/ene.13003. Epub 2016 Apr
23.

ADCK3 mutations with epilepsy, stroke-like episodes and ataxia: a POLG mimic?

Hikmat O(1)(2), Tzoulis C(2)(3), Knappskog PM(2)(4), Johansson S(4)(5)(6), Boman
H(2)(4), Sztromwasser P(4), Lien E(7), Brodtkorb E(8)(9), Ghezzi D(10), Bindoff
LA(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine (K1), University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Neurology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Centre for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(5)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(6)K.G. Jebsen Centre for Research on Neuropsychiatric Disorders, University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, St Olav's University Hospital Trondheim,
Trondheim, Norway.
(8)Department of Neuroscience, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Trondheim, Norway.
(9)Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, St Olav's University
Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(10)Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Foundation IRCCS Neurological Institute
'Carlo Besta', Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Defects of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) metabolism cause a
variety of disorders ranging from isolated myopathy to multisystem involvement.
ADCK3 is one of several genes associated with CoQ10 deficiency that presents
with progressive cerebellar ataxia, epilepsy, migraine and psychiatric
disorders. Diagnosis is challenging due to the wide clinical spectrum and
overlap with other mitochondrial disorders.
METHODS: A detailed description of three new patients and one previously
reported patient from three Norwegian families with novel and known ADCK3
mutations is provided focusing on the epileptic semiology and response to
treatment. Mutations were identified by whole exome sequencing and in two
measurement of skeletal muscle CoQ10 was performed.
RESULTS: All four patients presented with childhood-onset epilepsy and
progressive cerebellar ataxia. Three patients had epilepsia partialis continua
and stroke-like episodes affecting the posterior brain. Electroencephalography
showed focal epileptic activity in the occipital and temporal lobes. Genetic
investigation revealed ADCK3 mutations in all patients including a novel change
in exon 15: c.T1732G, p.F578V. There was no apparent genotype-phenotype
correlation.
CONCLUSION: ADCK3 mutations can cause a combination of progressive ataxia and
acute epileptic encephalopathy with stroke-like episodes. The clinical,
radiological and electrophysiological features of this disorder mimic the
phenotype of polymerase gamma (POLG) related encephalopathy and it is therefore
suggested that ADCK3 mutations be considered in the differential diagnosis of
mitochondrial encephalopathy with POLG-like features.

© 2016 EAN.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.13003
PMID: 27106809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
