---
reference_id: "PMID:9655532"
title: Prospective randomized double blind placebo-controlled evaluation of azithromycin for treatment of cat-scratch disease.
authors:
- Bass JW
- Freitas BC
- Freitas AD
- Sisler CL
- Chan DS
- Vincent JM
- Person DA
- Claybaugh JR
- Wittler RR
- Weisse ME
- Regnery RL
- Slater LN
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1097/00006454-199806000-00002
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Azithromycin/therapeutic use
- Bartonella henselae
- Cat-Scratch Disease/drug therapy
- Child
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Logistic Models
- Lymph Nodes/diagnostic imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prospective randomized double blind placebo-controlled evaluation of azithromycin for treatment of cat-scratch disease.
**Authors:** Bass JW, Freitas BC, Freitas AD, Sisler CL, Chan DS, Vincent JM, Person DA, Claybaugh JR, Wittler RR, Weisse ME, Regnery RL, Slater LN
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00006454-199806000-00002](https://doi.org/10.1097/00006454-199806000-00002)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1998 Jun;17(6):447-52. doi: 
10.1097/00006454-199806000-00002.

Prospective randomized double blind placebo-controlled evaluation of 
azithromycin for treatment of cat-scratch disease.

Bass JW(1), Freitas BC, Freitas AD, Sisler CL, Chan DS, Vincent JM, Person DA, 
Claybaugh JR, Wittler RR, Weisse ME, Regnery RL, Slater LN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tripler Army Medical Center, Honolulu, HI 
96859-5000, USA. jimbass@pixinet.com

Comment in
    Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1998 Nov;17(11):1059-61. doi: 
10.1097/00006454-199811000-00027.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy of azithromycin in the treatment of 
patients with typical cat-scratch disease.
DESIGN: Prospective, randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled clinical 
trial.
SETTING: Large military medical center and its referring clinics.
PATIENTS: Active duty military members and their dependents with 
laboratory-confirmed, clinically typical cat-scratch disease.
INTERVENTION: Study participants assigned by randomization to treatment with 
oral azithromycin or placebo for 5 days.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Lymph node volume was calculated using three dimensional 
ultrasonography at entry and at weekly intervals. The ultrasonographer was 
blinded to the treatment groups. Endpoint evaluations were predetermined as time 
in days to 80% resolution of the initial total lymph node volume.
RESULTS: Demographic and clinical data showed that the azithromycin and placebo 
treatment groups were comparable at entry although the placebo group tended to 
be older. Eighty percent decrease of initial lymph node volume was documented in 
7 of 14 azithromycin-treated patients compared with 1 of 15 placebo-treated 
controls during the first 30 days of observation (P = 0.026). After 30 days 
there was no significant difference in rate or degree of resolution between the 
two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of patients with typical cat-scratch disease with oral 
azithromycin for five days affords significant clinical benefit as measured by 
total decrease in lymph node volume within the first month of treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/00006454-199806000-00002
PMID: 9655532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]