---
reference_id: "PMID:29454847"
title: "Bejel in Cuba: molecular identification of Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum in patients diagnosed with venereal syphilis."
authors:
- Noda AA
- Grillová L
- Lienhard R
- Blanco O
- Rodríguez I
- Šmajs D
journal: Clin Microbiol Infect
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2018.02.006
keywords:
- Adult
- Cuba/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Typing
- Phylogeny
- "Syphilis/epidemiology, microbiology"
- "Treponema pallidum/classification, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bejel in Cuba: molecular identification of Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum in patients diagnosed with venereal syphilis.
**Authors:** Noda AA, Grillová L, Lienhard R, Blanco O, Rodríguez I, Šmajs D
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Infect (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmi.2018.02.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2018.02.006)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2018 Nov;24(11):1210.e1-1210.e5. doi:
10.1016/j.cmi.2018.02.006. Epub 2018 Feb 16.

Bejel in Cuba: molecular identification of Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum
in patients diagnosed with venereal syphilis.

Noda AA(1), Grillová L(2), Lienhard R(3), Blanco O(1), Rodríguez I(1), Šmajs
D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mycology-Bacteriology, Institute of Tropical Medicine 'Pedro
Kourí', Havana, Cuba.
(2)Department of Biology, Masaryk University, Brno, 625 00, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, ADMED Microbiology, La Chaux-de-Fonds,
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Biology, Masaryk University, Brno, 625 00, Czech Republic.
Electronic address: dsmajs@med.muni.cz.

OBJECTIVES: Bejel, caused by Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum (TEN), was
until now considered as a non-venereal disease endemic in areas with hot and dry
climates. This study has identified TEN in clinical samples from Cuban patients
previously diagnosed with syphilis.
METHODS: We performed sequencing-based molecular typing on 92 samples from Cuban
individuals diagnosed with syphilis. Moreover, to differentiate T. pallidum
subspecies, multi-locus sequence analysis (MLSA) was designed and was applied to
suspicious samples.
RESULTS: Nine samples, from six patients, had a nucleotide sequence similarity
(at all typing loci) to the Bosnia A genome, which is the infectious agent of
bejel. Additionally, MLSA clearly supported a TEN classification for the
treponemal samples. Clinical and epidemiological data from the six patients also
suggested sexual transmission of bejel as well as the endemicity of this rare
treponematosis in Cuba.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular identification of Treponema pallidum subsp. endemicum,
the agent of bejel, in Cuban patients diagnosed with syphilis indicates the
clear limitations of a diagnosis based exclusively on serology, geographical
occurrence, clinical symptoms and anamnestic data. This finding has important
implications for Global Public Health Systems, including paradigm changes
regarding the location of endemic outbreaks, clinical aspects and transmission
of this neglected disease.

Copyright © 2018 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2018.02.006
PMID: 29454847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
