---
reference_id: "PMID:35892334"
title: "Integrative Organelle-Based Functional Proteomics: In Silico Prediction of Impaired Functional Annotations in SACS KO Cell Model."
authors:
- Morani F
- Doccini S
- Galatolo D
- Pezzini F
- Soliymani R
- Simonati A
- Lalowski MM
- Gemignani F
- Santorelli FM
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/biom12081024
keywords:
- Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Muscle Spasticity
- Mutation
- Organelles
- Proteomics
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrative Organelle-Based Functional Proteomics: In Silico Prediction of Impaired Functional Annotations in SACS KO Cell Model.
**Authors:** Morani F, Doccini S, Galatolo D, Pezzini F, Soliymani R, Simonati A, Lalowski MM, Gemignani F, Santorelli FM
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom12081024](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom12081024)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2022 Jul 24;12(8):1024. doi: 10.3390/biom12081024.

Integrative Organelle-Based Functional Proteomics: In Silico Prediction of 
Impaired Functional Annotations in SACS KO Cell Model.

Morani F(1), Doccini S(2), Galatolo D(2), Pezzini F(3), Soliymani R(4), Simonati 
A(3), Lalowski MM(4)(5), Gemignani F(1), Santorelli FM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, 56126 Pisa, Italy.
(2)Molecular Medicine for Neurodegenerative and Neuromuscular Diseases 
Unit-IRCCS Stella Maris, 56128 Pisa, Italy.
(3)Department of Surgery, Dentistry, Paediatrics and Gynaecology, University of 
Verona, 37129 Verona, Italy.
(4)HiLIFE, Meilahti Clinical Proteomics Core Facility, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, PAS, Department of Biomedical Proteomics, 
61-704 Poznań, Poland.

Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is an 
inherited neurodegenerative disease characterized by early-onset spasticity in 
the lower limbs, axonal-demyelinating sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy, and 
cerebellar ataxia. Our understanding of ARSACS (genetic basis, protein function, 
and disease mechanisms) remains partial. The integrative use of organelle-based 
quantitative proteomics and whole-genome analysis proposed in the present study 
allowed identifying the affected disease-specific pathways, upstream regulators, 
and biological functions related to ARSACS, which exemplify a rationale for the 
development of improved early diagnostic strategies and alternative treatment 
options in this rare condition that currently lacks a cure. Our integrated 
results strengthen the evidence for disease-specific defects related to 
bioenergetics and protein quality control systems and reinforce the role of 
dysregulated cytoskeletal organization in the pathogenesis of ARSACS.

DOI: 10.3390/biom12081024
PMCID: PMC9331974
PMID: 35892334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.