---
reference_id: "PMID:36151773"
title: "A phase I trial of metformin in combination with vincristine, irinotecan, and temozolomide in children with relapsed or refractory solid and central nervous system tumors: A report from the national pediatric cancer foundation."
authors:
- Metts JL
- Trucco M
- Weiser DA
- Thompson P
- Sandler E
- Smith T
- Crimella J
- Sansil S
- Thapa R
- Fridley BL
- Llosa N
- Badgett T
- Gorlick R
- Reed D
- Gill J
journal: Cancer Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/cam4.5297
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Irinotecan/adverse effects
- Temozolomide/therapeutic use
- Vincristine/therapeutic use
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/drug therapy"
- Metformin/therapeutic use
- Camptothecin
- Dacarbazine
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, etiology"
- Central Nervous System Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Maximum Tolerated Dose
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A phase I trial of metformin in combination with vincristine, irinotecan, and temozolomide in children with relapsed or refractory solid and central nervous system tumors: A report from the national pediatric cancer foundation.
**Authors:** Metts JL, Trucco M, Weiser DA, Thompson P, Sandler E, Smith T, Crimella J, Sansil S, Thapa R, Fridley BL, Llosa N, Badgett T, Gorlick R, Reed D, Gill J
**Journal:** Cancer Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cam4.5297](https://doi.org/10.1002/cam4.5297)

## Content

1. Cancer Med. 2023 Feb;12(4):4270-4281. doi: 10.1002/cam4.5297. Epub 2022 Sep
23.

A phase I trial of metformin in combination with vincristine, irinotecan, and
temozolomide in children with relapsed or refractory solid and central nervous
system tumors: A report from the national pediatric cancer foundation.

Metts JL(1), Trucco M(2), Weiser DA(3), Thompson P(4), Sandler E(5), Smith T(6),
Crimella J(7), Sansil S(8), Thapa R(9), Fridley BL(9), Llosa N(10), Badgett
T(11), Gorlick R(12), Reed D(13), Gill J(12).

Author information:
(1)Cancer and Blood Disorders Institute, Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital,
St Petersburg, Florida, USA.
(2)Cleveland Clinic Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology & Bone Marrow Transplantation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, Montefiore Medical Center, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(4)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University of North Carolina
Health Care, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Nemours Health Systems, Jacksonville,
Florida, USA.
(6)Cognitive Research Corporation, St Petersburg, Florida, USA.
(7)Clinical Trials Office Partnerships, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(8)Cancer Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamic Core, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer
Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(9)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center
and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(10)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, University of Kentucky College of Medicine,
Lexington, Kentucky, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(13)Adolescent and Young Adult Program, Department of Interdisciplinary Cancer
Management, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida, USA.

BACKGROUND: Patients with relapsed and refractory solid and central nervous
system (CNS) tumors have poor outcomes and need novel therapeutic options.
Vincristine, irinotecan, and temozolomide (VIT) is a common chemotherapy regimen
in relapsed pediatric tumors with an established toxicity profile. Metformin
shows preclinical anti-cancer activity through multiple pathways.
METHODS: The objective of this Phase I trial was to establish the maximum
tolerated dose (MTD) and recommended Phase II dose (RP2D) of metformin in
combination with VIT in children with relapsed and refractory solid and CNS
tumors. A 3 + 3 design was used to test the addition of metformin at five dose
levels (666, 999, 1333, 1666, and 2000 mg/m2 /day). Therapy toxicity,
pharmacokinetics, and radiologic response to treatment were evaluated.
RESULTS: Twenty-six patients (median age 13 years, range 2-18 years) were
enrolled with 22 evaluable for toxicity. The most common diagnoses were Ewing
sarcoma (n = 8), rhabdomyosarcoma (n = 3) and atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor
(n = 3). The MTD was exceeded at Dose Level 5 due to two dose-limiting
toxicities; both were Grade 3 diarrhea requiring prolonged hospitalization and
intravenous fluids. The MTD was not determined due to study closure with less
than six patients enrolled at Dose Level 4. Frequently observed toxicities were
gastrointestinal (most notably diarrhea) and hematologic. Amongst 16 patients
evaluable for best overall response, there was one complete response (Ewing
sarcoma), three partial responses (Ewing sarcoma, glioblastoma multiforme, and
alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma), and five patients with stable disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The MTD of VIT with metformin was not determined due to premature
study closure. We recommend an RP2D of Dose Level 4, 1666 mg/m2 /day.
Radiographic responses were seen in multiple tumor types. Further evaluation for
efficacy could be investigated in a Phase II trial.

© 2022 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.5297
PMCID: PMC9972017
PMID: 36151773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest with
this work.
