---
reference_id: "PMID:33579864"
title: Approaches to Sequence the HTT CAG Repeat Expansion and Quantify Repeat Length Variation.
authors:
- Ciosi M
- Cumming SA
- Chatzi A
- Larson E
- Tottey W
- Lomeikaite V
- Hamilton G
- Wheeler VC
- Pinto RM
- Kwak S
- Morton AJ
- Monckton DG
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-200433
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Approaches to Sequence the HTT CAG Repeat Expansion and Quantify Repeat Length Variation.
**Authors:** Ciosi M, Cumming SA, Chatzi A, Larson E, Tottey W, Lomeikaite V, Hamilton G, Wheeler VC, Pinto RM, Kwak S, Morton AJ, Monckton DG
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-200433](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-200433)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2021;10(1):53-74. doi: 10.3233/JHD-200433.

Approaches to Sequence the HTT CAG Repeat Expansion and Quantify Repeat Length 
Variation.

Ciosi M(1), Cumming SA(1), Chatzi A(1), Larson E(1), Tottey W(1), Lomeikaite 
V(1), Hamilton G(1)(2), Wheeler VC(3)(4), Pinto RM(3)(4), Kwak S(5), Morton 
AJ(6), Monckton DG(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical, 
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(2)Glasgow Polyomics, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)CHDI Management/CHDI Foundation, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(6)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of 
Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative 
disorder caused by the expansion of the HTT CAG repeat. Affected individuals 
inherit ≥36 repeats and longer alleles cause earlier onset, greater disease 
severity and faster disease progression. The HTT CAG repeat is genetically 
unstable in the soma in a process that preferentially generates somatic 
expansions, the proportion of which is associated with disease onset, severity 
and progression. Somatic mosaicism of the HTT CAG repeat has traditionally been 
assessed by semi-quantitative PCR-electrophoresis approaches that have 
limitations (e.g., no information about sequence variants). 
Genotyping-by-sequencing could allow for some of these limitations to be 
overcome.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the utility of PCR sequencing to genotype large (>50 
CAGs) HD alleles and to quantify the associated somatic mosaicism.
METHODS: We have applied MiSeq and PacBio sequencing to PCR products of the HTT 
CAG repeat in transgenic R6/2 mice carrying ∼55, ∼110, ∼255 and ∼470 CAGs. For 
each of these alleles, we compared the repeat length distributions generated for 
different tissues at two ages.
RESULTS: We were able to sequence the CAG repeat full length in all samples. 
However, the repeat length distributions for samples with ∼470 CAGs were biased 
towards shorter repeat lengths.
CONCLUSION: PCR sequencing can be used to sequence all the HD alleles 
considered, but this approach cannot be used to estimate modal allele size or 
quantify somatic expansions for alleles ⪢250 CAGs. We review the limitations of 
PCR sequencing and alternative approaches that may allow the quantification of 
somatic contractions and very large somatic expansions.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-200433
PMCID: PMC7990409
PMID: 33579864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: V.C.W. is a scientific advisory board member of 
Triplet Therapeutics, a company developing new therapeutic approaches to address 
triplet repeat disorders such as HD and myotonic dystrophy and of LoQus23 
Therapeutics, and has provided paid consulting services to Alnylam. Her 
financial interests in Triplet Therapeutics were reviewed and are managed by 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Partners HealthCare in accordance with their 
conflict of interest policies. S.K. is employed by CHDI Management, Inc., as an 
advisor to the CHDI Foundation. D.G.M. has been a scientific consultant and/or 
received honoraria or stock options from Biogen Idec, AMO Pharma, Charles River, 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Triplet Therapeutics, LoQus23, and Small Molecule RNA 
and has had research contracts with AMO Pharma and Vertex Pharmaceuticals.