---
reference_id: "PMID:17156977"
title: A CSF and postmortem brain study of D-serine metabolic parameters in schizophrenia.
authors:
- Bendikov I
- Nadri C
- Amar S
- Panizzutti R
- De Miranda J
- Wolosker H
- Agam G
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2006.10.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A CSF and postmortem brain study of D-serine metabolic parameters in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Bendikov I, Nadri C, Amar S, Panizzutti R, De Miranda J, Wolosker H, Agam G
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2006.10.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2006.10.010)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2007 Feb;90(1-3):41-51. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2006.10.010. Epub
 2006 Dec 6.

A CSF and postmortem brain study of D-serine metabolic parameters in 
schizophrenia.

Bendikov I(1), Nadri C, Amar S, Panizzutti R, De Miranda J, Wolosker H, Agam G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel 
Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel.

Clinical trials demonstrated that D-serine administration improves schizophrenia 
symptoms, raising the possibility that altered levels of endogenous D-serine may 
contribute to the N-methyl D-aspartate receptor hypofunction thought to play a 
role in the disease. We hypothesized that cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF) D-serine 
levels are decreased in the patients due to reduced synthesis and/or increased 
degradation in brain. We now monitored amino acid levels in CSF from 12 
schizophrenia patients vs. 12 controls and in postmortem parietal-cortex from 15 
control subjects and 15 each of schizophrenia, major-depression and bipolar 
patients. In addition, we monitored postmortem brain serine racemase and D-amino 
acid oxidase protein levels by Western-blot analysis. We found a 25% decrease in 
D-serine levels and D/L-serine ratio in CSF of schizophrenia patients, while 
parietal-cortex D-serine was unaltered. Levels of L-serine, L-glutamine and 
L-glutamate were unaffected. Frontal-cortex (39%) and hippocampal (21%) serine 
racemase protein levels and hippocampal serine racemase/D-amino acid oxidase 
ratio (34%) were reduced. Hippocampal D-amino-acid-oxidase protein levels 
significantly correlated with duration of illness (r=0.6, p=0.019) but not age. 
D-amino acid oxidase levels in patients with DOI>20 years were 77% significantly 
higher than in the other patients and controls. Our results suggest that reduced 
brain serine racemase and elevated D-amino acid oxidase protein levels may 
contribute to the lower CSF D-serine levels in schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2006.10.010
PMID: 17156977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]