---
reference_id: "PMID:32181939"
title: Homozygous Loss-of-Function Mutations in CCDC134 Are Responsible for a Severe Form of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
authors:
- Dubail J
- Brunelle P
- Baujat G
- Huber C
- Doyard M
- Michot C
- Chavassieux P
- Khairouni A
- Topouchian V
- Monnot S
- Koumakis E
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4011
keywords:
- Bone and Bones
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Loss of Function Mutation
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous Loss-of-Function Mutations in CCDC134 Are Responsible for a Severe Form of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
**Authors:** Dubail J, Brunelle P, Baujat G, Huber C, Doyard M, Michot C, Chavassieux P, Khairouni A, Topouchian V, Monnot S, Koumakis E, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4011](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4011)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2020 Aug;35(8):1470-1480. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4011. Epub 2020 
Apr 14.

Homozygous Loss-of-Function Mutations in CCDC134 Are Responsible for a Severe 
Form of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.

Dubail J(1), Brunelle P(1), Baujat G(1), Huber C(1), Doyard M(1), Michot C(1), 
Chavassieux P(2), Khairouni A(3), Topouchian V(4), Monnot S(1), Koumakis 
E(1)(5), Cormier-Daire V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics and Reference Centre for Constitutional Bone 
Diseases, INSERM U1163, Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Necker-Enfants 
Malades Hospital, AP-HP, F-75015, Paris, France.
(2)INSERM UMR 1033, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(3)Pediatric Orthopedics, Casablanca, Morocco.
(4)Pediatrics Orthopedics Department, Necker-Enfants Malade Hospital, Paris 
Descartes University, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(5)Rheumatology Department, Cochin Hospital, AP-HP Centre-Paris University, 
Reference Center for Rare Genetic Bone Disorders-Cochin-Constitutive Site, 
Paris, France.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a primary bone fragility disorder with an 
estimated prevalence of 1 in 15,000 births. The majority of OI cases are 
inherited in an autosomal-dominant manner, while 5% to 10% have recessive or 
X-linked inheritance. Up to now, approximately 5% of OI cases remain without 
mutation demonstrated, supporting the involvement of other genes in the disease 
spectrum. By whole-exome sequencing, we identified a homozygous variant (c.2T>C) 
in CCDC134 gene in three patients from two unrelated families with severe bone 
fragility that did not respond to bisphosphonate treatment, short stature, and 
gracile long bones with pseudarthroses but no dentinogenesis imperfecta. CCDC134 
encodes a secreted protein widely expressed and implicated in the regulation of 
some mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) signaling pathway. Western blot 
and immunofluorescence analyses confirmed the absence of CCDC134 protein in 
patient cells compared with controls. Furthermore, we demonstrated that CCDC134 
mutations are associated with increased Erk1/2 phosphorylation, decreased OPN 
mRNA and COL1A1 expression and reduced mineralization in patient osteoblasts 
compared with controls. These data support that CCDC134 is a new gene involved 
in severe progressive deforming recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (type III). © 
2020 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2020 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4011
PMID: 32181939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]