---
reference_id: "PMID:25799227"
title: Brain somatic mutations in MTOR cause focal cortical dysplasia type II leading to intractable epilepsy.
authors:
- Lim JS
- Kim WI
- Kang HC
- Kim SH
- Park AH
- Park EK
- Cho YW
- Kim S
- Kim HM
- Kim JA
- Kim J
- Rhee H
- Kang SG
- Kim HD
- Kim D
- Kim DS
- Lee JH
journal: Nat Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nm.3824
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Brain/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA/genetics
- Electroporation
- Epilepsy
- Exome
- Exons
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development, Group I/genetics"
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutagenesis
- Mutation
- Neurons/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Sirolimus/chemistry
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain somatic mutations in MTOR cause focal cortical dysplasia type II leading to intractable epilepsy.
**Authors:** Lim JS, Kim WI, Kang HC, Kim SH, Park AH, Park EK, Cho YW, Kim S, Kim HM, Kim JA, Kim J, Rhee H, Kang SG, Kim HD, Kim D, Kim DS, Lee JH
**Journal:** Nat Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.3824](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3824)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2015 Apr;21(4):395-400. doi: 10.1038/nm.3824. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

Brain somatic mutations in MTOR cause focal cortical dysplasia type II leading 
to intractable epilepsy.

Lim JS(1), Kim WI(1), Kang HC(2), Kim SH(3), Park AH(4), Park EK(5), Cho YW(6), 
Kim S(7), Kim HM(1), Kim JA(2), Kim J(7), Rhee H(8), Kang SG(5), Kim HD(2), Kim 
D(4), Kim DS(5), Lee JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
(2)1] Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric 
Epilepsy Clinics, Severance Children's Hospital, Seoul, Korea. [2] Epilepsy 
Research Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Brain Korea 21 project for medical science, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
(5)1] Epilepsy Research Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea. [2] Department of Neurosurgery, Pediatric Epilepsy Clinics, Brain Korea 
21 project for medical science, Severance Children's Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Korea Basic Science Institute, Chuncheon Center, Chuncheon-si, Gangwon-do, 
Korea.
(7)Severance Biomedical Science Institute, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(8)Macrogen Bioinformatics Center, Macrogen, Gasan-dong, Geumcheon-gu, Seoul, 
Korea.

Focal cortical dysplasia type II (FCDII) is a sporadic developmental 
malformation of the cerebral cortex characterized by dysmorphic neurons, 
dyslamination and medically refractory epilepsy. It has been hypothesized that 
FCD is caused by somatic mutations in affected regions. Here, we used deep 
whole-exome sequencing (read depth, 412-668×) validated by site-specific 
amplicon sequencing (100-347,499×) in paired brain-blood DNA from four subjects 
with FCDII and uncovered a de novo brain somatic mutation, mechanistic target of 
rapamycin (MTOR) c.7280T>C (p.Leu2427Pro) in two subjects. Deep sequencing of 
the MTOR gene in an additional 73 subjects with FCDII using hybrid capture and 
PCR amplicon sequencing identified eight different somatic missense mutations 
found in multiple brain tissue samples of ten subjects. The identified mutations 
accounted for 15.6% of all subjects with FCDII studied (12 of 77). The 
identified mutations induced the hyperactivation of mTOR kinase. Focal cortical 
expression of mutant MTOR by in utero electroporation in mice was sufficient to 
disrupt neuronal migration and cause spontaneous seizures and cytomegalic 
neurons. Inhibition of mTOR with rapamycin suppressed cytomegalic neurons and 
epileptic seizures. This study provides, to our knowledge, the first evidence 
that brain somatic activating mutations in MTOR cause FCD and identifies mTOR as 
a treatment target for intractable epilepsy in FCD.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.3824
PMID: 25799227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]