---
reference_id: PMID:38201236
title: Successful Correction by Prime Editing of a Mutation in the RYR1 Gene Responsible for a Myopathy.
authors:
- Godbout K
- Rousseau J
- Tremblay JP
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells13010031
keywords:
- Humans
- Muscle Weakness
- Muscular Diseases
- Mutation/genetics
- Point Mutation
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful Correction by Prime Editing of a Mutation in the RYR1 Gene Responsible for a Myopathy.
**Authors:** Godbout K, Rousseau J, Tremblay JP
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13010031](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13010031)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Dec 22;13(1):31. doi: 10.3390/cells13010031.

Successful Correction by Prime Editing of a Mutation in the RYR1 Gene 
Responsible for a Myopathy.

Godbout K(1)(2), Rousseau J(2), Tremblay JP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Department, Laval University, Quebec, QC G1V 0A6, Canada.
(2)CHU de Québec Research Center, Laval University, Quebec, QC G1V 4G2, Canada.

We report the first correction from prime editing a mutation in the RYR1 gene, 
paving the way to gene therapies for RYR1-related myopathies. The RYR1 gene 
codes for a calcium channel named Ryanodine receptor 1, which is expressed in 
skeletal muscle fibers. The failure of this channel causes muscle weakness in 
patients, which leads to motor disabilities. Currently, there are no effective 
treatments for these diseases, which are mainly caused by point mutations. Prime 
editing allows for the modification of precise nucleotides in the DNA. Our 
results showed a 59% correction rate of the T4709M mutation in the RYR1 gene in 
human myoblasts by RNA delivery of the prime editing components. It is to be 
noted that T4709M is recessive and, thus, persons having a heterozygous mutation 
are healthy. These results are the first demonstration that correcting mutations 
in the RYR1 gene is possible.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13010031
PMCID: PMC10777931
PMID: 38201236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.