---
reference_id: "PMID:16704491"
title: "Extrarenal rhabdoid tumors of soft tissue: clinicopathological and molecular genetic review and distinction from other soft-tissue sarcomas with rhabdoid features."
authors:
- Oda Y
- Tsuneyoshi M
journal: Pathol Int
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2006.01962.x
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone"
- Cytogenetics
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/analysis, genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Infant
- Molecular Biology
- Mutation
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/chemistry, genetics, pathology"
- SMARCB1 Protein
- "Sarcoma/chemistry, genetics, pathology"
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/chemistry, genetics, pathology"
- "Transcription Factors/analysis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extrarenal rhabdoid tumors of soft tissue: clinicopathological and molecular genetic review and distinction from other soft-tissue sarcomas with rhabdoid features.
**Authors:** Oda Y, Tsuneyoshi M
**Journal:** Pathol Int (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1440-1827.2006.01962.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1827.2006.01962.x)

## Content

1. Pathol Int. 2006 Jun;56(6):287-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2006.01962.x.

Extrarenal rhabdoid tumors of soft tissue: clinicopathological and molecular
genetic review and distinction from other soft-tissue sarcomas with rhabdoid
features.

Oda Y(1), Tsuneyoshi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. oda@surgpath.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT) of the soft tissue is a rare and highly
aggressive tumor that occurs in infancy or childhood. It predominantly involves
a deep axial location such as the neck or paraspinal region. Microscopically,
the tumor is composed of a diffuse proliferation of rounded or polygonal cells
with eccentric nuclei, prominent nucleoli and glassy eosinophilic cytoplasm
containing hyaline-like inclusion bodies, arranged in sheets and nests. These
characteristic 'rhabdoid cells' are also present in certain soft-tissue sarcomas
such as synovial sarcoma, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma and
leiomyosarcoma. The existence of rhabdoid cells in these other sarcomas is
correlated with a worse prognosis for the patients. Cytogenetic and molecular
analyses have shown abnormalities in the long arm of chromosome 22 and
alteration of the hSNF5/INI1 (SMARCB1) gene in renal, extrarenal and
intracranial MRT. This gene alteration has been considered to be a specific
molecular event in MRT, but a recent study has also demonstrated frequent
alteration of this gene in proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma (ES). Both MRT of
soft tissue and proximal-type ES show immunoreactivity for vimentin, cytokeratin
and epithelial membrane antigen. The tumor cells of proximal-type ES are also
occasionally positive for CD34 and beta-catenin, whereas MRT of soft tissue has
no immunoreaction for these markers. Detailed clinicopathological and
immunohistochemical evaluations are necessary to distinguish MRT of soft tissue
from proximal-type ES, because these tumors demonstrated a similar morphology
and the same gene alteration.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2006.01962.x
PMID: 16704491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
