---
reference_id: "PMID:34099908"
title: Early detection of pancreatic cancer using DNA-based molecular approaches.
authors:
- Singhi AD
- Wood LD
journal: Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41575-021-00470-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early detection of pancreatic cancer using DNA-based molecular approaches.
**Authors:** Singhi AD, Wood LD
**Journal:** Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41575-021-00470-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41575-021-00470-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021 Jul;18(7):457-468. doi: 
10.1038/s41575-021-00470-0. Epub 2021 Jun 7.

Early detection of pancreatic cancer using DNA-based molecular approaches.

Singhi AD(1), Wood LD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.
(2)Departments of Pathology & Oncology, Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research 
Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. 
ldwood@jhmi.edu.

Due to its poor prognosis and the late stage at which it is typically diagnosed, 
early detection of pancreatic cancer is a pressing clinical problem. Advances in 
genomic analysis of human pancreatic tissue and other biospecimens such as 
pancreatic cyst fluid, pancreatic juice and blood have opened the possibility of 
DNA-based molecular approaches for early detection of pancreatic cancer. In this 
Review, we discuss and focus on the pathological and molecular features of 
precancerous lesions of the pancreas, including pancreatic intraepithelial 
neoplasia, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm and mucinous cystic neoplasm, 
which are target lesions of early detection approaches. We also discuss the most 
prevalent genetic alterations in these precancerous lesions, including somatic 
mutations in the oncogenes KRAS and GNAS as well as tumour suppressor genes 
CDKN2A, TP53 and SMAD4. We highlight the latest discoveries related to genetic 
heterogeneity and multifocal neoplasia in precancerous lesions. In addition, we 
review specific approaches, challenges and clinically available assays for early 
detection of pancreatic cancer using DNA-based molecular techniques. Although 
detection and risk stratification of precancerous pancreatic neoplasms are 
difficult problems, progress in this field highlights the promise of molecular 
approaches for improving survival of patients with this disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41575-021-00470-0
PMID: 34099908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]