---
reference_id: "PMID:29641836"
title: Association of Cardiomyopathy With MYBPC3 D389V and MYBPC3Δ25bpIntronic Deletion in South Asian Descendants.
authors:
- Viswanathan SK
- Puckelwartz MJ
- Mehta A
- Ramachandra CJA
- Jagadeesan A
- Fritsche-Danielson R
- Bhat RV
- Wong P
- Kandoi S
- Schwanekamp JA
- Kuffel G
- Pesce LL
- Zilliox MJ
- Durai UNB
- Verma RS
- Molokie RE
- Suresh DP
- Khoury PR
- Thomas A
- Sanagala T
- Tang HC
- Becker RC
- Knöll R
- Shim W
- McNally EM
- Sadayappan S
journal: JAMA Cardiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0618
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Cardiomyopathy With MYBPC3 D389V and MYBPC3Δ25bpIntronic Deletion in South Asian Descendants.
**Authors:** Viswanathan SK, Puckelwartz MJ, Mehta A, Ramachandra CJA, Jagadeesan A, Fritsche-Danielson R, Bhat RV, Wong P, Kandoi S, Schwanekamp JA, Kuffel G, Pesce LL, Zilliox MJ, Durai UNB, Verma RS, Molokie RE, Suresh DP, Khoury PR, Thomas A, Sanagala T, Tang HC, Becker RC, Knöll R, Shim W, McNally EM, Sadayappan S
**Journal:** JAMA Cardiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0618](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0618)

## Content

1. JAMA Cardiol. 2018 Jun 1;3(6):481-488. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0618.

Association of Cardiomyopathy With MYBPC3 D389V and MYBPC3Δ25bpIntronic Deletion 
in South Asian Descendants.

Viswanathan SK(1)(2), Puckelwartz MJ(3), Mehta A(4)(5)(6), Ramachandra CJA(4), 
Jagadeesan A(2), Fritsche-Danielson R(7), Bhat RV(7), Wong P(4)(8)(9), Kandoi 
S(1)(2)(10), Schwanekamp JA(1), Kuffel G(11), Pesce LL(12), Zilliox MJ(11), 
Durai UNB(13), Verma RS(10), Molokie RE(13), Suresh DP(14), Khoury PR(15), 
Thomas A(16), Sanagala T(17), Tang HC(9), Becker RC(1), Knöll R(7)(18), Shim 
W(4)(8), McNally EM(3)(19), Sadayappan S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Heart, Lung and Vascular Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Loyola University Chicago, 
Maywood, Illinois.
(3)Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)National Heart Research Institute Singapore.
(5)Cardiovascular Academic Clinical Program, DUKE-NUS Medical School, Singapore.
(6)PSC and Phenotyping Laboratory, Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, 
Sydney, Australia.
(7)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease Innovative Medicines and Early 
Development Unit, AstraZeneca Research and Development, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(8)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disorders Program, DUKE-NUS Medical School, 
Singapore.
(9)Department of Cardiology, National Heart Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(10)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, 
Tamilnadu, India.
(11)Department of Public Health Sciences, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, 
Illinois.
(12)Computation Institute, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(13)Divison of Hematology and Oncology, University of Illinois at Chicago.
(14)St Elizabeth Physicians Heart and Vascular, Florence, Kentucky.
(15)Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(16)Marcella Niehoff School of Nursing, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, 
Illinois.
(17)Department of Cardiology and Echocardiography and Cardiographics, Loyola 
University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois.
(18)Integrated Cardio-Metabolic Centre, Myocardial Genetics, Karolinska 
Institutet, University Hospital, Heart and Vascular Theme, Stockholm, Sweden.
(19)Associate Editor for Translational Science.

IMPORTANCE: The genetic variant MYBPC3Δ25bp occurs in 4% of South Asian 
descendants, with an estimated 100 million carriers worldwide. MYBPC3 Δ25bp has 
been linked to cardiomyopathy and heart failure. However, the high prevalence of 
MYBPC3Δ25bp suggests that other stressors act in concert with MYBPC3Δ25bp.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether there are additional genetic factors that 
contribute to the cardiomyopathic expression of MYBPC3Δ25bp.
DESIGN, SETTING, ANDPARTICIPANTS: South Asian individuals living in the United 
States were screened for MYBPC3Δ25bp, and a subgroup was clinically evaluated 
using electrocardiograms and echocardiograms at Loyola University, Chicago, 
Illinois, between January 2015 and July 2016.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Next-generation sequencing of 174 cardiovascular 
disease genes was applied to identify additional modifying gene mutations and 
correlate genotype-phenotype parameters. Cardiomyocytes derived from 
human-induced pluripotent stem cells were established and examined to assess the 
role of MYBPC3Δ25bp.
RESULTS: In this genotype-phenotype study, individuals of South Asian descent 
living in the United States from both sexes (36.23% female) with a mean 
population age of 48.92 years (range, 18-84 years) were recruited. Genetic 
screening of 2401 US South Asian individuals found an MYBPC3Δ25bpcarrier 
frequency of 6%. A higher frequency of missense TTN variation was found in 
MYBPC3Δ25bp carriers compared with noncarriers, identifying distinct genetic 
backgrounds within the MYBPC3Δ25bp carrier group. Strikingly, 9.6% of 
MYBPC3Δ25bp carriers also had a novel MYBPC3 variant, D389V. Family studies 
documented D389V was in tandem on the same allele as MYBPC3Δ25bp, and D389V was 
only seen in the presence of MYBPC3Δ25bp. In contrast to MYBPC3Δ25bp, 
MYBPC3Δ25bp/D389V was associated with hyperdynamic left ventricular performance 
(mean [SEM] left ventricular ejection fraction, 66.7 [0.7%]; left ventricular 
fractional shortening, 36.6 [0.6%]; P < .03) and stem cell-derived 
cardiomyocytes exhibited cellular hypertrophy with abnormal Ca2+ transients.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: MYBPC3Δ25bp/D389V is associated with hyperdynamic 
features, which are an early finding in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and thought 
to reflect an unfavorable energetic state. These findings support that a subset 
of MYBPC3Δ25bp carriers, those with D389V, account for the increased risk 
attributed to MYBPC3Δ25bp.

DOI: 10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0618
PMCID: PMC6054452
PMID: 29641836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors 
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest. Dr McNally provides consulting services to AstraZeneca 
unrelated to the content of this manuscript. No other disclosures are reported.