---
reference_id: "PMID:33926668"
title: Alpha(1)-antitrypsin Disease, Treatment and Role for Lung Volume Reduction Surgery.
authors:
- Foray N
- Stone T
- White P
journal: Thorac Surg Clin
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.thorsurg.2021.02.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha(1)-antitrypsin Disease, Treatment and Role for Lung Volume Reduction Surgery.
**Authors:** Foray N, Stone T, White P
**Journal:** Thorac Surg Clin (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.thorsurg.2021.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.thorsurg.2021.02.002)

## Content

1. Thorac Surg Clin. 2021 May;31(2):139-160. doi: 10.1016/j.thorsurg.2021.02.002.

Alpha(1)-antitrypsin Disease, Treatment and Role for Lung Volume Reduction 
Surgery.

Foray N(1), Stone T(2), White P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, 801 North Rutledge 
Street, Room 1269, Springfield, IL 62702, USA. Electronic address: 
nforay@siumed.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, 801 North Rutledge 
Street, Room 1269, Springfield, IL 62702, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary usually is subcategorized into 2 groups: chronic 
bronchitis and emphysema. The main cause of chronic bronchitis and emphysema is 
smoking; however, alpha1-antitrypsin also has been seen to cause emphysema in 
patients who are deficient. As symptoms and lung function decline, treatment 
modalities, such as lung volume reduction surgery, have been used in individuals 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and upper lobe predominant emphysema. 
This article analyzes multiple published series where lung volume reduction 
surgery has been used in individuals with alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency and 
their overall outcomes.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thorsurg.2021.02.002
PMID: 33926668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]