---
reference_id: "PMID:32597833"
title: A CLN6-CLN8 complex recruits lysosomal enzymes at the ER for Golgi transfer.
authors:
- Bajaj L
- Sharma J
- di Ronza A
- Zhang P
- Eblimit A
- Pal R
- Roman D
- Collette JR
- Booth C
- Chang KT
- Sifers RN
- Jung SY
- Weimer JM
- Chen R
- Schekman RW
- Sardiello M
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1172/JCI130955
keywords:
- Animals
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/enzymology, genetics"
- "Golgi Apparatus/enzymology, genetics"
- "Lysosomes/enzymology, genetics"
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Multiprotein Complexes/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Protein Transport/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A CLN6-CLN8 complex recruits lysosomal enzymes at the ER for Golgi transfer.
**Authors:** Bajaj L, Sharma J, di Ronza A, Zhang P, Eblimit A, Pal R, Roman D, Collette JR, Booth C, Chang KT, Sifers RN, Jung SY, Weimer JM, Chen R, Schekman RW, Sardiello M
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI130955](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI130955)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2020 Aug 3;130(8):4118-4132. doi: 10.1172/JCI130955.

A CLN6-CLN8 complex recruits lysosomal enzymes at the ER for Golgi transfer.

Bajaj L(1)(2), Sharma J(1)(2), di Ronza A(1)(2), Zhang P(3), Eblimit A(1), Pal
R(1)(2), Roman D(4), Collette JR(4), Booth C(5)(6), Chang KT(1)(2), Sifers
RN(4), Jung SY(7), Weimer JM(5)(6), Chen R(1)(8)(9), Schekman RW(3)(10),
Sardiello M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute at Texas Children's
Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, California, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, USA.
(5)Pediatrics and Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, South
Dakota, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Sanford School of Medicine, University of South
Dakota, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, USA.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.
(8)Human Genome Sequencing Center, and.
(9)Department of Structural and Computational Biology and Molecular Biophysics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(10)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, California, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2025 Dec 15;135(24):e202081. doi: 10.1172/JCI202081.

Lysosomal enzymes are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
transferred to the Golgi complex by interaction with the Batten disease protein
CLN8 (ceroid lipofuscinosis, neuronal, 8). Here we investigated the relationship
of this pathway with CLN6, an ER-associated protein of unknown function that is
defective in a different Batten disease subtype. Experiments focused on protein
interaction and trafficking identified CLN6 as an obligate component of a
CLN6-CLN8 complex (herein referred to as EGRESS: ER-to-Golgi relaying of enzymes
of the lysosomal system), which recruits lysosomal enzymes at the ER to promote
their Golgi transfer. Mutagenesis experiments showed that the second luminal
loop of CLN6 is required for the interaction of CLN6 with the enzymes but
dispensable for interaction with CLN8. In vitro and in vivo studies showed that
CLN6 deficiency results in inefficient ER export of lysosomal enzymes and
diminished levels of the enzymes at the lysosome. Mice lacking both CLN6 and
CLN8 did not display aggravated pathology compared with the single deficiencies,
indicating that the EGRESS complex works as a functional unit. These results
identify CLN6 and the EGRESS complex as key players in lysosome biogenesis and
shed light on the molecular etiology of Batten disease caused by defects in
CLN6.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI130955
PMCID: PMC7410054
PMID: 32597833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared
that no conflict of interest exists.
