---
reference_id: "PMID:38592278"
title: "Hepatomegaly and Splenomegaly: An Approach to the Diagnosis of Lysosomal Storage Diseases."
authors:
- Jerves Serrano T
- Gold J
- Cooper JA
- Church HJ
- Tylee KL
- Wu HY
- Kim SY
- Stepien KM
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13051465
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatomegaly and Splenomegaly: An Approach to the Diagnosis of Lysosomal Storage Diseases.
**Authors:** Jerves Serrano T, Gold J, Cooper JA, Church HJ, Tylee KL, Wu HY, Kim SY, Stepien KM
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13051465](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13051465)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Mar 2;13(5):1465. doi: 10.3390/jcm13051465.

Hepatomegaly and Splenomegaly: An Approach to the Diagnosis of Lysosomal Storage 
Diseases.

Jerves Serrano T(1), Gold J(2), Cooper JA(3), Church HJ(3), Tylee KL(3), Wu 
HY(3), Kim SY(4), Stepien KM(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(2)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Willink Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester 
University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester M13 9WL, UK.
(4)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45219, USA.
(5)Salford Royal Organization, Northern Care Alliance NHS Foundation Trust, 
Adult Inherited Metabolic Diseases Department, Salford M6 8HD, UK.
(6)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 
9PL, UK.

Clinical findings of hepatomegaly and splenomegaly, the abnormal enlargement of 
the liver and spleen, respectively, should prompt a broad differential diagnosis 
that includes metabolic, congestive, neoplastic, infectious, toxic, and 
inflammatory conditions. Among the metabolic diseases, lysosomal storage 
diseases (LSDs) are a group of rare and ultrarare conditions with a collective 
incidence of 1 in 5000 live births. LSDs are caused by genetic variants 
affecting the lysosomal enzymes, transporters, or integral membrane proteins. As 
a result, abnormal metabolites accumulate in the organelle, leading to 
dysfunction. Therapeutic advances, including early diagnosis and 
disease-targeted management, have improved the life expectancy and quality of 
life of people affected by certain LSDs. To access these new interventions, LSDs 
must be considered in patients presenting with hepatomegaly and splenomegaly 
throughout the lifespan. This review article navigates the diagnostic approach 
for individuals with hepatosplenomegaly particularly focusing on LSDs. We 
provide hints in the history, physical exam, laboratories, and imaging that may 
identify LSDs. Additionally, we discuss molecular testing, arguably the 
preferred confirmatory test (over biopsy), accompanied by enzymatic testing when 
feasible.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13051465
PMCID: PMC10932313
PMID: 38592278

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.