---
reference_id: "PMID:38397161"
title: "Progressive Myoclonus Epilepsy: A Scoping Review of Diagnostic, Phenotypic and Therapeutic Advances."
authors:
- Zimmern V
- Minassian B
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15020171
keywords:
- Humans
- Myoclonus
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progressive Myoclonus Epilepsy: A Scoping Review of Diagnostic, Phenotypic and Therapeutic Advances.
**Authors:** Zimmern V, Minassian B
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15020171](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15020171)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Jan 27;15(2):171. doi: 10.3390/genes15020171.

Progressive Myoclonus Epilepsy: A Scoping Review of Diagnostic, Phenotypic and 
Therapeutic Advances.

Zimmern V(1), Minassian B(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX 
75390, USA.

The progressive myoclonus epilepsies (PME) are a diverse group of disorders that 
feature both myoclonus and seizures that worsen gradually over a variable 
timeframe. While each of the disorders is individually rare, they collectively 
make up a non-trivial portion of the complex epilepsy and myoclonus cases that 
are seen in tertiary care centers. The last decade has seen substantial progress 
in our understanding of the pathophysiology, diagnosis, prognosis, and, in 
select disorders, therapies of these diseases. In this scoping review, we 
examine English language publications from the past decade that address 
diagnostic, phenotypic, and therapeutic advances in all PMEs. We then highlight 
the major lessons that have been learned and point out avenues for future 
investigation that seem promising.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15020171
PMCID: PMC10888128
PMID: 38397161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.