---
reference_id: "PMID:7904584"
title: "Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency: the prevalent mutation G985 (K304E) is subject to a strong founder effect from northwestern Europe."
authors:
- Gregersen N
- Winter V
- Curtis D
- Deufel T
- Mack M
- Hendrickx J
- Willems PJ
- Ponzone A
- Parrella T
- Ponzone R
journal: Hum Hered
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1159/000154157
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency: the prevalent mutation G985 (K304E) is subject to a strong founder effect from northwestern Europe.
**Authors:** Gregersen N, Winter V, Curtis D, Deufel T, Mack M, Hendrickx J, Willems PJ, Ponzone A, Parrella T, Ponzone R
**Journal:** Hum Hered (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000154157](https://doi.org/10.1159/000154157)

## Content

1. Hum Hered. 1993 Nov-Dec;43(6):342-50. doi: 10.1159/000154157.

Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency: the prevalent mutation 
G985 (K304E) is subject to a strong founder effect from northwestern Europe.

Gregersen N(1), Winter V, Curtis D, Deufel T, Mack M, Hendrickx J, Willems PJ, 
Ponzone A, Parrella T, Ponzone R, et al.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Chemistry, Aarhus Kommunehospital, Denmark.

Medium-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency is a potentially fatal 
inherited defect of fatty acid beta-oxidation. Approximately 90% of the 
disease-causing alleles in diagnosed patients are due to a single base mutation, 
an A (adenine) to G (guanine) transition at position 985 of MCAD cDNA (G985). In 
a limited number of cases it was found that this mutation was always associated 
with a particular haplotype, defined by three intragenic restriction fragment 
length polymorphisms, indicating a founder effect [Kølvraa et al.; Hum Genet 
1991; 87: 425-429]. In addition, recent studies of American patients and their 
ancestors suggested the existence of a founder from northern Europe [Yokota et 
al.; Am J Hum Genet 1991; 49: 1280-1291]. In the present study we document (1) 
that the G985 heterozygous frequency in the Caucasian population of North 
Carolina in the USA is 1/84, which is 5- to 10-fold higher than in non-Caucasian 
Americans; (2) that there exists a 100% association of the G985 mutation in 17 
families with MCAD-deficient patients to a certain haplotype, defined by the 
restriction endonucleases BanII, PstI and TaqI; (3) that MCAD deficiency due to 
the G985 mutation is more frequent in the Netherlands, Ireland, England, Belgium 
and Denmark than in other western European countries, and (4) that the frequency 
distribution of G985 mutation carriers is 1/68-1/101 in newborns in the United 
Kingdom and Denmark, and 1/333 in Italy. These results support the notion of a 
founder effect in northwestern Europe.

DOI: 10.1159/000154157
PMID: 7904584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]