---
reference_id: "PMID:34162036"
title: "Acromesomelic dysplasia-Maroteaux type, nine patients with two novel NPR2 variants."
authors:
- Kılıç E
- Çavdarlı B
- Büyükyılmaz G
- Kılıç M
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2021-0055
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Testing
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- "Receptors, Atrial Natriuretic Factor/genetics"
- Atrial Natriuretic Factor Receptor B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acromesomelic dysplasia-Maroteaux type, nine patients with two novel NPR2 variants.
**Authors:** Kılıç E, Çavdarlı B, Büyükyılmaz G, Kılıç M
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2021-0055](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2021-0055)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2021 Jun 24;34(9):1115-1121. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2021-0055. Print 2021 Sep 27.

Acromesomelic dysplasia-Maroteaux type, nine patients with two novel NPR2 
variants.

Kılıç E(1)(2), Çavdarlı B(3), Büyükyılmaz G(4), Kılıç M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, University of Health Sciences, Ankara City 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Üniversiteler Mahallesi, 1604, Cadde No: 9, 06800 Çankaya/Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatric Metabolism, Sami Ulus Children Hospital, Ankara, 
Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: Acromesomelic dysplasia, type Maroteaux, is an autosomal recessive 
skeletal dysplasia caused by biallelic loss of function variations of NPR2, 
which encodes a cartilage regulator C-type natriuretic peptide receptor B. NPR2 
variations impair skeletal growth. It is a rare type of dwarfism characterized 
by shortening of the middle and distal segments of the limbs with spondylar 
dysplasia.
METHODS: We performed detailed clinical and radiological evaluation and sequence 
analysis for NPR2.
RESULTS: Herein, we report nine patients from eight families with two novel NPR2 
pathogenic variants.
CONCLUSIONS: This study describes typical clinical phenotypes of Maroteaux type 
acromesomelic dysplasia, and enriches the variant spectrum of NPR2 by reporting 
one nonsense and one missense novel variant. We emphasize the importance of 
detailed clinical evaluation before genetic testing in diagnosing rare skeletal 
disorders.

© 2021 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2021-0055
PMID: 34162036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]