---
reference_id: "PMID:26261776"
title: "Severe scrub typhus infection: Clinical features, diagnostic challenges and management."
authors:
- Peter JV
- Sudarsan TI
- Prakash JA
- Varghese GM
journal: World J Crit Care Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.5492/wjccm.v4.i3.244
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe scrub typhus infection: Clinical features, diagnostic challenges and management.
**Authors:** Peter JV, Sudarsan TI, Prakash JA, Varghese GM
**Journal:** World J Crit Care Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.5492/wjccm.v4.i3.244](https://doi.org/10.5492/wjccm.v4.i3.244)

## Content

1. World J Crit Care Med. 2015 Aug 4;4(3):244-50. doi: 10.5492/wjccm.v4.i3.244. 
eCollection 2015 Aug 4.

Severe scrub typhus infection: Clinical features, diagnostic challenges and 
management.

Peter JV(1), Sudarsan TI(1), Prakash JA(1), Varghese GM(1).

Author information:
(1)John Victor Peter, Thomas I Sudarsan, Medical Intensive Care Unit, Christian 
Medical College, Vellore 632004, Tamil Nadu, India.

Scrub typhus infection is an important cause of acute undifferentiated fever in 
South East Asia. The clinical picture is characterized by sudden onset fever 
with chills and non-specific symptoms that include headache, myalgia, sweating 
and vomiting. The presence of an eschar, in about half the patients with proven 
scrub typhus infection and usually seen in the axilla, groin or inguinal region, 
is characteristic of scrub typhus. Common laboratory findings are elevated liver 
transaminases, thrombocytopenia and leukocytosis. About a third of patients 
admitted to hospital with scrub typhus infection have evidence of organ 
dysfunction that may include respiratory failure, circulatory shock, mild renal 
or hepatic dysfunction, central nervous system involvement or hematological 
abnormalities. Since the symptoms and signs are non-specific and resemble other 
tropical infections like malaria, enteric fever, dengue or leptospirosis, 
appropriate laboratory tests are necessary to confirm diagnosis. Serological 
assays are the mainstay of diagnosis as they are easy to perform; the reference 
test is the indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) for the detection of IgM 
antibodies. However in clinical practice, the enzyme-linked immuno-sorbent assay 
is done due to the ease of performing this test and a good sensitivity and 
sensitivity when compared with the IFA. Paired samples, obtained at least two 
weeks apart, demonstrating a ≥ 4 fold rise in titre, is necessary for 
confirmation of serologic diagnosis. The mainstay of treatment is the 
tetracycline group of antibiotics or chloramphenicol although macrolides are 
used alternatively. In mild cases, recovery is complete. In severe cases with 
multi-organ failure, mortality may be as high as 24%.

DOI: 10.5492/wjccm.v4.i3.244
PMCID: PMC4524821
PMID: 26261776