---
reference_id: "PMID:32404601"
title: Patients with elevated blood pressure or stage 1 hypertension have structural heart disease.
authors:
- Ghany R
- Palacio A
- Chen G
- Dawkins E
- Forbes E
- Tajiri T
- Tamariz L
journal: Blood Press Monit
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/MBP.0000000000000447
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patients with elevated blood pressure or stage 1 hypertension have structural heart disease.
**Authors:** Ghany R, Palacio A, Chen G, Dawkins E, Forbes E, Tajiri T, Tamariz L
**Journal:** Blood Press Monit (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MBP.0000000000000447](https://doi.org/10.1097/MBP.0000000000000447)

## Content

1. Blood Press Monit. 2020 Aug;25(4):178-183. doi: 10.1097/MBP.0000000000000447.

Patients with elevated blood pressure or stage 1 hypertension have structural 
heart disease.

Ghany R(1), Palacio A(2)(3), Chen G(1), Dawkins E(1), Forbes E(1), Tajiri T(1), 
Tamariz L(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Chen Neighborhood Medical Centers.
(2)Population Health and Computational Medicine, Miller School of Medicine, 
University of Miami.
(3)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Miami, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: The 2017 American College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart 
Association (AHA) recommendations lower the hypertension threshold to 
130/80 mmHg and recommends treatment for high-risk patients. Our aim is to 
determine whether the new blood pressure categories are associated with left 
ventricular (LV) structural changes and whether echocardiograms can provide risk 
stratification and help treatment initiation.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study and performed screening 
echocardiograms to consecutive primary care patients. We calculated the 
Framingham score to identify patients with a low or intermediate score who had 
structural heart disease.We classified everyone as having normal, elevated blood 
pressure, stage 1 or stage 2 hypertension according to the 2017 ACC/AHA 
guidelines. We defined structural heart disease as having LV hypertrophy and an 
abnormal LV mass index.
RESULTS: We included 16 650 patients who underwent a screening echocardiogram 
and had recorded blood pressure. Out of the 16 650 patients, 1465 patients had a 
normal blood pressure, 1382 had elevated blood pressure, 1333 had stage 1 
hypertension, and the remainder had stage 2 hypertension. The adjusted odds 
ratios of having structural heart disease for elevated blood pressure and stage 
1 hypertension were 1.30; 95% CI, 1.112-1.64; P < 0.01 and 1.69; 95% CI, 
1.25-2.30; P < 0.01, respectively. We identified 542 patients with stage 1 
hypertension who had a low or intermediate Framingham score and 19% (95% CI, 
16-23%) had structural heart disease.
CONCLUSION: A quarter of patients identified as having elevated blood pressure 
or stage 1 hypertension have structural heart disease. Screening echocardiograms 
may help to risk stratify those patients deemed ineligible for treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/MBP.0000000000000447
PMID: 32404601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]