---
reference_id: "PMID:36359858"
title: Membrane Attack Complex Mediates Retinal Pigment Epithelium Cell Death in Stargardt Macular Degeneration.
authors:
- Ng ESY
- Kady N
- Hu J
- Dave A
- Jiang Z
- Pei J
- Gorin MB
- Matynia A
- Radu RA
journal: Cells
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cells11213462
keywords:
- Humans
- Stargardt Disease
- Complement Membrane Attack Complex/metabolism
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/metabolism
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, metabolism"
- Complement System Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Death
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Membrane Attack Complex Mediates Retinal Pigment Epithelium Cell Death in Stargardt Macular Degeneration.
**Authors:** Ng ESY, Kady N, Hu J, Dave A, Jiang Z, Pei J, Gorin MB, Matynia A, Radu RA
**Journal:** Cells (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells11213462](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11213462)

## Content

1. Cells. 2022 Nov 2;11(21):3462. doi: 10.3390/cells11213462.

Membrane Attack Complex Mediates Retinal Pigment Epithelium Cell Death in 
Stargardt Macular Degeneration.

Ng ESY(1)(2), Kady N(1)(3)(4), Hu J(1), Dave A(1), Jiang Z(1), Pei J(1), Gorin 
MB(1), Matynia A(1), Radu RA(1).

Author information:
(1)UCLA Stein Eye Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, David Geffen School 
of Medicine at UCLA, University of California at Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(2)Molecular Cellular and Integrative Physiology Interdepartmental Program, 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(4)Clinical Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, 
Mansoura 35516, Egypt.

Recessive Stargardt disease (STGD1) is an inherited retinopathy caused by 
mutations in the ABCA4 gene. The ABCA4 protein is a phospholipid-retinoid 
flippase in the outer segments of photoreceptors and the internal membranes of 
retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells. Here, we show that RPE cells derived via 
induced pluripotent stem-cell from a molecularly and clinically diagnosed STGD1 
patient exhibited reduced ABCA4 protein and diminished activity compared to a 
normal subject. Consequently, STGD1 RPE cells accumulated intracellular 
autofluorescence-lipofuscin and displayed increased complement C3 activity. The 
level of C3 inversely correlated with the level of CD46, an early negative 
regulator of the complement cascade. Persistent complement dysregulation led to 
deposition of the membrane attack complex on the surface of RPE cells, decrease 
in transepithelial resistance, and subsequent cell death. These findings are 
strong evidence of complement-mediated RPE cell damage in STGD1, in the absence 
of photoreceptors, caused by reduced CD46 regulatory protein.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11213462
PMCID: PMC9655712
PMID: 36359858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests. 
The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to publish the results.