---
reference_id: "PMID:27048656"
title: "Copa Syndrome: a Novel Autosomal Dominant Immune Dysregulatory Disease."
authors:
- Vece TJ
- Watkin LB
- Nicholas S
- Canter D
- Braun MC
- Guillerman RP
- Eldin KW
- Bertolet G
- McKinley S
- de Guzman M
- Forbes L
- Chinn I
- Orange JS
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-016-0271-8
keywords:
- "Arthritis/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Coatomer Protein/genetics
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- "Kidney Diseases/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- "Lung Diseases/genetics, immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Copa Syndrome: a Novel Autosomal Dominant Immune Dysregulatory Disease.
**Authors:** Vece TJ, Watkin LB, Nicholas S, Canter D, Braun MC, Guillerman RP, Eldin KW, Bertolet G, McKinley S, de Guzman M, Forbes L, Chinn I, Orange JS
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-016-0271-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-016-0271-8)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2016 May;36(4):377-387. doi: 10.1007/s10875-016-0271-8. Epub 
2016 Apr 5.

Copa Syndrome: a Novel Autosomal Dominant Immune Dysregulatory Disease.

Vece TJ(#)(1), Watkin LB(#)(1)(2), Nicholas S(1)(2), Canter D(2), Braun MC(1), 
Guillerman RP(3), Eldin KW(4), Bertolet G(1)(2), McKinley S(1), de Guzman 
M(1)(2), Forbes L(1)(2), Chinn I(1)(2), Orange JS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(2)Texas Children's Hospital Center for Human ImmunoBiology, Houston, TX.
(3)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX.
(4)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(#)Contributed equally

Inherently defective immunity typically results in either ineffective host 
defense, immune regulation, or both. As a category of primary immunodeficiency 
diseases, those that impair immune regulation can lead to autoimmunity and/or 
autoinflammation. In this review we focus on one of the most recently discovered 
primary immunodeficiencies that leads to immune dysregulation: "Copa syndrome". 
Copa syndrome is named for the gene mutated in the disease, which encodes the 
alpha subunit of the coatomer complex-I that, in aggregate, is devoted to 
transiting molecular cargo from the Golgi complex to the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER). Copa syndrome is autosomal dominant with variable expressivity and results 
from mutations affecting a narrow amino acid stretch in the COPA gene-encoding 
COPα protein. Patients with these mutations typically develop arthritis and 
interstitial lung disease with pulmonary hemorrhage representing a striking 
feature. Immunologically Copa syndrome is associated with autoantibody 
development, increased Th17 cells and pro-inflammatory cytokine expression 
including IL-1β and IL-6. Insights have also been gained into the underlying 
mechanism of Copa syndrome, which include excessive ER stress owing to the 
impaired return of proteins from the Golgi, and presumably resulting aberrant 
cellular autophagy. As such it represents a novel cellular disorder of 
intracellular trafficking associated with a specific clinical presentation and 
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-016-0271-8
PMCID: PMC4842120
PMID: 27048656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]