---
reference_id: "PMID:17539897"
title: Constitutive deficiency in DNA mismatch repair.
authors:
- Felton KE
- Gilchrist DM
- Andrew SE
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00803.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Constitutive deficiency in DNA mismatch repair.
**Authors:** Felton KE, Gilchrist DM, Andrew SE
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00803.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00803.x)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2007 Jun;71(6):483-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00803.x.

Constitutive deficiency in DNA mismatch repair.

Felton KE(1), Gilchrist DM, Andrew SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.

Mutations in the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes are associated with the 
inheritance of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer, also known as Lynch 
syndrome, a cancer syndrome with an average age at onset of 44. Individuals 
presenting with colorectal cancer are diagnosed with Lynch I, whereas 
individuals who present with extra-colonic tumors (such as endometrial, stomach, 
etc.) are identified as patients with Lynch syndrome II. Recently, 30 families 
have been reported with inheritance of biallelic mutations in the MMR genes. 
Here we summarize the phenotype of individuals with inheritance of homozygous or 
compound heterozygous mutations in the MMR genes that result in a complete lack 
of protein or greatly compromised protein function. In contrast to individuals 
with Lynch syndrome I and II, individuals with no MMR function present with 
childhood onset of hematological and brain malignancies, whereas residual MMR 
function can also result in gastrointestinal cancers and an age of onset in the 
second to fourth decade. Individuals with biallelic MMR mutations often present 
with café-au-lait spots, regardless of the level of MMR function remaining. 
Thus, the inheritance of two MMR gene mutations is a separate entity from Lynch 
I or II or the subtypes Turcot and Muir-Torre.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00803.x
PMID: 17539897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]