---
reference_id: "PMID:31751110"
title: Tangier Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Burnett JR
- Hooper AJ
- McCormick SPA
- Hegele RA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tangier Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Burnett JR, Hooper AJ, McCormick SPA, Hegele RA

## Content

1. Tangier Disease.

Burnett JR(1), Hooper AJ(1), McCormick SPA(2), Hegele RA(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2019 Nov 21.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry Royal Perth Hospital & Fiona Stanley
Hospital Network PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA; School of Medicine Faculty of
Health & Medical Sciences University of Western Australia Perth, Australia
(2)Department of Biochemistry University of Otago Dunedin, New Zealand
(3)Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry Schulich School of Medicine and
Robarts Research Institute Western University London, Ontario, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Tangier disease is characterized by severe deficiency
or absence of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) in the circulation resulting in
tissue accumulation of cholesteryl esters throughout the body, particularly in
the reticuloendothelial system. The major clinical signs of Tangier disease
include hyperplastic yellow-orange tonsils, hepatosplenomegaly, and peripheral
neuropathy, which may be either relapsing-remitting or chronic progressive in
nature. Rarer complications may include corneal opacities that typically do not
affect vision, premature atherosclerotic coronary artery disease occurring in
the sixth and seventh decades of life (not usually before age 40 years), and
mild hematologic manifestations, such as mild thrombocytopenia, reticulocytosis,
stomatocytosis, or hemolytic anemia. The clinical expression of Tangier disease
is variable, with some affected individuals only showing biochemical
perturbations.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Tangier disease is established in a proband
with absent or extremely low HDL-cholesterol and apo A-I levels and biallelic
pathogenic variants in ABCA1 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Tonsillectomy in those with airway
obstruction or mass symptoms; transient bracing (such as ankle-foot orthosis)
and exercise for those with peripheral neuropathy; corneal transplantation for
corneal opacities that interfere with daily living; standard treatment for
hepatosplenomegaly, coronary artery disease, severe thrombocytopenia, and severe
hemolytic anemia. Prevention of primary manifestations: Mitigation of
cardiovascular risk factors, including improvement of plasma lipid profiles
using statin therapy and a low-fat diet. Surveillance: Assessment for
hepatosplenomegaly by physical examination and imaging at each visit; neurology
and ophthalmology evaluations annually; cardiovascular risk assessment of
atherosclerotic plaque burden annually beginning in adulthood; complete blood
count with differential as clinically indicated. Agents/circumstances to avoid:
Obesity (which makes walking more difficult); medications that are toxic or
potentially toxic to those who are predisposed to the development of peripheral
neuropathy; contact sports in those with hepatosplenomegaly. Evaluation of
relatives at risk: It is appropriate to measure a lipid profile (total
cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, triglyceride, and calculated LDL-cholesterol) and
apo A-I concentration in at-risk sibs to identify as early as possible those who
would benefit from appropriate treatment or measures to prevent disease
complications.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Tangier disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. Most parents are heterozygous for a pathogenic variant. At conception
each sib has a 25% chance of being unaffected, a 50% chance of being a carrier
(with no overt clinical manifestations, but with plasma HDL-cholesterol
concentrations that are ~50% of normal), and a 25% chance of being unaffected
and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing
for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the pathogenic variants in the
family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 31751110
