---
reference_id: "PMID:33091561"
title: A meta-analysis of reversion mutations in BRCA genes identifies signatures of DNA end-joining repair mechanisms driving therapy resistance.
authors:
- Tobalina L
- Armenia J
- Irving E
- "O'Connor MJ"
- Forment JV
journal: Ann Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2020.10.470
keywords:
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- DNA End-Joining Repair
- DNA Repair/genetics
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Female
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A meta-analysis of reversion mutations in BRCA genes identifies signatures of DNA end-joining repair mechanisms driving therapy resistance.
**Authors:** Tobalina L, Armenia J, Irving E, O'Connor MJ, Forment JV
**Journal:** Ann Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.annonc.2020.10.470](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.10.470)

## Content

1. Ann Oncol. 2021 Jan;32(1):103-112. doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2020.10.470. Epub
2020  Oct 19.

A meta-analysis of reversion mutations in BRCA genes identifies signatures of
DNA end-joining repair mechanisms driving therapy resistance.

Tobalina L(1), Armenia J(1), Irving E(2), O'Connor MJ(2), Forment JV(3).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics and Data Science, Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(2)DDR Biology, Bioscience, Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(3)DDR Biology, Bioscience, Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK. Electronic
address: josep.forment@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: Germline mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 (BRCA) genes predispose to
hereditary breast and ovarian cancer and, mostly in the case of BRCA2, are also
prevalent in cases of pancreatic and prostate malignancies. Tumours from these
patients tend to lose both copies of the wild-type BRCA gene, which makes them
exquisitely sensitive to platinum drugs and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
inhibitors (PARPi), treatments of choice in these disease settings. Reversion
secondary mutations with the capacity of restoring BRCA protein expression have
been documented in the literature as bona fide mechanisms of resistance to these
treatments.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analysed published sequencing data of BRCA genes (from
tumour or circulating tumour DNA) in 327 patients with tumours harbouring
mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 (234 patients with ovarian cancer, 27 with breast
cancer, 13 with pancreatic cancer, 11 with prostate cancer and 42 with a cancer
of unknown origin) that progressed on platinum or PARPi treatment.
RESULTS: We describe 269 cases of reversion mutations in 86 patients in this
cohort (26.0%). Detailed analyses of the reversion events highlight that most
amino acid sequences encoded by exon 11 in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are dispensable to
generate resistance to platinum or PARPi, whereas other regions are more
refractory to sizeable amino acid losses. They also underline the key role of
mutagenic end-joining DNA repair pathways in generating reversions, especially
in those affecting BRCA2, as indicated by the significant accumulation of DNA
sequence microhomologies surrounding deletions leading to reversion events.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses suggest that pharmacological inhibition of DNA
end-joining repair pathways could improve durability of drug treatments by
preventing the acquisition of reversion mutations in BRCA genes. They also
highlight potential new therapeutic opportunities when reversions result in
expression of hypomorphic versions of BRCA proteins, especially with agents
targeting the response to DNA replication stress.

Copyright © 2020 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annonc.2020.10.470
PMID: 33091561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure LT, JA, EI, MJO and JVF are full-time
employees and shareholders of AstraZeneca. Ethical approval Not required.
