---
reference_id: "PMID:39838063"
title: "Preclinical assessment of splicing modulation therapy for ABCA4 variant c.768G>T in Stargardt disease."
authors:
- Karjosukarso DW
- Bukkems F
- Duijkers L
- Tomkiewicz TZ
- Kiefmann J
- Sarlea A
- Bervoets S
- Vázquez-Domínguez I
- Molday LL
- Molday RS
- Netea MG
- Hoyng CB
- Garanto A
- Collin RWJ
journal: Commun Med (Lond)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s43856-024-00712-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preclinical assessment of splicing modulation therapy for ABCA4 variant c.768G>T in Stargardt disease.
**Authors:** Karjosukarso DW, Bukkems F, Duijkers L, Tomkiewicz TZ, Kiefmann J, Sarlea A, Bervoets S, Vázquez-Domínguez I, Molday LL, Molday RS, Netea MG, Hoyng CB, Garanto A, Collin RWJ
**Journal:** Commun Med (Lond) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s43856-024-00712-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00712-7)

## Content

1. Commun Med (Lond). 2025 Jan 21;5(1):25. doi: 10.1038/s43856-024-00712-7.

Preclinical assessment of splicing modulation therapy for ABCA4 variant c.768G>T 
in Stargardt disease.

Karjosukarso DW(1), Bukkems F(1)(2), Duijkers L(1), Tomkiewicz TZ(1), Kiefmann 
J(1), Sarlea A(3), Bervoets S(4), Vázquez-Domínguez I(1), Molday LL(5), Molday 
RS(5), Netea MG(3), Hoyng CB(2)(6), Garanto A(1)(7), Collin RWJ(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Research Institute for Medical Innovation, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Astherna B.V., Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, 
Research Institute for Medical Innovation, Radboud University Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Radboudumc Technology Center Bioinformatics, Research Institute for Medical 
Innovation, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Research Institute for Medical Innovation, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Amalia Children's Hospital, Research Institute for 
Medical Innovation, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Research Institute for Medical Innovation, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
rob.collin@radboudumc.nl.
(9)Astherna B.V., Nijmegen, The Netherlands. rob.collin@radboudumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Stargardt disease type 1 (STGD1) is a progressive retinal disorder 
caused by bi-allelic variants in the ABCA4 gene. A recurrent variant at the 
exon-intron junction of exon 6, c.768G>T, causes a 35-nt elongation of exon 6 
that leads to premature termination of protein synthesis.
METHODS: To correct this aberrant splicing, twenty-five 2'-O-methoxyethyl 
antisense oligonucleotides (AONs) were designed, spanning the entire exon 
elongation.
RESULTS: Testing of these AONs in patient-derived photoreceptor precursor cells 
and retinal organoids allow the selection of a lead candidate AON (A7 21-mer) 
that rescues on average 52% and 50% expression of wild-type ABCA4 transcript and 
protein, respectively. In situ hybridization and probe-based ELISA demonstrate 
its distribution and stability in vitro and in vivo. No major safety concerns 
regarding off-targets, immunostimulation and toxicity are observed in 
transcriptomics analysis, cytokine stimulation assays in human primary immune 
cells, and cytotoxicity assays.
CONCLUSIONS: Additional optimization and in vivo studies will be performed to 
further investigate the lead candidate. Considering the high prevalence of this 
variant, a substantial number of patients are likely to benefit from a 
successful further development and implementation of this therapy.

Plain Language Summary: Stargardt disease is an inherited blindness that is 
caused by defect(s) in the ABCA4 gene. It starts with central vision loss which 
may gradually lead to complete blindness. We designed drugs to modify a common 
ABCA4 gene mutation and restore the correct function of the ABCA4 protein. We 
evaluate these drugs in cell and mouse models of eye disease to select the most 
promising one. Further studies could result in the start of testing the drug in 
patients with Stargardt disease.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s43856-024-00712-7
PMCID: PMC11751084
PMID: 39838063

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: R.W.J.C. is the Chief 
Executive Officer (interim) of Astherna B.V. C.B.H. is Senior Clinical Advisor 
of Astherna B.V. F.B. is employed in Astherna B.V. from September 1st 2023. 
R.W.J.C. and A.G. are inventors on several filed patents describing the use of 
antisense oligonucleotides (WO2013036105A1, WO2018109011A1, WO2020015959A1, 
WO2020115106A1, WO2021023863A1) to treat inherited retinal diseases, including 
Stargardt disease. These patents have been licensed by Radboudumc to Astherna 
B.V. M.G.N. is a scientific founder of TTxD, Lemba and Biotrip (not related to 
the current study).