---
reference_id: "PMID:8741809"
title: The relationship between cow's milk exposure and type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Gerstein HC
- VanderMeulen J
journal: Diabet Med
year: '1996'
doi: "10.1002/(SICI)1096-9136(199601)13:1<23::AID-DIA4>3.0.CO;2-D"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The relationship between cow's milk exposure and type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Gerstein HC, VanderMeulen J
**Journal:** Diabet Med (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1096-9136(199601)13:1<23::AID-DIA4>3.0.CO;2-D](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-9136(199601)13:1<23::AID-DIA4>3.0.CO;2-D)

## Content

1. Diabet Med. 1996 Jan;13(1):23-9. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1096-9136(199601)13:1<23::AID-DIA4>3.0.CO;2-D.

The relationship between cow's milk exposure and type 1 diabetes.

Gerstein HC(1), VanderMeulen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Environmental factors are important for the development of Type 1 diabetes 
mellitus. They likely account for changes in the incidence of this disease over 
time, as well as the well-documented differences in incidence in ethnically and 
genetically similar people living in different parts of the world. There is a 
relationship between early cow's milk exposure and the development of Type 1 
diabetes in humans, and between early cow's milk exposure and the development of 
autoimmune diabetes in rodent models of Type 1 diabetes. Moreover, some 
immunological studies have suggested a possible mechanism whereby exposure to 
cow's milk protein could result in beta-cell directed autoimmunity and 
subsequent Type 1 diabetes. Although provocative, the existence of alternative 
explanations for these epidemiological and biological observations, suggest that 
the data are insufficient to conclude that the observed associations represent 
causal relationships or to mandate changes in recommendations for infant 
feeding. The question of whether or not avoidance of cow's milk protein in 
infancy will prevent Type 1 diabetes can, however, be tested in an international 
randomized clinical trial of infant diets, which is currently under review.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-9136(199601)13:1<23::AID-DIA4>3.0.CO;2-D
PMID: 8741809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]