---
reference_id: "PMID:32278767"
title: The Clinical Features and Genetic Spectrum of a Large Cohort of Chinese Patients With Vitelliform Macular Dystrophies.
authors:
- Xuan Y
- Zhang Y
- Zong Y
- Wang M
- Li L
- Ye X
- Liu W
- Chen J
- Sun X
- Zhang Y
- Chen Y
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2020.03.047
keywords:
- Adult
- Asian People/genetics
- "Bestrophins/chemistry, genetics"
- China/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Electrooculography
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- "Glaucoma, Angle-Closure/diagnosis, genetics"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Intraocular Pressure/physiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Conformation
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- "Tonometry, Ocular"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/diagnosis, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Clinical Features and Genetic Spectrum of a Large Cohort of Chinese Patients With Vitelliform Macular Dystrophies.
**Authors:** Xuan Y, Zhang Y, Zong Y, Wang M, Li L, Ye X, Liu W, Chen J, Sun X, Zhang Y, Chen Y
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajo.2020.03.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajo.2020.03.047)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2020 Aug;216:69-79. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2020.03.047. Epub 2020
 Apr 9.

The Clinical Features and Genetic Spectrum of a Large Cohort of Chinese Patients
With Vitelliform Macular Dystrophies.

Xuan Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Zong Y(2), Wang M(1), Li L(1), Ye X(1), Liu W(1), Chen
J(2), Sun X(3), Zhang Y(1), Chen Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Science, Eye and ENT Hospital, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Visual Impairment and Restoration, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Science, Eye and ENT Hospital, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Visual Impairment and Restoration, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; NHC Key
Laboratory of Myopia, Fudan University, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Science, Eye and ENT Hospital, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Visual Impairment and Restoration, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; State Key
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Institutes of Brain Science and
Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China; NHC Key Laboratory of Myopia, Fudan University, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Science, Eye and ENT Hospital, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Visual Impairment and Restoration, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; NHC Key
Laboratory of Myopia, Fudan University, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Shanghai, China. Electronic address: yuhongchen@fudan.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: To provide the clinical and genetic characteristics of a large cohort
of Chinese patients with vitelliform macular dystrophies.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
METHODS: One hundred and thirty-four unrelated Chinese patients diagnosed with
Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD), autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy
(ARB), or adult vitelliform macular dystrophy (AVMD) were enrolled. Detailed
ophthalmic examinations and genetic testing on vitelliform macular
dystrophy-related genes were performed. Genotype and phenotype association were
analyzed among different diagnostic groups.
RESULTS: In total, 87 BVMD, 30 AVMD, and 17 ARB patients were enrolled in this
study. Genetic analysis identified 37 BEST1 mutations in 53 patients with BVMD
and ARB. Of these, 5 variants (c.254A>C, c.291C>G, c.722C>G, c.848_850del,
c.1740-2A>C) were novel. The variant c.898G>A was a hotspot mutation, which was
identified in 13 patients with BVMD and 1 patient with ARB. There were
significant differences of ocular biometric parameters among patients with
homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations, heterozygous mutations, and those
without mutations of BEST1. Homozygous or compound heterozygous patients had
shortest axial length (AL), shallowest anterior chamber depth (ACD), and highest
intraocular pressure (IOP); patients without mutations had longest AL, deepest
ACD, and lowest IOP; and heterozygous patients were in between. Moreover, 7
patients harboring heterozygous mutations in BEST1 and 3 patients without BEST1
mutations showed similar clinical appearance to ARB in our cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the largest sample size study of Chinese vitelliform
macular dystrophy patients. Our results indicated that assessment of
angle-closure risk is a necessary consideration for all types of BEST1-related
vitelliform macular dystrophies. The study expanded both the clinical and
genetic findings of 3 common types of vitelliform macular dystrophies in a
Chinese population.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2020.03.047
PMID: 32278767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
