---
reference_id: "PMID:38802173"
title: "Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; clinical features, differential diagnosis and pathology."
authors:
- Van Es MA
journal: Int Rev Neurobiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/bs.irn.2024.04.011
keywords:
- Humans
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/diagnosis, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Frontotemporal Dementia/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; clinical features, differential diagnosis and pathology.
**Authors:** Van Es MA
**Journal:** Int Rev Neurobiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.irn.2024.04.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.irn.2024.04.011)

## Content

1. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2024;176:1-47. doi: 10.1016/bs.irn.2024.04.011. Epub 2024
May  22.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; clinical features, differential diagnosis and 
pathology.

Van Es MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Brain Center UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: m.a.vanes@umcutrecht.nl.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a late-onset syndrome characterized by 
the progressive degeneration of both upper motor neurons (UMN) and lower motor 
neurons (LMN). ALS forms a clinical continuum with frontotemporal dementia 
(FTD), in which there are progressive language deficits or behavioral changes. 
The genetics and pathology underlying both ALS and FTD overlap as well, with 
cytoplasmatic misvocalization of TDP-43 as the hallmark. ALS is diagnosed by 
exclusion. Over the years several diagnostic criteria have been proposed, which 
in essence all require a history of slowly progressive motor symptoms, with UMN 
and LMN signs on neurological examination, clear spread of symptoms through the 
body, the exclusion of other disorder that cause similar symptoms and an EMG 
that it is compatible with LMN loss. ALS is heterogeneous disorder that may 
present in multitude ways, which makes the diagnosis challenging. Therefore, a 
systematic approach in the diagnostic process is required in line with the most 
common presentations. Subsequently, assessing whether there are cognitive and/or 
behavioral changes within the spectrum of FTD and lastly determining the cause 
is genetic. This chapter, an outline on how to navigate this 3 step process.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.irn.2024.04.011
PMID: 38802173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]