---
reference_id: "PMID:10352410"
title: Interstitial pathomechanisms underlying progressive tubulointerstitial damage.
authors:
- Strutz F
- Müller GA
journal: Kidney Blood Press Res
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1159/000025911
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interstitial pathomechanisms underlying progressive tubulointerstitial damage.
**Authors:** Strutz F, Müller GA
**Journal:** Kidney Blood Press Res (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000025911](https://doi.org/10.1159/000025911)

## Content

1. Kidney Blood Press Res. 1999;22(1-2):71-80. doi: 10.1159/000025911.

Interstitial pathomechanisms underlying progressive tubulointerstitial damage.

Strutz F(1), Müller GA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Georg-August-University Medical 
Center, Göttingen, Germany. fstrutz@gwdg.de

Progressive renal disease poses an increasing problem for the medical community. 
Though the causes of end-stage renal failure are multiple, the histologic 
pictures of chronic renal disease are remarkably similar being characterized by 
interstitial infiltration, fibrosis, tubular atrophy and dilatation. This 
similarity points to a final common pathway. In addition, renal disease often 
progresses despite elimination or amelioration of the inciting stimulus. This 
review deals with the pathomechanisms of progressive renal failure proposing a 
three-step model of fibrogenesis with an induction phase, a phase of 
inflammatory, and, lastly, a phase of postinflammatory matrix synthesis. The 
central role of the tubular epithelial cell as a mediator of interstitial 
inflammation and its participation in matrix synthesis will be discussed 
particularly. Finally, a brief overview is listed on new therapeutic approaches 
to limit the progressive nature of fibrogenesis.

DOI: 10.1159/000025911
PMID: 10352410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]