---
reference_id: "PMID:9635427"
title: "Spastic paraplegia and OXPHOS impairment caused by mutations in paraplegin, a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial metalloprotease."
authors:
- Casari G
- De Fusco M
- Ciarmatori S
- Zeviani M
- Mora M
- Fernandez P
- De Michele G
- Filla A
- Cocozza S
- Marconi R
- Dürr A
- Fontaine B
- Ballabio A
journal: Cell
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81203-9
keywords:
- ATPases Associated with Diverse Cellular Activities
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cell Nucleus/genetics
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16/genetics"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- Female
- Fetus
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- Humans
- Italy
- Male
- Metalloendopeptidases/genetics
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- Oxidative Phosphorylation
- Pedigree
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Yeasts/enzymology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spastic paraplegia and OXPHOS impairment caused by mutations in paraplegin, a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial metalloprotease.
**Authors:** Casari G, De Fusco M, Ciarmatori S, Zeviani M, Mora M, Fernandez P, De Michele G, Filla A, Cocozza S, Marconi R, Dürr A, Fontaine B, Ballabio A
**Journal:** Cell (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81203-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81203-9)

## Content

1. Cell. 1998 Jun 12;93(6):973-83. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81203-9.

Spastic paraplegia and OXPHOS impairment caused by mutations in paraplegin, a 
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial metalloprotease.

Casari G(1), De Fusco M, Ciarmatori S, Zeviani M, Mora M, Fernandez P, De 
Michele G, Filla A, Cocozza S, Marconi R, Dürr A, Fontaine B, Ballabio A.

Author information:
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Milan, Italy.

Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is characterized by progressive weakness and 
spasticity of the lower limbs due to degeneration of corticospinal axons. We 
found that patients from a chromosome 16q24.3-linked HSP family are homozygous 
for a 9.5 kb deletion involving a gene encoding a novel protein, named 
Paraplegin. Two additional Paraplegin mutations, both resulting in a frameshift, 
were found in a complicated and in a pure form of HSP. Paraplegin is highly 
homologous to the yeast mitochondrial ATPases, AFG3, RCA1, and YME1, which have 
both proteolytic and chaperon-like activities at the inner mitochondrial 
membrane. Immunofluorescence analysis and import experiments showed that 
Paraplegin localizes to mitochondria. Analysis of muscle biopsies from two 
patients carrying Paraplegin mutations showed typical signs of mitochondrial 
OXPHOS defects, thus suggesting a mechanism for neurodegeneration in HSP-type 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81203-9
PMID: 9635427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]