---
reference_id: "PMID:34621377"
title: The impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on the mental health of hemodialysis patients in Lebanon.
authors:
- Beaini C
- Aoun M
- El Hajj C
- Sleilaty G
- Haber N
- Maalouf G
- Abi Rached E
journal: J Med Life
year: '2021'
doi: 10.25122/jml-2020-0165
keywords:
- Aged
- COVID-19
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Humans
- Lebanon/epidemiology
- Male
- Mental Health
- Pandemics
- Renal Dialysis
- SARS-CoV-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on the mental health of hemodialysis patients in Lebanon.
**Authors:** Beaini C, Aoun M, El Hajj C, Sleilaty G, Haber N, Maalouf G, Abi Rached E
**Journal:** J Med Life (2021)
**DOI:** [10.25122/jml-2020-0165](https://doi.org/10.25122/jml-2020-0165)

## Content

1. J Med Life. 2021 Jul-Aug;14(4):523-530. doi: 10.25122/jml-2020-0165.

The impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on the mental health of hemodialysis 
patients in Lebanon.

Beaini C(1)(2), Aoun M(1)(3), El Hajj C(2), Sleilaty G(4)(5), Haber N(6), 
Maalouf G(6), Abi Rached E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, Saint-Joseph University, 
Beirut, Lebanon.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Bellevue Medical Center, Mansourieh, Lebanon.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Saint-George Hospital, Ajaltoun, Lebanon.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, Saint-Joseph University, 
Beirut, Lebanon.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Hôtel-Dieu de France Hospital, Beirut, 
Lebanon.
(6)Administrative Department, Bellevue Medical Center, Mansourieh, Lebanon.
(7)Department of Psychology, Bellevue Medical Center, Mansourieh, Lebanon.

Hemodialysis is a necessary treatment for end-stage kidney disease patients. It 
imposes undergoing three sessions of dialysis per week in a specialized center. 
Amid the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, precautionary measures were mandatory in all 
dialysis facilities and may have negatively impacted patients' well-being. This 
study aimed to uncover the scale of this effect. We performed a cross-sectional 
study of all patients undergoing chronic hemodialysis in two dialysis units (one 
urban and another rural). Patients with Alzheimer's disease were excluded. 
Patients filled a questionnaire including information on socio-demographics, 
factors related to the dialysis facility, and the impact of the COVID-19 
epidemic on their mental health. A total of 72 patients responded. Their median 
age was 70 (60.79) years. Of them, 68% were males, 71% were married, and 10% 
were living alone. Following the pandemic, 35% felt more anxious, with a higher 
incidence of anxiety in the rural unit (p=0.021). Half of them felt very limited 
in their relationships, and 29% were isolated from their families. In total, 98% 
of patients were satisfied with the staff support. The imposed preventive 
measures were perceived as very strict in 27% of the surveyed patients. The 
majority of the urban group were bothered for not eating during the session, and 
they felt significantly more stress than the rural group (p=0.001). The 
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic increased anxiety among hemodialysis patients from a rural 
setting. Stress was more prevalent in the urban group and most probably related 
to limitations in eating during sessions. The majority were satisfied with staff 
support.

©2021 JOURNAL of MEDICINE and LIFE.

DOI: 10.25122/jml-2020-0165
PMCID: PMC8485366
PMID: 34621377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]