---
reference_id: "PMID:29214523"
title: Haematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Arrests the Progression of Neurodegenerative Disease in Late-Onset Tay-Sachs Disease.
authors:
- Stepien KM
- Lum SH
- Wraith JE
- Hendriksz CJ
- Church HJ
- Priestman D
- Platt FM
- Jones S
- Jovanovic A
- Wynn R
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2017_76
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Arrests the Progression of Neurodegenerative Disease in Late-Onset Tay-Sachs Disease.
**Authors:** Stepien KM, Lum SH, Wraith JE, Hendriksz CJ, Church HJ, Priestman D, Platt FM, Jones S, Jovanovic A, Wynn R
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2017_76](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2017_76)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2018;41:17-23. doi: 10.1007/8904_2017_76. Epub 2017 Dec 7.

Haematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Arrests the Progression of
Neurodegenerative Disease in Late-Onset Tay-Sachs Disease.

Stepien KM(1), Lum SH(2), Wraith JE(3), Hendriksz CJ(4)(5), Church HJ(3),
Priestman D(6), Platt FM(6), Jones S(3), Jovanovic A(4), Wynn R(2).

Author information:
(1)The Mark Holland Metabolic Unit, Adult Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Salford
Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK. kstepien@doctors.org.uk.
(2)Department of Paediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant, Royal Manchester
Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(3)Willink Biochemical Genetics Department, St. Mary's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(4)The Mark Holland Metabolic Unit, Adult Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Salford
Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.
(5)Steve Biko Academic Unit, Paediatrics and Child Health, University of
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Tay-Sachs disease is a rare metabolic disease caused by a deficiency of
hexosaminidase A that leads to accumulation of GM2 gangliosides predominantly in
neural tissue. Late-onset Tay-Sachs disease variant is associated with a higher
level of residual HexA activity. Treatment options are limited, and there are a
few described cases who have undergone haematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT) with variable outcome.We describe a case of a 23-year-old male patient
who presented with a long-standing tremor since 7 years of age. He had gait
ataxia, a speech stammer and swallowing problems. His condition had had a static
course apart from his tremor that had been gradually deteriorating. Because of
the deterioration in his neurological function, the patient had an uneventful,
matched-sibling donor bone marrow transplant at the age of 15 years. Eight years
post-HSCT, at the age of 23, he retains full donor engraftment, and his white
cell beta-HexA of 191 nmol/mg/h is comparable to normal controls (in-assay
control = 187). He continues to experience some intentional tremor that is
tolerable for daily life and nonprogressive since HSCT.
CONCLUSION: HSCT is a potential treatment option which might arrest
neurodegeneration in patients with LOTS.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2017_76
PMCID: PMC6122053
PMID: 29214523
