---
reference_id: "PMID:32029743"
title: Down syndrome.
authors:
- Antonarakis SE
- Skotko BG
- Rafii MS
- Strydom A
- Pape SE
- Bianchi DW
- Sherman SL
- Reeves RH
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0143-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Down syndrome.
**Authors:** Antonarakis SE, Skotko BG, Rafii MS, Strydom A, Pape SE, Bianchi DW, Sherman SL, Reeves RH
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-019-0143-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-019-0143-7)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Feb 6;6(1):9. doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0143-7.

Down syndrome.

Antonarakis SE(1), Skotko BG(2)(3), Rafii MS(4), Strydom A(5), Pape SE(5), 
Bianchi DW(6)(7), Sherman SL(8), Reeves RH(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical 
School, Geneva, Switzerland. stylianos.antonarakis@unige.ch.
(2)Down Syndrome Program, Division of Medical Genetics, Department of 
Pediatrics, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California, California, CA, 
USA.
(5)Department of Forensic and Neurodevelopmental Sciences, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(6)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
GA, USA.
(9)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(10)McKusick-Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Trisomy 21, the presence of a supernumerary chromosome 21, results in a 
collection of clinical features commonly known as Down syndrome (DS). DS is 
among the most genetically complex of the conditions that are compatible with 
human survival post-term, and the most frequent survivable autosomal aneuploidy. 
Mouse models of DS, involving trisomy of all or part of human chromosome 21 or 
orthologous mouse genomic regions, are providing valuable insights into the 
contribution of triplicated genes or groups of genes to the many clinical 
manifestations in DS. This endeavour is challenging, as there are >200 
protein-coding genes on chromosome 21 and they can have direct and indirect 
effects on homeostasis in cells, tissues, organs and systems. Although this 
complexity poses formidable challenges to understanding the underlying molecular 
basis for each of the many clinical features of DS, it also provides 
opportunities for improving understanding of genetic mechanisms underlying the 
development and function of many cell types, tissues, organs and systems. Since 
the first description of trisomy 21, we have learned much about intellectual 
disability and genetic risk factors for congenital heart disease. The lower 
occurrence of solid tumours in individuals with DS supports the identification 
of chromosome 21 genes that protect against cancer when overexpressed. The 
universal occurrence of the histopathology of Alzheimer disease and the high 
prevalence of dementia in DS are providing insights into the pathology and 
treatment of Alzheimer disease. Clinical trials to ameliorate intellectual 
disability in DS signal a new era in which therapeutic interventions based on 
knowledge of the molecular pathophysiology of DS can now be explored; these 
efforts provide reasonable hope for the future.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-019-0143-7
PMCID: PMC8428796
PMID: 32029743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]