---
reference_id: "PMID:32300215"
title: The mutational spectrum of Myocilin gene among familial versus sporadic cases of Juvenile onset open angle glaucoma.
authors:
- Gupta V
- Somarajan BI
- Gupta S
- Walia GK
- Singh A
- Sofi R
- Chaudhary RS
- Sharma A
journal: Eye (Lond)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41433-020-0850-z
keywords:
- Adult
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- "Glaucoma, Open-Angle/epidemiology, genetics"
- Glycoproteins
- Humans
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Myocilin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The mutational spectrum of Myocilin gene among familial versus sporadic cases of Juvenile onset open angle glaucoma.
**Authors:** Gupta V, Somarajan BI, Gupta S, Walia GK, Singh A, Sofi R, Chaudhary RS, Sharma A
**Journal:** Eye (Lond) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41433-020-0850-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-020-0850-z)

## Content

1. Eye (Lond). 2021 Feb;35(2):400-408. doi: 10.1038/s41433-020-0850-z. Epub 2020 
Apr 16.

The mutational spectrum of Myocilin gene among familial versus sporadic cases of 
Juvenile onset open angle glaucoma.

Gupta V(1), Somarajan BI(2), Gupta S(2), Walia GK(3), Singh A(2), Sofi R(2), 
Chaudhary RS(2), Sharma A(4).

Author information:
(1)Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. gupta_v20032000@yahoo.com.
(2)Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(3)Public Health Foundation of India, Gurgaon, India.
(4)Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

PURPOSE: Juvenile onset primary open angle glaucoma (JOAG) is a rare disorder 
associated with high IOP and progressive optic neuropathy in patients diagnosed 
before the age of 40 years. While in some populations it has primarily an 
autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, in others it occurs in a primarily 
sporadic form. The main aim of the study was to assess the relative prevalence 
of Myocilin (MYOC) mutations in familial versus sporadic cases of JOAG.
METHODS: We screened 92 unrelated (sporadic) JOAG patients, and 22 affected 
families (70 affected members and 36 unaffected) for variations in the MYOC 
gene. We also analyzed the clinical features associated with these variations.
RESULTS: Three coding sequence variants were identified as mutations causing 
JOAG. Four families segregated distinct mutations at Gly367Arg, and two families 
at Gln337Arg, while only two sporadic JOAG cases harbored MYOC mutations 
(Gly367Arg and Gln48His). The frequency of MYOC mutations in familial cases 
(27%) was significantly higher than in sporadic JOAG cases (2%); p = 0.001. A 
90% penetrance for the Gly367Arg variant was seen by the age of 40 years in our 
patients. Characteristic allele signatures, indicative of specific founder 
effects, were not observed for the Gly367Arg mutation that was looked for in 12 
patients among 2 geographically close families, which harbored this mutation.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrated that genetic screening for MYOC mutations 
should be focused toward cases with familial rather than sporadically occurring 
JOAG.

DOI: 10.1038/s41433-020-0850-z
PMCID: PMC8027054
PMID: 32300215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.