---
reference_id: "PMID:33347393"
title: "Clinical Effect of Driver Mutations of KRAS, CDKN2A/P16, TP53, and SMAD4 in Pancreatic Cancer: A Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Gu Y
- Ji Y
- Jiang H
- Qiu G
journal: Genet Test Mol Biomarkers
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2020.0078
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Carcinoma, Pancreatic Ductal/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, p16"
- "Genes, p53"
- "Genes, ras"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Invasiveness/genetics
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Sex Factors
- Smad4 Protein/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Effect of Driver Mutations of KRAS, CDKN2A/P16, TP53, and SMAD4 in Pancreatic Cancer: A Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Gu Y, Ji Y, Jiang H, Qiu G
**Journal:** Genet Test Mol Biomarkers (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1089/gtmb.2020.0078](https://doi.org/10.1089/gtmb.2020.0078)

## Content

1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2020 Dec;24(12):777-788. doi:
10.1089/gtmb.2020.0078.

Clinical Effect of Driver Mutations of KRAS, CDKN2A/P16, TP53, and SMAD4 in 
Pancreatic Cancer: A Meta-Analysis.

Gu Y(1), Ji Y(2), Jiang H(3), Qiu G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ultrasound Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou City, China.
(2)Department of Interventional Ultrasound, Xianyang Central Hospital, Xianyang 
City, China.
(3)Medical Imaging Department, Zhaoqing Medical College, Zhaoqing City, China.

Objective: To evaluate the prognostic value of driver mutations in the KRAS, 
CDKN2A/P16, TP53, and SMAD4 genes in pancreatic cancer to aid in the design of 
therapeutic strategies. Search Strategy: A systematic search was conducted using 
PubMed, MEDLINE, Springer, and Cochrane library to identify eligible studies 
published between January 1990 and June 2018 that reported an association 
between driver mutations in these genes and survival data. Inclusion Criteria: 
Articles which passed the primary screen were further scrutinized for the 
presence of all the following items: (1) cohort studies or case-control studies, 
evaluating the relationship between driver mutations and cancer; (2) cancer 
diagnoses clearly proved; and (3) hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs) were characterized by sufficient information. Data Extraction 
and Analysis: Selection of included articles, data extraction, and 
methodological quality assessments were, respectively, conducted by two authors. 
Results: The meta-analysis was composed of 17 studies on the P53, 8 on SMAD4, 7 
on CDKN2A/P16, and 2 on KRAS, containing 3373 samples. Our pooled results 
demonstrated that the patients with overexpression of the P53 (HR = 1.249, 95% 
CI = 1.003-1.554, p = 0.047), SMAD4 (HR = 1.397, 95% CI = 1.015-1.922, 
p = 0.040), CDKN2A/P16 (HR = 0.916, 95% CI = 0.583-1.439, p = 0.704), and KRAS 
(HR = 1.68, 95% CI = 1.27-2.22, p < 0.001) mutations all had poorer overall 
survival. Conclusion: This systematic review and meta-analysis supports the use 
of driver mutations in the P53, SMAD4, and KRAS genes as prognostic markers for 
pancreatic cancer.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2020.0078
PMID: 33347393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]