---
reference_id: "PMID:18951069"
title: "Autonomic ganglia, acetylcholine receptor antibodies, and autoimmune ganglionopathy."
authors:
- Vernino S
- Hopkins S
- Wang Z
journal: Auton Neurosci
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2008.09.005
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Animals
- "Autoantibodies/blood, immunology"
- Autoantigens/immunology
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/diagnosis, immunology"
- Female
- "Ganglia, Autonomic/chemistry, immunology"
- Humans
- "Immunization, Passive"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myasthenia Gravis/immunology
- "Nervous System Autoimmune Disease, Experimental/immunology"
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/immunology"
- "Primary Dysautonomias/diagnosis, immunology"
- Rabbits
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/immunology, physiology"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Synaptic Transmission
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autonomic ganglia, acetylcholine receptor antibodies, and autoimmune ganglionopathy.
**Authors:** Vernino S, Hopkins S, Wang Z
**Journal:** Auton Neurosci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autneu.2008.09.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2008.09.005)

## Content

1. Auton Neurosci. 2009 Mar 12;146(1-2):3-7. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2008.09.005. 
Epub 2008 Oct 31.

Autonomic ganglia, acetylcholine receptor antibodies, and autoimmune 
ganglionopathy.

Vernino S(1), Hopkins S, Wang Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines 
Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9036, USA. steven.vernino@utsouthwestern.edu

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (AChR) are ligand-gated cation channels that 
are present throughout the nervous system. The ganglionic (alpha3-type) neuronal 
AChR mediates fast synaptic transmission in sympathetic, parasympathetic and 
enteric autonomic ganglia. Autonomic ganglia are an important site of neural 
integration and regulation of autonomic reflexes. Impaired cholinergic 
ganglionic synaptic transmission is one important cause of autonomic failure. 
Ganglionic AChR antibodies are found in many patients with autoimmune autonomic 
ganglionopathy (AAG). These antibodies recognize the alpha3 subunit of the 
ganglionic AChR, and thus do not bind non-specifically to other nicotinic AChR. 
Patients with high levels of ganglionic AChR antibodies typically present with 
rapid onset of severe autonomic failure, with orthostatic hypotension, 
gastrointestinal dysmotility, anhidrosis, bladder dysfunction and sicca 
symptoms. Impaired pupillary light reflex is often seen. Like myasthenia gravis, 
AAG is an antibody-mediated neurological disorder. Antibodies from patients with 
AAG inhibit ganglionic AChR currents and impair transmission in autonomic 
ganglia. An animal model of AAG in the rabbit recapitulates the important 
clinical features of the human disease and provides additional evidence that AAG 
is an antibody-mediated disorder caused by impairment of synaptic transmission 
in autonomic ganglia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autneu.2008.09.005
PMCID: PMC2677210
PMID: 18951069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]