---
reference_id: "PMID:21813327"
title: Clinical symptoms and microbiological outcomes in tuberculosis treatment trials.
authors:
- Bark CM
- Dietze R
- Okwera A
- Quelapio MI
- Thiel BA
- Johnson JL
journal: Tuberculosis (Edinb)
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2011.05.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical symptoms and microbiological outcomes in tuberculosis treatment trials.
**Authors:** Bark CM, Dietze R, Okwera A, Quelapio MI, Thiel BA, Johnson JL
**Journal:** Tuberculosis (Edinb) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tube.2011.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tube.2011.05.007)

## Content

1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2011 Nov;91(6):601-4. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2011.05.007. 
Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Clinical symptoms and microbiological outcomes in tuberculosis treatment trials.

Bark CM(1), Dietze R, Okwera A, Quelapio MI, Thiel BA, Johnson JL.

Author information:
(1)Tuberculosis Research Unit, Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH, USA. cmb148@case.edu

During a recent Food and Drug Administration workshop on clinical trials to 
evaluate new TB drugs, questions were raised regarding the use of bacteriologic 
endpoints such as treatment failure and relapse as measures of improvement in 
health status and long term outcome after treatment. FDA scientists asked how 
patients' clinical signs and symptoms changed during therapy, noting that while 
such information is usually collected during clinical trials, it is not often 
reported. We analyzed data from an international phase 3 TB treatment trial that 
included systematic assessments of symptoms. The percentage of subjects with 
self-reported symptoms at baseline ranged from 30% for dyspnea to 81% for cough, 
with 51% reporting fever. During therapy, fever, sweats, and dyspnea decreased 
most rapidly, with near resolution by the end of therapy. Chest pain and cough 
resolved more slowly; 13% of subjects reported cough at six months. Symptom 
resolution during treatment did not differ between those who relapsed and those 
who did not. Among those with microbiological relapse, symptoms returned with 
significant increases in the proportion with fever, cough, and chest pain. At 
the time of relapse, cough was the most frequent symptom, occurring in 75% of 
subjects who relapsed but only 12% of those who did not. Our data support the 
continued use of bacteriologic endpoints based on sputum culture as surrogate 
measures of the relief of symptoms, improvement in health status and favorable 
long term treatment outcome in TB drug trials.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2011.05.007
PMCID: PMC3215825
PMID: 21813327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]