---
reference_id: "PMID:41173142"
title: "Refeeding syndrome in adult and elderly patients: Retrospective study in a university hospital."
authors:
- Vieira Neves Soares MV
- de Oliveira Vasconcelos Filho P
- Gomes da Silva E
- Cândido de Souza L
- Mazzu do Nascimento T
- Nogueira Evangelista D
- Zani G
journal: Rev Clin Esp (Barc)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.rceng.2025.502386
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Refeeding syndrome in adult and elderly patients: Retrospective study in a university hospital.
**Authors:** Vieira Neves Soares MV, de Oliveira Vasconcelos Filho P, Gomes da Silva E, Cândido de Souza L, Mazzu do Nascimento T, Nogueira Evangelista D, Zani G
**Journal:** Rev Clin Esp (Barc) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rceng.2025.502386](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rceng.2025.502386)

## Content

1. Rev Clin Esp (Barc). 2025 Dec;225(10):502386. doi:
10.1016/j.rceng.2025.502386.  Epub 2025 Oct 29.

Refeeding syndrome in adult and elderly patients: Retrospective study in a 
university hospital.

Vieira Neves Soares MV(1), de Oliveira Vasconcelos Filho P(1), Gomes da Silva 
E(1), Cândido de Souza L(1), Mazzu do Nascimento T(1), Nogueira Evangelista 
D(1), Zani G(2).

Author information:
(1)Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar), São Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(2)Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar), São Carlos, SP, Brazil. Electronic 
address: gustavozani48@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the prevalence of adult and elderly patients at risk of 
or diagnosed with refeeding syndrome (RS), as well as to explore potential 
associations with age, comorbidities, antibiotic use, and clinical outcomes 
during hospitalization.
METHOD: This is a retrospective, cross-sectional study conducted through the 
analysis of electronic medical records of hospitalized adult and elderly 
patients. Three groups were analyzed: moderate risk for RS (food intake less 
than 50% and not reaching nutritional goals and/or body mass index between 16 
and 18.5 kg/m²); severe risk (food intake less than 50% and/or body mass index 
<16 kg/m²); and RS (presence of hypophosphatemia, hypomagnesemia, and/or 
hypokalemia).
RESULTS: A total of 121 patients were evaluated, of whom 38.8% presented with 
RS, 49.6% belonged to the moderate-risk group and 11.6% to the severe-risk 
group. Regarding age, 62% were elderly and 38% were adults.
CONCLUSION: Significant differences were observed in the prevalence of RS risk 
between adults and elderly individuals (χ²(1) = 7, p < 0.05), with a higher 
prevalence among the elderly. The prevalence of RS was higher in elderly 
individuals aged 60 to 74 years compared to those over 74 years, and this 
difference was statistically significant. Antibiotic changes during 
hospitalization were more prevalent in the moderate-risk group for RS. No 
significant association was found between RS risk and mortality.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier España, S.L.U.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rceng.2025.502386
PMID: 41173142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
declare no conflict of interest.