---
reference_id: "PMID:22409389"
title: "Development in children with achondroplasia: a prospective clinical cohort study."
authors:
- Ireland PJ
- Donaghey S
- McGill J
- Zankl A
- Ware RS
- Pacey V
- Ault J
- Savarirayan R
- Sillence D
- Thompson E
- Townshend S
- Johnston LM
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2012.04234.x
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/complications, epidemiology"
- Australia
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Community Health Planning
- "Developmental Disabilities/complications, epidemiology"
- Disability Evaluation
- Family Health
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Movement/physiology
- New Zealand
- Retrospective Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development in children with achondroplasia: a prospective clinical cohort study.
**Authors:** Ireland PJ, Donaghey S, McGill J, Zankl A, Ware RS, Pacey V, Ault J, Savarirayan R, Sillence D, Thompson E, Townshend S, Johnston LM
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1469-8749.2012.04234.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8749.2012.04234.x)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2012 Jun;54(6):532-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-8749.2012.04234.x. Epub 2012 Mar 12.

Development in children with achondroplasia: a prospective clinical cohort 
study.

Ireland PJ(1), Donaghey S, McGill J, Zankl A, Ware RS, Pacey V, Ault J, 
Savarirayan R, Sillence D, Thompson E, Townshend S, Johnston LM.

Author information:
(1)Queensland Paediatric Rehabilitation Service, Royal Children's Hospital, 
Brisbane, Qld., Australia. penny_ireland@health.qld.gov.au

Comment in
    Dev Med Child Neurol. 2012 Jun;54(6):488-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-8749.2012.04267.x.

AIM: Achondroplasia is characterized by delays in the development of 
communication and motor skills. While previously reported developmental profiles 
exist across gross motor, fine motor, feeding, and communication skills, there 
has been no prospective study of development across multiple areas 
simultaneously.
METHOD: This Australasian population-based study utilized a prospective 
questionnaire to quantify developmental data for skills in children born from 
2000 to 2009. Forty-eight families from Australia and New Zealand were asked to 
report every 3 months on their child's attainment of 41 milestones. Results 
include reference to previously available prospective information.
RESULTS: Information from questionnaires was used to develop an 
achondroplasia-specific developmental recording form. The 25th, 50th, 75th, and 
90th centiles were plotted to offer clear guidelines for development across 
gross motor, fine motor, feeding, and communication skills in children with 
achondroplasia.
INTERPRETATIONS: Consistent with results from previous research, children with 
achondroplasia are delayed in development of gross motor and ambulatory skills. 
Young children with achondroplasia demonstrate a number of unique movement 
strategies that appear compensatory for the biomechanical changes. While delays 
were seen in development of later communication items, there were fewer delays 
seen across development of early communication, fine motor, and feeding skills.

© The Authors. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology © 2012 Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2012.04234.x
PMID: 22409389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]