---
reference_id: "PMID:11381029"
title: The 1.4-Mb CMT1A duplication/HNPP deletion genomic region reveals unique genome architectural features and provides insights into the recent evolution of new genes.
authors:
- Inoue K
- Dewar K
- Katsanis N
- Reiter LT
- Lander ES
- Devon KL
- Wyman DW
- Lupski JR
- Birren B
journal: Genome Res
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1101/gr.180401
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 1.4-Mb CMT1A duplication/HNPP deletion genomic region reveals unique genome architectural features and provides insights into the recent evolution of new genes.
**Authors:** Inoue K, Dewar K, Katsanis N, Reiter LT, Lander ES, Devon KL, Wyman DW, Lupski JR, Birren B
**Journal:** Genome Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gr.180401](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.180401)

## Content

1. Genome Res. 2001 Jun;11(6):1018-33. doi: 10.1101/gr.180401.

The 1.4-Mb CMT1A duplication/HNPP deletion genomic region reveals unique genome 
architectural features and provides insights into the recent evolution of new 
genes.

Inoue K(1), Dewar K, Katsanis N, Reiter LT, Lander ES, Devon KL, Wyman DW, 
Lupski JR, Birren B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Duplication and deletion of the 1.4-Mb region in 17p12 that is delimited by two 
24-kb low copy number repeats (CMT1A-REPs) represent frequent genomic 
rearrangements resulting in two common inherited peripheral neuropathies, 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A (CMT1A) and hereditary neuropathy with 
liability to pressure palsy (HNPP). CMT1A and HNPP exemplify a paradigm for 
genomic disorders wherein unique genome architectural features result in 
susceptibility to DNA rearrangements that cause disease. A gene within the 
1.4-Mb region, PMP22, is responsible for these disorders through a gene-dosage 
effect in the heterozygous duplication or deletion. However, the genomic 
structure of the 1.4-Mb region, including other genes contained within the 
rearranged genomic segment, remains essentially uncharacterized. To delineate 
genomic structural features, investigate higher-order genomic architecture, and 
identify genes in this region, we constructed PAC and BAC contigs and determined 
the complete nucleotide sequence. This CMT1A/HNPP genomic segment contains 
1,421,129 bp of DNA. A low copy number repeat (LCR) was identified, with one 
copy inside and two copies outside of the 1.4-Mb region. Comparison between 
physical and genetic maps revealed a striking difference in recombination rates 
between the sexes with a lower recombination frequency in males (0.67 cM/Mb) 
versus females (5.5 cM/Mb). Hypothetically, this low recombination frequency in 
males may enable a chromosomal misalignment at proximal and distal CMT1A-REPs 
and promote unequal crossing over, which occurs 10 times more frequently in male 
meiosis. In addition to three previously described genes, five new genes (TEKT3, 
HS3ST3B1, NPD008/CGI-148, CDRT1, and CDRT15) and 13 predicted genes were 
identified. Most of these predicted genes are expressed only in embryonic 
stages. Analyses of the genomic region adjacent to proximal CMT1A-REP indicated 
an evolutionary mechanism for the formation of proximal CMT1A-REP and the 
creation of novel genes by DNA rearrangement during primate speciation.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.180401
PMCID: PMC311111
PMID: 11381029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]