---
reference_id: "PMID:30685241"
title: "Congenital erythropoietic porphyria: Recent advances."
authors:
- Erwin AL
- Desnick RJ
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.12.008
keywords:
- Animals
- Biosynthetic Pathways
- GATA1 Transcription Factor/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn"
- Genetic Therapy
- Heme/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Porphyria, Erythropoietic/complications, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital erythropoietic porphyria: Recent advances.
**Authors:** Erwin AL, Desnick RJ
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.12.008)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2019 Nov;128(3):288-297. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.12.008.
Epub  2018 Dec 27.

Congenital erythropoietic porphyria: Recent advances.

Erwin AL(1), Desnick RJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States of 
America.
(2)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States of America. Electronic address: 
Robert.Desnick@mssm.edu.

Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by photosensitivity and by hematologic abnormalities in affected 
individuals. CEP is caused by mutations in the uroporphyrinogen synthase (UROS) 
gene. In three reported cases, CEP has been associated with a specific X-linked 
GATA1 mutation. Disease-causing mutations in either gene result in absent or 
markedly reduced UROS enzymatic activity. This in turn leads to the accumulation 
of the non-physiologic and photoreactive porphyrinogens, uroporphyrinogen I and 
coproporphyrinogen I, which damage erythrocytes and elicit a phototoxic reaction 
upon light exposure. The clinical spectrum of CEP depends on the level of 
residual UROS activity, which is determined by the underlying pathogenic 
loss-of-function UROS mutations. Disease severity ranges from non-immune hydrops 
fetalis in utero to late-onset disease with only mild cutaneous involvement. The 
clinical characteristics of CEP include exquisite photosensitivity to visible 
light resulting in bullous vesicular lesions which, when infected lead to 
progressive photomutilation of sun-exposed areas such as the face and hands. In 
addition, patients have erythrodontia (brownish discoloration of teeth) and can 
develop corneal scarring. Chronic transfusion-dependent hemolytic anemia is 
common and leads to bone marrow hyperplasia, which further increases porphyrin 
production. Management of CEP consists of strict avoidance of exposure to 
visible light with sun-protective clothing, sunglasses, and car and home window 
filters. Adequate care of ruptured vesicles and use of topical antibiotics is 
indicated to prevent superinfections and osteolysis. In patients with 
symptomatic hemolytic anemia, frequent erythrocyte cell transfusions may be 
necessary to suppress hematopoiesis and decrease marrow production of the 
phototoxic porphyrins. In severe transfection-dependent cases, bone marrow or 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has been performed, which is curative. 
Therapeutic approaches including gene therapy, proteasome inhibition, and 
pharmacologic chaperones are under investigation.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.12.008
PMCID: PMC6597325
PMID: 30685241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors report no 
relevant conflicts