---
reference_id: "PMID:38385142"
title: Immune mapping of human tuberculosis and sarcoidosis lung granulomas.
authors:
- Carow B
- Muliadi V
- Skålén K
- Yokota C
- Kathamuthu GR
- Setiabudiawan TP
- Lange C
- Scheu K
- Gaede KI
- Goldmann T
- Pandita A
- Masood KI
- Pervez S
- Grunewald J
- Hasan Z
- Levin M
- Rottenberg ME
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1332733
keywords:
- Humans
- Granuloma
- Tuberculosis
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/genetics, pathology"
- Sarcoidosis
- Mycobacterium tuberculosis
- Lung/pathology
- "RNA, Messenger"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune mapping of human tuberculosis and sarcoidosis lung granulomas.
**Authors:** Carow B, Muliadi V, Skålén K, Yokota C, Kathamuthu GR, Setiabudiawan TP, Lange C, Scheu K, Gaede KI, Goldmann T, Pandita A, Masood KI, Pervez S, Grunewald J, Hasan Z, Levin M, Rottenberg ME
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1332733](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1332733)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Feb 7;14:1332733. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1332733.
eCollection 2023.

Immune mapping of human tuberculosis and sarcoidosis lung granulomas.

Carow B(1), Muliadi V(1), Skålén K(2), Yokota C(3), Kathamuthu GR(1),
Setiabudiawan TP(1), Lange C(4), Scheu K(4), Gaede KI(5)(6), Goldmann T(4)(5),
Pandita A(2)(7)(8), Masood KI(9), Pervez S(9), Grunewald J(10), Hasan Z(9),
Levin M(2)(7)(8), Rottenberg ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine/Wallenberg Laboratory,
Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Research Center Borstel, Leibniz Lung Center, Borstel, Germany.
(5)German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Airway Research Center North (ARCN),
Borstel, Germany.
(6)BioMaterialBank North, Research Center Borstel, Leibniz Lung Center, Borstel,
Germany.
(7)Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(8)Department of Oncology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Aga Khan University,
Karachi, Pakistan.
(10)Respiratory Medicine Division, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Tuberculosis (TB) and sarcoidosis are both granulomatous diseases. Here, we
compared the immunological microenvironments of granulomas from TB and
sarcoidosis patients using in situ sequencing (ISS) transcriptomic analysis and
multiplexed immunolabeling of tissue sections. TB lesions consisted of large
necrotic and cellular granulomas, whereas "multifocal" granulomas with
macrophages or epitheloid cell core and a T-cell rim were observed in
sarcoidosis samples. The necrotic core in TB lesions was surrounded by
macrophages and encircled by a dense T-cell layer. Within the T-cell layer,
compact B-cell aggregates were observed in most TB samples. These B-cell
clusters were vascularized and could contain defined B-/T-cell and
macrophage-rich areas. The ISS of 40-60 immune transcripts revealed the enriched
expression of transcripts involved in homing or migration to lymph nodes, which
formed networks at single-cell distances in lymphoid areas of the TB lesions.
Instead, myeloid-annotated regions were enriched in CD68, CD14, ITGAM, ITGAX,
and CD4 mRNA. CXCL8 and IL1B mRNA were observed in granulocytic areas in which
M. tuberculosis was also detected. In line with ISS data indicating tertiary
lymphoid structures, immune labeling of TB sections expressed markers of high
endothelial venules, follicular dendritic cells, follicular helper T cells, and
lymph-node homing receptors on T cells. Neither ISS nor immunolabeling showed
evidence of tertiary lymphoid aggregates in sarcoidosis samples. Together, our
finding suggests that despite their heterogeneity, the formation of tertiary
immune structures is a common feature in granulomas from TB patients.

Copyright © 2024 Carow, Muliadi, Skålén, Yokota, Kathamuthu, Setiabudiawan,
Lange, Scheu, Gaede, Goldmann, Pandita, Masood, Pervez, Grunewald, Hasan, Levin
and Rottenberg.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1332733
PMCID: PMC10879604
PMID: 38385142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission.
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.
