---
reference_id: "PMID:12428211"
title: The deficiency of PIP2 5-phosphatase in Lowe syndrome affects actin polymerization.
authors:
- Suchy SF
- Nussbaum RL
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1086/344517
keywords:
- Actinin/analysis
- Actins/metabolism
- "Biopolymers/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Cytoskeleton/enzymology, metabolism, pathology"
- Fibroblasts
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Gelsolin/analysis
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/deficiency, genetics"
- Proteins/genetics
- "Stress Fibers/chemistry, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The deficiency of PIP2 5-phosphatase in Lowe syndrome affects actin polymerization.
**Authors:** Suchy SF, Nussbaum RL
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1086/344517](https://doi.org/10.1086/344517)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Dec;71(6):1420-7. doi: 10.1086/344517. Epub 2002 Nov 11.

The deficiency of PIP2 5-phosphatase in Lowe syndrome affects actin
polymerization.

Suchy SF(1), Nussbaum RL.

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
suchy@nhgri.nih.gov

Lowe syndrome is a rare X-linked disorder characterized by bilateral congenital
cataracts, renal Fanconi syndrome, and mental retardation. Lowe syndrome results
from mutations in the OCRL1 gene, which encodes a phosphatidylinositol 4,5
bisphosphate 5-phosphatase located in the trans-Golgi network. As a first step
in identifying the link between ocrl1 deficiency and the clinical disorder, we
have identified a reproducible cellular abnormality of the actin cytoskeleton in
fibroblasts from patients with Lowe syndrome. The cellular abnormality is
characterized by a decrease in long actin stress fibers, enhanced sensitivity to
actin depolymerizing agents, and an increase in punctate F-actin staining in a
distinctly anomalous distribution in the center of the cell. We also demonstrate
an abnormal distribution of two actin-binding proteins, gelsolin and
alpha-actinin, proteins regulated by both PIP(2) and Ca(+2) that would be
expected to be altered in Lowe cells. Actin polymerization plays a key role in
the formation, maintenance, and proper function of tight junctions and adherens
junctions, which have been demonstrated to be critical in renal proximal tubule
function, and in the differentiation of the lens. These findings point to a
general mechanism to explain how this PIP(2) 5-phosphatase deficiency might
produce the Lowe syndrome phenotype.

DOI: 10.1086/344517
PMCID: PMC378584
PMID: 12428211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
