---
reference_id: "PMID:33401196"
title: Strong interactions between Salp15 homologues from the tick I. ricinus and distinct types of the outer surface OspC protein from Borrelia.
authors:
- Bierwagen P
- Sliwiak J
- Jaskolski M
- Urbanowicz A
journal: Ticks Tick Borne Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2020.101630
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antigens, Bacterial/genetics, metabolism"
- "Bacterial Outer Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ixodes/genetics, metabolism"
- "Salivary Proteins and Peptides/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Strong interactions between Salp15 homologues from the tick I. ricinus and distinct types of the outer surface OspC protein from Borrelia.
**Authors:** Bierwagen P, Sliwiak J, Jaskolski M, Urbanowicz A
**Journal:** Ticks Tick Borne Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ttbdis.2020.101630](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ttbdis.2020.101630)

## Content

1. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2021 Mar;12(2):101630. doi:
10.1016/j.ttbdis.2020.101630.  Epub 2020 Dec 14.

Strong interactions between Salp15 homologues from the tick I. ricinus and 
distinct types of the outer surface OspC protein from Borrelia.

Bierwagen P(1), Sliwiak J(1), Jaskolski M(2), Urbanowicz A(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, 
Poland.
(2)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, 
Poland; Department of Crystallography, Faculty of Chemistry, A. Mickiewicz 
University, Poznan, Poland.
(3)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, 
Poland. Electronic address: aniau@ibch.poznan.pl.

Ticks belonging to the genus Ixodes are parasites feeding on vertebrate blood 
and vectors for many pathogenic microbes, including Borrelia burgdorferi sensu 
lato spirochetes, the causative agent of Lyme borreliosis. The tick saliva 
contains a mixture of bioactive molecules showing a wide range of properties for 
efficient engorgement. One of the most extensively studied components of tick 
saliva is a 15-kDa salivary gland protein (Salp15) from Ixodes scapularis. This 
multifunctional protein suppresses the immune response of hosts through 
pleiotropic action on a few crucial defense pathways. Salp15 and its homologue 
from I. ricinus Iric1 have been also shown to bind to Borrelia burgdorferi sensu 
stricto outer surface protein C (OspC) permitting the spirochetes to evade 
antibody-mediated killing in the human host. Further studies revealed that 
Salp15 and Iric1 protected B. burgdorferi s. s. and B. garinii expressing OspC 
against the complement system. OspC is the most variable protein on the outer 
surface of Borrelia, which in addition to Salp15 can also bind other ligands, 
such as plasminogen, fibrinogen, fibronectin or complement factor 4. So far 
several OspC variants produced by B. burgdorferi s. l. spirochetes were shown to 
be capable of binding Salp15 or its homologue, but the protection against 
borreliacidal antibodies has only been proven in the case of B. burgdorferi s. 
s. The question of Salp15 contribution to Borrelia survival during the infection 
has been comprehensively studied during the last decades. In contrast, the 
organization of the OspC-Salp15 complex has been poorly explored. This report 
describes the binding between three Salp15 homologues from the tick Ixodes 
ricinus (Iric1, Iric2 and Iric3) and OspC from four B. burgdorferi sensu lato 
strains in terms of the binding parameters, analyzed with two independent 
biophysical methods - Microscale thermophoresis (MST) and Biolayer 
interferometry (BLI). The results of both experiments show a binding constant at 
the nanomolar level, which indicates very strong interactions. While the 
Iric1-OspC binding has been reported before, we show in this study that also 
Iric2 and Iric3 are capable of OspC binding with high affinity. This observation 
suggests that these two Salp15 homologues might be used by B. burgdorferi s. l. 
in a way analogous to Iric1. A comparison of the results from the two methods 
let us propose that N-terminal immobilization of OspC significantly increases 
the affinity between the two proteins. Finally, our results indicate that the 
Iric binding site is located in close proximity of the OspC epitopes recognized 
by human antibodies, which may have important biological and medical 
implications.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2020.101630
PMID: 33401196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]