---
reference_id: "PMID:19127584"
title: "The basal ganglia in Parkinson's disease: current concepts and unexplained observations."
authors:
- Obeso JA
- Marin C
- Rodriguez-Oroz C
- Blesa J
- Benitez-Temiño B
- Mena-Segovia J
- Rodríguez M
- Olanow CW
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ana.21481
keywords:
- Animals
- "Basal Ganglia/anatomy & histology, physiology, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dopamine/metabolism
- Dopamine Agents/therapeutic use
- Electric Stimulation Therapy
- Humans
- "Neural Pathways/anatomy & histology, physiology, physiopathology"
- "Parkinson Disease/physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The basal ganglia in Parkinson's disease: current concepts and unexplained observations.
**Authors:** Obeso JA, Marin C, Rodriguez-Oroz C, Blesa J, Benitez-Temiño B, Mena-Segovia J, Rodríguez M, Olanow CW
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.21481](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.21481)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2008 Dec;64 Suppl 2:S30-46. doi: 10.1002/ana.21481.

The basal ganglia in Parkinson's disease: current concepts and unexplained 
observations.

Obeso JA(1), Marin C, Rodriguez-Oroz C, Blesa J, Benitez-Temiño B, Mena-Segovia 
J, Rodríguez M, Olanow CW.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology, Neurophysiology and Neurosurgery, Clinica 
Universitaria and Medical School, Neuroscience Centre, Center for Applied 
Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2009 May;65(5):618; author reply 618-9. doi: 10.1002/ana.21649.

The pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease is reviewed in light of recent 
advances in the understanding of the functional organization of the basal 
ganglia (BG). Current emphasis is placed on the parallel interactions between 
corticostriatal and corticosubthalamic afferents on the one hand, and internal 
feedback circuits modulating BG output through the globus pallidus pars interna 
and substantia nigra pars reticulata on the other. In the normal BG network, the 
globus pallidus pars externa emerges as a main regulatory station of output 
activity. In the parkinsonian state, dopamine depletion shifts the BG toward 
inhibiting cortically generated movements by increasing the gain in the globus 
pallidus pars externa-subthalamic nucleus-globus pallidus pars interna network 
and reducing activity in "direct" cortico-putaminal-globus pallidus pars interna 
projections. Standard pharmacological treatments do not mimic the normal 
physiology of the dopaminergic system and, therefore, fail to restore a 
functional balance between corticostriatal afferents in the so-called direct and 
indirect pathways, leading to the development of motor complications. This 
review emphasizes the concept that the BG can no longer be understood as a 
"go-through" station in the control of movement, behavior, and emotions. The 
growing understanding of the complexity of the normal BG and the changes induced 
by DA depletion should guide the development of more efficacious therapies for 
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21481
PMID: 19127584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]