---
reference_id: "PMID:30863496"
title: mTOR inhibition affects Yap1-β-catenin-induced hepatoblastoma growth and development.
authors:
- Molina L
- Yang H
- Adebayo Michael AO
- Oertel M
- Bell A
- Singh S
- Chen X
- Tao J
- Monga SPS
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2019'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.26668
content_type: abstract_only
---

# mTOR inhibition affects Yap1-β-catenin-induced hepatoblastoma growth and development.
**Authors:** Molina L, Yang H, Adebayo Michael AO, Oertel M, Bell A, Singh S, Chen X, Tao J, Monga SPS
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2019)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.26668](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.26668)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2019 Feb 19;10(15):1475-1490. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.26668. 
eCollection 2019 Feb 19.

mTOR inhibition affects Yap1-β-catenin-induced hepatoblastoma growth and 
development.

Molina L(1)(2), Yang H(3), Adebayo Michael AO(4), Oertel M(1)(5), Bell A(1), 
Singh S(1), Chen X(6), Tao J(1), Monga SPS(1)(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Ultrasonics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Guangxi, China.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(5)Pittsburgh Liver Research Center, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center and 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh PA, USA.
(6)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Liver Center, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of 
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Erratum in
    Oncotarget. 2019 Sep 24;10(54):5670. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.27218.

Hepatoblastoma (HB) is the most common pediatric liver malignancy. Around 80% of 
HB demonstrate simultaneous activation of β-catenin and Yes-associated protein 1 
(Yap1). The mechanism by which these signaling pathways contribute to HB 
pathogenesis remain obscure. Recently, mTORC1 activation was reported in human 
HB cells and in a murine HB model driven by β-catenin and Yap1. Here, we 
directly investigate the therapeutic impact of mTOR inhibition following HB 
development in the Yap1-β-catenin model. HB were established by hydrodynamic 
tail vein injection of Sleeping Beauty transposase and plasmids coding for 
ΔN90-β-catenin and S127A-Yap1. Five weeks after injection, when HB were evident, 
mice were randomized into Rapamycin diet-fed or basal-diet-fed groups for 
5-weeks. Tumor growth was monitored via ultrasound imaging and mice in both 
groups were euthanized after 5-weeks for molecular analysis. Transcriptomic 
analysis showed a strong correlation in gene expression between HB in the 
Yap1-β-catenin model and HB patient cohorts. Rapamycin treatment decreased HB 
burden, almost normalizing liver weight to body weight ratio. Ultrasound imaging 
showed reduction in tumor growth over the duration of Rapamycin treatment as 
compared to controls. Majority of HB in the controls exhibited crowded fetal or 
embryonal histology, while remnant tumors in the experimental group showed 
well-differentiated fetal morphology. Immunohistochemistry confirmed inhibition 
of mTORC1 in the Rapamycin group. Thus, Rapamycin reduces HB in a clinically 
relevant model driven by β-catenin and Yap1, supporting use of mTORC1 inhibitors 
in their therapy. We also show the utility of standard and 3D ultrasound imaging 
for monitoring liver tumors in mice.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.26668
PMCID: PMC6407673
PMID: 30863496

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.