---
reference_id: "PMID:9256435"
title: "Human argininosuccinate lyase: a structural basis for intragenic complementation."
authors:
- Turner MA
- Simpson A
- McInnes RR
- Howell PL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.17.9063
keywords:
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Argininosuccinate Lyase/chemistry, genetics"
- Conserved Sequence
- Crystallization
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human argininosuccinate lyase: a structural basis for intragenic complementation.
**Authors:** Turner MA, Simpson A, McInnes RR, Howell PL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.94.17.9063](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.17.9063)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Aug 19;94(17):9063-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.94.17.9063.

Human argininosuccinate lyase: a structural basis for intragenic
complementation.

Turner MA(1), Simpson A, McInnes RR, Howell PL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry Research, Research Institute, Hospital for Sick
Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Intragenic complementation has been observed at the argininosuccinate lyase
(ASL) locus. Intragenic complementation is a phenomenon that occurs when a
multimeric protein is formed from subunits produced by different mutant alleles
of a gene. The resulting hybrid protein exhibits enzymatic activity that is
greater than that found in the oligomeric proteins produced by each mutant
allele alone. The mutations involved in the most successful complementation
event observed in ASL deficiency were found to be an aspartate to glycine
mutation at codon 87 of one allele (D87G) coupled with a glutamine to arginine
mutation at codon 286 of the other (Q286R). To understand the structural basis
of the Q286R:D87G intragenic complementation event at the ASL locus, we have
determined the x-ray crystal structure of recombinant human ASL at 4. 0 A
resolution. The structure has been refined to an R factor of 18. 8%. Two
monomers related by a noncrystallographic 2-fold axis comprise the asymmetric
unit, and a crystallographic 2-fold axis of space group P3121 completes the
tetramer. Each of the four active sites is composed of residues from three
monomers. Structural mapping of the Q286R and D87G mutations indicate that both
are near the active site and each is contributed by a different monomer. Thus
when mutant monomers combine randomly such that one active site contains both
mutations, it is required by molecular symmetry that another active site exists
with no mutations. These "native" active sites give rise to the observed partial
recovery of enzymatic activity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.17.9063
PMCID: PMC23030
PMID: 9256435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
