---
reference_id: "PMID:34226616"
title: Further confirmation of the association of SLC12A2 with non-syndromic autosomal-dominant hearing impairment.
authors:
- Adadey SM
- Schrauwen I
- Aboagye ET
- Bharadwaj T
- Esoh KK
- Basit S
- Acharya A
- Nouel-Saied LM
- Liaqat K
- Wonkam-Tingang E
- Mowla S
- Awandare GA
- Ahmad W
- Leal SM
- Wonkam A
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-021-00954-6
keywords:
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- "Hearing Loss/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 2/chemistry, genetics"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Further confirmation of the association of SLC12A2 with non-syndromic autosomal-dominant hearing impairment.
**Authors:** Adadey SM, Schrauwen I, Aboagye ET, Bharadwaj T, Esoh KK, Basit S, Acharya A, Nouel-Saied LM, Liaqat K, Wonkam-Tingang E, Mowla S, Awandare GA, Ahmad W, Leal SM, Wonkam A
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-021-00954-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-021-00954-6)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2021 Dec;66(12):1169-1175. doi: 10.1038/s10038-021-00954-6. Epub 
2021 Jul 5.

Further confirmation of the association of SLC12A2 with non-syndromic 
autosomal-dominant hearing impairment.

Adadey SM(#)(1)(2), Schrauwen I(#)(3), Aboagye ET(1), Bharadwaj T(3), Esoh 
KK(2), Basit S(4), Acharya A(3), Nouel-Saied LM(3), Liaqat K(5), Wonkam-Tingang 
E(2), Mowla S(6), Awandare GA(1), Ahmad W(7), Leal SM(8)(9), Wonkam A(10).

Author information:
(1)West African Centre for Cell Biology of Infectious Pathogens (WACCBIP), 
University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape 
Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Center for Statistical Genetics, Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, and the 
Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Centre, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Center for Genetics and Inherited Diseases, Taibah University Al Madinah Al 
Munawarah, Al Munawarah, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Faculty of Biological Sciences, Department of Biotechnology, Quaid-i-Azam 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(6)Division of Haematology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Pathology, 
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(7)Faculty of Biological Sciences, Department of Biochemistry, Quaid-i-Azam 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(8)Center for Statistical Genetics, Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, and the 
Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Centre, New York, NY, USA. 
sml3@cumc.columbia.edu.
(9)Taub Institute for Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia 
University Medical Centre, New York, NY, USA. sml3@cumc.columbia.edu.
(10)Division of Human Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape 
Town, Cape Town, South Africa. ambroise.wonkam@uct.ac.za.
(#)Contributed equally

Congenital hearing impairment (HI) is genetically heterogeneous making its 
genetic diagnosis challenging. Investigation of novel HI genes and variants will 
enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms and to aid genetic 
diagnosis. We performed exome sequencing and analysis using DNA samples from 
affected members of two large families from Ghana and Pakistan, segregating 
autosomal-dominant (AD) non-syndromic HI (NSHI). Using in silico approaches, we 
modeled and evaluated the effect of the likely pathogenic variants on protein 
structure and function. We identified two likely pathogenic variants in SLC12A2, 
c.2935G>A:p.(E979K) and c.2939A>T:p.(E980V), which segregate with NSHI in a 
Ghanaian and Pakistani family, respectively. SLC12A2 encodes an ion transporter 
crucial in the homeostasis of the inner ear endolymph and has recently been 
reported to be implicated in syndromic and non-syndromic HI. Both variants were 
mapped to alternatively spliced exon 21 of the SLC12A2 gene. Exon 21 encodes for 
17 residues in the cytoplasmatic tail of SLC12A2, is highly conserved between 
species, and preferentially expressed in cochlear tissues. A review of previous 
studies and our current data showed that out of ten families with either AD 
non-syndromic or syndromic HI, eight (80%) had variants within the 17 amino acid 
residue region of exon 21 (48 bp), suggesting that this alternate domain is 
critical to the transporter activity in the inner ear. The genotypic spectrum of 
SLC12A2 was expanded and the involvement of SLC12A2 in ADNSHI was confirmed. 
These results also demonstrate the role that SLC12A2 plays in ADNSHI in diverse 
populations including sub-Saharan Africans.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-021-00954-6
PMCID: PMC8612923
PMID: 34226616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no 
competing interest.