---
reference_id: "PMID:6091953"
title: "Disorders of the adrenal cortex: their effects on electrolyte metabolism."
authors:
- Fraser R
journal: Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1016/s0300-595x(84)80029-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disorders of the adrenal cortex: their effects on electrolyte metabolism.
**Authors:** Fraser R
**Journal:** Clin Endocrinol Metab (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0300-595x(84)80029-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0300-595x(84)80029-8)

## Content

1. Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1984 Jul;13(2):413-30. doi: 
10.1016/s0300-595x(84)80029-8.

Disorders of the adrenal cortex: their effects on electrolyte metabolism.

Fraser R.

The adrenal cortex is an important factor in the control of electrolyte and 
water balance and in blood pressure homeostasis. Not surprisingly, therefore, 
hyper- and hyposecretion of one or more of its products has extensive 
repercussions. Hypersecretion of aldosterone, as seen in primary 
hyperaldosteronism and related diseases, and of other mineralocorticoids such as 
corticosterone and/or 11-deoxycorticosterone, as seen in 17 alpha-hydroxylase 
deficiency or 11 beta-hydroxylase deficiency syndromes, respectively, are 
associated with hypertension, sodium retention, potassium wastage and a 
metabolic alkalosis. On the other hand, impaired secretion, as in Addison's 
disease or in congenital deficiencies of other steroid-synthesizing enzymes, 
leads to hypotension, sodium loss with hypovolaemia, and hyperkalaemia. In each 
case, these disturbances of electrolyte metabolism may cause neurological and 
muscle dysfunction. The relationship between glucocorticoid hypertension and 
electrolyte metabolism is less clear and the importance of the adrenal cortex in 
the aetiology of essential hypertension is still being assessed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0300-595x(84)80029-8
PMID: 6091953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]