---
reference_id: "PMID:39791512"
title: "10 Years of Mohs Micrographic Surgery in Denmark: Results from a Nationwide Cohort."
authors:
- Andersen YMF
- Karmisholt K
- Høgsberg T
- Nielsen ML
- Brosbøl A
- Stave S
- Schøsler L
- Omland S
- Daugaard CA
- Glud M
journal: Acta Derm Venereol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2340/actadv.v105.41118
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mohs Surgery/statistics & numerical data"
- Denmark/epidemiology
- "Skin Neoplasms/surgery, pathology, epidemiology"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/surgery, pathology"
- Female
- Male
- Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/epidemiology"
- Registries
- Middle Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Risk Factors
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 10 Years of Mohs Micrographic Surgery in Denmark: Results from a Nationwide Cohort.
**Authors:** Andersen YMF, Karmisholt K, Høgsberg T, Nielsen ML, Brosbøl A, Stave S, Schøsler L, Omland S, Daugaard CA, Glud M
**Journal:** Acta Derm Venereol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2340/actadv.v105.41118](https://doi.org/10.2340/actadv.v105.41118)

## Content

1. Acta Derm Venereol. 2025 Jan 10;105:adv41118. doi: 10.2340/actadv.v105.41118.

10 Years of Mohs Micrographic Surgery in Denmark: Results from a Nationwide
Cohort.

Andersen YMF(1), Karmisholt K(2), Høgsberg T(3), Nielsen ML(2), Brosbøl A(2),
Stave S(2), Schøsler L(3), Omland S(2), Daugaard CA(3), Glud M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen,
Denmark. yuki.egeberg@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus, Denmark.

Basal cell carcinoma is the most common skin malignancy and constitutes a burden
for patients and society. Mohs micrographic surgery is a recommended treatment
for high-risk basal cell carcinoma, but long-term outcomes of Mohs micrographic
surgery in Denmark are unknown. This study aimed to estimate the 5-year
recurrence rate of basal cell carcinoma following Mohs micrographic surgery, and
to investigate patient and procedure characteristics since the introduction of
the procedure in Denmark. The Danish Registry for Mohs Surgery was established
and all Mohs micrographic surgery cases nationwide from January 2012 to December
2022 were included. A total of 1,774 patients were included in the cohort, and
2,203 high-risk basal cell carcinomas were treated using Mohs micrographic
surgery techniques. The overall 5-year recurrence of basal cell carcinoma
following Mohs micrographic surgery was 3.8% (95% CI 2.8-5.0), 3.1% (95% CI
2.1-4.7) for primary basal cell carcinomas, and 5.3% (95% CI 3.6-7.8) for
recurrent basal cell carcinomas. The primary basal cell carcinomas showed a
tendency towards lower recurrence rates and better surgical outcomes than
recurrent basal cell carcinomas, although not significantly. The recurrence rate
estimates correspond to international levels, supporting Mohs micrographic
surgery as a treatment option for high-risk basal cell carcinomas in Danish
dermatological practice. The newly established patient registry serves as a
cohort for future research in this field.

DOI: 10.2340/actadv.v105.41118
PMCID: PMC11744706
PMID: 39791512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
