---
reference_id: "PMID:21874760"
title: Aromatase activity and bone loss.
authors:
- Gennari L
- Merlotti D
- Nuti R
journal: Adv Clin Chem
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-387025-4.00006-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aromatase activity and bone loss.
**Authors:** Gennari L, Merlotti D, Nuti R
**Journal:** Adv Clin Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/b978-0-12-387025-4.00006-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-387025-4.00006-6)

## Content

1. Adv Clin Chem. 2011;54:129-64. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-387025-4.00006-6.

Aromatase activity and bone loss.

Gennari L(1), Merlotti D, Nuti R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Endocrine-Metabolic Sciences and 
Biochemistry, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. gennari@unisi.it

Aromatase is a specific component of the cytochrome P450 enzyme system that is 
responsible for the transformation of C19 androgen precursors into C18 
estrogenic compounds. This enzyme is encoded by the CYP19A1 gene located at 
chromosome 15q21.2, that is expressed in ovary and testis not only but also in 
many extraglandular sites such as the placenta, brain, adipose tissue, and bone. 
The regulation of the level and activity of aromatase determines the levels of 
estrogens that have endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine effects on target issues 
including bone. Importantly, extraglandular aromatization of circulating 
androgen precursors is the major source of estrogen not only in men (since only 
15% of circulating estradiol is released directly by the testis) but also in 
women after the menopause. Several lines of clinical and experimental evidence 
now clearly indicate that aromatase activity and estrogen production are 
necessary for longitudinal bone growth, attainment of peak bone mass, the 
pubertal growth spurt, epiphyseal closure, and normal bone remodeling in young 
individuals. Moreover, with aging, individual differences in aromatase activity 
and thus in estrogen levels may significantly affect bone loss and fracture risk 
in both genders.

DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-387025-4.00006-6
PMID: 21874760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]