---
reference_id: "PMID:30729910"
title: "Neuropsychological Findings in Hamamy Syndrome: A Clinical Case Report."
authors:
- Roukoz C
- Kanj R
- Maalouf FT
- Zeinoun P
journal: J Int Neuropsychol Soc
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1017/S1355617718001133
keywords:
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/etiology, physiopathology"
- Bone Diseases/complications
- Child
- Humans
- Hypertelorism/complications
- Intellectual Disability/complications
- Intelligence/physiology
- "Language Disorders/etiology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Myopia/complications
- "Speech Disorders/etiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychological Findings in Hamamy Syndrome: A Clinical Case Report.
**Authors:** Roukoz C, Kanj R, Maalouf FT, Zeinoun P
**Journal:** J Int Neuropsychol Soc (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1355617718001133](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1355617718001133)

## Content

1. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2019 Mar;25(3):336-342. doi:
10.1017/S1355617718001133.  Epub 2019 Feb 7.

Neuropsychological Findings in Hamamy Syndrome: A Clinical Case Report.

Roukoz C(1), Kanj R(2), Maalouf FT(1), Zeinoun P(1).

Author information:
(1)1American University of Beirut,Department of Psychiatry,Beirut,Lebanon.
(2)3American University of Beirut,Department of Education,Beirut,Lebanon.

This study, reports for the first time, the neuropsychological profile of a
child with Hamamy syndrome-a rare genetic disorder with only five published
cases (Buget, Canbolat, Akgul, &amp; Kucukay, 2015). The patient was seen for a
neuropsychological evaluation at ages 6 and 7, at the American University of
Beirut Medical Center. Procedures included an extended clinical interview with
the parent, behavioral observations, formal tests, and a series of parental
rating scales. Patient was found to have relatively spared nonverbal
intelligence, borderline-impaired language, and clinically impaired verbal
reasoning, attention, and motor coordination. Additionally, he showed clinically
significant concerns with behavioral regulation, metacognition,
attention-deficit, and hyperactivity/impulsivity. The patient was diagnosed with
a DSM-V Language Disorder, Speech Sound Disorder, and Attention
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, combined presentation, in the context of
low-average intelligence. At follow-up, the neuropsychological profile was
consistent, albeit improvement was noted following pharmacotherapy. This is the
first published report that describes the neuropsychological functions of Hamamy
syndrome. We make recommendations for early identification of cognitive
strengths and weaknesses, and interventions to address them. Future research
should evaluate additional functions such as memory and social/emotional
development. (JINS, 2019, 25, 336-342).

DOI: 10.1017/S1355617718001133
PMID: 30729910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
