---
reference_id: "PMID:24850378"
title: Effective clearance of GL-3 in a human iPSC-derived cardiomyocyte model of Fabry disease.
authors:
- Itier JM
- Ret G
- Viale S
- Sweet L
- Bangari D
- Caron A
- Le-Gall F
- Bénichou B
- Leonard J
- Deleuze JF
- Orsini C
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-014-9724-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Disease Progression
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Fabry Disease/drug therapy
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Male
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/cytology"
- Phenotype
- Trihexosylceramides/metabolism
- alpha-Galactosidase/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effective clearance of GL-3 in a human iPSC-derived cardiomyocyte model of Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Itier JM, Ret G, Viale S, Sweet L, Bangari D, Caron A, Le-Gall F, Bénichou B, Leonard J, Deleuze JF, Orsini C
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-014-9724-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-014-9724-5)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2014 Nov;37(6):1013-22. doi: 10.1007/s10545-014-9724-5.
Epub 2014 May 22.

Effective clearance of GL-3 in a human iPSC-derived cardiomyocyte model of Fabry
disease.

Itier JM(1), Ret G, Viale S, Sweet L, Bangari D, Caron A, Le-Gall F, Bénichou B,
Leonard J, Deleuze JF, Orsini C.

Author information:
(1)Bio-Innovation, Global Biotherapeutics, SANOFI, 13 quai Jules Guesdes, 94400,
Vitry-sur Seine, France, jean-michel.itier@sanofi.com.

Fabry disease, a rare X-linked α-galactosidase A deficiency, causes progressive
lysosomal accumulation of globotriaosylceramide (GL-3) in a variety of cell
types. As the disease progresses, renal failure, left ventricular hypertrophy,
and strokes may occur. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), with recombinant
α-galactosidase A, is currently available for use to reduce GL-3 deposits.
However, although it improves cardiac function and decreases left ventricular
mass, GL-3 clearance upon ERT has been demonstrated in cardiac capillary
endothelium but not in cardiomyocytes of patients. Relevant models are needed to
understand the pathogenesis of cardiac disease and explore new therapeutic
approaches. We generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) from Fabry
patients and differentiated them into cardiomyocytes. In these cells, GL-3
accumulates in the lysosomes over time, resulting in phenotypic changes similar
to those found in cardiac tissue from Fabry patients. Using this human in vitro
model, we demonstrated that substrate reduction therapy via glucosylceramide
synthase inhibition was able to prevent accumulation and to clear lysosomal GL-3
in cardiomyocytes. This new in vitro model recapitulates essential features of
cardiomyocytes from patients with Fabry disease and therefore provides a useful
and relevant tool for further investigations of new therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-014-9724-5
PMID: 24850378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
