---
reference_id: "PMID:10879785"
title: Relapsing polychondritis.
authors:
- Chow MT
- Anderson SF
journal: Optom Vis Sci
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1097/00006324-200006000-00008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relapsing polychondritis.
**Authors:** Chow MT, Anderson SF
**Journal:** Optom Vis Sci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00006324-200006000-00008](https://doi.org/10.1097/00006324-200006000-00008)

## Content

1. Optom Vis Sci. 2000 Jun;77(6):286-92. doi: 10.1097/00006324-200006000-00008.

Relapsing polychondritis.

Chow MT(1), Anderson SF.

Author information:
(1)VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Sepulveda Ambulatory Care Center 
and Southern California College of Optometry, Fullerton, USA.

BACKGROUND: Relapsing polychondritis (RPC) is a rare, chronic, and potentially 
fatal multisystemic inflammatory disorder targeting cartilaginous structures. 
This disorder is frequently associated with rheumatoid arthritis, systemic 
vasculitis, connective tissue diseases, and/or hematologic disorders. RPC 
afflicts patients with recurrent and often progressive episodes of inflammation 
with the potential for destruction of the affected structures. Tissues involved 
include the ears, joints, nose, larynx, trachea, eyes, heart valves, kidneys,and 
skin. Ocular manifestations commonly include episcleritis, scleritis, 
conjunctivitis, iridocyclitis, chorioretinitis, and proptosis. Lid edema, 
orbital inflammation, muscle palsies, and corneal melting may also occur.
CASE REPORT: An 83-year-old man previously diagnosed with RPC presented to our 
clinic with acute unilateral chemosis, conjunctivitis, lid edema, proptosis, and 
extraocular muscle restriction. After orbital cellulitis was ruled out, further 
evaluation revealed posterior scleritis with choroidal detachment OS. A course 
of oral indomethacin and topical antibiotic-steroid combination drops was 
implemented in the treatment of the ocular manifestations. The quick positive 
response to the anti-inflammatory agents confirmed the diagnosis of ocular 
complications secondary to RPC.
DISCUSSION: The presenting ocular signs and symptoms of RPC often resemble other 
commonly encountered ocular conditions. It is important for the eye care 
practitioner to be familiar with the ocular manifestations of RPC because the 
eyes are sometimes the initial site of involvement and may be a marker of 
severity. Early diagnosis and intervention may significantly improve the 
patient's outcome. This case report with literature review will hopefully bring 
to light features of this disease which will help the eye care practitioner in 
the diagnosis and management of this condition.

DOI: 10.1097/00006324-200006000-00008
PMID: 10879785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]