---
reference_id: "PMID:36248746"
title: The protease DDI2 regulates NRF1 activation in response to cadmium toxicity.
authors:
- Ribeiro ST
- de Gassart A
- Bettigole S
- Zaffalon L
- Chavarria C
- Op M
- Nugraha K
- Martinon F
journal: iScience
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.105227
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The protease DDI2 regulates NRF1 activation in response to cadmium toxicity.
**Authors:** Ribeiro ST, de Gassart A, Bettigole S, Zaffalon L, Chavarria C, Op M, Nugraha K, Martinon F
**Journal:** iScience (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.isci.2022.105227](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.105227)

## Content

1. iScience. 2022 Sep 27;25(10):105227. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.105227.
eCollection 2022 Oct 21.

The protease DDI2 regulates NRF1 activation in response to cadmium toxicity.

Ribeiro ST(1), de Gassart A(1), Bettigole S(2), Zaffalon L(1), Chavarria C(1),
Op M(1), Nugraha K(1), Martinon F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, University of Lausanne, 155 Ch. des Boveresses,
Epalinges 1066, Switzerland.
(2)Volastra Therapeutics, 1361 Amsterdam Avenue, Suite 520, New York, NY 10027,
USA.

DNA-damage inducible 1 homolog 2 (DDI2) is a protease that activates the
transcription factor NRF1. Cellular models have shown that this pathway
contributes to cell-stress adaptation, for example, on proteasome inhibition.
However, DDI2 physiological function is unknown. Ddi2 Knock-out (KO) mice were
embryonic lethal. Therefore, we generated liver-specific Ddi2-KO animals and
used comprehensive genetic analysis to identify the molecular pathways regulated
by DDI2. Here, we demonstrate that DDI2 contributes to metallothionein (MT)
expression in mouse and human hepatocytes at basal and upon cadmium (Cd)
exposure. This transcriptional program is dependent on DDI2-mediated NRF1
proteolytic maturation. In contrast, NRF1 homolog NRF2 does not contribute to MT
production. Mechanistically, we observed that Cd exposure inhibits proteasome
activity, resulting in DDI2-mediated NRF1 proteolytic maturation. In line with
these findings, DDI2 deficiency sensitizes cells to Cd toxicity. This study
identifies a function for DDI2 that links proteasome homeostasis to heavy metal
mediated toxicity.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.105227
PMCID: PMC9557025
PMID: 36248746

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
