---
reference_id: "PMID:26514362"
title: Review of seizure outcomes after surgical resection of dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors.
authors:
- Bonney PA
- Boettcher LB
- Conner AK
- Glenn CA
- Briggs RG
- Santucci JA
- Bellew MR
- Battiste JD
- Sughrue ME
journal: J Neurooncol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s11060-015-1961-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Brain Neoplasms/complications, surgery"
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Neoplasms, Neuroepithelial/complications, surgery"
- Neurosurgical Procedures/methods
- "PubMed/statistics & numerical data"
- "Seizures/etiology, surgery"
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of seizure outcomes after surgical resection of dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors.
**Authors:** Bonney PA, Boettcher LB, Conner AK, Glenn CA, Briggs RG, Santucci JA, Bellew MR, Battiste JD, Sughrue ME
**Journal:** J Neurooncol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11060-015-1961-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11060-015-1961-4)

## Content

1. J Neurooncol. 2016 Jan;126(1):1-10. doi: 10.1007/s11060-015-1961-4. Epub 2015 
Oct 29.

Review of seizure outcomes after surgical resection of dysembryoplastic 
neuroepithelial tumors.

Bonney PA(1), Boettcher LB(1), Conner AK(1), Glenn CA(1), Briggs RG(1), Santucci 
JA(1), Bellew MR(1), Battiste JD(2), Sughrue ME(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
1000 N. Lincoln Blvd., Suite 4000, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
1000 N. Lincoln Blvd., Suite 4000, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. 
mes261@columbia.edu.

Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors (DNETs) are rare tumors that present 
with seizures in the majority of cases. We report the results of a review of 
seizure freedom rates following resection of these benign lesions. We searched 
the English literature using PubMed for articles presenting seizure freedom 
rates for DNETs as a unique entity. Patient demographics, tumor characteristics, 
and operative variables were assessed across selected studies. Twenty-nine 
articles were included in the analysis. The mean age at surgery across studies 
was a median of 18 years (interquartile range 11-25 years). The mean duration of 
epilepsy pre-operatively was a median 7 years (interquartile range 3-11 years). 
Median reported gross-total resection rate across studies was 79% (interquartile 
range 62-92%). Authors variously chose lesionectomy or extended lesionectomy 
operations within and across studies. The median seizure freedom rate was 86% 
(interquartile range 77-93%) with only one study reporting fewer than 60% of 
patients seizure free. Seizure outcomes were either reported at 1 year of 
follow-up or at last follow-up, which occurred at a median of 4 years 
(interquartile range 3-7 years). The number of seizure-free patients who 
discontinued anti-epileptic drugs varied widely from zero to all patients. 
Greater extent of resection was associated with seizure freedom in four studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-015-1961-4
PMID: 26514362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]