---
reference_id: "PMID:23774118"
title: Pathophysiological mechanisms involving aggressive islet cell destruction in fulminant type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Tanaka S
- Aida K
- Nishida Y
- Kobayashi T
journal: Endocr J
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1507/endocrj.ej13-0222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiological mechanisms involving aggressive islet cell destruction in fulminant type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Tanaka S, Aida K, Nishida Y, Kobayashi T
**Journal:** Endocr J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1507/endocrj.ej13-0222](https://doi.org/10.1507/endocrj.ej13-0222)

## Content

1. Endocr J. 2013;60(7):837-45. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.ej13-0222. Epub 2013 Jun 18.

Pathophysiological mechanisms involving aggressive islet cell destruction in 
fulminant type 1 diabetes.

Tanaka S(1), Aida K, Nishida Y, Kobayashi T.

Author information:
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of 
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo 409-3898, Japan. 
tanakas@yamanashi.ac.jp

Fulminant type 1 diabetes is characterized by a rapid onset of severe 
hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis, with subsequent poor prognosis of diabetic 
complications. This review summarizes new findings related to the 
pathophysiology of accelerated β-cell failure in fulminant type 1 diabetes. 
Immunohistological examination revealed the presence of enterovirus in 
pancreatic islet cells and exocrine tissues and hyperexpression of pattern 
recognition receptors (PRRs) including melanoma differentiation-associated 
antigen 5 (MDA5), retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I), Toll-like receptor 
(TLR)3 and TLR4, essential sensors of innate immunity, in islet cells and 
mononuclear cells (MNCs) infiltrating islets. Interferon (IFN)-α and IFN-β, 
products of PRR cascades, were expressed in both islet cells and infiltrating 
MNCs. Phenotypes of infiltrating cells around and/or into islets were mainly 
dendritic cells, macrophages and CD8+ T cells. Islet β-cells simultaneously 
expressed CXC chemokine ligand 10 (CXCL10), IFN-γ and interleukin-18, indicating 
that these chemokines/ cytotoxic cytokines mutually amplify their cytoplasmic 
expression in the islet cells. These positive feedback systems might enhance 
adaptive immunity, leading to rapid and complete loss of β-cells in fulminant 
type 1 diabetes. In innate and adaptive/autoimmune immune processes, the 
mechanisms behind bystander activation/killing might further amplify β-cell 
destruction. In addition to intrinsic pathway of cell apoptosis, the Fas and Fas 
ligand pathway are also involved as an extrinsic pathway of cell apoptosis. A 
high prevalence of anti-amylase autoantibodies was recognized in patients with 
fulminant type 1 diabetes, which suggests that Th2 T-cell reactive immunity 
against amylase might contribute to β-cell destruction in fulminant type 1 
diabetes.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.ej13-0222
PMID: 23774118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]