---
reference_id: "PMID:21666264"
title: "White matter damage in primary progressive aphasias: a diffusion tensor tractography study."
authors:
- Galantucci S
- Tartaglia MC
- Wilson SM
- Henry ML
- Filippi M
- Agosta F
- Dronkers NF
- Henry RG
- Ogar JM
- Miller BL
- Gorno-Tempini ML
journal: Brain
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awr099
content_type: abstract_only
---

# White matter damage in primary progressive aphasias: a diffusion tensor tractography study.
**Authors:** Galantucci S, Tartaglia MC, Wilson SM, Henry ML, Filippi M, Agosta F, Dronkers NF, Henry RG, Ogar JM, Miller BL, Gorno-Tempini ML
**Journal:** Brain (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awr099](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awr099)

## Content

1. Brain. 2011 Oct;134(Pt 10):3011-29. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr099. Epub 2011 Jun
11.

White matter damage in primary progressive aphasias: a diffusion tensor 
tractography study.

Galantucci S(1), Tartaglia MC, Wilson SM, Henry ML, Filippi M, Agosta F, 
Dronkers NF, Henry RG, Ogar JM, Miller BL, Gorno-Tempini ML.

Author information:
(1)Memory and Ageing Centre, Department of Neurology, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-1207, USA.

Comment in
    Brain. 2011 Oct;134(Pt 10):2798-9. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr231.

Primary progressive aphasia is a clinical syndrome that encompasses three major 
phenotypes: non-fluent/agrammatic, semantic and logopenic. These clinical 
entities have been associated with characteristic patterns of focal grey matter 
atrophy in left posterior frontoinsular, anterior temporal and left 
temporoparietal regions, respectively. Recently, network-level dysfunction has 
been hypothesized but research to date has focused largely on studying grey 
matter damage. The aim of this study was to assess the integrity of white matter 
tracts in the different primary progressive aphasia subtypes. We used diffusion 
tensor imaging in 48 individuals: nine non-fluent, nine semantic, nine logopenic 
and 21 age-matched controls. Probabilistic tractography was used to identify 
bilateral inferior longitudinal (anterior, middle, posterior) and uncinate 
fasciculi (referred to as the ventral pathway); and the superior longitudinal 
fasciculus segmented into its frontosupramarginal, frontoangular, frontotemporal 
and temporoparietal components, (referred to as the dorsal pathway). We compared 
the tracts' mean fractional anisotropy, axial, radial and mean diffusivities for 
each tract in the different diagnostic categories. The most prominent white 
matter changes were found in the dorsal pathways in non-fluent patients, in the 
two ventral pathways and the temporal components of the dorsal pathways in 
semantic variant, and in the temporoparietal component of the dorsal bundles in 
logopenic patients. Each of the primary progressive aphasia variants showed 
different patterns of diffusion tensor metrics alterations: non-fluent patients 
showed the greatest changes in fractional anisotropy and radial and mean 
diffusivities; semantic variant patients had severe changes in all metrics; and 
logopenic patients had the least white matter damage, mainly involving 
diffusivity, with fractional anisotropy altered only in the temporoparietal 
component of the dorsal pathway. This study demonstrates that both careful 
dissection of the main language tracts and consideration of all diffusion tensor 
metrics are necessary to characterize the white matter changes that occur in the 
variants of primary progressive aphasia. These results highlight the potential 
value of diffusion tensor imaging as a new tool in the multimodal diagnostic 
evaluation of primary progressive aphasia.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awr099
PMCID: PMC3187537
PMID: 21666264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]