---
reference_id: "PMID:17282996"
title: Pattern-specific loss of aquaporin-4 immunoreactivity distinguishes neuromyelitis optica from multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Roemer SF
- Parisi JE
- Lennon VA
- Benarroch EE
- Lassmann H
- Bruck W
- Mandler RN
- Weinshenker BG
- Pittock SJ
- Wingerchuk DM
- Lucchinetti CF
journal: Brain
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awl371
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Aquaporin 4/immunology
- Astrocytes/immunology
- Autoantibodies/analysis
- Brain/immunology
- Case-Control Studies
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Immunohistochemistry
- Macrophages/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multiple Sclerosis/immunology
- Myelin Sheath/immunology
- Neuromyelitis Optica/immunology
- Oligodendroglia/immunology
- Optic Nerve/immunology
- Spinal Cord/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pattern-specific loss of aquaporin-4 immunoreactivity distinguishes neuromyelitis optica from multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Roemer SF, Parisi JE, Lennon VA, Benarroch EE, Lassmann H, Bruck W, Mandler RN, Weinshenker BG, Pittock SJ, Wingerchuk DM, Lucchinetti CF
**Journal:** Brain (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awl371](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awl371)

## Content

1. Brain. 2007 May;130(Pt 5):1194-205. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl371. Epub 2007 Feb
4.

Pattern-specific loss of aquaporin-4 immunoreactivity distinguishes
neuromyelitis optica from multiple sclerosis.

Roemer SF(1), Parisi JE, Lennon VA, Benarroch EE, Lassmann H, Bruck W, Mandler
RN, Weinshenker BG, Pittock SJ, Wingerchuk DM, Lucchinetti CF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, College of Medicine, 200 First St. SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Comment in
    Brain. 2007 May;130(Pt 5):1178-80. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm092.

Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease that
typically affects optic nerves and spinal cord. Its pathogenic relationship to
multiple sclerosis (MS) is uncertain. Unlike MS, NMO lesions are characterized
by deposits of IgG and IgM co-localizing with products of complement activation
in a vasculocentric pattern around thickened hyalinized blood vessels,
suggesting a pathogenic role for humoral immunity targeting an antigen in the
perivascular space. A recently identified specific serum autoantibody biomarker,
NMO-IgG, targets aquaporin-4 (AQP4), the most abundant water channel protein in
the CNS, which is highly concentrated in astrocytic foot processes. We analysed
and compared patterns of AQP4 immunoreactivity in CNS tissues of nine patients
with NMO, 13 with MS, nine with infarcts and five normal controls. In normal
brain, optic nerve and spinal cord, the distribution of AQP4 expression
resembles the vasculocentric pattern of immune complex deposition observed in
NMO lesions. In contrast to MS lesions, which exhibit stage-dependent loss of
AQP4, all NMO lesions demonstrate a striking loss of AQP4 regardless of the
stage of demyelinating activity, extent of tissue necrosis, or site of CNS
involvement. We identified a novel NMO lesion in the spinal cord and medullary
tegmentum extending into the area postrema, characterized by AQP4 loss in foci
that were inflammatory and oedematous, but neither demyelinated nor necrotic.
Foci of AQP4 loss coincided with sites of intense vasculocentric immune complex
deposition. These findings strongly support a role for a complement activating
AQP4-specific autoantibody as the initiator of the NMO lesion, and further
distinguish NMO from MS.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awl371
PMID: 17282996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
