---
reference_id: "PMID:37217231"
title: "Late-onset multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: an insidious presentation."
authors:
- Rao NN
- Burns K
- Manolikos C
- Hodge S
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-252668
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-onset multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: an insidious presentation.
**Authors:** Rao NN, Burns K, Manolikos C, Hodge S
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2022-252668](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2022-252668)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2023 May 22;16(5):e252668. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-252668.

Late-onset multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: an insidious 
presentation.

Rao NN(1)(2), Burns K(3)(2), Manolikos C(3)(4), Hodge S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Royal Perth Hospital, Perth, 
Western Australia, Australia n.nishita.rao@gmail.com.
(2)School of Medicine, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Western 
Australia, Australia.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Royal Perth Hospital, Perth, 
Western Australia, Australia.
(4)Department of Dietetics and Nutrition, Royal Perth Hospital, Perth, Western 
Australia, Australia.

Multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD) is a rare inborn error of 
metabolism that results in impairment of mitochondrial β-oxidation of fatty 
acids. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and impairs electron 
transfer in the electron transport chain. The clinical manifestations of MADD 
are highly variable and include exercise intolerance, myopathy, cardiomyopathy, 
encephalopathy, coma and death. Early-onset MADD is often associated with a high 
mortality with significant number of patients presenting with severe metabolic 
acidosis, non-ketotic hypoglycaemia and/or hyperammonaemic presentations. While 
late-onset MADD is suggested to have a lower mortality, the severe 
encephalopathic presentations may well be under-reported as a diagnosis of MADD 
may not be considered.MADD is treatable with riboflavin and appropriate 
nutrition with a focus on prevention and early management of metabolic 
decompensation. The neonatal phenotype differs significantly from late-onset 
MADD, where diagnosis may be delayed due to heterogeneity in clinical features, 
atypical presentation and confounding comorbidities, together with lower 
awareness among physicians.This report describes a woman in her 30s who 
presented with acute-onset ataxia, confusion and hyperammonaemic encephalopathy 
requiring intubation. Subsequent biochemical investigation revealed a diagnosis 
of MADD. At present, there are no national guidelines in Australia for the 
management of MADD. This case highlights the investigation and treatment of 
late-onset MADD.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2022-252668
PMCID: PMC10230867
PMID: 37217231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.