---
reference_id: "PMID:37308616"
title: Functional roles of reactive astrocytes in neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Patani R
- Hardingham GE
- Liddelow SA
journal: Nat Rev Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41582-023-00822-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Astrocytes/metabolism
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/metabolism
- Neuroinflammatory Diseases
- Alzheimer Disease/metabolism
- Parkinson Disease/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional roles of reactive astrocytes in neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Patani R, Hardingham GE, Liddelow SA
**Journal:** Nat Rev Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41582-023-00822-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-023-00822-1)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Neurol. 2023 Jul;19(7):395-409. doi: 10.1038/s41582-023-00822-1. Epub
2023 Jun 12.

Functional roles of reactive astrocytes in neuroinflammation and
neurodegeneration.

Patani R(1)(2), Hardingham GE(3)(4)(5), Liddelow SA(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Disease, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology,
London, UK.
(2)The Francis Crick Institute, Human Stem Cells and Neurodegeneration
Laboratory, London, UK.
(3)Euan MacDonald Centre for MND, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)UK Dementia Research Institute at the University of Edinburgh, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(5)Centre for Discovery Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(6)Neuroscience Institute, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
shane.liddelow@nyulangone.org.
(7)Department of Neuroscience & Physiology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New
York, NY, USA. shane.liddelow@nyulangone.org.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY,
USA. shane.liddelow@nyulangone.org.
(9)Parekh Center for Interdisciplinary Neurology, NYU Grossman School of
Medicine, New York, NY, USA. shane.liddelow@nyulangone.org.

Despite advances in uncovering the mechanisms that underlie neuroinflammation
and neurodegenerative disease, therapies that prevent neuronal loss remain
elusive. Targeting of disease-defining markers in conditions such as Alzheimer
disease (amyloid-β and tau) or Parkinson disease (α-synuclein) has been met with
limited success, suggesting that these proteins do not act in isolation but form
part of a pathological network. This network could involve phenotypic alteration
of multiple cell types in the CNS, including astrocytes, which have a major
neurosupportive, homeostatic role in the healthy CNS but adopt reactive states
under acute or chronic adverse conditions. Transcriptomic studies in human
patients and disease models have revealed the co-existence of many putative
reactive sub-states of astrocytes. Inter-disease and even intra-disease
heterogeneity of reactive astrocytic sub-states are well established, but the
extent to which specific sub-states are shared across different diseases is
unclear. In this Review, we highlight how single-cell and single-nuclei RNA
sequencing and other 'omics' technologies can enable the functional
characterization of defined reactive astrocyte states in various pathological
scenarios. We provide an integrated perspective, advocating cross-modal
validation of key findings to define functionally important sub-states of
astrocytes and their triggers as tractable therapeutic targets with
cross-disease relevance.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41582-023-00822-1
PMID: 37308616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
